C4516 15586836 103995
A Geographicall Description Of all the COUNTRIES In the known VVORLD. AS ALSO Of the greatest and famousest Cities and Fabricks which have been, or are now remaining: Together with The greatest Rivers, the strangest Fountains, the various Minerals, Stones, Trees, Hearbs, Plants, Fruits, Gums, &c. which are to bee found in every Country. Unto which is added, a Description of The rarest Beasts, Fowls, Birds, Fishes, and Serpents which are least known amongst us. Collected out of the most approved Authors, and from such as were eye-witnesses of most of the things contained herein. By SA: CLARKE, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Bennet Finck, London. PSALM 104.24, 25. O Lord, how manifold are thy Works! In wisdome hast thou made them all: The earth is full of thy riches: So is the great and wide Sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable: both small and great Beasts, &c. LONDON, Printed by R. I. for Thomas Newberry, at the three Lions in Cornhill, over against the Conduit. MDCLVII.
A GEOGRAPHICALL DESCRIPTION OF ALL THE COVNTRIES IN THE KNOWNE WORLD as also of the Chiefest Cit∣tyes, Famousest Str¦uctures, Greatest Rivers▪ Strangest Fountaines &c. Together with The rarest Beasts▪ Birds Fishes &c, which are Least known amongst vs. BY SA: CLARKE: R Gaywood fecit
A Geographicall Description Of all the COUNTRIES In the known VVORLD. The Division of the World. THE Earth is commonly divided into four parts, Asia, Africa, Europe, and America. Asia Described. Asia is divided into two parts: Asia the lesse, next to Europe, called also Anatolia, or Natolia, thus bounded: Towards the West and North, is Greece: Full West is the Archipelagus: On the East is the River Euphrates: On the North is the Euxine Sea: And on the South the Mediterranean. This Country was once of admirable fertility, affording all sorts of Commodities, both for necessity and delight: But for the sins of her Inhabitants its turned into barrennesse, having been so often wasted by the great Monarchs of the earth. First, by the Babylonians, then by the Meads and Persians, then by the Grecians, then by the Romans, and lastly by the Turks, who have made such wofull havock, that in it are to bee seen the ruines of above four thousand Cities, and Towns: the residue have lost both the names, and memory of their Predeces∣sors, and the people are faln from the Knowledge, Religion, and In∣dustry
of their fore-fathers: and for the most part are Mahume∣tans. In this Asia the Lesse are contained these Provinces: Caria, Jonia, Dori, Lydia, Aeolis, Phrygia minor, and major, Cilicia, Pamphilia▪ Lycia, Bythinia, Pontus, Paphlagonia, Galacia, Cappadocia, Lycaonia Pysidia, and Armenia minor. In Jonia stood Miletum where Paul Preached to the Elders, Acts 20.17. and Ephesus. In Lydia were seated Laodicea, Thyatira, Philadelphia, Sardis and Pergamus. In Phrygia minor was Adramitium mentioned Act. 27.2. In Phrygia major was Colosse, to whom Paul wrote his Epistle. In Cilicia was Tarsus where Paul was born. In this Country feed those Goats whose hair makes our curious Chamlets, and Grogerams, falsely called Camels hair. In Pamphilia are seated Perga, Pisidia, and Attalia, Sea Towns, Act. 13.1, 14. In Lycia the cheif City was Patara. In Lycaonia were Iconium and Listra. In Pisidia was the famous City of Antiochia. In Asia the Greater are contained these Countries, Syria, Palestine, Armenia major, Araa the Happy, Stony, Desert, Media, Assyria, Me∣soptamia, Persia, Chaldn, Partia, Hircania, Trtaria, hia, and India. In Syria are Phaenicia, Caelsyria and Syrophnicia. In Phaenicia are Tyre and Sidon, Sarepta and Ptolaemais. In Caelosyria are Hieropolis, Damascus, Aleppo, Tripolis &c. Palestine is in length two hundred miles: in breadth but fifty: con∣taining Samaria; Idumaea, Judaea, Galile the higher, called Galile of the Gentiles: Galile the lower, wherein were Nazareth: and Mount Tabor, where Christ was transfigured. Armenia major, now Turkomania, wherein was Colchus whence Jason fetched the golden Fleece. Arabia divided into three parts, Arabia Deserta, where the Chil∣dren of Israel were fed with Manna forty years. Arabia Petrosa, where Mount Sinai was, and the Law given. Arabia Faelix, abounding with Spices and Drugges, where Medina is, the place of Mahomets Se∣pulchre. Media where the fruits of the Country are said to bee always green, and flourishing. Assyria where Nineveh stood to which Jonah was sent. Mesopotamia where was Babylon. Persia a great Empire where the Regall City is Persepolis. Chaldaea often mentioned in Scripture. Parthia the Inhabitants whereof were famous for their Archery, and opposition against the Romans. Hircania which hath many Cities of note, and abounds with Wine, and Honey. Tartaria formerly called Scythia, whose Queen Tomyris, overcame Cy∣rus,
and cut off his head: They have neither Cities nor houses but live in hoards; their Prince is the great Cham. China is a very great, populous, and fruitful Country, and the In∣habitants are very ingenuous, but it is lately overrun by the Tartars, as you shall hear afterwards. India, through the midst whereof runs the River anges, dividing it into India intra Gangem, which lieth towards the West, and India extra Gangem, which lyeth towards the East. The chief place whereof is Goa, where the Vice-roy of Portugal resides. The Islands of Asia the less are Rhodes, over against Caria; and Cyprus, formerly consecrated to Venus. In the Indian Ocean the Islands are very many, principally Ormus, Zeilan, Sumatra, Avirae insulae, Bocuro, Java major, and minor, Japan, the Molucco's, and the Philippine Islands, which abound with Spices of all sorts, Pearls, and Gold, whereof I will now give a more particular account. Asia minor, more largely described. Cappadocia described. Cappadocia, called also Leucosyria, and now Amasia, stretcheth four hundred and fifty miles along the Euxine Sea; bounded on the West, with Paphlagonia, Galatia, and part of Pamphilia, on the South with Cilicia, on the East with the Hills Antitaurus, and Moschius, and part of Euphrates; Here runneth Halis, the end of Craesus Empire, both in the site and fate thereof, hee being deceived with that ambiguous Oracle, Craesus Halin penetrans, magnam pervertet opm vim, that passing Halis, hee should overturn a great State, which hee interpreting actively of his attempts against Cyrus, verified it passively in himself. In Cap∣padocia was the City of Comana, famoused by the Temple of Bellona, and a great multitude of such as were there inspired by Devillish illu∣sions. Not far thence also was Castabala, where was the Temple of Diana Persica. Galatia, or Gallo-graecia, hath on the South, Pamphilia, and on the North its washed with the Exine Sea, by the space of two hundred and fifty miles. Sinope was the chief City: Deiotars a famous King: but Galacia is made more famous by St. Pauls Epistle written to the Church thereof. Pontus, and Bithinia, now called Bursia, hath on the West the mouth of Pontus, the Thracian Bosphorus, and part of Propontis; Galacia on the East: part of the Euxine Sea on the North: and Asia, properly so cal∣led, on the South: The most famous Cities in it were Nice, wherein was celebrated the first General Council gathered against the Arians: Nicomedia, sometimes the seat of the Emperors; Apamia, or Bursa, nigh to Mount Olympus, where the first Ottamans had their Seat-Royal, and all of that race (except the Great Turks themselves) are still there buried: Chalcedon, builded seventeen years before Biamium
and the builders thereof are said to bee blinde, which neglected that better seat. Here was held a famous Council of six hundred and thirty Bishops against the Heresie of Eutiches. Paphlagonia▪ hath on the North Pontus, on the East the River Halis, on the South Phrygia and Galacia, and on the West Bithynia: Vetru∣vius tells us of a ountain here that seems to bee mixed with wine, that makes drunken such as drink freely thereof. Asia, properly so called, now Sarcum, is bounded on the West with part of Propontis, and Hellespont, the Aegean, Icarian and Myrtoan Seas; On the South with the Rhodian Sea, Lycia and Pamphilia; On the East with Galacia: and on the North with Pontus, Bythinia, and part of Propontis. In which space are contained Phrygia, Caria, and both Mysia's, Aeolis, Jonia, Doris, and Lydia. Phrygia is divided into the greater, and the less, called also Helle∣spontiaca, and Troas. The greater lyeth Eastward, and is so called from the River Phryx, which parts it from Caria. Here stood Midaium the Royal Seat of Mydas, and Apamia the Phrygian Metropolis. Here also upon the River Sangarius stood Gordie, where was the Gordian knot, which when Alexander could not untie, hee cut it in sunder with his sword. In the lesser Phrygia stood the eye of Asia, and Star of the East, cal∣led Ilium, or Troy, destroyed by the Grecians after ten years siege, the ruines whereof appear at this day, the walls, and decayed buildings entertaining the beholder with a kinde of majesty; the walls were of a large circuit, of great, spongy, black, and hard stones, cut foursquare; the ruines of the Turrets on the walls are yet to be seen, also great marble Tombs of ancient workmanship made Chest-fashion, and their covers whole are yet to be seen without the walls. Many great Cisterns made to receive rain water are yet whole; The soil about it is dry, and barren: The Rivers Xanthus, and Simois so much famoused, are small Rivers, which in Summer are quite dry. Nunc seges est ubi Troja fuit. Cyzicus was a City of Mysia, wherein was a famous Temple, whose Pillars were four cubits thick, and fifty cubits high, each of one stone, the whole building was made of polished stone, and each stone was joyned to other with a line of gold: The Image of Jupiter within was made of Ivory, crowned with a marble Apollo, which City and Temple were swallowed up in an Earthquake, and probably for their abominable Idolatry. The like befel Philadelphia (one of the seven Churches to which St. John wrote) another City of Mysia, and the like to Magnesia in the same Region. A little hence standeth Abydus, and over against it on Europe side was Sestus; one of the Guards of the Turkish Empire, he having built Castles there which are well furnished, and the Straits not being above seven Furlongs over. Here Xerxes joyned Asia to Europe by a Bridge, for the transportation of his huge Army into Greece.
In Mysia also was that famous Pine-tree that was four and twenty foot in compass, and growing intire for seventy foot from the root, was then divided into three Arms, equidistant, which afterwards gathered themselves close into one top two hundred foot high. Jonia is situated on the Icarian Seas over against the Isle of Chios, wherein were ten principal Cities, Miletus, Myus, Priene, Ephesus, Colo∣phon, Lebedus, Teos, Clazomenae, Phocaea, and Erythraea. The Temple of Diana Described. The Temple of Diana at Ephesus was one of the Worlds Wonders; two hundred and twenty years were spent in the building of it: It was built upon a Marish to prevent hurt by Earthquakes, which were very common in those parts; the first foundation was laid upon Coals, the second upon Wooll; It was four hundred twenty and five foot long, and two hundred and twenty broad, there were in it one hun∣dred twenty and seven Pillars of Marble, sixty foot in height, and thirty six of them curiously wrought and engraven, the works of so many Kings. The doors of the Temple were of Cypress, which after four hundred years, were as fresh as if they had been new made; the roof was of Cedar: The Image, which superstition supposed to have come down from Jupiter, was made by one Canesia: some say of Ebonie, others of the Vine which had many holes made, and filled with Spikenard, the moisture whereof closed up the rifts. It was in∣riched and adorned with gifts beyond value. It was contrived by Ctesiphon, and was seven times fired, the last whereof was by Erostra∣tus, who did it to get himself a name: Herodo. Doris was almost surrounded with the Sea, wherein was Gnidus, a City famous for the Marble Image of Venus and Halycarnassus, famous for Herodotus, and Dionysius the Historians; and for Mausolus, whose Sepulchre erected by Artimesia his wife, and sister, was accounted one of the seven Wonders of the World. Lycia is washed by the Sea for the space of two hundred miles: In it Mount Taurus ariseth, hence stretching it self Eastward under divers appellations, to the Indian Sea. Pamphilia beareth Eastward from Lycia, and now together with Cilicia is by the Turks called Caramania. Armenia minor, which is divided from the greater, now Turcomania, by the River Euphrates on the East. A more full description of the Countries in Asia major. The Land of Canaan Described. It was first called Canaan after that the posterity of Canaan the son of Cham had possessed it, when Moses and Joshua had conquered it, it was called the Land of Israel. After the Babylonish Captivity it was called the Land of Judaea: From the Philistines, which inhabited the
Sea-coasts, it was called the Land of Palestine: and by Christians since, the Holy Land. Adricomius, which hath best described it, makes it to bound Eastward on Syria, and Arabia: Southward on the Desart of Paran and Egypt: Northward on Mount Libanus: and Westward on the Sea. From Dan to Bersheba its about a hundred and sixty Italian miles in length, and sixty in breadth. No Country in the world had so many Cities in so little a compass as this once had. The Royal Cities in each Tribe were these: In Aser, Acsaph, besides Sidon, and Tyrus: In Benjamin, Bethel, Gaaba, Jerusalem, and Jerico. In Dan, achish; besides Eckron and Gath: In Ephraim, Gazer, Samaria, Saron, and Tapua: In Gad, Rabba: In Isachar, Aphec: In Juda, Arad, Be∣eck, Eglon, Hebron, Libna, Mackeda, Odolla, Taphua: In Manasse, Dor, Gilgal, Jezreel, Megiddo, Taanac, and Thirza: In the other part of Manasse, Astaroth, Edri, Geshur, Machathi, Soba, Teman, and Damascus. In Nepthali, Aser, Kedes and Hemath: In Ruben, Heshbon, Madian and Petra: In Simeon, Debir, and Gerar: In Zebulon, Jeconan and Shimron. Jordan is the chiefest River, which at last looseth it self in the Lake Asphaltites, but before that, it makes many fruitful Vallies, and spread∣eth it self into a Lake called Genazereth, sixteen miles long, and six broad, environed with many pleasant Towns, as Julias and Hippo on the East: Tarichea on the South, and Tiberias on the West, made wholesome with her hot-waters. But before it makes the Lake of Ge∣nazereth, it makes another called Samachonitis, it especially is filled with the snow of Libanus usually melted in the first month, which causeth Jordan then to swell, and overflow his banks (which made Josua's passing thorough it at that time the more miraculous:) In Scripture its called the waters of Merom. The variety of fruits, and other tempo∣rall blessings, wherewith this Country was inriched, are so fully set down in Scripture that I need make no particular mention of them. What multitudes of people it fed, may be taken notice of in those two Instances; First, When David numbred them, there were found Eleven hundred thousand in Israel, and four hundred and seventy thousand in Judah, valiant men that drew the sword, 2 Sam. 24.9. and yet Benjamin and Levi were not reckoned: And in the dayes of Jerobo∣am, 2 Chr. 13. Abijah King of Judah brought into the field four hundred thousand, and Jeroboam eight hundred thousand, and on this part were slain five hundred thousand, all choice men, which no history can match in any age, or place of the world: What then was the total number, if women, children, impotent, and aged men had been reckoned? After the return from the Babylonish Captivity, one third part of this Country was called Judaea, to distinguish it from the other two, Samaria and Galilee. Galilee was the most Northerly, confining on Libanus and Anti-Libanus towards the North: on Phaenicia Westerly: having Caelosyria on the East: and Samaria with Arabia on the South: Jordan parted it n the middest It was divided into the higher and lower Galilee, the higher was called Galilee of the Gentiles, containing the Springs of
Jordan, and those Cities which Salomon gave to King Hyram: The lower was called Galilee of Tiberias, that City giving name both to the Lake and Region, in which Nazareth, and the Hill Tabor were famous. Samaria is seated betwixt Galilee, and Judaea, being much lesse than either of them. Judaea is the most Southerly, between the Medi∣terranean, and Dead Seas, Samaria, and Idumaen. Pliny addeth to these the Region of Decapolis, so called from her ten Cities, which were, Caesarea Philippi, Aser, Kedes, Nepthalim, Sephet, Corazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, Jotopata, Tiberias, and Bethsan, called also Scythopolis. A Description of Hierusalem, and the Temple, as they were when they were destroyed by the Romans. Hierusalem was compassed with a treble wall on every side, save only on that part where it was inclosed with inaccessible Vallies; for on that side it needed onely one wall: It was built upon two hils, the one opposite to the other, separated by a Valley, which was won∣derously replenished with houses. One of these Hills, whereon stood the upper part of the City, was far higher and steeper than the other; whereupon King David compassing it about with a Wall, called it the City of David. The other hill called Acra, was the place whereon the lower part of the City stood: And opposite to this Acra, was an∣other hill lower than it, which at first was divided from it by a large Valley; but when the Asmonians reigned, they filled up this Valley, and cut down the top of Acra, that it might not hide the Temple: within one of the vallies was Siloam, a Fountain sending forth abun∣dance of clear and sweet water: The outmost wall, by reason of the valley about it, and the Rock whereon it stood was impregnable, the rather, because besides the situation, it was built very strongly by David, Salomon, and other Kings. A fourth wall was begun by A∣grippa: In humane reason, had this wall been finished, the City could never have been taken: For hee began to build it with stones twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, so that it could neither bee easily undermined, nor battered with Engines: But hee built this wall but ten cubits high, and then fearing lest Claudius Caesar should think that hee had a purpose to Rebell, hee gave it over: Yet afterwards the Jews raised this wall twenty cubits high: made a Battlement two cu∣bits high, and the Tower three cubits, in all four and twenty cubits high: Besides, upon the wall were three Towers twenty cubits broad, and twenty cubits high, built four square, very strongly; with∣in these Towers were rooms for men to dwell in, and Cisterns to re∣ceive rain-water. The third wall had ninty of these Towers, and be∣tween every Tower were two hundred cubits space: The second wall had fourteen Towers; and the old wall had threescore, and the com∣passe of the whole City was three and thirty furlongs. Between the North, and the West-part of the City, upon the out∣most wall, stood the Tower Psephina, which was raised threescore and ten cubits high; so that in a clear day a man might from thence disco∣ver
Arabia, and the utmost confines of the Jews, even to the Sea. Just opposite to this was the Towe Hippicos, built by Herod upon the old wall, which for bignesse, beauty, and strength, surpassed all others in the world: It had four corners, each of which was five and twenty cubits broad, as many long, and thirty cubits high, and in no place hollow: On the top was a Well to receive Rain-water, twenty cu∣bits deep. On the top of all were Houses five and twenty cubits high, divided into many rooms: Above them were battlements two cubits high, and Turrets three cubits high, so that in all it was fourscore and five cubits high. Hee built also a second Tower, in breadth and length forty cubits, and as many high, in figure of a square pillar, all solid, and not hollow within: And above this, a Porch ten cubits high, adorned with Tur∣rets and Pinacles: Over the midst of this Porch hee built another Tow∣er, distinguished into goodly roomes, and sumptuous Baths; and on the top it was beautifyed with Turrets and Pinacles; so that the whole height was almost fourscore and ten cubits. Lastly, Hee built a third Tower, which hee called after his Queens name, Mariamne, twenty cubits high, and twenty broad, all of solid stone, and not hollow, having more stately and magnificent lodgings in it than either of the former: It was in all fifty five cubits high. These Towers, though they were very high, yet by reason of their situation they seemed far higher: For the old Wall whereon they were built stood upon a Rock that was thirty cubits high, whereby their height was much increased: They were not built also of ordina∣ry stone, but all of white Marble, whereof each stone was twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, and five cubits thick; and so curi∣ously joyned together that every Tower seemed but one stone; with∣in the City was the Kings Palace, surpassing all that can bee spoken of it, and for greatnesse, and curious workmanship, may bee compa∣red with any other in the world: It was invironed with a wall thirty cubits high, adorned with goodly Towers round about, Beautified with Houses for an hundred of the Nobility: The variety of the Marble wherewith it was built, was admirable, all sorts being there∣in used, though never so rare to bee found. In every room also were many vessels of gold, and silver, and many Porches round about, a∣dorned with most curious Pillars: There were in it very many plea∣sant walks, adorned with all sorts of Trees, and Gardens, beset with Fountains that spouted up water on high, and Cisterns beautiyed with many Brazen Statues, from which ranne out water continually. The Temple Described. The Temple was built upon a Rocky Mountain; the plain on the top whereof was at first scarce big enough for the Temple and Court, the hill being very steep: But the people every day bring∣ing earth thither, at last made it plain, and large enough, and inclosed the hill with a treble wall, which was a work passing all expectation; to the effecting whereof many Ages were spent, and all the holy trea∣sure offered to God from all parts of the world: The foundations of
the Temple were laid three hundred cubits deep, and in many places more. The stones of it were forty cubits, The Porches were double, and every one was supported by many stately pillars, five and twenty cubits high, all of one peece of white Marble; the tops of them were of Cedar so exactly wrought, as astonished the beholders: These Porches were thirty Cubits broad, and the compass of all was six Fur∣longs. The Courts were curiously wrought, and paved with all sorts of stones. Thirdly, The way to the inward Temple was all inclosed with stones, wrought like Lattice-work, which were three Cubits high, of curious workmanship: to this second there was an ascent by fourteen staires; and aloft it was four square, and enclosed with a wall by it self, whose outside being forty Cubits high, was all covered with stairs to ascend up to it, and within, it was twenty five Cubits high: At the top of the fourteen staires within the wall was a level, compassed with a wall of three hundred Cubits, which had eight Gates in it; and between the Gates were Porches opposite each to other, reaching from the wall to the Treasury, supported with great and stately Pil∣lars. All the gates were covered with Plates of gold, and silver, on∣ly one was covered with Corinthian brasse, which for beauty far excel∣led the other, dazling the eyes of the beholders: In every gate were two doores, each of them thirty Cubits high, and fifteen broad; and on each side they had seats thirty Cubits long, and forty Cubits high, each one supported with two Pillars, twelve Cubits thick: Only the gate which was covered with Corinthian brasse, was fifty Cu∣bits high, the gates were forty Cubits, and it was more richly adorned than the rest. Fourthly, the Holy of Holies was situated in the midst of all, and had twelve staires to go up to it. The forepart of it was an hundred Cubits high, and as many broad: Backward it was forty Cubits; on each side it had as it were two shoulders rising up in height twenty Cubits: The first gate was seventy Cubits high, and five and twenty wide, and had no doores, to shew that Heaven was alwayes open, &c. All the fore∣parts were gilded, and all wiin was covered with fine gold. The inward part was divided into two rooms, whereof the first only might bee seen, which was in height fourescore, and ten Cubits, in length forty, and in breadth tvventy: round about the wall vvas a golden Vine, vvhereon hung many grapes in clusters all of gold, every clu∣ster being about six foot long: It had golden gates fifty five Cubits high, and sixteen Cubits broad. It had curious hangings of the same length, admirably vvrought vvith Purple, Violet, and Scarlet Silk, all the fabrick vvas so exquisitely and richly vvrought, that none could possibly imagine any vvorkmanship that it vvanted: For it vvas all co∣vered vvith a massie plate of pure gold vvhich dazled the eyes of the beholders: The top vvas all set vvith rods of gold, sharp like pikes at the ends, lest birds should sit thereon, and defile it. The stones wherewith it was built were forty five Cubits large, five in length, six broad, and as many long. Joseph. l. 6. c. 7.
The City of Ninive described. Ninive was first founded by Assur the son of Sem, Gen. 11.10. Enlarged by Ninus, the third Babylonish King: The compasse of it was four hundred and eighty Furlongs, or sixty four Italian miles▪ the Walls were one hundred foot high, and so broad, that three Cha∣riots might passe abreast upon them; upon the Walls were fifteen hundred Towers, each of them two hundred foot high: It's called a great City, Jonah 3.3. It was eight years in building, and there were never fewer than ten thousand workmen about it. The City of Babylon described. Babylon was founded by Nimrod, Gen. 10.10. but enlarged by Semiramis, who for the carrying on of that work, drew to∣gether thirty hundred thousand workmen; who in one year finished the Walls, which contained in circuit four hundred and eighty furlongs, or sixty four Italian miles: They were two hundred foot high, and fif∣ty foot thick; so that six Chariots might drive abreast on them. The River Euphrates ran through the midst of it: over which shee built a strong, and stately Bridge of a mile long, binding each stone to other, with clips of Iron fastened with molten lead. These Walls were one of the seven Wonders of the World. It was built four square, each side sixteen miles long; scituated in a large plain. Aristotle calls it a Country, rather than a City: and it must needs bee very great, when some part of it was taken three dayes before the other heard of it. It had a hundred brazen Gates, and two hundred and fifty Towers upon the Walls, for beauty, and strength. Semiramis built in it two Pallaces both for ornament, and defence: One in the West, which was sixty Furlongs in compasse, with high brick Walls, and within that a lesse, and within that a third, wherein also was an im∣pregnable Tower. These were wrought sumptuously with Images of Beasts: It had three stately gates, and within the walls were game of Beasts of sundry sorts. The other Pallace was in the East, on the other side of the River, containing thirty Furlongs in circuit. Semiramis her Obelisk described. Semiramis Queen of Babylon caused an huge Obelisk, square, and of the fashion of a Pyramid, to bee cut out of the Armenian Moun∣tains one hundred and fifty foot long, and four and twenty foot thick, which with much difficulty was brought to the River Euphrates, and from them thence to Babylon, where shee erected it, to bee matter of admiration to future ages. Diod.
The Rarities in old Babylon described. Within the heart of this huge and stately City of Babylon shee built a Tower, reckoned amongst the VVorlds VVonders; It had an hundred brazen gates, and two hundred and fifty Towers. Se∣miramis also built in the same City a stately Temple which shee dedi∣cated to Cush, or Jupiter Belus, four square; each side containing two Furlongs or a thousand paces, with thick Towering walls, entred by four gates of polished brasse. In the midst was a solid Tower of the height and thicknesse of a Furlong: upon this another, and so each higher than another, being eight in number, reaching far above the middle Region of the Air: In the highest Tower was a Chappel, and therein a fair bed covered, and a Table of gold, in the top of this Chappel shee placed three golden Statues: One of Jupiter, forty foot long weighing a thousand Talents (each Talent containing sixty three pounds, and almost ten ounces): Another of Ops, weighing as much, sitting in a golden Throne, at her feet two Lions, and hard by, huge Serpents of silver, each of thirty Talents. The third Image was of Juno standing, in weight eight hundred Talents: To all which was a common Table of gold forty foot long, and twelve broad, weighing fifty Talents. There were also two standing Cups of thirty Ta∣lents, and two Vessels for perfume, of the like weight: besides three other Vessels of gold weighing twelve hundred Talents: all which the Persian Kings after their conquest of it took away. Herod. Nebuchadnezzar's Babylon with its Rarities described. Nebuchadnezzar, after hee came to it, having conquered all the neighbouring Nations, enriched this Temple of Belus with their spoils, and added a new City to the old without the same, which hee compassed about with three walls, and made in them stately gates: and neer his Fathers Palace hee built another more stately, wherein hee raised stone works like unto Mountains, which hee planted with all manner of trees: Hee made also Pensile Gardens (one of the VVorlds VVonders) born upon arches four square, each square containing four hundred foot, filled above vvith earth, vvherein grevv all sorts of trees and plants: the arches vvere built one upon another in conve∣nient height, still increasing as they ascended: the highest vvhich bate the vvalls vvere fifty Cubits high: Hee made also Aquaeducts for the vvatering of this Garden. Hee erected also an Image of gold in the plain of Dura sixty Cubits high, and six broad: These stately buildings made him so to boast;When Alexan∣der took it, hee hd in i two hundred thou∣sand Talents of Gold. Is not this great Babel that I have built for the house of the Kingdome, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my Ma∣jesty? Herod.
The Tower of Babylon Described. About one hundred and thirty years after Noahs comming out of the Ark, his posterity being affrighted with the late Flood, under Nimrod they intended to raise up such a pile, as should secure them from a second deluge, and admirable it is to consider, what multi∣tudes of men there were in the world in so short a space, there being but eight persons that came out of the Ark, and now this building was carried on by five hundred thousand men; the Basis of it was nine miles in compass, and in a few years they raised it above five thousand paces into the sky, and had proceeded farther, but that God by con∣founding their Languages, despersed them over the whole face of the Earth. Herb. Trav. The Country about Babylon hath been the fruitfullest in the VVorld, yeilding ordinarily two hundred, and in some places three hundred increase: the blades of the VVheat and Barley are about four fingers broad; They cut their Corn twice in the year, and depas∣ture it a third time, or else it would bee nothing but blade: Pur. Pilgri. p. 59. The City of Bagdat Described. Bagdat is raised out of the ruines of old Babylon: its in circuit above three miles, containing fifteen thousand families: its watered by Tygris, somewhat broader than the Thames; it hath a bridge over it made upon thirty long boates, chained together, made to open, and shut at plea∣sure: The Mosque stands at the West end, large, round, and plea∣santly raised of white freestone: The Pallace joyns to the market, its large but low. The Coha-house is a house of good fellowship, where every evening they assemble to drink a certain Stygian Liquor, a black, thick, bitter potion, brewed out of Bunum berries, of great repute, because it provokes lust, and purges melancholly. The Buz∣zar is square, and comely, the gardens are sweet and lovely. Syria Described. Syria bounds Northward upon Cilicia, and part of Cappadocia by Mount Amanus: on the South upon Judea, and part of Arabia-Pe∣traea: On the East upon Arabia Deserta, and Euphrates: and on the West upon the Syrian Sea. This Country is thought to have been the habitation of our first parents before the Flood, and of Noah, and the better part of his Family, after. Hierapolis was the chief City, where was a Temple built in the midst of the City, compassed with a double wall: The Porch looking Northward was almost a hun∣dred fathoms high: the Temple it self, was three hundred fa∣thoms, at the top whereof stood Images of Priapus; which was their God, whom they served with filthy and godlesse vices. The Tem∣ple
within shined with gold, and the Roof was wholly of the same mettall. It yeilded so fragrant a smell, that the garments of those that came into it retained the sent long after: within it was a Quire, where stood the Images of Jupiter, supported with Bulls, and of Juno sitting upon a Lyon, with a Scepter in one hand, and a distaffe in the other, adorned with many Jewels; and amongst the rest on her head, one called the Lamp, yeilding light in the night sea∣son. Not far from the City was a lake two hundred fathoms deep, where∣in was preserved sacred Fishes, and in the middest thereof an Altar of stone, crowned always with garlands, and burning with O∣dours. Antioch, another City in Syria, was built by Seleucus, and was sometimes the Seat Royall of the Syrian Kings, and afterwards it was the third City in the Roman Empire: the third seat of the Christian Patriarks: and the first place where the Disciples were called Christians: but now its a Sepulchre to it self, being left but a small village. Damascus, another Regal City, was fair, and great, every side containing fifteen miles, by it ran the River Pharphar, that wate∣red their gardens: but Abana entered into the City, and by Conduits was carried into their private houses, both of them adding both plea∣sure and Profit to the inhabitants; which made Naaman prefer them before all the Waters of Israel. In it was a Synagogue of the Ismalites, a stately building, wherein was a wall of glasse distinguished by three hundred sixty and five holes, in each of which was a Dial with twelve Degrees, answering to the hours of the day, within it were bathes and costly buildings, so rich of gold and silver as seemed incredible: it had forty great Porches in the circuit of it, wherein nine thousand Lamps, all of gold, and silver hanged from the roof of them. It was ca1led the Palace of Benhadad. Aleppo is now the chiefest City in Syria, wherein this is very remark∣able, that though the Plague rage never so much (as many times it doth) yet upon that very day wherein Sol enters into Leo, which is u∣sually the twelfth or thirteenth day of July, it immediately ceaseth, and all that are then sick amend, and such as are then come abroad, need fear no further danger. The Turks call Aleppo, Halep, which sig∣nifies milk, because it yeilds great store of milk. Its usuall here with many Christians to take a woman of the Country (provided shee bee not a Turk, for its death for a Christian to meddle with them) and when they have bought them, to enroll them in the Cadi's book, and so to use them as wives at bed, and board, while they sojourn there, and then at their departure to leave them to shift for themselves, and children. Tripolis is a City on the main land of Syria, neer unto Mount Liba∣nus, which is a Mountain of three days journey in length, reaching from Trypolis to Damascus: The Christians which dwell upon this Mountain are called Maronites, they are a very simple and ignorant
People, yet civil, kind, and curteous to strangers. There are now few Cedars growing here, only in one place, there are four and twenty growing together, they are tall, and as big as the greatest Oaks, with diverse rows of branches, one over another, stretching strait out, as though they were kept by Art. There is no place in all the VVorld, wherein they speak the Syriack tongue naturally at this day, but only in four villages on this mountain, which are Eden, Hatche∣eth, Shany, and Boloza. Neer unto Tripolis, there is a gallant plain of about a mile in length full of Olive, and Fig-trees. Scandaroon, by Christians called Alexandretta, is in the very bot∣tome of the Straights: The Air is very unwholsome, and infects those that stay any time there, occasioned by two high mountains, which keep away the Sunne from it for a great part of the day: the wa∣ter also neer the Town is very unwholsome. Here our Merchants land their goods, and send them by Caravan upon Camels to Alep∣po, distant about three days journey. Here are many Jackalls, which in the night make a great crying, and comming to a grave where a Corse hath been buried the day before, if the grave bee not well filled with many great stones upon it, they will scrape up the Earth, and devour the corps. Mr. Bidulphs Travels. The Empire of Persia Described. Persia at this day hath many famous Provinces subjected to her Command; as Persia, Parthia, Media, Hyrcania, Bactria, Sogdiana, Everge∣ta, Ara, Drangiana, Margiana, Paropamisa, Caramania, Gedrosia, Susiana, Arabia, Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Armenia, Iberia, and Men∣grellia, twenty Noble Kingdomes of old: The whole Empire is bounded East, West, North, and South, with India, Arabia, the Caspian and Persian Seas. In length from East to West is one thou∣sand three hundred and twenty miles; and in breadth from North to South; its One thousand four hundred fourscore and eight miles; So that the whole Circuit is about Four thousand miles: the Reve∣nues of the Persian King, amount yearly to the sum of one million and one hundred and ninty thousand pounds sterling. The Persians are usually big-boned, strong, straight, and proper: Of an Olive colour, the women paint, the men love Arms, and all love Poetry. No part of their body is allowed hair, the upper lip excep∣ted, where it grows long, and thick: they turn it downwards: the meaner sort reserve a lock in the middest of their head, by which they believe Mahomet will pluck them up into Paradise. Their eyes are black, their foreheads high, and their Noses hooked; upon their heads they wear Shashes of great rowls of Calico, silk, and gold, the higher, the more beautiful: They wear no bands, their outside garment is usually of Calico, stitched with silk, quilted with Cotton; the better sort have them farre richer, of silk, silver and gold; their sleeves are straight and long, their garment reaches to the Calf of the leg, their wasts are girt with Towels of silk, and
gold very long: next their skin they wear smocks of Cotton very short; their breeches and stockings are sowed together; from the ankle to the shooes they are naked; their shooes have no latchets, sharp at the toes, and turn upward. Circumcision is so necessary, that without it none can call himself a Mussulman: Both men and women use it; the women at any time from nine to fifteen: the men at twelve, which was Ishmaels age, when Abraham circumcised him, whom they make their progenitor. Their ordinary houshold furniture is a Pan, a Platter, and a Carpet▪ their diet is soon drest, and as soon eaten; their Table is the ground, covered with a Carpet, over which they spread a Pintado cloth: be∣fore each man they lay four or six thin Cakes of Wheat: for every one a wooden spoon, their handles almost a yard long, and huge big mouthes: Their only meat is Pelo, dressed after diverse manners. It consists of Rice, Mutton, and Hens boiled together, to which they adde various sauces, &c. Their drink is Sherbet, made of fair water, sugar, Rosewater, and juice of Lemmons mixt together. The chief Cities in Persia described. The City of Lar described Lar is the chief City in the Province of Larestan. Its not walled about: In that Art is needlesse, the lofty Rock, so naturally defen∣ding her: shee hath a brave Castle on the North Quarter, mounted upon an imperious Hill, not only threatning an enemy, but awing the Town with her frownin posture: the ascent is narrow and steep: the Castle of good stone: the walls are furnished with good battle∣ments, whereon are mounted twelve brasse Cannons, and two Basi∣lisks (the spoils of Ormus) within the walls are one hundred houses stored with souldiers, who have there a gallant Armory, able to furnish with Lance, Bow, and Gun, three thousand men. The Buzzar or Market-place, is a gallant Fabrick; the materials, a good Chalkie-stone, long, strong and beautiful: Its covered a top, arched, and con∣taining in it a Burse, or Exchange, wherein the shops are stored with variety of wares: the walk from North to South is a hundred and se∣venty paces: from East to West one hundred and sixty: the Oval in the Center is about one hundred and ninety. The Mosques or Churches are not many: One especially is round, figuring eternity: in some places engraven with Arabick letters, and painted with knots, and in other places with Mosaick fancies. Its low, and without glasse win∣dows, woodden trellizes (excellently cut after their manner) supply∣ing that want: Here are the fairest Dates, Orenges, Lemmons, and Pomecitrons in all Persia: at easy rates you may have Hens, Goats, Rice, Rache, and Aquavitae. The Inhabitants are for the most part naked, being a mixture of Jews, and Mahumetans; their habit is only a wreath of Calico tyed about their heads, a cloth about their loins, and sandals on their feet; the rest naked. Herb. Trav.
Shyraz described. Shyraz is at this day the second City for magnificence in the Persian Monarchy: It's watered by the River Bindamyr, that springs out of the Tapirian Mountains: It's each way about three miles in length; the compasse nine miles. Its pleasantly seated in the North West end of a spacious plain, twenty miles long, and six broad; enviro∣ned with stupendious Hills, under one of which the City is placed: Its defended by Nature, inriched by Trade, by Art made lovely: The Vine-yards, Gardens, Cypresses, Sudatories, and Temples ra∣vish the eye, and smell, in every part sweet, and delightful. The houses are of Sun-burnt Bricks, hard, and durable; flat and tarrassed about: the Belconies, and windows are curiously and largely trellized: the floores spred with rich Carpets: None are without their Gardens, or Forrests, rather of high Chenaers, and Cypresses: In it are fif∣teen brave Mosques, pargetted with Azure-stones, resembling Tur∣quoises, without; lined within with pure, black polished Marble: the tops beautified with many double-guilt-spires, which reflect the Sun beams with a rich and delightful splendor: two excel all the rest: One of them is fifty foot high in the body, leaded, covered with gold, and blew; the walls, varnished and wrought with knots and poesies: Above, aspiring with two colums of wood round, cut and garnished with great bravery, very nigh as high as Pauls in London. The o∣ther is Quadrangular: the superficies of Arabick invention, imbost with gold, paved with Porphiry, painted with Azure, garnished with Mazes, and at their festivals made resplenent with one thousand Lamps and Torches. Idem. When our English Embassador passed through this City, hee was en∣tertained in the Dukes Palace, where all the great men of the Court and City were present, and many young Ganimedes arrayed in cloath of gold, went up and down with flagons of pure gold, to fill out VVine to such as nodded for it: they were served with a curious banquet, at the end whereof came in the Duke: Hee was ushered in by thirty gallant young Gentlemen vested in crimson Satten: Their Tulipants were of Silk and Silver, wreathed about with chains of Gold, of Pearl, of Rubies, Turquoises, and Emeralds: they were all girded with rich swords, and imbroidered scabbards, they had Hawks on their fists, each hood worth one hundred pound. To these suc∣ceeded their Lord, the Arch Duke of Shyraz, his Coat was of blew Satten, richly imbroidered with silver, upon which hee wore a Robe of a great length, so glorious to the eye, so thick powdered with O∣riental Gems, as made the ground of it invisible, the price invaluable. His Turbant was of pure fine silk and gold, bestudded with Pearl and Carbuncles: his Scabbard was beset all over with Rubies, Pearls, and Emeralds: His Sandals resmbled the bespangling Firmament, &c. Idem.
The ancient Persepolis described. Persepolis was a City so glorious, that Quintus Curtius, and Diodo∣rus Siculus intitle it the richest, and most lovely City under the Sun. It was a very large City, and the Metropolis of all Persia, two of the gates standing twelve miles asunder, which shews what the circuit of it was, when in her beauty and bravery. On the South side was a stately and magnificent Pallace, built by King Cyrus: On the North side stood a mighty strong Castle, which was girt about with three walls: The first wall was four and twenty foot high, adorned and beautified with many turrets and spires: The second was like the first, but twice as high: And the third was foursquare, being ninety foot high; all built of polished Marble: On each side of the City were twelve brasen gates, with brasen Pales set before them very cu∣riously wrought. On the East arose amiably an Hill of four Acres, in which, in stately Mausoleum's, were entombed the Monarchs of the VVorld. Many rare and admirable buildings it had, amongst which the glorious Temple of Diana was the most exquisite for Art, and materials in the VVorld: The stones were of the richest Marble and Porphery, the roof of refined gold. The Pallace Royal was cut out of the Marble Rock, above two miles in compasse: the roof and windows were of Gold, Silver, Amber, and Ivory: The Seate within was of Gold, and Oriental glittering Gems: In one room was an artificial Vine, the stalk of pure Gold, the clusters of Grapes of Pearls and Carbuncles: His bolster was valued at five thousand Talents of Gold; the footstool worth three thousand Ta∣lents: so that when the greedy Greeks had pillaged three dayes, yet Alexander had for his share seventy two millions of Crowns of Gold: besides hee loaded away three thousand Mules, with two and thirty millions, and seven hundred and fifty thousand pounds in Coin. The ruines of this stately City are seen at this day with astonishment. Herb. Trav. p. 144. The City of Spahawn described. Spahawn, The Metropolis of the Persian Monarchy, is seated in the Parthian territory, as the navel to that spacious body: It's nine English miles in compasse, containing seventy thousand houses, and of souls a∣bout two hundred thousand, composed (besides natives) of English, Dutch, Portuguize, Poles, Moscovites, Indians, Arabians, Armenians, Georgians, Turks, Jews, &c. drawn thither by the magnetick power of gain and novelty. The principal things observeable in it are, The Bridge well built of stone, supported by five and thirty Arches, through which the Syndery from the Acroceraunian Mountains gently floweth. The Midan, or great Market-place▪ which is the most spa∣cious, pleasant and Aromatick Market in the VVorld: a thousand pa∣ces from North to South, the other way above two hundred, re∣sembling
our Exchange: the building is of Brick, well made, and fra∣med in a most delightful manner; the inside is full of shops, each shop full of ware, arched above, a top framed Tarrase-wise: and cemen∣ted with excellent plaister, its placed in the heart of this triumphant City. The Kings Pallace joyns to the West side of it, possessing a large quantity of ground backward, though to the street side it hath no magnifick front; her best bravery being in the trim pargetting and painting with Azure and Gold, in Mosaick and Antick sort, interlaced with Poesies of Arabick: But within, the rooms are arched, en∣lightened with curious trellizes: the roof embossed with red, white, blew, and gold, the sides with sports, and painted Images: the ground spread with rich and curious Carpets of Silk and Gold. Tarrased above, garnished with a very high Tower, excellent for view; and breathing. The Wildernesse behinde is filled with all sorts of birds, priviledged from hurt, or affrights, who return their thanks in a sweet melodious consort. The North Isle of the Midan, contains eight or nine arched rooms, hung with Lamps and Candle∣sticks, which being lighted, gives a curious splendor. Opposite to this Pallace is a fair Mosque, in form round, and within distinguished into Isles; the walls are lined fifteen foot high from the ground with white, and well polisht Marble, without pews or seats: In the midst is a stately Tank, or Pond, and at the Por∣tal another eightsquare, filled with Christal streams of water, where∣in all Musslemen wash their hands, armes, eyes, &c. as an operative work to purge sin, and confer devotion. In the Midan the shops bee uniform, the Trades are no where se∣vered; all the Mercers together, the Lapidaries together, &c. but most of them are of gums, drugs, and spices so sweet and delicate as can bee imagined. The Hummums or Sudatories are many, and very beautiful, some square, but most round, made of white stone polished, and durable; the windows are large without, and narrower within, the glasse is thick, and dark: the top round, tyled with a counterfeit Turquoise, perfectly blew, fresh and lasting; they are divided into many rooms, some for delight, and others for sweating: the paving all pure black Marble: Men use them in the morning, women towards night. Tis their Catholicon against all diseases, colds, catarrhes, flegme, aches, &c. The City is Oval, each house made pleasant by large Cypresse Gardens. The Seraglio for his women, is full of precious treasures, and more precious beauties, but not to bee seen. The Castle is ve∣ry large, well walled, and deeply moated. The City hath so ma∣ny pleasant Gardens, that at a distance you would take it for a For∣rest, so sweet, you would call it a Paradise: I shall only describe one of them excelling all others. Going from the Midan, you passe through an even delicate street two miles long, most part of the way walled on both sides, bedecked with Summer-houses, but more remarkable in that abundance of
green, broad spreading Chenore Trees, yeelding shade, and incom∣parable order and beauty. The Garden is circled with a stately wall, three miles in compasse, entred by three gallant and curious gates. From North to South it is one thousand paces; from East to West seven hundred: from one end to the other easily seen by reason of a fair large Alley, running all along in parallel, distinguished into nine ascents, each surmounting other a foot, each distance smooth and even. In the Center is a spacious Tank, made into twelve equal sides, each side being five foot, set round with pipes of lead, which spout out water in variety of conceits and postures, which sort of pastime continues thence to the North gate, where is raised a house of pleasure, antickly garnished without, within divided into four or six Chambers: the lower is set out with Tanks of rich white Marble, and fumes out a cool Breese: the higher rooms are garnished with variety of Land∣skips, representing their sports of hunting, hawking, fishing, riding, shooting, wrestling, and other fancies: the seeling is inriched with beaten gold, imbost with Azure. From her Tarrasses is a dainty prospect of most part of the City. This Garden is replenished with trees of all sorts, for fruit, shade, and medicine: All so green, so sweet, so plea∣sant, as may well bee tearmed a Compendium of Sense-ravishing delights. Within the City is a Column or Pillar, at the base twenty foot round, and sixty foot high, made of the heads of men and beasts: the oc∣casion of this was Anno Christi 1500. when Tamas Shaw ruled Persia, being much troubled with Turks and Tartars, these Citizens refused not only to contribute to his Wars, but denyed him enterance, where∣upon hee vowed revenge, entred the City by force, and without re∣garding age, or sex, slew three hundred thousand of them; and of their heads made this Pillar, as a Trophee of his victory, and their basenesse. — En quo discordia Cives perduxit miseros. — When our English Embassador came to the Emperor of Persia, he found him at Asharaff in Hircania, two miles from the Caspian Sea: when hee came to the Court with his retinue, they allighted, and were ushered into a little Court du Guard, that stood in the center of a spacious Court, the ground spread with Persian Carpets, about a pretty white Marble Tank, where they were feasted with Pelo, and Wine, the flagons, cups, dishes, plates, and covers being of pure bea∣ten gold: Thence they were led through a spacious and fragrant Garden, curious to the eye, and delicate to the smell, to another Summer-house, rich in gold imbossements, and paintings; but far more excellent for the admirable prospect▪ for from thence they viewed the Caspian Sea on one side, and the Mountain Taurus on the other. The ground Chambers were large, four-square, archt, and rich∣ly guilded above, and on the sides, below, bespread with curious Car∣pets of Silk and Gold.
In the Center were Tanks of Christalline water (an Element of no mean account in those Torrid habitations) Round about the Tanks were placed Goblets, Flagons, Cisterns, and Standards of pure Mas∣sy-gold: some of them were filled with perfumes, others with Rose∣water: with wine some, and others with choisest Flowers. From thence they were led into another large square upper Room, where the roof was formed into an Artificial Element, many golden Planets attracting the wandring eye to help their Motion: The ground was covered with far richer Carpets than the other: the Tank was larger: the matter, Jasper; and Porphiry: the silver purling-stream was forced up into another Region, yet seemed here to bubble wan∣tonly as in her proper Center: about it was so much gold in ves∣sels for use, and oftentation, that some Merchants with them, judg∣ed it worth twenty millions of pounds sterling: Another Tank there was incircled with a wall of Gold, and richest Gems: No other Fla∣gons, Cups, nor other vessels were there but what were thick, and cove∣red over with Diamonds, Rubies, Pearls, Emeralds, Turquises, Jacinths, &c. The seeling of this Chamber was garnished with Poetick fan∣cies in gold, and choicest colours. The ground in this room was co∣vered with such Carpets as befitted the Monarch of Persia: Above sixty of the greatest Nobles sat round about it, cross-legged with their bums to the ground, and their backs to the wall, like so many statues, their eyes fixed on a constant object; not daring to speak, sneese, Cough, spit, &c. in the Emperors presence. The Ganimed Boys in vests of Gold, and richly bespangled Turbanes, &c. with Flagons of most glorious mettal, profering wine to such as would tast it: The Emperor Abbas himself sat at the upper end; so much higher than the rest, as two or three silken shags could elevate him: his appar∣rel was plain, &c. The City of Casbine Described. Casbine is at this day for multitude of Buildings, and inhabitants, the chiefest City in Media, and next to Spahawn, the greatest City in the Persian Monarchy. Its compassed with a wall seven miles in compasse: seated in a fair even plain, having no hill of note within thirty miles compasse: the Champain yeilds grain, and grapes, but no wood. It hath a small stream to water it, which gives drink to the thirsty; and makes fruitfull the gardens, whereby they yeild abun∣dance of fruits, and roots in variety; as Grapes, Orenges, Limes, Lemons, Pomecitrons, Musk melons, and Water-melons, Apples, Pistachoes, Filberts, Almonds, Walnuts, Plums, Cherries, Peaches, Apricocks, Figs, Pears, Goosberries, Dates, and excellent Pom∣granats; &c. The Families in it are twenty thousand, and the Inha∣bitants about two hundred thousand: The Buzzars, or market pla∣ces are large, and pleasant: The Midan is uniform, and beautifull: The Kings Palace nigh the market, low built, painted with blew, red, and yellow colours, commixt with Arabick letters and knots in
gold, and azure: The windows are spacious, trellized, and neatly carved: Neer the Kings gate is a great Tank: The Hummums, or sweating places are many, resplendent in the azure pargetting, and tile∣ing: The gardens are pleasant for view and smell. The City of Tauris Described. Tauris was the late Metropolis of Media, taking its name from the prodigious Mountain Taurus, under which it is built; the ancient name was Ecbatane, when shee was farre greater than now shee is: Strabo saith, that it was fifteen miles in compasse, the walls were strong and stately, seventy cubits high, and fifty broad, beautified with ma∣ny lofty Turrets, and battlements, within were many great and ex∣cellent Palaces, especially that which was built by Daniel (the Mau∣soleum of the Median Kings) was most magnificent, which remained undemolished till the time of Josephus. That built by Darius was no lesse memorable, most whereof was built of Cedar, the roof stud∣ded, and plaited with burnished gold. At this day its about five miles compasse, well peopled, traded to from farre and neer; The houses are flat on the top, made of brick; the Buzzar large, and the gardens lovely. The City of Derbent Described. Derbent is a strong and famous Port Town upon the Caspian Sea, viewing from her lofty Turrets, the Armenian, and Hyrcanian Terri∣tories, as also Ararat, and the sea. Its circled with a strong, high, and defensible stone-wall, above three miles in compasse: The houses, Hum∣mums, and Churches, are but meanly beautifull: the strong Castle Kastow is most observeable in it, pleasantly, and very advantagiously seated. Hyspaan Described. The City of Hyspaan in Persia, was formerly called Hecatompolis, by reason of its hundred gates; It's compassed with a strong wall, and is in circuit as much as a man may well ride on horseback in a day; its a very strong City, and is excellently watered with deep channels of running springs, conveyed into it from the Coronian Mountains, which are as a wall inaccessible about it. On the North side is a very strong Castle, which is compassed about with a wall of a thousand and seven hundred yards in compasse. On the West side of the City are two Seraglio's, one for the King, the other for his women: Palaces of great state, and Magnificence, the Walls whereof glister with pol∣lished Marble, and pargetting of divers colours; and all the Palaces are paved with curious checkered work, and covered with curious Carpets wrought with Silk, and Gold; the windows are made of Marble, Porphery, and Alabaster; the Posts and doors of Massie I∣vory,
checkered with glistering black Ebonie, so curiously wrought in winding knots, as may easilier stay than satisfie the wondering eye of the spectator. Near the Palace is a stately Garden, spacious, and large, beautifully adorned with a thousand sundry kinds of Fruit-trees, plants, and flowers of all sorts to delight the beholders. There are in it a thousand Fountains, and a thousand Brooks, and as the Fa∣ther of them all, a pretty River which with a mild stream, and de∣lightful murmure, divides the Garden from the Kings Palace. Casan described. Casan is the chiefest City in Parthia; It is seated in a goodly plain, having no Mountains within a dayes journey of it: It wanteth neither Fountains, Springs, nor curious pleasant Gardens: It aboundeth with all necessaries for the life of man; It's greatly frequented with all sorts of Merchandize, especially out of India. The Citizens are very industrious, and curious in all manner of Sciences, especially in weaving girdles, and shashes; in making Velvets, Satins, Damasks, excellent Persian Carpets of a wonderful finenesse: Here you may buy all manner of Drugs, and Spices; as also Turkesses, Diamonds, Rubies, and Pearles; as also all sorts of Silk, raw and wrought: For there is more Silk brought into Casan in one year, than there comes broad cloth into London. This City is much to bee commended for Civil Government: For an idle person is not suffered to live amongst them; the child that is but six years old is set to labour: no ill rule, disorder or riot is suffered there. They have a Law amongst them, whereby every person is compelled to give his name to the Magistrate, withal declaring by what course hee liveth; and if any tell untruly, hee is either well beaten on the feet, or imployed in publick sla∣very. Casan contains above four thousand families; the houses are fairly built; the streets bee large and comely: the Mosques and Hum∣mums are curiously painted, and covered with blew Tiles, like Tur∣quoises: The Buzzar is spacious, and uniform. The Gardens abound with fruit, and the fields with Corn: The Carravans-Raw is an admi∣rable Fabrick, able to receive all the retinue of the greatest Po∣tentate in Asia. It was built by Saw-Abbas for the entertainment of Travellers on free cost: The whole building is founded on Marble, six foot high, the rest of Brick; varnished and coloured with knots, and Phansies of Arabick characters in Azure, red, and white, laid in Oile: Its a perfect quadrangle, each side two hundred paces long: In the midst of this spacious Court is a large fouresquare Tank, or Pond, with Christaline water: This Royal Inne is seated in the midst of fragrant and spacious Gardens. Armenia the greater described Armenia Major lyeth on the farther side of Euphrates: is a very
mountainous Country; hath part of Cappadocia, and Euphrates, on the West. Mesopotamia on the South: Colchis, Iberia, and Albania on the North. And the Caspian Sea, and Media on the East: One part of it is called Turcomania, the other Georgia. On the Mountain of Ararat, in this Countrey the Ark rested, and from hence the World was repeopled. The chiefest Rivers are Phasis and Lycus, which runne into the Pontick Sea: Cyrus, and Araxes into the Caspian; Euphrates, and Tygris which run into the Red, or Persian Sea. Tygris, so called from its swiftnesse, passeth through the Lake Are∣thusa, yet neither mingling water, nor fishes, saith Solinus; afterward it diveth under Taurus, and riseth on the other side bringing much filth with it, and is again hidden, and again riseth, and at last carrieth Euphra∣tes into the Sea. Mr. Cartwright in his Preachers Travels, saith, that these present Armenians are a very industrious people in all kind of Labour: that their women are very skilful, and active in shooting, and managing any sort of weapon, like the Ancient Amazons; That their Families are great, the Father and all his posterity dwelling together under one roof, having their substance in common, and when the father dy∣eth, the eldest son governs, all submitting themselves under his regi∣ment, after his death, not his son, but his brother succeeds, and when all the brethren are dead, then the eldest Son. In diet, and clothing they are all alike. Media Described. Media hath on the North the Caspian Sea: on the South Persia: on the West Armenia: and on the East Parthia. Ecbatane was once the Metropolis of it, twenty miles distant from the Caspian Straits: which are a narrow way made by hand through the Hills, scarce wide enough for a Cart to pass, eight miles in length, the rocks with their obscure frowns, hanging over them, and in the summer time multitudes of Serpents guarding them. The walls of Ecbatane were built of hewen stone, seventy cubits high, and fifty cubits broad, and sixteen miles in compasse. Herodotus saith, that after the Assyri∣ans had raigned in Asia, five hundred and twenty years, the Medes rebelled, chose Deioces for their King, at whose command they buil∣ded him this royall City, and in it a Palace of Cedar wood; joyned with plates of silver, and gold, being a stately thing, the whole com∣passe of it was seven furlongs. Diodorus Siculus reports, that at one time, multitudes of Sparrows that devoured their seed, forced the inhabi∣tants to leave this Countrey, and to seek their living in other places: as Mice caused them in some part of Italy: and Frogs that rained out of the Clouds, made the Attariotae: and Fleas chased away the Inhabitants of Myus: How great is that God, who of the smallest of his Creatures, can muster Armies to conquer them that swell in the conceit of their own greatnesse? as against Pharoah, &c. And how many Nati∣ons in Africa have the Grashoppers exiled from their native habitati∣ons?
amongst the Medes none might bee King except hee was in sta∣ture and strength more eminent than others: They used to nourish Dogs with great care, to whom they cast men ready to dye, whilest yet breathing, to bee devoured of them. In this Country is the Lake of Van, three hundred miles long, and a hundred and fifty broad, of salt water the greatest next to Meotis. Gyllicus affirms that eight great Rivers run into it, without any apparent issue to the Sea. Parthia described. Parthia is seated at the roots of the mountains, having the Arians on the East; the Medes on the West: Caramania on the South: and Hyrcania on the North, surrounded with Desarts: they used not gold, or silver, but only to adorn their armour: they had many wives, of whom they were so jealous that they forbad them the sight of any other man: They performed all businesses, both pub∣lick and private on horseback; this being the distinction of free men from servants; they buried their dead in the bellies of birds, or dogs: they were exceeding superstitious in the service of their Gods: they were a stout, unquiet, and unfaithful people: their fight was more dangerous in their flight, than in their onset; whence Seneca saith Terga, conversi metuenda Parthi. The Parthians flight doth most affright. Its now called Arach. Hyrcania described. Hyrcania (now Strava) hath on the West Media: on the East Mar∣giana: on the South Parthia: and on the North the Caspian Sea: Its famous for store of woods, and Tygers: Strava the chief City a∣bounds with trafick for Silk: Their Religion agrees with that of the Persians. Arabia described. Arabia is a very large Country lying between the Persian Gulph on the East, and the Arabian Gulph on the West: On the South is the Ocean; and on the North is Syria and Euphrates. Its usually di∣vided into Petraea, Deserta, and Foelix: The name Faelix, or Happie is given to the Southern part, from the fertility of it. Petraea to a se∣cond part, of Petra the Seat Royal: Deserta, or the Desert from the na∣ture of it, being a very barren soil. Arabia the Desert is bounded on the East with Babylonia, and part of the Persian Gulph: on the North with Mesopotamia, neer to Eu∣phrates: On the West with Syria, and Arabia Petraea: and on the South with the Mountains of Arabia Faelix, neer unto which, and
Euphrates, it hath some Towns which are frequented by Merchants: In other parts it is unpeopled, only by some roving Arabians wander∣ing in it, seeking pasture for their Cattel. Arabia Petraea hath Syria on the West and North: Arabia the De∣sert on the East; and Arabia Foelix on the South: some call it Naba∣thaea: that part of it which is next to Syria is fruitful; the other bar∣ren, wanting both wood, and water, and frequented by wandring theevish Arabians: In this Country it was, that the Israelites wandred forty years up and down in their passage to Canaan. Here is Mount Sinai, a mile and an half from Horeb, and far higher: Sinai is ascended by steps cut out of the Rock, and from the top of it may bee seen both shores of the Red-Sea. Arabia Foelix bounds upon the former, and hath the Sea on all o∣ther parts, against which it doth abut for the space of three thousand five hundred and four miles. Its now called Ayaman, or Giamen. Its probable to bee the Country where Saba stood, whose Queen came to visit Salomon, though the Abassines challenge her to themselves: It hath store of Rivers, Lakes, Towns, Cities, Cattel, and fruits of many sorts. The chief Cities are Medina, Mecca, Ziden, Zebit, Aden, &c. Here is store of gold, silver, and variety of precious stones: As also wild beasts of diverse kinds. The Inhabitants use circumcision at thirteen years old after the xample of Ismael. Frankincense grows only in this Country, and not in every part, but in one part only, guarded, and almost unpassable by Rocks; the place is one hundred miles long, and about fifty in breadth; there are three hundred families appointed to attend this Wood, who are called Holy, and when they cut the trees, whence Incense sweats, which is in the Spring and Autum, they must abstain from Women, funerals, &c. when its gathered, they carry it on Camels by Sabota, where they pay the Tithe to a God called Sabis. They have in Arabia sheep with great tailes, some of which weigh forty pounds, some much more: they kill all the Mice they can, as supposing them enemies to their Gods: the women cover their faces, being contented rather to see but with one eye, than to prostitute their whole faces. They have also Bal∣som trees. The Arabick language is now the most common in all the Eastern Countries, especially amongst those that imbrace the Maho∣metan Religion. Tartary described. The Tartars inhabit a vast space of ground in Asia, and are divided into many Tribes different both in name and government one from another: The greatest and mightiest of them is the Crim Tartar, cal∣led by some the great Cham, that lyeth South, and South East from Russia. Their Arms are Bows, Arrows, and Swords; they are all Horse-men, and use to shoot as readily backward, as forward: the common souldiers have no armour more than their ordinary apparel, which is a black sheep skin with the wool side outward in the day
time, and inward in the night, with a cap of the same: the Nobles imitate the Turks, both in apparrel and armour. In their wars they chiefly seek to get store of Captives, especially of Boyes and Girles, whom they sell to the Turks, or other neighbour Nations; they are most of them Mahometans. They have certain Idol puppets made of Silk or other stuff in the likenesse of a man, which they fasten to the door of their walking houses to keep them in safety; besides they have the Image of their great Cham, of an huge bignesse, which they erect at every stage when they march, and every one as he passeth by, must bow down to it, they are much given to witchcraft, and sorce∣ry. They are divided into Hoords, over each of which is a Duke, who are bound when the Emperor sends for them, to attend him with such a number of Souldiers, every one having two horses, one to ride on, and the other to kill, when his turn comes to have his horse ea∣ten: for their chief food is horseflesh, which they eat without any bread: They keep also great heards of Kine, and black sheep, ra∣ther for their skins and milk (which they carry with them in great bottles,) then for their flesh, which (they say) is not so strengthning as horse-flesh, they drink milk and bloud mingled together: Some∣times as they travel, they let their horses blood; and drink it warm. They have no Towns but walking houses, built upon wheeles, like Shepheards Cottages: these they draw with them, and drive their cattel before them, and when they stay, they plant their Cart-hou∣ses very orderly in rank, so making the form of streets, and of a large Town: the Emperor himself hath no other City but such as these: In the spring they move with their Cattel Northward grazing up all before them, and then return Southward again, where they remain all the winter: Towards the Caspian sea, and on the frontiers of Russia, they have a goodly Country, but marred for want of Til∣lage. They use no money, and prefer brass and Steel before all other mettals. They have broad and flat visages, much tanned, have fierce and cruel looks, thin hair on their upper lips, they are light and nimble, they have short legs, as if they were made for horsemen: their speech is sudden, and loud, speaking out of a deep hollow throat: their singing is very untunable. The Circasses that border upon Lituania, are more civil than the rest, applying themselves to the fashions of the Polonians: The Nagay Tartars lye Eastward, and are far more savage, and cruel: The most rude, and barbarous, are the Morduit-Tartars, that worship for god, the first living thing they meet in the morning, and swear by it all the day after: when his friend dyes hee kills his best horse, and carries his hide upon a long pole, before the Corps to the place of buriall: that so his friend may have a good horse to carry him to heaven; they are void of lear∣ning, and without written Laws, only some rules they hold by tradi∣tion, as to obey their Emperor and Governors: none to possesse any land, but the whole Countrey to bee common: not to use daintiness in diet, &c.
This great Country is bounded on the East with the Eastern Ocean: On the West with Russia, and Moldovia: On the North with the Sythick, or frozen Sea: and on the South with Mare Caspium, the Hill Taurus, and the wall of China: Its in length from East to West, five thousand four hundred miles, and in breadth from North to South, three thousand and six hundred miles. It was formerly called Scy∣thia. It hath been so fruitfull of people, that it was called, Vagi∣na gentium, et officina generis humani; the mother of all inunda∣tions. From hence indeed Huns, Herules, Franks, Bulgarians. Circassians, Sueves, Burgundians, Turks, Tartarians, Dutch, Cimbers, Normans, Almaines, Ostrogothes, Tigurines, Lombards, Vandals, Visigothes, Have swarm'd like Locusts, round about this Ball. And spoil'd the fairest Provinces of all. The Island of Cyprus Described. In the Mediterranean Sea: there are only two Islands belonging to Asia, Cyprus, and Rhodes. The Island of Cyprus Described. Cyprus is seated in the Sea of Syria, and is in compasse five hundred and fifty miles: Its in length from East to West, two hundred miles: In breadth but sixty five miles. Its about sixty miles distant from Cilicia, and one hundred from the main land of Syria. In summer its very hot: the greatest supply of water is from the Clouds: So that in Constantines time, there being a great, and long drought, the Island was almost unpeopled for thirty six years together. Ordinari∣ly its very fruitfull, and so stored with Commodities, that without the help of other Countrys, its able to build a ship from the keel to the top-sail, and to furnish it to Sea, with all things necessary, either for a voyage or Sea-fight. It yeilds plenty of wine, Oile, Corn, Sugar, Honey, Wool, Cotton, Turpentine, Allum, and Verdegreece: As also all sorts of Mettals, Salt, Grograms, and other Commodities; whence it was called Macaria; or the blessed Island. There are a∣bundance of Cyprus Trees growing in it. The Inhabitants are warlike, strong, and nimble, civil, Hospitable, and friendly to strangers. The Jews in Trajans time slew in this Island, two hundred and forty thou∣sand living souls, whereupon ever since they suffer no Jew to come a∣mongst them. The Island is divided into eleven Provinces: the chief Rivers are Pedeus and Tenus: The chief Cities are Paphos, once famous for the Temple of Venus. Famagusta on the South Sea. Nicosia almost in the center of the Countrey. Amathus, Ceraunia, now called Cerines: And Arsione, now Lescare. Its now under the Turks, who took it from
the Venetians, Anno Christi, One thousand five hundred threescore and ten. The Island of Rhodes Described. Rhodes is situated in the Carpathian Sea, over against Caria in the lesser Asia: Its in circuit one hundred and twenty miles: The chief City is of the same name, where stood that huge Colossus of Brasse, in the Image of a man fourscore cubits high, whose little finger was as big as an ordinary man: it was the work of twelve years, made by Chares of Lindum. The Inhabitants of this Ile were always good Seamen. Anno Christi 1308. the Knights of St. John in Hierusalem, being driven out of Asia by the Saracens, seized upon this Island, and were always trou∣blesome neighbours to the Turks, till the year 1522. at which time Solyman the Magnificent, wrested it from them. The forenamed City of Rhodes, stands on the East part of the Island at the bottome of a hill, and on the shore of the Sea; having a safe and fair Haven: it hath also two walls for defence, thirteen high towers, five bulwarks, besides sconces and outworks: Its inhabited only by Turks and Jews: for though the Christians are suffered to trade freely all day; yet at night, upon pain of death they must leave it. The Rhodian Colossus more fully Described. In the Isle of Rhodes stood one of the worlds seven wonders, which was a huge Colossus made of Brasse in the form of a man, standing with his two leggs striding over an haven, under which, ships with their Masts and Sails might passe: It was fourscore cubits high, with all the parts proportionable, and all gilt over. When Muani the fifth Caliph of Babylon, overcame Constance the Emperour in a Sea-fight, and had taken the Isle of Rhodes, this image being formerly thrown down by an Earthquake, was sold by him to a Jew, who loaded nine hundred Camels with the brasse of it. Theoph. Pez. Mel. Hist. The Islands and Countries in the East-Indies Described. Malabar Described. Malabar is neer to Cape Comeryn: Its four hundred miles in length, but not above a hundred in breadth: yet so populous that one of the Samorines, or Kings, hath brought into the field two hundred thousand men: The Countrey is green and full of all delights, Cattel, Corn, Fruit, Cotton, silk-worms, and other Merchandise: it hath store of strong Towns, and safe Harbours. Its divided into many Topar∣chies, but all obeying the Samorine, a naked Negro, yet as proud as Lucifer: The Nayroes are his Lords, a sort of Mammeluks, that live by the sweat of other mens brows, lust wholly Mastering them: they al∣ways
go armed with sword and Buckler: The people generally are big-limmed, strong, cole-black, wear their hair, (which is like wool) long, and curled: about their heads they have a wreath of a curious sort of linnen wrought with gold, and silk: about their wast a peece of Calico, all the rest naked: the vulgar sort pink their skins in many places: some are Mahometans, others Gentiles: the Mahometan women use vails like other Indians: such as are Gentiles affect nakedness: their greatest pride is in their noses, and ears; and they judge them most brave which are bigest, and widest: their ears they make big by weigh∣ty bables which they hang in them: they wring their snouts with sil∣ver, brass, or Ivory: their arms and legs are chained richly. Their Braminies, or Priests, have the maiden heads of all that are married: they are couragious and politick. The City of Callecut in Malabar Described. Callecut a City is not large, nor of any beauty▪ the houses are low, thick, and dark: The Samorine, or Emperor usually abides here: ma∣ny deformed Pagathoes are here worshipped: The chappel where their grand Idol sits is covered, and about three yards high: the wooden entrance is ingraven with infernal shapes: within their beloved Pria∣pus is imperiously enthronized upon a brasen Mount: his head hath a re∣splendent Diadem, from whence issue four great Rams horns: his eyes squint: his mouth is wide, from whence branch four Monstrous Tusks: his nose is flat: his beard like the Sun beams, of an affrighting aspect; his hands are like the claws of a Vulture; his thighs and legs big, and hairy; his feet, and tail resemble a Munkies; Other Temples▪ have other Pagods, ugly all, yet all differ in invention. They commonly exchange their wives; As men have many wives, so one woman may have many husbands. The Isle of Zeiloon Described. Zeiloon, or Ceilon, is two hundred and fifty miles in length, one hundred and forty in breadth. It abounds with sundry sorts of aroma∣tick spices: but especially with Cinamon: It hath plenty of Orenges; Dates, Cocoes, Ananas, Plantans, and Mastick; It hath Elephants, Bufolos, Cowes, Sheep, Hogs, &c. Smaragds, Rubies, Amber∣greece, &c. The King hereof to shew his bravery to the Portugals, invited them to see him walk upon a Tarras, arraied in an imbroidered Coat, powdered with Gold, Smaragds, Diamonds, and Pearl; alto∣gether darting out rayes wonderfull, delightfull and pleasant: Here∣upon Selveira, the Portugese Governor, builds a stately and strong Castle amongst them, under pretence of defending them from the Mallabars; but it was rather to bee his Jewel keeper: for in a short time hee ravished the King of all his riches; In this Island there is scarce any village, or Mount, without its Pagod: amongst which, that Apes tooth god was the principal, resorted to by millions of Indians: and
when Columbo, the Vice-Roy of Goa took it away, they proered to re∣deem it with three hundred thousand Duckets; Their Idols are horribly deformed, and ugly: yea the more ugly the more venerable. The Manner of fishing for Pearls in the Isle of Zeilan. They begin their fishing every year in March or April, and it lasteth fifty dayes, and when this time draweth neer, they send very good Divers to discover where there is the greatest plenty of Oisters under water, and right against that place they pitch their Tents on the shore, making as it were a little Village; and so when the time is come, they go out in their Boats, and Anchor in fifteen or eighteen fathom of water, and then they cast a rope into the Sea with a great stone fastened at the end of it: Then a man that hath his nose and ears well stopped, and anointed with Oile, with a basket under his left arm, goes down by the rope to the bottome of the Sea, and as fast as hee can fills the basket with Oisters, and then shaking the rope, his fel∣lowes in the boat pull him up with his basket, and thus they go on till they have filled their Boats with Oisters, and so at evening when they come to their Tents, each lay their heap of Oisters by them∣selves, and none of them are opened, till their fishing bee ended: At which time they open every man his own, which is easily done, because then they are drie, and brittle: There are but few of these Oisters in comparison, that have Pearles in them. There are also cer∣tain that are expert in Pearles, present, that set the price upon them, according to their carracts, beauty, and goodness: the round ones are best. Choromandel described. Choromandel stretches from Cape Comoryn to the famous Gulph of Bengala, and hath in it these famous Towns of Trade: Negapatan, Me∣liapore, Polycat, Armagun, Narsinga, Mesulipatan, and Bipilipatan. Negapatan is hot, and unwholesome, the wind and raines being for the greatest part of the year high, and unseasonable. The Town hath good water, and fruits well relished, cooling and nutritive, yet the people are much vexed with feavers, fluxes, &c. they are blackish, blockish, unapt for study or exercise, by reason of the heat: A small thin shuddery or lawn is drawn before their secret parts: their head hath a small wreath, the rest is all naked: they have gold, and precious stones, which they esteem as wee do trifles. The Bannians Wives have here more freedome to burn themselves when their Husbands dye, than in other places; so that in this place the custome is usual. If any refuse to burn, they must shave, and are accounted as Mon∣sters.
The City of Goa described. Goa is the bravest, and best defenced City in all the Orient, where the Vice-Roy of Portugal keeps his residence, and seats of Justice. Its built three hours journey within land, in an Island thirty miles com∣pass, surrounded by a River that flows from the mighty mountain Bellaguate. Its compassed with a strong and beautiful wall, proud in her aspiring Turrets, dreadful in many tormenting Cannons. The Mar∣ket-place or Buzzar is in the Center of the City, richly built, plea∣sant, and capacious: the other streets (after the Indian mode) are nar∣row, and nasty: the buildings in general are spacious and comely: Tis watered with a delicious stream: the Gardens are filled with sweet, and eye-pleasing flowers: the whole Isle abounds with Grass, Corn, Groves, Cattel, fruits, and many other sense-ravishing de∣lights, wherein there are above twenty Villages: The field peeces here are above three hundred; the Palaces are strong, of good stone, fur∣nished within with rich Arras, and painting, and the Churches beautiful, and comely. Herb. Travels. The City of Amadavar described. Amadavar is the Metropolis of Cambaya, or Guzurat, watered by a sweet River, and circled by a beautiful strong stone wall of six miles compass, well and orderly adorned with many pretty Towers, and twelve Posterns. The streets are many, indifferently large, and come∣ly: most shops abound with Aromatick Gums, perfumes, and spices: as also with Silks, Cottons, Calicoes, and choice of Indian, and China rarities, owned, and sold by the fair spoken, but crafty Bannians. The Market-place is rich, and uniform, the Castle strong, large, and moa∣ted about. The houses in general are built of Sun-dryed Bricks, low, large, and tarrassed. The Island of Socotora described. Socotora is an Island in the mouth of the Red-Sea: a little Island, but pleasant, and abounding with good things, one part rising into wholesome Hills, other parts falling into fruitful dales; all places gar∣nished with spreading trees, sweet Grass, fragrant flowers, and rich Corn: hath store of Olives, Aloes, Sempervive, Sanguis Draconum, Cocoes, Dates, Pistachoes, Orenges, Pomegranats, Pomecitrons, Le∣mons, Melons, Suger-Canes, &c. It abounds with fish, foul, and flesh: Here are Civet-Cats. The inhabitans are black; they are Christi∣ans by profession; their Churches are built in the form of a Cross, kept sweet, and neat, without seats and images: they have a Patriarch whom they reverence, and duly pay their Tithes to the Clergie: their feasts and fasts like ours. Age is much regarded, humility com∣manded, and commended: second marriages are not allowed, except
they had no Children by the first: have their Sacraments; wrap the dead in clean linnen, and so bury them without lamentation. Ormus described. Ormus is situated in the Persian Gulph, a miserable, and forlorn City, and Isle at this day; though not many years since, it was the bravest place in all the Orient. If all the world were made into a Ring, Ormus the Gem, and grace thereto should bring. The whole Island is a Sulphurious Earth, which together with the heat of the Sun, from May to September, makes it almost intollera∣ble; so that their custome is to sleep in beds of water all day, naked; the City had a fair Buzzar, many Churches, Monasteries, brave Ma∣gazeens, stately houses, and as gallant a Castle as any was in the East. The whole Isle exceeds not fifteen miles in compass, and is the most barren place in the World, neither affording Tree, nor spring of good water: yet from the advantagious standing, the industrious Por∣tugal made it the staple, and glory of the world, till in the year 1622. the English joyning with the Persians, made it a ruinous heap, as it con∣tinues till this day. Narsinga Described. Narsinga is famous all over Asia: its confined by Mallabar, Gul∣cunda, Bengala, and the Ocean: the King is very rich, and powerfull in men, arms, and ammunition: His Countrey full of all things requi∣site for use, and pleasure: Hath many fair Towns, strong Forts, pleasant fields, and choicest Minerals, abounding in Rivers, hills, dales, Cattel, Corn, Fruits, &c. The Temples have in them many rich, and Massy Idols, of ugly shape, as best pleaseth the Devil for his service, and devotion. Bisnagar is the second City in Narsinga for grandeure, and bravery; being circled with a wall of four miles compass, and as well fortified: well built, and wealthy; It is much frequented by our European ships, and Junks from all parts of India. Few strangers come thither but they are invited by the King, who delights to shew them his fine cloathes, being set thick with stones, and Gems of infinite value: hee hath for his guard a thousand Pensioners: Hee affects Polygamy, and therefore stiles himself, The Husband of a thousand women, who at his death makes his flaming grave their consuming Sepulcher. Mesulipatan is seated neer the Bengalan Ocean; The Town hath little beauty, not many years since a raging mortality, and Famine having well nigh depopulated it; The fields, and gardens, are parched by the Sun from March to July; the four next months are disturbed with wind, and incessant rains; only from November to March, they
have kindly weather. The English have here a residence where they trafick for Calicoes, Rice, &c. Malacca described. Malacca is a Peninsula, whence abundance of gold is carried into Pegu, Siam, Borneo, and Sumatra; Its judged to bee part of the Ophir whence Solomon fetched his gold. Malacca, the Royal City obeyes now the Siam Monarchy; being conquered by the King thereof, Anno Christi 1508. by the help of the Portugals, at which time they gat an incredible Mass of Treasure, three thousand peeces of great Ordinance, and so much minted coin that the King of Portugals part came to two hundred and fifty thousand Ryals of eight. The City is above three miles long, but narrow; built upon the banks of a pleasant River as broad as our Thames. A rivo∣let of sweeter water runnes through the Town, over which is raised a strong stone bridge, the buildings are generally low, and but mean∣ly furnished, though they want no gold to purchase better. The streets and fields shew many delightful Arbours, and choice fruits, with Corn, Sugar, and Durapen trees, preferred before gold, and silver. Patania Described. Patania stands between those two famous Ports of Malacca, and Siam: the Town is strong, and defended by twelve great brass guns, whereof one is a Basilisco of twenty six foot long. The People are black, and go almost naked: they delight much in eating Bettle, and Opium: they usually eat in plates of Gold, they are very hospitable to strangers, and the better sort of them blush not to proffer their daughters, and neeces to be their bed-fellows during their stay there. Adultery they punish sharpely, Fornication lightly, they delight much in wine, Rack, Rice, Fruites, &c. Siam Described. Siam is a powerful and wealthy Kingdom: The King hath under him many Countries watered by Ganges: he usually goes to war with a thou∣sand Elephants; and two hundred thousand men: The Inhabitants are black, and almost naked: As a badge of devotion, they gird their middles with a peece of Leather, and carry an umbrella in their hands to lenefy the flaming Sun; they are great Idolaters, worshiping gods in the shape of Prtapus, or Pan: They have Groves and Altars, where∣on they offer flesh, fruit, and flowers; their Tallapois, or Priests, are great Conjurers, and much esteemed by the People. Here are a∣bundance of Diamonds, Chrysolites, Onix-stones, Magnets, Bezars, with Lignum aloes, Benjamin, Cotton, and mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, &c. Victuals, and other Commodities are very cheap: But its most memorable in the Cabriz, or blood-stone here gene∣rated.
The Riches of the King of Pegu. The King of Pegu in the East-Indies for people, dominions, gold, sil∣ver, and precious stones, far exceeds the power of the great Turk. This King hath diverse Treasuries full of Riches: Hee is Lord also of the Mines of Rubies, Saphires, and Spinels. Near unto his Royal Palace there is an inestimable Treasure, whereof hee makes no account, for it stands in such a place as every one may see it. It is a great Court, walled about with stone, with two gates which stand alwayes open; and within this Court are four guilded houses covered with lead, and in each of them are Idols of a very great value. In the first there is the Image of a man of gold, very great, and on his head a Crown of gold, set with most rare Rubies, and Saphires, and round about him are four little Children of gold. In the second there is the statue of a man of silver, sitting on heaps of money, whose stature in height as he sits is higher than the roof of an house: I measured one of his feet (saith mine Author) and it was as long as all my body, with a Crown on his head like the first. In the third there is a statue of Brasse of the same bignesse, with the like Crown on his head. In the fourth there is a statue as big as the other of Gansa, which is the mettal they make their mony of, which is copper and lead mingled together: this also hath a Crown on his head like the first. They have many Idol-houses, which they call Pagods, all the tops whereof are covered with leaf gold, and some of them are covered with gold from the top to the bottome, and once in ten years they guild them a new. This King stiles himself King of the white Elephants, and when hee rides abroad, four white Elephants are led before him vested with gold, having their teeth inclosed in sheathes wrought with Jewels. Hee keepeth above four hundred tame Elephants, and hath many wild ones in the Woods, which they can catch at their pleasure▪ The City of Pegu described. Pegu is a very great, strong, and fair City, and very populous: Its made square, with very fair walls, and a great Trench round about it, full of water, wherein are many Crocodiles: It hath twenty fair Gates made of stone, on every side five Gates; there are upon the walls many Turrets, guilded with gold very fair; the streets are as streight as a line, from one Gate to another, and so broad, that twelve men may ride abreast in them: On both sides, at every mans door there grows a Palmer tree, which yeilds a pleasing shadow, so that a man may walk in the shade all day long: their houses are covered with Tiles. The Kings house is in the midst of the City, walled, and trenched a∣bout, the buildings within are very curious, and sumptuously guilded, having costly workmanship on the front, which is also fairly guilt. The house wherein his Idol stands is covered with tiles of silver, and all the walls are guilt with gold.
Not far from this City there is an Idol-house of a wonderfull big∣ness, and all guilt from the top to the bottome; unto which adjoy∣neth an house for their Tallipoies, or Priests to preach in. It is five and fifty paces long, and hath three walks in it, and between them four great Pillars guilded: The house it self is guilded with gold within, and without, and round about it are very fair houses for Pilgrims to lodge in: and many goodly houses for their Priests which are full of Images of men, and women, all covered with gold. Sir Walter Raughly in his History of the World, proves by many probable arguments that this was the Ophir from whence Solomon fetched his gold, and Ivory. Pur. Pil. This Kingdome of Pegu is bounded by Siam, Ganges, and the Oce∣an, and is Commandresse of many Islands, as Monim, Barongo, Nogo∣mallo, Cocos, &c. It is a Kingdome full of all earthly delights, and blessings of nature, as gold, silver, lead, and Iron: Also Smaragds, Topaz, Rubies, Saphires, Garnats, Emeralds, Espinels, and Cats eyes. As also of Rice, long Pepper, Sugar, Benoin, Musk, Gum-Lack, Cotton, Calicoes, and what else a reasonable man can desire. Their habit is thin and fine; they wear no beards: they dye their teeth black, because Dogs teeth are white, they cut and pink their flesh as a mark of bravery. The King of Pegu on festival dayes rides abroad in his triumphant Chariot all guilded, which is drawn by sixteen goodly horses: His Chariot is high, with a rich Canopy over it. About, and behinde it go twenty of his Nobles, each of them having a rope in his hand that is fastened to the Chariot, to hold it upright from falling. The King sit∣teth in the midst of the Chariot, and about him stand four of his No∣bles that are in greatest favour, &c. Hee hath one Principal wife, and at least three hundred Concubines. Every day▪ hee sits to hear the suits of his Subjects in this manner: Hee sits on an high seat in his great Hall, and under him sit his Nobles; and they which desire audience come and set them down before him at forty paces distance, holding up their supplications in one hand, and in the other a present, according to the weightiness of the matter; then come the Secretaries, take their petitions, and read them before the King, and if hee grants their re∣quests, hee sends one to take their present, otherwise not: but never speaks to them himself. The Noble and simple are all apparelled alike for the fashion, only differing in the finenesse of the cloth, which is of Bombast: First they have a shirt of white Bombast; then another painted cloth which they binde up betwixt their legs, and on their heads they wrap an other cloth in fashion of a Miter: they go all barefooted: all sorts of women wear a smock that reacheth to their middle, and from thence downward they wear a cloth open before, so that they cannot go but they discover natures secrets, which they say was invented to keep men from sin against nature; they go also barefooted, having their arms adorned with hoopes of gold, and Jewels, and their fingers full of precious rings.
Sumatra described. Sumatra is that famous Isle formerly called Trapabone: Its six hun∣dred miles long, and two hundred and forty broad. Its rich in gold, fruits, and precious stones, but miserably overspread with ignorance, and superstition; the Inhabitants worshiping Cats, Rats, Dogs, yea and the Devil himself: both sexes go for the most part naked: The soil is good where the Rivers water it, but barren where the veins of gold are found. There are many good inland Towns, but the Ports are best known, as Aken, Aru, Daru, &c. but especially Passaman, where is most store of gold; the Rivers abound in Fish, and Croco∣diles, which Creature is a wonder in nature, comming from a little Egg, and growing till it bee eight or ten yards long: their tailes are as long as their bodies; their mouths and throats so wide, that they are able to swallow a horse, and man at one bit; their teeth are engrailed; they have no tongue, and contrary to all other Creatures move only the upper jaw; their bellies are penetrable, their backs hard to bee peirced. In the winter quarter they fast from food; all the rest of the year devour their prey with much greedinesse; sixty dayes passe before the female layes her eggs, which are commonly sixty in number, and shee is sixty dayes in hatching them, and usually they live sixty years: some call them Aligartos. The Jchneumon steals into his belly, and gnaws in sunder his guts whilst hee lies gaping that the little Trochil may pick his teeth, which gives it feeding. Java Major described. Java the greater is an Island neer the Bengalan Sea, in length four hundred and fifty miles, in breadth two hundred and seventy: the midland is for the most part Mountainous, and ill peopled; the Sea coasts low, and populous, yet unhealthful. The Sea-coasts by reason of trade for Pepper, hath well-built Towns, especially Bantam, Palamban, Jackatra, Japarra, Tuban, Jortan, &c. Bantam is the biggest City in the Island, nigh two miles long: It yeelds Rice, Pepper, and Cotton-wool; though most of the Pepper bee brought thither by the Chineses from Janeby, Borneo, and Malac∣ca. Four Vice-Royes are under the Mattarans, or great Kings com∣mand; who is able to bring into the field two hundred thousand des∣perate slaves, black, but valiant: the Climate is so hot, that for the most part they go naked; their weapons are lances, darts, arrows, but especially creezes, two foot long, broad, waved, sharp, and small poin∣ted, and basely poisoned: the hilt of wood, horn, the better sort of gold, silver, or Ivory, cut in the figure of a deformed Pagod: They are given to murders, theft, Adultery, deceit, &c. also Magick, and A∣strology delight them, in which Satan instructs them, the better to ob∣lige them to his worship. They are excellent swimmers; they delight in hunting Tygers, Ouzces, &c. They are friendly to the English,
especially ever since the Dutch took Jackatra from them. Their Oran∣kayes, or great men are idle, sociable, but not to be trusted. The Isle of Celibes Described. Celibes is by some called Makasser, from her best City in the Island: Its oval, and above two hundred miles long: well peopled, but with bad people: Its fruitful, though under the hotest part of the burning zone; They are black, naked, only having a few plantane leaves tyed about their middles; the better sort wear Tulipants, and white shirts upon their coal-black skins. The women are very immodest. The men use long Canes, out of which they can blow a little pricking quill, which if it draw bloud in any part of the body, it kills immediately, so strong is the poyson. The Molucco Isles described. The Molucco Isles are five in number: Molucco, Gillolo, Tirnate; Tidore, and Machan: The English were the first Traders hither, and the na∣tives acknowledged our King their Sovereign, though since the Dutch thrust us out, as if all India was theirs by title from the Cre∣ation. Gillolo is the greatest, but in Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger, Pepper, Oile, Aloes, and Honey, all of them alike plentifull. The Bandaneza Islands Described. Neer unto the former, are the Islands of Amboyna, Banda, Pulo∣way, Pulerone, Lantore, Batan, Labatacka, Nero, Ticobassa, Cumber, Sala∣mo, &c. All of them, especially Pulerone, and Puloway, seeming conti∣nued wildernesses of Nutmeg, and Clove trees, Pepper, Vines, and Olives. These two last, first traded with our Merchants, and ac∣knowledged fealty to our King James, till the uncivil Dutch dispos∣sessed us, cruelly abusing our men, and entitling themselves Lords of the Banda-Islands. The Isle of Borneo described. Borneo resembles an Oval shield, and for the most part groans uder the Spanish servitude: It hath many villages and people, which are great Idolaters: It yeilds Mines of gold, and Diamonds, Bezar, Musk, Lignum Aloes, Amber, Sanguis Draconum, VVax, Rice, and Rat∣toons. Her chief haven Towns are Socodania, and Bemermassin. The Isle of Japan described. Japan is in length six hundred miles: in breadth One hundred four score and ten: The best towns and Ports in it are Meacco, Ozacca, Tenze, Firando, Fuccate, &c. Macco is an inland City as big as Florence, but
not so beautifull; Hath a sweet and large River: low but comely houses: abundance of stately Fotiquees, or Temples full of guilded I∣dols, called by them Mannada's. The Government is Monarchicall, a∣bove sixty petty Kings do homage to the Emperor: whose frowns are worse than an ordinary death. The Countrey is for the most part mountainous, full of Rivers, Trees, Corn, Grasse, and Mines: It hath plenty of villages swarming with Heathen Idolaters. The peo∣ple in the North, and East parts of it are more savage, treacherous, idle, Lascivious, and awed by no Law: malefactors they crucify. The Civil Japonians are valiant, courteous, and great affectors of Novel∣ties. The best port in it is Ozacca, strong, and beautifull, famous for its royal Castle, varnished, tiled, and burnished over with pure Gold: rich, and Majesticall, of excellent stone, and well built; the walls are every where twenty foot thick, well polished, and curiously cemented; circled with deep trenches ful of water, having above twelve Iron Gates, with draw-bridges. Fuccate is a pretty sweet Town, well watered, having a strong, and defensive Castle, Its environed for three miles compasse with sprea∣ding Sycamore Trees, wherein are many small, but richly-tiled Fo∣tiquees, or Temples, in which they worship Pan, or Priapus, yea the Devil in his ugliest shapes. In Meacco are seventy Temples, wherein they number three thou∣sand three hundred thirty and three little guilded Devils: but more memorable is that in Meacco, huge, and wonderfull, of guilt Copper: Its posture is sitting in a chair seventy foot high, and fourscore broad: fifteen men may conveniently stand upon his head, his thumb is for∣ty inches about, and his other limbs proportionable. At Dabis is a∣nother of these Idols, made of Copper; hollow, vast, thick, and double guilt: his height is twenty four foot, though formed kneel∣ing, his buttocks resting on his legs, his arms are stretched out, and sometimes making a fire in him, they sacrifice a child, which in his em∣braces is fryed to death with horrible torture. The women of Japan, if they want means to bring up their chil∣dren, most unnaturally deprive them of that life, which not long be∣fore they had given them. Their houses are most of wood; because of their frequent Earth-quakes: With them black is a feastival colour, and white a Funeral. They dye their teeth black. Reproaches, Thefts, Pery, and Dice-play, is very hateful to them. Herb. and Purch. The Kingdome of China described. China hath on the East, the sea of Japan: On the West the De∣serts of Judustan: On the North the Tartars: On the South the Philippine Islands: And on the South West, Cochinchina, Pegu, with part of Siam. In form its square, each way One thousand five hun∣dred miles over: The circuit above four thousand miles: The Coun∣try is generally plain, and fruitfull, full of sweet and Navigable Ri∣vers, which are no lesse inhabited than the Cities, and villages; There are in it six hundred Cities: two thousand walled Towns, and four
thousand unwalled; one thousand Castles, and Villages numberlesse: it feeds above sixty millions of men, and boyes, besides women which bee not inrolled: The whole Empire is divided into fifteen Provin∣ces; each of which hath a Metropolis, full of people, fairly built, and very spatious. One of their Kings to keep out the Tartars, built a wall of one thousand and two hundred miles in length, six fathom high, twelve yards thick: it was twenty and seven years in building, though constantly wrought upon by seven hundred and fifty thousand men. Pequin the now Regal City of China described. Pequin is in compasse thirty Leagues, or fourscore and ten English miles, environed with two walls, upon which are innumerable Tow∣ers and Bulwarks. It hath three hundred and sixty gates, each hav∣ing over it a Castellet with two Towers, and a draw-bridge. There are in it three thousand eight hundred Temples, wherein are continu∣ally sacrificed birds, and wild beasts, and amongst these, four very ad∣mirable, for their curiosity, and costlinesse. The streets are long, and large; the houses fair, encompassed with Iron, and Latten grates: at each street end is a Triumphal Arch, shut up at nights, in the chief whereof are Watch-bells. There are one hundred and twenty large Channels of water, and over them eighteen hundred rich, and fair bridges: There are in this City one hundred and twenty Shambles, one hundred and twenty market-places; besides in every street five or six shops, wherein they sell flesh, poultry, and Bacon. There are with∣out the City sixteen hundred Garden-houses belonging to persons of Principal note: And twenty four thousand Sepulchres of Mandarines, [Justices of Peace] with their little gilded Chappels, encompassed with Grates of Iron, and Latten, with rich Arches at their entries. The gar∣dens, groves, Tanks, and Fountains, have their walls lined within with fine Porcelane which makes a gallant shew. There are also store of other houses with great walls, in which are Gardens, and groves with game for hunting, which belong to several companies. The City of Nanquin described. The City of Nanquin is thirty and six miles in compasse, circled with three strong walls and ditches: the Kings Palace in it is vast, and glo∣rious: the other buildings many: the inhabitants are reckoned to bee twenty thousand: the Temples are above a thousand: the streets fair and the people industrious. The Country of Quinsay described. Quinsay borders upon Cochin-china: The whole Countrey is well watered, and the Rivers abound with
fish; which they use to take with Cormorants. The People are of an Olive colour, wear their hair very long: their eyes are commonly black: their noses little: their eyes small: their beards deformedly thin; their nailes oft-times as long as their fingers, serving as a mark to distinguish the gentry by: The better sort are cloathed in silk, and Satten: the meaner in black cloth made of Cotton▪ their coats long, and quilted, made to tye under the left arm, after the Astick mode: their sleeves are long and strait at hand: their shooes oft of the same stuff with their coats: some have them richly imbroidered▪ some knit their hair in cawls of silk, in horse-hair some, and some in fillets of gold, or silver: Others wear high Caps, or Felts, made of fine twigs, round, and mixed with silk of divers colours, &c. The wo∣men are modest, a light vail of fine linnen wholly covering them. They are generally proud, crafty, jealous, voluptuous, and given to Musick▪ Poetry, Painting, and stage-playes; They eat in porcellane, and have their diet in many small dishes, minced, which they take up with two sticks of bone, or Ivory: for to touch their meat, or their mouths with their fingers is held absurd, and impious; they all sit on stools, and eat on Tables. No Beggars are suffered amongst them, for if they bee young, the whip rewards them, but if they bee old, and lame, the Hospital relieves them: murther they punish with death: adultery, and theft, with the Strappado. They exceedingly honor, and reverence their Parents: they obey them at all times, in all places: marry not with∣out their assent: they honor them bee they never so mean: relieve them bee they never so poor: at their death shew loyalty and duty, and seldome mourn lesse than two or three years. They arrogate all sorts of excellencys in Art, or Science as peculiar to their Nation, they think their speech, (which mostly consists of Monosyllables) the most sweet, and Rhethorical of any in the world: They say they are the antientest of all other People, and that they borrow nothing from any other, but all other from them: They say they were the first inventers of Letters, Guns, Painting, Tillage, and Navigation: For all which they say That they only see with two eyes, and all others but with one. They are great Gamesters, and when they have lost all, stake their wives, and children, whom they part with, till they can redeem them; they so firmly believe the Resurrection, that sometimes they lend money to bee repayed in the world to come: Though their houses outwardly are but mean, yet oft-times the insides are lined with excellent good Marble, Porphyry, and Serpentine. When the Husband dyes, the wife mourns exceedingly, puts sackcloath next her skin: for three years is scarce seen to laugh, and abstains from publick Feasts, and pastimes. There hath often been great warres between the Tartars who lived beyond the vast wall before mentioned; and the Chineses; as Anno Christi 1206, which lasted for seventy and seven years, at which time the Tartars wholly conquered that potent Empire, extinguished the imperially family of the Sunga's: erected a new family of their own,
which they called Ivena, of which Tartarian race nine Emperors gover∣ned successively the Kingdome of China, for the space of seventy years in peace: but at the end thereof a contemptible person of the Chineses, called Hugh, presumed to rise up against them, acting first the part of an high-way man, and wanting neither courage, nor companions, in a short time made up the vast body of an army, fought with; and after many signal victories in the year 1368. finally drove them out of the King∣dome of China, receiving for his pains the whole Empire, and was the first erector of the Imperial family of the Taiminges, who enjoyed the Kingdome in peace for two hundred and fifty years: The last of them was called Vanley, who from the year 1573 to 1620: gover∣ned the Kingdome of China, with much prudence, and equity: But about that time the Tartars being multiplied; and receiving many inju∣ries from the Chineses, they again take armes, invade China, and with mighty successe began, and continued the wars till the year 1653; at which time they had made a full conquest of it, no considerable party opposing them in their peaceable possession; as you may read more ful∣ly in a book called Bellum Tartaricum. The City of Quinsay described. Quinsay was formerly the Regal City of China, situated abuut the heart of the Country, and yet not far from the Sea: In it were to bee found so many delights, that it seemed an earthly Paradise: It was one hundred miles in compasse, for the streets, and channels there∣of were very wide, and the Market-places very large. It had on the one side, a clear lake of fresh water, and on the other, a great River, which entring into many places of the City carryed away all the filth, and occasioned a good air. There were store both of Carts, and Barks to carry necessaries. It had in it twelve thousand Bridges, great and small; those on the chiefest Channels being so high, that ships might passe under them. On the other side of the City was a great Trench forty miles long, large, and full of water from the River, which served both to receive the overflowings of the River, and as a fence to that side of the City, the earth, that was taken out, being laid as a bank, or hill on the inside. There are ten chief Market-places (besides infinite others along the streets) all of them square, the square being half a mile on each side, and from the fore part of them runs a principal street forty paces wide, reaching from one end of the City to the other, with many Bridges traversing of it; and at the end of every four miles is such a Market-place. There is also a large channel running over against the street behinde the Market-places, on the banks whereof are erected store-houses of stone, where Mer∣chants out of all Countries laid up their Commodities, being com∣modious to the Markets. In each of the Market-places three dayes in a week was a concourse of forty, or fifty thousand persons which brought in whatsoever was requisite for the life of man, besides beasts, and fowls of game. Then followed the Butchers rows of Beef,
Veal, Kid, and Lamb: Besides there were all sorts of Herbs; and fruits, and amongst them huge Pears weighing ten pound a peece, and very fragrant: Peaches yellow, and white, very delicate. Every day from the Ocean, which is but five and twenty miles off, is brought up abundance of fish, besides what the Lake and River yeeld. All the Market-places are encompassed with high and fair houses, and under∣neath are shops of Artificers, and all sorts of Merchandises, Spices, Jewels, Pearls, Rice-wine, &c. Many streets answer one another in those Market-places, wherein are many Bathes, both of cold, and hot waters, and people wash every day before they eat any thing. At the end of each Market-place is a Palace where Magistrates determine all controversies which happen amongst Merchants and others. There are twelve Principal trades, each of which have one thou∣sand shops, and yee shall see in every shop ten, twenty, thirty, or for∣ty men at work under one Master. The Masters themselves work not, but stand richly apparreled, and their wives with Jewels inestimable: their houses are well ordered, and richly adorned with Pictures, and other stupendious costs. About the Lake are many fair buildings, and great Palaces of the Nobles, and chief men; and Temples of their Idols, and Monasteries of many Monks. In the middest of the Lake are two Islands, upon each of which is a Palace with incredible numbers of rooms, whither they re∣sort upon occasions of marriages, or other feasts, where are provisions of Vessels, Nappery, and other things, kept in common for such pur∣poses. In the Lake also are Boats and Barges, for pleasure, adorned with fair seats, and Tables, and other provision for banquets, covered over head: within they are neatly painted, and have windows to open, and shut at pleasure. Nor can any thing in the World seem more plea∣sant, than from the Lake to have such a prospect, the City so fully pre∣senting it self to the eye, with so many Temples, Monasterys, Pala∣ces, Gardens with high trees, Barges, People, &c. For their man∣ner is to work one part of the day, and the other part to spend in so∣lace with their friends, or with women on the Lake, or in riding in Cha∣riots up and down the City. All the streets are paved with stone, as are all the high wayes in China: The principal street of Quinsay is pa∣ved ten paces on each side, and in the midst it's well gravelled with pas∣sages for the water, which keeps it alwayes clean: There are also mul∣titudes of Chariots, accommodated with cloathes, and cushions of Silk, for six persons in each of them; and in them the inhabitants solace themselves in the streets, or go to Gardens provided on purpose for their pleasure. This City contains about sixteen hundred thousand housholds, and together with the Country adjoyning, yeelded to the King sixteen millions, and eight hundred thousand Ducats of gold yearly, besides six millions, and four hundred thousand Ducats for the customes of salt. Pur. Pil. v. 3. p. 98.
The Great Mogols Empire described. The Great Mogols Country is called Indusan, which for spaciousness, abundance of brave Towns, numberlesse inhabitants, infinit treasure, mines, food, and all sort of Merchandise exceeds all Kings and Poten∣tates in the Mahomitan World. This vast Monarchy extends from East to West two thousand six hundred miles: From North to South one thousand four hundred miles: Its in circuit five thousand. It is boun∣ded with the Bengalan Gulph, and Indian Ocean: On the South with Decan and Mallaber: North and North West with Tartary, and Persia▪ It contains thirty seven large Provinces: thirty great Cities: three thousand walled Towns: His revenues are very great: He hath in conti∣nual pay three hundred thousand Horse, and keeps two thousand Ele∣phants at a vast charge; his Treasurer yearly issuing out above forty millions of Crowns. The names of the Provinces are 1. Candahor, The chief City is of the same name: It lies Northward, and confines upon Persia. 2. Cabul, The chief City is of the same name: It lyes in the North West part, and confines upon Tartary. 3. Multan, The chief City is of the same name: On the West it joyns with Persia. 4. Hajacan, It hath no great City: Its bounded Eastward with the famous River of Indus, and Westward with Persia. 5. Buckor, The chief City is Buckor-succor: Indus runs through it, and much inriches it. 6. Tatta, The chief City is of the same name: The River Indus maketh many fruitful, and pleasant Islands in it: the chief arm of it falls into the Sea at Synde, a place famous for curious handy crafts. 7. Sorat, The chief City is Janagar. Its a little Province but rich, bounded with the Ocean on the South. 8. Jeselmeere, The chief City is of the same name. 9. Attack, The chief City is of the same name: It lyeth on the Eastside of Indus. 10. Peniab, It's seated  five Rivers, which all fall into Indus: Its a great, and very fruitful Province. Lahor is the chief City, after∣wards described; which is the chiefest City of Trade in all India. 11. Chishmeere, The chief City is called Siranakar: the River Phat passeth through it that falls into Indus. 12. Bankish, The chief City is called Bishur: Its divided from Chishmeere by the River Indus. 13. Jengapor, The chief City is of the same name: It lies upon the River Kaul. 14. Jenba, The chief City is of the same name: It lies East of Peniab. 15. Delli, The chief City is of the same name; which is a great City, where most of the Great Mogols lye interred. 16. Bando, The chief City is of the same name. It hath Agrae on the West.
17. Malway, A very fruitful Province: The chief City is Rantipore. 18. Chitor, A great Province, where the chief City is of the same name. 19. Guzarat, A goodly Kingdome, and exceeding rich, inclosing the bay of Cambaia: The chief City is Surat, a place of great trading. 20. Chandis, VVhere the chief City is Brampoch, large, and popu∣lous, and the South bounds of this Empire. 21. Berar, The chief City is Shapore, the South part of it also bounds this Empire. 22. Narvar, VVhere the chief City is Gehud, watered by a fair River that empties it self into Ganges. 23. Gualiar, The chief City is so called, where the Mogol hath a great Treasure. In this City also is a strong Castle, where hee useth to keep his Prisoners. 24. Agra, Where the chief City is of the same name, and after∣wards described. 25. Sanbal, The chief City is of the same name: Its watered by the River Jemini, which falls into Ganges. 26. Bakar, where the chief City is Bikaneer: It lies on the VVest side of the River Ganges. 27. Nagracut, The chief City is of the same name, where is a Chap∣pel richly seeled, and paved with plates of pure gold. The Idol is cal∣led Matta, visited by many thousands yearly, which out of devotion cut off a part of their tongues to sacrifice to it. 28. Syba, VVhere the chief City is Hardwair: Here the famous River Ganges springs out of a Rock, whither the superstitious Gen∣tiles go daily in troops to wash their bodies. 29. Kakares, Where the principal Cities are Dankalee, and Purhola: Its very large, and exceeding mountainous, and is parted from Tartarie by the Mountain Caucasus, being the Mogols most Northerly bound. 30. Gor, The chief City is of the same name: The River Persilis begins here, which runs into Ganges. 31. Pitan, the chief City is of the same name: Its watered by the River Kanda, which falls into Ganges. 32. Kandua, Where the chief City  Karhakatenka: the River Sersili parts it from Pitan, and lies Northward. 33. Patna, The chief City is of the same name: A fertile Province, bounded by Ganges on the West. 34. Jesual, Where the chief City is Raiapore: It lies East of Patna. 35. Mevat, Where the chief City is Narnol: Its a very mountai∣nous Country. 36. Udessa, Where the chief City is Jokanat. Its the Eastermost part of this vast Empire. 37. Bengala, Its a very spacious and fruitful Kingdome, bounded by the Gulph of Bengala, into which the River Ganges emptieth it self at four mouthes. This Empire hath plenty of excellent Wheat, Rie, and Barley, whereof they make pure white bread. As also of Kine, Sheep, and
Goats, with whose Milk they make much Butter, and Cheese▪ they have store of Bufelo's that give good milk: Its a very large Beast, having a smooth thick skin without hair. They have store of red Deer, fallow Deer, Elks, and Antilops, which are good Venison; and every mans Game, not being enclosed in Parks. They have Geese, Ducks, Pigeons, Partridges, Quails, Peacocks, and many other sin∣gular good fowl: a sheep is usually sold for twelve pence, four couple of Hens for twelve pence: A Hare for a penny, three Partridges for a penny, &c. They have store of Salt and Sugar. They have abun∣dance of Musk-melons, Water-melons, Pomegranats, Pomecitrons, Lemmons, Orenges, Dates, Figs, Plantans, Mangoes, in shape like our Apricocks, but more luscious: Ananas, a delicate fruit: store of Potatoes, Carrats, and other good roots: as also Pears, and Ap∣ples in the Northerly parts: many good Garden Herbs, and Ginger: also Taddy, an excellent Drink that issues out of a Tree. For three months they have abundance of rain, with much thunder, and lighte∣ning: the other nine months so clear, that a cloud is scarce to bee seen. The Country is beautified with many woods, and great variety of fair goodly trees, some having leaves as big as bucklers, others parted small as Fern, as the Tamarine trees that bear a sower fruit; somewhat like our Beans, very good to cool, and cleanse the blood: all their trees are green all the year about. There are rare flowers of admirable colours, but few of them sweet, save their Roses, and two or three more sorts. The Country is watered with many goodly Rivers, especially In∣dus, and Ganges; besides which, they have store of springs, upon many of which they bestow great cost of stonework, making Tanks, or Ponds, some of them a mile in compasse, others more, surroun∣ded with stone walls, and within them fair stone steps round about. Some of them are filled with rain water. They have a strong drink called Rack, distilled from Sugar, and the spicie rind of a tree called Jagra: they have also Cohha made with a black seed boiled in water, that helps digestion, quickens the spirits, cleanses the blood, and provokes lust. Many of their houses are flat on the top, on which in the cool seasons of the day, they take the cool air: they have no chimnies, using no fire, but only to dresse their meat. The upper rooms have many lights to let in air, but they use no glasse: Amongst their houses are many fair trees, which are a great defence against the Sun. Most of their houses in the Cities are of Brick, or stone, well squared. Their staple commodities are Indico, and Cotton-wool, of which they make diverse sorts of cloth, some finer, and pu∣rer than our best Lawns: some of it they staine in variety of curious figures. They have also store of Silk, which they weave curiously, sometimes with gold, and silver, whereof they make Velvets. Sattens, and Taffaties, but not so good as in Italie. They have store of Drugs, and Gums, especially Gum-Lac, of which wee make hard wax. The Earth hath store of minerals of Lead, Iron, Brasse, Copper, and Silver,
which yet they need not open, having so much brought out of all other Countries. They have curious Gardens, planted with fruitfull trees, and dainty flowers, which never fade: in which they have fountains to Bathe in, and other water works for delight. There are Lyons, Ty∣gers, Wolves, Jackals: Over grown Snakes, and in their Rivers Cro∣codiles. There are many Scorpions, and Flies that are very trouble∣some, and Muskitees. The Wind, called the Monson blows six months Southerly, and six months Northerly, seldome varying: April, May, and the begin∣ning of June, till the Rains fall, are exceeding hot: Thus hath the wise disposer of all things tempered bitter things with sweet, to teach us that there is no true, and perfect content in any Kingdome, but that of heaven. They have store of good Horses, and Camels, Dromedaries, Mules; Asses, Rhynocerots; which are as long as the fairest Oxe in England, their skines lye plaited in wrinkles on their backs. They have many Elephants, their King having usually fourteen thousand, and many of the Nobles a hunded a peece: There are some of them fifteen foot high, all of them black, their skin thick, and smooth, without hair: they take much delight in the water, and will swim excellent well, they are exceeding docible, so that they will do almost any thing the keeper bids them: If he would have them affright a man; he will make towards him as if hee would tread him in peeces, and yet when hee comes to him, not touch him. If hee bid him abuse a man, hee will take dirt, or kennel water in his trunk, and dash it in his face; &c. They are most sure of foot, never stumbling: they are governed with a hook of steel, with which their keeper sitting on their Necks, pull them back, or prick them forward at their pleasure. Every Male hath allowed to him four females. The Inhabitants of Indostan Described. The Inhabitants before they were conquered by Tamerlane, were all Gentiles, but now they are mixed with Mahometans: they are of stature, like us, very streight, seldome or never is there a crooked person amongst them: They are of an Olive colour, have black hair, but not curled; they love not any that are white, saying that they are like Lepers, their chins are bare, but have long hair on their upper lips, shave their heads; only reserve a lock on the Crown for Mahomet to pull them to heaven by. The habits of men and women differ little, mostly made of white Cotton cloth, made close to the middle, then hanging loose down below the knee: under them they have long breeches reach∣ing to the ancle, and close to their bodies: their feet are bare in their shooes, which they commonly wear like Slippers, which they put off when they come into their houses, whose floores are covered with excellent Carpets, upon which they sit when they talk or eat, like Taylors on their shop boards: on the mens heads are shashes, which is a long thin wreath of cloath, white or coloured. The Mahometan
women cover their heads with vails, their hair hangs down behind twist∣ed with silk: oft bedecked with jewels, about their necks and wrists: their ears have pendants: their nostrils pierced to put in rings at their plea∣sure: Their ease in child bearing is admirable: for it is a common thing there, for women great with child, one day to ride carrying their Infants in their bodies, and the next day to ride carrying them in their arms. The great Mogol, every year at the entring of the Sun into Aries, makes a feast to his Nobles which lasts nine days, at which time they present him with gifts, and he again repays them with Princely rewards: I was astonished (saith mine Author, who was an eye witnesse of it) when I beheld at that time the incredible riches of gold, pearls, Pretious stones, jewels, and many other glittering vanities which were amongst them. The walls in the Kings house are painted, or beautified with pure white Lime: the floores are covered with rich, and costly Carpets: there lodge none with him in his house but his Eunuches, and women, and some little boys, that hee keeps for detestable uses: hee always eats in private amongst his women, upon great variety of excellent di∣shes, which being prepared, and proved by the Taster, are served up in vessels of Gold covered, and sealed up, and so by the Eunuches brought to him. In this Empire there are no Inns to entertain strangers, onely in great Towns are fair houses built for their receit, which they call Sarrays, not inhabited, where Travellers have room freely, but they must bring with them beds, food, and other necessaries which they usually carry upon Camells, or in Carts drawn with Oxen, wherein they have tents to pitch when they meet with no Sarray's. The inferior sort of people ride upon Oxen, Horses, Mules, Camels, or Dromedaries, and the women like unto the men, or else in slight Coaches drawn with Oxen, many whereof are white and large, and they are guided with cords, which go through the parting of their Nostrils, and so betwixt their horns, into the Coach-mans hands: they are nimble, and will go twenty miles a day. The better sort ride up∣on Elephants, or are carried on mens shoulders in Sedans, which they call Palankeenes. In all their great Cities they have Markets twice a day, early in the morning, and in the evening; wherein they sell almost every thing by weight. They are generally so superstitious, that they will rather dye than eat, or drink any thing that their Law forbids. The chief Cities in the great Mogols Countries Described. Lahore in the great Mogols Country, is a vast and famous City, not much inferiour to Agra, the Metropolis; yea, for circuit and bravery, it much excells it: The aire for eight months is pure, and restorative: the streets are paved and gracefull, which are cleansed, and watered by the River Ravee, which flows most pleasantly into this City, from
the Casmyrian Mountains, and after a stately course of three thousand English miles, deep enough for Junks of sixty Tun, it falls into Indus at Tutia. This City is beautified with stately palaces, Mosques, Hum∣mums, or Sudatories, Tanks or Ponds, Gardens, &c. The Castle is large, strong, uniform, pleasant, and bravely seated, being built of hard, white, and polished stone: armed with twelve Posternes: with∣in which is a Palace, sweet, and comely, entred by two Gates, and Courts: on the walls, are pictured sundry stories, and pastimes. From this City to Agra is five hundred miles, the Country in all that distance being even without Mountains, and hills, and the high way planted on both sides, with shady Ash-trees, whose spreading green tops lenefies the scorching heat of the Sun: At the end of each eight miles is a fair, and convenient lodge built for travellers to repose themselves in: Herb. Trav. p. 69. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1468. Brampore in the same Countrey, is a City seated low, and in an un∣healthful plain, very large, and spacious, and inhabited most by the Bannians: the streets are many and narrow; the houses not high, and but meanly beautifull. In the North-East end it hath a Castle stand∣ing by the Rivers side, large and defensive: In the River is an Arti∣ficial Elephant, so skilfully shaped, that by the Bannians it is adored, and by others admired. Idem. Fettipore, if the water were good, it had triumphed over all the Ci∣ties in India; It is walled about, and to the North, North West, hath a lake, or fish pond five miles over: The North East hath a fair Buzzar, or market place five hundred paces long, well paved, and built on all sides with pleasant houses: At one end is the Mogols house, and a Mohol most excellently framed; the other side is glorious by a curious Mosque, or Church ascended by thirty steps, adorned with a brave gate: the top is full of Pyramids, the Court within is six times bigger than the Royal Exchange in London, excellently paved with free stone, the Iles are large and well paved, the Pillars all of one stone, and beautifull: and affronting this Gate is a most sumptu∣ous Monument, covered with painting, and Pearl-shell: proud in the many Princes there buried. Idem. Candahor is seated in a reasonable fruitfull Countrey, redundant in all good things, yet by reason of so many Caravans passing, and repas∣sing from Lahore to Persia, all sorts of provision is very dear, and the passage much pestered with theeves: the City is not very spatious but strong, made defensive by many helps of Nature, and Art: In the South, and East; its surrounded with an advantagious wall: In the West, and North, with high and precipitious Mountains: the Suburbs are large, adding to the City both beauty and Wealth. Idem. Mandow is a City both antient, and famous, seated on the side of a lofty and steep hill, and beautified with a strong and stately Castle, encompassed with a defensive wall of five miles compass; the City is very beautiful, adorned with Temples (in one of which are buried four Kings) Palaces, Fortresses, especially with a Tower ascended by
one hundred and seventy steps, supported by Massy Pillars, and adorn∣ed with gates and Windows very observable. Idem. Surat is at this day a City, great, famous, rich, and populous; yet neither air, nor soil agrees with strangers; the one being extream hot, the other sandy, and sulphurious. From June to September the clouds showre down continually unhealthful rains, the wind and thunder so commixing, that no place in the world seems more unhealthful: Its counted the third best Town in the Guiarat Kingdome: Amadavar, and Cambaya excelling her: Its watered with a sweet River called Tap∣pee, which arising out of the Decan mountains, glides through Bram∣pore, and so to Surat. Its circled with a mud-wall, a strong stone Ca∣stle is built at the South-West side, the River washing it: the VVest opens into the Buzzar through a fair gate of stone: The Medan is of no great beauty, nor do the shops give any splendor. The houses are indifferently beautiful, some of carved wood, others of Brick: the English, and Dutch houses at the North end, excelling the other for bignesse, and furniture: adjoyning to one gate is a Tank of water, made of good free-stone, circling in above one hundred sides, or angles, in compasse near one thousand paces. Agra is the navel of the Mogols territories, and Empresse of India: Its watered by the River Jeminey, which from Delly glides hither, and commixing with Ganges, flows into the Bengalan Sea: Its in shape like an half Moon; the streets long, and narrow, and nasty, of seven miles continuance: part of it is walled about, the rest ditcht. Here the Great Mogol hath a Palace, wherein are two large towers, at least ten foot square, which are covered with Plates of the purest gold. Asmeer is seated upon an high impregnable mount, the greater part of the City being below, fairly built, walled with good stone, and moated about: the Country about it is Champaigne and very fruit∣full. The Kingdome of Bengala Described. Bengala is a very large Kingdome, lying along the Sea-coast one hun∣dred and twenty leagues, and as much into the land: Its watered by the River Cabaris, called by some Guenga. It abounds with Rice, VVheat, Sugar, Ginger, long Pepper, Cotton, and Silk, and enjoyeth a very wholesome air. Gouro is the Regal City, spacious, and beautiful; and so is Bengala, which hath given name to that part of the Sea called the Gulph of Bengala: Chatigan is also another of their Cities. The inhabi∣tants are a most subtile, and wicked people: Men, and VVomen given much to uncleannesse; they never dress or seeth meat twice in one pot, but every time have a new one. Adultery is punished with the losse of their noses. In this Country are many Rhinocroces. It is now sub∣ject to the Great Mogol.
Cambaia described. Cambaia is called also Gsarat, containing in length from the River Bate to Circam, which is a Country belonging to Persia, five hundred miles upon the Sea-coasts: On all other parts its invironed with the Kingdomes of Dulcinda, and Sanga on the North: Mandao on the East; and with the Gredosians on the VVest; the Sea▪ and the confines of Decan being the Southerly bounds. It hath in it sixty thousand Ci∣ties, and villages. Its watered with many Rivers, whereof Indus is the chief, which divides it in the middle, arising from Caucasus, and after a course of nine hundred miles, at two mouths disembogues it self into the Ocean. Its a fertile Country, not inferiour to any o∣ther in India: the earth and trees bring forth plenty, and varie∣ty of fruits: It hath store of Elephants, precious stones, Silk, Cot∣ton, &c. The people are of an Olive colour, and go naked, except a∣bout their privities: They eat no flesh, but Rice, Barley, milk, and other liveless Creatures; their chief Sea-Towns are Daman, Bandora, Curate, Ravellum, and Bazuinum; and within land, Cambaia, Mada∣bar, Campanel, Tanaa, &c. Cambaia being the chiefest, situate three miles from Indus: Its called the Indian Cairo, having much tra∣fick to it by Indians, Portugals, Persians, Arabians, Armenians, &c. The VVomen dye their teeth black, thinking it a great part of their beauty, and therefore alwayes go with open lips to shew it. VVhen men die they burn their bodies, and their wives dressed as for a wedding, burn with them. Six leagues from Decan is a Hill out of which Diamonds are taken; it is walled about, and kept with a Garrison: Their Religion is partly Moorish, partly Heathenish. They have Hospitals for sick, or lame Birds, Beasts, &c. yea they redeem Beasts, and Birds lives, and if maimed, or hurt, carry them to their Hospitals. In the high wayes, and woods they set pots with water, and scatter meat to feed them. If they catch a Flea, or a Louse, they will not kill it, but let it go: and you can do them no greater injury, than to kill either in their presence; and if by intreaty they cannot perswade you to forbear, they will re∣deem its life with mony. They drink no Wine, eat no Vinegar, use water only; they will eat no Eggs, as supposing blood to bee in them; they are very careful before they sit down, that no living Creature bee under them. Pur. Pilgrimage. The Philippine Islands described. The Philippine Islands were discovered by the Spaniards out of new Spain, Anno Christi 1542. who in honour of their King Philip the se∣cond, gave them that name: They are many in number, lying far into the Sea before Cauchin-China, and Chambaia: some of them are great, and very rich in Rice, Honey, Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Gold, &c. and inriched more by trade from China: seventy of these
Islands are subjects, or friends to the Spaniards, their intestine divisi∣ons making an easy way to the Spanish Conquest. They worshiped the Sun, and Moon. Now they have amongst them many Monaste∣ries of Friers, and Jesuites: But the wicked lives of the Spaniards, makes the Inhabitants abhor their Religion: They carve, and cut their skins in sundry fashions, and devises, all over their body. The Island of Mauritius described. The Island of Mauritius lies within the torrid Zone, about one hundred Leagues from Madegascar. It abounds with all good things, requisite for mans use: The land is high, and mountainous; the shape somewhat round; in circuit about one hundred miles, every where sweet, and flourishing; having an healthful air, and the blooming fra∣grant trees abating the heat of the Sun: besides the gentle Breezes moderating the weather: There are delicious Rivers which make the Earth fruitful: Infinite store of lofty spreading trees, green all the year; their boughs being never unapparrelled of their Summer livery: The ground is ever spread with natures choicest Tapestry, the mirthful Sun ever re-inforcing a continued vigor, and activity: Of the trees, some are good for timber, others for food; all for use: Here is store of Box, and of Ebony of all sorts, black, white, red, and yellow: the tree is high, small, and streight: and the wood of such esteem, that many ships come yearly to it to load with Ebony; besides which, there are Coquo trees, Pines, Ashes, Cypresses, &c. As also store of rare fruits: birds, and fowl: Hawks of all kinds: Bats as big as Gos-hawks, Passo-Flemingos, Herons, Geese, and many others, good in their flesh, and excellent in their feathers: Fish there are plenty, as the Cow-fish, Dolphins, Abicores, Cavalloes, VVhale, Por∣pice, Grampasse, Mullet, Bream, Trout, Tench, Soles, Flounders, Tortoises, Eeles, Sharks, Pikes, Crabs, Lobsters, Oysters, Cut∣tle-fish, Rock-fish, and other strange fishes: some like Hedg-hogs; some like Cats, others with bristles, &c. This Isle also affords Goats, Hogs, Beeves, and land Tortoises so big, that two men may sit on one of them, and shee will go away with them. Africa described in General. Africa is divided on the North from Europe, by the Mediterranean Sea: On the South it runs on a point to the Cape of Good Hope, and is bounded with the vast Ocean, called there the Aethiopick Sea: On the East with the Red-Sea; and on the VVest with the Atlantick Ocean, called Mare del Nort, so that her longitude and latitude contains a∣bout four thousand and two hundred English miles. Its much lesse than Asia, and far bigger than Europe. In most parts its very barren, and therefore hath no great plenty of Inhabitants. Its full of sandy desarts▪ which lying open to the winds, and storms, are often moved like to the waves of the Sea, by which
means Cambysis with his Army was much hazarded. Its full of vene∣mous Serpents, which much endanger the Inhabitants; besides other ravenous beasts, which ranging about, possesse themselves of a great part of this Country, and make it a VVildernesse of Lions, Leopards, Elephants, and in some places Crocodiles, Hyena's, Basilisks, and Monsters without number, and name: for when, for want of water, Creatures of all kinds, at sometimes of the year come to those few rivolets that bee, to quench their thirst; the Males promiscuously for∣cing the Females of every species that comes next him, produceth this variety of forms. Salust reports that there dye more of the people by beasts, than by diseases: And in the tracts of Barbary, the Inhabi∣tants every tenth, fifteenth, or five and twentieth year, are visited with a Plague, and with the French disease in such violence, that few re∣cover, except they remove into Numidia, or the land of Negros, the very air whereof is an excellent Antidote against those diseases. Their commodities are Elephants, Camels, Barbary-hoses, Rams with great tails weighing above twenty pound, &c. Africa is divided into seven parts. Barbary, or Mauritania: Nu∣midia, Lybia, The land of Blacks: Aethiopia superior: Aethiopia infe∣rior: and Egypt, besides the Islands. Barbary hath on the North the Mediterranean Sea: on the VVest the Atlantick: on the South the mountain Atlas, and on the East Egypt. The Inhabitants are crafty, covetous, ambitious, jealous of their VVives: their Country yeelds Orenges, Dates, Olives, Figs, and a kinde of Goat; whose hair makes a stuff as fine as Silk. It contains in it the Kingdomes of Tunnis, Algier, Fess, and Morocho. Tunnis is famous for the chief City of the same name, five miles in compasse; and Carthage, two and twenty miles in circuit, that con∣tended so long with Rome for the Monarchy of the world; and Utica memorable for Catoes death there. Algier contains in it a strong harbor for Turkish Pirates: before the chief Town whereof the Emperor Charles the fifth received a mighty losse of ships, Horses, Ordinance, and men. Fess hath in it a City with seven hundred Churches, one of which is a mile and an half in compasse. Morocho, where the chief City of the same name hath a Church lar∣ger than that of Fess, and thereon a Tower so high, that from thence may bee discerned the to of the Mountains Azaci which are at one hundred and thirty miles distance. Here is also a Castle famous for Globes of pure gold that stand on the top of it, weighing one hundred and thirty thousand Barbary Duck∣e. Numidia, the second part of Africa hath on the East Egypt: on the VVest the Atlantick Ocean: on the North the Mountain Atlas, and on the South the desarts of Lybia: Its called also the Region of Dates from the abundance that grows there. The Inhabitants are very wicked: stay in a place but till they have eaten down the grasse: Hence there are but few Cities, and those in some places three hundred miles di∣stant.
Lybia on the East is bounded with Nilus, on the West with the Atlantick: on the North with Numidia; and on the South with the Country of the Blacks: Its so dry, that a traveller can scarce meet with any water in seven dayes journey; the Inhabitants live without any Law, almost so much as that of nature. The Land of Blacks, or Negroes, hath on the West the Atlantick; on the East Aethiopia superior; on the North Lybia; and on the South the Kingdome of Manicongo. The River Niger runs through it, al∣most as famous as Nilus for her overflowing: It yeelds store of gold, silver, Ivory, and other commodities. It hath in it four Kingdomes: Tombuo, infinitly rich. Bornaum, where the people have no names proper; no wives peculiar; all therefore no children which they call their own. Gonga, the King whereof hath no estate but from his subjects as hee spends it. And Gualatum, a very poor Country. Of this Land of Negroes one makes these verses. The Land of Negroes is not far from thence, neerer extended to th' Atlantick main, Wherein the Black Prince keeps his residence, attended by his Jetty-coloured train; Who in their native beauty most delight, And in contempt do paint the Devil white. Aethiopia superior; or the Kingdome of the Abyssines. Is bounded on the North with Egypt; on the South with the Mountains of the Moon; on the East with the Red-Sea, and on the VVest with the Country of the Blacks. The King hereof is called Prete Janny, or Presbyter John: they are mungril Christians: The King hath under him seventy petty Kings, which have their several laws, and cu∣stomes: The Country yeelds Orenges, Lemmons, Citrons, Barley, Sugar, Honey, &c. Aethiopia inferior is on every side begirt with the Sea, except on the North, which is bounded with the Mountains of the Moon. It consists of five Kingdomes; 1 Aiana which abounds with Gold, Ivory, Honey, Wax, Corn, large sheep, &c. 2 Zanguabar in which is Mosambique. 3 Monomopata, wherein are plenty of Gold Mines. The King is served with great pomp, and hath a guard of two hun∣dred Mastiffs. 4 Cafraria, in which is the cape of Good hope: alwayes stormy to the Spaniards; whence one was very angry with God, for suffering the English Hereticks to passe by it so easily, and not giving his good Catholicks the like speed. 5 Manicongo, where in many parts the Inhabitants are men-eaters, selling such flesh in their Sham∣bles. Egypt hath on the East the Red-Sea, on the VVest Barbary: on the North the Mediterranean and Aethiopia superior on the South. It was called the Granary of the VVorld: for though it hath rain but sel∣dome, yet Nilus overflowing makes it very fruitful: the chief Ci∣ties;
are Grand Cairo, and Alexandria: see afterward a more full dis∣cription of it. The Islands belonging to Africa Described. The Atlantick Islands are 1. that of Saint Thomas, lying directly under the Aequinoctiall line, inhabited by the Portugalls, and yeild∣ing plenty of Sugar. 2. Prince Island, lying between the Aequator and Tropick of Capricorn: a fertile place. 3. The Gorgades being nine in number, lying neer to Cape Virde: they abound in Goats, and the chief of them is called St. James. 4. The Canaries, for their fruit∣fulnesse called, The fortunate Islands: they are seven in number, the cheif is called the Grand Canary, they yeild excellent wines. 5. The Hesperides, not far from the Gorgades, where the soil is very fruitful; the weather continually fair, and the air very temperate. The Aethiopick Islands are 1. The Island of Saint Laurence, or Madagascar; which is four thousand miles in compasse, and longer than Italy, rich in all commo∣dities for mans use: The people are very barbarous, and most of them black, yet there is some white amongst them, supposed to bee trans∣planted out of China. 2. Socatrina, or Socotera, which lyes at the mouth of the Red-sea, and is sixty miles in length, and twenty five in breadth: Its very dry and barren, yet hath diverse good drugs in it. From thence cometh our Aloes Socotrina. The Principal Countries in Africa more largely Described. Africa is usually divided into 1 Egypt. 2 Barbary. 3 Numidia. 4 Lybia. 5 The land of Negro's. 6 Aethiopia interior. 7 Aethiopia exterior. 8 And the Islands, as was aforesaid. A more full Description of Egypt. This Country of Egypt containeth in length from Siene to the Medi∣terranean Sea, five hundred sixty and two miles, and in breadth from Rosetta to Damietta above one hundred and forty miles: yet in some places its not above thirty seven miles broad: The Inhabitants are tawny, and brown. From its fruitfulnesse it was called Horreum Popu∣li Romani: The Roman Granary, where Lucan saith. The Earth content with its own wealth, doth crave No forreign Marts: nor Jove himself: they have There hopes alone in Nilus fruitful wave. Dr. Heilen. This Nilus is divided towards the Sea, into seven Channels. It swelleth above its banks by the space of forty days, beginning upon the 15th day of June, and is forty days more decreasing, and return∣ing
into its banks. During this inundation, the Cattle live on hills, and in the Towns, unto which they are aforehand driven, and fod∣dered till the return of the water into its Channel. The Towns, and Villages stand all upon tops of hills, and in the time of the flood ap∣pear like so many Islands: and the people by boats have free inter∣course all the while. In the mud left upon the fields, are many crea∣tures ingendred by the heat of the Sun: Whence Ovid, And when the seven mouth'd Nile the fields forsakes, And to his ancient Channel him betakes: The tillers of the ground live creatures find Of sundry shapes, inth' mud that's left behind. Dr. Heilen. This River is almost three thousand miles long, and being the only River of Egypt, affords the only drink to the Egyptians, and indeed its very good water. The Paper made of Sedges, called Papi∣ri growing by this River, afforded Ptolemy Philadelphus materials for Books in that brave Library of Alexandria: but understanding that Attalus, King of Pergamus, used this Egyptian Paper, for to exceed him in another Library, hee prohibited the carrying of it out of E∣gypt, whereupon Attalus invented Parchment, called from his City Pergamena: and before these inventions, they wrote either on the inside of the bark of a tree called Liber, whence wee call our Books Libri, Or on Tables made of wood, called Caudex, whence came our Codex. Or on Tables covered over with wax: whence Tabel∣larius is a letter Carryer: and the pin which they wrote with, was called Stylus, which was afterwards used for that peculiar phrase used by any: as Negligens Stylus: exercitatus Stylus. Sometimes they wrote in leaves, as the Sybils did their Prophesies, called Sybillae folia: whence we call it a leaf of paper. Pharos is a little Island over against Alexandria, in which Ptolemae∣us Philadelphus built a watch-tower for the benefit of Saylors: the chief workman was Sostratus of Gnidos. It was all of white Marble, of a wonderfull height, ascended by degrees, and in the top were many Lanthorns with lights in the night, to direct those that travelled by Sea; for the admirable structure, it was counted one of the won∣ders of the world. The chief Cities in Egypt described, The Grand Cairo described. The Grand Cairo in Egypt is accounted one of the greatest Cities in the world. It is situated upon a most beautiful plain, neer unto a cer∣tain. Mountain called Mucatun, about two miles from the River Nilus, It's invirond with stately walls, and fortified with Iron Gates. In it are built most stately and admirable Palaces, and Colledges, and most sumptuous Temples. There are also many Bath stoves, very artifici∣ally
built: It aboundeth with all sorts of Merchandise out of all parts of the World. There is in it a famous Burse [Exchange] called Canen Halili, wherein the Persian Merchants dwell; It's built very stately in the manner of a King's Palace, of three stories high: Beneath it are many rooms, whither Merchants resort for the exchange of their costly wares; as all sorts of Spices, precious stones, Cloth of India, &c. There is also a stately Hospital, the yearly revenues whereof, amount to two hundred thousand peices of gold cal∣led Saraffi. The Suburbs are very large, wherein also are many stately buildings, especially a Colledge being of a wonderful height, and great strength: Besides many other Palaces, Colledges, and Temples. Here they have great store of poultry: For in certain Ovens built upon sundry lofts they put abundance of Eggs; which Ovens being kept in a moderate heat, will in seven days hatch all those eggs into chickens. P. Pil. There are in it eighteen thousand streets. It is so populous, that its reputed in very good health, if there dye but a thousand a day, or thirty hundred thousand in a year. I mean when the Plague; which comes once in seven years, is amongst them. Heil. In one of the streets are about threescore Cooks shops: then fol∣low othr shops, wherein are to bee sold delicate waters, and drinks made of all kinds of fruits, which are kept charily in fine vessels: next to these are shops, where diverse confections of honey, and Sugar, like to ours in Europe, are to bee sold: Then follow the Fruiterers shops, who have out-Landish fruits out of Syria, as Quinces, Pom∣granats, &c. Next to them are shops wherein they sell Eggs, Cheese and Pancakes fryed with Oyle: Next is a street, wherein all man∣ner of Artificers dwell: Then there are diverse ranks of Drapers shops; In the first rank they sell excellent fine linnen, fine cloth of Cotton, and cloth called Mosal, of a marvellous breadth and fine∣nesse, whereof the greatest persons make shirts, and scarfs to wear upon their Tulipants: Then are Mercers shops, wherein they sell Silks, Damask, Cloth of Gold, and Velvet brought out of Italy: The next are woollen Drapers, with all sorts of European cloth: next of all are store of Chamblets to bee sold. At the gate of Zuaila dwell great store of Artificers. Next to the forenamed Burse is a street of shops, where are all kind of Perfumes, as Civet, Musk, Ambergreece, &c. Next follows the street of Paper Merchants, with most excel∣lent smooth Paper: There are also to bee sold pretious stones, and Jewels of great value, which the Brokers carry from shop to shop: Then come you to the Gold-Smiths street, inhabited mostly by Jews, who deal in rich commodities: Then are there Upholsters, and Bro∣kers who sell apparel, and rich furniture at the second hand, as Cloaks, Coats, Nappery, &c. It hath many large Suburbs, as that of Bed Zuaila, containing a∣bout twelve thousand Families, being a mile and an half in length. The Suburb called Gemli Tailon, adorned with a most admirable Palace, and sumptuous Temple: where also dwell great store of
Merchants, and Artificers. The Suburb called Bell Elloch, contain∣ing neer three thousand Families, inhabited by Merchants, and Ar∣tizans of diverse sorts; there is also a great Palace, and a stately Col∣ledge: Here are many stage-players, and such as teach Camels, Asses, and Dogs to dance, very delightful to behold. The Suburb Bu∣lach upon the Bank of Nilus, containes four thousand Families: here are many Artificers, and Merchants, especially such as sell Corn, Oyle, Sugar, &c. Its also full of stately Temples, Colledges, and Hospitalls; under this Suburb you may sometimes see above a thou∣sand Barks upon the River, The Suburb of Caresa contains about two thousand Families: Here are many Sepulchers built with high and stately vaults, and Arches; adorned within with diverse Emblems, and colours, the pavement spread with sumptuous, and rich Car∣pets. The Inhabitants of Cairo in the Winter time, wear garments of cloth lined with Cotton: In the summer they wear fine shirts, over which some have linnen garments, curiously wrought with silk: o∣thers wear Chamblet, and great Turbants on their heads, covered with cloth of India: The women go in costly attire, having on their foreheads frontlets, and about their necks chains of Pearl: on their heads they wear a sharp, and slender Bonnet, about a span high very pretious, and rich, their Gowns are of woollen cloth with strait sleeves, curiously imbroidered with needle work, over which they cast veils of excellent fine cloth of India: their faces are cove∣red with a black scarff: on their feet they wear fine shooes, or Pantof∣fles, &c. The City of Alexandria described. The great City of Alexandria, was founded by Alexander the great, not without the advise of most famous, and skilful Architects, upon a beautiful point of land stretching into the Mediterranean Sea, be∣ing distant forty miles, Westward from Nilus: It was most sumptu∣ously, and strongly built, four square, with four Gates for entrance: One on the East-side towards Nilus: Another on the South towards the Lake of Buchaira: the third Westward towards the Desert of Barca: and the fourth towards the Haven. Neer unto the City walls, are two other gates, which are divided asunder by a fair walk, and a most impregnable Castle which stands upon the Wharf, in which Port the best ships out of these parts of the World ride: Here the Christians pay a tenth of all their wares, whereas the Mahome∣tans, pay but a twentieth part. At this time that part of the City that lyes towards Cairo is best inhabited, and furnished with Mer∣chandize, and so is the other part that lies next to the Haven: under each house in the City is a great vaulted Cistern, built upon mighty Pillars, and Arches, whereinto at the overflowing of Nilus, the wa∣ter is conveyed, under the City walls, by a most artificiall Sluce, that stands without them. The City stands in a sandy Desert, so that its
destitute of Gardens, Vines, and Corn, but what is brought from places at forty miles distance. The City of Rosetto Described. Rosetto was built by a Slave to one of the Mahometan Governours, upon the Eastern bank of Nilus, three miles from the Mediterranean Sea, and not far from the place where Nilus emptieth it self into the sea: In it is a stately Bath-stove, having fountains both of cold, and hot water belonging thereunto. The City of Thebe Described. Thebe at this present contains but about three hundred Families  but the buildings are very stately and sumptuous. It abounds with Corn, Rice, and Sugar, with a certain fruit of a most excellent tast, called Muse: It hath in it great store of Merchants, and Artificers: The Countrey about it, abounds with Date-trees, which grow so thick, that a man cannot see the City till hee comes neer the Walls: Here grow also store of Grapes, Figs, and Peaches: Over against the City the River of Nilus makes an Isle, which standing high, brings forth all sorts of fruits but Olives. The City of Chanca described. The great City of Chanca is about six miles from Cairo, at the ve∣ry entrance into the Desert, through which is the way to Mount Si∣nai: Its replenished with most stately houses, Temples, and Colled∣ges: All the fields between Cairo, and it, are full of Dates. From Chanca to Mount Sinai are one hundred and forty miles, in all which way there is no habitation: Through this City lye the two main roads, one leading to Syria, and the other to Arabia: They have no water, but what remains in certain channels after the inundation of Ni∣lus. In the other Cities there is nothing remarkable. The Egyptian Pyramids Described. In Egypt are diverse stupendious structures called Pyramids, the greatest whereof is situated on the top of a rocky hill, which riseth a∣bove the plain about an hundred feet, with a gentle, and easy ascent, the height of the situation adding beauty to the work, and the solidi∣ty of the rock giving the superstructure a permanent, and stable sup∣port: each side of this Pyramid is six hundred ninety three feet accord∣ing to the English Standard; so that the whole Basis contains four hundred eighty thousand two hundred, and fourty nine square feet, or eleven English acres of ground. The height is the same with the breadth: viz. six hundred ninety three feet. The ascent to the top is contrived in this manner: From all the
sides without, the ascent is by degrees; the lowermost step or degree is about four foot in height, and three in breadth, which running a∣bout the Pyramid in a level, makes on every side of it a long, but nar∣row walk; the second row is like the first, retiring inward from the first three feet, and so runs about the Pyramid. In the same man∣ner is the third row placed above the second, and so in order the rest like so many stairs rising one above another to the top, which con∣tains about nine foot square. The degrees by which men ascend are not all of an equal depth, for some are about four foot, others scarcely three, and the higher they ascend, the more they diminish, both in breadth, and thicknesse: so that a right line extended from any part of the Basis to the top, will equally touch the outward angle of eve∣ry degree. These are all made of Massie, and polished stones, hewn out of the Arabian Mountains, which bound the upper part of Egypt, being so vast, that the breadth and depth of every step, is one single and in∣tire stone, so that in most of them is contained thirty feet of stone: The number of these steps is two hundred and seven. On the North side ascending thirty eight feet upon an artificial bank of earth, there is a square, and narrow passage, leading into the inside of this Pyramid, containing in length ninety two feet, and an half: The structure of it hath been the labour of an exquisite hand, as appears by the smoothnesse and evennesse of the work, and by the close knitting of the joynts: it is now an habitation for great ugly batts of about a foot long. At the end of this entrance you must climb up a massy stone, eight or nine foot in height, where you enter into a Gallery, the pave∣ment consisting of smooth, and polished white Marble▪ the breadth is about five foot, and the height the like: the length of this Gallery is an hundred, and ten feet: At the end whereof begins a second Gallery, a very stately peece of work, and not inferiour either in respect of the curiousity of Art, or richnesse of materials, to the most sumptuous or magnificent buildings: Its divided from the for∣mer by a wall; at the end whereof is a Well about three feet in the dia∣meter, the sides whereof are lined with white Marble, its eighty six cubits in depth, hewn through the Rock on which the Pyramid stands▪ Beyond the Well about fifteen foot is a square passage, the stones whereof are exceeding massie, and exquisitely joyned, which contains one hundred and ten feet, at the end whereof is an arched Vault, or little Chamber; the length about twenty feet, the breadth seven∣teen, the height about fifteen. The length of this second Gallery before mentioned is one hundred fifty and four feet, of white, and polished Marble, both roof, walls, and bottome; the joynts are so well knit, that they are scarce discernable: The height of this Gallery is twenty six feet, the breadth six feet, bounded on both sides with two banks, like benches of polished Marble. At the end of this Gallery you enter into a square hole which brings you into a little room lined with rich, and speckled Thebaick
Marble, out of which through another passage, being all of Thebaick Marble; most exquisitely cut, you land at the North end of a very sumptuous, and well proportioned room, wherein Art seems to con∣tend with Nature, the curious work not being inferiour to the rich ma∣terials: It stands in the heart, or center of the Pyramid, equidistant from all the sides, and in the midst between the Basis, and the top: The floor, sides, and roof, are all made of vast, and exquisite tables of Thebaick Marble: from the top to the bottome are but six ranges of stone, all of an equal height. The stones which cover this room are of a strange, and stupendious length, like so many huge beams ly∣ing flat, and traversing the room, and bearing up that infinite weight, and Masse of the Pyramid above. Of these there are nine which co∣ver the roof; the length of this room is thirty four English feet: the breadth somewhat above seventeen feet, the height nineteen feet and a half. In the midst of this glorious room stands the Tomb of Cheops of one peece of Marble, hollow within, and sounding like a bell; but emp∣ty: For (saith Diodorus) although the Egyptian Kings intended these for their Sepulchres, yet it happened that they were not buried there∣in: For the people being exasperated against them, by reason of the toilsomenesse of these works, and for their cruelty, and oppression, threatned to tear in peeces their dead bodies, and with ignominy to throw them out of their Sepulchres, wherefore the commanded their friends when they were dead to bury them in some obscure place. The Tomb is cut smooth, and plain, without any sculpture, and ingraving: The outsides contain in length seven foot, three inches, and a half. In depth its three foot, and almost four inches, and the same in breadth: The hollow part within is something more than six foot long, the depth is somewhat above two feet; whereby it appears that mens bodies are now as big as they were three thousand years ago: For it is almost so long since this Tomb was made. This Pyra∣mid was twenty years in making, and yet there were three hundred threescore, and six thousand men continually working about it, who only in Radishes, Garlick; and Onions are said to have consumed eighteen hundred Talents. Collected out of Mr. Greaves, a curious obser∣ver of it. The Egyptian Mummi's described. Not far from this Pyramid in Egypt are the Mummi's, which were the graves of the ancient Egyptians, into which are discents not unlike to the narrow mouthes of Wells, some near ten fathomes deep, lea∣ding into long vaults, hewn out of the Rock with pillars of the same. Between every Arch lie the Corpses ranked one by another of all sizes, which are innumerable, shrowded in a number of folds of Lin∣nen, and swathed with bands of the same, the breasts of divers being stained with Hierogliphical Characters: The Linnen being pulled off, the bodies appear solid, uncorrupt, and perfect in all their
dimensions; whereof the musculous parts are of a brown colour, hard as stone-pitch, and hath in Physick the like operation; only more so∣veraign. To keep these from putrefactions, they drew the brains out at the nostrils with an Iron instrument, replenishing the head with preserva∣tive spices: then cutting up the belly with an Aethiopian stone, they took forth the bowels, cleansed the inside with Wine, and so stuf∣fing it with a composition of Myrrhe, Cassia, and other odours, they closed it up again: The like the poorer sort effected with Bitumen, fetched from the Lake of Asphaltites in Jury, whereby they have been preserved till this day, having lyen there for about three thou∣sand years. The Lake of Maeris described. Maeris, one of the Egyptian Kings, undertook, and finished that most admirable Lake, which for greatnesse, and colour is like a Sea: Its about six hundred furlongs from the City of Memphis, the cir∣cumference of it, contains M.M.M.DC. furlongs, the depth of it is fifty fathom, or three hundred feet; many myriads of men were imployed for many years about it. The benefit of it to the Egyptians, and the wisdome of the King cannot bee sufficiently commended: For seeing the rising of Nilus is not alwayes alike, and the Country is more fruitful by the mode∣ratenesse thereof: Hee digged this Lake to receive the superfluity of the water, that neither by the greatnesse of the inundation, it should cause Marshes, or by the scarcity of water, the earth should not yeeld her strength, hee therefore cut a ditch from the River to this Lake fourscore furlongs long, and three hundred feet in breadth, by which sometimes receiving in, and sometimes diverting the River, hee gave at his pleasure a sufficient quantity of water to the husbandmen. Af∣ter the Kings name, its called the Lake of Maeris. In the midst of this Lake hee built a Sepulchre, and two Pyra∣mids, each of them of an hundred fathoms high, placing upon them two Marble statues, sitting on a Throne, one representing himself, the other his wife; seeking hereby to make his memory immortal. The revenews which came by the fish of this Lake, hee gave to his wife to buy her unguents, and ornaments, which was so great, that it amoun∣ted to a Talent a day: For it was mightily replenished with fish of twenty sorts, so that very many were continually imployed in catch∣ing, and salting of them. Diod. Sion. Herod. Barbary described. Barbary hath on the East Cyrenaica: on the West the Atlantick Oce∣an; On the North the Mediterranean Sea; and on the South the Moun∣tain Atlas. Its now usually divided into the Kingdomes of Tunnis, Algiers, Fess, and Morocco. It produceth Figs, Olives, Dates, Sugar,
and horses excellent for shape, and service. The men are comely of feature, of a duskish colour, stately of gate, implacable in hatred, laborious, and treacherous. The women are rich in Jewels, beautiful in blacknesse, and have delicate soft skins. The Kingdome of Tunis described. Tunis hath on the East Cyrenaica, and on the VVest Algier: It con∣taineth all that which the Ancients called Numidia antiqua: The soil is fertile, especially the Western part: The Inhabitants are health∣ful, seldome vexed with any sicknesse; its divided commonly into five parts. 1 Ezzab in the East, having many Towns and Regions in it. 2 Tripolis, where the chief City is of the same name; and where the Great Turk hath a Bassa, or Vice-Roy: Its at this day a receptacle of Pyrats, that rove and rob in those Seas. Anno Christi 1551. It was wonne from the Knights of Malta by Sinan Bassa. 3 Tunis, where the chief City of the same name standeth, near to the ruines of Carthage: It hath in it about ten thousand housholds, and many Temples, and especially one of singular beauty, and great∣nesse. Cairoan also hath been a famous City six and thirty miles from the Sea, and one hundred from Tunis; where is an admirable Temple built upon Pillars of Marble. 4 Constantina, having the chief City of the same name, wherein a eight thousand families, and many sumptuous buildings, a great Temple, and two Colledges. 5 Bugia, which for one hundred and fifty miles space extends it self by the Sea side to the River Major; the Principal City is called Bugia, sometimes adorned with Temples, Hospitals, Monasteries, and Colled∣ges of students in the Mahometan Law. There is also in Bugia, Necotus a very pleasant City; and Chollo, very rich. In this Country also is seated Bona, formerly called Hippo, where St. Augustine was Bishop. The Kingdome of Algier described. Algier formerly called Mauritania Caesariensis, is bounded on the East with Tunis, on the VVest with Fess, and Morocco. It hath in it five Principal Cities. 1 Hubeda. 2 Tegdenit. 3 Guagido. 4 Telesine, which sometimes contained sixteen thousand families, and is adorned with many beautiful Temples, and hath in it five dainty Colledges, curi∣ously wrought with Mosaick work. And 5 Algier. The City of Algier described. Algier is seated on the Mediterranean Sea, upon the side of an hill, whereby one house hinders not the prospect of another: Its in fashion like a Bow: the old Town is in compasse three thousand four hundred
paces: the Island wherein it stands is walled about, except that part which is open to the Port, and City; where lately they have erected a five cornered Tower to secure both: Its well strengthened with Turrets, Fortresses, and Bulworks: without the Wall is a ditch of sixteen paces broad: without the Town there are three Castles: the Streets are generally narrow, and in the Winter Dirty: The Houses toward the street are dark: but being inwardly built with square Cloi∣sters, it makes them light: the roofs being flat serve them for galleries and Prospect: In the middest is a well, but the water brackish: they use no chimnies, but make fires in Panns. The Kings Palace, and great mens houses have spacious Courts, with specious Pillars about, and many by-rooms spread with Mats, and Carpets, their Cu∣stome being to put off their shooes when they enter. Their houshold furniture is generally mean: their common lodging is upon a Mat, or Carpet upon the ground: Pelts are their Nappery, water their drink, Rice with pulse their meat, &c. five Cisterns with∣out the City supply them with water, fetched in upon the shoulders of their slaves: There are seven fair Mosques, five Colledges of Janizaries, where six hundred of them live together in one house. One Hospital, four fair Baths, whereof two for washing with hot, and cold water, paved with Marble: Two Royall Porches, one of thirty six foot square, with columes for the Janizaries, and the other is before the Palace: within the Walls are neer thirteen thousand houses, many of them containing thirty Families, and some more: There are in all above one hundred Mosques, besides the Oratories of Hermites: Sixty two Baths, fourscore and six Schools, where∣in children learn to read, and write, and a few others for the Alco∣ran: In the Suburbs are fourteen thousand six hundred ninety eight Gardens, each having Christian Slaves to keep them: yea there is scarce a family in the City, wherein they have not one or more Christi∣an Slaves of both Sexes: Besides in the Kings Prison are commonly two thousand, and two or three thousand more in their Gallies, so that in all, there are seldome fewer than thirty thousand of these poor slaves. See what misery these poor captives indure before in the Chapter of Cruelty. Fesse and Morocco described. Fesse and Morocco, formerly called Mauritania Tingitana, have on the East Algiers; On the West the Atlantick Ocean: and are parted one from the other by the River Omiramble: The other principal Rivers in them are Tensilt, Sus, Suba, and Lyssus. Fesse is divided into seven Provinces, in the which the chief City is Fesse, so called from the abundance of Gold that was found at the laying of the foundation of it.
The City of Fesse Described. The City of Fesse is both great, and strong: the soil about it, is di∣versified with little Hills, and pretty vallies, which make it very pleasant: The River neer it disperseth it self into many channels, and when it enters into the City, it divideth it self into two arms, and these again are subdivided into variety of water-courses, passing through every street, and by pipes under ground is carried into eve∣ry Temple, Colledge, Inne, Hospital, and almost into every pri∣vate house, whereby it carrieth away all the silth that might annoy either the sight or sent. The buildings are of Mosaick-work, with fine bricks, and stones framed after a most curious manner, lovely for delight, and stately for admiration. The roofes of the houses are adorned with Gold, Azure, and other excellent colours: on the top they are flat for the Inhabitants use and pleasure: within they are richly furnished, every Chamber having in it a Presse curiously painted, and varnished. The Portals, Pillars, Cisterns, and other Ornaments of the City are very exquisitly framed: There are of Temples in it a∣bout seven hundred, whereof fifty are very great, and fair, adorned with Marble Pillars, and other Ornaments, the Chapiters whereof are wrought with Mosaick and carved works: each of them hath his Fountain of Marble, and other costly stones: the floores are cove∣red with Mats closely joyned; the walls also for a mans height are lined with the same; every Temple hath its Steeple after the Ma∣hometan manner, whereon their Priests call the People to prayer at the appointed hours. The principal Temple is that of Caruven, so great, that it contains in circuit a mile, and a half. It hath thirty one Gates great and high: the Roof is one hundred and fifty Tuscan yards long, and neer fourscore broad. Its supported with thirty eight Arches in length, and twenty in breadth: Round about it are Porches on the East, West, and North, every one in length forty yards, and in breadth thirty, under which are store-houses, wherein are kept Lamps Oyle, Mats, and other necessaries: every night are lighted nine hundred Lamps, for every Arch hath his Lamp, especially that row which ex∣tends through the midst of the Quire, which alone hath one hun∣dred and fifty Lamps: amongst which are some great lights made of Brasse, every of which hath sockets for one thousand five hundred Lamps: The Steeple is exceeding high. Not far from the City are twenty Lime-kills, and as many brick-kills, serving for the reparation of the Temple, and houses that belong to it. The revenues of this Tem∣ple are two hundred Duckets a day. In the City there are two Principal, and most stately Colledges, adorned with Mosaick, and carved works, paved with Marble, and stones of Majorca; in each of them are many Chambers: One of them containing above one hundred Chambers, is adorned with a goodly Fountain of Marble, and a continuall running stream: about it are three Cloisters, or Galleries of incredible beauty, supported with eight square
Pillars of diverse colours: the Arches adorned with Mosaick of Gold, and Azure: the roof of carved work. The Gates of the Colledge are of Brass finely wrought, and the Chamber doors are well carved. In the great hall where they say their Prayers, is a Pulpit, ascended by nine stairs, all of Ivory, and Ebony. There are many Hospitals in Fesse not inferior to the Colledges for building: there are also a hundred Bath-stoves well built, each of them having four Halls, and certain Galleries without; in which they put off their cloaths, most of them pertaining to the Temples, and Col∣ledges, and yeilding them a great rent. Their Inns are almost two hundred, built three stories high, each of them having one hundred and twenty Chambers in them, with Galleries before all the doors: but yeilding neither beds, nor food for strangers. There are also a thousand Mills, the revenues whereof be∣long to the Temples, and Colledges. Each trade in Fesse hath a pecu∣liar place allotted thereto. There are six hundred fountains walled about, which supply the Temples, and other places with water, because the River is sometimes dry. In the territories of Fesse is the City of Sella, where the buildings are of Mosaick work, supported with Marble Pillars. The shops are un∣der fair, and large Porches: in which, there are Arches to part the several Occupations: it hath in it fair and beautiful Temples: hither the Eng∣lish, Genowayes, Flemings, and Venetians use to trade. Morocco described. Morocco is divided into seven Provinces, in all which the chief Ci∣ty is Morocco, once the Metropolis of Barbary, containing one hundred thousand Families, but now inferior to Fess for voluptuousnesse, spaci∣ousnesse, and beauty: yet there is a large Church in it bigger than that of Fesse, though not so beautifull, having a Tower on it so high, that from thence may bee seen the hills of Azasi at one hundred and thirty miles distance. There is also a large and stately Castle, on whose Tower there stand three Globes made of pure Gold, weighing one hundred and thirty thousand Barbary Duckets, some Kings have been about to take them down, but have always been hindred by some disasters, which makes the common people judge, that they are kept by spirits. Numidia, and Lybia described. Betwixt Barbary, and these, is the Mountain Atlas, so high that the top of it cannot bee seen: It was so called from one Atlas a King, that dwelt at the bottome of it. Numidia hath on the East Egypt: on the West the Atlantick Oce∣an: on the North Atlas: and on the South Lybia: The Inhabitants live like the Nomades, not in houses, but in Waggons, and Carts, whence Lucan speaking of them, said,
They dwell in Waines, not houses, and do stray Through fields, and with them lead their gods each way. Heilin. They spend their time in hunting, staying but three or four dayes in a place, whilst the grasse will sustain their Camels; so that there are few Towns in this Country, and those far remote one from another. Teffet is their greatest City, which yet consists not of above four hun∣dred housholds, and hath no other Town within three hundred miles of it. In this Country are abundance of Dates, whence its called Dactylorum regio. This fruit is most of heir food, and with the stones of them they feed their Goats, which makes them fat, and causeth them to give store of milk. The air hath this property, that it presently cures all that have the French disease, and come into it. The chief Cities are Stafilet, Dausen, Dara, Lapsa, and Teffet. Lybia hath on the East Nilus; on the VVest the Atlantick Ocean; On the North Numidia; and on the South the Land of Negroes. In this Country Arius, the Heretick was born, who denyed the perpetual di∣vinity of Christ. It is now called Sarra, i. e. a Desart, because the whole Country is full of sandy Desarts, through which Merchants use to travel eight dayes together, without the sight of either River, Lake, Bush, or Tree. The chief Cities are Huadan, Guargata, and Toherra∣um. They have neither King nor Lawes, but are governed by the chief man in every Tribe: They are most Gentiles, they have some Mahometans amongst them. The Land of Negroes described. The Land of Negroes hath on the East Aethiopia superior: On the West the Atlantick Ocean: On the North Lybia; and on the South the Kingdome of Manicongo: The people are very ignorant and brui∣tish: most of them Gentiles, yet are there some Mahometans and Christians amongst them: They took the Portugal ships when they first saw them, for great birds with white wings: their guns for the work of the Devil, and bag-pipes for living Creatures. The Nobles in the presence of the King, never look him in the face, but sit on their buttocks with their elbows on their knees, and their hands on their faces; they anoint their hair with fat of fishes, which makes them stink abominably. They have abundance of gold and silver, very pure, and fine. Its watered with the River Niger, which from the fifteenth of June overflows its banks for the space of forty dayes, and is so many more before it returns into its channel, which makes the fields very fruitful: In one place Niger hides it self for six miles un∣der ground: The second River is Senega, upon whose Northern bank, the people are cole black; but on the South only tawny. The Chief Kingdomes are 1 Gualata, where they have no Laws. 2 Guinie, where there is neither Town nor Castle, except Mina built by the Portugals.
3 Tombutum, where the Inhabitants spend all their time in singing, and dancing. The King hereof is the richest of all the Princes in those parts of Africa, keeping a royal Palace, and hath for his guard three thousand horsemen, and footmen sance number. 4 Melli, which is three hundred miles long, the Inhabitants are rich, civil, and industrious. 5 Cana, where are Plenty of Lemons, and Pomegranats. 6 Gialoie, where the people are so nimble, that they will leap upon a horse when hee gallops, and stand upright when hee runs, turn them∣selves about, and suddenly sit down; mount, and dismount in a trice. 7 Benin, where the people rase their skins with three lines drawn to the Navel, without which they think they cannot bee saved; Both men and women go naked till they bee married, and then they wear a cloath from the wast to the knees. 8 Nubia, where there is a poison so exceeding strong, that the tenth part of a grain will kill a man in a quarter of an hour: Its sold for one hundred Duckats the ounce. 9 Bornum, where the people have neither wives, nor children that they call their own, nor names, but are only distinguished by some external accident. 10 Goaga, where the King hath no revenues, but what hee winnes from his enemies. 11 Ganaga, where the King hath nothing, but what his Nobles please daily to allow him. The Country of the Mandigos described. In Guinie upon the River Gambra live the Mandingos: The River abounds with Crocodiles, River-horses, Torpedoes, running-fishes, &c. On the banks of it are many Geese, Ducks, Hernes, Curlews, Storks, Plovers, &c. On the Land are Beeves, Goats, Guinie Hens, &c. The people are perfeclty black, and live a very idle life, except it bee in their seed-time, and harvest: their usual food is Rice, or some Grain boiled; their drink is water, or Dullo, made of Grain like our Ale: Their houses are round covered with Reeds, many of them built together, and compassed with a wall of Reeds six foot high, to defend them from wild-beasts, which yet many times, much endanger them. There are Ant-hills cast up by Pismires; some of them twenty foot high, and in compasse able to contain twelve men, which with the heat of the Sun are baked into that hardnesse, that our English which trade thither for gold, use to hide themselves in the ragged tops of them, when they take up their stands, to shoot at Deer, or other beasts. The Town wherein the King dwels is seated on the River, compassed about with Hurdles ten foot high, and fastened to strong poles: On the outside is a Trench of great breadth, beyond which the Town is again circled with Posts, set close together of about five foot high: their Armes are Azegaies, or Javelins, made of Reeds six foot long, with an Iron Pike artificially made, and dangerous: they have others
that they cast like Darts, with barbed heads: as also swords about two foot long. Some have Bows and Arrows made of Reeds, hea∣ded with Iron poisoned: when any of them come to the King, they presently kneel down, and comming nearer, they lay their hands first upon the ground, then upon their head, then comming to him, they lay their hand with much submission upon the Kings thigh, and so re∣tire back: the King answers them with nodding his head: They are generally cloathed in cloth made of Cotton, whereof there is plenty; their apparrel is a shirt to their knees▪ and a pair of breeches; they are mostly bare-headed, their hair bedecked with Gregories, made of lea∣ther, of several fashions, which whilst they wear, they think that no evil can betide them. The King hath two wives sitting by him, laying their hands on his naked skin, stroaking, and gently pulling the same. VVhen the wo∣man is with child, shee lyes no more with her husband till the child bee weaned. The wives live in great servitude, beating their Grain in Morters: they never are admitted to sit, and eat with their hus∣bands: you shall never see kissing, or dalliance betwixt husband and wife, nor brawling amongst the wives, though one man hath many, and they equal: each woman hath her several house for the night, and when they appear in the morning, they salute their husbands, knee∣ling, laying their hands on his thigh: her apparrel is loose, and party-coloured: from the wast upward shee is bare, to shew her painted ra∣zed body, whereof they are proud, turning themselves to shew it, and well pleased when you handle it. Few either of men or women are without Tobacco-pipes made of earth well glazed, about two inches long, the bowle will hold half an ounce of Tobacco: into these they put Reeds about a yard long, and so draw the smoak. They have store of Palmita wine: and gourds which grow like our Pumpions carryed up their walls, of unequal size, from an egge to a bushel, yeelding variety of houshold vessels to eat, drink, and wash cloaths in: they have store of great Locusts trees, which yeeld clu∣sters of Cods, ripe in May, which they eat. They have store of Bees, and Honey. They have a sort of trees, which on a long stalk have a great and round fruit with a pleasing pith therein, on which Baboons and Monkeys feed. There is a tree or shrub commonly growing on the River bank like our great Briars, having a ragged leaf, which leaf with the gentlest stealing touch, betwixt the finger, and thumb, will make the whole bough to close up all his leaves, and the touch of a sprig, will cause the whole tree to close up all his leaves: It bears a yel∣low flower like our Eglantines. There are many Lions, Jackals, Ouzes, and Leopards. The Civit-Cats, and Porcupins rob them of their Poultry. There are also abundance of Elephants, which going in companies spoil their Corn, and Cotton grounds: they feed a∣mongst sedges, and upon boughs of trees: the blacks eat their flesh▪ There are Deer of all sorts, Antilops, wild Bulls, and huge Bears. The Baboons go by three or four thousand in a Heard, some of the bigest being leaders, which are as big as Lions: the Females carry their
young under their bellies, and if any have two, shee carries one on her back. There are infinite store of Guinie-hens, Partridges, Quails as big as Woodcocks, Pidgeons, Parrats, and Parakitos: Their greatest fowl is a Stalker, who standing upright is taller than a man: the next is a Wake, which makes a great noise as hee flies, and doth much hurt in their Rice grounds: of smaller birds there are many sorts, pleasant to the eye, and delighting the ear. Aethiopia inferior Described. Aethiopia inferior hath on the East the Red-sea: on the VVest the Aethiopian Ocean: on the North the Land of Blacks, and Aethiopia su∣perior: and on the South the Southern Ocean. It hath in it these King∣domes. Atan between the mouth of the Red-Sea, and the River Caliman∣ci. It abounds with flesh, Honey, Wax, Corn, Gold, Ivory, and abundance of Sheep, whose tails usually weigh five and twenty pounds. Zanzibar extending from the River Calimanci to Monomopata: Its divided into fifteen Provinces, or Kingdomes, the chiefest whereof is Sofila, where there is so much Gold, and Ivory, that some would have it to be Solomons Ophir. Cafraria, which hath on the East the River de Infanto: on the VVest and South the Ocean: and on the North the Mountains of the Moon: it extends Southward to the Cape of Good hope, first discovered by the Portugals, Anno Christi. 1497. The Africans at the Cape of Good Hope Described. At the Cape of Good Hope: the Africans are ugly black, strong-limmed, desperate, crafty, and injurious. Their heads are long, their hair woolly, and crispt; of which some shave one side, leaving the other long, and curled: Another shaves all, saving a little tuft on the top: Another (thinking his invention better) shaves here, and there, the bald skull appearing in many places: other some shave away all save a lock before. Such as have tufts of hair, hang in them brasse but∣tons, spur rowels, peeces of Pewter, &c. Their ears are long, and made longer by heavy bables they hang in them, as links of brass, or I∣ron, chains, glass-beads, blew-stones, bullets, or Oister-shels: and such as cannot reach to such Jewels, have singles of Dear, beaks of birds, Dogs or Cat stones, &c. Their Noses are flat, crusht so in their infan∣cy, their Lips great: quick, crafty eyes: and about their necks they have guts, or raw puddings, serving both for good and Orna∣ment: The better sort instead of them get hoops of Iron, chains of brasse, or greazy thongs of stinking Leather: Their arms are loaden with voluntary shackles of Iron, Ivory, rusty brass, or musty Copper: the rest of their bodies are naked, saving that they are girded with a thong of raw Leather, to which is fastened, a square peece like the back
of a Glove to cover their privities: but the women, when they re∣ceive any thing, return their gratitude by taking up that slap, and dis∣covering their shame: But their great ones have better cloathing: A nasty untanned hide of a Lyon, Leopard, Calf, Baboon, or Sheep (the hair inward) which they put upon their shoulders, reaching to their wasts: for their thighs and legs are never covered: To their feet is fastened a broad peece of Leather, tyed by a little strap, which for the most part they hold in their hands, that their feet may have liberty to steal, which with their toes, they can do most cunningly, all the while looking you in the face, as if they meant no harm. Most of the men are semi-Eunuches, one stone being exsected in their infan∣cy by their nurses. Both sexes hideously cut, gash, and pink their brows, nose, cheeks, arms, breast, back, belly, thighs, and legs in sundry works, and Figures. They have no houses, they delight most in Caves, Holes, or Lyons dens, unfurnished; a whole Tribe com∣monly keeping together, coupling without distinction, the name of wife, or brother, being unknown amongst these incestuous per∣sons. They feed, sleep, and speak altogether without order, or Law: In the night they sleep round a fire, a Centinel watching the Lyons, their adversaries: Vivitur ex rapto: the one eating the other, the Ly∣on tearing some of them, and they other times training him over co∣vered pits, which catches him: and so they slay, and eat him to day, who perhaps was a Sepulcher to their friends, or parents the day be∣fore. They dawb, and rub their skins with grease, and coals, inden∣ting, and drying them in the Sun whereby they become Monsters to all civil eyes. They eat men alive, or dead, which when they fail of, dead Whales, Seals, Pengwins, grease, or raw puddings are their diet: and when the frost of old age benums their limbs, whereby they are unapt to provide their own food, they either eat them, or expose them upon the Mountains, either to bee killed by famine, or de∣voured by Lyons. With these no violent death, nor stroying rage Of Lust, is half so dreadful as old age. They have no spark of devotion, no knowledge of God, heaven, hell, or immortality; no place of worship, no day of rest, no order in na∣ture, no shame, no truth, no ceremony in births, or burials, meer brutish∣nesse, and stupidity over shadowing them. The women carry their children on their backs, and give suck with their long dugs stretched over their shoulders. Anno Christi. 1600. Sir James Lancaster had a∣mongst them a thousand sheep, and fifty Oxen for trifles. They train their Cattle to such obedience, as with a whistle, great Heards will follow them like Dogs, and being sold, with a like call will runne away after them, to the buyers costly mirth and admiration: to pre∣vent which, the Marriners upon the delivery of each beast; either kill it quickly, or fasten their horns with cords to stakes placed there on purpose.
The Kingdome of Sofala Described. Sofala is situate on the cost of Eastern Ethiopia, neer the Sea: here the Portugals traffick to Manica, a Land of much Gold, within land above threescore Leagues; the women perform the offices of Tillage, and Husbandry: In it are many sorts of fruit, as Pomgranats which bear all the year, some green, some ripe, and some in flowers: Fig-trees which yeild black Figs all the year about: Oranges, Limes, Vines, which bear twice a year, in January, and July; Ananas, Sugar canes, Palm-trees which yeild infinite Cocoes, and Wine; Guiny Wheat, and Rice; There are abundance of Hens, Goats, Kine, Wild beasts, and wild Swine. In Manica grow little trees on Rocks; which are dry most part of the year, but if you cut off a bough and put it into water, in the space of ten hours it springs, and flourisheth with green leaves: In some parts they have store of Orenges and Lemons. The King of this Country is called the Quitive, they are Gentiles; Hee hath above one hundred women whereof one or two are his Queens: and many of them are his Aunts, Cosins, Sisters, and Daughters, all whom hee useth promiscuously; when hee dies his Queens must dye with him, to do him service in the other world. The Kingdome of Monomopata Described. Monomopata is above two hundred Leagues long: On the North-West lies the Kingdome of Abutua, where is much fine Gold, yet their greatest riches they count their Cattle: On the East it hath the River Zambeze: On the South-West it extends to the Ocean, and Southward its bounded with the River Inhanabane: The King hath many women, whereof one is principal: None may speak with him, except hee bring a present; The King and his Subjects wear a white Perewinkle in their foreheads for a jewell, fastened in their hair, and the King hath another great one on his breast. None of them cut the hair of their heads or beards, yet they grow not long: they live commonly to ninety, or one hundred years: when the King dyes, his Queen must drink poyson to serve him in another World. It a∣bounds so with Elephants, that about five thousand are yearly killed for their teeth-sake: There are said to bee three thousand Mines of Gold. The Kingdome of Congo, or Manicongo Described. The Kingdome of Congo hath on the West the Ocean: On the South the Caphars and Mountains of the Moon: On the East those Hills from which the Rivers issue, and run into the Fountains of Ni∣lus: and on the North the Kingdome of Benin: The most Souther∣ly part is called Quimbibe: a great and mighty Kingdome, extending from Bravagal to Bagamidri; the air is wholesome, the earth out∣outwardly
furnished with store of fruits, inwardly with Mines of Christal, and other mettals. Angola is another Province of Congo, a great Kingdome, and very populous. Cabazza is the Royal City, one hundred and fifty miles from the Ocean: from this Country the Portugals use to carry above twenty thousand slaves yearly into Brasile. They are Heathens, have their Idols of wood in the midst of their Towns, in fashion like a Negro, which they call Mokisso's: they take as many wives as they please, there are Mines of Silver, and excel∣lent Copper: they have many Kine, but love Dogs-flesh better, which they feed for the Shambles; their houses are fashioned like Bee-hives: Horse-tails are great Jewels amongst them, for one of which they will give two slaves. Congo properly so called, extendeth Westward three hundred seventy five miles; Northward five hundred and forty; Southward six hundred, crossing over the Mountains of the Sun, and the Mountain of Christal: Its divided into six Provinces, Bamba, Songo, Sundi, Pango, Batti, and Pemba. Bamba is the greatest, and richest; there are Mines of silver, and on the Sea-shore, shells which they use in stead of mony: Amongst them there are some very strong men, who will cleave a slave in the middle, or cut off a Bulls head at one blow: There are certain crea∣tures as big as Rams, having wings like Dragons, long tails, and chaps with diverse rows of teeth; they live upon raw flesh; their co∣lour is blew, and green, and they have but two feet; the Pagan Negroes worship them for Gods. The Rivers of Congo are many, the greatest whereof is Zatre: In all of them are River-horses, and Crocodiles, and they overflow as doth Nilus. There are whole Mountains of Porphi∣ry, Jasper, white Marble, and other Marbles; and one, that yeelds fair Jacinthes, straked with natural veins. When any of the Inhabitants dye, they have no power to bequeath their goods to their kindred, but the King is heire general to all men. The Kingdome of Loango described. Loango is the Notherly neighbour of Congo, right under the Line: the Country stretcheth two hundred miles within Land: the people are called Bramanes, and the King Mani Loango: they are circumcised after the manner of the Jews, as all the rest of the Nations in those Countries use to bee: they have abundance of Elephants, and wear cloaths of Palm: they are Heathens, and use many superstitions; they have their Mokisso's, or Images, to which they offer several things. Beyond the Country of Loango are the Anzigues, the cruellest Cannibals that are under the Sun: for in other places they eat their enemies, or their dead, but here they eat their Country-men, and kins-folk, and keep shambles of mans flesh, as with us of Beef, or Mutton. They have many Mines of Copper, and great quantity of Sanders, both red, and gray. They are excellent Archers; they are circumcised, and worship the Sun for their greatest God, and the Moon next.
Ethiopia Superior; called also Abassia, described. It is watered with four principal Rivers, and as many huge Lakes: The first River is Taucea, running Northward, but drunk up by the thirsty sands, before it can come to the Sea: It hath bordering upon it, Mountains of admirable height, and inaccessible: The second River is Oara, larger than Nilus, that emptieth it self into the Sea of Zeila: the water is very clear, but the superstitious Abassines refuse to drink of it, because in its passage it watereth some Mahometan Regions. The third is Gabea, and the fourth is Nilus: One of the Lakes is called Dambea, threescore mile long, and five and twenty broad: It abounds with fish, and River-horses; and in it are many Islands, in which trai∣tors are confined. The Abassine soil is for the most part hollow, and in the midst of the plains, rise many Rockie-hills, which in times of war serve them for Fortresses: The whole Country abounds with Mettal-Mines; but the inhabitants, partly through ignorance, and partly for fear of the Turks, if the riches of their Country should bee discovered, suffer them to lye hidden in the earth, only they make use of so much Iron as lyes upon the surface of the earth. Of plants and trees there is great variety: There are Hares, Goats, Bores, Harts, Elephants, Camells, Buffalls, Lions, Panthers, Tigers, Rhinocerotes, and Jaraffs. The air in this Country is most part warm, and temperate: In some parts very hot, and unwholesome. The Winter is from the end of May, to the beginning of September; in which time it rains almost eve∣ry day, which is often accompanied with thunder: their VVine is made of Honey; their Churches are usually compassed with trees for shade. The richer sort buy garments of the Saracens, the rest both men and women cover their bodies either with a skin, or some course Hempen∣cloth: when they do reverence to any, they put off their cloth from the shoulders to their navel; their hair is long, which serves them for a Hat: the better sort curle and anoint their hair with butter; they brand marks in their bodies, especially in their face; on their little fingers they suffer their nails to grow as long as they will; their hands and feet are bare, which they colour reddish; they are artlesse and lazie: they lye on Ox hides, they eat their meat out of great bowles of wood, without any Napperie: they have no Cities, but great unwal∣led Villages; their greatest Town hath scarce sixteen thousand hou∣ses: These houses are small, without elegancy or story, round, and covered with earth, and straw: They paint Christ, the Virgin, and other Saints black, as Devils, and wicked men white. Their Temples are round, having a double Porch: they neither walk, nor talk, nor sit, nor spit, nor laugh in the Church, nor admit Dogs into the Church∣yards: some Churches are only for men, others for women: In small Villages they are common to both, but with divisions that they cannot see one another.
The chiefest Port belonging to the Abissines is Suaquen, situated in the Arabian Gulph: It excels most of the Cities in the Orient, in four things: First, in the goodnesse and security of the Haven, which is fenced by nature against all storms, and will contain two hundred ships, besides multitudes of small Vessels. Secondly, In the easinesse of loading, and unloading of them: For the City being built in an Island, they set the beak-heads of their Ships and Gallies over the streets, and by casting a plank over, they are emptied into the ware-houses. Thirdly, For trafick with strange Nations; for there repair thither Merchants from all parts of India, Cambaia, Pegu, Malacca, Arabia, E∣thiopia, Egypt, &c. which trade for abundance of gold, and Ivory. Fourthly, For the strength of the City, which is very great, by reason of Sholds, Flats, Islands, Rocks, Banks of sand, &c. which makes the approaches very difficult, and dangerous. This Country of Abassia is as big as Germany, France, and Italy, and hath in it plenty of Rice, Barley, Beans, Pease, Sugar, &c. The Hill Amara in Ethiopia described. In Ethiopia under Prete Janny, commonly called Prester, or Presby∣ter John, is an hill called Amara, situated in the navel of the Ethiopian body under the Equinoctial line, adorned with all variety of fruits, wholesome air, pleasant aspect, and prospect: yea Heaven, and Earth, Nature and Industry have all been corrivals to present their riches to it. It stands in a great plain, having no other hill near it by thirty leagues, the form of it is round: the rock is cut so smooth without a∣ny unequal swelling, that to him that stands beneath, its like an high wall: the top is overhanged with rocks, jutting forth for the space of a mile: Its above twenty leagues in the circuit, compassed with a wall on the top, well wrought, that so neither man, nor beast in chase may fall down. The top is a level, only towards the South is a rising hill beautify∣ing this plain, whence issueth a pleasant Spring which passeth through all that plain, and payeth its tribute to every Garden that will exact it, and so maketh a Lake at length, whence issueth a River that from thence runneth into Nilus. The way up to it is cut out of the Rock, not with stairs, but by an easy ascent, so that one may ride up with ease, at the foot whereof is a fair Gate with a Corps du Guard: Halfway up is a fair and spacious Hall, cut out of the Rock with three large windows to it, and at the top is another gate with the like Guard: The air above is wholesome, and de∣lectable, so that they live long there without sicknesse▪ There are upon it thirty four Palaces standing by themselves, spacious, sumptu∣ous, and beautiful, where the Princes of the Royal blood have their abode with their Families. There are two Temples also, the most beautiful in all Ethiopia.
There are many flourishing and fruitful Gardens, curiously made, and plentifully furnished with Europian fruits, as Pears, Pippins, &c. and of their own, as Oranges, Citrons, Lemons, &c. Its also adorned with Cedars, Palm-trees, &c. as also with variety of herbs, and flowers to delight the sight, taste, and sent: There are also Cubaio trees, plea∣sant in taste beyond all comparison, and great store of Balm-trees. There is plenty of all sorts of Grain, and Corn, and such charms of Birds as delight the ear with their melodious warbling notes, and please the eye with their variety of colours, and other creatures that adorn this Paradise. The aforenamed Churches have their Pillars, and Roofs of stone, richly, and cunningly wrought, the matter and workmanship conten∣ding for magnificence: That of Jasper, Alabaster, Marble, Porphyrie; This of painting, gilding, and much curiosity: To these are adjoy∣ning two stately Monasteries; in one whereof are two rare peeces, whereon wonder may justly fasten both her eyes. The Treasury, and the Library of the Emperor, are such as neither of them is thought to bee matchable in the world; neither that of Con∣stantinople, wherein were one hundred and twenty thousand Books; nor that of Alexandria, wherein were seven hundred thousand Books: For the number in this Library is numberlesse, their price inestimable. There are three great Halls, each above two hundred paces large, with Books of all Sciences, written in fine Parchment, with much curiosity of golden Letters, and other work, and cost in writing, bin∣ding, and covers: There are all the Greek Fathers: The Writers of Syria, Egypt, Africa, and the Latine Fathers, with others innumerable, in Greek, Hebrew, Arabick, Abyssine, Egyptian, Syrian, and Chaldee. There are Poets, Philosophers, Physicians, Rabbines, Talmudists, Cabalists, Hieroglyphicks, &c. The Treasury, leaves them of all other Princes behinde it. Its a Sea that every year receiveth new Rivers, which never run out: e∣very Emperor yearly laying up part of his revenue there. The Jewels here kept are incomparable, Topazes, Amethists, Saphires, Dia∣monds, &c. Hee hath one Jewel that was found in the River Niger (that brings forth more Gemmes than any other in the world) which is one peece diversified with a thousand variety of stones. Its about two spans, and an half square: there are in it one hundred and sixty Diamonds, one as large as the palm of ones hand: It hath in it above three hundred Emeralds; Rubies the greatest in the World: Above fifty Saphires, Turqueses, Balazes, Amethists, Spinels, Topazes: Jacinths, Chrysolites, &c. Nature here playing the Jeweller, and representing a Map of the worlds Gemmes in this one Jewel, without, and infinite∣ly beyond all Art of Man. Bernardo de Vecheti, a Jeweller, being sent thither by Francis de Medicis, Duke of Florence to see it, accounted it beyond all estimation, and value. The Emperor also hath made him Tables with thousands of stones set in them. In this hill are kept the Princes of the Blood Royal, as in a prison, and never return thence, except they bee chosen Emperors. Anno
Christi 1608. there were six of them: These meet all together when they please to recreate themselves by hauking, hunting, &c. and they have grave persons to instruct them in learning, and vertue. Pur∣chas Pilgrimage. p. 677. &c. The chiefest Cities in Abassia, or Aethiopia superior, Described. The chiefest Cities in this Empire are: 1. Saba, in which are four Gates made of Alabaster, and Jasper, wrought with antique work, and the doors thereof curiously carved. It hath in it five thousand great and sumptuous houses: the streets are spacious, and so shaded with Pent-houses, that a man may walk without being offended by either Sun or rain. The other Cities are 2. Aruma. 3. Cossomum. 4. Zameta, the seat of Barnagasso, or the Vice-Roy. 5. Suacen, before described. 6. Tanape. 7. And Zembra: The Kings Court also is a wandring City; For his Pavilions, and Tents belonging to him, and his retinue being pitched, take up ten miles in compasse. In this Empire are seventy Tributary Kingdomes, the chief where∣of are 1. Barnagassum, which lyeth towards the Red-sea, and borders on the Turks. 2. Tigremaon, famous for her Mines of Gold. 3. An∣gote, where the Inhabitants use Salt, Pepper, and Iron instead of mo∣ny, and feed on raw flesh. 4. Amara, where is that famous Moun∣tain before described. 5. Guagere, which is an Island in the River Nilus, one hundred seventy and five miles long, and one hundred twenty and five broad, &c. The Natives call this Emperor, The Ne∣gus. His revenues are so great, that besides the expences of his Court, and Camp, he coffers up three millions every year. The Islands in the Red-Sea, belonging to Africa Described. That which is now called the Red-Sea, or Arabian Gulph, that parts Asia from Africa, is in length one thousand and two hundred miles, in breadth for the most part one hundred: Its so full of sholds, that xcept they keep the channel in the middest, there is no sailing but by daylight: At the entrance into it, stands the Ile of Babel mandel, or Babmandel, which the ancient Kings of Egypt used to chain up to keep the passage. Sues is neer the bottome of this Sea, where the Turk hath his Arse∣nal, and Gallies for those Seas: The Timber is brought out of Cara∣mania by Sea, by the River Nilus, and by Cammels the rest of the way, at incredible charges. Some think that Pharaoh was here drow∣ned: Others think that the passage of the Israelites was at Tor, where this Sea is not above nine miles over. Ezion Geber was a Port hereabouts whence Solomon sent his Fleet to Ophir for Gold, &c. Bernice was a Port in the Red-sea, where the Indian Drugs, and Spices were unladen in the time of the Roman Empire, and from thence carried to Alexandria in Egypt. Zidem is twelve leagues from Mecca,
where since the ships used to unlade their Spicery, as formerly they did at Bernice. A little further is the Ile of Mehun: and then the Ile of Cameran, one of the hotest places in the world: then Dalaqua, where they get pearls. Its one hundred twenty and five Leagues long, and twelve broad. Mazzua is another Island which makes Ercocco a good Ha∣ven. There are diverse other small Iles, in which there is nothing me∣morable. The chiefest Islands belonging to Africa Described. Madagascar Described. Madagascar, or St. Laurence Island, is the greatest Island in the World, being a thousand miles in length, and in some places four hundred miles in breadth: Its full of Towns, people, Minerals, Beasts, Woods, waters, and what's requirable in a fruitful land. Its a good place for victualling, as they passe into the East-Indies, the air quick, and healthfull: Its divided into four Kingdomes, each King with their Ebony Scepters ruling his people, being jealous of each others great∣nesse. The Sea Towns are infected with Mahometisme, the midland eclipsed with black Idolatry. Nature hath taught them Laws, they punish Murther with death; adultery with publick shame, and thet with banishment. Fishing delights them more than Tillage. The people are generally strong, couragious, and proper. The men co∣ver their naked bodies in warre, with strong and Massy Targets, their right hand, brandishing a long neat pike, or lance of Ebony, barbed with Iron, kept as bright as silver, which they can throw with excel∣lent dexterity, and skill: Their colour is black, they anoint their na∣ked bodies with Grease, and Tallow; proud to see their skin shine, and are not offended with the stink: their hair is long, black, and cur∣led: They wear a few leaves plaited about their wasts, but are else∣where naked; their ears are bored and wide; they pink, and cut their flesh; and whilst the men seek their prey abroad, the women keep constantly at home and spin. The boys marry at ten, and the maids at twelve years old. They know no Letters: Nihil scire, nil jucundi∣us. The earth is rich in Minerals, Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, &c. but hearing of the cruelty, and covetousnesse of the Portugals, they prohibit the diging of them. If you will buy any thing of them, they give it in exchange for Agats, Helitropians, Jasper; and long red Cornelian beads, which they prefer before all the Diamonds of India, and of which they are so proud, that the owner, bee hee Subject or King, is oft dethroned for it, one string of them being able to put them all into a combustion. Bracelets, Copper-chaines, beads, bells, and Babies are much esteemed, for which you shall have in exchange, sheep with great tails, Beeves, Bufaloes, Camels, Antilops, Red-deer, Leopards, Goats, Milk, Hens, Eggs, VVheat, Barley, Rice, Oranges, Lemons, Lymes, Pomcitrons, Plantanes, Sugar Canes,
Ginger, Toddy; Coconuts, &c. Herb. Travels. Their time of marriage is for men at twelve, and for women at ten. They have a kind of Bean growing on trees, the Cod whereof is two footlong. The Island of Mohelia described. Mohelia, another Island beyond it, where the houses are made of Reeds, or straw, fitted to the heat of such a torrid climate. The In∣habitants are cole black, have great heads, big lips, flat noses, sharp chins, huge limbs, go naked, having only a few plantane leaves about their wastes, to veil their modest parts; they cut, and pink in several works their skins, face, armes, and thighs, striving to exceed each o∣ther in variety. Tobacco is of great account amongst them, which they suck out of long Canes, called hubble-bubbles: They have store of Buffols, Goats, Turtles, Hens, huge Bats, Camelions, Rice, Pease, Cuscus, Honey, Oisters, Breames, and much other fish: They have also Toddy, Cocos, Plantanes, Orenges, Lemons, Lymes, Pome∣citrons, Tamarind, Sugar-Canes, &c. The Isle is alwayes green, each day a gentle breeze, and shower bedewing the earth, and mollifying the scorching Sun; so that it is alwayes adorned in Floraes Livery, yea, roabed with Natures best Arras, pleasantly refreshed with silver pur∣ling streams, and shaded with dainty trees of all sorts. Here you may have thirty Orenges, or Lemons for a sheet of paper: for two sheets ten Coco-Nuts: An Oxe for a peece of eight, and a Goat for six pence. The Isle of St. Hellen described. This Island is on this side the Cape of Good Hope, and nearer to the African, than to the American shore: the Seas about it are very deep, and the Land so high and precipitious, that the Marriners use to say, A man may chuse whether hee will break his heart going up, or his neck comming down: But when up, no place yeelds a more delightful ob∣ject: Its even, and plain, cloathed with sweet grasse, long, and curious: The springs above are sweet; there are but two Rivolets in the Island: there are abundance of Hogs, and Goats: there are also Phesants, Powts, Quails, Hens, Partridges, and diverse sorts of useful herbs, as Wood-sorrel, Trifolie, Basil, Parsly, Mint, Spinage, Fennil, Annis, Radish, and Lemons. The Island of St. Thomas described. The Island of St. Thomas is of a round figure, being one hundred and fourscore miles in compasse; It lyeth directly under the Aequino∣ctial line: it so aboundeth with Sugar, that forty ships are laden from thence yearly: The chief City is Pavoasan: At the first discovery it was wholly overgrown with woods, now it is inhabited by the Portu∣gals, and Negroes; the latter often living till they bee an hundred years
old: the Portugals not exceeding fifty. It will bear no fruit that hath a stone in it. In the midst is a woody Mountain continually over-shadowed with a thick cloud, which so moistens the Trees, which are many, that from thence droppeth water sufficient to water all their Sugar grounds. Princes Island described. Princes Island lyes between the Aequator, and the Tropick of Capri∣corn, near unto the Isle of St. Hellen: Its called Princes Island, be∣cause, when it was first discovered, the revenues of it were allowed to the Prince of Portugal. The Isle of Cape Verde described. Next to Cape Verde are seven Islands full of birds, but empty of In∣habitants: But the Isles of Cape Verde are nine; they were first disco∣vered, Anno Christi 1440. None of them are inhabited but St. Jago, and Del Fogo, so called, because it burns perpetually: They were ta∣ken by Sir Anthony Sherly, Anno Christi 1596. who had in one night such a showre of ashes, as hee did lie by Del Fogo, that in the morning you might have written with your finger upon the Deck of his ship. St. Jago was taken by Sir Francis Drake, Anno Christi 1585. Brava, and Bona Vista have better names, than natures, they yeeld no matter for History: As neither do the Isles of St. Matthew, Sancta Cruz, St. Paul, and Conception. The former of these are called the Gorgades, and abound with Goats. The latter the Hesperides, distant from A∣frick ten thousand furlongs. The Island of Maio described. Maio hath in it a Lake two leagues long, where the Sun congeals and turns the water into salt. Here the Sea looketh like a green field, being covered over with an herb called Sergasso, like to our Sampher, which lies so thick that a man cannot see the water, hindring the ships passage, except it hath a strong wind: It is yellowish of co∣lour, and beareth an empty berry, like Goosberries. Its four hundred miles distant from the coast of Africk, and the Sea is so deep, that no ground can bee found, and yet this herb is thought to come from the bottome. These coasts are troubled with continual thunders, and lightenings; and unwholesome raines; and if this rain-water stand but a little, it turns into Worms, and it fills the meat that is hung up in it with Worms. Here swims also upon the face of the waters ano∣ther herb like a Cocks-comb, which is so venemous, that it can hardly bee touched without peril. In these Seas also they meet with great and tedious calmes.
The Canary Islands described. The Canary Islands are twenty leagues from the continent of Ly∣bia, being six in number. Canaria, La-Palma, Teneriffa, Lancerota, Hi∣erro, La-Gomara; and Forteventura. The ancient Inhabitants knew no God but Nature; were ignorant of the use of fire; shaved with flint-stones: Nursed their Children by Goats; tilled the Earth with Horns of Oxen; abominated the slaughter of Beasts; like beasts used wo∣men in common; had no meum, and tuum. The Woods their dwelling was, the Herbs their diet; And on the leaves, and boughs, they slept in quiet. They are now inhabited by the Spaniards, who have the Inquisi∣tion amongst them: The Grand Canary is the residence of the Inqui∣sitor whither all the other Isles repair for Justice. Its one hundred and twenty miles in compasse: Hath store of Goats, Bees, Asses, Hogs, Barley, Rye, Rice, variety of flowers, Grapes, and other excellent fruits. Teneriff may compare with the Grand Canary in multitude of Inha∣bitants; and exceeds it in Grapes, yeelding yearly eight and twen∣ty thousand Buts of Sack; of the high Pike in this Island, see after∣wards. Hyerro is famous for that Tree, which (like the Rock in the Desart) affords sweet water to all the Inhabitants: The description whereof, see afterwards. Madara stands in two and thirty degrees, and is the greatest of all the Atlantick Isles: It was so called of the wildernesses of trees there growing, which when they were first fired, they burned so fu∣riously, that the people for a time were forced to go some space into the Sea from the violent heat, and the wood-ashes made the soil so fat, that at first it yeelded threescore fold, since but thirty: The excellent Wines that wee have from thence are made of Vines that were brought from Candy, and they bring forth more Grapes than leaves, the clusters being two, three, and four spans long. At first here were many Pigeons that would suffer themselves to bee taken, not knowing, and therefore not fearing a man. Forty miles from Madara is the Isle of Porto Santo, or All-Saints, because discovered upon that day Anno Christi 1428. Here were such store of Conies, bred of one shee Cony, brought hither great with young, that the Island was almost destroyed, and made unhabitable by them. The Isle of Malta described. Within the Streights there are only some few Islands belonging to Affrica, whereof the Isle of Melita, or Malta is the chiefest: In old
time famous for the Temple of Juno, spoiled by the Roman Verres. Its distant from Sicilie threescore miles, from Africa one hundred and ninety: It was sometimes subject to the Carthaginians. It is now held by the Knights of Malta, whose valour appeared Anno Christi 1565. by defending it against their mighty and powerful adversary the Turk. The General Description of Europe. Europe by Pliny is called Orbis domitorum genitrix, and well shee may, if we read her story in her Greek Monarchy of Alexander the great, and in her Latine Empire of the Romans, who scarce left a corner of the World, then known, unconquered. It is almost encompassed with the Sea, being as it were a Peninsula, whose Isthmus, is that part which lyes between the River Tanais, and the frozen Sea, by which it is joyned to Asia. Westward it is bounded with the Atlantick Ocean, having no land till you come to Amerrica. On the East towards Asia, it hath the Aegean Sea, called Archipelagus, and Pontus Euxinus, Palus Meotis, and the River Tanais: Southward it hath the Mediterranean Sea, and Fre∣tum Herculeum. Northward the Pole Artick. She bears in length but three thousand and eight hundred miles, and in breadth nigh one thou∣sand and two hundred miles: So that shee is the least, but yet the most populous part of the world, and blessed with the Gospel a∣bove all others. The Kingdomes, and Countrys in the Continent of Europe are, Spain, France, Belgia, Germany, Italy, Denmark, Hungary, Poland, Sclavonia, Greece, Dacia, Norway, Sweden, and Muscovy. Spain, not long since consisted of three Kingdomes, Castile, Ar∣ragon, and Portugal, but lately Portugal hath rent it self from her, and chose for King, the Duke of Braganza, under the name of John the Fourth, but wee will speak of her as shee was before, and so in compass shee is about one thousand eight hundred and ninety Eng∣lish miles. Its begirt with the Sea on every side, unlesse on the Eastern, where it is joyned to France by a kind of Isthmus, crossed by the Pyrenaean Mountains from Sea to Sea. On the West its bound∣ed with the Atlantick Sea: On the North with the Cantabrick: On the South with the straits of Gibraltier: and South East with the Me∣diterranean Sea. It yeilds all sorts of Wines, Sugar, Fruits, Oils, Mettals, Lamb-skins, Wool, Cork, Rosen, Steel, &c. The Inhabitants are not many, nor have they many great Cities, as in other parts of Eu∣rope: the poor are proud, the best superstitious, and hypocritical: yet good Souldiers, because patient to endure labor, hunger, thirst, by which means they rather weary out, than overcome their enemies. France begins at the West from the Pyrenean Mountains, and is bounded on the East with Germany: On the North with our English Seas: Southward with the Mediterranean: and South-East with the Alpes, which divide it from Italy. The cheif Provinces are Lorraign, Burgondy, and Savoy, which have Princes of their own: the rest are
Normandy, Britany, Bury, Aquitane, Picardy, Peictoires, Languedock, Anio, Casconie, Provence, and Campaine, &c. The Country is very fruitfull, which causeth much Traffick from neighbouring Nations: their special commodities are Wine, Salt, Linnen, Paper, &c. Its well peopled, and hath many fair Cities, the Inhabitants are great Courtiers, and light of carriage. Belgia hath France on the South: Denmark on the North: Germa∣ny on the East: and the Ocean on the West: Its called the Lowcountrys, or Netherlands. Its in compasse about one thousand miles. Its divi∣ded into seventeen Provinces: whereof four are Dukedomes: seven Earldomes: five Baronies: and one Marqueship. The Dukedomes are 1. Brabant, in which is Anwerp. 2. Luick. 3. Lutzenburg, where is the vast Forrest of Ardenna. 4. Gilderland. The Earldoms are 1. Flanders. 2. Artois. 3. Heinolt. 4. Holland. 5. Zeland. 6. Zutphen. 7. Hamme. The Barronies are 1. Friezland. 2. U∣trech. 3. Mecklen. 4. Overysel. 5. Grauling. The Marquisat is that of the Holy Empire. Its a good land, and affords store of Butter, Cheese, and very great Oxen. The people are industrious, and ex∣cellent Mechanicks. The men are big boned, excellent Seamen, and maintain their liberty by the sword. Germany lyeth Eastward from Belgia, and is bounded on the West with France, and Belgia: On the East with Hungary and Poland, and the River Vistula. On the North with the German Ocean, and on the South with the Alps that divide it from Italy. Bohemia is situated in the middest, compassed with the Hyrcanian wood: whereof the Re∣gal City is Prague. Germany comprehends many Provinces, as Sa∣xony, Brandenberg, Pomeren, Bavaria, Silesia, Franconia, Austria, Helvetia, East-Friesland, Westphalia, Cleveland, Alsatia, Brunswick, and Hassia. The Emperor is now chosen by eight Electors, the Arch-Bishops of Tri∣ars, Ments, and Colen: the Count Palatine of the Rine: the Duke of Sax∣ony, and Bavaria: and the Marquesse of Brandenberg, and the King of Bohemia with his casting voice. Its a rich country in Corn, Wine, Fruits, and Mines, and hath in it healthful Baths: the People are warlick, and ingenious. Italy hath Germany on the North, the Mediterranean on the South, the Adriatick Sea on the East, and on the West Mare Terrenum. Its in length one thousand and ten miles: the greatest breadth is four hundred and twenty. Its divided into many States; the chief are the Kingdome of Naples: the territory of Rome, Lumbardy, Tuscany: The Signio∣ry of Venice, Verona, &c. Its of admirable fertility, and called the Paradice of the world. The Inhabitants are grave but exceeding libi∣dinous. Denmark is joyned to Germany on the South: on the West it hath Mare Germanicum, and is a Peninsula, the two principal Provinces are Irglant and Holstein: most of the other are petty Islands, whereof Ze∣land is the chief, and Loitland. It breeds goodly horses, and store of Cattle. Hungary hath on the VVest Germany, the River Tabiscus and Wala∣chia
on the East, Poland on the North, and on the South, is the Ri∣ver Sauri: Southward is Sclavonia. The famous River Danubius cuts her in the middle, nameing her parts Citerior, and Ulterior. The chief Provinces are Soliense, where the earth sends forth such a stink, that it poysons the birds that fly over it; and an Island in Danubius that is exceeding fertil, and so generally is the whole Country. The Inha∣bitants are strong, their Daughters Portions are only a new attire; and all their sons equally inherit without respect of primogeniture. The Empe∣ror and Turk share it betwixt them. Poland hath Silesia on the West, the River Boristhenes on the East, the Baltick Sea on the North, and Hungary on the South. Its in com∣passe two thousand six hundred miles. The chief Provinces are Livo∣nia, Lituania. Volinia, Samogatia, Podolia, Russia Nigra, Mazoria, Prussia Regal, Podlasia, and the Dukedome of Opwits, and Zator, and Polonia propria. The land abounds with hony, wax, Mines of Copper, and Iron, horses fit for service: the Kingdome is elective. Sclavonia hath Hungary on the North, the Adriatick sea on the South, Greece on the South-East, and Italy on the West. It contains in length four hundred and fourscore miles, and in breadth one hundred and twenty. Its divided into Illiricum, Dalmatia, and Croatia. The Scla∣vonian Language is used in many Countrys, both of Europe and Asia. Its divided betwixt the Empire of Germany, the Turk, and the Vene∣tians. Greece hath on the West the Adriatick sea: on the East the Aege∣an, Hellespont, and Propontis, Northward the Mountain Hemus, and South∣ward the Mediterranean. It was once the seat of the worlds Empire, and flourished above other Countries with all sorts of humane learning. It was one of the first that embraced the Gospel, and bred many Fa∣thers of our Church. Its now miserably enslaved to the Turks. Its commonly divided into Peleponesus, Achaia, Epirus, Albania, Macedo∣nia, Migdonia, and Thracia. It yeilds Gold, Silver, Coperas, Colours, Wines, Velvets, Stuffs, &c. Dacia hath on the West Hungary, on the East the Euxine sea, on the South Greece, and on the North Sarmatia, from the which its divided by the Carpathian Mountains. It was formerly called Misia. The cheif regions in it are Transilvania, Moldovia, Walachia, Servia, Rascia, Bul∣garia, and Bosnia. Norway is in length one thousand three hundred miles, in breadth a∣bout six hundred. Its under the Government of the King of Denmark. Theft is counted the greatest sin amongst them. It yeilds Cables, Masts, Furrs, Stockfish, which the poor eat instead of bread. The Metropo∣litan City is Nidrosio, besides which there are but two of note, Ber∣gla, and Asloia. On the North, and West, lies the populous Province of Finmark. Sweden is on the East of Norway, from which it is divided by the Do∣frine Mountains on the North and South its bounded by the seas, On the East it joynes to Muscovy. Its a fertile Country, and in some Provinces hath great plenty of Corn, Furrs, Mines of Gold, Silver,
Copper, and Lead. Its divided into Gotland, quasi good land, Finland, quasi fine land, Bodia, Scrickfinia, Lapland, &c. The inhabitants often live till they bee one hundred and forty years old. Thence lately have come the two great Conquerors, Gustavus Adolphus, that conquered much of Germany, and Carolus Adolphus, that now hath conquered Poland, and most of Prussia. Muscovy is the last country of Europe towards the East, and part of it stands in Asia. Its bounded on the West with Livonia, and part of Sweden: On the East with Tartary, on the North with the frozen seas: and on the South with Lituania. The length of it is three thou∣sand miles, the breadth of it is three thousand threescore and five. Most of it is extream cold, but to help that, they have great store of Furrs, as sables, Martins, white Foxes, &c. It hath store of Corn, Fruit, and Cattel. The people are very base, contentious, ignorant, and sottishly superstitious. They bury their dead upright, with a staff in his hand; and a penny in his Purse, with a letter to St. Nicolas to procure him entrance into heaven. The chief Provinces are Muscovy, where stands the Regal City of Mosco. Pernia where they eat dryed stags flesh instead of bread. Rhesan full of Corn, and Horses, &c. The Islands in Europe Described. In the Western Atlantick Seas are Groenland, Groviland, Island, and Frisland. These are extream cold, yet yeild plenty of Fish, Oil, Whale bones, and Morses teeth. In the British Seas, are Ireland, Great Britain with her train, the Orcades, Hebrides, Silly, Man, Weight, Anglesey, Jersey, Garnsey, &c. Others there are of lesse note in the German Seas, and those which di∣vide Norway, and Sweden from Germany, and Poland. Towards Spain are the Azores, nine in number, the chief of them is Faial. The Southern Islands of Europe lie in the Mediterranean Seas: As the Baleans neer Spain, Corsica, Sardinia neer Italy, Sicily, and Mal∣ta. In the Adriatick, and Jonian seas, Absorrus, Curicta, Scardona, Insulae Diomedeae, Issa, Tragurium, Pharia, Corsica, and Melitum. More Southward, Ertcusa, Cephalenia, Ithica, Echidnades, Zazinthus, the Strophades and Cythera. In the mouth of the Aegean sea is Candy, an Ile of five hundred and twenty miles in compasse, abounding with Cypresse trees, and a las∣civious wine called Malmesey. The chiefest Islands in the Aegean sea are Melos, Chias, Bria, the Cyclades, Sporades, Delos, &c. But I will write a little more particularly of the chiefest of these Islands; as 1 Samothracia, which is a small Island, where the air is most cleer, and pure: the chief Town is Samia, beautified with a goodly harbour, but now by reason of the Pyrates infesting it, left almost deso∣late. 2 Lemnos, containing in circuit almost one hundred miles: here
is digged that soveraign Mineral called Terra Lemnia, and Sigillata, be∣cause its sealed when made into pellets, with a Turkish character: The VVestern parts are dry, and barren, the Eastern more fruitful: It contains about seventy five Villages. 3 Lesbos is one hundred sixty eight miles in compasse: the South, and VVest parts are mountainous and barren, the rest level, and fruit∣ful. 4 Chios is one hundred twenty and five miles in compasse. It bea∣reth that sweet Gum called Mastick. In it are an infinite number of Partridges that are of a red colour, they are kept tame; and fed in flocks in the streets, and Villages, a little boy or girle driving them in∣to the fields, and with a whistle calling them home again. The most excellent Greekish VVines are made here, called Vina Chia. 5. Euboea, over against Chios, now called Negropont, is in com∣passe three hundred sixty five miles: A very fruitful Island; between the continent and it, is only a little Euripus that ebbs and flowes seven times in one day, the reason whereof, when Aristotle could not finde out, hee threw himself into it, saying, Quia ego non capio te, tu capis me: In it are two Rivers, Cireus, and Nileus: Strabo saith, that if sheep drink of the former, their wooll turns white; if on the latter, coal black. The Sporades are twelve in number, the chiefest is Milo: fourscore miles in circuit; the soil is fruitful of grain, and oil: Here is excel∣lent Marble, curiously spotted: pitch and brimstone, and hot springs good for many diseases. The Cyclades are in number three and fifty, the chiefest are. 1. De∣los, wherein they had a custome not to suffer men to dye, nor chil∣dren to bee born in it, sending their sick men, and great bellied wo∣men to Rhena, a small Island hard by▪ 2 Samos, where the Tyrant Polycrates lived, who, because hee never had any mischance, threw a Ring that hee loved dearly, into the Sea; but shortly after, hee found it in the belly of a fish that was brought to his Table: yet was hee at length brought to a miserable death by Orontes, a Persian, shewing the instability of all earthly things. 3. Patmos, whither St. John was banished by the Emperor Domitian, and where hee had his Revela∣tions. In the Cretan Seas are. 1. Crete, in compasse five hundred and nine∣ty miles, in length two hundred and seventy, in breadth, fifty: the soil is fruitful, especially of Wines called Muskadels: it yeelds also Su∣gar-Candie, Gums, Hony, Sugar, Olives, Dates, Apples, Orenges, Lemons, Raisons, Citrons, and Pomegranats, yet it wants Corn. Its very populous. Paul describes the people out of Epimenides: The Cretians are lyers, evil beasts, slowbellies. Its famous for three things. 1. They have no venemous Creature there. 2. If a woman bite a man hard, hee never recovers again. 3. There is an herb called Alimos, which if one chaw in his mouth, hee shall feel no hunger that day. It was once called Hecatompolis, because it had in it a hundred Ci∣ties. It is in the Venetians hands.
The Jonian Isles described. Cythera is in compasse threescore miles: It was formerly called Por∣phyris, from the abundance of that sort of Marble called Porphyrie, which the Mountains yeeld. The Strophades are two Islands, wherein there is nothing remark∣able, but a spring of fresh water in one of them, which hath his foun∣tain in Peloponesus, above five miles distant, which passing under the Sea, ariseth there. Zacinthus: now Zant, is threescore miles in compasse. Its won∣derfully stored with Wine, Oil and Currans, of which last ordinarily they make yearly one hundred and fifty thousand Chekins for their own Coffers, besides eighteen thousand Dolars, which they pay for cu∣stome to the State of Venice: when the English first traded thither, the inhabitants were very poor, and when the English bought so many Currans of them, they asked our Merchants whether they dyed cloaths, or fed their Swine with them; which uses themselves put them to, but now they know better, and grow rich by the trade. This Island is much troubled with earthquakes, commonly once a week, whereupon they build their houses low. The chief City is Zant, not big, the streets rugged and uneven, and the houses low for the cause aforesaid. Over the Town-hall door in this City is this Distich inscribed. Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat, nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos. The Echinades Islands are five in number, being but like Rocks, and are famous for nothing, but for the famous battel of Lepanto fought near them, betwixt the Turks, and the Christians. Cephalenia is in compasse one hundred sixty and six miles, and con∣tains two hundred Towns: the chiefest commodities it yeelds, are Wheat, Hony, Currans, Powder for dying Scarlet, Oil, and Wooll, &c. Corcyra, now Corfu, is neer Epyrus, in length, four and fifty miles, in breadth, four and twenty: Its seated in the midst of the Venetians Lordships by Sea: The chief City is Corfu, where the Turks have re∣ceived sundry repulses. Its very fruitful in Hony, Wax, Wine, Oil, &c. The Adriatick Isles have nothing of note in them, and therefore I proceed to the Mediterranean Isles, the principall whereof is 1 Sci∣cily, in compasse seven hundred miles. The people are ingenuous, e∣loquent, and pleasant, but very unconstant, and talkative. The soil is incredibly fruitful, in Wine, Oil, Hony, Saffron, Sugar, Salt: in Mines of Gold, Silver, Allom, having also Agates, and Emeraulds, with such abundance of Corn, that it was called, The Granary of the Romane Empire. In this Country is the Hill Hybla, so famous for
Bees, and Hony: and Aetna, which continually sendeth forth flames of fire: Here was once the famous City of Siracuse two and twenty miles in compasse: but now Palermo is the seat of the Spanish Vice-Roy. In this Island lived those two great Tyrants, Dionysius the elder, and Dionysius the younger, who were so odious for their cruelty, that all the people hated▪ and continually cursed them, only one old wo∣man prayed for the life of the latter; and being asked the reason, shee answered, that shee knew his Grand-Father to bee very bad, and when at the prayers of the people, hee was taken away, his son succeeded, that proved far worse than his Father; and after their curses had prevai∣led also for the removal of him, came this present Tyrant, worse than either: for whose life shee was resolved to pray, least after his decease the Devil himself should come amongst them. Malta is in compasse about threescore miles; Its seated on a Rock, over which the earth is not above three foot thick; yet have they a∣bundance of Pomegranats, Citrons, Orenges; and other excellent fruit: there is also great store of Cotton-Wooll, whch they sow as wee do Corn: In the Acts this Island is called Melita: It consists of four Cities▪ and threescore Villages. It was by Charles the fifth given to the Knights of the Rhodes, newly expelled by the Great Turk: they are a thousand in number, whereof five hundred must bee alwayes re∣sident in the Island: the others upon summons must make their appea∣rance. None are admitted into their order, unlesse they bring a testi∣mony of their Gentry for six descents. But some make this Island to belong to Africk, where you may see more of it. 3 Corsica is just against Greece in the Ligurian Sea, and is in length one hundred and twenty miles: in breadth threescore and ten: the whole circuit being three hundred twenty and five. Its a fine Coun∣try, yeelds excellent Dogs for game, good horses, fierce Mastiffs, and a beast called Musoli, found no where in Europe, but here, and in Sardinia: horned like Rams, and skinned like Stags, of incredible hard∣nesse. It produceth the best VVines, Oil, Figs, Raisons, and Ho∣ny, but bitter, and unwholesome. It abounds also with Allom, Box-trees, Iron-Mines, &c. Its under the Government of Genoa. The people are churlish, stubborn, poor, and illiterate. 4 Sardinia, which is seven miles distant from Corsica. It contains in length one hundred and fourscore miles, in breadth fourscore and ten, in circuit five hundred and threescore. It abounds in Corn, and Cat∣tel, but wants Oil. Their Bulls do naturally amble, and therefore the Country Peasants usually ride upon them. Here is the Beast Musoli, of whose skins carryed to Corduba, and there dressed, is made our true Cordovan Leather. The Inhabitants are little of stature, and prone to Rebellion, and therefore the Spaniard suffers neither Smith, nor Cutler to live there. The chief City is Calearis, just op∣posite to Africk, having a goodly haven much frequented by Mer∣chants, and is the seat of the Spanish Vice-Roy.
The Baleans Islands described. The chief of these Islands are, 1. Majorca, about threescore miles distant from Spain, and is three hundred miles in compasse; the chief Cities are Majorca, wherein is an university, and Palma. 2. Minorca, distant from the former nine miles; and is in circuit one hundred and fifty miles: the inhabitants are effeminate: the soil for the most part fruitful. Nigh to these are two lesser Islands. 1. Ebuisa, one hundred miles in circuit; the chief commodity in it is salt. 2. Olhiusa, threescore and ten miles about. The men and women in both of them are excel∣lent swimmers. The lesser Islands scattered up and down, have nothing in them remarkable, but only in one of them called Ischia, is a fountain so hot, that in a short time it will boil any flesh or fish put into it. Somewhat without the mouth of the Straits of Gibralter, is the Island of Gades, or Cales, in length thirteen miles. Anno Christi 1596. it was suddenly taken by the English under the conduct of Charles, Earle of Nottingham, Robert Earle of Essex, and Sir Walter Rawleigh: at which time they burnt the Spanish Indian fleet, consi∣sting of forty ships, whose lading was worth eight millions of Crowns. They overthrew also the Spanish fleet, consisting of fifty seven men of war: they took two great Gallions with their luggage: they spoiled and carryed away abundance of warlike amunition: they slew and took prisoners four thousand foot, and six hundred horse: whence one made this Distich. Alcides yeelds to Devereux; hee did see Thy beauties, Cales, but Devereux conquer'd thee. The British Islands discribed. England is bounded on the East with the German, on the West with the Irish, on the South with the Brittish Oceans, and on the North with the River Tweed, and a line drawn from it to Solwal VVest∣ward. Formerly the Northern limit was a wall crosse the Island from Carlile in Cumberland to the River Tine. It was built by Severus as a fortresse against the Picts: at every miles end was a Castle; between every Castle many Watch-Towers, and through the walls of every Tower and Castle went a pipe of brasse, which from one Garrison to another conveyed the least noise without interruption: so that the intelligence of an invading enemy, was quickly made known to all the borders. VVhen the wall failed, the strong Townes of Berwick and Carlile were the chief bars against invasion. Its in length three hundred and twenty miles: concerning our com∣modities, they are thus reckoned up.
England is stored with Mountains, Bridges, Wooll, With Churches, Rivers, Women beautiful. The Bridges are in number eight hundred fifty and seven. The Ri∣vers are three hundred twenty and five, the chief is Thames, which ebbs and flowes twice a day more than threescore miles: The banks of it are so adorned with fair Towns, and Princely Palaces, that a Dutch Poet made verses of them, thus Englished. Wee saw so many VVoods, and Princely Bowers Sweet Fields, brave Palaces, and stately Towers, So many Gardens, drest with curious care, That Thames with royal Tiber may compare. The second River is Severne, whose head is in Plinlimmon hill in Mountgomry-shire, and ends seven miles short of Bristol, washing in the mean space the walls of Shrewsbury, VVorcester, and Gloucester. The third Trent, so called from thirty kindes of fish found in it. Its fountain is in Stafford-shire, and passing through the Counties of Not∣tingham, Lincoln, Lecester, and York, it meets with Humber, the most violent River in all England. The fourth Humber, made up of the Rivers, Dun, Are, VVarfe, Youre, Darwent, and principally Ouze, and Trent. The fifth Medway, a Kentish River, famous for harbouring the Roy∣al Navy at Chatham. The sixth Tweed, the North East bound of England, on whose Northern bank stands the strong Town of Berwick. The seventh Tine, famous for Newcastle, and her inexhaustible Coale-pits. These with the rest are thus set forth by Draiton the Poet. Our Floods Queen Thames, for ships, and Swans is crowned, And stately Severn for her shore is praised, The Christal Trent for foords, and fish renown'd, And Avons fame to Albions cliffs is raised. Carlegion Chester vaunts her holy Dee, York many wonders of her Ouse can tell: The Peak her Dove, whose banks so fertil bee, And Kent will say her Medway doth excel. Cotswol commends her Isis to the Tame, Our Northen borders boast of Tweeds fair flood: Our VVestern parts extol their VVillies fame, And the old Lea brags of th'Danish blood. Our women are the most beautiful in the world, without the help of any adulterate Sophistications. In a compleat woman, say the Itali∣ans should bee the parts of a Dutch woman from the girdle down∣ward,
the parts of a French woman from the girdle to the shoulders, over which must bee placed an English face. And as their persons, so their priviledges are greater here than in any other Nation, they being not so servilely submiss as the French: nor so jealously guar∣ded as the Italians: hence England is called the Purgatory of servants, the hell of horses, and the Paradise of women. And the Italians common∣ly say, that if there were a bridge built over the narrow Seas, all the wo∣men of Europe would runne into England: For here they have the up∣per hand in the streets, and at the Table, the thirds of their husbands estates: their equal shares in lands; priviledges wherewith women in o∣ther countrys are not acquainted. The wooll of England is excellent fine, especially that of Cotswold in Glocester shire, of Lemster in Hereford shire, and in the Ile of Wight. Of it, are made excellent broad-cloaths, which are dispersed all over the World, bringing in much money into the Realm, and setting on work so many poor people. And the giving of some Cotswold sheep by King Edward the fourth, to Henry King of Castile, Anno Christi 1465. is counted one of the greatest prejudices that ever hapned to this Nati∣on. The wooll transported hath brought into us no lesse than one milli∣on and five hundred thousand pound yearly, and our Lead half as much. Wee have more Parks in England than in all Europe besides. Late∣ly we had Chases thirty, Forrests fifty five, Parks seven hundred for∣ty and five, replenished with abundance of Game. Our Mines are of Tin, Lead, and Coals. Beer wee have plenty, which being transported into France, the Lowcountries, and Germany is amongst them highly esteemed. We have so many well-tuned bells, that Forreigners have called it The Ringing Island. Our Air is very temperate: No seas in Europe yeild more plenty of fish. Our Oisters were famous amongst the old Romans. Our Herrings yeild great profit to the Netherlanders. Our Nobility have not such unlimited power as in other Nations. Our commonalty live in far greater reputation than they do in other Countries, and have more civility in them. Our Ministry is learned and religious, and have a more practical, and powerful manner of Preaching than in any other Nation. Their printed works are so famous, that many young Schollers of other Na∣tions, come over on purpose to learn our language, that they may bee able to make use of our Books; they are also the best provided for of any Ministers in the reformed Churches. The Diet of England is for the most part flesh: In London alone there are slain and uttered, no fewer than sixty seven thousand and five hundred beefes, and six hundred seventy five thousand sheep, besides Calves, Lambs, Swine, and Poultry, in a year: I beleeve now farre more: The Spanish Gondamor when hee was here, having often seen our Shambles, said that there was more flesh here eaten in a month, than in all Spain in a year. A Forreigner comming to London, and seeing such multitudes of people in the streets, wondred where there could bee meat to fill so many bellies: but when hee had seen our
Shambles, and markets, hee wondred where there could bee bellies to eat so much meat. Our Navy is called the walls of England, the like ships for ser∣vice are not to bee found in the World, and our Marriners, and Soul∣diers are not to bee equalled. In King Edward the third his time two hundred of our ships neer Scluse overcame four hundred of the French: of which they sunk two hundred sail, and slew thirty thousand Soul∣diers. In eighty eight a few of our Queens ships overthrew the Spa∣nish Invincible Armado, consisting of one hundred thirty and four great Gallions: Sir Francis Drake with four ships, took from the Spaniard one million, and one hundred eighty nine thousand, and two hundred Duckats in his voyage Anno Christi. 1587. And again, with five and twenty ships hee awed the Ocean, sacked St. Jago, Domin∣go, and Carthagena, bringing away with him besides much treasure, two hundred and forty peeces of Ordnance. Our Country men Drake, and Cavendish have sailed round about the World. I omit the voyage to Cales mentioned before. Sir Richard Creenvil in one of the Queens ships called the Revenge, wherein were but one hundred and fourscore Souldiers, and of them ninety so sick as not able to fight, yet maintained hee a Sea-fight for four and twenty hours a∣gainst above fifty of the Spanish Gallions, and though when his powder was spent to the last barrel, hee yeilded on honorable tearms, yet before, he had killed one thousand of the Spaniards, and sunk four of their greatest vessels. And what victories wee have had of late over all the Navies of the Lowcountries, I omit to speak of, because they are fresh in every ones memory. In land service our souldiers are able to endure, and resolute to undertake the hardest enterprises: witnesse our warres, and conquests in Spain, France, Ireland and Scot∣land, and the Netherlands assisted by us. England is a most fertile, and a most potent Island, as well for si∣tuation, as for men and ships: and the Inhabitants are good souldiers both by sea and land, in valour and courage, not inferior to any one Nation whatsoever, and are more apt to offend by temerity, and o∣vermuch forwardnesse, than by cowardize, It excells all other na∣tions in Mastiffs, Cocks of the Game, and Women, who are incom∣parably beautiful, and therefore have great influence upon the men: yea the Queens have commanded here more absolutely, and have been much better obeyed and respected, than the Kings. The division of England is into forty shires, and nine thousand seven hundred and twenty five Parishes, beside Chappels: In these are five hundred fourscore and five Market Towns, besides Cities: the chief are Shrewsbury, Northampton, South-hampton, Lecester, Warwick, &c. Our Universities are two, Cambridge, and Oxford, which for num∣ber, and beauty of Colledges, multitudes of Students, and largeness of revenues, are not to bee equalled in the Christian world. I will not determine which is of greater antiquity, this question having been a∣gitated by so many. In several places of England there is excellent white salt made: I
shall describe the manner of the making of it at Nantwich only. There is one salt spring, which they call the Brine-pit, standing close by the River Weever, from whence the Brine is conveyed into the severall Wich-houses, and when the Bell rings, they begin to make fire under the Leads, wherein they boil the said salt-water, and as it seeths, the Wallers (which are commonly women) do with a woodden Rake gather the Salt from the bottome, which they put into long wicker baskets, and so the water voideth, and the Salt remains. In some other places they boil it in Iron pans with coals, but they say the salt is not so white. The Cities in England Described. The City of London Described. No Records set down the Original of this ancient City. A City it was when Caesar first entred Brittain, and by the Testimony of Ta∣citus, Ptolemy, and Antonine, was called Londinium, and by Ammia∣nus Marcellinus, for her successive prosperity, Augusta, the greatest title that can bee given to any. In regard of both elements it is most happy, as being situate in a most rich, and fertile soil, abounding with plenty, and store of all things, and on the gentle ascent, and rising of a hill hard by the Thames side, which by his safe and deep chan∣nel is able to entertain the greatest ships, which daily bring in such store of rich Merchandise from all parts of the VVorld, that it striv∣eth at this day with the Mart towns in Christendome for the second place, and affordeth a most sure, and beautiful rode for shipping. This City doth shew her self as the Cedar amongst shrubs: It was the seat of the British Kings, and is the model of the Land, and Mart of the World: For thither are brought the Silks of Asia, the Spices of A∣frica, the Balms from Grecia, and the Riches from both the Indies. No City hath been so long famous, nor in civil Government can bee compared with her. Her walls were first built by Constantine the great, at the request of his mother Helena, reared with rough stone, and british brick, three English miles in compass: through which are seven fair Gates, besides posterns. A long the Thames this wall at first ranged with gates, the one Douregate, now Dowgate, the other Billingsgate, a receptacle for ships. In the middest of the City was set a mile mark (as the like was in Rome also) from whence they mea∣sured their stations, which stands till this day, and is commonly known by the name of London stone. St. Peters in Cornhill is thought to have been the Cathedral of Restitutus, a Christian Bishop in Constantine the great's time, which was afterwards removed to St. Pauls, whose greatness exceeds all others, and spires had so high that twice they were consumed by lightning from heaven: It hath in it besides this Church, one hundred twenty and one Churches more, viz. ninety and six within the walls, and sixteen without, but within the liberties, and nine more in her suburbs. Its divided into six and twenty Wards, governed by so many Aldermen, a Lord Maior, and two Sheriffs, the yearly
choice whereof was granted them by Patent from King John: In whose time also a Bridge of stone was built over the Thames upon twenty Arches, built of excellent freestone, and each Arch being sixty foot high, and full twenty in distance from one another; so that for length, breadth, beauty, and building, the like is not again to be found in the world. King John gave certain void places in London to the City to build upon, and the profits thereof were to go toward the charges of building and repairing the same bridg: and the Mason who was the chief wokman in building it, erected a large chappel upon it, at his own charges, and largely endowed it, which is since turned to a dwelling house. It was fi∣nished Anno Christi 1209. having been thirty and three years in build∣ing. Afterwards sundry beautiful houses were built upon it, that it seems a street rather than a bridge, and many charitable men have giv∣en lands, houses, and summes of money towards the maintenance of it. At the East end of this City standeth the Tower: A most famous and goodly Citadel, encompassed round with thick, and strong walls full of lofty and stately Turrets, fenced with a broad and deep moat, furnished with a gallant Magazine of warlick Ammunition, and other buildings besides, so that it resembles a big town. Concerning the Church of St. Paul, an ancient writer saith, that it contains in length six hundred and ninety feet, the breadth thereof is one hundred and thirty foot; the height of the West arched roof from the ground is one hundred and two foot, and the new fabrick from the ground is eighty eight foot high. The stone work of the steeple, from the plain ground rose in height two hundred and sixty foot, and the Timber frame upon the same was two hundred seven∣ty and four foot high, the Spire before it was burnt down, was five hundred thirty and four foot high. About the time of William the Conqueror, when Musters were made of able men to bear arms, London brought into the field under their colours forty thousand foot men, and twenty thousand horsemen. It hath often, and is daily enlarged with new buildings, and spacious Suburbs stretched forth from the Gates a great length on every side, but Westward especially, which are the great∣est, and best peopled: In which are twelve Inns for students of the Common Law. The four principal houses are the Inner Temple, the middle Temple, Grates Inn, and Lincolns Inn: six smaller belong to the Chancery: besides two Inns more for the Sergeants at Law. These Western Suburbs are so carried on, that they joyn to London another City called Westminster, famous for the Seat, and Sepulchre of our Kings, and for the Courts of justice kept every Tearm in Westminster Hall. No walls are built about this City: and those of London are left to shew rather what it was, than what it is: whose Citizens, as the Lacedemonians did, do repute their strength to consist in their men, and not in their walls. In the City of West∣minster along by the Thames side, are many stately buildings for the
Nobles, and great men of the Land, as Essex house, Arundel house, Summerset house, &c. The Abby Church in Westminster, was the last time built by King Henry the third, of excellent workmanship, sup∣ported with sundry rows of Marble Pillars▪ and the roof covered o∣ver with sheets of Lead: a peece of work that cost fifty years la∣bour in building: It was afterwards much enlarged towards the West end, by the succeeding Abbots: and at the East end King Henry the seventh built for the burial of himself, and his children, a Chappel of admirable, and stately workmanship: called by Leland, the VVonder of the VVorld: for a man would think that all the curious, and exquisite work that can bee devised, is there compacted together; wherein is to bee seen his own most stately, and magnificent monument all of massy and solid Copper. VVestminster Hall was built from the ground by King Richard the second, and made his own habitation, which continued so till Henry the eights time, who removed it to VVhite-Hall, which formerly be∣longed to Cardinal VVoolsey. The New Exchange was built by the Earle of Salisbury, and so named by King James. But to return a little again to London: There are in it many publick and beautiful buildings, as that famous Senate-house called Guild-hall, built by Sir Thomas Knowls, Lord Mayor: Leaden-hall, a large, and goodly building, erected by Simon Eire, to bee a common Granarie, wherein to lay up Corn, to bring down the price thereof in time of a dearth: But especially the Burse, which Queen Elizabeth with a so∣lemn Ceremony, named the Royal Exchange, erected upon Pillars for the use of Merchants, and ornament of the City: It was set up by Sir Thomas Gresham, Citizen, and Knight: A most magnificent work it is, whether you respect the model of the building, the resort of Merchants from all Nations thither, or the store of wares there∣in. The Royal Exchange. This Royal Exchange was erected in the year, 1566. in this order: The ground whereon it stands, and the houses, were purchased by the Citizens of London: It cost them above three thousand five hundred thirty and two pounds: the houses they sold for four hundred seventy and eight pounds, to such persons as should pull them down, and car∣ry them away: Then was the ground levelled at the charges of the City, and possession thereof was by some Aldermen, given to Sir Thomas Gresham, Knight, and Agent for Queen Elizabeth, thereupon to build a Burse at his own proper charges, and hee on the seventh of June, laid the first foundation Brick, being accompanied with some Aldermen, every one laying a peece of gold upon his Brick, which the workmen took for themselves, and forthwith followed their work with such diligence, that in September, Anno Christi, 1567. the same was finished, and covered with slate. In the year 1570. January the three and twenty: the Queen came
from Summerset-house through Thridneedle-street to Sir Thomas Gres∣hams house in Bishopsgate-street, where shee dined; and after dinner going through Cornhil, entred the Burse, viewed every part of it, e∣specially the Pawn, which was furnished with all sorts of fine, and rich ware, and then caused the said Burse by an Herald, and Trum∣pet, to bee proclaimed by the name of the Royal Exchange, and so to bee called from thenceforth, and not otherwise. Besides which, this Sir Thomas Gresham gave a most spacious house, sometimes his own habitation, one part thereof to bee an Hospital for poor people, and the other to the advancement of learning, now known by the name of Gresham Colledge; standing between Bishops∣gate-street, and Broad-street, and instituted professors of Divinity, Law, Physick, Astronomy, Geometry, Musick, and Rhethorick, al∣lowing them fifty pounds per annum a peece, besides Chambers, and other accommodations. Gresham Colledge. The first professors in this Colledge were Mr. Anthony VVootton, for Divinity: Doctor Matthew Guin for Physick: Doctor Henry Mount∣low for Civil Law: Doctor John Bull for Musick: Mr. Beerwood for Astronomy: Mr. Henry Bridges for Geometry: and Mr. Caleb VVil∣lis for Rhethorick: These Lectures are read daily in Tearm-time, ex∣cept Sabbaths, by every one upon his day, in the morning betwixt nine and ten a clock in Latine; and in the afternoon betwixt two and three in English, notice whereof is given by ringing the Exchange-Bell at these hours. Only the Musick Lecture is read in English on Sa∣turdayes between ten and eleven in the morning, and between three and four in the afternoon. But to passe by Sion Colledge (whereof Doctor VVhite was the founder) which is governed by a President, two Deans, and four Assistants yearly chosen, and the many Hospitals, and other publick buildings yet amongst them. The Charterhouse described. Wee may not passe by that greatest, and most noble work that e∣ver was done by one man, and hee a subject, which was the building and endowing of the Charter-house by Mr. Thomas Sutton for the entertainment of youth; and decayed Gentlemen, who by maims in the wars, or by other casualties were undone: where their provisi∣on is so bountious, that it can hardly bee matched in Europe: the very house and appurtenances cost him thirteen thousand pound, besides which, hee endowed it with five manners in Essex, two in Lincoln∣shire, eight in VVilt-shire, together with near four thousand acres of rich pasture ground in that County. Two in Cambridge-shire, beside his lands in Hackney-Marsh, and Tottenham in the County of Middlesex, and with all, and singular the VVoods, Reversions, Presentations, and
Rights of him the said Thomas Sutton in any of the aforesaid Mannors; over and above hee gave five thousand pound to make additions to his Hospital, and for some other charitable uses. And to the Trea∣sury of the house to defend their right if need were, one thousand pound, besides some other gifts. Wee may in the next place take notice how commodiously Lon∣don is supplied with water, conveyed by pipes under ground from excellent springs, some of them at a remote distance: besides the New-River water brought twenty miles from Chadwel, and Amwel, in Hartford-shire, to the North side of the City near Islington, where a large Cistern is made to receive it. This work was undertaken by Mr. Hugh Middleton, and begun February twenty, Anno Christi 1608. and in five years space was fully accomplished: by reason of the inequality of the ground, the Trench in some places descended full thirty foot: In others it was mounted over Vallies in a Trough, born up with wooden Arches, some fixed deep in the ground, others rising in height above three and twenty foot. Another convenience of water was devised by Peter Maurice, a Dutchman, who by means of a wheel brings water out of the Thames, into a great part of the City. Of the beauty and excelleny of this City one made these verses. Along Thames banks outstretched far the City London lies, Resembling much her Mother Troy; aloft shee lifts her eyes. VVhile on a gentle rising hill shee beareth towards East: A City pleasant for her site, in aire and soil much blest. Religious, and populous; and hence shee looks on high, And well deserves for to bee called, the Britans Britany. For learning new Lutetia, Ormus for trade, and wealth: A second Rome for valiant men; Chrysae for plate, and health. Salisbury described. In VViltshire the City of Salisbury was built about the year 1218. at which time Richard Poor, the Bishop (purposing first to begin with the house of God) in a most delectable place, began to found a most stately, and beautiful Minster, which, with an exceeding high spired steeple, and double crosse Isles on both sides hee with great cost fi∣nished forty years after▪ viz. one thousand two hundred fifty and eight, concerning which Church Daniel Rogers made verses thus in Eng∣lish. VVonders to tell: how many dayes in one whole year there been So many windows in that Church ('men say) are to bee seen365. So many Pillars made by Art, of Marble there appear. As houres do flit, and flie away throughout the running year:8820. So many Gates do entrance give as months one year do make,13 A thing well known for truth, though most it for a wonder take.
A Cloister it hath besides on the South side, for largenesse, and fine workmanship inferiour to none, whereunto adjoyned the Bishops Palace: and on the other side an high bell-Tower, passing strong, standing by it self, apart from the Minster: Through the City there are Rills, and sewers of water in every street: It is passing well inhabited, and frequented, plentiful of all things, especially of fish; adorned with a very stately Market-place, wherein standeth their common Hall of Timber-work, a very beautiful building. Camb. Brit. Bristow described. The City of Bristow hath the River Avon passing through the midst of it: It stands partly in Sommerset, and partly in Gloucester-shire; But is of it self a County incorporate: It is situate somewhat high between Avon, and the little River Frome: sometimes it was inviro∣ned with a double wall: it is so beautified with buildings publick and private, that it fully answers the name of Bright-stow. It hath com∣mon sewers or sinks so made to run under the ground for the con∣veyance, and washing away of all filth, that it is very cleanly, and wholsome, whereupon there is no use here of Carts; it is excellently furnished with all things necessary for mans life, so populous, and well in∣habited, that next after London, and York, it may justly challenge the chiefest place of all the Cities in England. It hath a very commodious Haven, which admitteth Ships under sail into the very bosome of the City; on the Southside, Radcliffe (by a stone Bridge with houses on each hand built upon it, which makes it more like a street, than a Bridge) is joyned to the City. It hath Hospitals in every quarter thereof, for the benefit of the poor, and fair Churches. The most beautiful of all which, is St. Maries of Radcliff without the walls, in∣to which there is a most stately ascent up many stairs: large withal, and finely and curiously wrought, with an arched roof of stone over the head, artificially embowed: a steeple also of an exceeding height, which was founded by one VVilliam Cannings an Alderman of the City. Hard by there is another Church called the Temple, the Tower whereof when the Bell rings shaketh to, and fro, whereby it hath cloven it self from the rest of the building. There is also St. Stephens Church, The Tower steeple whereof being of a mighty height, was most sumptuously and artificially built by one Shipward, alias Barstable, a Citizen, and Merchant. On the East, and North side its fenced with the River Frome, which gently falling into the Avon, maketh a dainty harbour for ships, with a convenient wharf, called the Kay: under which, between Avon and Frome there is a plain, set round about with trees, yeelding a most pleasant walk: On the South East there is a large and strong Castle for the defence of the City: Beyond the River Frome (which hath a Bridge over it) there ariseth an high hill, from which is a fair, and goodly prospect of the City, and haven: upon the top of this Hill, where it spreads into a
plain, shadowed with a double row of trees, is an handsome School. This City is further beautified with many stately buildings: amongst the rest is the Cathedral Church, &c. Neer unto this City is an high Cliffe by the Avons side, called St. Vincents Rock, very full of Diamonds, which are not much set by, because of the plenty of them: They are of a bright and transparent colour, matching, if not passing the Indian Diamonds, in hardnesse only they are inferior to them: Nature hath framed them four or six pointed with smooth sides; as if cut by a Lapidary. There is another Rock also on the West side full of Dia∣monds, which by a wonderful work of nature, are enclosed as young ones within the bowels of hollow, and reddish flints. There are within this City, and suburbs, twenty fair Churches, whereof eighteen are parish Churches: there is no dunghill in all the City, nor a sink that comes from any house into the street, but all is conveyed under ground: they carry all upon sleads, and bring no Carts into the City. The water at the Kay sometimes ebbs and flows forty foot in height. Four miles below it, the Avon falls into the Severn; the Bridge is half as long as London bridge, and yet hath but four Arches in it. The City of Wells Described. Neer unto Mendip hills, which are rich in Lead-Mines, stands the City of Wells, so named from the springs, or wells that boil up there, which for the multitude of Inhabitants, for fair, and stately buildings, is worthy to bee regarded. A goodly Church it hath, and a Colledge founded by King Ina. Neer unto the Church, there is a spring called St. Andrews well, from whence comes such a conflu∣ence of water, as by and by makes a swift brook. The Church is throughout very beautifull, but the frontispice thereof in the West end is most excellent: for it riseth up from the foot to the top all of Imagery, in curious and antike wise wrought of stone carved, and em∣bowed very artificially. The City of Bath Described. This City is seated low in a plain, environed round about with hills, almost of one height, out of which certain rills of fresh water flow con∣tinually to the great commodity of the Citizens; within the City there bubble and boil up in three several places hot springs of water, of a Sea colour, sending up from them thin vapours, and a kind of a strong sent withall, by reason that the water is drilled, and strained through veines of Brimstone, and a clammy kind of earth called Bitumen. These springs are very medicinal, and of great vertue to cure bo∣dies, overcharged and benummed with corrupt humors: by their heat causing much sweat. Of all these the Cross-Bath is of the most mild, and temperate nature, having twelve seats of stone in the sides of it, and is inclosed within a wall. A second, distant from this
not fully two hundred foot is much hotter, thence called the Hot-Bath, adjoyning to which is a Spittle or Lazar-house, built by Regi∣nald Bishop of Bath for the relief of poor diseased persons. The third and greatest is called the Kings-Bath, walled also round about, and fitted with thirty two seates of Arched work. The City is fortified with walls; wherein are set certain Antique Images, and Roman inscriptions; and hath in it a fair and large Cathedral Church. The City of Excester in Devonshire Described. The City of Excester stands upon the River Ex, whence it receives its name. It is pleasantly seated upon the gentle ascent of an hill: The Walls of it, which were first built by King Athelstone, are in a manner round, only towards the Ex it rangeth almost in a strait line, having six gates for entrance, and many watch-Towers inter∣posed betwixt, whose compass containeth above one thousand and five hundred paces, or a mile and an half, having Suburbs running out a great way on each side. In it there are fifteen Parish Churches: and in the highest part thereof neer the East Gate, standeth a Castle cal∣led Rugemont, commanding the whole City, and territory about it, and hath a very pleasant prospect into the Sea. In the East quarter of the City stands the Cathedral Church, having many fair houses round about it. By reason of some Wears the River is so stopped up that no vessels can come neerer the City than Topsham, which is three miles off. The soil about it is but barren: yet by reason of the statlinesse of the place, the riches of the Inhabitants, and the frequent concourse of strangers, all kinds of commodities are there so plentiful, that a man can ask for no necessary but he may have it. The City of Winchester Described. In the County of Hamtshire is the City of Winchester, situated in a fruitful and pleasant place, being a valley under hills, having a Ri∣ver on the East, and a Castle on the VVest: the circuit of her Walls are well neer two English miles, containing one thousand eight hundred and eighty paces, through which open six gates for entrance. In this City are seven Churches, besides the Minster which is seated a∣bout the middest of it, and built very sumptuously. The City of Chichester in the County of Sussex Described. The City of Chichester is walled about in a circular round form: The Lavant, a pretty riveret, running hard by it on the VVest, and South sides. Four gates it hath opening to the four quarters of the world, from whence the streets lead directly, and crosse themselves in the middest, where the market is kept, and where Bishop Robert Read e∣rected a fair market house of stone, supported with pillars round a∣bout it. Between the West, and South Gates stands the Cathedral
Church: not very great, but handsome, and neat, having a spire steeple of stone rising a very great height. The City of Canterbury in Kent Described. Canterbury is a very Ancient and famous City in Kent, much renow∣ned both for the situation, and great fertility of the soil adjoyning, as also for the walls enclosing it round about: By reason likewise of the Rivers watering it, and commodiousnesse of the woods there about; besides the vicinity of the Sea, yeilding store of Fish to serve it. And though it was sore shaken in the Danish warres, and consumed in a great part sundry times by fire, yet rose it up always again more beauti∣full than it was before. The Cathedral is raised aloft neer the heart of the City with great Majesty, and stateliness. The City of Rochester Described. In the same County is the City of Rochester, seated in a bottome, fortified on the one side with a Marsh, the river Medway, and weak walls. It is now stretched out with large Suburbs, on the East, West, and South sides: The Cathedral Church, was built by Bishop Gun∣dulph, a Norman, Anno Christi 1080. neer unto it stands an old rui∣nous Castle, fortified formerly both by art and situation. At the end of the City there is a very goodly Bridge of stone excellently Arched, built by Sir Robert Knowls, at the end whereof Sir John Cobham erec∣ted a Chappel: and the bridge is daintily coped with Iron bars; under which the River Medway, swelling with a violent, and swift stream, makes a loud roaring noise. The City of Glocester Described. The City of Glocester is a very fine, and beautiful City, both for the number of Churches, and buildings therein. It lyeth stretched out in length over the Severn: and on that side where it is not guard∣ed by the River; it hath in some places a strong wall for defence. The Cathedral Church is a stately building, with an exceeding high and fair steeple. In an Arch of this Church, there is a wall built in the form of a semicircle full of corners, with such an Artificial devise, that if a man speak with never so low a voice at the one part thereof, and a∣nother lay his ear to the other; which is a good way off, he may easily hear every sillable. The City of Oxford Described. Where the River Cherwel meets with Isis, and pleasant Ilets lye dis∣persed by the sundry disseverings of waters, there this famous City, and University of Oxford, sheweth it self aloft in a champion plain, from whence Religion, and learning have been spread into all the parts of
England. A fair and goodly City it is, whether wee respect the seemly beauty of private houses, or the stately magnificence of pub∣lick buildings, together with the wholsome situation, and pleasant prospect thereof. For the hills beset with woods, do so environ the plain, that as on the one side they exclude the pestilent Southwind, and the tempestuous West-wind on the other, so they let in the clear∣ing East-wind only, and the North-East-wind with all, which frees it from all corruption, whence sometimes it was called Bellositum. The City of Eli Described. The City of Eli is situate in the middest of great and large Fens, and was formerly famous for the reputed holinesse of the Nuns there residing: and for a stately Monastery, so rich that the Abbot there∣of, not long after VVilliam the Conquerors time, laid up every year in his own Coffers, a thousand and four hundred pounds. King Henry the first made it a Bishops Sea, promoting thereto one Hervey, who sought by all means to advance the dignity of his Church: For which end hee obtained of the King that it might bee Toll-free: hee made a way also from Exing to Eli through the Fens, of six miles in length: and the Monks growing rich, the Cathedrall Church being much decay∣ed through age, they by little and little built it, and brought it to the ample statelinesse which now it hath. A Lanthorn it hath at the very top thereof, just over the Quire supported by eight Pillars, and raised upon them right Artificially, built by John Hothum the Bishop: and under the Church towards the North, stands St. Maries chappel, a singular fine peece of work, built by Simon Montacut Bishop: The City it self is not much to bee accounted of either for beauty, or resort of people to it, as having an unwholsome air by reason of the Fens round about it. The City of Lincoln Described. The City of Lincoln is large, and well inhabited, and frequented, It stands upon the side of an hill, where the River VVitham bends his course Eastward, and being divided with three small channels, wa∣tereth the Lower part of the City. In the highest part of the City the Cathedral is erected, a stately structure, being built through out, not only most sumptuously, but with rare and singular workmanship, most beautiously: especially the forefront at the West end, which in a sort ravisheth, and allureth the eyes of all that judiciously view it; very ancient this City is, and hath been farre larger, and more popu∣lous: It hath in it fifty Parish Churches: whereof at this day there remain only fifteen besides the Minster. The City of Norwich in Northfolk described Norwich is situated upon the River Yare: the form of it is somewhat
long, being from South to North a mile and an half long, and in breadth about half so much, drawing it self in by little and little, in the Southend; making in a manner a sharp point; compassed it is a∣bout with strong walls, beautified with many Turrets orderly pla∣ced, and twelve gates: only it is not walled on the East side, where the River (after it hath with many windings in and out, watered the North part of the City, having four Bridges for passage over it) is a sufficient defence with his deep channel, and high steep banks. It flourisheth with wealth, plenty of inhabitants, great resort of stran∣gers, fair buildings, and hath in it about thirty Parish Churches: on the East side of it stands a very fair Cathedral Church near unto the Castle, built upon a very high hill, which was compassed about with an exceeding deep ditch. In the midst of the City near the Mar∣ket-place is a very fair Town-house, which on Market-dayes is plen¦tifully furnished with all things necessary for mans life. The Ne∣therlanders being driven away by the Duke d' Alva's cruelty, repai∣ring hither in great numbers, brought in the making of Sayes, Bayes, and other stuffe, to the great gain of the Citizens. Anno Christi 1583. the Citizens conveyed water out of the River in pipes by an artificial instrument, into the highest parts of the City. The City of Coventry in Warwickshire described. Coventry is a City very commodiously seated, large, sweet, and neat, fortified with very strong walls which are about three miles in compasse, through which are thirteen gates for enterance, most of them very stately, and strongly built, besides eighteen other Towers in several parts of the wall for defence. A little River called Shir∣burn runs through the City, which is beautified with many fair and goodly houses, amongst which there rise up on high two Churches, of rare workmanship: St. Michaels, and Trinity, standing one hard by another, with stately spire steeples of a very great height. In the midst of the City is the Market-place, called the Cross-cheaping, and therein a Crosse, or Pillar of stone of most exquisite, and admirable work∣manship: there is also a very fair Grammer-school, and a neat Libra∣ry at the end of it, with convenient habitations for the Master, and Usher: near unto it is VVel-street, and therein a very large fountain that continually sends forth great plenty of excellent water. The City had very large suburbs belonging to it, especially in the East and West ends, most whereof were broken down in our late Civil wars, and a large Trench made on the outside of the walls. The City of Worcester described. Under the City of Worcester runs the Severn with a slow pace, as ad∣miring, and wondring at the City as it passeth by: and truly worthy it is of admiration, whether you respect the antiquity, or the beauty thereof. It stands in a place rising somewhat with a gentle ascent by the
Rivers side that hath a fair Bridge, with a Tower over it. It is well, and strongly walled; and the inhabitants are much inriched by the trade of cloathing. It is one thousand six hundred and fifty paces a∣bout the walls, through which seven Gates give entrance, with five other VVatch Towers for defence, there are in it divers Churches be∣sides the Cathedral, which is seated on the South side of the City; and is a passing fair and stately building, adorned with the Tombs, and Mo∣numents of King John, Prince Arthur, diverse of the Beauchamps, &c. The City of Lichfield in Staffordshire described. Lichfield is a very ancient City, known unto Bede by the name of Lichidfield, i. e. the field of dead bodies, by reason of a number of Christians there martyred in the bloody persecution under the Em∣peror Dioclesian. This City is low seated, of a good largenesse, and fair withal, divided into two parts by a shallow pool of clear water; which parts are yet joyned into one by two Bridges, or causway's made over it, having sluces to let out the water, the South part is the greater, consisting of divers streets, having in it a School, and an Hospital of St. John, founded for the relief of the poor. The farther part is the lesse, but beautified with a very goodly Cathedral Church: which is round about compassed with a very fair wall, Castle-like: This Church mounteth up on high with three Pyramids or spires of stone, making an excellent shew, and for elegant, and proportionable building yeeldeth to few Cathedrals in England: But by our late ci∣vil wars it is much defaced. The City of Westchester described. The City of Chester is built foursquare, and is inclosed with a strong wall that is above two miles in compasse, and hath in it eleven Parish Churches, the fairest of which is that of St. Johns without Eastgate, being a very stately building: near unto the River Dee standeth the Castle upon a rockie-hill, where the Courts Palatine, and the Assises are kept twice a year. The houses are built very fair, and along the chief streets are galleries, or walking-places, they call them Rowes, having shops on both sides, in which a man may walk dry from one end to the other. Here King Edgar in a magnificent man∣ner triumphed over the Brittish Princes: for himself sitting at the foredeck of his Barge, Kennadie King of the Scots: Malcolin King of Cumberland; Mucon, King of Man, and of the Isles, with all the Prin∣ces of VVales, comming to do homage, like watermen working at the Oare; rowed him along the River Dee in a triumphant manner. There is in it a very large, and fair Cathedral Church, wherein is the Tomb of Henry the fourth, Emperor of Germany, who (as they say) gave over his Empire, and lived here an Eremites life. This City wants not any thing required in a flourishing City, but that the Sea, being
offended, and angry (as it were) at certain Mills, and a causway made crosse the channel of the River Dee, hath by degrees drawn himself back, and affordeth not unto the City the commodity of an haven, which formerly it did injoy. The wall hath in it four fair gates, open∣ing towards the four quarters of heaven, besides three Posterns, and seven watch-Towers. Before the desolations made by our late civil wars, without the East, and North gate, the City extended herself in her suburbs, with very fair streets, adorned with goodly buildings, both of Gentlemens houses, and fair Innes for the entertainment of strangers. The Water-Gate leadeth to the River of Dee, where it enters into the mouth of the Sea, and by which is a fine spacious peece of ground, called the Rood-eye, yeelding pleasure and profit: and upon which the Citizens walk for the air, and use sundry recreations. The Bridge-Gate hath lately been beautified by a seemly water-work of stone, built steeple-wise, by the invention, and charge of Mr. John Tyrer, and is of excel∣lent use for conveying the River-water into the Citizens houses throgh pipes of Lead, and wood, into almost all parts of the City. The City of Hereford described. The City of Hereford is seated amongst pleasant medows, and plentiful Corn-fields, compassed almost round about with Rivers; on the North, and West sides with one that hath no name, on the South side with the River Wy, that commeth out of Wales. It is walled about, having six Gates or entrance, and fifteen Watch-Towers for defence, extending in compasse to one thousand five hun∣dred paces. The Normans upon the side of Wy, built in it a mighty great and strong Castle, which time hath so defaced, that now there remains nothing but the ruines of it. The greatest glory that this City had, was when King Athelstan brought the Lords of VVales into it, and forced them yearly by way of tribute to pay him (be∣sides Hounds and Hawks) twenty pounds of gold, and there hundred pounds of silver by weight. The City of York described. The City of York is very ancient, and of so great estimation former∣ly, that the Roman Emperors kept their Courts there. It is at this day the second City of England, the fairest in all the Country, and a sin∣gular, both safeguard and ornament to all the Northern parts. A pleasant place, large, and stately, well fortified, beautifully adorned, as well with private, as publick buildings, rich, populous, and was lately an Archiepiscopal See. The River Ouse flowing with a gentle stream from the North part, Southward, cutteth it in twain, and divides it as it were into two Cities, which are conjoyned with a stone Bridge, ha∣ving in it a mighty Arch of extraordinary bignesse. The VVest part is compassed in with a very fair wall, and the River together, four∣square
wise, and gives entrance only at one gate, from which a long and broad Street reacheth unto the very bridge; which is beautified with handsome houses, having Gardens, and Orchards, planted on the backside on either hand, and behind them fields even to the walls, for exercise and disport. On the East side the houses stand very thick, and the Streets are narrower, and it is fortified also with a strong wall, and on the South-East it is defended with the deep channel of the muddy River Fosse, which entring into the heart of the City by a blind way, hath a Bridge over it with houses built upon it, and so close ranged one by another, that a man would judge it a Street ra∣ther than a Bridge, and so a little lower it runneth into the Ouse, where at there confluence, a strong and stately Castle was built that commanded the City, but is now gone to decay. Towards the North stands the Cathedral Church, an excellent fair and stately Fa∣brick. King Henry the Eight appointed here a Council, not unlike to the Parliaments in France, to decide and determine the causes, and con∣troversies of these Northern parts, according to equity and cosci∣ence, consisting of a Lord President, certain Counsellors, a Secretary, and under officers. This City is governed by a Lord Maior, twelve Aldermen, many Chamberlains, a Recorder, a Town Clerk, six Ser∣geants at Mace, and two Squires, which are the Sword-Bearer, and common Sergeant, who with a great Mace goeth on the left hand of the Sword. The City of Durham Described. The City of Durham is seated high, and is passing strong withall, yet taketh it up no great circuit of ground: It is of an Oval form, and environed on every side, save on the North, with the River Weer, and fortified with a wall: Towards the Southside stands the Cathedrall Church: built high, and stately, with an high Tower in the middest, and two Spires at the West end. In the middest is a Castle placed as it were between two stone bridges over the River. Northward from the Castle is a spacious Market place, and St. Nicholas Church, from whence there runneth out for a great length North-East, a Suburb compassed on two sides with the River, like as other on both sides beyond the River, which lead unto the Bridges, and each of them have their several Churches. Venerable Bede lies under a marble Tomb, in the Cathedral Church of this City. The City of Carlile in the County of Cumberland Described. The City of Carlile is passing commodiously, and pleasantly seat∣ed between severall rivers; being guarded on the North side with the Channel of Eden, on the East with Petteril, on the West with Caud: Besides which natural fences, it is fortified with strong walls of stone, with a Castel, and a Citadel: In form it is somewhat long, running
out from West to East: On the West side stands the Castle, fair, and large. Almost in the middest of the City, riseth on high the Cathe∣dral Church, the upper and newer part of it being very artificially, and curiously wrought: On the West side stands the Citadel built by King Henry the eight, very strongly and with bulworks. VVales Described. VVales is bounded with the Seas on all sides but the East, where it is separated from England by the River Dee, and a line drawn to the River VVie: or rather by that huge ditch cast up by King Offa, which begins where Wie falls into Severn, and reacheth unto Chester, even fourscore and four miles in length. The Country is very Mountainous, and barren, yet by the industry of the Inhabitants is made fruitful; their chiefest commodities are woollen Flannels, Cottons, Bays, &c. brought weekly to Oswestre, the farthest Town in Shropshire, and thence dispersed into other Countries. It is divided into North-Wales, and South-Wales, in both which are twelve shires, having in them one Chase, thirteen Forrests, thirty and six Parks, ninety and nine brid∣ges: The chiefest Rivers are Dee, VVie, Conwy, Tivy, and Chedhidy. The Welsh Language is least mixed with forreign words of any used in Eu∣rope, but having many Consonants in it, is lesse pleasing. The People are cholerick and hasty, but very loving each to other. In VVales are one thousand and sixteen Parishes, of which fifty and six are market Towns, besides the Cities, which are four, viz. St. Davids in Pembrook∣shire, Bangor in Carnarvonshire, Asaph in Flintshire, and Landaff in Glamorganshire. In Cardiganshire were found some silver Mines by the industry of Mr. Thomas Middleton, that yeilded some good quantity of Silver. The twelve shires of VVales are, Pembrookshire, Caermardenshire, Glamorganshire, Brecknockshire, Radnorshire, Cardiganshire, Moungomery∣shire, Mertonethshire, Denbighshire, Flintshire, Caernarvonshire, and the Isle of Anglesey, which is separated from the main Land by the Ri∣ver Moenay, wherein are Beu-marish, and Holi-head, common passages to Ireland. Scotland described. Scotland is separated from England by the Rivers Tweed, and Solway, and the Cheviot-Hills, reaching from one river to the other: Its in length four hundred and eighty miles: In breadth much lesse, no place being threescore miles from the Sea: Its divided into High-land and Low-land. The people of the High-land living on the VVestern parts of Scotland, have some civility: but those in the out Isles are very barbarous: The Low-landers are in dispositions, and language al∣most like the English. Scotland is far more barren than England. The chief commodities are course cloathes, Freeses, Fish, Hides, Lead-oare, &c. The principal Rivers are Forth, Clada, and Tay, all navi∣gable.
In Scotland there are four Universities, St. Andrews, Glasco, Aber∣deen, and Edenburgh. The Nobility and Gentry are great affecters of Learning, and therefore do not only frequent their own Universi∣ties, but travel into forraign parts for improvement of the same. The whole Country is divided into two parts by the great River Tay: the Southern part is more populous, and fruitful, every where bestrewed with Cities, and Towns, as England is: the Northerly more barren, and rude, retaining the customes of the wilde Irish, from whence they came. The Southren part hath in it these Counties, Tividale, Merch, Laudien, Liddesdale, Eskedale, Annandale, Niddesdale, Galloway, Car∣rick, Kyle, Cunningham, Arran, Cluidesdale, Lenox, Sterling, Fife, Strathern, Menteith, Argile, Cantire, and Lorn. The Northern counties are, Loquabrea, Braidalbin, Perth, Athol, Anguse, Mers, Mar, Buguhan, Murrey, Ross, Sutherland, Cathnes, and Strathnavern. And these again are divided into Sheriffdoms, Ste∣wardships, and Bailiwicks. The chief Cities in Scotland described. Edenburgh is the Regal City of Scotland, seated in Lothien, where is the Royal Palace, and the chief Courts of Justice. It consists princi∣pally of one street about a mile long, into which runne many petty lanes, so that the whole compasse may be about three miles: Its streng∣thened by a Castle that commands the Town. Glasco in Cluidsdale, where an University was founded by Bishop Turnbull, Anno Christi. 1554. St. Andrews in Fife. Sterling, or Striveling, seated in Striveling hundred. Aberdeen in Mar. Dondee, in Anguis. Perth, or St. Johns Town. Scotland was once inhabited by two populous Nations, the Scots, and Picts: the former inhabited the Western parts of the land, the latter the Eastern: These two Nations at length falling out, there were great and large warres betwixt them, till at last the Scots prevailing they extinguished, not the Kingdome only, but the very name of the Picts. Most memorable was that fortification drawn from Abercorn upon the Frith of Edenburgh, unto Dunbritton opening upon the West Sea, where Julius Agricola set the limits of the Romane Empire: At this place began the great wood Caledonia, famous for the wilde white Bulls bread therein, with Manes like Lyons, thick, and curled, of na∣ture fierce, and cruell, so hatefull to mankind that they abhorred whatsoever was by them handled, or breathed upon. The Cattle in Scotland are but small, yet many: Fish so plentifull, that in some pla∣ces men on horseback, hunt Salmons with Spears. The Islands be∣longing to it are, the Western, the Orknayes, and the Shetlands, in num∣ber
above three hundred. Amongst the Western, the Hebrides, Skie, Mula, Ila, and Arran, are the chief: all abounding with Corn, Wood, Salmons, Herrings; and some with Conies, Deer, Horses, and Sheep. The Orknay Islands upon the North, lie in a raging Sea, about three and thirty in number, whereof thirteen are inhabited, the other re∣plenished with Cattel. In them are no venemous Serpents, nor other ugly vermine; the aire sharp, and healthful, apt to bear Oats, and Barley, but have no wood: Of these Pomonia is the greatest, that hath six Minerals of Lead, and Tin, and twelve Parishes in it. Ireland described. Ireland is divided into four Provinces: Mounster, Leinster, Con∣naught, and Ulster. In Mounster are the Counties of Limmerick, Ke∣ry, Cork, Waterford, Dismond, and Holy Cross in Typperary. In Leinster are East-Meath, West-Meath, Kilkenny, Caterlough, Queens County, Kings County, Kildare, VVeshford, and Dublin: In Connaught are Clare, r Towmund, Gallaway, Maio, Slego, Letrim, and Roscoman. In Ulster are Dungal, or Tyr-connel, Tyrone-upper, Tyrone-nether, Farmanagh, Cavan, Monaghan, Colrane, Antrim, Down, Armagh, and Lough. Ireland hath on the East that tempestuous Sea that divides it from England. On the West, the Western Ocean: On the North, the Deucalidonian Sea: and on the South the Vergivian Sea: It contains in length four hundred, and in breadth two hundred miles. The air is temperate, but not so clear as ours in England; it doth not there∣fore ripen Corn well, but causeth grasse to grow abundantly: The Winter is more subject to wind than snow. The soil is uneven, wooddy, wilde, watrish, and boggy, full of Loghs, and Meers: yea great ponds are sometimes found upon high mountains: hence new commers are subject to Rheumes, dissenteries, and Fluxes, the usual cure whereof is Uskebah. This Island breeds no venemous creature, neither will any live there, if brought from other places. All the breed in Ireland (except women, and Grayhounds) are lesse than in England. The commodities are cat∣tel, and sheep, which are twice shorne in one year; but their wool is course, of which they make Mantles, Caddows, and Coverlets: their Hobbies also are of great esteem: Bees there are in great abundance. The people are generally strong, and nimble, patient of hunger, and cold, implacable in enmity, light of beleef, greedy of glory. The Kernes, or wilde Irish are extreamly barbarous, not behaving them∣selves as Christians, scarcely as men. The chief Rivers are, 1. Shenin, or Sinei, beginning in Ulster, and running two hundred miles till it falls into the Vergivian Sea, and is navigable threescore miles. 2. The Slane. 3. Awiduff, or Blackwater. 4. Showre, &c. of which Spencer makes these verses. There was the Liffie rowling down the Lea, The sandy Slane, the stony Aubrian:
The spacious Shenin spreading like a Sea, The pleasant Boyne, the fishie-fruitful Bann, Swift Awiduffe, which of the English man Is call'd Blackwater; and the Liffar deep, Sad Trowis that once his people over-run, Strong Allo tumbling from Slewtogher steep; And Mullamine, whose waves I whilome taught to weep. There also was the wide embayed Mayer, The pleasant Bandon crown'd with many a wood, The spreading Lee that like an Island fair, Enclosed Corke with his divided flood, And baleful Oure, distain'd with English blood: With many more, &c. The principal Lakes are, Lough Earn, Lough Foile, and Lough Cor∣bes, in length twenty, in breadth four miles, in which are three hun∣dred Ilets abounding with Pine-trees. Dublin the Metropolis of Ireland is seated on the Liffie in which is an University. Our King John was the first that was entituled Lord of Ire∣land, which title the Kings of England retained till Anno Christi 154. at which time in an Irish Parliament, King Henry the eight was decla∣red King of Ireland, as a name more repleat with Majesty. The Province of Mounster described. Mounster hath on the South the Vergivian Sea, on the North part Connaught, on the East Leinster, and on the VVest the Ocean. Its in length from Baltimore in the South unto the Bay of Galway in the North, fourscore and ten miles: Its breadth East, and West from Wa∣terford haven, to Feriter haven, is one hundred miles. The air is mild, and temperate: the soil in some parts hilly with woods, and solita∣ry mountains: the vallies beautified with Corn-fields: The commo∣dities are Corn, Wood, Cattel, Wool, and Fish, especially abundance of Herring, and Cod. The principal City is Limrick, compassed a∣bout with the famous River Shannon, by the parting of the channel. Also neer unto the River Savaren, which issues out of Muskerry moun∣tains, stands the City of Cork: and lastly in this Province is the fair City of VVaterford, having a commodious Haven for trade, and traffick. The Province of Leinster described. Leinster hath on the East the Irish Seas: VVestward on Connaught side, its bounded by the River Shannon: Northward with the territo∣ry of Lougth, and Southward with part of Mounster. Its in length fourscore miles: in breadth seventy▪ The airds clear, and mild: the soil generally fruitful, and plentifull both in fish, and flesh▪ stored
with corn, cattel, and pastures. Its well watered with Rivers, and for the most part well wooded, except the County Dublin, where it is much wanting: It breeds excellent Hobbies that amble very easily. It hath in it three Rivers of note, Shour, Neor, and Barraeo, which is∣sue out of the huge Mountains Blandinae, and meet together before they empty themselves into the Ocean. In this Province are, 1. Kilkenny, a fair midland Town. 2. Kildare. 3. VVexford, which was the first English Collony. 4. Dublin, the Metropolitan City, which is strong, beautiful, and frequented by Merchants: Near to it is the beautiful Colledge consecrated to the holy Trinity, which Queen Elizabeth made an University. The Province of Connaught described. Connaught is bounded Eastward with part of Leinster: Northward with part of Ulser: Westward with the main Ocean, and Southward with part of Munster: Its in length one hundred six and twenty miles, and in breadth fourscore. The Air is not so pure, and clear as in other Provinces, by reason of the many Bogs. In it Twomond, or the County of Clare, is best both for Sea, and Soil. Galway commodious for shep∣heards. Maio replenished with Cattel, Deer, Hawks, and Hony, Sle∣go with pasturidge. Le Trim full of rank grasse, and forrage. Rosco∣men, plain, and fruitful, fit for cattel, or husbandry. The principal City, and indeed the third in Ireland is Galway, built in manner much like a Tower, and is well frequented with Merchants, having a conve∣nient Haven: near unto it is the Isle of Arran. The Province of Ulster described. Ulster on the North is divided with a narrow Sea from Scotland, Southward it extends to Connaught, and Leinster, and on the VVest is beaten with the vast Ocean. Its length is near one hundred miles from North to South, the breadth one hundred and thirty, and odd miles. The air is temperate, which causeth the ground to bring forth great store of several trees, both for building, and fruit-bearing, plentiful it is of grasse for Cattel, well furnished with horses, sheep, and Oxen. The Rivers carry Vessels for pleasure, and profit, furnished they are with great store of fish, especially of Salmons, abounding more in some of these Rivers, than in any other place in Europe. In∣deed in some places this Country is barren, troubled with Loughs, Lakes, and thick woods, but in other places fruitful enough, if it were but well husbanded. The principal place in this Province is Armagh near unto the River Kalin, which though it make but a poor shew, yet lately was an Archiepiscopal See: wherein once sate Richard Fitz-Ralph, commonly called Armachanus, who Anno Christi 1355. wrote so sharply against the begging Friers, detesting such voluntary beg∣gery in Christians.
Thus was the state of Ireland before the late horrid rebellion brake forth, what alterations the same hath produced, I am not able to write. The Isle of Man Described. Man is situated in that part of the British Sea that is called St. Georges channel: It lyes between England and Ireland, containing in length a∣bout thirty miles, the broadest place exceeds not nine miles, the nar∣rowest is not lesse than five. Generally its an high land upon the Sea-Coasts, defended with rocks lying out into the Sea. The Har∣bours for shiping are, 1. Douglas the safest. 2. Rainsway, 3. Ram∣sey. 4. Laxie, all towards England: and Peel, a poor Harbour facing Ireland. It abounds with springs of water, which make diverse use∣full Rivolets: the soil is indifferently fruitfull, yet much of it is moun∣tainous: It yeilds Rie, Wheat, Barley, but especially Oates, of which they make their bread: Its stored with Beasts, Sheep of a course wooll, Horses of a small size, and Goates: there is no want of Fish, and plenty of Fowl. The Aire is quick and healthful: Frosts short, and seldome. Snow will soon dissolve because of the vicinity of the Sea: and its subject to extraordinary high winds. The Inhabitants are civil and laborious: their drink water, their meat Fish, their bed∣ding generally hay, or straw: they are much addicted to the musick of the Violine, so that there is scarce a family but more or lesse can play upon it: they are ingenious in learning manifactures, and bear a great esteem, and reverence to the publick service of God: Naturally they are unchaste. Anno Christi 1649. it was given by the Parliament to Thomas Lord Fairfax, as a reward of the great services he had done for them. The Azores Islands Described. The Islands of Azores are nine in number: Tercera, St. Michael, St. George, St. Mary, Pico, Fayall, Graciosa, Flores, and Corvo. They are named Azores from the many Ayeries of Goshawks found there. Of these Tercera is the greatest, and fruitfullest: It abounds with Oil, Wine, Corn, Oade, Fruits, &c. Her best Town is Angra, her best Fort Bra∣zeil, her Haven bad to Anchor in. Pico is the highest, being (as some say) above fifteen miles to the top, which is many times seen cleerly: but about the middle of it hang the clouds. Its about ten miles in circuit: Its for the most part composed of Brimstone, so that many times from the top issue forth flames of fire, as out of Aetna: Below are umbragious shades, and cold Rivolets, into which when the vomited fire is forced, those op∣posite Elements eccho forth their discontents in an hideous noise. In the Island of Tercera are some fountains, the water whereof is so hot, that it will boil an egg: There is also another fountain that turns
wood into stone, and a Tree that grows by it hath that part of the root which grows in the water petrified: the other that is out, is Wood, as of other trees. A more particular description of the Kingdomes, and Countries contained in the continent of Europe. Spain Described. Spain was seized upon by the Sweves, Goths, and Vandals, Anno Christi▪ 168. who remained in possession thereof more than four hun∣dred years, till their King Rodrigues, with almost all his Nobility, was defeated by the Saracens, who were brought in by a certain Earl in revenge of the dishonour of his daughter, whom the King had ravish∣ed. These Saracens maintained themselves there, above seven hun∣dred years, as well against the French, as the Spaniards themselves, who endeavoured to expell them. It was formerly divided into twelve Kingdomes, which were all reduced to one by Ferdinand, and Isabel Anno Christi 1474, except that of Portugal, which was subjugated by Philip the second, and peaceably possessed by him, and his heirs, till the year 1640 as above. It was in the reign of the aforesaid Ferdinand, that the Indies and many other Islands were found out, the riches whereof hath much augmented the potency of Spain, and made her to aspire to the Monarchy of the world. The chief Rivers in Spain are 1. Tagus, formerly famous for his golden sands: It riseth in the mountain of Seira Molina, running by the City of Toledo, and then smoothly gliding by the walls of Lis∣bon in Portugal, it pays his tribute to the Western Ocean. 2. Ana (now Guadiana) which rising about the same place, afterwards runs under¦ground for the space of fifteen miles, as our Mole in Surrey doth. 3. Baetis (now Guadalquiver) 4. Duerus, that runneth from its head in the hills of Biscay, Westward: 5. Iberus, which having his head in the same Mountains, runs Eastward almost four hundred miles, of which two hundred is navigable. The chief hills are 1. Aurentius Saltus, stretching from the Pyrene∣an Mountains towards Portugall. 2. Siera Morena, declining from the middest of Spain towards the straits of Gibraltar. 3. Seira Nevada, which crosses the Kingdome of Granata from East to West: steep hills, amongst which the people speak the Arabick tongue perfectly. Whilst the Saracen Moors possessed Spain, they divided it into twelve Principallities, as 1. Leon and Oviedo, having on the East Biscay, on the South Castile, on the North the Ocean, on the West Gallicia: It yeildeth little, yet swift horses called Hobbies. The chief Towns are 1. Aviles on the sea side. 2. Palenza. 3. Oviedo. 4. Astorga. 5. Leon. 2. Navarre, having on the East the Pyrenean mountains, on the West Iberus, on the North Biscay, and on the South Aragon. The chief Ci∣ties are 1. Victoria. 2. Viana. 3. Sanguessa. 4. Pampelune, the Metro∣tropolis
of the Country, Anno Christi. 1512. in the reign of Queen Katherine, who was married to John of Albert: the King of Spain raising an Army under pretence of rooting out the Moors, suddenly surprized this Kingdome, unprovided for resistance, and keeps it till this day, though the French have often attempted the recovery of it. 3 Corduba, comprehending Andaluzia, Granada, and Estrema∣dura. Andaluzia, is the richest, and fruitfullest Country in all Spain: the chief Towns are, 1. Corduba, the Metropolitan, whence comes our true Cordovan Leather, made of the skins of a Sardinian Beast. Neer this City is a wood thirty miles long, consisting all of Olive trees. 2. Marchena, where are the best Jennets in all Spain. 3. Medina Sidonia, the Duke whereof was General of the Armado in eighty eight. 4. Lucar di Barameda, an haven Town. 5. Xeres, a haven Town also, whence come our Xeres Sack, commonly called Sherry-Sacks. 6. Tariffa, seated at the end of the Promontory towards Af∣frick. 7. Sevil, the fairest City in all Spain, in compasse six miles, environed with beautiful walls, and adorned with many magnificent buildings of Palaces, Churches, and Monasteries, and hath under its jurisdiction twenty thousand small Villages: Its also divided into two parts by the River Baetis, yet both are joyned together by a beautifull and stately Bridge. Hence come our Sevil Oranges, and from hence go∣eth the Indian Fleet. Analuzia in Spain, as well for plenty of all blessings of the Earth, as for the pleasures, and delights of the fields, is a meer terrestrial Paradise. The horses which shee produceth are so swift in course, that they seem (according to the Proverb) to be engendred by the Wind. Spain feeds an infinite number of Sheep, especially in Castile, where is made most excellent Cloath, and the wooll for the superlative finenesse thereof, is transported into other Countries: In other parts it is barren, through the lazinesse of the people (as some think) who love much better to put their hands to the Sword than to the plough. The people are me∣lancholy and cholerick: sober, and content with a little, spending more upon the back than upon the belly: They are very ambitious, and good Souldiers, knowing as well how to use a victory, as to gain it; and are more exactly observant of Discipline than any other Nation in the world. The Kingdome is hereditary, and for want of an heir male it falls to the distaff. Granada, which is bounded with Murcia on the East, Andaluzia on the West, Castile on the North, and the Mediterranean Sea on the South. The chief Cities are 1. Granata, a neat and stately Town, the houses being all built of freestone with curious workmanship: It hath many wholsome Springs about it, and is fenced about with a strong wall, in which are twelve Gates, and one hundred and thirty Turrets. 2. Alamia, famous for her Baths. 3. Malaga, whence comes our Malaga sacks. 4. Almeria, a great Port-Town. 5. Osuna. 1. Estremedura, watered with the River Batis: the chief Cities are
1. Merida. 2. Guadalonal, famous for her Mines of Gold and Sil∣ver. 4. Gallicia, a very mountainous Country: In it the chief Cities are, 1. Compostella, in which is an University. 2. Baiona, at the mouth of Minius. 3. Coronna, called the Groine, a place often spoken of in our wars with Spain in Queen Elizabeths time. 5. Biscaie, having Navarre on the East, Old Castile on the South, Leon on the West, and the Cantabrian Ocean on the North. The chief Cities are, 1. Tholosa. 2. St. Sebastian. 3. Fontaraby. 4. Bilbo. It abounds with good Wines, store of cattel, and the best sword-blades: Its mountainous, and woody; out of the hills arise one hundred and fifty Rivers, of which Iberus and Duerus are the chief. It yeelds plen∣ty of Iron, and good Timber for ships. They admit no Bishops a∣mongst them; and the women at all meetings drink first. 6. Toledo, the chief City is of the same name, standing upon the River Tagus, beautified with many Palaces of rare and admirable ar∣chitecture, and fortified with good walls, on which stand one hun∣dred and fifty Towers: its seated almost in the midst of Spain, and is well inhabited by Noble men for pleasure, by Merchants for pro∣fit, and by souldiers, it being garrisoned. The Arch-Bishop hereof is the chief Prelate of Spain, President usually of the Inquisition, whose revenues amount to three hundred thousand Crowns per an∣num. It hath in it an University. 2. The next City is Calatrava, on the River Ana. 3. Talbora, on the River Tagus, a very neat City. 7. Murcia, The chief Cities whereof are, 1. Alicante, whence comes our true Aliant Wine, made of the juice of Mulberries grow∣ing here in great plenty. Murcia, on the River Segourg. 3. Cartagena, a brave haven upon the Mediterranean Sea. 8. Castile, bounded on the East with Navarre, Arragon, and Tole∣do: on the West with Portugal, on the North with Asturias, and on the South with Andaluzia, and Granada. Its now divided into the new, and old: the Old is on the North side, wherein the chief Ci∣ties are, 1. Soria. 2. Segovia, famous for Wooll, and cloathing 3. Validolid, a neat Town, and an University. 4. Avila. 5. Burgos. 6. Sa∣lamanca; the chiefest University in Spain. New-Castile is on the South of the old: The chief Cities are, 1. Ma∣drid, the Kings seat, and the most populous City in all Spain, though it bee seated in a barren Country. 2. Alcara de Henares, formerly Complutum, an University. 3. Alcantara. 4. Signeuca, a small Aca∣demy. 5. Cuenca, nigh to which is the Escurial, or Monastery of St. Lawrence, built by King Philip the second. A building of that magni∣ficence, that no building, either in times past, or present is comparable to it. The Front towards the VVest is adorned with three stately Gates, the middlemost whereof leadeth into a very sumptuous Tem∣ple; and into a Monastery wherein are one hundred and fifty Monks, of the order of St. Jerom, and a Colledge. That on the right hand openeth into divers offices belonging to the Monastery: That on the left into Schools, and out-houses belonging to the Colledge. At
the four corners are four Turrets of excellent workmanship, and for height Majestical: towards the North is the Kings Palace: On the South part are diverse beautiful, and sumptuous Galleries. And on the East side, sundry Gardens, and walks very pleasing, and de∣lightful. It contains in all eleven several Quadrangles, every one Cloistered about. Portugal described. 9. Portugal hath on the North the River Minius: On the South the River Ana: On the VVest the Ocean: and on the East Castile: for∣merly it was called Lusitania. The air is very healthful: the Coun∣try for the most part is hilly, and bare of Corn: But it abounds with Hony, VVine, Oil, Allom, Fruits, Fish, white-Marble, Salt, &c. Its in compasse eight hundred seventy and nine miles: the length three hundred and twenty: the breadth threescore: the most firtile part is about Conimbria: The people are excellent Ma∣riners, and happy in forreign discoveries. The Rivers, great and small, are near two hundred: the greatest is Minius, full of red Lead, and its navigable one hundred miles. The chiefest Cities are, 1. Lisbon upon Tagus, famous for traffick: Its seven miles in com∣passe, containing above twenty thousand houses of neat and elegant building: Its walled about, wherein towards the Sea are two and twen∣ty Gates, and towards the land sixteen: on the walls stand threescore and seven Turrets. 2. Miranda. 3. Braga. 4. Conimbra, a famous University. 5. Porto. At the Southern part of Portugal is the Cape of St. Vincent. After the overthrow of King Sebastian in the battel in Africk, where three Kings fell in one day, there were divers preten∣ders to the Crown of Portugal, and amongst the rest Philip the second, King of Spain was one, who made a shew that their titles should bee lawfully debated, yet in the mean time hee sent an Army under the Duke de Alva, seized on it by force, and so kept it, till within these few years the Portugals drave out the Spaniards (as was afore∣said) on a sudden, and made the Duke of Bragance, one of the fa∣mily of the former pretenders, King: who keeps it till this day. The King of Spain by the losse of it hath lost one of the fairest Diamonds in this Crown; having therewith lost the East Indies, and Brasile in the West. 10. Valentia, The chiefest City is of the same name, situated near the mouth of the River Guadalander; In it is an University, &c. there is nothing of note in this Country. 11. Catalonia, which hath Iberus on the South, Arragon on the West, the Sea on the East, and the Pyrenian mountains on the North; the chief Cities are, 1. Gironne. 2. Barcelona on the Sea, a Town of good strength. 3. Perpignan. 12. Arragon, is bounded with Catalonia on the East, Castile on the West, Navarre on the North, and Valentia on the South: the River Iberus runs through the midst of this Country. The chief Cities are,
1. Lerida, an University on the River Cinga, &c. there is nothing else of note. The Pyrenean Hills described. The Pyrenean Mountains stand as a natural boundary between the two great Monarchs of France, and Spain: they run in a ridge from Sea to Sea, the Cantabrian Ocean fiercely beating on the West, and the Mediterranean gently washing the East ends of them. The high∣est of them is called Canus, because it hath for the most part a white cap of Snow upon it, on the top whereof in a clear day, a man may see both the Seas. The French side of these mountains is naked, and barren, the Spanish very fruitful, and adorned with trees. France described. The Kingdome of France is composed of four and twenty Pro∣vinces, wherein are fifteen ArchBishopricks, ninety seven Bishopricks, ten Parliaments, fourteen Universities, and four orders of Knight∣hood. The French are so naturally inclined to Armes, that the Pro∣verb saith, They are born souldiers, nor indeed can they stay long at rest; for if they have no war with their neighbours, they quickly make it amongst themselves: Points of honour make them run into the field, as to a feast, so that many of the Nobility unhappily fall by Duels. They go like Thunderbolts to combats, and conquests, and overcome whatsoever opposes them; but as soon as their heat is cooled, they turn their backs, and suddenly loose what they had gai∣ned with such reputation. The French are more than men (saith the Proverb) at the beginning of a fight, and lesse than women towards the end. The French Cavalry is the stoutest and best in the World. Their generosity is such, that they grudge not to praise the vertue even of their enemies, when they deserve it. They agree so ill out of their own Country; that they make themselves disesteemed by it. France is wonderfully stored with Rivers, the chiefest whereof are, 1. Seine, which arising in Burgundy, passeth by Paris, and Rhoan, and receiving into it nine navigable streams, disembogueth it self into the Brittish Ocean. 2. Some upon which standeth Amiens, hath its head about St. Quintins, divides Picardy from Artois, and receiving eight lesser streams into it, falleth into the Sea. 3. Loyre, on which are seated Nants, and Orleance; it riseth out of the great mountains in Avergne, runs six hundred miles, receiveth into it seventy two lesser rivulets, and so falleth into the Aquitane Ocean. 4. Rhoane, rising at Briga, three miles from the head of Rhene, watering Lyons, where it meets with Sone flowing from Alsatia; then it waters Avignion, and ad∣mitting thirteen lesser brooks, it falls into the Mediterranean at Arles. 5. Garond, which running from the Pyrenean hills passeth by the walls of Burdeaux, and Tholouse: Of these Rivers it is said: The Seine is the richest; the Rhoane the swiftest; the Garond the greatest; and the Loyer
the sweetest. But come wee to a more particular description of the several Provinces. 1. Gascoyn, and Guien, are bounded with the Pyrenean Hills, the Aquitane Ocean, and the River Garond. The cheif Cities in it are, 1. Tholouse, wherein is a Parliamentary Court for the execution of Justice: the fields about it extend in length one hundred, in breadth, seventy French Leagues; wherein was fought that dreadfull battel be∣tween Attila King of the Huns, that had in his Army five hundred thou∣sand fighting men, and Aetius, the Roman Lieutenant in France, where∣in the Romans were Victors, and slew of the Barbarians an hundred and fourscore thousand persons. 2. Burdeaux, where our King Richard the second was born: In it are an Vniversity, and Parliamentary Court, 3. Bazas on the Garond. 4. Raion, on the coast of Spain. On the North end of this Country stands the little Province of Xantoigne: the cheifest Cities whereof are Sainctes, and Rochel, the best fortified Town in all France, and formerly the strongest hold of the Protestants. 2. Poictou, which hath on the North Brittain, and Anjou: on the East the Dutchy of Berry: on the South Xantoigne, and Guien, and on the East the Aquitain Sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Poictiers▪ on the River Clarius, next in greatness to Paris it self. 2. Castle He∣rauld, the title whereof was given to the family of Hamiltons in Scot∣land by Henry the second, and Francis his son, &c. 3. Anjou, is but a little Province, but very fruitfull, and yeilds the best wines in France. To it are annexed the Provinces of Turrain, and Main. The chief Towns of Anjou are, 1. Angiers, where is an University. 2. Beaufort, sometimes belonging to our Dukes of Lan∣caster. 3. Saumur, pleasantly seated on the Loyre, and an University: On the North sides of Anjou, between it, and Normandy, lyeth Main, whose chief Cities are, 1. Mans, or Main, 2. Beaumont, 3. Vendosme. On the South-East between Anjou, and Berry, lyeth Toureine, and in it the Cities of 1. Toures, neer unto which Charles Martel overthrew an Army of four hundred thousand Saracens, under their Captain Ab∣daramen, and slew of them three hundred and seventy thousand, about the year 732. 2. Amboise, 3. Bloys, 4. Orleance, upon the Loyre: an University, wherein especially the civil Law is studied. 4. Britain, environed with Main, Tourain, and the Sea: in it are two good Havens, Brest, and St. Malo: the chief Cities are 1. Nats upon the bank of Loyre, where is a Parliament. 2. Rhenes. 3. Vannes. 4. St. Briene. 5. Rohan. 5. Normandy, which hath on the South Main, and the Ile of France, on the East the River Some: on the other parts the Ocean: The river Seine runs through the middest of it. The chief Cities are; 1. Constance, 2. Cane, 3. Bayeux, on the Sea side. 4. Pontoyse, 5. Roan, 6. Falaise, 7. Mortaigne. 8. Crecy, 9. Caux. 10. Verneil. The cheif Haven Towns are, Hareslew, Deep, and Newhaven. 6. The Isle of France, encompassed with the Seine, and other petty brooks: in it is seated the regal City of Paris, formerly Lutetia,
quasi in luto sita, because situated in a clayie soil, whence grew the Pro∣verb, It stains like the dirt of Paris. The City of Paris Described. Paris is in compass twelve miles: It stands in a most fertile soil: The Citizens are reputed to be about five hundred thousand. Its honoured with a Parliament, to which all others may appeal, from which not one: It hath in it a famous University, counted the first in Europe, con∣taining fifty and five Colledges, built by Charles the great, Anno Christi 800. at the perswasion of Alcuinus, an English-man. Its seat∣ed on Seine, which serves the Town with little boats, and Barges, the river ebbing and flowing no higher than Pontelarch, about seventy and five miles below Paris. It was held by the English sixteen years, and in it our King Henry the sixth was crowned King of France and Eng∣land in the Church of Nostre Dame, or our Lady, which Church is three∣score and five fathom long, four and twenty broad, and fifteen high, above which the Steeples are raised thirty and four fathoms. In this Isle of France is also St. Vincents; and somewhat Eastward Soysons, then Carenton, where the Protestants have a Church: Also the Royall Palace of Fountainbleau, one of the fairest houses in Chri∣stendome. Northward lyeth the Dukedome of Valois, whose prime City is Senlis, and next it Luzarch. 7. Berry and Burbon, which are environed with Poictou, Limosin, Avern, Burgondy, and Champain. The chief City in Berry is Bourges, well stored with sheep. Its watered with the River Cher, and hath in it thirty and three walled towns. In Bourges is a famous University. 2. Sancerre. 3. Argenton. 4. Casteau Rous. Burbon is watered with the Rivers of Loyre, and Alliere: The Cities are, 1. Burbon. 2. Molins. 3. Nevers. To Burbon belong Bea∣vois, and Avern: In Beavois are the Cities of Beavois, and ville Franche: In Avern the chief Citie is Clermont; then St. Floure, invincible by its situation. 3. Claudes Argues. 4. Maregnes, and 5. Au∣bigny. 8. Limosin, is environed with Berry, Poictou, Xantoigne, and Averg∣ne. Its watered with the Rivers Vienne, and Vexerew. The chief Cities are, 1. Tulles. 2. Tuviers. 3. Maignai. 4. Limoges. 5. Chalue. South-West to Limosin are the ttle Countries of Perigort, and Quercu, whereof the chief Towns are, 1. Mountalbon, situated on the Garond: A strong hold of the Protestants. 2. Cahors, a beautiful rich City. In Perigort are the Cities of Perigeux, and Sarlat. 9. Daulphine, is environed with Avergne on the West, Provence on the South, Savoy on the East, and Bresse on the North. The Rhoan runs through this Countrey, and meeting with Zone it washeth the walls of Lyons, a famous mart Town, and University. 2. Valence. 3. Vi∣enna. 4. Grenoble, where is a Parliament. In the mountains bordering on this Country, and lying between it,
Savoy, Provence, and Piedmont, dwell the Waldenses, many times for∣merly, and now of late grievously persecuted by the Popish Party. 10. Languedoc, is environed with the Pyrenean hills, Gascoin, the River Rhoan, and the Mediterranean Sea: the chief Cities are, 1. Nar∣bon. 2. Montpelier on the sea side, which is a famous University for the study of Law, and Physick. 3. Nismes. 4. Agde. 5. Lodove. 11. Provence, is bounded with Languedoc, Dauphine, Piedmont, and the Mediterranean Sea. Its divided into three parts: one whereof be∣longs to the Pope, the Metropolis whereof is Avignion, seated on the River Rosne, wherein the Popes made their residence seventy years together; in it is an University. The second part belongs to the Prince of Orang, wherein the chief City is Orang, famous for her rare and wonderful Antiquities. The third and greatest part belongs to the King of France: wherein are 1. Marseleis, a famous mart Town. 2. Aix, where is a Parliament. 3. Arles, wherein was held a Councill by Constantine, Anno Christi 313. 12. Picardy, and Champaigne, are environed about with Normandy, Belgia, Lorayn, Burgundy, Berry, Burbon, and France: Its divided into the higher, and lower: In the higher is 1. Callis, taken by our Edward the third after eleven Months sieg, Anno 1347. and suddenly lost by Queen Mary, Anno 1557. after it had been English two hundred years, 2. Bullen, taken by our King Henry the eight, 3. Terwin, taken by the same King, Maximilian the Emperor of Germany serving under his ensigns. In the lower Picardy are, 1. St. Quintins. 2. Abbeville, strong fron∣tire Towns, 3. Peronne, 4. Amience, 5. Monstreville, 6. Guise. Campaigne hath in it, 1. Rheimes, where the Kings of France are Crowned, and anointed. In it is an University, and one Colledge for the entertainment of English fugitives. 2. Troys, 3. Brie. 4. Mon∣targis, 5. Sens, 6. Auxerre. 7. Chalons. 13. The Dutchy of Burgundy, is bounded with Champaign, Bresse, and Burbonoys: The chief Cities whereof are, 1 Dijon, where is a Par∣liament, 2 Autun, 3 Beaulne, 4 Verdune, 5 Sologne, 6 Chalons, be∣longing to the Prince of Orange, 7 Alice: Its watered with ten Ri∣vers. All these Provinces are under the King of France, and besides Ci∣ties, have in them thirty and four good Havens. Within the limits of France are three other Countries, which are not subject to the King of France, as 1 Savoy, 2 Lorrain, 3 the County of Burgundy, which last is bounded with Champaigne, Lorrain, Switzerland, and Bresse, and the Dutchy of Burgundy. The length of it is ninety miles, the breadth sixty: The Inhabitants are a warlike people, called commonly Wal∣loons: The soil is exceeding fruitfull: its watered with the Rivers Soan, Love, Dayne, and Doux, upon whose banks stands the fair, and strong City of Bezanson, an University. Dole also stands on the same River, a strong, rich, and beautiful City, and an University, wherein
the Jesuits have a Colledge. 3. Salines. 4. Gray. 5. Arbois. 6. Bou∣tenant. 7. Chastilion, and above three and twenty more walled Towns. 2 Lorrain, which is environed with part of Belgia, Alsatia, the County of Burgundy, and Champaigne: It abounds with Corn, Wine, Mines, Salt, Fish, and an excellent race of horses The people are hardy and politick, and are governed by a Duke: In it are store of Lakes well replenished with Fish, one whereof is fourteen miles in compasse: The chief Rivers are, 1. The Meure, 2. Mosa, 3. Mosella: The chief Cities are, 1. Nancy seated on the Meure, 2. St. Nicholas, well seated, neatly built, and very populous, but not walled about: 3. Vausoleur, 4. Pont Moson, 5. Neufa Chateau, 6. Vaudemant. Unto this Countrey belongs the County of Barrois, environed with the two streams of the River Marne: the chief Towns are, Barleduc, Lamot, Arg, and Ligni. 3. Savoy, which is bounded with Dauphine, Bress, Switzerland, and Piedmont. Within the limits of this Countrey stands the famous City of Geneva, being but two English miles in circuit, and the territories thereof stretch but two leagues and an half of each side. At the end of the City is the lake Lemannus, and the River Rhoan divides it into two parts. This little Common-wealth by the assistance of God, resisted a great siedg laid against it by the Duke of Savoy, Anno Christi 1589: As also another attempt made by Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, to have taken her by surprise. Hee secretly listed one thousand and two hundred men, under the command of Mounsieur d' Aubigny, who by means of great store of Ladders, and other instruments got to the number of two hundred into the Town, whilst the Duke was following with some Regiments for recruit: But being discovered, and the Ci∣tizens running to their Arms, it pleased God to strike those which were entered with such a Pannick fear, that they returned the same way they came, without having been able so much as to seize upon one gate, to let in the other Forces. Thus this great design so long premeditated, so se∣cretly carried on, so successefully begun, and almost compleatly execu∣ted, was by the watchful eye of Gods Providence over his people, pre∣vented: and this hot Camisado hath made them of Geneva stand better upon their guard ever since. They use to punish Adultery with death, and if any malefactor fly thi∣ther for refuge, they punish him after the custome of the country where the crime was committed. The chief Cities of Savoy, are 1. Chambery the Dukes seat: It stands in a pleasant valley amongst the Mountains, and is beautified with many neat houses, well fortified with a strong Castle, and some outworks. 2. Tarentaise, which commands the pas∣sage into Italy through the hills Geneura. 3. Bramont. 4. Aquibelle. 5. Carboneirs. 6. Maurienne. On the North East of Savoy is the County of Bresse: the chief Towns whereof are, 1. Chattillion 2. Mont Real, 3. Bourg, well seated and fortified. The Marquisat of Saluzzes is seated in Piedmont, a part of Italy. Piedmont it self, being bounded with Millaine on the East, Savoy on
the West, Switzerland on the North, and the Mediterranean on the South: A fruitful Country compared with Savoy, but inferior to the rest of Italy. It hath in it one hundred and sixty walled places, and is very populous: It hath in it fifty Earldomes, and fifteen Mar∣quisates: Its divided betwixt the Dukes of Savoy, and Mantua, the River Tenarus parting their possessions: The chief Towns belonging to the Savoyard are, 1. Turin built on the banks of the River Duria: In it is the Palace of the Duke of Savoy, and an University. 2. Aoste. 3. Vercelli, a strong Town. 4. Inurea, &c. The Alps described. The Mountains of the Alpes, which require five dayes to bee as∣cended, divide France, and Germany from Italy: they are alwayes co∣vered with Snow: Hanibal made a way through them with fire, and Vineger. They begin at Savona, and having run a good space in a continued hill, are at last divided into many parts: There are five passages over them into Italy: three out of France, and two out of Germany: The first out of France is through Provence, close upon the Tyrenean Seas, and so through Liguria, which is the easiest. The se∣cond through the Hills called Geneura, into the Marquisat of Saluzzes, and so into Lombardy: The third is over Mount Cenis, through the Country of Turin. The first way out of Germany is through the Gri∣sons Country, by the Town of Valtolin; the other way is through the Country of Tyrol, by the Towns of Inspurg, and Trent. Italy described. This Country abounds with Rice, Silks, Velvets, Sattins, Taffa∣ties, Grograms, Rash, Fustians, Gold Wire, Allom, Glasses, &c. The chief Rivers in it are, 1. Poe, which riseth out of the Alps, and running through Lombardy, emptieth it self into the Adriatique Sea. 2. Rubicon. 3. Tyber. Italy is usually divided into six parts; but the principalities thereof are ten; as 1. The Kingdome of Naples, having the land of the Church on one side, and the Sea on all others. Its in compasse one thousand four hundred sixty and eight miles: It abounds with Mines of divers Mettals, and the choisest Wines: The chiefest Provinces in it are, 1. Terra di Lavoro, formerly Campania, wherein the chiefest Cities are, 1. Cajeta, seated on the Sea side. 2. Naples the Metropolis, and a beautiful City containing seven miles in compasse: In this City, the French, or Neapolitan disease was first known in Christendome: It stands on the Sea shore, and is fortified with four Castles. 3. Capua, which emasculated the valor of Hanibals souldiers. 4. Cuma, nigh to which is the Lake Avernus, the stink whereof poisons birds that flye over it. 5. Baiae, famous for the Baths. 6. Nola. 7. Puteoli. 8. Mi∣senum, nigh unto which is the Hill Vesuvius, that casteth forth flames
of fire, and in the reign of Titus it cast forth such abundance of smoak, and ashes, as darkned the Sun, and overwhelmed two Cities. 2. Abruzzo, whereof the chief Towns are, 1. Aquilea. 2. Bene∣ventum. 3. Aquino, where Thomas Aquinas was born. 4. Sulmo, O∣vids birth-place. 3. Calabria inferior, whose chief Cities are, 1. Peste, where Roses blossom thrice in a year. 2. Salernum, famous for the study of Phy∣sick. 3. Consensia. 4. Regium. 5. Locris. 4. Calabria Superior, wherein the chief Towns are, 1. Tarentum, 2. Crotona. 3. Polycastrum. 4. Amicle. 5. Sybaris. 6. St. Severine. 5. Terra di Otranto, wherein the chief Cities are, 1. Brundusium, one of the best Havens in the world. 2. Hydruntum, now Otranto. 3. Gallipolis. 6. Puglia, the Cities whereof are, 1. Manfredonia. 2. Cannae, where Hanibal slew of the Romans forty two thousand and seven hun∣dred, and had hee followed that victory hee had been Master of Rome. In this Country is the Hill Gargalus, or Mount St. Angelo, one hun∣dred and twenty miles in compasse, strengthened both by nature, and Art: it abounds with cattel: The people in these two Provinces are troubled with a Tarantula, which is only cured by Musick. 2. The land of the Church, which North and South is extended from the Adriatick to the Tuscan Seas; the East bounds are Axafenus and Trontus, which divide it from Naples: North-West its bounded with the Rivers Poe, and Fiore, which divide it from the Venetians; and South-West with Pisseo, which parts it from the Florentines: The Provinces hereof are, 1. Romandiola extending from Rubicon East, to the Venetians on the West: from the Appenine Hills South, to Padus, and the Adriatique on the North. The chief Cities are, 1. Bononia, the principal Uni∣versity in Italy, where the civil Laws are much studied, seated on the River Aposa. 2. Rimana, formerly Ariminum, on the mouth of the River Rubicon. 3. Cervia, on the Adriatique Sea, where great store of salt is made. 4. Ferrara, whose territories stretch in length one hundred and sixty miles, and in breadth fifty, wherein are con∣tained the brave Cities of Modena, and Rhegium: Ferrara the chief-City is seated on the bank of Poe, a broad, deep, and swift River, which guards it on the one side, and on the other its fortified with strong walls, and a large moat. In the midst of the City is a large Green, into which there open on all sides nineteen streets, most of them half a mile long, and so even, that the ends of them may bee easily seen. The whole compasse is five miles. 5. Ravenna. 2. Marcha Anconitana, environed with Romagna, the Appennine, Na∣ples, and the Adriatique: The chief Towns are, 1. Ancona, seated on the Hill Cimmerius, and it is an Haven Town. 2. Ascoli the fair. 3. Fir∣mo the strong. 4. Macerata. 5. Adria, which gave the name to the neighbouring Sea. 6. Narma. 7. Humona. 8. Loretto, famous for the Pilgrimages made thither. 3. The Dukedome of Spoleto, is situate under the Appennine Hills.
The chief Cities are, 1. Spoleto. 2. Ovietto, seated on a very high Rock, where is a Church very lightsome, and yet the Windows are made of Alabaster in stead of Glasse. 3. Perugia. 4. Asis. In this Country is the Lake of Perugia, thirty miles in compasse. Near which Hanibal slew Flaminius with fifteen thousand of his Romane souldiers. 4. St. Peters Patrimony, containing Campagna di Roma (formerly La∣tium) and part of Hetruria. The chief Cities are, 1. Alba. 2. Ostia, at the mouth of Tyber. 3. Antrum. 4. Tybur. 5. Praenste. 6. Ardea. 7. Gabii. 8. Veii: a large and rich City. 9. Tivolis. 10. Rome, sea∣ted on the River Tyber, enlarged with the receit of two and forty Rivers, and is distant from the sea fifteen miles. See old Rome de∣scribed afterwards. The Roman Empire was extended from the Irish Seas in the West, to the River Euphrates in the East, three thousand miles: and from Danubius in the North, to Mount Atlas in the South, two hundred miles. The revenues of the Empire were esti∣mated to amount to one hundred and fifty millions of crowns per an∣num. But Rome as now, is but eleven miles in compasse, within which also there is much wast ground: The inhabitants are about two hun∣dred thousand, two parts whereof are Clergie men, and Curtesans, the latter being seldome under forty thousand, which pay to the Pope thirty thousand Duckats per annum. The principal buildings are the Church of St. Peter: The Castle of St. Angelo, an impreg∣nable fortresse: The Popes Palace called Belvidere: And the Vatican Library. 3. The Common-Wealth of Venice hath many territories belonging to it, the length whereof is above one thousand miles, but the breadth far lesse. For the City of Venice it self, see the description of it afterwards. The chief Provinces belonging to it are, 1. Marca Trevigiana, having on the South the River Poe, on the West the Dutchy of Millaine, on the East Frivli, and the Gulph of Venice, and on the North Tirol: The chief City is Treviso, 2. Pa∣dua, where an University was setled Anno Christi 1220. fa∣mous for Physicians, and their Garden of Simples. See the description of it afterwards. 3. Vincenza. 4. Brescia; the second City for bigness and beauty in all Lombardy: Her territories are in length one hundred, in breadth fifty miles. 5. Verona, seated on the Athesis. It boasteth of an Amphitheater, able to contain eighty tousand people: Her territories are threescore and five miles in length, and forty in breadth. 6. Briscello. 7. Bergamo. 8. Este. 9. Crema, a strong Fort against the Millanois. 2. Frivli, formerly called Forum Julii; Its environed with Istria, the Alps, Trevigiana, and the Adriatique: Its in length fifty miles, and the breadth no lesse. The chief Cities are, 1. Aquilegia, seated on the Natisco. 2. Treist close to the Sea. 3. Gorritia. 4. Palma, excel∣lently fortified. 5. Cividad di Austria. 3. Istria environed with the Sea, Frivli, and Carniola: Its in com∣pass two hundred miles, the air very unwholesome: The chief Towns
are, 1. Cape d' Istria, or Justinople. 2. Pola. 3. Parenza. 4. Portula. 5. Rubinum. 6. Monsona. The Polity whereby this Common-wealth hath so long subsisted is an Aristocracie: wherein, 1. They exempt their Citizens from the wars, and hire others in their places, so that by their death the Com∣mon-wealth sustains the lesse losse. 2. They entertain some for∣reign Prince for their General, whom, when the wars are ended, they presently discard, by which means they avoid factions, and ser∣vitude, which were like to happen if they should imploy any of their own people, who by his vertue, and valour might win the hearts of the souldiers, and so make himself their Prince. 3. Their Laws suffer not the younger sons of their Nobility and Gentry to marry, least the number increasing should diminish the dignity, yet they allow them unlawful pleasures, and for their sakes permit publick Stewes. 4. The Dukedome of Florence containing the greater part of Tus∣cany: Its parted from Genoa on the West by the Magra, and the strong Town Sarezana: From Romagna, and Ancona on the North by the Appennine Hills: On the East by the Pisseo, and on the South by the Tyrrhene Seas. The chief Cities are, 1. Florence seated nigh to the confluence of Arnus, and Chianus: See the description of it afterwards. Charles the Arch-Duke was wont to say, that it was a City to bee seen on Holy dayes only. 2. Pisa, a brave and strong Ci∣ty. 3. Sienna, in whose territories are Orbitello, Pienza, Soana, and six and twenty other walled Towns. 4. Pistoya, where began the factions of the Guelphs, and Gibbilines. 5. Massa, famous for her Quarries of white Marble. 6. Volaterra. 7. Arrezzo. 8. Cortona, sea∣ted under the Appennine. 9. Carara. 10. Borgo San Sepulchro. 11. Li∣gorne, a famous Haven seated at the mouth of the River Arnus. The whole length of this Dukdome is two hundred and sixty miles, the breadth not much lesse. The people are great Merchants. 5. The Dukedome of Millaine, which hath on the East Mantua and Parma: on the South Liguria: on the North Trevigiana, and on the West Piedmont: It stands wholly in Lombardy, the Garden of Italy. The chief Cities are, 1. Pavia, on the River Ticinus, an Uni∣versity. 2. Lodi. 3. Alexandria, a place of great strength. 4. Cre∣mona, famous for her high Tower. 5. Como, seated on a Lake so named. 6. Millaine, honoured with an University: See this stately City described afterwards. The Dukedome of Mantua bounded on the East with Romagna, on the West with Millaine, on the North with Trevigiana, and on the South with Parma, and Placentia. To this belongs the Dukedome of Mountferrat, situated on the South-East part of Piedmont, the chief Cities whereof are, 1. Alba. 2. Casala St. Vas. 3. Nicaea, or Niza; and 4. Isola. The chief Cities of Mantua are, 1. Mirabella. 2. Lu∣cera. 3. Capriana. 4. Modena. 5. Reggio. 6. Cuneto. 7. Mantua, a very strong Town, environed on three sides with a water that is three quarters of a mile broad, and on the fourth with a wall. 7. The Dukedome of Urbin which lies in the midst of the Papal
territories having the Adriatique on the North, the Appennine on the South, Romagna on the West, and Marca Anconitana on the East. In it are two hundred Castles, and seven Cities, the chief whereof are, 1. Urbin, at the foot of the Appennine, 2. Belforto, 3. Pisauro, a good Haven, 4. Cabo, 5. Fano, Sea Towns also. 8. The Principality of Parma, and Placentia, which hath on the North Mantua, on the South the Appennine, on the West Millain, & on the East Modena. Here are made those excellent Cheeses called Parmesans. Parma is seated on the little River Pirina, and Placentia on the Po. To this principallity belongs also Mirandula, with her Territories, where was born that famous Scholler, John Picus Mirandula. 9. The Common-wealth of Genoa, containing Liguria, which hath on the East the River Varus, on the West the River Magra, which parts it from Tuscany, on the North the Appennine, and on the South the Ligurian Seas: Its in compasse fourscore miles, but not so much in breadth. The people are much given to Usury, whence one said merrily, that in Christendome there were neither Schollers enough, nor Gentlemen enough, nor Jews enough, and being answered that there were of all these rather too great plenty than any scarcity: He replyed, That if there were Schollers enough, there would not bee so many double, and treble beneficed men; and if there were Gentlemen enough, so many Pesants would not be ranked amongst the Gentry; and if there were Jews enough, so many Christians would not professe Usury. The chief Towns are, 1. Ceva. 2. Finaly. 3. Noli. 4. Sarazena. 5. Genoa. in compasse eight miles: the building for the two first stories are built of Marble, curiously wrought, but by the Law they are forbidden to use marble any higher. It hath a very spacious Haven, well fortified, where ships may ride in safety. 10. The state of Luca, which is situated in Tuscany: the City is three miles in compass, the Territories eighty miles, in which they can raise three thousand horse, and fifteen thousand foot upon occasi∣on. And thus I have done with Italy, and come to the description of the chief Cities in it. The chief Cities in Italy described. A Description of old Rome, and the chiefest Rarities thereof. Rome when it was first built was but two & twenty miles in compasse: it was situated upon dainty hills, in a most healthfull air: had a brave River running by it, with the more ease to convey the in-land com∣modities for her necessity, and delight; it had the Sea at a conveni∣ent distance, not too neer, whereby shee might be annoyed with For∣reign Navies, nor so remote, but that shee might bee supplyed with outlandish Commodities. The River Tiber at Rome is four hundred foot broad, and so deep that it will carry ships of the greatest burden. Its about sixteen miles distant from the Sea. It was almost round in compasse. The Suburbs in processe of time grew so great, that Aure∣lian
the Emperor built new walls, which were almost fifty miles in compasse, the walls were adorned with seven hundred and forty Turrets: And yet again, the Suburds in a little time grew so great, that one of them was fifteen miles long, and reacht even to the Sea, and in Augustus his time, there was numbred in Rome above three hundred, and twen∣ty thousand poor people that received relief from the publick: Be∣sides the number of Bondmen was very great: few rich men, but they had an hundred and some four hundred a peece: Seneca saith in his time that the Inhabitants were so many, that the spatious and innume∣rable houses were scarce able to contain them: that a great part of them were Forreigners that came from all parts of the world to live there: So that the number of Inhabitants was reckoned to bee at least four millions. These people were sustained with provisions brought out of all Nations: so that Rome seemed to bee the common Mart of the whole World. Heliogabalus to shew the greatnesse of the City; caused all the Spi∣ders to be gathered and put together, which being weighed, amoun∣ted to ten thousand pound weight, and a great plague breaking out at Rome, for many dayes together, there dyed ten thousand per∣sons. The houses were generally built very high, that so they might bee the more capacious, insomuch as Augustus was fain to make a Decree, that their buildings should not exceed seventy foot in height, conceiv∣ing that they marred the delicacy of the air, by their over-much sha∣dow: but this extended only to private mens houses, for the great men were not limited. But besides the great height of the houses, they were beautified by the matter whereof they were built, by the Architecture, and by the Symmetry of them, wherein Art and Elegancy strove for priority. And for that end, what exquisite workmen soever Greece, or Asia brought forth, they were either sent for, or came of their own accord to beautify this Imperiall City, especially in Augustus's time, who made his boasts, Marmoream se relinquere, quam lateritiam accepisset: that hee should leave Rome built of Marble, which hee found built of Bricks. Nero also when hee had burned a great part of it, at his own charges built it up again, beautifying it with excellently composed streets large wayes, and curious porches to all the houses, which three things were a great Ornament to the City: whereupon Cassiodorus saith, Our fore-Fa∣thers tell us of the seven wonders of the world: The Temple of Diana at Ephesus: The costly Tomb of King Mausolus: The brazen Statue of the Sun in the Isle of Rhodes, called the Colossus: The Image of Jupiter Olympicus made by Phidias: The house of Cyrus King of the Medes and Persians, built by Memnon: The walls of Babylon built by Semiramis: And the Pyramides of Egypt. But now (saith hee) the City of Rome is the greatest miracle of them all. There were in it four hundred twenty four Temples erected to their Idol-gods. There were two Capitols in Rome; The old built by Numa, the
new begun by Tarquinius Priscus, and Superbus, finished by Horatius Pulvillus Consul, upon the Saturnin, or Tarpeian, or Capitoline hill. It was eight acres, or eight hundred feet in compasse, almost four square. It was ascended unto by one hundred steps on the South part, which looked towards the market place, and Palace, it would hold eight thousand men. It was covered with Brasse-tiles all guilt with Gold; There were three Chappels in it, to one of which (viz. Jupiters) Augustus gave sixteen thousand pound weight of gold, and jewels worth almost as much more, twelve thousand talents were spent in gilding of it. The gates were covered with thick plates of Gold. The only foundations of this Capitol cost Tarquinius forty thousand pound weight of silver, the pillars of it were cut out of a Quarry of Marble, called Pentick-marble, and they were as thick as long. Plut. Next after the Capitol, the Pantheon is worthily noted. It was built by Agrippa, son in Law to Augustus in the year of the City seven hundred twenty and nine. The Architecture of it was admirable, the beauty, and proportion of all the parts most exquisite: the breadth of it was one hundred forty and four feet, and the height as much: It was wholly covered over with very great tiles of Brass richly guilt. In the reign of Trajan it was burnt by lightning, and re-built by H∣drian. The Temple of Peace was built by Vespasian, three hundred foot long, and two hundred broad: It was the most beautifull of all the Temples in the City, and enriched with gifts of inestimable value: It was adorned with Statues, and pictures of most exquisite workman∣ship: yea and all the rarities were collected into this Temple, for the sight whereof men formerly used to travell through the whole world. And here also hee placed those vessels which formerly belonged to the Temple of Hierusalem, and were brought from thence by Titus at the sacking of it. It was burnt down in the time of Commodus, either with fire from heaven, or arising out of the earth after a little Earth∣quake. There were an infinite number of Baths both publike, and private in Rome. Some of which baths, were all paved with plates of silver and set with rows of Pillars for ornament. Antoninus's bath had sixteen hundred seats of polished Marble in it. The Appian Causey was built by Appius Claudius Censor▪ It reached from Rome to Capua, the bounds of the Empire that way, at that time; which was afterwards lengthened to Brundusium by Julius, and Au∣gustus Caesar, in all three hundred and fifty miles long, and so broad, that two coaches might easily pass by one another, being about twenty and five foot broad. It was made of hard flinty stones, hewen and laid so close together (yet without any morter or claspes of Iron) that it seem∣ed all of onestone; the stones were three, four, and five feet square: nine hundred years after it was made, the stones were not one whit dis-joyn∣ted or broken, ever and anon on the sides were stones whereon persons might sit, or lay their burdens, or get on horseback, and at every
miles end, high stones (or pillars) were raised, whereon were engra∣ven the number of the miles. Likewise there were many Monu∣ments on both sides with witty inscriptions, or pretty inventions on them, yeelding both matter of mirth, and seriousness to the travel∣lers. There were fourteen (saith Pliny) twenty (saith P. Victor) Aquae∣ducts in Rome; the chiefest of which was the Claudian, began by Ca∣ligula, and finished by Claudius; so big as a man might ride on horse∣back in it; brought forty miles to the City in a level, through the Mountains, and over the Vallies; as high as the highest hill in the City: seven millions and a half were spent in making it. There were besides in the City one thousand three hundred fifty two Lakes, or great receptacles of water for common use. The Cloacae, or common sewers, were made by Tarquinius Priscus; they were so wide, that a Cart loaden with Hay might passe along them, viz. sixteen foot wide, and as many high. There were seven chief armes from the seven hills (besides several smaller from other parts) which ran into the main Channel. Notwithstanding all the weight of building upon them, and several earthquakes, they remained firm almost eight hundred years. And at one time when they were out of repair, there were a thousand talents spent in repairing of them. There was an infinite number of Statues, or Images in every part of the City, costly for their matter, and curious for their work∣manship: some Authors say, that there were near as many of them, as there were living people in the City; some of them were of polished Marble; infinite of brass, some of Ivory, some of Silver, and some of Gold. Domitian the Emperour commanded that no statues should bee made for him in the Capitol, but such as were all of silver, or all gold, solid, and not hollow, each of them weighing at least an hundred pound weight: Commodus the Emperor had a statue made for him of gold that weighed a thousand pound weight: Together with a Bull and a Cow of the same mettal, as if hee had been the founder of the City. Hee had also in the Market-place a Pillar erected, and his Statue made upon it, of a thousand five hundred pounds weight of silver. Their statues of brass were most of them guilt, and so were many of their statues of silver. Some of them were of a Colossaean bigness, others mounted on horse-back, and in several postures, and habits: For the preserving of all which from hurt, there was one who was called Comes, or an Earl, whose office it was, continually to walk up and down in the night, attended with many souldiers, that none might wrong them, and besides it was death for any man to do it. Lipsius de Mag. Rom. Imperii. Rome was for her beauty and bravery called Aurea, and Aeterna, and the Romanes thought that the Monarchy of the World was tyed to them with chains of Adamant. But God hath confuted their golden dreams by breaking their Empire, and given up their City
six several times in one hundred thirty and nine years space, into the hands of Barbarians, who exercised therein all kinde of cruelty: besides, it is observed that Rome, since it became Papal, was never be∣sieged by any enemy, but it was taken. Sybil long since prophesi∣ed. Tota eris in cineres, quasi nunquam Roma fuisses. The manner of the Romane Triumphs: and particularly that of Palus Aemylius after the conquest of Perseus King of Macedon. First, the people having set up sundry scaffolds as well in the lists, and field called Circos, where the games, and races of horses, and Char∣rets used to bee, as also about the Market-place, and in all the streets through which the Triumph should pass, they all presented themselves in their best gowns, to see the magnificence, and state thereof. All the Temples of the Gods were set wide open, hanged full of Garlands of flowers, and all perfumed within. Through all the quarters of the City were set many Sergeants, and other officers, with tipstaves to order the stragling people, and to keep them from pestring the streets, or hindring the triumph which lasted three dayes. The first day was scant sufficient to see the passing by of the Ima∣ges, Tables, Pictures, and Statues of a wonderful bignesse, all wonne, and gotten of their enemies, and now drawn upon two hundred and fifty Charrets. The second day there were carried upon a great number of Carts all the fairest, and richest Armor of the Macedonians, as well of Cop∣per, as of Iron, and Steele, all glistering bright, being newly fur∣bished, and artificially laid in order: Fair Burganets upon Targets, Habergions, and Corslets upon greaves: Round Targets of the Cre∣tans, and Javelins of the Thracians, and arrows amongst the armed pikes: All bound so trimly one to another, that one hitting against another as they were drawn, made such a sound, and noise as was fearful to hear. After these Carts there followed three thousand men, which carried the ready mony in seven hundred and fifty Ves∣sels which weighed about three Talents a peece, each of them car∣ried by four men. Others carried great bowles, cups and goblets of silver, and other pots to drink in, beautiful to behold, as well for their bignesse, as for the great, and singular embossed work about them. The third day early in the morning the Trumpets sounded the brave alarum they give at an assault, after whom followed one hun∣dred and twenty goodly fat Oxen, with their horns guilt, and gar∣lands of flowers, and nosegaies about their heads, and by them went many young men with aprons of needle-work about their middles, who led them to the Sacrifice, and with them young boyes that car∣ried
goodly Basons of gold and silver to receive, and sprinkle the blood of the Sacrifices about. After these followed all those that carryed all coins of gold, and Basons, and Vessels, each of them weigh∣ing three Talents. Then was carryed the great holy cup which Aemy∣lius had caused to bee made of massy gold, set full of precious stones, weighing ten Talents for an offering to the gods. Next to them went they which carryed Plate, made, and wrought after Antick fa∣shions, and the admirable cups of the ancient Kings of Macedon: as the cup called Antigonus, and another Seleucus: and to bee brief, all the whole cup-broad of plate of gold, and silver of King Perseus: and next them came the Kings Charriot with his Armour, and his royal Crown upon the same. A little after followed the Kings Children, whom they led prisoners with the train of their School Masters, and other Officers, and their servants weeping, and lamenting, who held up their hands to the people that looked upon them, thereby teach∣ing the young Children to do the like, and to ask mercy, and grace at the peoples hands. There were three pretty little Children, two sons, and a Daughter amongst them, who by reason of their tender years lacked understanding, which made them (poor souls) insensible of their present misery, and that moved the people so much the more to pitty them, seeing the poor little infants that knew not the change of their hard hap: so that through compassion to them, they had almost let the Father pass without looking upon him: yea many of the peoples hearts did so melt for pitty, that the tears ran down their cheeks till they were past, and gone a good way out of sight. King Perseus the Father followed after his Children, and their train: Hee was cloathed in a black gown, with a pair of slippers on his feet, after his Country manner: Hee shewed by his countenance, his troubled mind, being opprest with sorrow for his most miserable estate, and condition: Hee was followed with his kinsfolk, his famili∣ar friends, his officers, and houshold servants, their faces being dis∣figured with blubbering, shewing to the world by their lamentable tears, and sorrowful eyes cast upon their unfortunate Master, how much they sorrowed, and bewailed his most hard and woful estate, whilest they made little account of their own misery. After all these, there followed four hundred Princely Crowns of gold, which the Cities, and Towns of Greece had purposely sent by their Ambassadors unto Aemylius, to honour his victory: And last of all came Aemylius himself in his Triumphant Chariot, which was passing sumptuously set forth, and adorned: This was a gallant sight to behold, and yet the person himself was worth looking on without all that great pomp, and magnificence: for hee was cloathed in a pur∣ple gown, curiously branched with gold, carrying in his right hand a bough of Lawrel, as all his Army did the like, the which being divi∣ded by bands and companies: followed the Triumphant Chariot of their Captain, some of the souldiers singing songs of victory, accor∣ding to the usual manner of the Romans in the like cases, mingle∣ing
them with merry, and pleasant toyes, as glorying, and rejoycing in their General: others of them sang songs of Triumph in the honour, and praise of Aemylius his noble conquests, and victorys: so that hee was openly praised, blessed and honoured of all, and neither hated, nor envied of any that were good, and honest. Plut. in vita ejus. Rome was so populous when Paulus Aemylius was Censor, that be∣ing mustered by him, they were found to bee three hundred thir∣ty seven thousand four hundred fifty and two men. The manner of Pompey's third Triumph. For the statelinesse and magnificence of this Triumph, though Pompey had two dayes to shew it in, yet were there many things, which for want of time were not seen; even so many as would have served to have set forth another Triumph. In the first place there were Tables carryed, whereon were written the names and titles of all the people, and Nations which hee had conquered, and for which hee triumphed; as the Kingdomes of Pon∣tus, Armenia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Media, Colchis, Iberia, Alba∣nia, Syria, Cilicia, and Mesopotamia: as also the people that dwell about Phaenicia, Palaestine, Judaea, and Arabia: and all the Pirates which hee had overcome both by Sea, and Land, in all parts of the world: In all these Countries, hee had taken a thousand Castles, al∣most nine hundred Cities, and walled Towns▪ Of Pirates ships eight hundred: Hee had replenished again with people, nine and thirty de∣solate Towns that were left without Inhabitants: In these Tables was further declared, that before these conquests the revenues of the Common-wealth of Rome were but five thousand Myriads per an∣num, but now Pompey had made them eight thousand and five hundred Myriads per annum: and that hee had brought now for the Treasu∣ry in ready gold and silver, Plate and Jewels, the value of twenty thousand Talents, besides that which hee had distributed amongst his souldiers, of which hee that had least for his share, had one thou∣sand five hundred Drachma's: The prisoners that were led in this Triumph, besides the Captains of the Pirates, were, the son of Ty∣granes, King of Armenia, with his wife and daughter: The wife of King Tygranes himself, called Zosime: Aristobulus, King of Judaea: Mithridates sister, with her five sons, and some Ladies of Scythia: The hostages also of the Iberians, and Albanians, and of the Kings of the Commagenians: beside many other things too large to recite: But that which made his honour the greatest, and whereunto never any of the Roman Consuls attained, was, that in his three Triumphs, hee triumphed over the three parts of the world: In his first over A∣frick, in his second over Europe, and now in this third over Asia, which was almost all the then known world; and all this before hee was forty years old. Plut. In vita ejus.
A Description of the City of Venice, with her Rarities, which was begun to bee built Anno Christi 421. upon the 25th of March, and upon seventy and two Islands. This Wonder of Cities, is seated in the bosome, or betwixt the Armes of the Adriatick Sea: It is built upon four thousand Islands, and is (as it were) chained together by four thousand Bridges. The occasion which made these watry Isles a mansion for men, was when that Northern Deluge of Goths, Vandals, Huns, and Longobards did o∣verflow all Italy, the people of all sorts fled to these lakes, to avoid the land torrent that was like to swallow them up; and finding the Air to bee gentle, and fit for habitation, and propagation, they pitched their Tents upon these Isles, and associated them by conjoyning Bridges. There are seventy two Isles that support Venice: and the nearest part of the Continent is five miles distant: There are banks, and dit∣ches cast up to preserve her from the impetuousnesse of the waves of the Sea, extending in length above six miles. Shee is above eight miles in circuit. Through the banks in seven places, there are passa∣ges broken for boats, but not for bigger vessels. Besides there be above twenty thousand Gondolaes, or Boats, which ply up and down perpetually, in each of which are two rowers at least, so that upon oc∣casion, shee can suddenly make an Army of above fifty thousand Gon∣doliers. Shee hath for her Motto, Nec fluctu, nec flatu movetur. Nor winds, nor waves can stir her. Her Fabriques, publick and private are extraordinary specious, and sumptuous, and her streets so neat, and evenly paved, that in the depth of winter a man may walk up, and down in a pair of Sattin Pan-tables, and Crimson Silk stockings, and not bee dirtied. There are above two hundred Palaces fit to receive any Prince with his ordinary retinue: Her situation is so rare, every street almost having an arm of the Sea running thorow it; and her structures so magnificent, and neat, that shee ravisheth therewith all strangers that come to visit her. She hath in her one hundred and fifty Churches, and Monasteries: but especially three things worthy of sight, viz. St. Mark's Church and Steeple, the Treasury, and the Arsenal. St. Mark's Church is built throughout with rare Mosaique work, and yet the furniture of the Church surpasseth the Fabrique in richnesse; Her walls are inlaid in many places with precious stones of diverse co∣lours, and in such a manner, that they seem rather to be the work of Na∣ture, than of Art. It is built in the form of a Crosse, whose corners are highly vaulted, and covered with bright Lead, as all the rest of the Church is. The whole Bulk is supported with most curious Arches joyned together by marvellous Art. The inside from the middle to the highest part there∣of glistereth with gold, and the concavity of the vaults is enriched
with divers curious, and antick pictures. That which is from the gilding down to the pavement, is excellently joyned together with goodly Tables of Marble, by whose pleasant veins in form of rays, the eyes of the beholders are rather fed than satisfied. The seats below are of an extraordinary red stone, like to Porphyry, the Pavement is all of Marble engraven with diverse figures wholly different, and of various colours: There are sundry Columnes and Tables of Pari∣an, Spartan, and Numidian work, that environ the seats on both sides the Quire. The entrance into the Church on both sides, is in a manner of the same trimming: while gilded Arches are sustained without, by more than three hundred exquisite Pillars, the space between those Pillars being filled with choyce Tables of Marble. On the height of this entrance, are four great brazen horses all gilded over, in a posture as if running, and neighing. All this bears up the highest top of the Church divided into six Steeples, every of which is like a Pyramid, and hath on the sharpest point thereof, a white Marble Statue of a naked man standing upright. Divers other representati∣ons delightfull to the eye, and wrought with exceeding skill, do beau∣tify the spaces between the Steeples, and all that which is vaulted underneath is covered with Gold▪ In sum, there is no place in the whole Church, either within, or without, but it's either adorned with Marble, Gold, or precious stones; so that the two Columnes of Alabaster, and the Chalcedony stones which are in the middest of the pavement, are accounted the least curiosities. The Arsenal of Venice is one of the greatest Magazines of Armes in all the World; It's three miles in compasse, wherein there are above three hundred Artificers, perpetually at work, who make, and repair all things that belong thereto. This Arsenal hath armes to furnish two hundred thousand men, and hath constantly belonging to it two hundred Gallies in Dock, or abroad in course, besides Galliasses, and Galleons, with all provisions necessary for them. Amongst the Armors, are one thousand coats of plate; garnished with gold, and covered with velvet, so that they are fit for any Prince in Christendome. The Treasury of St. Mark is cried up through the World: They say there is enough in it to pay six Kings Ransomes. There are Jewels of all sorts, and sizes, Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, Emerauds, Cups of Agat of an huge bigness. The great Diamond which Henry the third gave when hee was made a Gentleman of Venice: There you may see an Armour all of massie Gold, beset all over with great Pearles, Turkies, Rubies, and all manner of precious stones, in such a quantity, and bigness, that they alone would make a rich Treasury. There are also twelve Corslets of Gold beset with precious stones. There is an huge Gold chain that reacheth from Pillar to Pillar: Diverse Chests of Gold, and amongst others, one great Iron Chest with this inscripti∣on, When this Chest shall open, the whole earth shall tremble. There are two large Unicorn's horns. A great Bottle made of a Chalcedonian stone transparent, and clear, which will hold above a quart. There is a Garnet of a vast size, formed into the shape of a Kettle which will hold
neer a Gallon. There are many Crosses, and Crucifixes of massie Gold beset with Jewells of all sorts: There are the Crowns of Cyprus, and Candy, as also that of the Dukes of Venice all inlaid with choyce rich Diamonds, great Rubies, Emerauds, Saphires, and other stones that would beget astonishment in the beholders. In that of the Dukes, there is one great Ruby worth an hundred thousand Crowns. There are Cups of sundry formes cut out of rich stones, with dishes of sundry kinds. There are divers presses full of plate, huge, and mas∣sy, with Statues of Silver, and large Chalices of gold, and variety of other rich things, the worth whereof no eye is able to judge. There are moreover twelve Crowns of massie Gold, which were taken at the sacking of Constantinople, when the French, and Venetians divided the spoyles. Pacheco the Spanish Ambassadour, comming to see this Treasury, fell a groping whether it had any bottom, and being asked why? answered; In this amongst other things, my great Mast∣ers's Treasure, differs from yours, in that his hath no bottom, as I finde yours to have. Alluding to the Mines in Mexico, and Po∣tofi. In one of its Islands called Murano, Crystall Glasses are made where you may see a whole street; on the one side having above twen∣ty Furnaces perpetually at work both day, and night. If one of these Furnaces bee removed to any other Island, or but to the other side of the street, though they use the same men, materials, and fuel, yet can they not make Glasse in the same perfections for beauty, and lu∣stre, as in this place. Howels Survey. The City of Padua Described. Padua is a City within the Venetian Territories, and was erected in∣to an Academy. Anno Christi 1222. Shee is famous every where for a Seminary of the best Physicians, and hath a Garden of great variety of Simples. It was formerly girt with a treble wall: but a double contents her now, which hath very deep ditches round about: For the River Brent with vast charges, and labour was brought to this City, which hath much advantaged her, both for Strength, and Naviga∣tion: It is situated in a most pleasant, and plentiful plain, enjoying a sweet temperate Clime, with a singular good soil, by reason of the Neighbourhood of the Eugonian Mountains on the West side of it. Her circumference is neer upon seven miles; Her Temples, and dwel∣ling houses, both publike and private, are more magnificent than elsewhere. Shee hath six stately Gates: Five large Market-places, within the walls twenty two great Churches, twenty three Monaste∣ries, twenty nine Nunneries. She hath the most renowned Hall for publike Justice of any City in Italy, covered all over with Lead, and yet propped by no pillars. The Council-Court hath gates, and Columes of Marble; Shee hath twenty eight Bridges, Arched over the Brent which runns thorow her. She hath very spatious Piazza's: Shee hath six Hospitalls, three for the poor, and three for Pilgrims.
Shee hath a place called Monte de Pieta, set up on purpose to root out the Jews usury, who used to demand twenty per cent: for Brocage: Shee hath other two Hospitals for Orphans, and poor children. There are thirty eight thousand Crowns deposited in the hands of several persons of quality (to whom the poorer sort may repair with their pawns, and if it bee under thirty shillings, they pay no use for their mo∣ny, if it bee above, they pay five per centum) for relieving the poor. The City of Millan described. The City of Millan in Italy lies within a stately wall of ten miles compasse. Its situated in a great Plain, and hath about it green Hills, delightful Meadows, navigable Rivers, enjoyes an wholesome air, and the fertile Country about it, furnisheth it with all store of necessary provision. The City it self is thronged with Artisans of all sorts. There bee many stately Churches in it, and before that of St. Lorenzo there stand sixteen Marble Pillars, being a remnant of the Temple of Hercules. But of all the Churches, the Cathedral is most costly. 'Tis all of white Marble, and about it are five hundred Statues of the same: There is a late building added to it which is ve∣ry glorious, especially for the huge Pillars of Granito, an excellent sort of Marble: Private mens houses also in Millan are not inferiour to those of other Cities in Italy. The streets are of a more that com∣mon breadth, and there are very many Gardens within the Walls. The greatest Hospital in Italy is that in Millan, which is a square of Co∣lumnes, and Porches six hundred Roods about, seeming fitter to bee a Court for some King, than an Hospital for the poor. The Castle in Millan is accounted by all Engineers the fairest, and strongest Citadel in Europe. Riamund's Mer. Ital. The City of Naples described. Naples the Metropolis of that Kingdome, stands upon the shore of the Mediterranean Sea: Its reckoned the third City in Italy, and so great are the delights that nature hath allotted to this place, that it is still frequented by persons of great quality. The streets of it are generally well paved, of free stone, large, and even: The houses are very uniform, built flat on the top to walk on; a notable convenience in those hot Countries. Another like accommodation which this Ci∣ty hath against the heat, is the Mole, which is an Artificial street casting it self into the Sea, whither all the Gentry at the evenings re∣sort to take the Fresco. Amongst the Palaces that of the Vice-Kings is the fairest: It hath three Castles; and the Churches generally are very curious and costly, filled with Marble Statues. This City is exceeding populous, and consequently vicious: Hee that desires to live a chaste life must not set up there: For as their Gardens are well filled with Oranges, so their houses want not Lemmons; there are
usually thirty thousand Courtesans registred that pay taxes for their pleasure. Near unto Naples is Virgil's Tomb upon an high Rock. And the Crypta Neapolitana in the rocky Mountain Pausylippus, cut thorow, ve∣ry high, spacious, and well paved, so that for the space of a mile, two Coaches may go on front under the earth: In the midst is a Ma∣donna, with a Lamp perpetually burning. Not far off is the Hill of Brimstone, on which neither grass nor any herb grows; but 'tis all white with ashes, and ever casts out of several holes a continual smoak, with flames, making the very earth to boil: The ground is hollow underneath, and makes an hideous noise, if struck upon with an hammer. On the other side Naples, is the Mountain of Vesu∣vius, brother to Aetna, upon the top whereof is a terrifying spectacle, viz. a Vorago, or hole about three miles in compass, and half as much in depth, and in the midst is a new hill that still vomits thick smoak which the fire within hath raised within these few years, and it still daily increaseth. Pliny the Naturalist being too inquisitive after the cause of this fire, changed life for death upon this Mountain. Idem. Virgil made a Talisman, or Brazen Fly, which hee set upon one of the Gates of the City of Naples, which for the space of eight years kept all manner of Flies from comming into the City. Gaffarels Un∣heard of Curiosities. part. 2. chap. 7. See more there. The City of Florence described. Florence is the Capitol City of Tuscany, situated at the bottom of very high hills, and environed on all sides with the same, except on the West side, before which lies a plain Country. This City is divided into two by the River Arno, over which are built four Bridges of stone; upon one of the two chief is the Goldsmiths street: upon the other, which is a very stately structure, stand the four quarters of the year in Marble: Opposite unto which, stands a vast Co∣lumne with a Statue of Justice in Porphyrie at the top: Hard by is the Palace of Strossie, admirable for the immensity of its Fabrick; on the left hand whereof is the Merchants Vault supported with many fair Pillars, and before it a brazen Boar jetting forth water: Before that is the great place, in the middest whereof is the great Duke Cosmus on horseback in brass, near unto which is a Fountain, the like to which Italy affords not. Round about the Laver is the Family of Neptune in brasse, with his Colosse of Marble in the middest, born up by four horses. In this same Piazza is a Porch arched and adorned with some Statues, amongst which that of Judith in brass, with the rape of the Sabines, three persons in several postures cut all out of one stone. Just against it is the Palazzo Vechio, at the entrance whereof stand two Colossi, the one of David, the other of Hercules tramp∣ling on Caous, excellent pieces. Within is a Court set about with pil∣lars of Corinthian work. Above is a very spacious Hall with divers
Statues. Near to it is the richest of Treasures, the great Dukes Gallery, in the uppermost part whereof are contained as many won∣ders as things: some to bee admired for the preciousness, and Art; others for their rarity, and antiquity: On each side of the Gallery stand above fourescore Statues: One, an Idoll brought from the Temple of Apollo in Delphos: Another of Scipio Africanus holding up his gown under his Arm: Then two curious triumphant Pillars: O∣ver the Statues hang rare pictures, the most famous Scholars on the one side, and Souldiers on the other. At the right hand of this Gallery are several Stanza's full of curi∣osities, wherewith the spectators are astonished, both in regard of the richnesse, and rarity thereof. In the first Room is an Altar totally compacted of Jewels, and precious stones: The value inestimable. In the next is a Table with Flowers, and Birds in their natural colours of precious stones, with a Cabinet worth two hundred thousand Crowns, covered with Agates, Emerauds, Amethists, &c. Within it is the Hi∣story of Christs Passion, with the twelve Apostles all in Amber. In the third is a Cabinet with Calcedonie Pillars, filled with ancient Medals of gold. Round about this Room are an infinite number of Na∣tural, and Artificial curiosities: As the Emperours head cut on a Tur∣quoise bigger than a Walnut, with thousands more. Next is the Ar∣mory; wherein are the habits, and diverse sorts of Arms of several ages, and people. There is likewise a Loadstone that bears up four∣score pounds weight of Iron. In the last Cabinet are curious turn∣ed works of Ivory, A Pillar of Oriental Alabaster, &c. In another Room are twelve great Cupboards of silver Plate of all sorts, and another of all pure massie gold: A Saddle all embroydered with Pearls, and Diamonds; besides many other things of great worth. From hence is a private passage to the Dukes Court on the other side of the River: The front of which edifice is very Majestick, to∣wards the Basis of Dorick work, in the middest of Ionick, and the uppermost story of Corinthian. In the Court is a Grotto with Statues, and a Fountain over it; and a Loadstone of a most prodigious great∣nesse. The Gardens belonging to it, for their largenesse have the face of a Forrest, for their variety, of a Paradise. Here are Cypresse Groves, their Walks with Statues: Here a Sea of Fountains; these Swans, Ostriches, and other delighting Creatures. The Cathedral Church is of a vast bulk, and exquisite workman∣ship, made of Red, White, and black Marble. The Cupola is so high, that the brass Globe at the top will hold sixteen persons: No lesse excellent is the Steeple, composed of the same stone and materials with the Church, but with more Art, and Ornaments. The Chappel of St. Laurence seems more than terrestrial: Its wholly overlaid with fine polished stones, neither is there any colour upon Earth, but it's there in stones naturally. Near to this is a fa∣mous Library, filled with great variety of Manuscripts. In brief, the
houses of Florence are generally built high, the streets are paved with great stones, even and large, and adorned with many excellent Fountains, and other publick Ornaments. The chiefest Cities of Italy are thus usually distinguished: Rome the Un-holy; Venice the Rich; Naples the Gentle; Florence the Fair; Genoa the Proud; Millan the Great; Bolonia the Fat; Padua the Learned; and Verona the Ancient. Idem. Belgia, or the Netherlands described. Belgia is bounded on the East with the River Ems, and part of Ger∣many: On the West with the Germane Sea, on the North with East-Friezland, and on the South with the Some, Champaigne, and Lor∣rain: Its in compass one thousand miles. The Country is very po∣pulous, the men well proportioned, and ingenious: the inventers of Clocks, Printing, and the Compass: They found out diverse musi∣cal instruments, the making of Chariots, Painting with Oil colours, working pictures in Glass, making of Worsteads, Sayes, Tapestry, &c. The women govern all, both within doores, and without: The Country lies low upon the Seas, and therefore is very subject to in∣undations. In the reign of our King Henry the second, Flanders was so overflown, that many thousands of people, whose dwellings were devoured by the Sea, came into England, and were by the King first planted in York-shire, but afterwards removed into Pembrook-shire. Since then, the Sea hath swallowed up in Zealand eight of the Islands, and in them three hundred Towns, and Villages, the ruines of the Churches, &c. being seen at low water till this day. The commo∣dities are Linnen, Skarlet, Worstead, Sayes, Silks, Velvets, Ar∣mour, Cables, Ropes, Butter, Cheese, &c. The chief Rivers are, 1. Rheine. 2. Mosa, which compasseth half the Country. 3. Ems, dividing the two Friezlands. 4. Scaldis, which rising in Picardy, runs through Artois, divides Henault, and Brabant, and a little above Ant∣werp emptieth it self into the Sea. 5. Ley, which runs quite through Flanders. In Zealand and Holland especially, they are fain to defend themselves against the Sea by huge banks about ten ells high, and five and twen∣ty in breadth at the bottom, made of the hardest Clay, with great pains, and maintained with great charge; their inside is stuffed with wood, and stone, and their outside covered with strong, and thick Mats. Its divided into seventeen Provinces, which are these that follow. 1. Limbourg, and the Bishoprick of Leige, environed with Brabant, and Namurce, on the West: with Brabant, and Gulick on the North: with Gulick, and Collen on the East: and with Luxenbourg on the South. In the Bishoprick are four and twenty walled Towns, and one thousand and eight hundred Villages: the chief City is Leige, seated on the Meuse: the buildings of it are very fair. Its a famous University, wherein were students at one time, nine Kings Sons: four
and twenty Dukes sons: twenty nine Earles Sons, besides Barons, and Gentlemen. The next Cities are, 2. Tongres. 3. Dinand, neer Namur. 4. Huy. 5. Bilsen. 6. Truden. The Dutchy of Limbourg, contains five Towns. 1. Limbourg, on the River Weser. 2. Walkenbourgh. 3. Dalem. 4. Rode le Buck. 5. Carpen, besides one hundred twenty and three Villages. Luxenbourg, which is bounded on the North with Limbourg, on the South with Lorrain, on the East with the Bishoprick of Triers, and on the West with the Meuse. Its in circuit two hundred and forty miles, in which stand one thousand one hundred sixty and nine villages, and twenty and three walled Towns. The chief are, 1. Luxenburgh on the River Elze, 2. Bostonack, commonly called the Paris of Ardenne. 3. Thionville. 4. Mommedi. 5. Danvillers, 6. Ivoy. 7. Neuse Chastel. 8. Rocke de March. 9. Arluna. Here is the Forrest of Ardenna, once five hundred miles in compass; now scarce ninety: In the edges whereof are the famous hot Baths, called the Spaw, which are of most vertue in July, because then hottest. In the skirts of this Countrey towards France, is the Dukedome of Bovillion, whose cheif Towns are, Sedan, where is Schola Illustris; and Bovillon: The Duke is a Peer of France, and hath been a great friend to the Protestants. 3. Gelderland, which hath on the East Cleve, on the West Brabant, on the North Frizland, and on the South Limbourg▪ It contains three hundred villages, and twenty four Towns, the chief whereof are, 1. Nimmegen, seated on the branch of the Rheine, which is called Wha∣el. 2. Ruremond. 3. Arnheim. 4. Harderwick. 5. Doesbourgh. 6. Bu∣ren. Its a fertile soil for feeding of Beasts, which grow so great and fat, that Anno Christi 1570. there was a Gelderland Bull killed at Antwerp, that weighed three thousand and two hundred pounds. 4. Brabant, having on the East, North, and South the Meuse, and on the West the Scheld. Its in length seventy five, in breadth sixty miles, comprehending seven hundred villages, and twenty six Towns, whereof the chief are, 1. Lovain, in compasse within the walls four miles, and six without. Its an University wherein are twenty Colled∣ges, and a Seminary of English Jesuits: There are in it many goodly Gardens, Mountaines, Valleys, Medows, &c. 2. Bruxels of the same bigness, and the Dukes seat, but for pleasure, profit, uni∣form buildings, and elegancy thereof, far beyond Lovain. 3. Bergen ap some, famous for the notable resistance it made to Spinola, Anno Christi 1622. 4. Bolduc. 5. Tilmont. 6. Mastriecht. 7. Breda, the seat of the Prince of Orange. 5. The Marquisat of the Empire is contained in Brabant: the chief City is Antwerp, in circuit seven miles: In it are eight principal chan∣nels cut out of the Scheld, on which the Town is seated, the biggest of them being able to contain one hundred ships. Before the Civil warres, it was a place of wonderful great Trading: but now the Hol∣landers have so blocked up the Haven, that the traffick is removed to Amsterdam. 6. Flanders is divided into the Imperiall, Gallick, and Teutonick
Flanders. The last of these is divided from the other two, by the River Ley. The chief Towns in it are, 1. Gaunt, whose wall is seven miles round. The Rivers Scheld, and Ley run through it, and make in it twenty six Islands, conjoyned with ninety eight bridges. 2. Burgi, situated on a fair, and deep channel made by Art, which much advan∣tageth it. 3. Ypres, a very strong Town standing on a River of the same name. 4.Winnocks-Berg. 5. Grauling, on the sea side, a strong Fort. 6. Oudenard. The four principal Ports of Flanders are, 1. Dun∣kirk. 2. Scluse, at the mouth of the channel of Bruges, having a fair Haven able to contain five hundred good ships; Its in the hand of the States. 3. Newport, where was fought that famous Battle between the Spaniards, and States. 4. Ostend, which held out a siedg of three years, and three months against the Arch-Duke. Imperiall Flanders, is parted from Brabant, by the River Dender, from the Gallick Flanders, by the River Scheld about Oudenard. The chief Towns are, 1. Alost, on the Dender. 2. Dendermond. 3. Hulst, 4. Axelle. 5. Rupelmond. The Gallick Flanders, is severed from the Teutonick by the River Ley: from the Imperiall by the Scheld. The chief Towns are, 1. Lisle, 2. Doway, where is an University. 3. Orchies. 4. Armentiers. 5. St. Amand. 6. Turnay. In all Flanders there are thirty five Towns, and one thousand one hundred seventy and eight Villages. Its in length ninety six miles, in breadth much lesse. Its bounded with Brabant on the East: Picardy on the West: the Sea on the North: and Artoys on the South. 7. Artoys, which hath on the East Heinalt, on the West Picardy, on the North Flanders, and on the South Champaigne. It contains seven hundred fifty and four villages, and twelve walled Towns, whereof the chief are, 1. Arras, whence comes our Arras hangings, 2. Ayre. 3. Pernes. 4. St. Omer, a good Haven. 5. Lilliers. 6. Le-Cluse. The frontier Towns are, 1. Hedinfert against Picardy. 2. St. Paul. 8. Heinalt, bounded on the East with Limbourg, on the West with Flanders, on the North with Brabant, and on the South with Cham∣paigne: The length of it is sixty miles, and the breadth fourty eight. It contains nine hundred and fifty Villages, and twenty four Towns, the chief whereof are, 1. Mons, a strong and rich City, 2. Valencien∣nes, seated on the Scheld. 3. Conde. 4. Bavays. 5. Landrecy, on the River Sambre. 6. Mariembourgh. 7. Engien. 8. Reulx. 9. Aven∣nes. On the South part of Heinalt, is the Town, and territory of Cambray. 9. Namurce, which hath on the East Limbourg: on the VVest Heinalt: on the North Brabant, and on the South Luxenburg: In this Country are many Coals which are kindled with Water, and quen∣ched with Oil. It contains one hundred and eighty villages, and four Towns. 1. Namurce, seated where Sicambris falls into Meuse. 2. Char∣lemont. 3. Valencourt. 4. Bovines. Its a fruitful Country, enriched with Mines of Jasper, and all sorts of Marble, and abounding with
Iron. The Inhabitants are good souldiers. 10. Zutphen, is a Town in Gelderland, an ancient Earldom, seated on the River Ysell, a strong place, in the siege whereof that mirror of Chivalry, Sir Philip Sidney lost his life. 11. Holland is a woody Country, having on the East Utrecht: on the West and North, the Sea: and on the South the Meuse. Its in circuit one hundred and eighty miles, no part whereof is distant from the Sea three hours journey. It containes four hundred villages, and three and twenty Towns: whereof the chief are, 1. Dort, where the National Synod was held against the Arminians, Anno Christi 1618. 2. Harlem, where Printing was invented. 3. Leiden, a famous Uni∣versity. Which City consists of forty one Islands, passed partly by Boats, and partly by Bridges, whereof there are one hundred forty and five, and of them one hundred and four built with stone. 4. Delft. 5. Alkmer. 6. Rotterodam. 7. Horn. 8. Enchusen. 9. Amsterdam, a very fair Haven Town: the men are good Sea-men, the women very in∣dustrious: there is scarce a boy of four years old, but can earn his own meat. It yeilds Butter, Cheese, &c. The chief Village is the Hage, having in it two thousand housholds. 12 Zealand, consisteth of seven Islands, and in them three hun∣dred Towns. The first Island is Walcheren, and in it the chief towns are, 1. Midlebourg, 2. Flushing, an excellent Haven, and of great strength. Nigh unto it is the Fort Ramekins, and the Brill. 3. Vere. The next Island is South Beverland, whose chief Town is Tergowse. The third is Schoven, its chief Town Sixixee. 4. Tolen, whose chief Town is Tertolen, &c. In all this Countrey are eight Cities, and one hundred and two Villages, the soil is fruitful, but they have neither wood, nor fresh water. 13. West-Freizland, which hath on the East Groyning, on the South Overyssel, on the other sides, the Sea. It contains three hundred for∣ty and five Villages, and eleven Towns: the chief are, 1. Lewarden. 2. Harlingem, a sea Town. 3. Zwichen. 4. Doceum. 5. Franeker, an Univer∣sity. 14. Utrecht, is bounded on the East with Gelderland, on the other three sides with Holland: It contains seventy Villages, and five Towns, as, 1. Rhenen. 2. Wick de Duerstede. 3. Amesford. 4. Monfoort. 5. Utrecht just in the middest. 15. Overyssel, is bounded on the North with Freizland, and Gro∣ning, on the South with Gelderland, on the East with Westphalia, on the West with the sea. It contains one hundred and one Villages, and eleven Towns, the chief whereof are, 1. Swall. 2. Campene. 3. Deventer, basely betrayed to the Spaniards by Sir William Stan∣ley. 4. Steinwick. 5. Hasselt. 6. Oldezel. 7. Handerberg. 8. Del∣den. 16. Machlin, which is a Town in Brabant, which Anno Christi 1546. was much defaced by fireing of eight hundred barrels of Gun∣powder. Besides the Town, it contains nine Villages. Its a fair and strong Town, being daintily seated amidst the waters of the Ri∣ver
Dele, so that it may bee drowned on all sides. 17. Groyning, which is a Town of VVest-Friezland, containing un∣der her command one hundred forty and five Villages, the chief be∣ing Old haven, and Keikerk. Its bounded on the East with East-friezland, on the West with VVest-Friezland, on the South with Over∣yssel, and on the North with the Sea. These Countries are now divided between the States under an Aristocratical government, and the King of Spain: The States have the Dutchy of Guelders: The Earldomes of Holland, and Zealand, and Zutphen. The Lordships of Friezland, Utretcht, Overyssel, and Groning, seven in all; the rest are Spanish. Germany described. The compass of this spacious Country is two thousand and six hun∣dred English miles: The Inhabitants are little addicted to Venus, but very much to Bacchus; they are of strong constitutions, and much inclining to fatnesse. The titles of the Fathers descend to all their Children, every son of a Duke, being a Duke, and every Daughter a Dutchess. The soil for the most part is healthful, and profitable, yeelding several Minerals, Corn, and Wine, together with Linnen, Quicksilver, Allom, &c. The chief Rivers are, 1. Danubius, which rising out of Nigra sylva, receiveth threescore navigable Ri∣vers into it, and having run a course of one thousand and five hundred miles, emptieth it self at seven mouths into the Euxine Sea. 2. Rhene, which arising in Helvetia, and running through Germany, and Belgia, after a course of eight hundred miles, falleth into the German Ocean. 3. Albis, rising on the skirts of Bohemia, passing by Magdenbourg, Brunswick, and Denmark, after four hundred miles course, falls into the same Sea. 4. Oder, arising in Silesia, runs through Brandenbourg, and Pomerania about three hundred miles, and so falls into the Baltick Sea. 5. Maenus or the Main. 6. Weser. The Empire of Germany is not hereditary, but elective: and when the Emperor is dead, the Arch-Bishop of Mentz, writes to the rest of the Electors to meet at Frankfurt within three months, either in per∣son, or to send their Ambassadors: In the vacancy, the Elector Pa∣latine is the Vicar; and hee who is elected King of the Romans is decla∣red heir. The three Ecclesiastical Electors, are the Arch-Bishops of Mentz, Trevers, and Colein: the others are the King of Bohemia, the Elector Palatine▪ the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquiss of Branden∣burg: to whom was lately added the Duke of Bavaria. Being assem∣bled at Frankfurt, they make oath to chuse a fit person: they are ob∣liged to finish the choice within thirty dayes, and may not go out of the Town till it bee accomplished. If the voices happen to bee e∣qual, hee who hath the King of Bohemia's vote, is proclaimed Emperour. The three states of the Empire are, 1. That of the aforesaid E∣lectors, wherein the Ecclesiasticks have the precedency. The se∣cond
state consists of four Arch-Bishops, as Magdeburg, Salsburgh, Bre∣men, and Bezanson: after whom follows the great Master of the Teutonick Order; and then one and thirty Bishops; ten Abbots with the title of Princes; and some Abbesses; and lastly the Counts, and Barons, whereof there are many. The third State is made up of the Imperial Towns, which are in number threescore and five: the four principall are, Lubeck, Metz, Auspurgh, and Aixe, or Aquisgrae. Another Union there is for the preservation of Trade, and com∣merce, the chief Cities whereof are, Lubeck, Colein, Brunswick, and Dansick. These are called Hanse-Towns. The Empire is distributed into ten circles; Franconia, Bavaria, Au∣stria, Swevia: That of the upper Rheyn; that of the four Electors to∣wards the Rheyn, Westphalia, Saxony, Low Saxony, and Burgundy. Come wee now in particular to the chief Provinces of Germany, which are fifteen. As, 1. East-Friezland having on the West the River Ems, on the East the Weser, on the South Westphalia, and on the North the Sea: The chief Towns are, 1. Emden. 2. Ammer Dun. 3. Oldenbourg. 2. Westphalia, which is bounded on the East with Brunswick, on the West with Belgia, on the South with Hassia, and on the North with the Sea. The soil is fruitful, the trees yeeld abundance of sweet Acorns which feed our Westphalia Bacon: The Northern part is called Bremen, from the chief City of that name: the next parts be∣long to the Duke of Saxony, the chief Towns whereof are, 1. Clappenbourg. 2. Exenberg. 3. Alsdorpe, &c. The other part belongs to the Bishopricks of Collen, Munster, and Triers. In that of Col∣len are, 1. Collen, the Bishops seat. 2. Andernah. 3. Lentz seated on the Rhene. 4. Bonna. 5. Mondenand. The chief towns under the Bishop of Munster are, 1. Warendorp. 2. Her∣verden. 3. Munster, seated on the River Ems. Here the frantick Anabap∣tists seated themselves, Anno Christi 1522. till they were deservedly punished and destroyed The chief Towns in the Bishoprick of Triers are, 1. Bopport on the Mosel. 2. Engers. 3. Coblents. 4. Triers on the Mosel also. 3. Cleveland, which Dutchy contains Cleve, Gulick, and Berge. It joyns to Gelderland, and the chief Cities are, 1. Cleve. 2. Calkar. 3. We∣sel. 4. Emerick. In Gulick the chief Cities are, 1. Aquisgraue, or Aken. 2. Gulick. 3. Dulken. 4. Newis. The chief Towns in Berge are, 1. Dusseldorp. 2. Hattingen. 3. Arusberg. 4. Alsatia, which hath on the West Lorrain, on the South Helvetia, on the East the Rhene, and on the North, the Palatinate. The chief Towns are, 1. Strasbourg, where is a Tower five hundred seventy and eight paces high: It stands on the Rhene. 2. Psaltburg. 3. VVeisenberg. On the South end of Alsatia stand Colmer, Hagenaw, and Selestade, three fair Cities belonging to the Empire. 5. Franconia which is bounded on the East with Bohemia: on the West with Elsas: on the North with Hassia, and on the South with
Swevia, Bavaria, and Helvetia. Its divided betwixt the Palatine of Rhene, the Duke of VVittenberg, the Marquess of Anspach▪ and Ba∣den, the Bishops of Mentz, Bamberg, VVestberg, and the Emperour, of which in order. The Palatinate of Rhene is in length from North to South, threescore and twelve miles; in breadth from East to West, fourscore and six∣teen. In which compass are some Towns of the Empire, and some Lordships belonging to the Bishops of VVormes, and Spires, both sea∣ted on the Rhene. The Palatinate hath store of fruits, mettals, and Rhenish Wines: Hath many gallant Towns, as 1. Mospotch. 2. Hei∣delberg, an University. On the banks of Rhene stand 1. Bacharach, whence come the best Rhenish Wines called Bachrach. 2. Coub. 3. Op∣penheim. 4. Cruitznack. 5. Frankendale. 6. Germensheim. 7. Main∣hem, &c. There are in this Country fourteen other walled Towns. VVittenberg, whereof the chief Towns are, 1. Turbing, an Uni∣versity. 2. Stutguard, the Dukes seat. 3. Marback. 4. Caustat, &c. Anspach, the chief Towns whereof are, 1. Anspach. 2. Halbrun. 3. Plenifelt. Baden, a fruitful Country lying between the Rivers Rhene, and Neccar: The chief Towns are, 1. Durlach. 2. Pfortshaime. 3. Ba∣den, a neat Town seated on the Rhene, having hot Baths in it. Mentz, seated where the Main emptieth it self into the Rhene, whereof the chief Towns are, 1. Lanstein. 2. Bing, seated on the Rhene. Bamberg, which is a fair City seated on the Main, the other chief Towns are Schestlites, and Forchiam. VVirtzberg, a Bishops seat, formerly called Herbipolis, the other Towns belonging to it are Schwinfurt on the Main, and Arnsteme. The Emperors part contains the free, and imperial Cities seated in the Palatinate, and VVittenberg, the chief whereof are, 1. Norenberg, situated in the very center of Germany. 2. Frankfurt on the Main, where the two great book Marts are held in Midlent, and Mid-September. 6. Helvetia, or Switzerland, which is bounded on the East with Tyrol, on the West with France, on the North with Lorraine, and El∣sas, and on the South with Italy. It contains thirteen Cantons▪ as 1. Zurick. 2. Bern. 3. Lucern. 4. Urania. 5. Glaris. 6. Zugh. 7. Ba∣sil. 8. Friburg. 9. Underwalt. 10. Soloure. 11. Schaffhausen. 12. A∣pensol. 13. Swits. The chief Towns are, 1. Zurick, or Tygure. 2. St. Gall. 3. Basil. where is a famous University. 4. Constance seated on the Lake Bodenzee; it belongs to the house of Austria. 5. Bern. 6. Baden; where are good Bathes. 7. Lucerne, situate on the banks of a great Lake, bearing the same name. The Country is in length two hundred and forty, and in breadth one hundred and fourscore miles: In it are the heads ofthose four famous Rivers, Poe, Danow, Rhene, and Rhone, that run East, West, North, and South. These people were sometimes under the Emperor; but being over-burthened by the Tyran∣ny of their Governours, they shaked off the yoak, and entring into an
offensive, and defensive league, cantoned themselves under a new Government. These Helvetians are shut up within Mountains, and great Lakes, which make their Country unaccessible. The tyranny of some Go∣vernours, as aforesaid, caused them to shake off the yoak, not only of the house of Austria, but of their own Nobility also. Their first league was begun by three Country Peasants, which in a short time was much augmented, by the aversion of the people from the above∣said Government. Let no man trust to his own power, and maintain it by rigour, for enemies often come from whence they are least expected. So soon as this league was made, they seized upon the Castles of their Governours, and drove them out of their Country Anno Chri∣sti 1307. But Arch-Duke Leopold being puffed up by some con∣quests hee had made, and being provoked by the solicitations of the expulsed Nobility, led his forces against the Villages, but was de∣feated in the Mountains, near Morgarten. This victory of the Swit∣zers produced the perpetual alliance of the three Villages, to which the rest shortly after adjoyned themselves; yea, and many imperial Towns near them have so leagued themselves with them, that now they have no enemie that they need fear, except from among themselves: Since which time their alliance hath been sought by Popes, Kings, and Princes of Europe, and especially by France, which by keeping in with them, through a yearly pension, hath drawn no small ad∣vantages from them. Their Republick is composed of three orders: The Villages to the number of thirteen. The Associates, or Confederates: And the Towns which depend upon their direction. They have also di∣vers forms of Government: for that of the Villages is Democratical; and that of the Towns, Aristocratical: which mixt Common-wealth is only kept in unity by the care which shee hath of her own preser∣vation. Their Assemblies are made by a general Convocation to treat of war, peace, &c. at which the Ambassadors from every Town are to meet. Their Religion in some of the Cantons is only Ro∣mane, in others reformed, and in some mixed. In this Marshal age of ours, bloody Mars hath as well skipped over their Mountains, as through the Seas, Dess, and vast Forrests. 7. Suevia, which is divided into the upper, and lower. The up∣per is bounded on the East with Tyrol, on the West with Helvetia, on the North with lower Suevia, and on the South with Millaine: It was formerly called Rhetia, now they are called Grisons; divided in∣to three confederations. 1. Lega Cadi Dio; whose chief City is Coy∣ra. 2. Lega Grisa. 3. Lega Dritture, they are Papists, and Prote∣stants mixt together. Lower Suevia, or Schwaben hath on the East Bavaria; on the West Danubius: on the North Franconia, and on the South Tirol, and the Grisons. The chief Towns are, 1. Ulme. 2. Lindwe, on the Lake Bo∣denzee. 3. Auspurg on the River Leith. 4. Norlingen. 5. VVherlingen. 6. Ravensperg. 7. Dinkle spuhel. 8. Gmund.
8. Bavaria, which hath on the East Austria, and Stiria, on the West the Leike, on the North Bohemia, and part of Franconia, and on the South Tirol, and Carinthia: The chief Cities are, 1. Mun∣chen, the Dukes seat, on the River Aser. 2. Ingolstat, on the Danow, an University. 3. Ratisbone, on the Danow also. 4. Passaw. 5. Sulesbourg, on the River Saltzach. 6. Frising. 7. Eystet, &c. being in all thirty four, and forty six walled Towns besides: the soil is fruitful. The Northern part of Bavaria is called the Upper Palatinate, where∣of the chief Towns are, 1. Amberg, where are Silver Mines. 2. New∣burg. 3. Awerbach. 4. Sultzbach. 5. Weiden. 7. Castel. 9. Austria, is an Arch-Dukedome that contains the Province of Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Tirol, and Carniola: Its divided from Hun∣gary on the East, by the Leita: From Bavaria on the West, by the Ems: From Moravia on the North, by the Tems: and from Stiria on the South, by the Muer: It was once called Pannonia superior: the chief Cities in Austria are, 1. Vienna, an University, seated on the Danow, the beautifullest City in all Germany, adorned with magnificent Chur∣ches, stately Monasteries, and a sumptuous Pallace for the Archduke 2. Emps. 3. St. Leopald. 4. Neustat. 5. Hainburg. 6. Crems. Styria is in length one hundred and ten miles, and about sixty in breadth. It hath the River Rab on the East, Carinthia on the West, the Dravus on the South, and the Meur, and Austria on the North: the chief Cities are, 1. Marchpurg. 2. Gratz. Carinthia is seventy five miles in length, and fifty five in breadth. It hath Stiria on the East, Tirol on the West, Bavaria on the North, and the Alps on the South. The chief towns are, 1. Villach. 2. Spit∣tal. 3. Gurach. 4. Freisach. 5. St. Veit. Carniola is one hundred and fifty miles long, and forty five broad. It hath on the East Sclavonia, on the West Italy, on the North Ca∣rinthia, and on the South Istria: the chief towns are, 1· Newmark, 2. Esling. 3. Marsperg. 4. Bagonock. 5. Saxenfelt, all on the River Savus, which runs through the middle of the Country. Tirol, which is seventy two miles broad, and as many long. It hath on the East Carinthia, on the West the Grisons, on the North Schwa∣ben, and on the South Marca Trevigeana. Its a fruitful Countrey, and full of silver Mines: the chief towns are, 1. Oenipont, or Inspurch. 2. Landeck. 3. Tirol. 4. Bolzan. 5. Trent, on the River Adesis, where the Council was held against the Protestants. 10. Bohemia, which hath annexed to it Silesia, Lusatia, and Mora∣via. Bohemia is bounded on the East with Silesia, and Moravia, on the West with Franconia, on the North with Misnia, and Lusatia, and on the South with Bavaria, and is encompassed with the Hercynian Forrest. The whole Kingdome is in compasse five hundred and fif∣ty miles, in which are contained seven hundred and eighty Cities, walled Towns, and Castles, and thirty two thousand Villages: they use the Sclavonian Language. The soil is fruitful, enriched with
Mines of all sorts but Gold. Here are many Forrests, and in some of them a beast called Loris, having under its neck a bladder of scald∣ing water, with which, when shee is hunted, shee so tormenteth the Dogs, that shee easily escapeth them. The chief Cities are. 1. Prague, in the middest of the Countrey, seated on the River Mulda: It consists of four several towns, each of them having their several Ma∣gistrates, Laws and Customes: the principal is called the Old Town, adorned with many fair buildings, a spacious Market place, and a stately Senate-house: the second is called the New-town, separated from the other by a deep and wide ditch: the third is called the Little-town, divided from the Old by the River Mulda, and joined to it by a beauti∣ful Bridge consisting of twenty four Arches: In this Town is the hill Rachine, on whose sides are many stately houses of the Nobles, and on the top a magnificent Palace for the Kings: the fourth is that of the Jews, who have in it five Synagogues, and live after their own Laws. The second City is Egra, seated on the River Eger, on the borders towards Franconia. 3. Budwus towards Austria. 4. Mel∣mukle, on the river Albis. 5. Weldaw. 6. Pilsen. Silesia, is bounded with Bohemia on the West, Brandenburg on the North, Poland on the South, and Hungary, and Moravia on the East: Its in length two hundred and forty miles, and fourscore in breadth, and is equally divided by the river Oder: the chief towns are, 1. Pres∣law, or Uratislavia. 2. Jagundorfe. 3. Glats. 4. Oppolen. 5. Glogaw. 6. Older∣berg, all seated on the River Oder. Lusatia, which hath on the East and North Silesia, on the West Brandenburg, and on the South Silesia: the chief Cities are, Gorlits, and Trabel on the river Nisse, Spemberg, and Gotthuse, on the River Spe, and lastly Bautsen. Moravia, which hath on the North and East Silesia, on the West Brandenburg, and on the South Austria, and Hungary. It abounds with Corn, and hath much Myrrh, and Frankincense, which contra∣ry to the usuall manner, grow immediately out of the Earth, not from trees: the chief towns are, 1. Brinne. 2. Olmutz, an University. 3. Te∣rebitz. 4. Jasa. &c. 11. Brandenburg, which hath on the East Poland, on the West Saxo∣ny, on the North Pomerania, and on the South Lusatia: Its in compass five hundred and twenty miles, in which are contained fifty Cities, and sixty four walled towns: the chief are, 1. Brandenburg. 2. Frank∣furt upon Oder, an University, seated in a fruitful soil abounding with Corn, and Wine. 3. Berlin, where the Prince keeps his Court, seat∣ed on the River Spre. 4. Havelburg, to this belongs part of Prussia, called Ducal, with the Dukedomes of Cleve, Juliers, and Berg, &c. So that in largenesse of territories, they exceed the Dukes of Saxony, but not in revenues. 12. Pomerania; and Meclemburg. The first is bounded on the East, wirh the River Vistula, on the VVest with Meclemburg on the North with the Baltick sea, and on the South with Brandenburg: the chief towns are, 1. Stetin, the Princes seat, and an University. 2. Wol∣gast.
3. VVallin. 4. Gripswald an University. 5. Newtrepton, a Sea Town. Meclenburg, or Megalopolis stands on the West of Pomeren, the chief towns whereof are, 1. Malchaw. 2. Sternberg. 3. VVismar. 4. Rostock, an University. On the West hereof stands the fair Hans-Town of Lubeck; and about ten miles from it, Hamborough: On the further side of the River is Stoade, where the English house is to sell their wares. 13. Saxony, which hath on the East Lusatia, and Brandenburgh: On the West Hassia: On the North Brunswick; and on the South Fran∣conia, and Bohemia. It contains the Countries of Thuringia, Misnia, Voitland, and Saxony. The chief Cities in Thuringia are, 1. Erdford, a great City. 2. Iene, an University of Physicians. 3. Smalcald. 4. Hale. 5. VVeimar. The whole Country is in length one hundred and twenty miles, and a∣bout as much in breadth, and yet it contains two thousand Villages, and twelve Earledoms. Misnia, environed with Bohemia, Voitland, Thuringia, and Saxony; the chief Towns whereof are, 1. Dresden, on the River Albis: the Dukes seat, and principal Magazine. 2. Lipsique, an University. 3. Rochlits. 4. Mulburg. Voitland is a little Country South of Misnia, whose chief Towns are, 1. Olnits. 2. VVerde. 3. Cronach. 4. Culmbach. 5. Hoffe. Saxony, lies on the North of Thuringia, and Misnia: The chief Cities are, 1. Magdeburg, formerly Parthenopolis. 2. VVorlits seated on the Albie. 3. Helderick. 4. VVittenberg, the seat of the Duke, and an University, where Luther lived: within the bounds of Saxony are the two small Principalities of Anhalt, and Mansfield. 14. Brunswick, and Luneburg, which have on the East Brandenberg: On the West Westphalia: On the North Denmark: And on the South Saxony, and Hassia. The River Ems runs through this Country: and the chief Cities are, 1. Brunswick. 2. Wolfohaiton, where the Duke keeps his Court. Halberstade. 4. Lunebourg. 5. Cella. 5. Hassia, which hath Saxony on the East, Franconia on the South, Westphalia on the West and North: The chief Towns are, 1. Dor∣mestad. 2. Marpurg, an University. 3. Geysen. 4. Dries. 5. Franken∣burg. 6. Cassels. In this Country is the VVederaw, containing the Coun∣ties of Nassaw, and Hannaw, and the free City of Friburg. In the County of Nassaw are, 1. Dillingbourg. 2. Nassaw. 3. Catzenelbagen. and 4. Herborne, an University, where Piscator, and Alstedius were Professors. Denmark described. Denmark contains the Cimbrick Chersoness, part of Scandia, and the Islands of the Baltick Sea: The Chersoness is in length one hundred twenty miles, and in breadth fourscore, wherein are contained eight and twenty Cities, and twenty Royal Castles, or Palaces. The cheif Pro∣vinces are,
1. Holstein, whose chief Cities are, Nyemunster, and Brumsted. 2. Ditmars, whose chief Cities are, Meldory, where they cover their houses with Copper, and Mance. 3. Sleswick, whose chief Cities are, Goterpe, and Londen a Haven Town. 4. Iuitland, whereof the chief towns are, Rincopen, Nicopen, Hol, and Arhausen. The Islands are five and thirty, whereof the principal are, 1. Sen∣land, or Zeland, in length threescore and four, in breadth two and fifty miles, containing seven strong Castles, and about thirteen Ci∣ties; the chief being, 1. Coppenhagen, an University. 2. Elsennour on the Sea side, where they that pass the Sound pay their customes: This Sound is in breadth three miles, and is commanded by the Ca∣stles of Elsenbourg, on Scandia side, and Cronburg in this Island. 3. Ros∣chilt. The second Island is Fuinen. 3. Bornholme. 4. Fimera, where∣in Ticho Brahe built his artificial Tower, in which are rare Mathema∣tical Instruments. That part of Scandia which belongs to Denmark, is divided into three Provinces. 1. Hallandia. 2. Scania, in length threescore and twelve miles, in breadth eight and forty, the pleasantest, and fruit∣fullest Country in all Denmark, and having Seas abounding with Her∣rings. 3. Blicker, where is Colmar, a strong Fortress against the Swedes. The Province of Scania reaches up to Sweden, and Juland to Hol∣stein. The Kingdome is elective, and the principal strength of it consists in good, and stately ships, not only for the defence of the Islands, but of that most important passage of the Sound, which is a streight separating Scania from Zeland, and is of huge advantage by reason of the infinite number of ships which pass through it into the Baltick Sea, and come from all the Havens of that Sea back into the Ocean. The Noble men are much inclined to the wars; zea∣lous for their Rights and Liberties, and make no alliance by mar∣riage with the common people: they refuse Ecclesiastical honours, as below their condition. The Gentlemen are all equal, and as it were of one family, there being neither Earl, nor Baron; only the Officers of the Crown, and Counsellers of the Kingdome have the prehe∣minence. Norway described. Norway is bounded on the North with Lapland, on the East with the Dorine Mountains; which part it from Swethlnd: on the other parts with the Sea. Its in length one thousand and three hundred miles, in breadth not half so much. Its much troubled with certain little Beasts called Lemmers, about the bigness of a field-mouse, which, like Locusts, devoure every green thing on the earth, and at a certain time die in heaps, and with their stench poison the air; so that the people are long after troubled with the Jaundies, and a gid∣dinesse in the head: but these beasts come not often, The soil is barren, and the common people live on dryed fish in stead of bread.
The chief Commodities are stock-fish, butter, rich furrs, train Oile, pitch, masts, cables, deal-boards, &c. Towns here are few, and the houses are miserably poor: their cheif towns are, 1. Nidrosia. 2. Ber∣gen, an ancient mart town. 3. Asloia. 4. Staffanger: On the North, and West of it, lieth Finmark, a great and populous Province, both of them are subject to Denmark. The chief towns in Finmark are, 1. Saman. 2. Hielso, both sea towns. 3. Wardhouse, a place of much trading. Swethland Described. Swethland hath on the East Muscovy, on the West the Dofrine hills, on the North the frozen Seas, and on the South the Baltick Sea, which doth not ebb, and flow: This Sea begins at the Sound, and interlaceth Denmark, Swethland, Germany, and Poland, extending to Livonia, and Lituania. This Countrey with the Provinces of Lap∣land, Scricfinia, and Barmia: is bigger than France, and Italy joyned together. The soil is fruitful, the aire healthfull, so that many of the Inhabitants live to one hundred and thirty, and some to one hun∣dred and forty years old. It yeilds Mines of Lead, Copper, and Sil∣ver, Buck-skines, Goat-skines, Oxen, Tallow, Tar, costly Furrs, &c. The chief Provinces are, 1. Lapland, which is divided into two parts, whereof the Eastern part belongs to the great Duke of Mosco, the western containing Lapland, properly so called, and Scricfinia, belong to Swethland: they have store of rich Furrs, but use not many, and are good Ar∣chers. 2. Bodia, lying on the South of Scricfinia: the chief towns whereof are, 1. Virtis. 2. Vista. 3. Helsinga. 3. Finland, which hath the Baltick sea on the South. Its a very fruitfull and populous Countrey, containing one thousand four hun∣dred thirty and three Parishes, wherein are a thousand Families, in some of them: the chief towns are 1. Albo. 2. Name, a strong place, &c. 4. Sweden, which hath on the East Sinus Bodicus, on the West the Dofrine Hills, on the North Lapland, and on the South Gothland: For the most part it is a fruitful Countrey: the chief Cities are, 1. Upsale. 2. Nicopia, a sea town. 3. Coperdole, famous for its abundance of Brasse. 5. Gothland, which is the best and richest Province of the North: Its divided into the Island, and the Continent. The Island of Gothland is seated in the Baltick sea, being in length eighteen miles, and but five broad: the chief Town is Wisbich. The continent of Gothland joyns to Denmark, and hath in it the great Lake Weret, which receiving into it twenty and four Rivers, empties it self at one mouth, with such an hideous noise, that it is commonly called the Devills head, The chief Cities are, 1. Stockholm. 2. Lodusia. 3. Walburg. 4. Col∣mar, famous for its impregnable Castle.
Sweden is the biggest of all the Northern Kingdomes, the Regall City whereof is Stockholm, a town with the suburbs of great distent: there are in it many huge Mountains, Rocks, and Forrests, where are sometimes seen and hard, strange illusions and phancies, as likewise in the water, which are very terrible, both to men and horses that pass that way. The Swedes are good souldiers both by sea and Land, of a strong complexion, and fit to indure hardship, and labour: the Nobility is very milde, and frank, loves learning, and Languages, especially the Latine, and French: they travel much abroad: are dextrous at exerci∣ses, and seek learned company: they heartily love one another out of their own Country, hide the vices of their compatriots, and stand much for the honour of their Nation. Muscovy Described. Muscovy hath on the East Tartary, on the West Livonia, Lituania, and part of Sweden, on the North the frozen Ocean, and on the South the Caspian sea, and lake of Meotis. It is in length from East to West, three thousand and three hundred miles, in breadth three thousand sixty and five. The women love their husbands best, that beat them most: they use the Sclavonian Language, and in their Religion follow the Greek Churches: the Northren parts are so cold, that the people do not only line their cloaths, but their houses with Furrs: the chief Commodities are rich Furs, Flax, Hemp, Oil, Honey, Wax, Can∣vasses, Nuts, &c. It hath many great rivers, as 1. Tanais, which empti∣eth it self into Palus Meotis. 2. Duina, running into the Scythian seas. 3. Boristhenes, or Neiper, running into the Euxine sea. 4. Onega, run∣ning into the Baltick sea. 5. Volga, which at seventy mouths empties it self into the Caspian sea. The chief Provinces are, 1. Novograd, having a City of the same name on the Baltick sea, a place of great trading. 2. Plescovia, whose chief town is Plescow: it is in length three hun∣dred and thirty miles, and one hundred and thirty in breadth. 3. Volodomire, a fruitful Country, where usually one bushel of Corn returns twenty, and sometimes five and twenty: the chief town is of the same name. 4. Rhezan, very plentiful in Corn, Hony, Fish, Fowl, &c. 5. Severia, a great Province upon the lake of Maeotis. 6. Smolensco, whose chief City is of the same name. 7. Rescovy. 8. Rostowia. 9. Corelia. 10. Permia, where are abundance of stags. 11. Condora. 12. Petzora. 13. The Kingdome of Casan, and Citraham. 14. Muscovia, whose chief City is Mosco. The City of Mosco Described. Mosco, the Regal City in Russia is almost round, and bigger it is
than London, environed with three strong walls, circling the one with∣in the other, and having many streets lying betwixt them. The in∣most wall, and the buildings within it being fenced, and watered with the River Moschua, that runneth close by it, is all accounted the Emperors Castle. The number of houses (as they were formerly reckoned) amounted to forty one thousand, and five hundred. The streets of this City, instead of paving are planked with great Firr trees, planed, and laid even together, and very close the one to the o∣ther. The houses are of Timber without Lime, and stone, built very close and warm, of Fir trees, which are fastened together with not∣ches at each corner: and betwixt the Timber they thrust in Moss, to keep out the air, which makes them very warm: The greatest danger is their aptnesse to take fire, which being once kindled is hard∣ly quenched, and hereby much hurt hath been done, and the City mi∣serably defaced sundry times. The whole Countrey of Russia, in the Winter lyeth under snow a yard, or two thick, but greater in the Northern parts, from the be∣ginning of November to the end of March: in which time the Air is oft so sharp, that water thrown upward congeales into Ice before it comes to the ground: If you hold a pewter dish in your hand, it will freeze so fast to it, as that it will pull off the skin at parting: divers in the Markets are killed with the extremity of cold: Travellers are brought into towns sitting dead, and stiff in their sleds: some loose their Noses, some their Ears, Fingers, Toes, &c. which are frozen off: and yet in the Summer you shall see a new face on the Countrey: the woods, which mostly are Firr, and Birch, so fresh and sweet, the Pa∣stures, and Medows so green, and well grown: such variety of Flow∣ers: such melody of the Birds, especially of Nightingales, that you cannot travel in a more pleasant Country: The Summer is hotter than with us in England. For Fruits, they have Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries red, and black: Deens like Muskmelons, but more sweet and pleasant, Cucumbers, Gourds, Straberries, Hurtleberries, &c. Wheat, Rie, Barley, Oats, Pease, &c. Their cheif Commodities are Furrs of all sorts, as black Foxes, Sables, Lufernes, dun Foxes, Martrons, Gurnstales, or Ar∣mines, Minever, Beaver, Walverines, a great water Rat, whose skin smels like Musk: Squirrels grey and red: foxes white, and red: as also Wax, Honey, Tallow, Hides of Beeves, and Buffs: Train Oile, Ca∣viare, Hemp, Flax, Salt, Tar, Salt-Peter, Brimstone, Iron: Muscovy slate, Fallow Deer, Roe-bucks, and Goats great store: For Fowl, they have Eagles, Hawks of all kinds, swans tame and wild, Storks; Cranes, Fe∣sants, white Partridges, &c. For fresh water fish, they have Carp, Pike, Pearch, Tench, Roach: as also Bellouga of four or five ells long, Stur∣gion, Severiga, Sterledy, which four sorts breed in Volga, and of all their Roes they make Caviare, &c. The streets in their Cities and Towns instead of paving, are planked with Firr trees planed, and laid even together. Their chief Cities are,
Mosco, Novograd, Rostove, Volodomire, Plesco, Smolensco, Jaruslave, Perislave, Nisnovograd, Vologda, Ustiuck, Colmigroe, Casan, Astracan, Cargapolia, and Columna. Its governed by an Emperour, or great Duke▪ with most abso∣lute authority (after the manner of the Eastern Countries) though it lye very near the North. The Muscovites follow the Greek Religion, under a Patriarch, though yet it bee mingled with very many super∣stitions, which are not like to bee amended, because the Great Duke suffers none of his subjects to travel, and see other Countries. They are much tormented by the Turks, and Tartars. They have waged great wars with the Poles, and Swedes, but with many los∣ses. A Description of the state and magnificence of the Emperour of Russia. Sir Thomas Smith being sent Ambassador from King James to Bo∣ris, Emperour of Russia, Anno Christi 1604. one of his company thus relates their entertainment. When (saith hee) wee entrd the pre∣sence, wee beheld the excellent Majesty of a mighty Emperour, seat∣ed in a chair of gold, richly embroidered with Persian stuffe: In his right hand hee held a golden Scepter, had a Crown of pure gold upon his head, a coller of rich stones, and Pearles about his neck, his outward garments of Crimson Velvet, embroidered very fair with Pearles, precious Stones, and Gold: On his righthand stood a very fair Globe of beaten Gold, or a Pyramis with a Cross on it: Nigh that stood a fair Bason and Ewre, which the Emperour used daily. Close by him on another Throne sate the Prince, in an out∣ward Garment like his Fathers, but not so rich, with an high black Fox cap on his head, worth there five hundred pound, having a golden staffe in his hand. On the Emperours right hand stood two gallant Noble men in cloath of silver, high black Fox Caps, with great long gold chains hanging to their feet, with Poleaxes of gold on their shoulders; and on the left hand of the Prince stood two other such, but their Poleaxes were of silver: round about on benches sate the Council, and Nobility in golden and Persian Coats, and high black Fox Caps to the number of two hundred, the ground being covered with cloath of Arras. After dinner (saith hee again) wee were led to have audience through many Chambers to a very fair and rich room, where was infinite store of massie plate of all sorts, where wee again viewed the Emperour, and Prince seated under two Chairs of state, each having a scul of Pearl upon their heads. In the midst of the room stood a great Pillar, round about which for a great height stood wonderful great peeces of Plate very curi∣ously wrought, with Beasts, Fishes, and Fowles, besides other or∣dinary peeces of serviceable Plate. The Emperour at dinner was served in rare dishes of silver, but most of Massie gold, &c. Sic transit gloria mundi. Pur. Pil. v. 3. p. 748.
The Permians, and Samoeds described. The Permians lie North from Russia, and are now subject to the Emperor thereof: they have broad, and flat faces like the Tartars, from whom probably they had their original: they live by hunting, and trading with their Furrs. The Samoeds live more towards the North Sea; they are very bru∣tish, eating all manner of raw flesh, even to the very carrion that lyeth in the ditch: they are also subject to the Russees: they acknow∣ledge one God, but represent him by such creatures as they have most good by, and therefore they worship the Sun, the Ollen, the Losh, &c. They are clad in Seals-skins with the hairy side outward, that reaches as low as the knees; with their breeches and stockings of the same, both men, and women; they are all black-haired, and beardlesse: the women are known from the men by a lock of hair hanging down by their ears: they are ever roving about from one place of the Country to another, without property either of house, or land: Their leader in every company is a Priest. Lapland described. On the North of Russia next to Corelia, lyeth Lappia, about three hundred forty and five miles in length, in breadth fourscore and ten. The whole Country almost is either Lakes or Mountains: those on the outside are barren craggie Rocks: but in the inland they are well furnished with woods, the Lakes being in the Vallies: their diet is very mean; bread they have none, but feed only upon Fish, and Fowle: they are subjects, part to Russia, part to Sweden, and the other part to Denmark, which all exact tribute of them: but the Emperor of Russia the most. They are wholly unlearned, not ha∣ving so much as the use of the Alphabet amongst them: They pass all Nations in witch-craft, and sorcery: Their weapons are long-Bows, and hand-guns wherein they are very nimble, and excellent marks-men through their continual practise in shooting at wilde fowle: For our English cloath they give Fish, Oil, and Furs, whereof they have store: when their fishing is done, they draw their boats to shore, turning the keel upwards, and so let them lye till the next spring-tyde: They travel upon sleds drawn by Olen-Deer, which they use to turn a grazing all the Summer time in an Island called Kilden, and towards Winter, when the Snow begins to fall, they fetch them home for their use. Anno Christi 1611. VVilliam Purseglove, a servant to our English Muscovy company, makes this relation of his travels in these Coun∣tries: wee travelled (saith hee) in sleds, each of them drawn by two Rain Deer, the Snow was so hard frozen, that it did bear sleds and Deer. Two hundred and fifty Sleds were in this Argeshey, or com∣pany, with whom wee travelled some dayes: then chusing the best
Bucks; I, with seven Sleds more, rid Post, only staying now, and then for an hour, where the Samoed, our guide, knew that there was store of white Moss, wherewith to refresh our Deer, so that in eight and forty hours space wee rode three hundred and fifty miles. These Samoeds, by their frequent travel, know the wayes, though the weather bee thick, and foggy, as also where store of white Moss grows: at which places, if it bee night they pitch their Tents made of Deer, or Elks-skins, which work is done by the women; and in the mean time the men unyoak the Deer, and turn them loose to dig through the Snow, though it bee very deep, to seek for their food and sustenance. Pur. Pil. v. 3. p. 548. When a rich Samoed dies, because hee should not travel on foot, his friends will kill three Deer to carry him into the new World, they will also strangle a slave to attend on him. If a young child dye un∣der seven years old, they use to hang it by the neck on some tree, saying, it must flye to Heaven. The women are very hardy, and at their labour the Husband plaies the Midwife; as soon as the child is born, they wash it with cold, or Snow-water, and the next day the woman will bee able to conduct her Argish of Sleds. The men are stout, and bold of spirit, not very tall, but broad breasted, broad faced, with hollow eyes: their weapons are Bows, and Arrows, long Spears, and short Swords. Poland described. This Country is plain, and wooddie, the air so cold, that they have no Wine, or Grapes, but use Ale in stead thereof. It so abounds with Corn, that it sends much abroad into other Countries: they have also great store of cattel. They use the Sclavonian language, yet are much addicted to the Latine tongue: They are generally proud, impatient, delicious in diet, and costly in attire: they are of all Religions. The chief Rivers are, 1. Vistula, which parts it from Hungary. 2. Neister, which parts it from Moldovia. 3. Neiper, &c. But to speak more particularly of the Provinces, which are, 1. Livonia, which is bounded on the East with Muscovy, on the West with the Baltick Sea, on the North with Finland, and on the South with Lituania. Its in length five hundred miles, in breadth one hundred and threescore, very mountainous, and fenny; yet yeelds plenty of Corn. The chief Cities are, 1. Riga. 2. Derpt. a town of much traffick. 3. Rivalia, a strong place. 4. Name, another strong Fortress: Other chief Countries in it are, 1. Curland. 2. Senugal. 3. Estland. 4. Virland. 5. Harland. 6. Geroenland. 2. Lituania, which hath Livonia on the South: Podolia on the North: Poland on the East: and Muscovie on the West: The chief Cities are, 1. Vilna, an University. 2. Vilkomire. 3. Brestia. The air is sharp, and the Country barren, yet are there many beasts, whose skins are good commodities. 3. Volinia, environed with Lituania, Podolia, and Russia; It is a
small woody Province: the chief Cities are Kiovia, and Circassia, on the banks of the river Nieper. 4. Samogitia, whose chief town is Camia. It joyneth to Livonia on the North, and the Baltick sea on the West. Its full of wood, and yeilds great store of honey. 5. Podolia, which hath Lituania on the North, Neister on the South, Russia East, and Poland VVest. The ground is so fertile, that of one sowing they have three harvests: the chief Cities are, 1. Ca∣mienza; seated on high rocks. 2. Orkzacow. 3. Winieczia. 6. Russia nigra, having on the East Podolia, on the West and North Poland, and on the South Hungary: the chief Towns are, 1. Leopolis, or Lembourg. 2. Grodeck. 3. Luckzo. A fruitfull Countrey, having store of horses and Cattel. 7. Mazovia, which is environed with Russia, Prussia, Lituania, and Poland: the chief City is Marzow. 8. Spruce, Prussia, or Borussia, is upon the Baltick sea: that part of it which belongs to Poland is called Prussia Regal: the chief Cities whereof are, 1. Dantzick, a famous Mart town▪ 2. Koningsberg; an U∣niversity. 3. Heilsperg. 4. Maneburg, or Marpurg, 5. Angenberg. 6. Clune. 9. Podlossia, which hath Lituania, and Mazovia on the East and West: the chief Towns are, 1. Tycockzin, a strong fort. 2. Byesko. 3. Knissin. 10. The Dukedomes of Opswitz, and Zator, which have the chief towns of the same names; they are in Silesia, but under the King of Po∣land. 11. Poland properly so called, which hath Lituania on the East, Germany on the West, Mazovia on the North, and Podolia on the South: the chief Cities are, 1. Cracovia, on the bank of Vistula. 2. Lublin. 3. Guisna. 4. Siradia. 5. Sendomire. 6. Minsko. 7. Posna. 8. Dobrinia. 9. Vlatislavia. Poland takes her name from the great fields, which produce a huge quantity of Corn, there are in it many fens, Lakes, and very great Forrests, where, in the trunks of trees is often found great store of hony, whereof they make a certain drink (chiefly in Lituania) which is most delicate, and yeilds not a whit in goodnesse to Spanish wine: there Winter is very long, and sharp, against the rigour whereof they serve themselves of stoves, and good furred gowns: the Nobility is very studious of warre, and desirous of travel, and of an humor much like that of the French: they express their gallantry in the beauty of their cloaths, weapons, and horses: In the sumptuousness of feasts, weddings, funeralls, Christenings, and in numerous traines of servants, when they go a wooing. The most eminent dignities amongst them, are to be Senators, whom they call Waiwodes, Chattellans, and starosts, or Captains. Of Poland it is said, that if a man hath lost his religion, let him go seek it in Poland, and he shall find it there, or else let him make ac∣count that its vanished out of the world. Europae spec.
Hungary Described. The soil is wonderfull fruitful, yeilding Corn thrice a year, the Grass in some places exceeds the height of a man, which feeds a won∣derfull number of Cattel: Besides which, they have Deer, Partridg, and Pheasant in such abundance, that any man may kill them: They have also Mines of Gold, Silver, and Copper, Fish, Wine, &c. The chief Rivers are, 1. Danubius, called also Ister. 2. Savus. 3. Dravus. 4. Tibiscus, which exceedingly abounds with Fish. The Turk hath these chief Cities in Hungary, 1. Buda, on the Danow. 2. Gyula, on the confines of Transylvania. 3. Pest. 4. Alba Regalis. 5. Quinque Ecclsiae. 6. Rab. The Emperor hath in his part. 1. Pres∣burg upon the edg of Austria. 2. Strigonium, or Gran. 3. Agraria. 4. Comara. 5. Toctax. 6. Canista. 7. Alkeinburg. 8. Neheusel. 9. Zig∣eth on the Dravus. Dacia Described. This Countrey is sufficiently fruitful, and abounds with horses, whose manes reach to the ground: but to speak of the Provinces more particu∣larly, which are, 1. Transylvania, which hath on its North the Carpathean Moun∣tains, on the South Walachia, on the West Hungary, and on the East Moldovia. The chief towns are, 1. Alba Julia, or Weisenburg. 2. Claudiopolis, or Clausenburg. 3. Bristitia. 4. Centum Colles. 5. Fogaros. 6. Stephanopolis, &c. Their present Prince is Rogotzi, a Pro∣testant. 2. Moldovia, is on the North end of Transylvania, and extending to the Euxine Sea: the chief Cities are, 1. Zucchania. 2. Fucchiana, 3. Fa∣lezing. 3. Walachia, divided from Bulgary by the Danow: the chief Cities are, 1. Sabinium. 2.Prailaba. 3. Tergovista, the Vayvodes seat. It abounds with gold, Silver, Iron, Saltpits, wine, Cattel, horses, brim∣stone, &c. 4. Servia, which lyeth between Bosnia, and Rascia: the chief Ci∣ties are, 1. Stoinburg, the seat of the Despot. 2. Samandria. 3. Belgrade, on the Danow. 5. Rascia between Servia, and Bulgary: the chief City is Boden. 6. Bulgary, joyning on the East to the uxine sea: on the West to Rascia: the chief Cities are, 1. Sophia, the seat of the Beglerbeg of Greece. 2. Nicopolis. 7. Bosnia, having Servia on the East, Croatia on the VVest, Savus on the South, and Illiricum on the North: the chief Cities are, 1. Ca∣zachium, 2. Jaziga.
Sclavonia Described. Sclavonia, is more fit for Pasturage than for Corn: their sheep, and o∣ther Cattle bring forth young twice in a year, and are shorn four times: the Provinces are, Illiricum, or Windismarch, which is bounded on the East with the Danow, on the West with Carniola, on the North with Dravus, and on the South with Savus: the chief Cities are, 1. Zatha on Danubius. 2. Za∣kaocz 3. VVindishgretz on Dravus. 4. Sagouna. Its now a member of Hungary. Dalmatia which hath on the East Drinus, on the West Croatia, on the North Savus, and on the South the Adriatique sea: the chief Ci∣ties are, 1. Ragusi, a sea town, and of great traffick. 2. Sicum, on the sea also. 3. Jadara, another sea Town. 4. Spalato, a sea town. 5. Sco∣dra, or Scutary. 6. Lyssa, where Scanderbeg was buried: these two last are under the Turks, the other under the Venetians. Croatia, which hath on the East and South Dalmatia, on the North Savus, and on the West Istria, and Carniola: the chief Cities are, 1. Gradiska, situate on Savus. 2. Bruman. 3. Novigrade, on the Savus neer Germany. 4. Sisseg, or Sissaken. 5. Petrowya. These people are usually called Crabbats, and serve as mercenaries in the Emperors Armies. Greece described. Greece is bounded on the East with the Aegean sea, the Hellespont, Propontis, and the Thracian Bosphorus. On the West it hath Italy, with the Adriatick sea, on the North with the Mountain Hemus, and on the South with the Jonian sea. Its situate in the Northern tempe∣rate zone under the fifth and sixth Climates, the longest day being a∣bout fifteen hours. The people once were famous for Armes, and Arts, which made them account all others Barbarians: now they are degenerated from the Prinstine vertue of their ancesters, and are be∣come unconstant, ignorant, riotous, and idle: At their feasts they drink till they come to the height of intemperancy; hence grew our Proverb; As merrie as Greeks. The women are generally brown, yet well-favoured, and excessive∣ly amorous: they use much painting to keep themselves in favour with their husbands, who when they are wrinkled, and old, put them to all drudgery. Their Church government was by four Patriarks. 1. Of Alexan∣dria. 2. Of Hierusalem. 3. Of Antioch. 4. Of Constantinople. Their language was Greek, of which they had five Dialects. 1. the Attick. 2. the Dorick. 3. the Aeolick. 4. the Jonick. 5. the common Dialect; but now it is almost devoured by the Sclavonian or Turkish Tongue. The soil is fruitfull, and would yeild good profit if it were well husbanded: but the natives having nothing that they can call their
own, in regard of their slavery to the Great Turk, neglect husbandry. The Commodities that they send abroad into other Countries are Wine, Oil, Copper, Vitreal, Velvets, Damasks, Grogreams, &c. and some Gold, and Silver. The chief rivers are Cephisus, which rising in the frontiers of Epi∣rus, emptieth it self into the Aegean sea, Erigon, Alaicmon, Strimon, A∣thicus, Stymphalus, Ladon, Inacus, Pineus, Populifer, &c. Greece is ordinarily divided into these seven parts, 1. Peloponesus. 2. Achaia. 3. Epirus. 4. Albania. 5. Macedonia. 6. Migdonia. 7▪ and Thracia. Peloponesus Described. Peloponesus, is a Peninsula almost surrounded with the sea, only it is joyned to the firm land by an Istmus five miles broad, which was fortified by a strong wall, and five Castles called Hexamilium, which reached from sea to sea: It is in compasse six hundred miles, and it is now called Morea, and is divided into six Provinces, 1, Elis. 2. Mes∣sina. 3. Arcadia. 4. Laconia. 5. Argolis. and 6. Achaia propria. 1. Elis which hath on the East Arcadia, on the West the Jonian sea, on the North Achaia propria, and on the South Messina: the chief Cities are, Argis, nigh unto the river Alpheus. It was formerly cal∣led Olimpia, famous for the statue of Jupiter Olimpicus, which was one of the Worlds wonders. And Pisa. 2. Messina, which hath on the East Arcadia, on the North Elis, on the West and South the sea: the chief Cities are, 1. Messina, now Golpho di Coron. 2. Pilon, now Navarino. 3. And Methone, or Medon. 3. Arcadia, which hath on the East Laconia, on the VVest Elis, and Messina, on the North Achaia propria, and on the South the sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Psophis. 2. Mantinia. 3. Megalopolis. And 4. Phialia: here was the Lake Stymphalus, and the River Styx, whose water for the ill tast was called the Water of hell; this Countrey was fit for pasturage and grazing. 4. Laconia, which is bounded on the East and South with the sea, on the North with Argolis, and on the West with Arcadia: the chief Cities are, 1. Lacedaemon, once a most flourishing Commonwealth. 2. Leuctra, on the sea side. 3. Thalana, nigh unto the Lake Lerna, and Mount Te∣narus, and 4. Selassia. 5. Argolis, which is bounded on the East and North with the sea, on the VVest with Achaia propria, and on the South with Laconia: the chief Cities are, 1. Argos. 2. Micene. 3. Nemaea. 4. Epidaurus, and 5. Nauplia. 6. Achaia propria, which hath on the South Elis, Arcadia, and Argolis, on all other parts the sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Corinth, at the foot of the Acro-Corinthian hills, neer to the fountain Pyrene: this City was formerly strengthened with a Castle, which standing on the said Hills, was called Acro-Corinthus, and was impregnable. Here li∣ved Lais, that famous strumpet that exacted ten thousand Drachmas
for a nights lodging. Its now called Crato, and is a place of small note. 2. Patras. 3. Scycion, now Vasilico; and 4. Dimea. The Country of Achaia described. Achaia is bounded on the East with the Aegean Sea: On the West with Epirus: On the North with Thessaly: and on the South with Peloponesus, and the Sea thereof. Its divided into seven Provin∣ces. 1. Attica. 2. Megaris. 3. Boeotia. 4. Phocis. 5. Aetolia. 6. Doris; and 7. Locris. 1. Attica, which hath on the West Megaris; and on all other parts the Sea: the soil is barren, yet by the industry of the Inhabi∣tants was made fruitful: their current mony was stamped with an Oxe, whence grew that saying of corrupt Lawyers, Bos in lingua. The chief Cities are, 1. Athens, once famous all the world over. 2. Marathron, where Mltiades overthrew the huge Army of Darius. 3. Piraea, the Haven Town to Athens; and 4. Panormus. 2. Maegaris, which hath on the East Attica: on the West Sinus Corinthiacus: on the North Boeotia; and on the South the Istmus. The chief Cities are, 1. Megara, now Megra: and 2. Eleusis. 3. Boeotia, which is bounded on the East with Attica: on the West with Phocis: on the North with the River Cephisus: and on the South with Megaris, and the Sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Thebes on the River Cephisus. 2. Daulis. 3. Platea. 4. Leuctra, where Epami∣nondas gave that great overthrow to the Lacedemonians. 5. Ascra, the birth-place of Hesiod. 6. Cheronea; the birth-place of Plutarch. 7. Orchomenon. In this Country are the streights of Thermopylae, where Leonidas with three hundred Spartans slew twenty thousand of Xerxes his Army, and were themselves all slain. 4. Phocis, which hath on the East Boeotia: on the West Locris, and Doris: on the North the Rivers Cephisus; and on the South Sinus Co∣rinthiacus: Here is Mount Helicon, consecrated to the Muses: Mount Citheron, and Pernassus, whose two-fold top kissed the clouds. The cheif Cities are, 1. Cyrra. 2. Crissa. 3. Anticyra on the Sea side, where grew Eloborum, that cured the Phrensie. 4. Elladia. 5. Pytho; or Pythia seated in the heart of Greece. Here the Amphictyons kept their Court. They were men selected out of the twelve prin∣cipal Cities in Greece, and had power to decide all controversies, and to enact Lawes for the common good. 6. Delphos, where was the Temple of Apollo, the most famous Oracle of the Heathens. 5. Locris, which hath on the East Aetolia: on the North Doris: and on the other parts the Sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Naupactum, now called Lepanto, where was that famous battel between the Turks, and Christians. 2. Ematia. 6. Aetolia, which is bounded on the East with Locris: on the West with Epirus: on the North with Doris: and on the South with the Gulph of Lepanto: Here is the Forrest of Caledon, where Melea∣ger slew the wild Boar; and the Rivers Evenus, and Achilous.
The chief Cities are, 1. Chalcis. 2. Olenus. 3. Plurona; and 4. Thir∣mum. 7. Doris, which hath on the East Boeota: on the West Epirus: on the South the Sea; and on the North the Hill Oeta: The chief Ci∣ties are, 1. Amphissa. 2. Libra. and 3. Citinum. Epirus described. Epirus, is bounded on the East with Achaia; on the North with Macedonia; and on the other parts with the Sea: Here is the Mount Pindus, sacred to Apollo, and the Muses; and the Acroceraunian Hills: Here are also the Rivers Acheron, and Cocytus▪ for their colour, and taste, called the Rivers of Hell. The Eastern part of this Country is called Acarnania; the We∣stern Chaonia: The chief Cities are, 1. Antigonia. 2. Cassiope. 3. To∣ronia. These in the Western part, and in the other, 1. Nicopolis. 2. Ambracia: now Larta. 3. Leucas. 4. Anactorium; and 5. Actium, nigh to the Sea of Lepanto, where Augustus, and Anthony fought for the Empire of the world. This Country was once called Molos∣sia. Here that famous Scanderbeg was King; as also of Albania. Albania described. Albania, hath on the East Macedonia; on the West the Adriatick Sea: On the North Sclavonia; and on the South Epirus. The chief Cities are, 1. Albanopolis. 2. Sfetigrade. 3. Durazzo, formerly cal∣led Dyrachium. 4. Croya, under whose walls Amurath lost his life. Macedonia described. Macedonia, hath on the East Migdonia: on the West Albania: on the North Misia superior; and on the South Epirus, and Achaia: The chief Cities are, 1. Scydra, or Scodra. 2. Andaristus. 3. Aedessa. 4. E∣ribaea. 5. Pidna upon the mouth of the River Alaicmon. 6. Pella on the same shore, and 7. Syderocaspae, famous for her gold and silver Mines. Thessaly described. On the Southern part of Macedonia, is Thessalia planted. Its a fruit∣ful and pleasant Country: Here is the Hill Olympus, upon which were the Olympick games, as running with Chariots, and on foot, wrestling, fighting with Whirlebats, &c. The reward of the Conquerors was only a Garland of Palm; and yet highly esteemed by them: Here also are the Hills, Pelion, and Ossa, and betwixt Olympus, and Ossa was that delectable Valley called Tempe, five miles long, and six broad; so beautified with natures riches, that it was accounted the Gar∣den
of the Muses. The chief Cities are, 1. Tricca. 2. Lamia. 3. Deme∣trias. 4. Larissa, both upon the Pelasgick Bay. 5. Pharsalis, nigh un∣to which was that great battel fought between Caesar, and Pompey for the Monarchie of the world. And 6. Pherae. Migdonia described. Migdonia, is bounded on the East, and South, with the Aegean Sea; on the West with Macedonia; and on the North with Thracia: Here is the Hill Athos, which is threescore and fifteen miles in compass; three dayes journey in height, and casts a shadow as far as Lemnos, which is forty miles off. The chief Cities are, 1. Stagira. Aristotles birth-place. 2. Apollonia. 3. Pallene. 4. Neapolis, on the borders of Thrace. 5. Antigonia; and 6. Thessalonica, now Salonichi, seated on the Sea, to the Church whereof St. Paul wrote two of his Epi∣stles. Thrace described. Thrace hath on the East Pontus Euxinus, Propontis, and Hellespont: on the VVest Macedonia: on the North the Hill Haemus, and on the South the Aegean Sea: The Inhabitants are bold, and valiant: The earth ripens Corn slowly, because of the cold: The Vines yeeld more shade than juice, and the Trees more leaves than fruit. The chief Towns are, 1. Sestos on the Hellespont, over against Abidos in Asia, famous for the love of Hero, and Leander. 2. Abdera, the birth-place of Democritus, who spent his life in laughing at others. 3. Potidaea. 4. Cardia, seated on the Thracian Chersonese over against Troas on Asia side. Its now called St. Georges Arme. 5. Lysimachia, on the Sea shore. 6. Callipolis, on the Northern Promontory of the Chersonese, which was the first Town that ever the Turks took in Europe, which was Anno Christi 1358. 7. Trianopolis. 8. Adrianople. The first seat of the Grand Signiors in Europe. 9. Pera, formerly Galata; and 10. Constantinople, formerly Bizantium. The City of Constantinople described. Constantinople, was built by Constantine the Great; It stands on a cape of land, near the entrance of the Bosphorus: Its in form triangular: On the East side washed with the Sea; on the North with the Ha∣ven: and the West side joynes to the Continent. Its walled with brick, and stone intermixed orderly, having twenty four Gates, and Po∣sterns: Its about thirteen miles in Circumference. The world hard∣ly affords a more delicate object, if beheld from the Sea, or adjoy∣ning Mountains. The lofty, and beautiful Cypresse-trees are so inter∣mixed with the buildings, that it seems to present a City in a wood to the pleased beholders. Its built on seven hills, whose aspiring heads are crowned with magnificent Mosques, or Churches, all of
white Marble, round in form; and coupled above; being finished on the top with guilded spires, that reflect the Sun-beams with a mar∣vellous splendor: some having two; some four, and some six adjoy∣ning Turrets, exceeding high, and slender: Tarrast aloft on the out∣side, like the main top of a ship, in several places equally distant, whence their Priests with elated voices (for they use no bells) call the people together to their Mahometan service. When Constantine first built this City, hee enclosed it with a wall, that for length, fairness, and thickness, was one of the fa∣mousest in the world, every stone being cemented together with brass couplets, that the whole wall seemed to bee but one stone: Hee erected also many high Towers, built many sumptuous Temples, and adorned it with infinit more magnificent buildings, both publick, and private: commanding also by publick Edict all Princes of the Empire, that each of them should build a Palace or some other sumptuous, and splendid Monument there: Hee also brought from Rome divers memorable Antiquities, as the Palladium of Troy: the high Pillar of Porsido, which hee caused to bee erected in a fit place, by which hee set Apollo's brazen Image of an unmeasurable bigness, having his own name ingraven thereon: Amongst other glorious buildings was the proud Palace of the publick Library, wherein were one hundred and twenty thousand choice written Books: in the midst whereof were the guts of a Dragon, above one hundred and twenty foot long, on which Homers Iliads were written in letters of gold: In diverse other parts of the City were very rare things, as the Nymphs Grove: the Market-place of mettal: the famous I∣mages of Juno, Minerva, Venus, &c. with infinite other varieties: so that strangers which saw it, being full of admiration were astonished at the beauty of it, judging it a dwelling meet for the Gods, rather than an habitation for earthly Emperours. But now Time, with her Iron teeth, and the many changes which have happened, have quite altered the face of Constantinople: So that now upon the Hill, whereon the Imperial Palace once stood, there are kept Elephants, Panthers, and other wild Beasts in the ru∣ines of it. On the second Hill whereon stood the Palace of the Pa∣triarches, in which were buried in chests of fine Marble, most of the Christian Emperors, a Mosque is now erected. Upon the third Hill is the Sepulchre of the Great Mahomet, that won the City, of a marvellous greatness, and magnificence, surrounded with one hundred houses covered with Lead, made to receive strangers of any Nation, where themselves, servants, and horses, may remain three dayes on free cost: Sultan Mahomet leaving two hundred thousand Ducats reve∣nue per annum, to maintain the same. The fourth Hill hath on it the Church, and Sepulchre of Sultan Selim in the same form, and order as the other. The fifth hath the Church and Sepulchre of Bajazet, with a great and spacious Piazza about it. The sixth hath the Church and Sepulchre of Solyman the Magnificent, which in greatness, workman∣ship, Marble Pillars, and riches more than Kingly, passeth all the
rest, and deserves to bee matched with the seven wonders of the world: The seventh contained the sumptuous Temple of Sancta Sophia, which deserves a particular description by it self. The Temple of Sancta Sophia Described. The Temple of Sancta Sophia standing upon one of these hills, ex∣ceeds not only all the rest, but all the most stately fabricks in the world: the principal part thereof riseth in an Ovall, surrounded with pillars admirable for their matter, proportion, and workmanship: Over those are others, through which ample Galleries curiously paved, and arched above, have their prospect into the Temple: the roof is compact, and adorned with Mosaick painting; which is composed of little square peices of Marble, gilded, and coloured according to the place they are to assume in the Figure or ground, which set together, as if im∣bossed, present an unexpressible statelinesse, and are of marvellous durance. The sides, and floor of the whole Church are laid with ex∣cellent Marble: it is vaulted underneath, containing large Cisternes which are replenished with water from an Aquaeduct: within on the left hand is a Pillar covered with Copper, which ever sweats: the doors are curiously cut through, and plated. It was from East to West two hundred and sixty foot long, and in height one hundred and fourscore; and hath contained at once, six and thirty thousand Turks. In the middest of it there are pillars of gold and silver, huge Can∣dlesticks, Lanthornes, Lamps, and other Ornaments of gold and sil∣ver, whereof the worth is inestimable. It had in it one hundred gates, and was above a mile in compass. The Turks Seraglio Described. In the extreamest North-east angle of Constantinople, standeth the great Turks Seraglio or Palace, compassed with a lofty wall three miles in compasse, comprehending goodly Groves of Cypresse-trees, in∣termixed with plaines, delicate Gardens, Artificial Fountains, vari∣ety of Fruit-trees, and what not rare? Luxury being the Steward, and the Treasury inexhaustible. The proud Palace of the Tyrant o∣pens to the South, having a lofty Gate-house, engraven with Ara∣bick Characters, set forth with Gold, and Azure, all of white Mar∣ble: This gate leadeth into a stately Court three hundred yards long, and about one hundred and fifty wide; at the farther end whereof is another gate hung with shields, and Cymiters; this leads into a second Court full of tall Cypresse-trees, being not much lesse than the for∣mer. It is Cloistered round about, covered with lead, handsome∣ly paved, and supported with Columns of Marble, which have Cha∣piters, and Bases of Copper. On the left hand is the Divano kept, where the Bassa's of the Court do administer Justice: Beyond this Court on the right hand is a street of Kitchins, and on the left stalles large enough for five hundred horses. Out of the second Court is an
entrance into the third, surrounded with the Royal buildings, large, curious, and costly. Without on the North side stands the Sultan's Cabinet, in form of a sumptuous summer-house, where hee of ten o∣laceth himself with variety of Objects, and from whence taking barge hee passeth to the delightfull places of the adjoyning Asia. In the Seraglio also, are many stately rooms appropriated to the season of the year, which are called Rooms of fair prospect, into which the Sultan goeth sometimes alone, but more usually with his Concubines for his recreation. Within a fine little Court adorned with very many delicate Fountains is the Chamber wherein hee gives audience to Ambassadors, &c. one part whereof is spread with very sumptuous Carpets of gold, and Crimson velvet, embroydered with very costly Pearls, upon which the grand Signeur sitteth: the walls of the room are covered with fine white stones, having divers sorts of leaves, and artificial Flowers cu∣riously wrought upon them, which make a glorious shew. A little Room adjoyns to it, the whole inside whereof is covered with silver plate, hatched with gold, the floor being spread with rich Persian Car∣pets of silk, and gold. There are belonging to the Sultan's lodgings very fair gardens, of all sorts of flowers, and Fruits, that can bee found in those parts; with many very pleasant walks, enclosed with high Cypresse-trees on both sides, and fountains in such abundance, that almost in every walk there are some of them. Besides the former rooms (which are very many) for the Sultan's own use, there are also the womens lodgings, wherein the Queen, the Sultanaes, and all the Kings women do dwell, and they have in them bed-chambers, dining rooms, with-drawing rooms, and all other kinds of rooms necessary for women. In another place there are divers Rooms, and lodgings for all the principal, and inferiour Officers so well furnished, that nothing is want∣ing that is fit, and necessary. Amongst which are two large buildings, one his Wardrob, the other his Treasury, with very thick walls, Iron windows, and Iron doors. In the Seraglio are Rooms for Prayer, Bagnoes, Schools, Butteries, Kitchins, Stillatories, Swimming places, places to run horses in, wrestling places, butts to shoot at, and all the commodities that may adorn a Prince's Court. There is also an Hospital for such as fall sick in the Seraglio, in which there are all things necessary for diseased persons: And another large place wherein is kept Timber, Carts, &c. to have them neer hand for the use, and service of the Seraglio. Over the Stables there is a row of rooms, wherein is kept all the furniture for the horses, which is of an extraordinary value; for the Bridles, Petorals, and Cruppers, are set so thick with jewels of divers sorts, that they cause admiration in the beholders, and exceed Ima∣gination. The Grand Signior's Bed-chamber hath the walls covered with stones of the finest China mettal, spotted with flowers of divers colours, which make a very dainty shew: The Antiportaes were of
cloath of gold of Bursia, and their borders of Crimson Velvet, embroi∣dered with gold, and Pearls: The posts of his Bedstead were of sil∣ver, hollow, and instead of knobs on the tops, there were Lyons of Crystall; the Canopy over it was of cloth of gold, and so were the Bolsters, and Matteresses: the floor was covered with very costly Persian Carpets of silk, and gold, and the Pallats to sit on, and Cushi∣ons were of very rich cloth of gold. In the hall adjoyning is a very great Lanthorn round, and the bars of silver, and gilt, set very thick with Rubies, Emeralds, and Turkes∣ses; the panes were of very fine Crystal, which made a very resplen∣dent shew. There was also a Bason, and Ewre, to wash in, of massie gold, set with Rubies, and Turkesses. In Constantinople is a Piazza, in which is raised upon four Dice of fine Mettal, a very fair Pyramid of mingled stone all of one peice, fifty Cubits high, carved with Heroical letters, resembling the Agulia of Rome, in whose top were the enclosed ashes of Julius Caesar: In the same Piazzo also is a great Pillar of Brasse, made with marvellous Art, in form of three serpents wreathed together with their mouths up∣ward. There are in Constantinople eighteen thousand Mosques, great and small: In the chief place of it are two Burses, built four square, high, and round at top, each having four gates opening upon four streets, round about garnished with shops, stuffed with all sorts of rich, and cost∣ly wares of inestimable value, as precious stones, Pearls, Sables, and other rich Furs of all sorts; Silk, and cloath of gold: Bows, Arrows, Bucklers, and Swords: Here also they fell Christian Slaves of all a∣ges, as wee sell horses, the buyers looking them in the eyes, mouth, and all other parts, which is done every forenoon, except Fridayes, which is their Sabbath. The Bassa's also in sundry places have built fair houses, encompassed with high walls, which outwardly have no beauty: but inwardly full of all riches▪ and pleasure, the world can afford: For they use to say, that they build not to please passers by, but for their own Commodity. The Turkish Empire Described. The Grand Signior, who hath his seat in the stately, and Imperiall City of Constantinople, hath under his command, the chiefest, and most fruitful parts of the three first known parts of the world. In Eu∣rope he hath all the sea coasts, from the confines of Epidaurus (the utmost bound of his Empire in Europe Westward) unto the mouth of the River Tanais, now called Don, with whatsoever lyes from Buda in Hungary, to the Imperial City of Constantinople: in which space is comprehen∣ded the greater part of Hungary, all Bosna, Servia, Bulgaria, with a great part of Dalmatia, Epirus, Macedonia, Grecia, Peloponesus, Thra∣cia, the Archipelago, with the rich Islands contained therein. In Affrica he possesseth from the river Mulvia (the bounder of the kingdom of Fesse, to the Arabian Gulph, or Red-sea Eastward, except some sea-towns
held by the King of Spain, and from Alexandria Northward, unto the City of Asna Southward: In which space are contained the fa∣mous Kingdomes of Tremizen, Algiers, Tunes, and Egypt, with di∣vers other great Cities, and Provinces. In Asia all is his from the Hellespont Westward, unto the great City of Tauris Eastward: and from Derbent neer unto the Caspian sea Northward, unto Aden upon the Arabian Gulph Southward. The greatnesse of his Empire may bee the better conceived by the greatnesse of some of the parts of it: the Meer of Meotis (which is all at his command) being in compasse one thousand miles: and the Eu∣xine, or Black-sea, which is in circuit two thousand seven hundred miles, and the Mediterranean coast which is subject to him, contains in compasse about eight thousand miles. The like distance is from Derbent to Aden: And from Balsara upon the Persian Gulph, unto Tremisen in Barbary, are neer four thousand miles. Hee hath also in the Me∣diterranean sea, the noble Isles of Cyprus, Euboea, Rhodes, Samos, Chios, Lesbos, &c. In this so large, and spatious an Empire, are contained many great Countries, sometimes famous Kingdomes, abounding with all sorts of temporal blessings, and natures store; For what Kingdome is more fruitful than Egypt, Syria, and a great part of Asia? what Countrey more abounding with all good things, than was sometimes Hungary, Grecia, and Thracia? In these Countries hee hath also many rich and famous Cities, but especially four, which bee of greatest wealth, and trade, viz. Constantinople, Grand-Caire, Aleppo, and Tauris. Con∣stantinople, for multitude of Inhabitants, exceeds all the Cities in Europe, wherein are reckoned to bee above seven hundred thousand men. Aleppo is the greatest City of Syria, and the Centre whereun∣to all the merchandize of Asia is brought. Tauris, of late the roy∣al seat of the Persian Kings, hath in it above two hundred thousand men. Grand-Caire amongst all the Cities in Africk, is the chiefest, being the store-house, not only of the riches of Egypt, but of much of Africk and India. For his ordinary revenews they are not estimated to exceed eight millions of gold, but his extraordinary escheates are very considera∣ble, as his confiscations, forfeitures, fines, amerciaments, tributes, customes, tenths of all Prizes taken by sea, or Land, &c. which far exceed his standing revenew: His Bassa's, and great officers, sucking out the blood of his poor subjects, and heaping up inestimable trea∣sures, which usually falls to the Grand Signiors coffers. His pre∣sents also amount to a great value: for no Ambassadour can come before him without great gifts: none can get Offices, or preferments without money: none may return to him from their Provinces, or expeditions, empty-handed: In brief, its easy for so great a Tyrant to pick a quarrel with any rich man, and so to take away his life, and seize upon his estate be it never so much. The strength of his Empire consists especially in these four things. In his Timariots, which are horsemen, to whom hee hath given lands
for their life, upon condition of serving him upon all occasions with men and horses: by these, as with a bridle, hee keeps all the rest of his Subjects in his vast Empire in awe: for they can no sooner move, but they shall have these Timariots, as Falcons in their necks, for to that purpose they are dispersed all over his Dominions: and again, out of them hee is always able to draw into the field one hundred and fifty thousand horse-men well armed, without a farthing charge, to go whither soever hee shall command them. The whole number of them is accounted to bee seven hundred and ninety thousand fighting men: whereof two hundred fifty seven thousand dwell in Europe, the other four hundred sixty and two thousand in Asia, and Affrica. Secondly, In his Spahi, Ulufagi, and Carapici of his Court, which are another sort of horse-men, to whom hee gives pay, being indeed the Seminaries of the great Officers, and Governours of his Empire, for from amongst them, hee chooseth his Sanzacks, or Captaines, whom for their good deserts, he raiseth to be Begs, Begler-begs, Visiers, and Bassaes. Thirdly, Besides these, hee hath other horse-men, called Acanzii, which for some priviledges are bound to serve▪ they are of the pea∣sants whom hee much esteems not, only they serve to blunt his ene∣mies swords. Fourthly, In his footmen, and Janisaries, which are born of Chri∣stian parents in Europe, and taken from them when they are young, and in whom there appeareth the greatest strength, activity, and courage: They are bred up to hard labour and pains, and after a certain time are taken into the Cloisters of the Aiamoglans (for so they are called, till they bee admitted into the number of Janisaries) and there delivered to governours, who keep them still exercised to pain∣ful labour, using them hardly in apparrel, diet, and lodging: there they learn to shoot in Bows, and Guns, the use of the Scimiter, and feats of activity, and when they are expert therein, they are admitted into the number of Janisaries, or Spahi. Now for his strength by sea, hee hath as great means to set forth a Fleet as any Prince whatsoever, the overgrown woods of Epirus, and Cilicia, with those of Nicomedia, and Trapezund, yeild him abun∣dance of Timber for ships, and Gallies: neither can he want shipwrights and Carpenters for the framing of them, his large pay drawing many, even from amongst the Christians into his Arsenals at Constantinople, Synope, Callipolis, &c. Neither hath hee ever wanted good store of expert Sea-men: for besides those which hee hath in the forenamed places, out of his Gallies, which hee hath at Lesbos, Chios, Rhodes, Cy∣prus, and Alexandria, and from the Pyrates which frequent his Ha∣vens of Tunis, Bugia, Tripolis, and Algeirs, hee can as need requires, chuse Captains, Marriners,, and rowers, sufficient for the storing, and managing of his Fleet. Notwithstanding all which, this vast Em∣pire is much declined of late: their late Emperors much degenerating from their warlike Progenitors, their souldiers generally addicting themselves to unwonted pleasures, their ancient discipline of warre be∣ing
neglected: their Religion, or superstition rather, not with so much zeal, as of old, regarded, and rebellions in diverse parts of the Empire, of late strangely raised, and mightily supported, being all signs of a declining state. See Knolles his discourse hereof. America described. Anno Christi 1486. Christopher Columbus, born at Neri in the Country of Genoa, being a man of projecting wit, excellently skil∣led in Astronomy, and Navigation, strongly conceited that some Lands must needs lye in the portion of the circle▪ which should make up the World into a Globe; considering also the motion of the Sun, hee perswaded himself that there was another world, to which the Sun imparted his light, when hee went out of our Horison. This world hee hoped to discover, and therefore imparted his intent to the Genowaies, but was by them rejected. Then sent hee his Bro∣ther Bartholomew Columbus, to motion the matter to our King Henry the seventh, but hee, falling into the hand of Pyrates by the way, was long a prisoner before hee was enlarged; but as soon as hee was free, hee came to our English Court, and his motion was readily embraced by the King: But God, who had otherwise disposed it, so ordered it, that Columbus, not knowing of his Brothers imprison∣ment, because hee heard nothing from him, thought that his suit was rejected, and thereupon addressed himself to the King of Spain, who after many delayes, furnished him with two ships only for disco∣very: with this small assistance hee sailed in the Ocean more than threescore dayes, without discovery of any land, so that his discon∣tented Spaniards began to mutiny, absolutely resolving to go no fur∣ther; Columbus did all that hee could to pacifie and incourage them, but when nothing would prevail, hee was fain to ingage himself to them, that if land was not discovered within three dayes, hee would steer his course back again: At the end of which time one of the company discryed fire, an evident sign of land, which they took possession of, Anno Christi 1492. and Columbus in honour of the Spaniards, called it Hispaniola: after which hee discovered Cuba, and so with much treasure, and greater content hee returned into Spain; and after two other voyages hee sickned, and dyed, and was buried at Sivil. This Columbus being on a time at supper with some of the great Spanish Dons in the Court, they took occasion to speak very sleightly of his Indian discoveries, as if it was such a small matter which might have been performed by any man: Hee hearing them, called for an Egge, and when hee had it, desired them to try if any of them could make it stand an end upon their trenchers: they all tryed, and by indeavouring equally to poise it, laboured to make it stand, but could not; then did Columbus take it, and knocking it down pretty hard, crackt the end, which caused it to stand up∣right: at this they all laughed, saying, that every fool could do so:
Yea (saith hee) and now I have made a discovery of that new world, every one can go thither, &c. VVhen the Spaniards first arrived in those parts, they found the Inhabitants naked, unacquainted with husbandry, making their bread of Cassavy roots, worshiping the Devils, whom they called Zemes, in remembrance of whom they had certain Images made of Cotton-wool, like to our Childrens babies: To these they did great reverence, as supposing the spirit of their Zemes to bee in them: and the Devil to blind them the more, would sometimes make these Puppets move, and make a noise: they stood also in great fear of them, for if they did not fulfil his will, the Devil would ex∣ecute vengeance upon some of the Children of these poor deluded souls. They thought the Christians to bee immortal, wondring at the Masts, Sails, and tacklings of their ships, and to try whether they were immortal or no, having taken some straglers, they held their heads under water till they were strangled, which made them change their opinions. They esteemed gold and silver no more than dross, yet for the colours sake adorned themselves therewith, as they did with shells, feathers, and the like. The Spaniards after their coming amongst them behaved themselves very cruelly, killing them like sheep, and forcing them like beasts, to labour in their Mines, to carry their burthens, and to do all manner of drudgery, which caused them so to hate them, that one Haythney a noble man amongst them being perswaded to bee baptised, with the promise of Heaven for his reward; asked whither the Spaniards went when they dyed? and when answer was made that they went to Heaven, hee renounced his intended Baptisme, protesting that hee had rather go to Hell, with the unbaptised, than to live in Heaven with so cruel a people. In some places there was such abundance of gold, that in some Mines they found more gold than earth, which the Indians ex∣changed greedily for Hammers; Knives, Axes, Hatchets, and such tools of Iron; for before, they were fain to make their Canows or Boats plain without, of the body of a great tree which they made hollow with the force of fire. Columbus having thus happily begun this noble enterprize, hee was seconded by Americus Vesputio, a Florentine, from whom (un∣justly) it was called America. To him succeeded John Cabot, im∣ployed by our King Henry the seventh. Ferdinando Magellane first found out the South passage, called the streights of Magellane, by which hee compassed the world, and was afterwards followed by our Drake, and Candish; and the Dutch Nandernoort: since which time another Dutchman called Le Maire, found out a more Southerly passage into the South Sea, called Le Maires Streights, by which hee also com∣passed the world. America is divided into two parts, Mexicana, and Peru∣ana. Mexicana is the Northern tract, containing the Provinces of Mexico▪
Quivira, Nicaragua, Jucutan, Florida, Virginia, Norembega, New-France, New-England, &c. Mexico, is now called New-Spain, in which is that excellent tree cal∣led Mete, which they plant, and dress as wee do our Vines, yeelding so many sorts of commodities: For when they bee tender, they make of them Conserves, Paper, Flax, Mantles, Mats, Shooes, Girdles, and Cordage: On the leaves grow prickles so hard, and sharp, that they use them in stead of sawes. From the root of the tree comes a juice like unto syrup, which if you seeth, it will become Hony, if you purifie it, it will become Sugar: you may also make Wine, and Vineger of it: The rind rosted cureth hurts, and sores, and from the top boughs is such a Gum which is an excellent antidote against poison. It abounds also with many golden sanded Rivers, wherein are Crocodiles which the natives eat: It hath Mines of gold, and a mountain burning like Aetna. Its bounded on the East with Jucutan, and the Gulph of Mexico: on the West with California: on the South with Perua∣na; and the Northern limits are not known. It was very populous before the arrival of the Spaniards, who in seventeen years slew six millions of them, roasting some, plucking out the eyes, cutting off the arms of others, and casting them alive to bee devoured of dogs, and wild beasts. Mechuacan, one of the Pro∣vinces of New-Spain, abounds with Mulberry trees, Silk, Hony, Wax, black Amber, and great plenty of Fish: the Inhabitants are tall, strong, active, and speak a copious language. Mexico, hath in it a City of the same name, in compass six miles, consisting of six thousand houses of Spaniards, and sixty thousand of Indians: Its situate on Lakes, and Islands like Venice, every where interlaced with pleasant currents of fresh, and Sea waters: The plain wherein the Town standeth is seventy leagues in compass, environed with high hills, on the tops of which Snow lyeth continually. The Lake on whose banks the City lyeth is fifty miles in compass, the banks whereof are adorned with pleasant Towns, and houses, and on the Lake are fifty thousand wherreyes plying continually. Nigh to this City is the Gulph of Mexico, whose current is so swift, and heady, that ships cannot pass directly to, and fro, but are compelled to bear either much North, or much South. Its nine hundred miles in compass, and hath two Ports, one between the farthest part of Jucatan, and the Isle of Cuba, at which the tide entereth with a vio∣lent stream, the other between the said Cuba, and the farthest part of Florida, at which the tide with the like violence goeth forth: the Sea is very tempestuous, and hath only two safe Havens, viz. Ha∣vana on the North side, and St. John de Luna on the South, which are strongly fortified by the Spaniards. The Country of Mexico is inferior to Peru, in the plenty and purity of gold, and silver, but far exceeding it both in the Mechanical, and ingenious arts here professed, and in the abundance of fruits, and cat∣tel, of which last there is such store, that many a private man hath forty thousand Kine, and Oxen to himself; Fish also are very plen∣tiful:
that only which is caught in the Lake, whereon Mexico stands, being reputed worth twenty thousand Crowns per annum. Mexico was conquered by Ferdinando Cortez, Anno Christi 1521. His Army consisting of one hundred thousand Americans, nine hun∣dred Spaniards, eighty horsemen, seventeen small peeces of Ordnance, thirteen Brigandines, and six thousand Wherrie-boats which from the Lake assaulted Mexico. In Quivira, another Province, the riches of the people consists in cattel, whose hides yeeld them coverings for their houses; their bones, bodkins; their hair, thred; their sinewes, ropes; their horns, mawes, and bladders, vessels; their dung; fire; their Calf-skins, budg∣ets to draw, and keep water in: their blood, drink; and their flesh meat. Nova Albion, lyeth on the West towards Tartary: It was discove∣red by Sir Francis Drake, Anno Christi 1585. The King whereof did willingly resign himself, and land to our Queen. In it is a Hare, resembling a Mole in his feet, a Cat in his tail; under whose chin nature hath fastened a little bag, as a store-house; for in it, when hee hath filled his belly, hee reserveth the rest of his provision. It abounds in good fruits. Jucutan, is a Peninsula in circuit nine hundred miles, a fruitful Coun∣try situated over against Cuba. Florida, hath on the East the Northern Sea: on the West Mexico; on the North New-France, and on the South Virginia: It abounds with goodly fruits, and hath some quantity of gold, and silver. E∣meralds are also found there, and Turquesses, and Pearls. Women when their Husbands dye, cut off their hair close to their heads, strewing it upon their husbands graves, and may not marry again, till their hair bee grown to cover their shoulders. Virginia described. Virginia, is seated between four and thirty, and four and forty de∣grees of Northerly latitude: Its bounded on the East with the great Ocean; with Florida on the South: New-France on the North: and the Western limits are unknown. The Summer is as hot as in Spain; the VVinter is as cold as in France, and England. It was discovered by the English by the direction, and at the charge of Sir VValter Rawleigh, Anno Christi 1584. and in honour of our Virgin Queen called Virginia. It yeelds store of Tobacco, and now they get Silk-worms, and plant store of Mulberry trees, which is like to bee a good commodity. There is but one entrance by Sea into this Country, at the mouth of a goodly Bay: The Capes on both sides are named Henry, and Charles: The water floweth in this Bay near two hundred miles, and hath a Channel for one hundred and forty miles, between se∣ven, and fifteen fathom deep, and ten, or fourteen miles broad. At the head of the Bay, the land is mountainous, from which proceed
great brooks, which make five navigable rivers: the mountains have in them Milstones, Marble, and some peices of Christal: The earth is generally black, and sandy. The river neer to the mouth of the bay is called Powhatan, the mouth whereof is neer three miles broad, and it is Navigable one hundred miles: Hence their Emperor is called Powhatan. In a Peninsula on the North side thereof, is pla∣ced James Town. No place in Summer affords more Sturgeons, whereof threescore and eight have been caught at one draught. In Winter they have a∣bundance of Fowl. Fourteen miles from Powhatan is the River Pa∣maunk, seventy miles navigable with big vessels. Then Toppahanock, which is Navigable one hundred and thirty miles. Then Patawomeck, one hundred and twenty miles navigable. At the mouth of Powhatan are the Forts Henerico, and Charles; forty two miles upward, is James Town, seventy miles beyond that, the Town of Henerico, ten miles higher are the falls, where the River falls down between Mineral rocks, twelve miles beyond that, there is the Crystall Rock, wherewith the Indians head their Arrows. The Commodities are silk-grass, Hemp, and Flax, surpassing ours; A certain Sedg, which by boiling yeilds skeines of good strength, and length, some like silk, some like flax, and some like hemp. There is also Allom, Terra Sigillata, Pitch, Tar, Rozen, Turpentine, Sas∣safras, Cedar, Grapes, Oil, Iron, Copper, &c. Sweet Gums, Dies, Timber, Trees of sweet wood of fourteen kinds: Besides, plen∣ty of Fowl, Fishes, Beasts, Fruits, Plants, Hearbs, Berries, Grains, especally Maiz, whereof one acre of ground will yeild two hundred Bushels of Corn, Roots, &c. Their chief Beasts are Bears, Deer, a beast like a Badger, but living in trees like a Squirrel: Flying Squir∣rels. another beast headed like a Swine, tailed like a Rat, as big as a Cat, and hath under her belly a Bag, wherein shee carrieth her young: Their Dogs bark not, their Wolves are little bigger than our Foxes, their Foxes like our silver haired Conies, and smell not as ours. They have Eagles, Hawks, wild Turkies, &c. The People are cloathed in Deer skines about their middles, else all naked. Their houses are round, of small poles fastened at the tops; and co∣vered with bark, or mats: they are good Archers, so that they will kill birds flying, fish swiming, and beasts running. Their chief God is the Devil, which they call Oke, whose Image is made ill-fa∣vouredly. On the North of it lyes New-England, planted with many English Towns, especially New-Boston, an haven Town, and a place of good trading: The other Countryes in this tract of ground have lit∣tle that is remarkable in them. Florida Described. The length of Florida extends to twenty and five degrees: It runs with a long point into the Sea, and into land it stretches Westward
unto the borders of New-Spain, and to those Countries which are not yet fully discovered: On other parts its washed with a dangerous sea. It is very rich with Silver, Gold, and stones of great value. In it are great variety of Trees, fruits, fowls, Beasts: as Bears, Leopards, Ounces, Wolves, Wild Dogs, Goats, Hares, Conies, Deer, Oxen, &c. Their Towns are paled about with Posts fastened in the ground, hav∣ing no more entrance than for two men to passe at a time, where stand two watch Towers for defence: their houses are round, their apparrel nakedness, except a skin about their secrets: they paint and rase their skin curiously, which they rub over with the juice of an herb, that cannot bee gotten out: they let their nailes on their fingers and toes grow long, they are tall, nimble, and comely. When the King dieth, they bury him with solemnity, and upon his grave they set the cup wherein hee was wont to drink, and about it they stick many Arrows: for six months certain women are ap∣pointed to bewail his death: His house, and goods they burn together. They sow, or set their Corn as in Virginia, and have two seeds times, and two harnests, their meat is Venisons, Fish, and Crocodiles dried in the smoak for preservation. Peruana Described. The other part of this new World, is called Peruana, being in com∣passe seventeen thousand miles, comprehending in it Golden Castile, Guiana, Peru, Brisile, and Chili. The first is so called from the abun∣dance of gold in it, lying in the Northern parts of Peruana, and part of the Istmus, which is but seventeen miles broad between sea and sea: Its admirably stored with silver, Spices, Pearls, and medici∣nal herbs, and is divided into the Provinces of Castella del oro, Nova Andaluzia, Nova Granata, and Carthagena. Castella del Oro is in the very Istmus, an unhealthful Countrey: the chief Cities are Nombre de dios on the East, and Panama on the West side: Through which two places comes all the traffique be∣tween Spain, and Peru. The commodities from Peru being unladen at Panama in the South sea, and thence carried by land to Nombre de dios, in the North sea, and thence shiped to Spain. In Guiana is the great River Orenoque, which is Navigable with ships of burthen for one thousand miles, and with Boats, and Pinnasses al∣most two thousand more: It was discovered by Sir Walter Rawleigh, and the River Margnon, called the River of the Amazons, which is Navigable almost six thousand miles, and towards the sea two hundred miles broad. Peru, lieth under the Aequinoctial line, and stretcheth for the space of eight hundred leagues, upon six hundred whereof, viz. from A∣tacama, to Tumbez it never raineth and yet it is as fruitful a land for all sorts of necessaries for the life of man, as is in the world: On the West frontire, is a mighty ridg of high Mountains that are always co∣vered with Snow, from whence issue great store of Rivers into the
South sea, with the water whereof, being led by sluces, and channels, they moisten their vineyards, and Corn fields, which makes them exceeding fruitful: Besides, Mines of gold and silver, there are mines of Copper, and Tin, there is also abundance of Salt-peter, and Brimstone. It is now well replenished with horses, kine, sheep, goats, and Wheat. The Fortresse of Cusco Described. One of the Incas of Peru built a fort, that may rather seem the work of Devils than of men, especially considering that these Indians had neither Iron, nor steel to work, and cut the stones with, nor Cart, nor Oxen to draw them: yet was this Fort built with stones that seemed Rocks, rather than stones, drawn by strength of men with great Cables, and that through uneven ways, in rough mountains: many of them being brought from places that were ten, twelve, and some fifteen Leagues off: especially that stone which the Indians cal∣led VVearied, which was brought fifteen Leagues, and over a great river in the way: The most of them came five Leagues off these stones they joined so close together in the building, that the joynts could scarcely bee discerned, which required often lifting up, and setting down, neither could they make Cranes, or any kind of Engines to help them therein, neither had they square, or Rule to direct their work. Instead of mortar they used a kinde of Clay that held fa∣ster. This Fortresse was built on an hill on the North side of the City of Cusco, the hill was so steep on one side, that that way it could not bee assaulted, and therefore one wall served on that side, which was two hundred fathoms long: On the other sides they made three walls, one without another, each being above two hundred fathoms, and were made in the fashion of an half Moon, in which there were stones admirably great: each wall had in the middest one gate, which was covered over with one entire stone: each wall stood thirty foot di∣stant from the other, and at the top of them the battlements were above a yard high: Within those walls there were three strong forts, the middlemost was round, which had in it a Conduit of very good water, brought under ground from far. The walls were all adorned with gold and silver, and had Images of beasts, birds, and Plants enchased therein, which served instead of Tapestry, the other two Forts were square, and they had passages under ground from one to another, artificially made with Labarinthian windings, and turnings, in∣extricable but by a thread. They drew their great stones with great Cables: To draw the stone which they called Wearied, they had twenty thousand Indians, the one half before, the other behind, and yet in one uneven passage it crushed three or four thousand of them to death. This proved so un∣weildy that they never laid it in the building, Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1478.
Another of the Incas to shew his magnificence, caused a chain of gold to bee made, which was seven hundred foot long, and every link as big as a mans wrist, two hundred Indians could but lift it. Caxamalca, another City in Peru, is four miles in circuit, entered by two gates▪ on the one side stands a great Palace walled about, having within it a great Court planted with trees: this they call The house of the Sun, whom they worship, putting off their shooes when they enter into it: in this City there are two thousand houses; the streets are as strait as a line, the walls are strong; built of stone about three fathoms high; within there are fair fountains of water. In the mid∣dest is a very fair street walled about, having before it a fortress of stone. On one side of this street was the Palace of the nas, or Em∣peror, with lodgings and Gardens: the houses were all painted with diverse colours, and in one room were two great Fountains adorned with plates of Gold: one of them was so hot that a man cannot en∣dure his hand in it, the other was cold. Atabalipa was Emperour when the Spaniards took it, from whom they presently got fifty thousand Pezoes of gold, each of them being worth one ducat, and two Carolines, and seven thousand Marks of silver, besides many Eme∣ralds. The Spaniards asked Atabalipa what he would give them for his ran∣some? Hee told them that hee would fill that room with Gold, to a mark, that was higher than a tall man could reach by a span, the room being five and twenty foot long, and fifteen foot broad: Then they asked him how much silver hee would give besides: Hee an∣swered, as much as ten thousand Indians could carry in ves∣sels of silver of diverse sorts. The Spaniards went to Cusco to receive part of it, where they found a Temple of the Sun covered with plates of gold: as also many pots and vessels of gold, yea there was such store of gold as amazed them, especially one seat which weighed ninteen thousand Pezoes of gold: In another room the pavement, and walls were covered with plates of gold and silver, they found also a great house full of pots, and tubs of silver: The Spaniards having worn out their horses shooes in their travel, caused the Indians to shooe them with gold. In the City of Pachalchami, they found an Image with many Emeralds at his feet fastened in gold, Idem p. 1490. Peru is plentiful in all manner of grain; hath civil Inhabitants, ma∣ny Cities, and an healthful air. It hath store of Tobacco, first brought into England by some Marriners, Anno Christi 1585. the use whereof is now grown too common. It abounds above all other Pro∣vinces with gold and silver. In this Countrey is the river of Plate, one hundred and fifty miles broad at the mouth, and two thousand miles long. In it also is a beast that hath a bag in her neck, into which shee puts her young ones when any body approaches, and so runs away with them, there is also a sort of fig-trees, of which they write that the Northside that stands towards the Mountains, bringeth forth fruit in the Summer only: and the Southside towards the Sea is fruit∣full
only in winter. Atabalipa King of this Countrey being taken prisoner by the Spaniards, was forced to redeem his life, with an house full of refined gold and silver, judged to bee worth ten mil∣lions, which when they had received, they perfidiously slew him. The admirable High-waies in Peru described. In Peru in the West-Indies are two admirable High-wayes made by the Ingas, or Emperours: The one is by the Andes, or Forrests from Pasto unto Chile, being nine hundred Leagues long, the Caw∣sey five and twenty foot broad; and every four leagues hath a state∣ly house, where was provision of victuals, and apparel, and every half League, men that stood ready to carry messages, and orders from hand to hand. The other way was thorow the Plains along the coast, of twenty five foot broad, and on each side a wall of a mans height from Piura, to Chile, where both the wayes met. This latter way was between trees that yeelded a very pleasant shadow in those hot Countries, and both of them began at the imperial Ci∣ty of Cuzco. P. Pil. v. 3. p. 887, 888. The Emperors Garden described. There belonged also to the Incas a Garden of silver, and gold, wherein were many sorts of Herbs, Flowers, Plants, Trees, Beasts, great and small, Snakes, Snails, Lizzards, Butterflies, small and great Birds, each set in their places all of gold: They had also Maiz, Qui∣nua; Pulse, Fruit-trees, with fruit on them all of gold, and silver, re∣sembling the natural. In the Incas house they had heaps of wood all counterfeit of gold, and silver. All the vessels (which were infi∣nite) for the Temple-service, Pots, Pans, Tubs, Hogsheads were of gold, and silver, yea the spades▪ and pickaxes, for the Garden were of the same. At the taking of this City by the Spaniards, the I∣mage of the Sun fell to one Captains share, who lost it one night at dice, whereupon they said, That hee had played away the Sun before it was up. P. Pil. v. 4. p. 1464, &c. The Temple of the Sun described. Cusco, the Imperial City of the Incas in America, when the Spani∣ards first took it, had in it a Temple of the Sun, all the walls where∣of were covered with plates of gold, from the top to the bottom. At the East end was the image of the Sun of one plate of gold, as thick again as the other: the face was round with raies of gold like flames of fire, all of one peece: It was so big, that it filled all from one wall to the other. On both sides were the bodies of their de∣ceased Kings, embalmed, set in seats of gold, placed on planks of
gold: All the doors about the Temple were lined with plates of gold; without the Temple, on the top of the walls ran a champhered work of gold, above a yard broad, round about the Temple; Beyond the Temple ran a cloister of four squares, round about the top whereof was such a crown of champhered gold above a yard broad: In the corners of the Cloister were Chappels▪ one whereof was dedicated to the Moon, all which with the Gates thereof were covered with plates of silver: the image was placed, as that of the Suns, with the face of a woman, all of one plank of silver▪ The next Chappel was de∣dicated to Venus, and the Starres, lined also with silver, and the porch of silver. The third was dedicated to the Thunder, and Light∣ning: The fourth to the Rainbow; which two last were all lined, and garnished with gold. Hard by was an house for the Priests, all lined with gold from the top to the bottom. There were twelve doors to the Cloister, and as many Tabernacles or Shrines which were all plated over with gold in form of Porches, and the floores covered with gold. The Images were all set with Turkesses, and Emeralds. In the house also were five Fountains, of water wherein they washed the sacrifices: out of them the water ran in Pipes of gold; and many of their pillars were of gold, hollow, and some of them were of sil∣ver. Brasile, hath on the North Guiana, on the South the River of Plate and Chile, on the East the Ocean, and on the West the Moun∣tains of Peru, called the Andes: The hills are high, and craggie, full of ravenous beasts, and poisonous Serpents: on them also inhabite a barbarous people going stark naked. In the Vallies the air is healthy, the earth fat, and alwayes flourishing. It yeelds great store of Sugar, and rich Mines: and Brasil wood to dye with; the natives go naked, and are very barbarous: In their feasts they used to roast a fat man, and cutting him to collops, did eat him with much delight: Both men and women are great swimmers, and excellent divers, being able to endure long under water. Here is a beast so slow in motion, that in fifteen dayes, hee cannot go further than a man can throw a stone, whence the Portugals call it Pigritia. Brasile, is generally temperate, of a delicate and healthful air, so that many of the Inhabitants live till they bee above one hundred years old: generally, its neither hot, nor cold: The Heavens are very pure, and clear, especially by night: The Moon is prejudici∣al to health, and corrupteth things very much: the mornings are most healthful: there are very little twilights: their Summer be∣gins in September, and endeth in February: Their Winter in March, and ends in August: the nights and dayes are almost all equal: The Country is very watery, both from the plenty of Rain, and Ri∣vers. Its full of great woods, which are green all the year: To∣wards the Sea coast it is Hilly: From Parnambuck to the Captainship of the Holy-Ghost, its scarce of stone: From thence to St. Vincent, moun∣tainous, with many Quarries of stone: there is little provision for apparrel, the Country yeelding nothing but Cotton-wool.
They have fair, and large Deer, with large heads, of several kinds: As also Elks somewhat like a Mule, that have no horns; a snout that they shrink up, and put forth, and are excellent swimmers. There are store of wild Boars that have their navel on their backs, whence comes a sent like that of Foxes. There are a sort of Acuti, like Conies, that live in their houses, that having filled their bellies, hide what they leave till they bee again hungry. Their Pacas are like Pigs, their flesh is pleasant, but they never bring forth above one at a time. There are Ounces, some black, some grey, some speck∣led, a cruel, and dangerous beast. The Curigue is grey, as big as a Cat, shaped like a Fox, and smells worse; they have a bag from the fore to the hinder feet, wherein they carry their young ones, till they can get their own food: they usually have six or seven young ones. The Armadillo is as big as a Pig, of a whitish colour, having a long snout, and the body armed with things like Plates, so hard, that no arrow can peirce them, except in the flank: with their snouts they dig into the earth with incredible celerity: their flesh tastes pleasant∣ly, and of their skins they make purses. There are several sorts of Porcupines: If one of their quills enter the flesh, it works it self in strangely, if it bee not pulled soon out. There are many kindes of Apes with beards, and Monkies; and wild Cats with excellent Furrs. There are huge Snakes, some of twenty foot long, that will swallow a whole Deer; others there are that live of Birds Eggs, black, long, and having a yellow breast; they live on trees. Another sort there is, big, and long, all green, and beautiful, that live also of Birds, and Eggs. Another sort with a long snout that feeds only upon Frogs, there are rattle-snakes so swift, that they call them the flying-snakes, some of them twelve or thirteen spans long. There are abun∣dance, of other sorts, with Scorpions, and Spiders, and so many Lizards that they cover the walls of their houses. There are abundance of Parots that flye in flocks, and fill whole Islands, they are fair, and of sundry colours, and are good meat. There are other curious birds, and amongst the rest, the Awaken-Bird, which sleeps six months, and lives the other six months: they have Partridges, Turtle-Doves, Blackbirds: yea and Ostriches, Eagles, Faulcons, &c. They have many sort of fruit-trees, and Cocoes, and above twenty sorts of Palm-trees; Pine-trees also, and others that are me∣decinable: some they have that never rot, and others that yeeld an excellent smell. Chilie, hath on the East the Virginian Sea, on the West the South Sea, or Mare del Zur: on the North Peru, and on the South the Streights of Magellane. Its very cold, and in the Midland very mountainous, and barren, but towards the Sea level, fruitful, and watered with many Rivers that flow from the mountains: It yeelds plenty of gold, abundance of Hony, store of Cattel, and
Wine; fruits, and plants brought from Spain prosper well here: here are the Patagons some of them are said to bee eleven foot high. Here is a River having in the day time a violent stream, and in the night no water in it, the water proceeding from the melting of the snow upon the Mountains. The gold in Chily is gotten two wayes: One, by washing the earth in great trays of wood; the earth by washing wasteth, and the Gold remaineth in the bottome. The other is by art to draw it out of the Mines: every shower is a shower of gold: for with the violence of the water falling from the Mountains, it brings from them gold along with it. There are also rich Copper Mines, Horses, Goats, and Kine brought thither out of Spain, are so encreased, that there are found thousands in heards, wild, and without owners. They have also o∣ther Cattel, that are natural to America, in some of which the Be∣zar stones are found. Amongst the rest, there is a little beast like unto a Squirel, whose skin is the rarest, delicatest, and softest furr that is: It is of a grey colour. No Fruits that have stones will pros∣per here. The Magellanick Streights Described. Fourteen Leagues within the Cape of St. Mary, lyeth the first Streight, where it ebbs and flows violently: the Streight being not full half a mile broad, so that the first entrance is dangerous, and doubt∣ful: three Leagues this Streight continues, whence it opens into a sea eight miles long, and as broad, beyond which lyes the se∣cond Streight, West, South West, from the first, a dangerous pas∣sage also, being three leagues long, and a mile in breadth, this opens into another Sea, extending to the Cape of Victory, a place of such a nature, that which way soever a man steers his course, hee shall be sure to have the wind against him: the length of it is forty Leagues, the breadth in some places two leagues, in some others not half a mile: the channel so deep, that there can bee no anchorage, the wa∣ter full of turnings, and the stream so violent that being once entred there is no returning. On both sides are high Mountains continual∣ly covered with Snow, from whence proceed also dangerous counter-winds, that beat on all sides of it. The Principal of the American Islands Described. Many of the Islands in this part of the World have nothing remark∣able in them, and therefore I will speak but briefly of them. The Islands neer unto the Gulph of Mexico Described. At Paria begin two ranks of Islands, the one extending East and West, the other North, and South: Amongst the former is Margari∣ta, so called from the abundance of Pearls gotten there: but being bar∣ren,
and wanting fresh water, it is not inhabited. Cubagua is her next neighbour, yeildeth also store of Pearls, but for the like barrennesse is unpeopled: Here were so many Pearls got∣ten, that the King of Spains fifth, amounted ordinarily to fifteen thousand Duckats a year. On the East part of this Island neer un∣to the Sea, there is a fountain that casteth forth a bituminous sub∣stance like Oil, in such abundance, that it is seen floating upon the sea, two or three leagues off. Then follow Orchilia, Oruba, and some other Islands concerning which we have no more than their names upon record. That other rank that trends Northward▪ are Granata, St. Vincent, St. Lucia, Dominica, and North-west, Desiderara, St. Christophers, Holy-Cross, &c. all which are called the Islands of the Caribes, or Canibals, the Inhabitants whereof eat mans flesh, and passing over in their Canoes, to other Islands, hunt for men as others do for beasts At home they only cover their privities, but in war they use many Ornaments: they are nimble, beardlesse, shoot poisoned arrows, bore holes in their ears, and nostrils, for bravery, which the richer sort deck with gold, the poorer with shels, and make their teeth black, which never ake nor rot: their houses are round, they have hanging beds of Cotton, called Hammackoe, and they worship only the Sun and Moon. They have Parrats bigger than Pheasants, with backs, breasts, and bellies of a purple colour. In Guadabuza is a fountain so hot, that it will quickly boil a peece of meat. In Mevis also there is an hot bath like ours in England. In Mona are wild Boars, and great wild Bulls: in Moneta are abun∣dance of Fowl. The Antiles Islands are seven. St. Vincent, Granado, Lucia, Mata∣lina, Dominica, Guadalupa, and Aysey, where the Natives paint themselves, to keep off the Muskitoes, wear their hair long, cut their skins in diverse works, worship the Devil, and poison their arrows. Boriquen, or St. Johns Island is three hundred miles long, and seven∣ty broad, traversed with a rough Mountain, out of which flow ma∣ny rivers: Here the Spaniards have some Towns: the chiefest is Por∣to Rico, taken by the Earl of Cumberland, Anno Christi 1597. from whence hee brought about eighty cast peices, and much other wealth. Mevis hath in it great store of wood, and in a valley betwixt two hills, there is a bath like unto ours in England: There are in it store of Conies, sundry kinds of Fowl, and plenty of Fish; some of our English under Captain Middleton, Anno Christi 1606, passing through the woods, came to a most pleasant Garden, being one hundred paces square on every side, and had many Cotton trees growing in it, and many Guiacum trees; about it were such goodly tall trees growing, as if they had been planted by Art. In the Islands of Margarita, and Cubagua, which are situate nigh un∣to the Golden Castile, there is neither Corn, Grass, Trees, nor wa∣ter; so that sometimes the people will give a tun of Wine for a tun
of Water: But they have abundance of precious stones, hence cal∣led Margarites, and the gems called Unions▪ because they alwayes grow in couples. Jamica described. Jamica, or the Island of St. James, which was once very popu∣lous, but now is almost destitute of Inhabitants; the Spaniards ha∣ving slain in this, and a neighbouring Island called Boriquen above sixty thousand living souls: so that the women used to kill their Children before they had given them life, that they might not serve so cruel a Nation: Its in length two hundred and fourscore mils, and in breadth threescore and ten. Its well watered, and hath two Towns of note, Oristana, and Sevil: Here the English have this last year planted themselves. Jamica is very subject to Hurricanes, which are such terrible Gusts of wind, that nothing can resist them. They urn up Trees, over∣turn houses, transport ships from Sea to Land, and bring with them a most dreadful confusion▪ they are most frequent in August, Septem∣ber, and October, The natives are of quicker wits, than in other Islands. Cuba is three hundred miles long▪ some say three hundred leagues, and threescore and ten broad. Its full of Forrests, Rivers, Lakes salt, and fresh, and mountains: Here the people were prohibited the eat∣ing of Serpents, as a dainty, reserved for the higher powers. The air is temperate, the soil is fertil, producing excellent brass, but the gold is drossie: it abounds with Ginger, Mastick, Cassia, Aloes, Cina∣mon, Sugar, Flesh, Fish, and Fowle. The chief Cities being seated on the Northern shoar, are, St. Jgo, and Havana, a safe rode for ships, where the King of Spains▪ Navie rides till they carry home their rich lading. In this Isle of Cuba two things are admirable: one a Valley trend∣ing between two hills for three leagues, which produceth abundance of stones, of a perfect round form like bullets: The other a Foun∣tain, whence Bitumen, or a pitchie substance floweth abundantly, and is excellent to pitch ships. In these Islands the Inhabitans have been wasted by the Mines of Hispaniola, and Cuba to the number of twelve hundred thousand. Bermudae were discovered by Sir Thomas Summers, and thence called Summers Islands: they are four hundred in number: In the biggest is a Colony of English, who found it fruitful, and agreeable to their constitutions. The commodities in these Islands, are variety of Fish, plenty of Swine, Mulberries, Silk-worms, Palmitos, Cedars, Pearls, and Am∣ber-greese. They have great variety of Fowle, as big as Pidgions, which lay speckled Eggs as big as Hens Eggs on the Sand. Another Fowle there is that lives in holes, like Conie-holes: Tortoises they have, and in the belly of one of them they finde a bushel of Eggs, very sweet: One of them will serve fifty men at a meal: Their win∣ter
is in December, January, and February, yet not so sharp, but then you may meet with young birds. Its so invironed with Rocks, that without knowledge a Boat of ten Tuns cannot bee brought in, and yet within is safe harbour for the greatest ship. Hispaniola, which lamenteth her loss of three millions of her in∣habitants murthered by the bloody Spaniards. Its in compass one thousand and four hundred miles, having a temperate air, fertil soil, rich Mines, Amber, and Sugar. It excels Cuba in three things. 1. In the fineness of gold. 2. In the increase of Sugar, one Sugar-Cane will here fill twenty, sometimes thirty measures. 3. The great fruitfulness of the soil; the Corn yeelding an hundred fold. The chief City is St. Domingo, ransaked by Sir Francis Drake, Anno Christi 1585. And lately attempted by our English, but through miscarriages they lost their opportunity of taking it, which made them go to Jamica. Hispaniola seemeth to enjoy a perpetual spring, the trees always flourishing, and the Medows all the year cloathed in green. Its in a manner equally divided by four great Rivers, descending from high mountains, whereof Junna runneth East, Attibunicus West, Na∣biba South, and Jache Northward: Diverse of their Rivers after they have run a course of ninety miles, are swallowed up of the earth. On the top of an high Mountain is a lake three miles in compasse, into which some Rivolets run, without any apparent issue. In one part of this Island is a Lake, whose water is salt, though it receive into it four great fresh rivers, and twenty smaller: It is thought, to have some intercourse with the sea, because some Sharks are found in it: it is sub∣ject to stormes, and tempests. Another Lake there is that is partly salt, partly fresh, being twenty five miles long, and eight broad. These are in a large plain which is one hundred and twenty miles in length, and between twenty five and twenty eight miles in breadth. Another valley there is, that is two hundred miles long, and broader than the former, and another of the same breadth, but one hundred and eighty miles long. One of the Provinces in Hispaniola called Magua, is a plain compas∣sed about with hills, wherein are many thousand Rivers and Brooks, whereof twelve are very great: some thousands of them are enriched with gold. Another Province is most barren, and yet most rich, with Mines. From this Island the Spaniards used to bring yearly, four or five thousand Duckats of gold. This Island is much infested with flyes, whose stinging, causeth great swelling; also there is a worm that creepeth into the soles of mens feet, which causeth great swelling, and pain, for which they have no remedy, but to lance the flesh, and so to dig them out. They have a certain kinde of Beetles, which have four lights that shine much in the dark, two in their eyes, and two under their wings when they flye; they use to bring them into their houses, where they do them double service: First, by killing the Gnats: secondly, by giving them light, which is so great, that they can see to read by it. Kine
in this Island carried thither by the Spaniards are so multiplied, and grown wild, that they kill them for their hides and Tallow, leaving their flesh to bee devoured by dogs, and fowl: Almost forty thou∣sand of them have been transported in one year. Anno Christi 1519. Ants were as noisome to them, as Grashoppers in other parts of the world; they spoiled their fruits, and fruit trees; they could keep nothing in their houses, which was fit to bee eaten, from them, and had they continued, they would have unpeopled the Island. There are worms also which do such harm in Timber, that a house will scarce stand here thirty years: when the King in this Countrey died, they buried the best beloved of his Concubines with him, who also had o∣ther women buried for to attend upon them in the other World, toge∣ther with their Jewels and Ornaments: they had also set in their Se∣pulchre a Cup of water, and some of their Cassavi bread. Anno Christi 1508, here happened such an Hurricane as threw down most of the houses in Domingo, and Bona ventura, destroied twenty sail of ships, lifted up many men into the air, who falling down again were miserably bruised. Newfound-land described. Newfound-land is an Island bordering upon the continent of Ame∣rica, no farther distant than England is from the nearest part of France. It lies between six and forty, and three and fifty degrees of Norther∣ly latitude: Its near as big as Ireland, and is near half the way be∣tween Ireland, and Virginea; even in winter its as pleasant, and health∣ful a place as England. The natural Inhabitants are not many, and those rude, ignorant of God, and living under no kinde of civil Go∣vernment. In their habits, customes, and manners, they resemble the Indians, which live upon the continent. They are ingenious, and tractable, and take great pains in helping those Christians which yearly fish upon their coasts, to kill, cut, and boil their Whales, ex∣pecting nothing for their labour, but a little bread, or some other trifles. All along the coast of this Country, there are many spacious and excellent Bayes, some of them stretching into the land more than twenty leagues. And round about the Coast, and in the Bayes, there are many small Islands, all within a league of the land, which are both fair, and fruitful, neither doth any Country in the world afford greater store of good harbours, nor those more safe, commodious, and free from danger. The soil of the Country in the Vallies, and sides of the Moun∣tains is so fruitful, that without the labour of man it naturally pro∣duceth great plenty of Pease, and Vetches, as full, and wholesome as ours in England: Other places produce plenty of Grass: There are Strawberries red, and white, and Rasberries as fair, and good as ours in England: Multitude of Bilberries, and other delicate Berries, in great abundance: There are also Pears, Cherries, Filbeards, &c. There are Herbs for Sallets, and broth, as Parsley, Alexander, Sor∣rel,
&c. As also Flowers, as Red, and Damask-Roses, with others; beautiful, and delightful both to the eye, and smell: There are also diverse Physical Herbs, and Roots. Some Corn that our men have sowed proved very good, and yeelded great increase: so do Cabba∣ges, Carrats, Turneps, Lettice, &c. In the Country there are great store of Deer, Hares, Foxes, Squir∣rels, Beavers, Wolves, Bears, and other kindes of Beasts, both for necessity, profit, and delight. Besides great numbers of small Birds, there are Hawks, great and small, Partridges, Thrustles, Nigh∣tingals, &c. As also Ravens, Gripes, Crowes, &c. besides plenty of water-Fowle, as Geese, Ducks, Gulls, Penguines, Pigeons, &c. Of these there is such abundance, that the Fisher-men which yearly trade thither finde great refreshing by them. The Country yeelds store of Rivers, and Springs, pleasant, de∣lightful, and wholesome: together with abundance of fuel for the fire; besides Timber Trees, as Fir, Spruce, fit for Masts of ships; from whence also comes abundance of Turpentine: Pines also, and Birch-Trees, &c. The Rivers, and Harbours are stored with deli∣cate Fish, as Salmons, Pearles, Eeles, Herrings, Makarel, Flounders, Cods, Trouts, as large, fat, and sweet as any in the world: Besides Lobsters, Crab-fish, Muscles, &c. There are also Beavers, Otters, &c. The Seas along the shore yeeld Whales, Spanish-Makarel, Dor∣rel, Pales, Herring, Porposses, Seales, &c. Especially by their Cod-fishing, both our own, and other Nations are much enriched. Two hundred and fifty sail of Ships go thither usually in one year from England. New-Scotland described. New-Scotland lyeth on the East of St. Croix: on the North its compassed with the great River Canada; and hath the main Ocean on the South. It hath many safe harbours, and great Rivers, ha∣ving on the sides of them delicate medows, where the earth of it self, bringeth forth Roses red, and white, and Lillies, having a dain∣ty smell. The soil is fat, producing several sorts of Berries, as Goos-berries, Straw-berries, Hind-berries, Ras-berries, &c. as also Pease, Wheat, Barley, and Rye. The Rivers abound with Lobsters, Cockles, and other small fishes: There are great store of wild fowle, as Geese, Herons, Ducks, Wood-cocks, Pigeons,: The Coast hath store of Cod, and other great fishes: The Land is full of wood. mostly of great Oaks; the rest Fir-trees, Spruce, Birch, and many o∣ther sorts here unknown. Groenland described. Groenland is accounted part of America, and is high, mountainous, and full of broken Islands along the Coast: It hath good Baies, and navigable Rivers that are full of fish: Between the mountains are plea∣sant plains and vallies: there ae store of fowle; black Foxes, and
Deer: The people wander up and down in the Summer time, with∣out fixed habitations, for hunting, and fishing, carrying their Tents, and baggage with them: they are of a middle stature, brown, active, warlike, eating raw flesh, or a little perboiled in blood, oil, or a little water, which they drink. Their apparrel are Beasts, or Fowles skins, the hairy, or feathered side outward in summer, and inward in winter: Their Arrows and Darts have but two feathers, and a bone∣head; no wood growes there; they worship the Sun. Their Win∣ter-houses are built of Whales-bones, covered with earth, and vaulted two yards deep under the earth; within land they have a King that is carried upon mens shoulders: They have Hares as white as Snow, with long fur: Dogs which live on fish, whose pizzels, as also of the Foxes, are bony. Their Summer work is to dry their fish on the Rocks, for their Winter provision: Every one hath a Boat made of Fir-wood, driven thither from other Countries, cove∣red with Seals-skins, about twenty foot long, sowed with sinewes, or guts; so light, that one may carry them, and so swift, that no ship can hold way with them, and yet they use but one Oar which they hold by the middle, in the midst of their Boat, being broad at both ends wherewith they row forward, or backward, at pleasure. A brief Narrative of some of the barbarous, and inhumane cruel∣ties exercised by the Spaniards upon the Indians in this American world, collected out of their own Authors. Bartholomew de las Casas, a Domnick Frier, and Bishop in America, who wrote in the year 1542. saith thus of them. The Indians are a simple, harmless people, loyal to their Lords, and such as gave no occasion of offence to the Spaniards, till by their extream injuries they provoked them thereto. To these Lambs (saith hee) the Spani∣ards came as cruel, and hungry Tygers, Bears, and Lions, intending nothing for these forty years but blood, and slaughter to satisfie their avarice and ambition: Insomuch that of three millions of Na∣tives, that they found in Hispaniola there remains not one. Cuba, and the other Islands indured the like miseries; and in the firm land ten Kingdomes, greater than all Spain, were dis-peopled, and left desolate, in which there perished not less than twelve mil∣lions by their tyranny, hee might as truly have said fifty millions. Their cruelties at their first planting in Hispaniola drave the poor Indians to their shifts, and to their weak defence, which so enraged these Lions, that they spared neither man, woman, nor child: yea they ripped up the great bellied women▪ and used to lay wagers which of them could with greatest dexterity cut off an Indians head, or cut him in sunder in the midst: They would pluck the Infants by the heels from their Mothers breasts, and dash out their brains a∣gainst the stones, or throw them into the River. They set up Gib∣bets, and in honour of Christ, and his Apostles (as they used pro∣phanely
to say) they would both hang, and burn them. Others they took, and cutting their hands almost off, bid them carry letters to their Country-men, who for fear of these Tyrants were fled into the Mountains: The Nobles, and chiefest men they broiled on Gridirons: I once (saith mine Author) saw four or five of them thus roasted, and when they made a lamentable noise, they stopped their mouthes, and so made them indure the torment till they dyed. They kept Dogs to hunt them out of their coverts, which devoured these poor souls: and if at any time an Indian thus provoked, killed a Spaniard, they made a Law, that one hundred of them should bee slain for him: One of the Kings proffered to till the ground for them for fifty miles space, if they would spare him, and his people from the Mines; but for recompence, the Spanish Captain deflou∣red his wife, and took him prisoner, and sent him into Spain, where hee perished by the way. In another Province of Hispaniola, the Spanish Governour called be∣fore him three hundred Indian Lords, some of them hee burned, slew others with the sword, and hanged up the Queen; as they did also in another Province: and for the rest which remained after these Butcheries, they shared them amongst them for slaves. The men they consumed in the Mines, the women by tillage, and by heavy burdens that they made them to carry, and both by famine, scourg∣ing, and other miseries. And thus they did in all other places whithersoever they came: In the Islands of St. John, and Jamica were six hundred thousand Inhabitants, and within few years, there were scarcely two undred left in either of them: In Cuba a Cacique, or Lord, called all his sub∣jects together, and shewed them a box of gold, saying, This is the Spaniards God, and made them dance about it, and then hurled it into the River: And afterwards being taken, and condemned to the fire, when hee was bound to the stake, a Frier came and preached to him about Heaven, and Hell: The Cacique asked if any Spaniards were in Heaven? yea (said the Frier) such as were good: Then said the Cacique, I will rather go to Hell, than come where any of that cruel Nation are. I was once present (saith Casas) when the Inhabitants of a Town brought us forth victuals, and met us with great kindness, and the Spaniards without any cause given, slew three thousand of them, neither sparing age, nor sex. At another time (saith hee) at their request, I sent to other Towns to meet us, promising them good u∣sage, and when two and twenty Caciques met us, our Captain against all Faith, caused them to bee burned; which base usage caused the poor Indians to hang themselves: so that a Spaniard seeing them take this course, hee made them beleeve that hee would also hang him∣self, to persecute them in the other world, which kept some from this self-execution. Six thousand Children dyed in three, or four months space of Famine, their Parents being sent away to the Mines; the rest they hunted out in the Mountains, and desolate Islands.
In the Land of Lucaia they destroyed all, and when they shipped mul∣titudes of them for the Mines in Hispaniola, for want of food, a third part of them commonly perished by the way, so that an unskilful Pilot might have been directed his way by these floating Carkasses. The like havock they made in the Continent, almost unpeopling all places whe∣ther they came. From Dariena to Nicaragua, they slew four hundred thousand people with Dogs, sword, fire, and other torments. They used to send Friers to Preach, that under pain of confiscation, and losse of Lands, Liberty, Life, &c. they should acknowledge God, and the King of Spain: yea they would steal to some places, and half a mile off of the citys by night they would make this Proclamation where none heard it, and then in the Night whilst they were asleep, fire their houses, slaying, and taking Captive at their pleasures, and then fall to search for gold. A certain Cacique gave the Spanish Gover∣nour the weight of nine thousand Crowns in gold, and hee by way of requital to extort more, bound him to a post, and putting fire to his feet, forced him to send home for three thousand more, and yet not satisfied, hee persisted to torment him, till the marrow came forth of his feet, wherewith hee died; when any of the Indians fainted under their grievous burdens, or for want of food, the Spaniards, least they should loose time in undoing the chain wherein they were tyed, they would cut off his head, and so let the body fall out. At another time they robbed the Nicaraguans of their Corn: whereby thirty thousand of them died of famine, and a mother was driven to eat her own child: besides, five hundred thousand were carried away into bondage, and fifty or sixty thousand more were slain in their warres: so that in one of the most populous Regions in the World (saith Casas) there remain not above four or five thousand persons. Cortes used to have four Kings to wait upon him: hee burned sixty Kings, their children looking on. Another Spaniard cast four of their Kings to bee devoured by his dogs. In New-Spain from the year 1518 to 1530. within the compasse of four hundred and eighty miles about Mexico, they destroyed above four millions of people by fire, and sword, besides those that dyed by miserable servitude and drudgery. In the Province of Naco and Honduras in the space of eleven years, two millions of men perished by the same ways. In Guatimala, in sixteen years space, were destroi∣ed five millions of souls. Alvarado, who was the instrument of this destruction dyed by the fall of his horse, and had his City of Guati∣mala destroyed, and overwhelmed by a threefold deluge, of Earth, water, and stones. In his expeditions, he forced the Indians by ten, or twenty thousand at a time to go with him, allowing them no o∣ther sustenance, but the flesh of their slain enemys, keeping in his Ar∣my Shambles of mans flesh. In Panuco and Xalisco, they exercised the like cruelties: One of the Spaniards forced eight thousand of the Indians to wall about his Garden, and suffered them all to perish with Famine. In Machua∣chan they tortured the King that came forth to meet them, that they
might extort gold from him: they set his feet in the stocks, and put fire thereto, binding his hands to a Post behind him, and then had a boy standing by, that basted his roasted feet with Oil: Another stood with a Cross-bow bent against his breast, and a third stood with Dogs ready to devour him, by these tortures hee dyed. They forced the Indi∣ans to bring them their gods, hoping they had been of gold, but when their golden hopes failed, they forced them to redeem them again with Gold. Yea where the Fryers had forced the Indians to cast a∣way their gods, the Spaniards brought more from other places to sell them. In the Province of St. Martha, they laid utterly waste and desolate four hundred and fifty miles of land, by destroying the Inhabitants: The like they did in the Kingdome of Venezula, where they destroyed four or five millions. Besides, they carried of them Captive out of the Continent into the Islands, a million of Peo∣ple. They spared no sort of persons; plucked the Children from the breasts to quarter them to their dogs, tortured Kings with new de∣vices borrowed either from the Inquisition, or from hell: they used to cut off the Noses, and hands of men and women that lived peacea∣bly with them: they sold Fathers, Mothers, Children, asunder into diverse places, and to diverse persons never to meet again: they used to ly with the women, that being with child they might yeild them the more mony in their sale. The Spanish Priests used to devote them with Curses to the Devil, and taught them vices by their evil practises and examples, insomuch as one said, Hee would perswade the King of Spain to send no more Priests into America. They teach them Usury, Lying, Swearing, Blasphemy. A Caciques son that was towardly in his youth, and proved after dissolute, being asked the reason of it, said, since I was a Christian, I have learned to swear several sorts of Oaths, to Dice, to Lye, to swagger, and now I want nothing but a Con∣cubine, to make mee a compleat Christian: This made them to say, that of all Gods the Christians God was the worst, which had such bad ser∣vants, and to wish for their own gods again, of whom they never re∣ceived so much hurt as from the Christians. A Christian (said one of them) is one that impiously demands Maiz, Honey, Silk, Raiment, an Indian woman to lye with; they call for gold and silver, are idle and will not work, are Gamesters, Dicers, wicked Blasphemers, Backbiters, Quarrellers, &c. And taking a peece of Gold, hee said, Loe this is the Christians God: For this they kill us, and one another, for this they play, blaspheme, curse, steal, and do all manner of villanies. In Peru they had publike places of torture, whereinto they might put a thousand of the miserable Creatures at once, by exquisite tortures to force them to a confession of their hidden treasures: such as escaped these, used to hang themselves in the Mountains, and their wives by them, and their little children at their feet. By Dogs at Land they worried them, and in their Pearl fishings, exposed them to the ravenous Sharks in the seas; by fire, and sword consuming twenty millions of people, since the Jesuits went amongst them. These
and infinite more, have been the cruelties which the cruel Spaniards have exercised upon the poor, naked, innocent people: Our Author, a Papist, that relates these things, least any should think that hee wrote too much, protests that they were a thousand times worse than hee had set down, the Reading whereof might astonish the sence of the Reader, amaze his Reason, exceed his faith, and fill his heart with horror, and uncouth passions. It is no marvel that God follows such bloody beasts with his vengeance, as lately hee hath done (if the re∣lation be true) which cometh from the mouths of some of themselves, lately taken by some of our Frigots upon the Coast of Spain, as they came out of these Countryes, whereof the Narrative follows. The Marquesse of Baydex, now taken by our Fleet neer Cadiz, up∣on examination saith, that above five months since there happened in Lima a fearfull Earthquake, and a most miraculous rain of fire in Peru, insomuch that the whole City of Lima is swallowed up, and destroyed, as also the City of Calao, in which places there perished above eleven thousand Spaniards, and (through the wonderful distinguishing hand of God) not above one hundred Indians. In the City of Lima the King of Spain hath lost by the Earthquake, one hundred Millions of silver ready wrought up. Also the famous Mines of Potozi, where they had their greatest quantities of silver, are destroyed in a wonderfull manner, so that the hill is not to be seen, but all is plain, nor is there any further possibility of having gold, or silver in Peru: Some of the Spaniards themselves acknowledge, that this judgement is justly befaln them for their cruelty to the poor Indians, who crying to God for ven∣geance, have pulled down this visible hand of God upon them. Lima and Potosi Described. In Lima no houses are covered on the tops, because it never rains, and is a hot Countrey: no City in India is richer. Over the top of the Mountain of Potosi, there always hangs a cloud even in the clearest day. The hill riseth in the form of a Pyramis, being three Leagues high, environed with cold air: at the foot of it standeth the fair City of Potosi, within six leagues about grows no grasse, Corn, nor wood: the entrance, and Mine works are so dangerous, that few that go in return again. The metal lies above two hundred fathoms deep, the King of Spain receives thence yearly, eight, or ten millions of silver. Lima, is the cheifest City in Peru, standing within two Leagues of the South sea, containing about two thousand houses, is very rich, and of more trade than all the Cities of Peru besides. It is the seat of the Vice-Roy, the Arch-Bishop, and of the Inquisition. FINIS.
EXAMPLES OF THE Wonderfull VVorks OF GOD IN THE CREATURES. CHAP. I Of strange Stones, Earth, and Minerals. IN Cornwal, near unto a place called Pensans, is that famous stone called Main-Amber: which is a  great Rock advanced upon some other of meaner size, with so equal a counterpoize, that a man may stir it with the push of his finger, but to remove it quite out of his place, a great number of men are not able. Camb. Brit. p. 188. The like is in the Country of Stratherne in Scotland. In Summerset-shire, near unto Cainsham are found in Stone-quarries, stones resembling Serpents, winding round in manner of a wreath, the head bearing up in the Circumference, and the end of the tail, taking up the centre within: but most of them are headless. Camb. Brit. p. 236. In Gloucestershire upon the hills near Alderly are found certain
stones, resembling Cockles, Periwinckles, and Oisters, which seem to bee the gaimsome works of nature, or such shells turned into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 363. In Yorkshire, about Whitby are found certain stones fashioned like  Serpents foulded, and wrapped round, as in a wreath, so that a man would verily think that they had been sometimes Serpents tur∣ned into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 718. Also in the same County at Huntly Nabb, there ye scattering here, and there amongst the Rocks, stones of divers bigness, so Ar∣tificially by nature shaped round in manner of a Globe, that one would take them to bee big bullets made by the Turners hand, for shot to bee discharged out of great Ordnance; in which, if you break them, are found stony Serpents, enwrapped round like a wreath: but most of them are headlesse. Camb. Brit. p. 721. In the County of Cornwal, near unto St. Neots, there are a num∣ber  of good great Rocks heaped up together, and under them one stone of lesser size, fashioned naturally in the form of a Cheese lying in presse, whereupon its named Wring-cheese. Camb. Brit. p. 192. In Richmondshire amongst the ragged Rocks, are found stones like unto Periwinckles, Cockles, and other shell fish. Camb. Brit. p. 727. In the County of Hereford, a hill which they call Marcley-hill, in the year 1571. (as though it had wakened on a sudden out of a deep sleep) roused it self up, and for the space of three dayes to∣gether moving and shewing it self (as mighty, and huge an heap as it was) with roaring noise in a fearful sort, and overturning all things that stood in the way, advanced it self forward to the wondrous astonishment of the beholders. Camb. Brit. p. 620. In Glamorganshire in a Rock, or Cliffe by the Sea side, there ap∣peareth  a very little chinck, unto which, if you lay your ear, you shall hear a noise as if it were of Smiths at work, one while the blowing of the bellows, another while the striking of the sledge, and hammer; sometimes the sound of the grindstone, and Iron tools rubbing against it, the hissing sparks also of steel gads with∣in holes as they are beaten, and the puffing noise of the fire burning in the furnace. Camb. Brit. p. 643. This is called Merlins Cave. At Aspley  in Bedfordshire, near unto Woburn, there is a kind  of earth that turns wood into stone: For proof whereof there was a woodden Ladder in the Monastery of Woburn, that having lien a good while covered in that earth, was digged forth again all stone. Camb. Brit. p. 401. I have a peece of wood turned into stone by that earth. In Kile, in Scotland, there is a Rock about twelve foot high, and as much in breadth, called the Deaf-Craig: For though a man call ne∣ver so loud, or shoot off a Gun on the one side, yet his fellow on the other side cannot hear the noise. Description of Scotland.
In Argile there is a stone found in diverse places, which being laid  under straw, or stubble, doth set it on fire, by reason of the great heat that it gathereth there. Idem. It is most strange, yet true, that the Arms of the Duke of Rohan in  France, which are Fusils, or Lozenges, are to bee seen in the wood, and stones through all his Country: so that if you break a stone in the mid∣dest, or lopp a bough of a Tree, you shall behold the grain thereof (by some secret cause in nature) Diamonded, or streaked in the fashi∣on of a Lozeng. Camb. Brit. In VVarwick-shire, the Armes of the Shugburies, which are starres, are found in the stones in their own Manour of Shugbury; so that break the stone where you will, and there is the exact fashion of a star in the end of it. Idem, I have some of these stones. In the Kingdome of Fesse in Affrica there is a Mountain called Be∣niguazeval, in the top whereof there is a Cave that casteth out fire per∣petually, Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 807. In Prussia there is great store of Amber, which groweth like Corall in a mountain of the North sea, which is clean covered with water: by the violence of the waves beating against this Rock, the Amber is oft broken off, and cast up by the sea into their Havens. About Bever Castle in Lincoln-shire, are found the stones called As∣troites, which resemble little stars joyned one with another, wherein are to be seen at every Corner five beams, or rayes, and in the middest of every ray is to bee seen a small hollownesse. Cam. Brit. Wee have Corral, Amber, Emeralds, Calcedony, Pearl, O∣nix, Sardonix, Sardis, Bezar, Hemathist, and the Turquoise from A∣rabia, Indostan, and Persia. Pearls, Berils, Saphires, and Adamants, from Zeilan. Jasper, Cornelion, Agate, Heliotrope, Jacinth, and Chrysolite, from Malabar, Nursinga, and Cochin-china. Diamonds from Borneo, and Gulkunda. Gold, Silver, Rubies, Saphires, Granats, To∣paz, Emerald, Smaradg, Espinels, Cats-eyes, and Porcellane, from Pegu, Siam, Bengala, Sumatra, Japan, and China. A strange report of a City in Barbary that is turned into stone. They write from Barbary, that a whole City consisting of men, beasts, trees, houses, Utensils, &c. are turned lately into stone: e∣very thing remaining in the same posture, as children at their mo∣thers  breasts, &c. One Whiting, Captain of an English ship, who was a a slave there, comming to the Duke of Florence, told him of it, hav∣ing himself seen it, whereupon the Duke) holding fair correspon∣dence with the Bassa of Tripolis,) wrote to him about it: the Bassa by letter hath assured him of the truth of it, and that himself was an eye witnesse of the same, going to the place to see it, and that it was done in few hours, and hee hath sent the Duke diverse of thse things petri∣fied, and amongst the rest some peeces of gold that are turned into stone. This information Sir Kenelm Digby, had from a friend of his in Florence, besides other letters that mention it. If it bee true wee
shall have further confirmation of it. I am not apt to beleeve such reports, yet seeing the Psalmist tells us, that strange punishments are for the workers of Iniquity, I thought fit to insert it, till time discover the truth▪ CHAP. II. Examples of the rare works of God in the Creatures. Of Trees, Hearbs, Plants, and Gums. OF Date-Trees, some are Males, and other Females: the Male  brings forth Flowers onely; the Female fruit, but the Flowers of the Female will not open unlesse the boughs, and flowers of the male be joyned unto them: and if they be not thus coupled the Dates will prove stark naught, and have great stones in them, Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 823. Neer unto the Grand-Cairo in Egypt, is a Garden environed with  a strong wall, in the Garden is a large fountain, and in the middest of it groweth the only Balm-tree bearing true balm, that is in the world: it hath a short stock or body, and beareth leaves like unto Vine-leaves, but not altogether so long. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 838. In the Country of Indostan they have a pleasant clear liquor which  they call Taddy, issuing from a spongie▪ Tree that grows straight, and tall, without boughs to the top, and there spreads out into branches, somewhat like to an English Colewort, where they make incisions, under which they hang earthen pots to preserve the influence: that which distills forth in the night, is as pleasing to the taste, as any white Wine, if drunk betimes in the morning; and of a peircing, and me∣dicinable quallity, excellent against the stone. But in the heat of the day the Sun alters it, so that it becomes heady, ill-relished, and un∣wholesome. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1469. For Cotton Wool, they plant seeds, which grow up into shrubs  like unto our Rose-bushes: It blows first into a yellow blossome, which falling off, there remains a Cod about the bignesse of a mans thumb, in which the substance is moist, and yellow, but as it ripens, it swells bigger, till it break the Cod, and in short time be∣comes as white as snow, and then they gather it. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1470. The Cynamon-tree is a small tree, and low, having leaves like to our Bay-tree: In the month of March, or April, when the sap go∣eth up to the top of the tree, they cut the bark off the tree round about in length▪ from knot, to knot or from joynt to joynt, above, and below, and then easily with their hands they take it away, lay∣ing it in the Sun to drye, and yet for all this the tree dyes not, but against the next year it will have a new bark; and that which is ga∣thered every year is the best Cynamon: that which grows longer is
great, and not so good. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1709. In India is a tree called Arbore de Ray's, or the Tree of roots, it grow∣eth first up like other trees, and spreadeth the branches, out of  which there come strings, which seem afar off to bee cords of hemp; which growing longer till they reach the ground, there take root a∣gain: so that in the end one tree will cover a great peece of ground, one root crossing within another like a Maze, each of these young trees will in time grow so big, that it cannot bee discerned which is the principal trunk, or body of the tree. There is also a tree called Arbore triste, or the sorrowful tree, so cal∣led, because it never beareth blossoms but in the night-time, and so it doth, and continueth all the year long: So soon as the Sun sets, there is not one blossom seen upon the tree, but presently within half an hour after, there are as many blossoms as the tree can bear, plea∣sant to behold, and smelling very sweet, and as soon as the day comes, and the Sun is rising, they all presently fall off, and not one to bee seen on the tree, which seems as though it were dead, till evening comes again, and then it begins to blossome as it did before, its as big as a Plum-tree: it groweth up quickly, and if you break but a branch of the tree, and set it in the earth, it presently takes root, and grows, and within a few dayes after it beareth blossoms, which are like O∣range-tree-blossoms, the flower white, and in the bottom somewhat yellow, and redish. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1780. There is also an herb in India called by the Portugals, Herba senti∣da, or feeling herb, which if a man touch, or throw sand, or any o∣ther thing upon it, presently it becomes as though it were withered, closing the leaves together, and it comes not to it self again, as long as the man standeth by it, but presently after hee is gone, it open∣eth the leaves again, which become stiffe, and fair, as though they were newly grown: and touching it again, it shuts, and becomes withered as before, so that its a pleasure to behold the strange nature of it. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1781. Pepper is planted at the root of some other tree, and runs up it  like Ivie: the leaves are like the Orange leaves, but somewhat smal∣ler, green, and sharp at ends: the Pepper groweth in bunches like Grapes, but lesse, and thinner; they are alwayes green till they be∣gin to drye, and ripen, which is in December, and January, at which time it turns black, and is gathered. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1782. The best Ginger grows in Malabar; it groweth like thin, and young Netherland Reeds, two or three spans high, the root whereof is the  Ginger, which is gathered in December, and January. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1782. The Clove-trees are like Bay-trees, the blossoms at the first white, then green, and at last red, and hard, which are the Cloves; these  Cloves grow very thick together, and in great numbs. In the place where these trees grow, there is neither grass, nor green herbs, but s wholly drye, for that those trees draw all the moisture unto them. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783.
The Nutmeg-tree is like a Pear-tree, but that its lesse, and with round leaves, the fruit is like great round Peaches, the inward part whereof is the Nutmeg; this hath about it an hard shell like wood, and the shell is covered over with Nutmeg-flower, which is the Mace, and over it is the fruit, which without is like the fruit of a Peach. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783. Gumme-Lac comes most from Pegu: where are certain very great Pismires with wings, which flye up the trees like Plum-trees, out of which trees comes a certain Gumme which the Pismires suck up, and then they make the Lac round about the branches of the trees, as Bees make Wax, and when it is full, the owners come, and break∣ing off the branches, lay them to dry, and being dry, the branches shrink out, and the Lac remains. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783. Amber-greese, is usually cast upon the Sea-shore, which as some  suppose is the dung of the Whale, or as others, the sperme, or seed of the Whale consolidated by lying in the Sea. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 772. The Herb Addad is bitter, and the root of it so venemous, that one  drop of the juice will kill a man within the space of one hour. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 850. Of Palm-trees, which they keep with watering, and cutting every  year, they make Velvets, Satins, Taffaties, Damasks, Sarcenets, and such like, all which are spun out of the leaves cleansed, and drawn into long threads. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 985. Frankincense grows in Arabia, and is the gumme that issueth out  of trees. Idem. p. 1781. In Mozambique, Manna is procreated of the dew of heaven falling  on a certain tree, on which it hardens like Sugar, sticking to the wood like Rozen, whence its gathered, and put into jars, and is used much for purging in India. Idem. p. 1554. Mastick-trees grow only in the Island of Sio: the trees are low shrubs, with little crooked boughs, and leaves: In the end of August they begin their Mastick-harvest, men cutting the bark of the Tree with Iron instruments, out of which the Gumme distills uncessantly for almost three months together. Idem. p. 1812. Spunges are gathered from the sides of Rocks, fifteen fathom un∣der  water, about the bottom of the Streights of Gibralter, the peo∣ple that get them being trained up in diving from their child-hood, so that they can indure to stay very long under water, as if it were their habitable Element. In Manica, is a tree called the Resurrection-tree, which for the  greatest part of the year is without leaf, or greenness: but if one cut off a bough, and put it into the water, in the space of ten hours, it springs, and flourisheth with green leaves; but draw it out of the water, as soon as it is dry, it remaineth as it was before. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1537. There is in the Island of Teneriff (which is one of the Canaries)  a Tree as big as an Oke of a middle size, the bark white like Hornbeam; six, or seven yards high, with ragged boughs, the leaf like the Bay-leaf.
It beareth neither fruit, nor flower; it stands on the side of an hill, in the day its withered, and drops all night (a cloud hanging thereon) so that it yeelds water sufficient for the whole Island, wherein are eight thousand souls, and about an hundred thousand Cammels, Mules, Goats, &c. The water falls from it into a pond made of brick, paved with stone; from whence its conveyed into several ponds, thorough the whole Island. They also water there∣with their Corn-ground, for they have no other water in the Island, except Rain-water. The Pond holds twenty thousand Tun of water, and is filled in one night. Many of our English that have been there have attested the truth hereof. Idem. p. 1369. Concerning which Tree, Sylvester the Poet made these verses. In th' Ile of Iron (one of those same seven Whereto our Elders happy name have given) The Savage people never drink the streams Of Wells, and Rivers, as in other Realms. Their drink is in the air! their gushing spring, A weeping tree out of it self doth wring. A Tree, whose tender bearded root being spread In dryest sand, his sweating leaf doth shed A most sweet liquor; and (like as the Vine Untimely cut, weeps (at her wound) the Wine In pearled tears) incessantly distills A royal stream, which all their Cisterns fills Throughout the Island: for all hither hie, And all their vessels cannot draw it drye! Aloes grows in the Island of Socotera which is nothing but Semper  vivum, it is so full of a Rosin-like juice, that the leaves are ready to break with it: which leaves they cut in small peeces, and cast them into a clean pit made in the ground, and paved: there it lies to ferment in the heat of the Sun, whereby the juice floweth forth, which they put in skins, and hang them up in the wind to drye, where∣by it hardens. P. Pil. v. 1. p. 419. Indico groweth in the Moguls Country, having a small leaf like  that of Sena: the branches are of a wooddy substance like Broom: It grows not above a yard high, the stalk about the bignesse of a mans thumb: The seed is included in a small round Cod of an inch long. This once sowed lasteth three years: that of the first year makes a weighty reddish Indico, that sinks in water, being not yet come to its perfection: that of the second year is rich, very light, and of a perfect Violet colour, swimming on the water: that of the third year is weighty, blackish, and the worst of the three. This herb, when its cut, is put into a Cistern, and pressed down with stones, then covered over with water, where it remains till the substance of the herb is gone into the water: then its drawn forth into another Cistern, and laboured with staves till it bee like Batter, then they
let it seeth, and so scum off the water two or three times, till nothing but a thick substance remains, which taking forth, they spread on a cloath, dry it in the Sun, then make it into balls, dry it on the sand, which causes the sandy foot: That is best, which is of a pure grain, Violet-colour, is glossie, dry, and light. Idem. p. 430. Sir James Lancaster in his East-Indy Voyage, in the Isle of Sombrero found on the Sea-sands, a young twig growing up to a tree, and of∣fering to pluck up the same, it shrank down into the ground, and when it was by strength pulled up, a great Worm was the root of it, and as the Tree groweth in greatnesse, the Worm diminisheth: This Tree plucked up, the leaves, and pill stripped off, by that time its dryed, is turned into a hard stone; so that this Worm was twice trans∣formed into different natures, after a wondrous manner: Of these hee brought home many. P. Pil. v. 1. p. 152. About Saffron Walden in Essex, there grows great store of Saffron, which was first brought into England, in the reign of King Edward the third. This in the month of July every third year, being pluck∣ed up, and after twenty dayes, having the root split, and set again in the earth, about the end of September it putteth forth a whitish blew flower, out of the midst whereof there come three chives, which are gathered in the morning before Sun-rising, and being plucked out of the flower, are dried by a soft fire; and so great is the increase that commeth thereof, that out of every acre of ground, there are made fourscore, or an hundred pound weight of Saffron, whilst it is moist, which being dryed, yeeld some twenty pound weight. And the ground which three years together hath brought Saffron is so enrich∣ed thereby, that it will bear very good Barley, many years together without dung, or manuring. Camb. Brit. p. 453. All along the shores of the Red-sea are abundance of Palm-Trees, of  a very strange nature: They grow in couples, Male and Female: both thrust forth cods full of seed: but the Female is only fruitful, and that not except growing by the male, and having her seed mixed with his. The pith of these Trees is an excellent sallet, better than an Artchoke: Of the branches are made bedsteads, Lattices, &c. Of the leaves, Baskets, Mats, Fans, &c. Of the outward husk of the cod, cor∣dage, of the inward brushes. The fruit it beareth is like a Fig, and final∣ly it is said to yeild whatsoever is necessary for the life of man. It is the nature of this tree, that if never so great a weight bee laid upon it, it will lift and raise up it self the more, for which it was given to con∣querors in token of victory. Herb. Trav. In Italy there grows an Hearb called Balilisco, which hath this in∣nate property, that if it bee laid under a stone in some moist place, in two days space it produceth a Scorpion: Raimunds Mercu. Ital. The Assa-Faetida Tree is like our Bryer in height, the Leaves re∣semble Fig-leaves, the root is like our Radish: though the smell bee so base, yet the taste is so pleasing, that no meat, no sauce, no vessell is pleasing to the Gusarats pallats where it grows, except it relish of it. Herb. Trav.
Benjamin is either, pure, cleer, and white, or yellow, and streaked: This Gum issues from an high tree, small, and furnished with fruitlesse branches; the leaves are not unlike to those of the Olive: Pegu, and Si∣am yeild the best. The Coco tree is very rife in the East-Indies. In the whole world there  is not a tree more profitable than this is, neither do men reap more be∣nefit of any other tree than of this. The heart of the Tree makes good Timber, Planks, and masts for ships: with the leaves thereof they make sails, with the rinde of it they make cordage: A Gum that grows out of it caulks the ship: the fruit of it is a kinde of Nut, which being full of kernel, and a sweet liquor, serves for meat and drink: much Wine also it yeilds, and of the wine they make Sugar, and Placetto. The wine they gather in the spring of the year out of the middle of the Tree, from whence there runs continually a white thin liquor, at which time they put a vessel under it, and take it away full every morning, and evening, and then distilling it they make a very strong liquor of it. Of the Nuts also they make great store of Oil: out of the tree they make bows, Beadsteads: of the leaves also they make very fine mats▪ which whilst green, are full of an excellent sweet liquor, with which if a man bee thirsty hee may satisfy himself: with the bark they make spoons, dish∣es, and platters for meat. The first rinde of the nut they stamp, and make thereof perfect Ockam: and the store of these nuts serve for merchandise. So that out of this one Tree, they build and rig ships, furnish them with meat, drink, utensils, and merchandise, without the least help of any other whatsoever. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1466. and 1704. Mr. Herbert in his Travels thus describes it. The Tree that bears the Coco, is strait, & lofty without any branches, save at the very top, where  it spreads its beautiful plumes, and Nuts like Pearls, or pendants a∣dorning them. It is good Timber for Canoes, Masts, Anchors: The leaves for Tents or thatching▪ the rinde for sailes, Matteresses, Cables, and Linnen: the shels for furniture: the meat for victualling. The Nut is covered with a thick rinde equall in bignesse to a Cabbage. The shell is like the skull of a man, or rather a deaths head, the eyes, nose, and mouth, being easily discerned: within it is contained a quart of sweet and excellent liquor, like new white-wine, but farre more aromatick tasted: the meat or kernel, is better relished than our Phil∣berds, and is enough to satisfy the appetite of two reasonable men. —The Indian Nut alone Is cloathing, meat, and trencher, drink, and Can. Boat, Cable, Sail, Mast, Needle, all in one. Herb. And Sylvester hath set them forth to the life in these verses. The Indian Isles most admirable be, In those rare fruits call'd Coquos commonly, The which alone far richer wonder yeilds, Then all our Groves, Meads, gardens, orchards, Fields,
What wouldst thou drink? the wounded leaves drop wine, Lackst thou fine linnen? dresse the tender rine. Dresse it like Flax, spin it, then weave it well, It shall thy Cambrike, and thy Lawn excell. Longst thou for Butter, bite the poulpous part, For never better came to any mart. Do'st need good Oyle? then boult it to, and fro, And passing Oyle it soon becometh so. Or Vinegar? to whet thine appetite. Why, Sun it well, and it will sharply bite. Or want's thou Sugar? steep the same a stownd, And sweeter Sugar is not to bee found. 'Tis what you will; or will bee what you would: Should Midas touch it, sure it would bee gold. And God, all-good, to crown our life with Bayes, The Earth with plenty, and his Name with praise, Had done enough, if hee had made no more But this one plant, so full of choicest store; Save that the world (where one thing breeds satiety) Could not bee fair, without so great variety. The Plantan Tree is of a reasonable height; the body about the bigness of a mans thigh, compacted of many leaves, wrapped one up∣on another, adorned with leaves in stead of boughs from the very ground, which are for the most part about two ells long, and an ell broad, having a large rib in the middle thereof. The fruit is a bunch of ten, or twelve Plantans, each a span long, and as big almost as a mans wrist; the rind being stripped off, the fruit is yellowish, and of a pleasant taste. Pur. Pil. p. 416. The Cedars of Mount Libanus grow higher than Pines, and so big,  that four or five men with their arms can but fathom them; the boughs rise not upward, but stretch out a cross, largely spread, and thickly enfolded one in another, as if done by Art, so that men may sit, and lye along upon the boughs: the leaves are thick, narrow, hard, prick∣ly, and alwayes green, the wood is hard, incorruptible, and sweet smelling; the fruit like the Cones of Cypress, gummy, and marvellous fragrant. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1500. In Africa are many Palmeta trees, whence they draw a sweet, and  wholesome Wine, by cutting, or boring holes into the body of the Tree, into which a Cane is put that receives the sap, and conveyes it into Gourds: It tastes like white Wine, but it will not last above four and twenty hours. Idem. In New-Spain there are many trees which they call Manguey: It  hath great, and large leaves, at the end whereof is a strong, and sharp point, which they use for pins, and needles, and out of the leaf they draw a kind of thred which they use much to sew with. The body of the Tree is big, which when it is tender, they cut, and out of the hole proceeds a liquor which they drink like water, being fresh, and
sweet. This liquor being sodden, becomes Wine, which being kept till it bee sower, makes good Vineger: Boil it a little more than for Wine, and it makes a fine Syrup; and boil it till it bee thick, and it makes Hony. Idem. v. 3. p. 957. There is a certain Tree in New-Spain called Tunalls, in whose leaves  breed certain small worms, which are covered with a fine web, com∣passing them in daintily. This in the season they gather, and let it drye, and this is that Cochenille, so famous, and dear, wherewith they Dye in grain. Idem. The Jack, or Giack is an high tree, and uneasy to bee ascended;  the Jack for shew and bigness resembles a Pumpeon: without, it is of a gold yellow, mixt with veins; within, its soft, and tender, full of golden coloured cloves, each full of kernels, not unlike a great French Bean, but more round, each of them hath an hard stone within it; the fruit is somewhat unpleasant at the first taste; tis glutinous, and clammy in the mouth, but very restorative, and good for the back. The Ananas is not inferiour to the Jack in bulk, and roundnesse: It ariseth from no seed, or sowing, but from a root like an Arti∣choke: when they are ripe they shew themselves, and are not above two foot high: without, it is covered with a drie rind, hard, and skaley; within, its wholesome, and pleasant, and though a little of it seems to satiate the appetite, yet the stomach likes it well, and its easie of digestion. The Duroyen is somewhat like the Jack, in shape round, the inward  vertue, is far greater than the outward beauty: at first opening it hath an unpleasant smell: the meat is whitish, and divided into a dozen cells, or partitions, filled with stones as big as Chesnuts, white, and cordial. Its a fruit nutritive, and dainty, and may well bee called an Epitome of all the best, and rarest fruits in the Orient. The Arec-tree is almost as high as a Cedar, but more like the Pal∣meto: It is of a fuzzie, hollow substance, adorned at every top with  Plumes, wherein the fruit hangs in clusters; its in shape and bigness like a Walnut; white, and hard within; hath neither taste, nor smell: they never eat it alone, but wrap it in a leaf of Bettle, and are fre∣quently chawing of it: some adde to it a kinde of Lime made of Oister-shells, it cures the Chollick, removes Melancholly, kills Wormes▪ provokes lust, purges the maw, and prevents hunger. Its much used in the East-Indies. The Palmeto-tree is long, strait, round, and soft, without leaf, bough, or branch, save at the top, and those are few, green, and  sedgie: under which branches there appear certain codded seeds: Both the Male, and Female bear blossoms, but the Female only bears fruit, and yet not that, unless a flowring branch of the Male tree bee yearly inoculated: The leaves serve for many uses. At the top of this tree there is a soft pith, in which consists the life of it: for that being cut out, the tree dyes. This pith is in bigness like a small Cabbage, in taste like a nut kernel, and being boiled it
eats like a Colly-flower. But of more value is the Palmeto Wine, which is sweet, pleasant, and nourishing; in colour, and taste not un∣like Muskadine: It purges, cures obstructions, and kills the Worms. If it stand two dayes in the Sun it makes good Vinegar. The Wine is thus gotten. They cut a small hole in two or three Trees that grow together, which in a short time are filled with the sap that issues in them, which with a Cane, or Quill they draw forth. Pur. Pil. In Summersetshire, near unto Glastenbury, in Wiral Park was that  famous Hawthorn tree, which used upon Christmas day to sprout forth as fresh as in May; but now its cut down. Camb. Brit. p. 227. In the Marishes of Egypt grow those sedgie reeds, called Papyri, whereof formerly they made Paper, and from whence ours that is made of rags assumed that name. They divide it into thin flakes, whereinto it naturally parteth: then laying them on a Table, and moistening them with the glutinous water of Nilus, they press them together, drye them in the Sun, and then they are fitted for use Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 898. CHAP. III. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fountains, Rivers, and VVaters. IN the Bishoprick of Durham, in Dirlington feild, there are three pits of a wonderful depth, called by the Vulgar Hell-Kettles, in which the water by an Antiperistasis, or reverberation of the cold air, striking thereupon, waxeth hot; which pits have passage under ground, into the River Teese, as Archbishop Guthbert Tonsta! observed, by finding that Goose in the River which hee had marked, and let down into these pits. Camb. Brit. p. 737. In Yorkshire, near unto Knasburrow Castle is a Well, in which the waters spring not up out of the veins of the earth, but distil, and trickle down, dropping from the Rocks hanging over it, whence its called Dropping-VVell: into which, what wood soever is put, it will in a short space bee turned into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 700. In Caermardenshire, near unto Careg Castle, there is a fountain that twice in four and twenty hours ebbeth, and twice floweth, resembling the unstable motions of the main Sea. Camb. Brit. p. 650. In VVestmerland, hard by Shape there is a Well, or Fountain, which  after the manner of Euripus, ebbeth, and floweth many times in a day. Camb. Brit. p. 762. In Ireland is a Fountain, whose water killeth all those beasts that  drink thereof, but hurteth not the people, though they usually drink of it. Ortelius.
Neer unto Lutterworth in Leicester shire, there is a spring of water so  cold, that in a short time it turneth straws, and sticks into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 518. In Derbyshire in the Peak-Forrest not far from Buxtone, is a Well  which in a wonderful manner doth ordinarily ebb, and flow, four times in the space of one hour, or thereabouts, keeping his just tides. Camb. Brit. p. 558. Also in the same County at the spring head of Wie there rise, and  walm up, nine Fountains of hot waters, commonly called Buxton Wells, very sovereign for the stomach, sinews, and whole body. Camb. Brit. p. 557. In Scotland on the bank of Ratra neer unto Stang's Castle, there is, a Cave, wherein the water distilling naturally by drops from the head of the Vault, is presently turned into Pyramidal stones; and were not the said hole, or Cave otherwhiles rid, and cleansed, the whole space as far as up to the vault, would in a short time be filled therewith. Camb Brit. Scotl. p. 48. In Scotland in the Countrey of Murray, there is a River called Naes the water whereof is almost always warm, and at no time so cold that it freezeth, yea, in the most cold time of winter, broken ice falling in∣to it, is dissolved with the heat thereof. Descrip. of Scotl. Also in Galloway the Loch called Loch-Merton is of such a strange na∣ture, that the one half of it doth never freeze in the coldest winter. Descrip. of Scotl. In Lenox is a great Loch, or Meere, called Loch-Lowmond, in length  twenty four miles, and eight in breadth, wherin are three strange things: First, Excellent good Fish without any fins: Secondly, a floating Island whereon many Kine feed: And thirdly, Tempestuous waves rageing without winds, yea, in the greatest calms. Desc. of Scotl. There is a certain Island called Lounda in the Kingdome of Congo, wherein is no fresh water (being a very sandy ground) but if you dig but the depth of two or three hand breadthes, you shall find sweet water, the best in all those Countryes: and (which is most strange) when the Ocean ebbeth, this water grows brackish, but when it flows to the top, it is most sweet. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 989. Not far from Casbine, the Regal City in Persia is a fountain of a  strange, and wonderful nature, out of which there continually spring∣eth, and issueth a marvellous quantity of black Oil, which serveth in all parts of Persia to burn in their houses, and is usually carried all o∣ver the Countrey upon Kine, and Asses, whereof you may often meet three or four hundred in company. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1431. About three days journey from old Babylon, is a Town called Ait, and neer unto that is a valley of pitch very marvellous to behold, wher∣in are many Springs, throwing out abundantly a kind of black sub∣stance, like unto Tar, and Pitch, which serveth all the Country there∣about to make staunch their barques with, and boats: every one of which springs makes a noise like to a Smith's Forge in puffing, and blowing out the matter, which never ceaseth day nor night, and the noise is hard a
mile off: the Moors call it Hell-mouth. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1437. Clitumnus is a River in Italy, which makes all the Oxen that drink of it, white. Fulk. Meteor. Lib. 4 The River Melas in Boeotia makes all the Sheep that drink of it, black. Plin. The Fountain of Jupiter Hammon, is cold in the day time, and hot at midnight. The Fountain of the Sun hath its water extream cold, and sweet at  noon; and boiling hot, and bitter at midnight. Plin. lib. 2. c. 103. Au∣gustine. There is a River in Palestine called the Sabbatical River, which runs with a violent and swift stream all the week; but every Sabbath it re∣mains dry. Joseph. de Bel. Jud. l. 7. c. 24. Some question the truth of this. In Idumaea is a fountain called the Fountain of Job, which for one quarter of the year is troubled and muddy; the next quarter bloody, the third green, and the fourth clear. Isiod. The River Astaces in the Isle of Pontus uses sometimes to over flow  the fields, after which whatsoever sheep, or milch Cattel feed thereon, give black milk, Plin. l. 2. c. 103. Furius Camillus being Censor in Rome, the Lake Albanus being en∣vironed  with Mountains on every side, in the time of Autumn when other Lakes and Rivers were almost dry, the waters of this Lake after a wondrous manner began to swell, and rise upwards, till at last they were equall with the tops of the Mountains, and after a while they brake thorow one of those Mountains, overflowing and bearing all down before them till they emptied themselves into the Sea. Plut. The River Dee in Merionneth shire in Wales, though it run through Pimble-Meer, yet it remaineth intire, and mingles not its streams with the waters of the Lake. Cam. Brit. Ana a River in Spain, burieth it self in the earth, and runneth un∣der  ground fifteen miles together, whereupon the Spaniards brag that they have a bridge whereon ten thousand Cattel feed daily. Pliny tells us of a fountain called Dodon, which always decreaseth  from midnight till noon, and encreaseth from noon till mid∣night Hee also tells us of certain Fountains in an Island neer Italy,  which always increase and decrease according to the ebbing, and flow∣ing of the sea. Aristotle writeth of a Well in Sicilie, whose water is so sharp, that  the Inhabitants use it instead of Vinegar. In Bohemia neer to the City of Bilen is a Well of such excellent wa∣ter,  that the Inhabitants use to drink of it in a morning instead of burnt wine. Dr. Fulk. In Paphlagonia is a Well, which hath the taste of wine, and it makes  men drunk which drink of it; whence Du Bartas,
Salonian Fountain, and thou Andrian Spring, Out of what Cellars do you daily bring The oyl, and wine that you abound with so? O Earth, do these within thine entrals grow? &c. Aelian mentioneth a Fountain in Boeotia neer to Thebes, which makes horses run mad if they drink of it. Pliny mentioneth a water in Sclavonia which is extream cold, and yet if a man throw his cloath cloak upon it, it is presently set on  fire. Other waters there are which discolour the fleeces of the sheep which drink of them: whence Du Bartas. Cerona, Xanth, and Cephisus do make, The thirsty flocks that of their waters take, Black, red, and white: Add neer the crimson deep, Th'Arabian Fountain maketh crimson sheep. And again. What should I of th'Illyrian Fountain tell? What shall I say of the Dodonean Well? Whereof the first sets any cloathes on fire; Th' other doth quench (who but will this admire) A burning Torch: and when the same is quenched, Lights it again, if it again be drenched. In the Province of Dara in Lybia, there is a certain River, which  sometimes so overfloweth the banks that it is like a sea, yet in the Summer it is so shallow, that any one may passe over it on foot. If it overflow about the beginning of Aprill, it brings great plenty to the whole region, if not, there follows great scarcity of Corn. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 823. In the Kingdome of Tunis, neer unto the City El-Hamma, is a  hot River, which by diverse Channels is carried through the City, the water of it being so hot that few can endure to go into it, yet having set it to cool a whole day, the people drink of it. Idem. p. 821. In Africa, there is a River called Margania, and by it a salt spring  which turns all the wood is thrown into it, into hard stone. Idem. p. 1547. The River Meander is famous for its six hundred windings, and tur∣ning in, and out: whence that of the Poet. Quique recurvatis ludit Maeander in undis. Maeander plays his watry pranks, within his crooked winding banks. Groenland in the Hyperborean Sea, was discovered Anno Christi
1380. it hath in it the Monastery of St. Thomas, situate in the North-East part thereof at the foot of a Mountain, where there is a River so hot, that they use to boil their meat in it, and it serves for other such purposes as fire doth with us. Isac. Chron. p. 275. The River Hypanis in Scythia every day brings forth little bladders,  out of which come certain flies which are thus, bred in the morning, are fledge at noon, and dye at night. Fit Emblems of the vain, and short life of man. The famous River of Nilus in Egypt useth once in the year to o∣verflow her banks, whereby the whole Country is watered. It u∣sually beginneth to overflow upon the seventeenth of June, and increaseth daily, sometimes two, sometimes three fingers, and some∣times half a cubit high on a day. The increase of it is known by a Pillar erected in a Cistern, whereinto the water is conveyed by a Sluce; which pillar is divided into eighteen parts, each a cubit high∣er than the other. If the water reach no higher than to the fif∣teenth cubit, they expect a fruitful year: if it stay between the twelfth, and fifteenth cubit, the increase of that year will bee but mean. If it reach not to the twelfth, its a sign of scarcity. If it rise to the eighteenth, the scarcity will bee greater, in regard of too much moisture. This River continueth forty dayes increasing, and forty dayes decreasing. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 838. Another thing is wonderful, which is this: In the Grand Cairo (which is the Metropolis of Egypt) the Plague useth many times to bee very violent, till the River begins to overflow its banks, at which time it doth instantly cease. So that whereas five hundred a day dyed the day before, not one doth dye the day following. Idem. p. 897. In the County of Devon, not far from the Town of Lidford, at a Bridge, the River Lid is gathered into a strait, and pent in between Rocks, whereon it runneth down a main, and the ground daily wax∣ing deeper, and deeper under it, his water is not seen, only a roaring noise is heard, to the great wonder of those that pass by. Camb. Brit. p. 199. In VVarwickshire, at Nevenham Regis, three fountains arise out of  the ground, strained through an Allom Mine: the water whereof carrieth the colour, and taste of Milk, which cureth ulcers in the blad∣der, or kidneys caused by the stone, and provoketh urine abundantly, Green wounds it cleanseth, closeth up, and quickly healeth; being drunk with salt it looseth, and with Sugar it bindeth the belly. A∣bout fifty years ago these wells were famous, and in great request, many resorting to them, and the water by others was sent for, far and near. Idem. p. 562. In Herefordshire, a little beneath Richards Castle, Nature, who ne∣ver  disports her self more in shewing wonders, than in waters, hath brought forth a pretty well, which is alwayes full of little fish bones, although they bee drawn out from time, to time, whence its com∣monly called Bone-VVell. Idem. p. 619.
In Yorkshire, upon the Sea-shore by Sken-grave, when the winds  are laid, and the weather is most calm upon the Sea: the water ly∣ing level, and plain without any noise: there is heard here many times on a sudden▪ a great way off as it were, an horrible, and fearful groan∣ing, which affrights the Fishermen at those times, so that they dare not launce forth into the Sea. Idem. p. 720. Pliny tells us of the fountain Chymaera, that is set on fire with  water, and put out with earth, or hey. Plin. nat. Hist. Lib. 2. c. 106.107. The same Author also tells us, that in the hot deserts of India grows a certain kinde of Flax that lives in the fire, and consumes not wee have seen (saith hee) table-cloathes made of it, burning in fires at feasts, by which they have been cleansed from their stains, and spots, and made whiter by the fire than they could bee by water. At Belgrad in Hungary, where Danubius, and Sava (two great Ri∣vers) meet, their waters mingle no more than water and Oil: not that either flote above other, but joyn unmixed, so that near the middle of the River I have gone in a boat (saith Sir Henry Blunt in his voyage into the Levant) and tasted of the Danow as clear, and pure as a well; then putting mine hand an inch further, I have taken of the Sava, as troubled as a street-channel, tasting the gravel in my teeth. Thus they ran sixty miles together, and for a dayes journy I have been an eye-witness of it. CHAP. IIII. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fishes. ANno Christi 1204. at Oreford in Suffolk a fish was taken by the  Fishermen at Sea, in shape resembling a wild man, and by them was presented to Sir Bartholomew de Glanvil, Keeper of Oreford Castle. In all his limbs and members hee resembled a man, had hair in all the usual parts of his body, only his head was bald. The Knight caused meat to bee set before him, which hee greedily devoured, and did eat fish raw, or sod: that which was raw hee pressed with his hand, till hee had squeezed out all the moisture: Hee uttered not any speech, though to try him, they hung him up by the heels, and grievously tormented him. Hee would get him to his Couch at the setting of the Sun, and rise again at the Sun-rising. One day they brought him to the haven, and let him go into the Sea, but to prevent his escape, they set three rows of very strong nets before him, to catch him again at their pleasure: but hee, streightwaies diving to the bottom, crept under all their nets, and shewed himself again to them, and so often diving, hee still came up, and looked upon them that stood on the shoar, as it were mocking of them.
At length after hee had sported himself a great while in the water, and there was no hope of his return, hee came back to them of his own accord, and remained with them two months after. But finally, when hee was negligently looked to, hee went to the Sea, and was never after seen, or heard of. Fabians Chron. Anno Christi 1404. some women of Edam in the Low-Countries,  as they were going in their barks to their cattel in Purmer-Meer, they often saw at the ebbing of the water, a Sea-woman playing up and down, whereat at the first they were afraid, but after a while, incou∣raging one another, they made with their boats towards her, and the water by this time being nor deep enough for her to dive in, they took her by force, and drew her into the boat, and so carried her to Edam, where in time shee grew familiar, and fed of ordinary meats: and being sent from thence to Harlem, shee lived about fif∣teen years, but never spake, seeking often to ge away into the water. Belg. Common VVealth. p. 102. In the Seas, near unto Sofala are many VVomen-Fishes; which from  the belly to the neck are very like a woman: The Females have breasts like womens, with which also they nourish their young. From the belly downward they have thick, and long tails, with fins like a Dolphin: the skin on the belly is white; on the back rougher than a Dolphins. They have arms, which from the elbows end in fins, and so have no hands: the face is plain, round, and bigger than a mans, deformed, and without humane semblance: They have wide mouths, thick hanging lips like a hound; four teeth hanging out almost a span long, like the tusk of a Boar: and their nostrils are like a Calves. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1546. Upon the coasts of Brasile are often found Meer-Men, which are  like unto men of a good stature, but that their eyes are very hol∣low. Captain Richard VVhitburn in his description of Newfound-land,  writes that Anno Christi 1610. early in a morning as hee was standing by the water side, in the harbour of St. Johns, hee espied a strong Creature swimming very swiftly towards him, like a woman, looking chearfully upon him: Her face, eyes, nose, mouth, chin, ears, neck, and forehead were like a womans. It was very beautiful, and in those parts well proportioned, having hair hanging down round about the head: He seeing it come within a pikes length of him, stepped back, whereupon it dived under the water, swimming to another place, whereby hee beheld the shoulders, and back down to the middle, which was as square, white, and smooth as the back of a man; from the middle to the hinder part it pointed in proportion like a broad hooked Arrow: Afterwards it came to a Boat wherein some of his men were, attempting to come in to them, till one of them struck it a full blow upon the head: Others of them saw it afterwards also. About Brasile are many Meer-Men, and Meer-VVomen; that have long hair, and are very beautiful. They often catch the Indians as
they are swimming, imbracing them, and kissing them, and clasp them so hard, that they crush them to death, and when they per∣ceive that they are dead, they give some sighs, as if they were sor∣ry. Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1315. There are also another sort of them, that resemble Children, and  are no bigger, that are no wayes hurtful. Idem. The Torpedo is a strange kind of fish, which a man holding in his  hand, if it stir not, it produceth no effect; but if it move it self never so little, it so torments the body of him that holds it, that his arteries, joints, sinews, and all his members feel exceeding great pain, with a cer∣tain numness, and as soon as he layeth it out of his hand, all that pain, and numnesse is gone also. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1183. See more of it afterwards. In Sofala are many River-horses, as big as two of our horses, with thick, and short hinder legs, having five clawes on each fore-foot, and four on the hinder; the mouth is wide, and full of teeth, four of which are above two spans long a peece; that two lower stand upright; the two upper are turned like a Boars tush; they live in the water, but feed on the land upon grass: they have teats wherewith they nourish their young ones: Their Hides are thicker than an Oxes; they are all of an ash colour gray, with white strakes on their faces, or white stars in their foreheads. Idem. p. 1544. In the mouth of the River of Goa, there was taken a fish of the  bigness of a Cur-Dog, with a snout like an Hog, small eyes, no ears, but two holes in stead thereof: It had four feet like an Elephant: the tail was flat, but at the end round, and somewhat sharp: It snort∣ed like a Hog; the body, head, tail, and legs, were covered with broad scales as hard as Iron, so that no weapon could peirce them: when hee was beaten, hee would rowle himself round like an Urchin, and could by no strength bee opened, till hee opened of his own accord. Idem. p. 1774. There are also Toad-Fishes of about a span long, painted, having  fair eyes: when they are taken out of the water, they snort, and swell much: their poison lies only in the skin, and that being flaid off, the Indians eat them. Idem. p. 1314. The Cuttle-Fish hath a hood alwayes full of black water, like Ink, which when shee is pursued by other fishes that would devoure her, shee casts it forth, which so darkens and soileth the water, that shee thereby escapeth. Idem. There are a sort of fishes, whose wonderful making magnifieth  their Creator, who for their safety hath given them sins, which serve in stead of wings: they are of such a delicate skin interlaced with fine bones as may cause admiration in the beholder: These fishes are like to Pilchards,, only a little rounder, and bigger: they flye best with a side wind, but longer than their wings are wet, they cannot flye, so that their longest flight is about a quarter of a mile. The Dolphins, and Bonitos do continually hunt after them, to prey upon them: whereupon for safety they take the air: but then there is a Fowle called an Alcatrace, much like a Hern, which hovers in the air to seize upon them.
Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Caribdim. Out of the frying Pan into the fire, as our Proverb hath it. There is often a strange fight in the Sea between the VVhale and his enemies, viz. The Swordfish, and the Thresher. The Swordfish is not great, but strongly made, and between his neck and shoulders he hath a bone like a Sword, of about five inches broad, and above three foot long, full of prickles on either side. The Thresher is a bigger fish, whose tail is broad, and thick, and very weighty. The fight is in this manner; the Swordfish placeth himself under the belly of the VVhale, and the Thresher above with his tail thresheth upon the head of the Whale, till hee forceth him to give way, which the Swordfish perceiv∣ing, wounds him in the belly with the Sword, and so forceth him to rise up again. In this manner they torment him, that the fight is some∣times heard above three leagues off, the Whales roaring being heard much further, his onely remedy in this case is to get to the shore, which hee laboureth to do as soon as hee sees his enemys: for then there can fight but one with him, and for either of them hand to hand hee is too good. Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1377. Mr. Herbert in his East-Indy voyage, relates of a Shark taken by one of their men, that was nine foot and an half in length, and they found in her paunch fifty and five young ones, each of them a foot in length, all which go out and in at their pleasures: Shee is armed with a double row of venemous teeth: and is guided to her prey by a little Musculus, or Pilot fish that scuds to and fro to bring intelligence, the Shark for his kindnesse suffering it to suck when it pleaseth. The Sea Tortoise is not much differing from those at land, only her  shell is flatter: by overturning them they are easily taken, being there∣by dis-inabled either to sink, or help themselves: they taste waterish and cause Fluxes: they superabound in eggs, one of them having in her neer two thousand, which eggs are pale, and round, and will never be made hard with boiling. Herberts Travels. p. 26. In the Indion sea is an Eagle-fish, whose eyes are five quarters asunder, from the end of one fin to the end of the other are above four yards: Its mouth and teeth resemble a Portcullis: it hath a long small tail, and it is rather to be wondred at than to be eaten. In Le Maires voyage about the world, a certain fish, or Sea mon∣ster,  with an horn struck against the ship with such violence that shook it, whereupon the Master looking overboard, saw the sea all bloody, but knew not what should be the cause, till coming into Port Desire, where they cleansed and trimmed their ship, they found seven foot under wa∣ter, a Horn sticking in the ship, for bignesse, and fashion like an Elephants tooth: yet not hollow, but all solid of hard bone, which had pierced through three double planks, and was entred into a rib of the ship, it stuck about half a foot deep in the ship, and by great force was bro∣ken off, which caused that great monster to bleed so much as discolour∣ed the water, Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 90.
The Mannaty is a strange fish resembling a Cow: Her face is like a  Buffalo's, her eyes small and round, having hard gums instead of teeth: they feed much on the shore, which makes them taste like flesh of veal: their intrails differ little from a Cows: their bodies are com∣monly three yards long, and one broad, they swim slowly wanting fins, in the place wherof they have two things like paps, which are their stilts when they creep on shore to graze, where they sleep long, suck∣ing in the cool air: they cannot keep under water above half an hour. The stone generated in their head is most esteemed, being soveraign against choller adust, the stone collick; and dissenteryes, if beaten small infused in wine, and drunk fasting. Herb. Trav. p. 26. See more afterwards. The Carvel comes of the foam of the sea, every where floating up∣on  the surface of the Ocean, of a round form, throwing abroad her strings like so many lines, which shee can spread at pleasure, therewith angling for small fishes, which shee catches at leisure: you may call her a sea Spider: for when shee sees her webb too weak, she can blow an infectious breath foming death, or such a sting as if she had borrow∣ed it from a Scorpion. Idem. In the East-Indies is a trade wind, which they call a Briese, or Mon∣son, which blows West all April, May, June, July, August, and part  of September, and East the rest of the year: Only on the East of Su∣matra, it blows five months East, and five months West, and the o∣ther two variable. This is well known to our East-Indy Merchants. The Torpedo is a Fish like a Bream, but somewhat thicker: some  Marriners having one of them in a net, went to take it forth, but one of them presently cryed out that hee had lost the use of his hands, and armes: another that was bare legged putting his foot to it, lost the sence of his leg: but after a while their feeling returned again: whereupon calling their Cook, they bade him to take and dresse it, who laying both his hands thereon, made grievous moan that hee felt not his hands: but when its dead it produceth no such effect, but is good meat. Pur. Pil. p. 1568. About Jamica in the West-Indies is a Fish called a Manati, which is  of a strange shape, and nature: It brings forth her young ones alive, and nourisheth them with Milk from her teates, feeding upon grass in the fields, but lives for the most part in the water: the hinder parts of it are like unto a Cow, and it eats like veal. Idem v. 3. p. 930. In Brasile are Oxe-fishes, which are very good meat: For head, hair, skin, cheeks, and tongue, they are like Oxen: their eyes small with lids to open and shut, which no other fish hath: It breatheth, and therefore cannot bee long under water: Instead of fore-feet, it hath two arms of a cubit long, with two round hands, and on them five fin∣gers close together with nails like a mans; Under these arms the female hath paps wherewith she nourisheth her young, she brings forth but one at once. It hath no fins but the tail, which is also round and close: their bones are all massie, and white like Ivory: of this Fish they make great store of sweet Oil: they feed most upon the land. Idem. v. 4. p. 1313. In Sir Francis Drakes voyage about the world, when they came to
the Island of Celebes, which is wholly overgrown with wood: amongst the Trees night by night, they saw infinite swarms of fiery wormes flying in the air, their bodies no bigger than of our English Flyes, which made such a shew, and gave such a light, as if every twig or tree had been a burning candle. In which place also were great store of Bats; as big as large Hens, Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 56. In Captain Saris his voyage to Bantam, about midnight they fell  into the strangest, and fearfullest water that ever any of them had seen, the water giving such a glaring light about the ship, that they could discern letters in a book thereby, whereas a little before it was so dark, that they could discern nothing. This made them fear that it had been the breach of sunken ground: But finding that they had fail∣ed half an hour in it, and saw no alteration, they perceived at length, that it was a multitude of Cuttle-fish that made this fearful shew. Pur. Pil. p. 352. CHAP. V. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fowls, and Birds. IN one of the Scottish Islands there is a rare kinde of Fowl unknown  to other Countrys, called Colca, little lesse than a Goose: They come thither every year in the spring, hatch, and nourish their young ones: About which time they cast all their feathers, and become stark naked all their bodies over, and then they get themselves to the Sea, and are no more seen till the next spring: Their feathers have no quill, as other feathers have, but are all like unto Down, wherein is no hardness. Descr. of Scot. In the North Seas of Scotland are great loggs of Timber found, in  which are ingendred after a marvellous manner, a sort of Geese, cal∣led Claik-geese: and they do hang by the beak till they are grown to perfection, and then they receive life and fall off: they are many times found, and kept in admiration for their rare manner of Generation: They are very fat, and delicious to bee eaten. Idem. Some question the truth hereof. Storks are so careful of their parents; that when they grow old,  and so are unable to help themselves, the young ones feed them: and when in passing the Sea their wings fail them, the young ones will take them on their backs, and carry them over. And this is remarka∣ble about them. The Town of Delph in the Low-Countries is so seated for the breed∣ing,  and feeding of these Birds, that it is hard to see an house wherein they do not build. In this Town upon the third of May; Anno Christi 1536. a great fire happened when the young Storks were grown pret∣ty big: The old ones perceiving the fire to approach to their Nests,
attempted to carry away their young ones, but could not, they were so weighty, which they perceiving, never ceased with their spread wings to cover them, till they all perished in the flames together. Belg. Common Wealth. p. 63. In America there are certain small Birds called Viemalim, with small  and long bills, that live upon the dew, and of the juice of Flowers, and roses, like Bees: their feathers are of very curious colours▪ they dye, or sleep every year in October, sitting upon the bough of a Tree in a warm place, and in Aprill following, when the Flowers are sprung, they awake again. I have one of them. In the Arabian Deserts there are great store of Ostriches, that go in flocks, and often affright passengers that are strangers, with their fear∣ful  schreeches, appearing a farre off like a Troop of horsemen. Their bodies are too heavy to bee born up by their wings, which, though uselesse for flight, yet serve them to run with greater speed, so that a swift horse can scarce overtake them: whatsoever they finde, bee it stones or iron, they greedily swallow it down, and concoct it: when they have laid their eggs, (which are as big as a Culverin Bullet) they forget where they left them, and so return no more to them: but they are hatched by the heat of the Sun in the warm sands: hence. those expressions, Lam. 4.3. The Daughter of my people is become cruell, like the Ostriches in the wildernesse: whereupon shee is made the Em∣bleam of folly, Job 39.14. &c: She leaveth her eggs in the earth, and war∣meth them in the dust, and forgets that the foot may crush them, &c. In Brasile there is a little bird, which they call The risen, or Awa∣ken  Bird, because it sleeps six months, and awakes the other six. It hath a Cap on its head of no one colour, but on what side soever you look, it sheweth red, green, black, and other colours, all very fine. and shining: the breast also shews great variety of colours, especially yellow, more fine than gold; the body is grey, and it hath a very long small bill, and yet the tongue is twice as long as the bill: it flyes very swiftly, and makes a humming like a Bee. It always feeds flying. Pur. Pil. In Socotera there are Bats, whose bodies are almost as big as a Co∣nies, their heads are like Foxes with an hairy Furr upon them: In o∣ther  things they are like our Bats. One of them being killed by some English, his wings when they were extended, were an ell in length: their cry is shril and loud. Idem. In Italy are the Flies Cantharides, which by day are of a green shin∣ing  colour, but in the night they shine in the air, like flying Glow-worms, with fire in their tailes. Raimunds Mercu. Ital. In China there is a Fowl of a prodigious shape, and bignesse: It is three foot high: the body being exceeding great, more than a man  can fathom: their feathers are all white like a Swans, their feet broad like Fowls that swim: their neck half a fathom long, and their beak half an ell, the upper part of it being crooked. From the nether par of the beak there hangs a very great and capable bag of a yellow gol∣den colour, resembling Parchment. With these Fowls the Natives
use to fish, as wee do in England with Cormorants. They will catch fish with great dexterity, and when they have filled their great bag, which will hold divers fishes of two foot long a peece, they will bring them to their Masters. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1643. In the African Desarts is a certain Fowle called a Nesir, some call it a Vultur. Its bigger than a Crain. In flying it mounts very high, yet at the sight of a dead carkass, it descends immediatly. Shee lives long, and in extream old age looseth her feathers, and then re∣turning to her nest, is there fed by the young ones of the same kinde. Idem. Near unto the Streights of Magellane, there is an Island called Pen∣guin  Island, wherein are abundance of Fowls called Penguins, that go upright; their wings, in stead of feathers, are only covered with down, which hang down like sleeves faced with white. They flye not, but walk in paths of their own making, and keep their divi∣sions, and quarters orderly. They are a strange Fowle, or rather, a miscellaneous creature, of beast, Bird, and Fish: but most of Bird. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 536. In the Isle of Man, there is a sort of Sea-Fowles called Puffins:  they are of a very unctious constitution, and breed in Cony-holes (the Conies leaving their burrows for that time) they are never seen with their young, but very early in the morning, and late in the evening: they nourish their young (as it is conceived) with Oil drawn from their own bodyes, and dropped into their mouths, for that be∣ing opened, there is found in their crops no other sustenance, save a single Sorrel-leaf, which the old give their young (as is conjectu∣red) for digestions-sake; the flesh of them whilst raw is not savoury, but powdered, it may bee ranked with Anchoves, and Caviare; pro∣fitable they are in their feathers, and oil, which they use much a∣bout their Wooll. In the Isle of Mauritius is a Fowle called a Dodo: Her body is round, and extream fat, which makes her pace slow: few of them weigh less than fifty pound: Her wings are so small, that they cannot lift her above the ground: Her head is variously dressed, the one half hooded with downy black feathers, the other wholly naked, of a whitish colour, as if a transparent Lawn had covered it: her bill is very hooked, bending downwards, the breathing place being in the midst of it, from which part to the end, the colour is light green, mixt with a pale yellow: Her eyes are round, and small, and bright as Diamonds: her cloathing is of the finest down: her train is of three or four short feathers: her legs thick, and black: her tallons sharp: her stomach so hot, that shee digests stones, or Iron, as doth the Ostrich. In Lincolnshire there is a Bird called a Dotterel, so named of his dol∣tish foolishness: Its a bird of an apish kinde, ready to imitate what it sees done: they are caught by Candle-light by the Fowlers ge∣stures: for if hee put forth an arm, they stretch forth a wing: if hee sets forward a leg, or hold up his head, they likewise do the same:
In brief, whatsoever the Fowler doth, the same also doth this fool∣ish bird, untill it bee caught within the net. Camb. Brit. p. 543. There is an Island called Bas, bordering upon Lathaien in Scotland, unto which there resort a multitude of Sea fowls, especially of Soland Geese, which bring with them such abundance of Fish, that, as it is reported, an hundred souldiers that lay there in Garrison for defence of the place, fed upon no other meat, but the fish that was thus brought to them: And the said Fowles also bring such a number of sticks, and twigs wherewith to build their nests, that thereby the in∣habitants are also abundantly provided of fewel for the fire: and such a mighty gain is made of their feathers, and oile, that no man would scarcely beleeve it, but hee that hath seen it. Camb. Brit. of Scotland. p. 12, 13. In Magallanes voyage about the world, the King of the Island of Bacchian sent the King of Spain two dead birds of a strange shape: they were as big as Turtle-Doves, with little heads, and long bills, long small legs, and no wings, but in stead thereof certain long fea∣thers of divers colours, and tails like Turtle-Doves: all their other feathers were of a tawny colour; they flye not, but when the wind blows, and they call them Birds of God. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 44. In Sofala in the East-Indies is a kinde of bird called Minga, green, and yellow, very fair, about the bigness of a Pigeon, which never treads on the ground, their feet being so short, that they can scarce bee discerned: they settle on trees, of the fruit whereof they live: when they drink they flye on the tops of the water; and if they fall on the ground they cannot rise again; their flesh is fat, and savourie. Idem. p. 1546. CHAP. VI. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Beasts, and Serpents. WHilst Sir Thomas Row, our English Ambassador, was at the great  Moguls Court, hee saw many stately Elephants brought be∣fore the Emperor: some of which being Lord-Elephants (as they called them) had their chains, bells, and furniture of gold, and sil∣ver, each of them having eight, or ten other Elephants waiting on him: they were some twelve companies in all, and as they passed by, they all bowed down before the King very handsomely. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 550. Though these Elephants be the largest of all beasts, yet are they very tractable, unless at such times when they are mad through lust: some of them are thirteen, and some fifteen foot high; their colour is usually black, their skins thick, and smooth without hair; they de∣light much to bathe themselves in water, and are excellent swim∣mers,
their pace is about three miles an hour; of all Beasts they are most sure of foot, so that they never stumble, or fall to indanger their rider: they lye down, and rise again at pleasure, as other beasts do; they are most docible creatures, doing almost whatsoever their Keeper commands them. If hee bid one of them afright a man, hee will make towards him, as if hee would tread him in peeces; and yet when hee comes at him, do him no hurt: If hee bid him abuse, or disgrace a man, hee will take dirt, or kennel-water in his trunk, and dash it in his face, &c. Their trunks are long, grissely snouts hanging down betwixt their teeth, which (as a hand) they make use of upon all occasions. Some Elephants the great Mogul keeps for execution of malefactors; who being brought to suffer death by that mighty beast, if the Keeper bid him dispatch the offender pre∣sently, hee will immediatly with his foot pash him in peeces: If hee bid him torture him slowly, hee will break his joynts by degrees one after another, as men are broken upon the wheel. An English Merchant of good credit being at Adsmeer (a City where  the great Mogul then was) saw a great Elephant daily brought through the Market-place, where an Hearb-woman used to give him an handful of herbs as hee passed by. This Elephant afterwards being mad, brake his chains, and took his way through the Market-place; the people being affrighted, hasted to secure themselves, a∣mongst whom was this Hearb-woman, who through fear, and haste, forgat her little childe. The Elephant comming to the place where shee usually sate, stopt, and seeing a childe lye about her hearbs, took it up gently with his Trunk, and without harm, laid it upon a stall hard by, and then proceeded in his furious course. Idem. p. 1472. The Males Testicles lye about his forehead: the Females teates are betwixt her fore legs; they carry their young two years in their wombs: conceive but once in seven years: they are thirty years be∣fore they come to their full growth, and fulfil the accustomed age of a man before they dye. As Pyrrus King of Epyrus was assaulting the City of Argos, one of  of his Elephants called Nicon. i. e. Conquering, being entred the City, perceiving that his governour was stricken down to the ground from his back with terrible blows; ran upon them that came back upon him, overthrowing friends, and foes, one in anothers neck, till at length, having found the body of his slain Master, hee lift him up from the ground with his trunk, and carrying him upon his two tushes, returned back with great fury, treading all under feet whom hee found in his way. Plut. In vita Pyrri. The Lion hath the Jackall for his Usher, which is a little black,  shag-haired beast, of the bigness of a Spaniel, which when the even∣ing comes, hunts for his prey, and comming on the foot, follows the scent with open crye: to which the Lion as chief Hunt gives dili∣gent ear, following for his advantage: If the Jackall set up his chase before the Lion comes in, hee howles out mainly, and then the Lion seizeth on it, making a grumbling noise, whilst his servant stands
by barking, and when the Lyon hath done, the Jackall feeds on the relicks. Idem. p. 1575. See more afterwards. Example seventeen. The Panther hath a very sweet smell, so that other Beasts are much taken therewith, but they are terrified with the ugly deformity of his  face, and therefore as hee goes hee hides that part between his legs, and will not look towards them till hee hath gotten them within his compasse, which when hee hath done, hee devours them without mercy: so deals the Devil with wicked men, strewing their way to Hell with variety of worldly delights, and profits (the thorns of af∣flictions must not touch their flesh, nor hells terrors come within their thoughts) till hee hath made them past feeling, than hee devours them. Plin. nat. Hist. L. 8 C. 17. The Rhynoceros is so called because of the horn in his nose: hee is a large beast, as big as our fairest Oxe in England: His skin lyeth pla∣ted, and as it were in wrinkles upon his back: Their Horn, Teeth, Claws, yea flesh, and blood, are good against poyson, which as is conceived, proceeds from the Herbs which they feed on in Bengala, where are most store of them. The Camelopardalus is the highest of Beasts, so that a man on horse∣back may ride upright under his belly, his neck is long, so that hee  usually feedeth upon the leaves of trees: his colour is white and speck∣led, his hinder legs are shorter than his former, so that he cannot graze but with difficulty. P. Pil. p. 1381. He is also called a Jaraff. In India is a certain beast called a Buffelo, which is very large, hath a thick and smooth skin, but without hair: She gives good milk, and  her flesh is like beefe. Idem. p. 1469. In the same Country also are certain wild Goats, whose horns are  good against poison. Pur. Pil. p. 472. In the Country of Indostan in the East-Indies, are large white Apes, as big as our Grey-hounds, which will eat young birds, whereupon Nature hath taught their Dams this subtilty: they build their Nests on the utmost boughs at the end of slender twigs: where they hang them like Purse-nets, to which the Apes cannot possibly come: yet many times with their hands they will shake those boughs til the nests break, and fall down, and then they will devour them. Pur. Pilgrimag. p. 1475. The Camelion is of the shape, and bigness of a Lizzard, it is a deform∣ed  lean, and crooked creature, having a long and slender tail, like a Mouse, and is of a slow pace. It lives only upon Flys. It changeth colours accor∣ding to the variety of places where it comes. It is a great enemy to venemous Serpents, for when it sees any lye sleeping under a Tree, it gets upon a bough just over the Serpents head, and voideth out of its mouth, as it were a long thred of Spittle, with a round drop hanging at the end, which falling on the Serpents head, immediately kills him. P. Pil. p. 848. There was lately found in Catalunia, in the Mountains of Cerdania, a certain Monster, that had humane shape as far as the waste, and down∣wards  it was like a Satyre: Hee had many heads, Arms, and Eyes,
and a mouth of extraordinary bignesse, wherewith hee made a noise like a Bull: His picture was sent by Don John of Austria (now Governour of the Low Countryes) to the King of Spain, and after∣wards many Coppies thereof. were drawn, and sent abroad by Am∣bassadors, and other persons to several Princes, and States in Europe. Hist. of this Iron age. In Brasile is a certain Beast called a Tamandua, or Ant-Bear, of the bignesse of a great dog, more round than long, and the tail above twice so long as the body, and so full of hair that under it hee shelters himself from raine, heat, cold, and wind. His head is small; and hath a thin snout: his mouth round, with a tongue three quarters of a yard long: hee is diligent in seeking Ant-hills, which hee tear∣eth with his claws, and then thrusts in his long tongue, upon which the Ants run, and when it is full hee licks them in, and this is all his food. Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1301. The Armadillo is of the bignesse of a Pig, and of a white colour: It hath a long snout, and the body is covered with shels like Plates, wherwith they are armed: for they are so hard that no arrow will pierce them except in the Flanks, where they are softer: their flesh is good to eat, they dig holes in the ground with their snouts, in which they lye. Idem. The Porcupine hath bristles, or quils, white and black, of a span  and an half long, which they can cast: and they have this quality, that where one of these bristles enters into the flesh, if it bee not pulled out presently, it will work it self quite through, they are of a good flesh, and taste. The Civet Cat exceeds the Castor for bignesse, her head is little,  her eyes cleer; hath a long muzzle; sharp, and offensive teeth. Her hair is parti-coloured, harsh, and bristley, yellow above, and whiter down∣wards; The pocket wherein the Civet is bred is neer the genitory, which is taken forth with a spoon or stick; But when shee is wild, shee casts it forth of her own accord, and by the sent it is found by the passengers. The Lyons in Affrick, are more fierce than in colder Countryes; here  was one of their skins brought into England, which from the snout to the top of the tail, contained one and twenty foot in length. They engender backwards as do Camels, Elephants, Rhinoceroses, Oun∣ces, and Tygers. They spare such men as prostrate themselves to them, and prey rather upon men than women, and not at all on In∣fants except compelled by hunger. His tail is his Scepter, by which hee expresses his passion. Hee shrinks not at danger, except some covert of woods hides him from witnesses, and then he will take the benefit of flight, which otherwise he seems to disdain. The Hyaena hath no joints in her neck, and therefore stirrs not her  neck, but with the bending of her whole body. Shee hath one conti∣nued tooth through her whole mouth. In Africk are many wild Asles, whereof one male hath many females,  & he s so jealous, that he bites off the stones of the young males, if the
suspicious female, prevent him not by bringing forth in a close place. The Dabuh is a simple Creature, like to a Wolf, but that his legs  and feet are like to a mans, they which know his haunt, with a Taber, and singing will bring him out of his den, and captivate his ears with their Musick, whilst another captivateth his legs with a rope. The Zebra is a very beautiful Creature, resembling a curiously  shaped horse, but not all out so swift, all overlaid with party coloured lades, and guards from head to tail. In Sofala there is a certain creature called Inhazaras, as big as a hog, and somewhat like, with thin and black hair, having on his hinder feet five fingers like unto a mans, and four on his forefeet; they live meer∣ly upon Ants, by thrusting their tongues which are two spans and an half long into an Ant-hill, whereon the Ants running, they pull them into their mouths, and so eat them: some call them Ant-Bears, Pur. Pil. There is in Affrica a certain monster called Pongo, in the whole  proportion like unto a man, but that it is bigger. It hath a mans face, hollow eyes, long hair upon the brows, his face and ears be∣ing without hair: but his body is all hairy of a dunish colour, &c. Hee differs from a man only in his legs which have no calves: hee goes always upright upon his legs, and carries his hands clasped in the nape of his neck, when hee walkes upon the ground: They use to sleep in trees, and live upon fruits and nuts, Idem. v. 2. p. 982. In Congo there is a strange Creature as big as a Ram, that hath wings like a Dragon, a long tail, and great chaps, with diverse rows of  teeth: They feed upon raw flesh. Idem. p. 1003. In Affrica there is a beast called a Dabuk, in bignesse, and shape re∣sembling  a Wolf, saving that his legs and feet are like a mans. Hee useth to rake dead men out of their graves, and eat them. Idem. p. 847. In the Kingdome of Mexico there are Kine, with bunches on their backs, about the bignesse of our bulls, having little horns, and more  hair on their foreparts than behind, which is like Wooll: On the back bone they have manes like horses, and long hair from their Knees downward, with much long hair on their throats: They are meat, drink, shooes, houses, fire, vessels, and their masters whole substance. Other Creatures there are as big as horses, which the Spaniards for  their fine wooll call Sheep: One of their horns usually weigheth fifty pounds. P. Pil. v. 4. p. 1561. In Virginia is a beast called a Possown, the female whereof hath  a bag under her belly, from whence shee letteth forth her young ones, and taketh them in again at her pleasure. Idem. p. 1772. In Socotera are Sheep, whose tails weigh twenty eight pounds a peece, which therefore are usually cut off from the Ewes, least they should hin∣der their breeding. In the Great Mogols Countrey there are Asses with horns, whereof  they make diverse sorts of drinking cups, of excellent vertue. Some judging them to be the right Unicorns horn. Idem. p. 436. Most certain it is that the Irish Cows, will not give down their milk, unlesse their own Calves be set by their sides, either alive, or else the
skin of the dead Calf must bee stuffed with straw, and set by them. Camb. Brit. of Ireland. p. 1145. In the Island of Orknay the Ewes are of such fecundity, that they  bring forth constantly two, and many times three Lambs a peece; There bee neither ravenous, nor venemous creatures there, nor if transported thither, will they live in that Island. Description of Scot∣land. There are three sorts of Camels: the first sort are gross, and tall  of stature: these will usually carry one thousand pound weight a peece, when they are to bee loaden, being beaten on the knees, and neck with a cudgel, they will kneel down, and when they feel their load sufficient, they will rise up again of themselves. The second sort of them have two bunches on their backs, and are fit either for bur∣then, or to ride on. The third sort are of a slender, and low stature, called Dromedaries, unfit for burthens, but they excel in swiftness, so that in the space of one day they will travel one hundred miles, and will so continue for eight, or ten dayes together, with very lit∣le provender; and they will abstain from drink eight, ten, and some∣times fifteen dayes together, without any inconvenience, as they tra∣vel through the Deserts. Musk is taken from a little reddish beast, that they beat with many  blows in one place, that so the blood may gather into it: and when the skin is by this means swolne, and full of blood, they binde it strait, that the blood may not issue forth, and being put into one, or more bladders, its dryed on the beasts back, till the bladder fall off of it self; and so that blood after a month becomes excellent musk. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1500. Amongst the Blackmoores, there is a strange beast called a Car∣buncle,  which is seen only by night, having a stone in his forehead that shineth incredibly, and giving him light whereby to feed: But when hee hears the least noise, hee presently lets fall over it a skin, which hee hath as a natural covering, least his splendor should betray him. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 416. In Abassia are Kine with horns like unto Harts horns: Others there bee that have but one horn in the midst of their foreheads of about a span and an half long, turning upward. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1495. There is in the Country of Mexico a kinde of sheep, which all  things considered is a beast of the greatest profit, and least charge that is: For from them they draw meat and cloathing: They use them also to carry all their burthens, having need neither of shooes nor saddles, nor yet of Oats, so that they serve their Masters for nought, feeding only on grass which they finde in the fields; There are two kindes of these creatures, the one bearing Wooll, the other are bare, which are the better for burthen; they are big∣ger than great Sheep, and less than Calves; they have long necks like a Cammel. They are of divers colours, some white, some black, and others grey, or spotted; Their flesh is good meat, but
that of their Lambs is best: Of their Wooll the Indians make cloath some courser, other finer like half silk; they also make Carpets, and Coverings, and other exquisite works of it, which last long, and have a very good gloss; they die it into sundry colours: upon these the Spaniards carry their bars of silver; one of these sheep carrying about an hundred and fifty pound weight. In the stomach, or belly of this beast, is found the Bezar's stone;  sometimes one alone, sometimes two, three, or four: They are different in form, greatness, and colour; some like Filbirds, others like Walnuts: Some as big as Pigeons Eggs, some as big as Hens Eggs: In form some are round, some oval, and of other forms. For their colour, some are black, some white, some grey, dark green, and some as if they had been gilded: they are all made of divers filmes, and skins one upon another. P. Pil. v. 3. p. 969. There is in Italy the Tarantula (a kinde of Serpent) the venome  whereof hath such an operation, that whosoever is stung with it, fal∣leth a dancing, and capering, and nothing can allay it but Musick. Raimunds Mercu. Ital. Examples of Dogs love to their Masters. When the Athenians quit their City, and betook themselves to  Sea, upon Xerxes his invasion of Greece, Xantippus, the Father of Pericles had a Dog, which for sorrow that his Master had left him behinde him, cast himself after him into the Sea, swimming still by the Gallies side wherein his Master was, till hee came to the. Isle of Salamina, where so soon as the poor Cur landed, his breath failed him, and hee dyed presently. Plut. In vita Themist. CHAP. VII. Admirable Works done by the Art of man. PRotogenes the Rhodian, an exquisite Painter, bestowed seven years  in drawing a most curious picture, which when Apelles beheld, hee stood amazed at the excellency of the workmanship, so that for a while hee could not speak, but afterwards hee said, This is an admirable work, and of huge labour, yet hee wants an Orator to extol his workmanship to the skies. When King Demetrius besiedged the City of Rhodes, hee took the suburbs, and in them this picture, whereupon the Citizens sent on him, requesting him not to deface it; to whom hee answered, That hee would sooner burn the Picture of his Father, than hurt a peece of such admirable workmanship. Diod. Sic. Plut.
Glasses malleable. Anno Christi 1610. amongst other rare Presents sent from the Sophy of Persia, to the King of Spain, were six drinking glasses so ex∣quisitely tempered, that they could not bee broken. Turk. Hist. p. 1273. Stone-henge described. About six miles from Salisbury, upon the plains, is to bee seen a  huge, and monstrous peece of work, such as Cicero calleth insanam substructionem. For within the circuit of a ditch there are erected in the manner of a Crown, in three ranks, or courses one within another, certain mighty, and unwrought stones, whereof some are twenty eight foot high, and seven broad; upon the heads of which, others like overtwhart peeces do bear, and rest cross-wise with tenents, and mortesses, so as the whole frame seemeth to hang, whereof its commonly called Stone-henge. Camb. Brit. In Westmerland, hard by Shape, there bee huge stones in form of Pyramids, some of them nine foot high, and fourteen foot thick, ranged directly as it were in a row for a mile in length, with equal di∣stance almost between them. Camb. Brit. p. 762. Mausolus his Tombe described. Artimesia Queen of Halicarnassus, when her husband Mausolus dy∣ed, built him a stately Tomb, accounted for the rare workmanship, and costly magnificence one of the worlds Wonders. It was five and twenty cubits high, and supported with six and thirty curious pillars, of which Martial thus writeth. Aere nam vacuo pendentia Mausolaea, laudibus immodicis Cares ad astra ferunt. The Mausolaea hanging in the skie, the men of Caria's praises Deifie. When Sir. Thomas Row was Ambassador there, the Great Mogul built a stately Monument for his Father: it was about twenty years in building, and three thousand men working daily at it: it was built square, three quarters of a mile in compass: it was made with se∣ven heights one above another, and each narrower than other, till you come to the top where the herse is: At the outward Gate is a most stately Palace, and Gardens walled about, at least three miles in compass; all built at a vast charge. Pur. Pil. p. 226. Mr. Herbert, who saw it afterwards, thus describes it. It consists (saith hee) of four large squares, each about three hundred paces
long, the matter is freestone polished, having at each Angle, a small Tower of party coloured Marble. Ten foot higher is another Tarras, on each side beautified with three such Towers. The third Gallery hath two Towers, on each side. The fourth, one. The fifth half, and a small square Gallery mounting to a Royall Pyree, within which is the Mummy of Ecbar; bedded in a Coffin of pure Gold. The whole structure is built in the middest of a spatious and curious Garden, sur∣rounded with a wall of red stone, and planted with beautiful and o∣doriferous flowers. Porsennah's Tomb described. Porsenna King of Hetruria, not far from the City of Clusium, built for himself a Monument of square stone, each side of it was three  hundred foot broad, and fifty foot high; within which square Basis there was an inextricable Labyrinth, into which whosoever adventured without a clue, could finde no passage out. Upon this square hee e∣rected five Pyramids, four in the corners, and one in the middest; in the bottom they were seventy five foot broad, and each of them one hundred and fifty foot high, on the top was one brasse circle, and co∣vering for them all, from which there hung bells fastened with chains, which being moved with the winde gave a sound a far off: Upon this brazen circle stood other four Pyramids, each of them one hundred foot high; and upon them (being covered with another plain) were again erected five other Pyramids, the height whereof my Author was ashamed to name: so foolishly did hee waste the wealth of his King∣dome▪ that in the end the commendation of the Artificer should bee the greatest. Pliny out of Varro; and Greaves out of him. In the Great Moguls Country, from Agra to Lahor (which are the two chief Cities in this Empire) is about four hundred English miles: The  Countrey in all that distance being even without Mountains or hills: and the high-way betwixt them is planted on both sides with Trees, like unto a delicate walk. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1468. The Trees are Mulberry trees. And in all this way, ever and anon, are Inns built by several Kings, and great men, for the entertainment of strangers: In which you may have a chamber for your self, room for your horse, and horse-meat, but little for your servant: when a man hath taken up his lodging, no other may dispossesse him. In the morning about break a day, all make ready to depart, at which time the gates are opened, and none suffered to depart sooner for fear of theeves. p. 520. The first invention of Printing. Laurence Jans, a rich Citizen of Harlem in the Low-Countrys, walk∣ing forth one day into the neighbouring Woods for recreation, began  to cut in peices of wood the letters of his name, printing them on the back of his hand; which pleasing him well, hee cut three or
four lines which hee beat with Ink, and printed them upon Paper, wherewith hee much joyed, and determined to find out another kind of Ink more fastening, and holding, and so with his Kinsman Thomas Peterse, found out another way to print whole Sheets, but of one side only, which are yet to bee seen in the said town: afterwards hee changed his Letters of Wood into Lead, and after that into Tin, and so by degrees this famous Art of Printing grew to perfection. Belg. Common-Wealth. p. 57. Some say that John Guttenberg of Strasburg, was the first Inventer of it, Anno Christi 1440. In which City he first practised it, and remov∣ing from thence to Mentz, there perfected it. They say that Tullies Offi∣ces was the first book that ever was printed. P. Ramus Schol. Math. L. 2. It doth with wonderful celerity convey learning from one Country, and age, to another. Imprimit ille die, quantum vix scribitur anno. The most famous Printers were. Aldus Manutius, and after him Paulus his son in Venice. In France Crispinus, Henry Stevens, father to Charles; and Charles to Robert; Ro∣bert to Henry, and Henry to Paul, all Printers. Christopher Plantine of Antwerp, was a most famous and learned Printer. Frobenius, that was Erasmus his faithful Printer. Daniel Bombergus, an excellent Printer of the Hebrew Bible, and many other Hebrew books, &c. The first Invention of Guns. A German Fryer of the Order of St. Francis, called Bertholdus Swart,  being very studious of Chymistry, as hee was one evening (for the finding out of some experiment) very busy in tempering Brimstone, Sulphureous powder of dryed earth, and certain other ingredients in a Morter, which hee covered with a stone: when it grew dark, hee took his Tinder-box to light him a candle, a spark whereof by chance flying into the mortar, caught hold of the Brimstone, and Salt-Peter, and firing, with a sudden flash blew up the stone. The cunning Chy∣mist guessing what it was which wrought this effect, never left till hee found out the certainty, and then taking an iron pipe, hee crammed it full of the said ingredient, together with some stones, and so putting fire to it, hee saw that with great fury, and noise it discharged it self: Soon after which, hee communicated this his Invention to the Vene∣tians, who, having been often vanquished by the Genowayes, did by the help of these Bombards, or Guns, give them a notable discomfi∣ture. Anno Christi 1380. Bucholtz. At Middleburg in Zealand, in the Steeple of the Abby-Church, there  is a Bell of eighteen thousand weight to strike the houres on, and twen∣ty
four small ones which serve for the Chymes. Belg. Common-wealth. p. 162. A Description of the situation of Utrecht in the Low-Countries. Utrecht in the Low-Countries, is so situated, that one may go to what Town hee please of fifty, that lye round about it, in one day. And  in a Summers day, if one go early from Utrecht, he may dine at any one of twenty six Towns, where he pleaseth, and return to his own house to Supper. Idem. p. 200. Trajan built a Bridge over the River Ister, or Danow, containing twen∣ty Arches, each Arch being one hundred and fifty foot high, sixty  thick, and one hundred and seventy foot distant one from another: So that the whole length of it was four thousand seven hundred and seventy feet, which was almost a mile long. The River was very deep, and swift, and the bottome not firm ground, neither could the stream be diverted any other way; all which made the work farre more difficult, and admirable. Ancus Martius, the fourth King of Rome, built a woodden Bridge o∣ver  the River Tybur, yet without nails, or pins, so that in times of war it might be taken down: Afterwards Aemilius the Consul built it of stone: And Lastly Antoninus Pius the Emperor built it of Marble. FINIS. Soli Deo Gloria.
A TABLE OF THE Principal things contained IN THE Geographical part of this Book. A General description of Asia. Page 1. A more particular description of it. Page 3. Cappadocia described. Page 3. Galatia described. Page 3. Pontus and Bithinia described. Page 3. Paphlagonia described. Page 4. Asia propria described. Page 4. Phrygia major described. Page 4. Phrygia minor described. Page 4. Jonia described. Page 5. Doris described. Page 5. Pamphilia described. Page 5. Armenia minor described. Page 5. Canaan described. Page 5. Galilee described. Page 6. Samaria described. Page 7. Syria described. Page 12. Persian Empire described. Page 14. Armenia major described. Page 22. Media described. Page 23. Parthia described. Page 24. Hircania described. Page 24. Arabia described. Page 24. Tartaria described. Page 25. Cyprus described. Page 27. Rhodes described. Page 28. Malabar described. Page 28. Zeilan described. Page 29. Coromandel described. Page 30. Socotera described. Page 31. Narsinga described. Page 32. Malacca described. Page 33. Siam described. Page 33. Pegu described. Page 35. Sumatra described. Page 36. Java major described. Page 36. Celebes Islands described. Page 37. Molucco Islands. Bandaneza's Islands. Borneo. Japan. Page 37.
China described. Page 38. Industan described. Page 43. Bengala described. Page 49. Cambaia described. Page 50. Philippine Islands described. Page 50. Mauritius Island described. Page 51. A general description of Af∣frica. Page 51. Affrican Islands described. Page 54. A more particular description of Affrica. Page 54. Egypt described. Page 54. Barbary described. Page 61. Tunis described. Page 62. Algier described. Page 62. Fesse and Morocco described. Page 63. Numidia and Libia described. Page 65. Land of Negroes described. Page 66. Country of the Mandingos descri∣bed. Page 67. Aethiopia inferior described. Page 69. Aian. described. Zandzibar described. Cafraria. described. Page 69. Cape of Good Hope described. Page 69. Sofala described. Page 71. Monomopata described. Page 71. Congo, or Manicongo described. Page 71. Loango described. Page 72. Aethiopia superior described. Page 73. Islands in the Red-sea described. Page 76. Madagascar described. Page 77. Mohelia described. Page 78. St. Hellens Island described. Page 78. St. Thomas Island described. Page 78. Princes Island described. Page 79. Cape verde described. Page 79. Maio Island described. Page 79. Canary Islands described. Page 80. Malta described. Page 87.80. A general Description of Europe. Page 81. The Islands in Europe described. Page 84. Samothracia described. Lemnos described. Page 84. Lesbos. described. Chios. described. Euboea. described. Sporades. described. Cyclades. described. Crete. described. Page 85. Cythera. described. Strophades. described. Zant. described. Echidnades. described. Cephalenia. described. Corfu. described. Scicily. described. Page 86. Corsica. described. Sardinia. described. Page 87. Majorca. described. Minorca. described. Cales. described. Page 88. England described. Page 88. Wales described. Page 106. Scotland described. Page 106. Ireland described. Page 108. Isle of Man described. Page 111. Azores Islands described. Page 111. Spain described. Page 112. Portugal described. Page 115. Pirenean Mountaines described. Page 116. France described. Page 116. The Alps described. Page 121. Italy described, Page 121. The Roman Triumphs described. Page 129. Belgia or the Netherlands described. Page 138. Germany described. Page 142. Switzerland described. Page 144. Bohemia described. Page 146. Denmark described. Page 148. Norway described. Page 149.
Swethland described. Page 150. Muscovy described. Page 151. The State of the Emperor descri∣bed. Page 153. The Permians and Samoeds des∣cribed. Page 154. Lapland described. Page 154. Poland described. Page 155. Hungary described. Page 157. Dacia described. Page 157. Sclavonia described. Page 158. Greece described. Page 158. Peloponesus described. Page 159. Achaia described. Page 160. Epirus. described. Albania, described. Macedonia. described. Thessaly. described. Page 161. Migdonia. described. Thracia. described. Page 162. The Turkish Empire described. Page 166. America described Page 169. Mexico, or New Spain described. Page 171. Quivira. described. Nova Albion. described. Florida. described. Virginia. described. Page 172. Florida more fully described. Page 173. Peruana, and the Countryes therein described. Page 174. Magellanick Streights described. Page 180. American Islands described. Page 180. Jamica. described. Cuba. described. Bermudae. described. Page 182. Hispaniola described. Page 183. Newfound-land described. Page 184. New-Scotland described. Page 185. Groenland described. Page 185. Spaniards cruelty to the poor In∣dians. Page 186. Examples of the wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Page 191. Of strange Stones. Page 191. A moving hill. Page 192. ex. 8. Merlins Cave. Page 192. ex. 9. Earth turning wood into stone. Page 192. ex. 10. Wood, and stones with Lozenges in them. Page 193. ex. 13. Stones with stars in them▪ Page 193. ex. 14.17. Burning Mountains. Page 193. ex. 15. Of a City petrified. Page 193. Of strange Trees, Hearbs, Plants, and Gums. Page 194. Of strange Fountains, Rivers, and Waters. Page 202. Of strange Fishes. Page 207. Of strange Fowls, and Birds. Page 212. Of strange Beasts and Serpents. Page 215. Of strange, costly, and stupendious works done by the Art of Man. Page 221. The chiefest Cities in the World, mentioned and described. Cities in Asia. NIce, where the Council was held. Page 3. Nicomedia. Page 3. Apamia, now Bursa. Page 3· Chalcedon, where a Council was held Page 3. Troy described Page 4· Cyzicus Page 4· Halicarnassus Page 5· The Chief Cities in Canaan Page 6· Hierusalem described. Page 7. Nineve described Page 10.
Babylon described. Page 10. Tower of Babylon described. Page 12. Bagdat described. Page 12. Antioch described. Damascus described. Aleppo described. Tripolis described. Page 13. Scandaroon now Alexandretta Page 14. Lar described. Page 15. Shyraz described. Page 16. Persepolis described. Spahawn described. Page 17. Casbine described. Page 20. Tauris described. Derbent described. Hyspaan described. Page 21. Casan described. Page 22. Callecut described. Page 29. Negapatan described. Page 30. Goa described. Amadavar described. Page 31. Ormus described. Bisnagar described. Mesulipatan described. Page 32. Malacca described. Patania described. Page 33. Pegu described. Page 34. Bantam described. Page 36. Meacco described. Page 37. Fucata described. Page 38. Pequin described. Nanquin described. Page 39. Quinsay described. Page 41. Lahore described. Page 47. Brampore described. Fettipore described. Candahor described. Mandow described. Page 48. Surat described. Agra described. Asmeere described. Page 49. Grand Cairo described. Page 55. Alexandria described. Page 57. Rosetto described. Page 58. Chanca described. Page 58. Tropolis in Tunis Page 62. Tunis Constantina Page Bugia Page 62. Algier described. Page 62. Fesse described. Page 64. Sella described. Morocco described. Page 65. Teffet Page 66. Suaquen described. Page 74. Amara in Aethiopia described. Page 74. Saba, &c. described. Page 76. Sues described. Page 76. Bernice described. Page 76. Siracuse described. Page 87. London described. Page 92. Westminster described. Page 93. Salisbury described. Page 96. Bristow described. Page 97. Wels described. Page 98. Bath described. Page 98. Excester described. Winchester described. Chichester described. Page 99. Canterbury described. Rochester described. Gloucester described. Page 100. Oxford described. Page 100. Eli described. Lincolne described. Norwich. described. Page 101. Coventry described. Worcester described. Page 102. Lichfield described. Westchester described. Page 103. Hereford described. York described. Page 104. Durham described. Page 105. Carlile described. Page 105. Cities in Scotland. Page 107. Cities in Ireland. Page 109. Sivil described. Page 113. Granata described. Page 113. Toledo described. Page 114. Escurial described. Page 114. Lisbon described. Page 115. Paris described. Page 118. Geneva described. Page 120.
Ferrara described. Page 122. Rome described. Page 123, 125. Mantua described. Page 124. Genoa described. Page 125. Venice described. Page 132. Padua described. Page 134. Millan described. Page 135. Naples described. Page 135. Florence described. Page 136. Leige described. Page 138. Lovaine described. Page 139. Bruxels described. Antwerp described. Page 139. Leiden described. Machlin described. Page 141. The Cities in Germany described. Page 143, &c. Prague described. Page 147. Mosco described. Page 151. Constantinople described. Page 162. The Turks Seraglio described. Page 164. Caxamalca described. Page 176. Stones, Precious-stones, Minerals. Diamonds where gotten Page 50.98. Gold how gotten: Page 180. Pearls where gotten: Page 180.181. Strange Stones: Page 191. Amber how it grows: Page 193. ex. 16. Whence all sorts of precious stones come: Page 193. ex. 18. Trees, Hearbs, Plants, and Gums, strange. A famous Pine-tree. Page 5. Cedars of Libanus: Page 14. A strange walk with trees: Page 48. Ebony where it grows: Page 51. Sensitive Trees: Page 68. Resurrection Trees: Page 71. A very profitable Tree: Page 171. Strange Fig-Trees: Page 177. Of Date-Trees: Page 194. ex. 1. Balm Tree: Page 194. ex. 2. Cotton Trees: Page 194. ex. 4. Cynamon Trees: Page 194. ex. 5. Arbore de Ray's: Page 195. ex. 6. Arbore Triste. Page 195. ex. 7. Herba sentida: Page 195. ex. 8. Pepper: Ginger: Cloves: Page 195. ex. 9, 10, 11. Nutmegs: Gum-lack: Amber-greese: Page 196. ex. 12, 13, 14. Addad: Palm-Trees: Frankincense: Manna: Mastick: Page 196. ex. 15, 16, (&c. Spunges how gotten. Page 196. ex. 20. Resurrection Tree: Page 196. ex. 21. An Oak yeilding water. Page 196. ex. 23. Aloes: Indico: Page 197. ex. 23, 24. A Tree whose root is a worm. Page 198. ex. 25. Saffron: Palm-Trees: Basilisco: Assa-faetida: Page 198. ex· 26, &c. Benjamin. Page 199. Coquo Trees admirable: Page 199. Plantane-Trees: Cedars: Palmita Trees: Manguy: Page 200. Tunals and Cochenille: Jack, or Giack: Ananas: Duroyen: Arec Tree: Page 201. Palmeto Trees: Page 201. Hawthorn Tree: Papyri: Page 202. Sergasso: Page 79. Coxscomb: Page 79. Alimos: Page 85. Frankincense: Page 25. Aloes Socotrina: Page 54.
Fountains strange. A Fountain that makes drunk. Page 4. Lake of Maeris described. Page 61. Fountains hot. Page 88.111.181.205. Salt how made. Page 92. Bituminous Fountain. Page 181, 182. Hell Kettles. Page 202. Fountains turning wood into stone. Page p. 202. ex. 2. p. 203. ex. 6. p. 205. ex. 37. Fountains that ebb, and flow. Page p. 202. e. 3, 4. p. 203. ex. 7. p. 204. e. 26, 27. Fountains hurtful to Beasts. Page 202. ex. 5. Fountains hot. Page p. 203. ex. 8.10. p. 205. ex. 39. Water turned into stone. Page 203. ex. 9. Strange Meers. Page 203. e. 11, 12. p. 204. e. 24. Fountain of Oil. Fountain of Pitch. Page 203. e. 14, 15. Fountain that makes Oxen white. Page 204▪ e. 16. River that makes sheep black. Page 204. e. 17. Fountain of Jupiter. Page 204. e. 18. Fountain of the Sun. Page 204. e. 19. Sabbatical River. Page 204. e. 20. Fountain of Job. Page 204. e. 21. Water that causeth black milk. Page 204. e. 22. A swelling Lake. A Fountain like Vinegar. Fountains like Wine. Page 204. e. 23, 28, 29, 30. Other strange Fountains. Page 205. River hot. Page 205. e. 36. A River that breeds Flyes. Page 206. e. 40. A Fountain like Milk. Page 206. e. 44. Bone-Well. Page 206. e. 45. A strange noise in the water. Page 207. e. 46. Fountain Chymaera. Flax that is purifi∣ed by fire. Two Rivers that mix not. Page 207. e. 47. (&c. Strange Fishes. A man Fish. Page 207. e. 1. A woman Fish. Page 208. e. 2. Meer-maids. Page 208. e. 3.5. Meer-men. Page 208. e. 4.6. Fishes like children. Page 209. e. 7. Torpedo. Page 209. e. 8. p. 211. e. 22. River Horses. A very strange Fish. Toad Fishes. Cuttle Fishes. Flying Fishes. Page 209. e. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Of the VVhale, Swordfish, and Thre∣sher. Page 210. e. 14. Shark. Sea Tortoise. Eagle Fish. Sea Unicorn. Page 210. e. 15, 16, 17 18. Sea-Cow. Page 211. e, 9.23 Sea-Spider. Page 211. e. 20. Of the Briese, or Trade wind. Page 211. e. 2. Oxe Fishes. Page 211. e. 24. Shining Flyes. Page 212. e. 25. Shining Sea, Page 212. e. 26. Fowls, and Birds strange. The Stalker. Page 69. In Brasile. Page 179. Cholca. Page 212. e. 1. Claik-Geese. Page 212. e. 2. Storks. Page 212. e. 3, 4. Awaken Birds. Ostriches. Strange Bats. Cantharides. A huge Fowl. Page 213.5, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Vulturs: Penguins: Puffins: Dodos: Dotterels: Page 214. e. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Soland Geese: Strange Birds: Mingas: Page 215. ex. 16, 17, 18. Beasts strange. Jackals: Page 14. Crocodiles: Page 36. Elephants: Page 46. Baboons: Page 68. Horse Tails highly prized. Page 72. A strange Beast in Congo. Page 72. Musoli: Page 87. A very profitable Beast. A strange Hare Page 172. A strange Beast in Virginia. Page 173. A strange Beast in Peru. Page 176. The Beast Pigritia. Page 178. Elks described: Page 179. Strange Boars: described Acuti: described Pacas: described Carague: described Armadillo: described Page 179. A Beast like a Squirrel of a delicate Furr: Page 180. Elephants: Page 215. ex. 1, 2, 3, 4. Lyons: Page 216. ex. 4, 17. Panthers: Rhynoceros: Camelopardalus: Bufelo's: Page 217. ex. 5, 6, 7, 8. Wild Goats: White Apes: Camelions: Page 217. ex. 9, 10, 11. A strange Monster: Page 217. ex. 12. Ant-Bears: Page 218. ex. 13, 22. Armadillo's: Porcupines: Civit-Cats: Hyaena's: Page 218. ex. 14, 15, 16, 18. Asses: Page 218. ex. 19 Dabub: Zebra: Pongoes: A strange Beast: Strange Kine: Strange Sheep: Possowns: Asses with horns: Page 219. ex. 20, 25, 21, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 30 Sheep with great tails: Page 219. ex. 29. Irish Cows: Page 219. ex. 31. Fruitful Ews: Camels. Musk: Carbuncles: Page 220. ex. 3, 33, 34, 35, 37 Kine with Harts-horns. Page 220. ex. 36. Strange Sheep. Page 220. ex. 37 Bezar stones: Tarantula's: A Dogs love to his Master. Page 221. ex. 37, 38 39 Admirable works made by Man. Famous Temples. Bellona's Temple: Page 3 Jupiters Temple: Page 4 Diana's Temple described. Page 5 Hierusalems Temple described. Page 8 Priapus Temple: Page 12 Jupitur Belus's Temple: Page 11 Temples in Pegu. Page 35 Temples in Japan. Page 38 Temples of China: Page 39 Temple in Fesse: Page 64 Temple of the Sun: Page 177 Obelisks, Pillars, and Pyramids. Obelisk of Semiramis: Page 10 A strange Pillar of heads: Page 19 Colossus at Rhodes described. Page 28 Egyptian Pharos described. Page 55 Egyptian Pyramids described. Page 58 Egyptian Mummies described. Page 59 Stones like Pyramids: Page 222. ex. 4.
Strange, and Stupendious works made by the Art of Man. The Fortress of Cusco. Page 175. Admirable high ways in Peru: Page 177. The Incas Garden. Page 177. A rare Picture: Page 221. e. 1. Glasses Malleable: Stone-heng described. Mausolu's Tomb: Moguls Tomb: Page 222. e. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7. Porsennahs Tomb: Admirable walk: Printing when, and how invented: Page 223. e. 7, 8, . Most famous Printers: Guns, when and how invented. Page 224. e. 10. A huge Bell. Page 4. e. 11. Strange Bridges. Page 225. e. 13, 14. Judgements strange. Cities Swallowed by Earthquakes▪ Page 4. People plagued by Sparrows, Mice, Frogs, Fleas, Grashoppers, &c. Page 23. Plague by Conies. Page 80. Plague by Lemmers like Mice. Page 149. Plague by Ants. Page 184. Plague by an Hurricane. Page 184. FINIS.
