C4514 08608609 41459
The skilfull'st Physiognomers, who Scan Each line and wrinkle in the face of man, Can tell no more what Soules dwell there, then wee By Seing Stars can tell what Angels be. Then ask not at the door who 'tis: if so, This Shadow cannot tell thee. Read and know.
A Generall Martyrologie, CONTAINING A COLLECTION Of all the greatest PERSECUTIONS which have befallen the CHURCH OF CHRIST From the Creation to our present Times, Both in England and all other Nations. Whereunto are added two and twenty LIVES OF ENGLISH Modern Divines, Famous in their Generations for Learning and Piety, and most of them great Sufferers in the Cause of CHRIST. As also the Life of the Heroical Admiral of France, slain in the Parisian Massacre, and of Joane Queen of Navar, poisoned a little before. By Sa. Clarke, Pastor in Bennet Fink, London. The second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged; having the two late Perse∣cutions inserted: the one in Piemont: the other in Poland. PSAL. 44.22. For thy sake are we kiled all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Nihil crus setit in nervo, cum animus est in caelo, Tertul. Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for  and  in Saint Pauls Church-yard, near the little North-door. MDCLX.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER; Especially to the suffering Saints in these three Nations. Christian Reader. THou hast here presented to thy view that strange sight which so much astonished Mo∣ses, Exod. 8.3. A bush burning with fire, and not consumed: A lively Emblem of the Church, oft times all on a light flame with the fire of Persecution,Sanguis Martyrum semen Eccle∣siae. and yet so far from being con∣sumed, that The bloud of the Martyrs proves the seed of the Church: And indeed she is the only, and true Salamander, that can live in the fire: Yet this, not by any strength of her own, but because the Angel of the Covenant, even the Lord Jesus Christ is in the bush, either to slack the fire, or to strengthen the bush, and make it incombustible. In this Book thou mai∣est see, as in a Mirrour, what hath been the lot and portion of the Church and people of God from the Creation hitherto, viz.Act. 14.22. Through many tribulations to enter into the kingdom of hea∣ven. Here thou hast a certaine and infallible mark of the true Church of Christ, viz. To be hated and persecuted by the De∣vil and his instruments. Here thou maiest see what is the con∣stant concommitant of the Gospel, when it is received in the love and power of it, viz. Persecution, according to that of the Apostle, Ye became followers of us, and of the Lord,1 Thes. 1.4. having received the word in much affliction, &c. Neither yet is God an hard Master in dealing thus with his faithfull servants. He knows that heavy afflictions are the best benefactors to heavenly affections: and that grace is hid in nature
here, as sweet water in rose leaves, which must have the fire of affliction put under to distill it out. He knows that when afflictions hang heaviest, corrupt affections hang loosest upon his children. Yet doth not the Lord afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men, to crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth:Lam. 3.33, 34 but he will hereby try who are his indeed and in truth, not in name and profession only: For as the Eagle tries her young ones by turning their faces to the sun beams, so those Christians that can outface the sun of Persecution, are sincere indeed. One thing is very remarkable in this History, that usually before any great Persecution befell the Church, the holy men of those times observed that there was some great decay of zeal, and of the power of godliness, or some mutuall conten∣tions and quarrels amongst the people of God, or some such sin or other that provoked God against them; and then, as the shepherd sets his dog upon his sheep, when they go a∣stray to bring them in, and then rates him off again: So God lets loose wicked Persecutors upon his own children, but it's only to bring them in unto him; and then, he not only re∣strains their rage, but casts the rod into the fire. If judgement begin at the house of God,Isa. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4.17. what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God? Much excellent use may be made of this History: As, teaching us, That whosoever will take Christ truly, must take his Crosse as well as his Crown, his Sufferings as well as his Sal∣vation. That persecution is the bellows of the Gospel, blowing every spark into a flame; and that Martyrs ashes are the best compost to manure the Church, their bloud to water it, and make it fertill. That Gods children are like Starres, that shine brightest in the darkest night: Like Torches that are the better for beating: Like Grapes that come not to the proof, till they come to the presse: Likes Spices, that smell sweetest, when pounded: Like young Trees, that root the faster for shaking: Like Vines, that are the better for bleeding: Like Gold, that
looks the brighter for scouring. Like Glow worms, that shine best in the dark: Like Juniper that smels sweetest in the fire: Like the Pomander, which becomes more fragrant for chafing: Like the Palm tree, which proves the better for pressing: Like the Camomile, which the more you tread it, the more you spread it. Yea God knoweth that we are best, when we are worst, and live holiest, when we die fastest; and therefore he frames his dealing to our disposition, seeking ra∣ther to profit, then to please us. That when God exposeth us to Persecution, he expects our  speedy and thorow Reformation, if we desire the affliction to be removed. For as it were to no purpose for the Finer to put his gold into the fire, except it lie there till it be re∣fined: So were it to small purpose for God to lay afflictions on us, if so soon as we whine and groan under his hand, he should remove them, before we be bettered thereby. Whereas afflictions, like Lots Angels, will soon away, when they have done their errand. Like plaisters, when the sore is once whole, they will fall off of their own accod. That we should with patience submit to the afflicting  hand of the all wise God, and our mercifull Father, saying with the Church, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, be∣cause I have sinned against him▪Micha 7.9. Considering also that impa∣tience under affliction, makes it much more grievous. As a man in a feaver, that by tossing and tumbling, exasperates the disease, and encreaseth his own grief. That all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer perse∣cution. It hath been the portion of all the Saints,1 Tim. 3.12 from the cre∣ation hitherto. What son is there whom the Father chasteneth not? One son indeed God had without sin,Heb. 12.7. but not without sorrow; for though Christ his naturall Son, was sine corrupti∣one, without corruption, yet not sine correctione, without cor∣rection; though he was sine flagitio, with out crime, yet not sine flagello, without a scourge. And if they did these things to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? And behold the wonderfull wisdom of God herein? who by these afflictions separates the sinne that hates, from the son that he loves,Luk. 23.31.
and keeps him by these thorns from breaking over into Satans pleasant pastures, that would fat him indeed, but to the slaughter. In an Appendix to this Book, I have added the Lives of sun∣dry of our Modern Divines, which I conceive not to be hete∣rogeniall to the rest of the Work; for though they were not Martyrs, yet may they well be stiled Confessors, in regard of the great Persecution and Sufferings, which most of them met withall whilest they lived here. And if any ask the rea∣son why I have added no more? It is because my intelligence comes in so slowely; and if such as are able, will take the pains to inform me, I shall (if God spares life) adde more to the end of the next impression of my Lives of the Fathers, and modern Divines. I hope that these my weak and poor endea∣vours will not prove ungratefull, nor be judged unseasona∣ble, considering the times wherein we live: For if the same sins abound amongst us in these daies, which have been the forerunners of persecutions formerly;Praemonitus praemunitus. we have cause to fear the worst, and to prepare for it; Forewarnd, forearmed. The reading of this History will manifest what wonderfull constancy and patience the Saints have shewed in their greatest sufferings: what hath been the power of Almighty God in their support: and what miserable ends many of their Persecutors have come to. My hearty desire is, That by reading of this Book, God may have the glory, and thy soul the comfort, and I shall be well appaied for my pains, Who am, Thine in the Lord SA. CLARKE. From my study in Thridneedle-street, Octob. 10. 1659.
. . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . , . . . . . . Thomas Dugard. A. M. Rector Barfordiae. . . , . . . , , . . , . . . Tho. Dugard.
To the Reverend, the Author of the Book, CALLED A Generall Martyrologie, &c. WHat? yet more Books? what spirit now inspires Your Pen to write of Torments, Warres and Fires? What? Will that Pen that drew to th' Life before, Change stile, draw Death, and speak of Life no more? What blustering Boreas rais'd these stormy Windes, Which blew down Churches, shook the steddiest Mindes, Sure Hell's broke loose, and Devils in the flesh Are come out thence to try their wits afresh. Who ever heard Troy's story with his ears, And could restrain his eies from shedding tears? I quake to hear what Saints in former daies Ne're shook to feel, so they might win the Baies. They conquer'd all; Their patient disposition, O're came both Pope, and Spanish Inquisition. They conquer'd Kings, and won the Crown at last; Prest towards the Prize, forgetting what was past. The Story's sad; 'tis true, yet the Authors skill Hath made that pleasant which in't self is ill. Away long-winded Volumes, Times disease; This Author doth our phansies better please. Large Books are endlesse; but 'tis his design T'enclose great Volumes in his single Line. Eli. Awn:
To the Reverend Mr. Sa. Clarke, ON HIS MARTYROLOGIE. OH, Welcome home, Divine Drake, welcome home, First girdle of the World of Martyrdome. Who seeks for more, can no new thing descry, Y' have left no room for new discovery. These Maps and Charts you bring, nay every letter Makes you the worlds great Patron, it your Debtor. To call't a Map doth but a Part imply, 'Tis the whole Globe of Martyrologie. Each Picture is a Map, each Figure breaths A little hist'ry of the Martyrs deaths. Pisgah's too farre to see the Holy-Land, Stand here on Calvary, and view't at hand. Let others brag at large, whose fancy 'tis To say A SAINT by a Periphrasis. Who doth this Book of yours with theirs confer, Findes Saint and Martyr in one Character. Though (some there be) that differ from the rest In judgement, and account short-writting best: Those I am sure will praise you when they eye Your skill in Tachyhagiography. Th'are many words make Volumes, do but look And you shall see 'tis matter makes a Book. All Volumes of this Subject here are set As't were contracted in an Alphabet. In characters, for brevity, 'tis good That Vowels be by Cons'nants understood. The least is best, if no essentiall be Wanting to make't a perfect Entitie. Man's but the World Epitomiz'd, but this Compendium of Saints and Martyrs is. Its commendation is it self, 'tis best Though't were without this my Probatum est. J. C.
A Table of the Names of all those Martyrs that are mentioned in this book. A ABel Pag. 1 Aber 21 Achaz 22 Achilleus 36 J. Addis 385 Aegidio 257 Agathonica 39 Agapetus 48 Agatha 51 Agathon 52 Agnes 77 Agricol 75 Aimeri 147 Alcibiades 44 Alexander 36, 49 Algerius 270 Aloisius 271 Ammonarion 51 Andas 81 Anthimus 64 Andoclus 47 Andrew 29 G.J. Annick 303 Anthea 36 Apollonia 51 Apollonius 45 Areth 22 Arias 254 Arnald 263 Antemìus 83 Armand 422 Asclepiades 47 Asyrius 59 Athanasia 75 Athanasius 85 Attalus 41 A. Audebert 320 Austin 290 B BAbilas Pag. 49 J. Baker 261 Barbara 78 Barlaam 75 Bartholomew 75, 301 Baudison 293 Isa. Beard 390 de Beck 317 Benjamin 81 Bergerius 322 M. Bertino 422 Bertrand 292 D. Berto 361 Betkin 305 Biblides 42 de Bile 193 Blandina 41 Blondel 320 J. de Boisons 268 B. Bor 340 J. de Boscane 301 F. de Bossu 350 Bovellus 271 A. du Bourg 328 F. Bribard 318 P. Bruly 289 S. Brunes 317 W. Burgate 261 W. Burges ib. N. Burton 260 C CAcalla 235 Calepodius 48 Ja. Calvin 338 Campbel 351 A. Canus 316
de Cadurco. 316 G. Carpenter. 283 Carpus. 39 Jo. Castellane. 316 Cecilia. 47 Cheremon. 51 P. Chapot. 319 Charlin. 135 Chober. 195 J. Clarke. 315 Claudius. 317, 321 N. Clivet. 326 J. Cobard. 318 V. Cockan. 194 Concordus. 40 C. Conink. 297 Constantino. 258 Martha Constantine 421 J. Coomans. 302 B. Copin. 131 J. Cornon. 317 P. Coulogue. 305 J. Cowder. 351 H. Cowell. 391 Cronion. 50 Cyprian. 56 Cyrillus. 84 D M. DImonet. 322 Dionysius. 35 Dionysia. 51, 98 Dominicus. 266 Domitius. 83 P. Domo. 337 Dorotheus. 64 P. Dorzeky. 193 E R. ECklin. 391 Eleazer. 19 Elutherius. 36 Emilianus. 83 Encenas. 264 J. English. 319 Enraudus. 108 Epimachus. 51 J. Eseh. 278 Eulalia. 76 Eusebius. 45, 88 Eustachius. 36 Eustratius. 64 F J FAber. 293 C. Fabri. 290 Fabian. 49 Faninus. 264 Faustinus. 36 Felicitas. 39, 47 Ferdinando. 251 H. Forrest. 378 T. Forret. 365 Mr. Fournier. 331 Mis. Frankland. 384 Fructuosus. 59 M. Fruen. 197 G F. GAmba. 270 E. Garcino. 422 W. Gardiner. 275 C. Gauderin. 303 P. Gaudet. 16 George. 76 Germanicus. 39 Gervasius. 35 Glee. 335 C. Girard. 115 Girauda. 147 Gisbitzky. 197 Godfrid. 293 J. Gonsalvo. 250 M. Gonin. 317 Gordius. 73 Gorgonius. 64 N. Gourlay. 364 Granvelle. 326 H P. HAmilton 363 P. Hamlin. 324 L. Harant. 192 B. Hector. 118 Hermes. 36 Hermogines. 76
Herwin. 299 An. Hill. 385 Hipolitus. 49 W. Hooker. 261 Hormisda. 81 M. Hostialek. 196 Hostius. 291 Mis. Howard. 384 Hubert. 320 de Hues. 302 J. Huglin. 283 J. Husse. 170 W. Husson. 318 I IAcob. 23 St. James. 27 James Justus. 29 N. of Jenvile. 324 Jerome of Prague 170 Jessenius. 195 J. Insperg. 286 Jobita. 36 John Bap. 26 John. 75 Irenaeus. 47 Isaiah. 4 Ischirion. 51 Judas Mac. 17, 21 Judas brother of James. 29 Julius. 45 Julianus. 50 Julitta. 78 Juliano. 251 Justin Martyr. 39, 44 K C. KAplitz. 292 A. Kennedy. 366 L. Keyser. 284 J. Kutnaur. 196 L S. LAloe. 322 La-moth. 337 Laurence. 56 de Lavoy. 317 Leonides. 46 J. Leon. 252 Lin. 386 Lollard. 165 M. Loquis. 172 C. Losada. 253 Will. Loverden. 386 Lucianus 69 Lucius. 40 Ludomilla. 168 M MAcer 50 Maccabeus 20 Machir 21 Malchus 58 Mappalicus 54 Marchus Arethusius 83 Marcella 46 Mark 30 Marinus 59 Maris 84 Marlorat 336 Martin 287, 296. Martina 48 Mr. Jo. Mason 350 P. Masson 136 Tho. Mason 383 Mathew 29 Mathias ib. Maturus 41 Mauritius 67 J. Maxwell 388, 391 Menas 74 Mercuria 51 T. Messino 361 Metra 51 Metrodorus 39 L. Meulin 303 G. de Meyer 304 M. Michelot 319 Midleton 382 W. Mill 378 P. Moice 289 Montgemery 390 J. Mollius 268
N N. NAile 323 Nemesion 51 Nereus 36 Nicanor 30 Nicholas 285 Nicholson 389 O L. of OBiers 352 Oguire 293 L. Hen. Otto 193 P PAmachius 48 Pamphilus 63 Pampinian 91 J. Panane 316 Papilus 39 Paul 29, 31, 87 Peregrinus 85 Perpetua 47 Persival 286 Pescinus 165 Peter 31, 49, 64, 65, 69 Philip 29, 48 Phocas 36 Photinus 46 M. Pierrone 356 M. Pilot 422 Pionies 39 Pistorius 285 de la Place 345 Plutarch. 46 J. Pointer 316 S. Polliot 319 Polycarp 39 J. Pontio 249 Potentianus 45 Potichus 44 Potamiena 46 Priscus 58 Procopion 76 Protasius 35 Ptolemaeus 40 Pusices 80 Q QUinta 51 Quirinus 36, 69 R P. RAmus 346 Sara Rastignole 421 de Reux 316 Revocatus 47 Rhais 46 Ricetto 272 P. Roch 338 Rochus 234 J. Rogres 367 F. Romane 233 Romanus 71, 72 Rogues 338 L. of Rugenice 394 J. Russel 334 S SAlamona 24 Sanctus 41 Satyrus 47 G. Scherter 285 Schlick 391 Scoblant 302 W. Scuch 282 Sebastian 75 Sega 273 Secundianus 53 Secundulus 47 Serena 64 Serenus 46 Serapion 52, 53 P. Serre 323 J. Shultes 195 Simon 34, 79 P. Simon 422 Simon Zelotes 29 Silvanus 63, 64, 69 Sixtus 56 P. Spengler 281 F. Spinola 273 Starky 391
Stemback. 265 Steven. 27 T. Steffeck. 195 Jo. Stone. 384 D. Straton. 364 Suenes. 81 Sulpitius. 36 H. Sutphen. 279 S. Sussikey. 196 Symphorissa. 36 Syrus. 75 T TAilor. 289 Tertullia. 47 Theodora. 52 Theodorus. 71, 83 Thiessen. 288 Thomas. 29, 321 Tiburtius. 47 G. Tilleman. 286 Timothy. 35 Tiranion. 63 J. de Tour. 335 G. Trecius. 267 V VAlerianus. 47 de Valougnes. 336 F. Venote. 320 Uetius Epagethus. 41 Vincentius. 45, 76 Vitalis. 75 H. Voes. 278 Urbanus. 47, 48 Usthazares. 79 W A. WAllace. 377 Watson. 391 Wendelmutha. 284 Wenceslaus. 168, 191 William of Nassaw. 273 G. Wiseheart. 367 N. Wodniansky. 196 Z ZEchariah. 3 Zenon. 36 Zenobius. 64 Zepherinus. 47 D. Zervius. 194
The CONTENTS of the Chapters, CONTAINING The several Persecutions, together with the Lives of such Persons as are mentioned in this Book. THE Persecutions mentioned in the Old Testament Pag. 1 The Persecutions from Nehemiah to Antiochus his time 5 The Persecutions under Antiochus Epiphanes 6 The Life of Judas Maccabeus 9 The Martyrdom of the Maccabees 18 The Persecutions mentioned in the New Testament 26 The first primitive Persecution under the heathen Roman Em∣perors 30 The second primitive Persecution 32 The third primitive Persecution 35 The fourth primitive Persecution 39 The fifth primitive Persecution 46 The sixth Primitive Persecution 48 The seventh primitive Persecution 49 The eight primitive Persecution 56 The ninth primitive Persecution Pag. 61 The tenth primitive Persecution 62 The Persecution of the Christi∣ans in Persia 79 The Persecution of the Church under Julian the Apostate 82 The Persecvtion of the Church under the Arrian Hereticks 86 The Persecution by the Donatists 89 The Persecution under the Arrian Vandals in Africk 90 The persecution of the Waldenses 102 The persecution of the Waldenses in Calabria 133 The persecution of the Waldenses in Provence 136 The persecution of the Albingen∣ses 140 The persecution of the Church in Bohemiah 167 The persecution under Ferdinand 1617 180 The persecution of the Church in Spain 233
The Original, Progress, and Pra∣ctice of the Spanish Inquisition 236 The Life of Dr. Aegido 256 The Life of Dr. Constantino 258 The Martyrdom of Nic. Burton in Spain 260 The Persecution of the Church in Italy 263 The Life of Mr. John Mollius 268 The Life of William Gardiner 275 The Martyrdom of a Christian Jew 277 The Persecution of the Church in Germany 278 The Martyrdom of a Minister in Hungary 284 The Persecution of the Church in the Low-Countries 284 The Persecution under the D. de Alva 297 The Martyrdom of W. of Nassaw 306 The modern persecution of Ger∣many 308 The Persecution of the Church in France 315 The Persecution in the Civil Wars in France 329 The History of the Massacre of Paris 341 The Siege of Sancerre 352 The Siege of Rochel 354 The Persecution of the Church in the Valtoline 359 The Persecution of the Church in Scotland 363 The Life of Mr. George Wiseheart 367 The Persecution of the Church in Ireland 379 A continuation of the History of the Waldenses from the year 1560. to our time 397 The Marquisat of Saluces describ∣ed, with its several troubles and persecutions 401 The Artifices and wicked practi∣ces used to consume and de∣stroy the faithfull in the valleys of Piemont 407 The motives of the late persecu∣tion in the valleys of Piemont 411 A Narrative of the bloody cruel∣ties lately exercised there 418 A Narrative of the War between the Papists and Protestants there 431 Who interceded to the D. of Sa∣voy in the behalf of the Prote∣stants 442 A Description of Piemont, and the valleys thereof 447 The late persecution of the Church of Christ in Poland 451 The Destruction of Lesna 452 The cause of Religion as it stands now in Germany 454
THE PERSECUTIONS Mentioned in the Old Testament. CHAP. I. The Persecution of the Church in the first Ages of the World, and so forward till the Incarnation of Christ. THE first Murtherer and Persecutor that was in the World, was the Devil, and the first method and means that he made use of to carry on this perse∣cution, was by subtilty and large promises, that by eating the forbidden fruit, they should have their eyes opened,Gen. 3.5. and should be as gods knowing good and evil: and hereby he drew our first Parents from their Obedience unto God, and cheated them of that blessed and happy estate which God had created them in. Since which time his enmity against the Church and Children of God hath never ceased: but by his effectual working in the Children of dis∣obedience, he hath provoked and stirred up one man to be the Persecu∣tor and Devourer of another: Thus he provoked Cain to rise up against, and to slay his brother Abel,Gen. 4.8. Abel. and though the Scripture be silent how the wicked Cainites, the sons of men, behaved themselves towards the sons of God; yet doubtless they perse∣cuted them with the tongue, if they proceeded no further. Can we imagine that Noah,Noah. that was a Preacher of Righteousness in the midst of a perverse generation, could escape without hatred, scorn and contempt? How many jeers (think ye) had he whilest he was building the Ark, as doting and dreaming (not of a dry Summer, but) of a wet winter? the earth in his days was said to be corrupt and filled with violence,Gen. 6.11. which violence certainly was principally exercised against the Church
of God: And afterwards when the world was reduced to a very small number, yet then Satan had his cursed Ham that persecuted and mock∣ed his own father,Gen. 9.22. Lot. Isaac. the righteous Noah. Was not Lot also persecuted and scoffed at in Sodom? Gen. 19.9. Isaac in Abrahams house mocked by Is∣mael?Jacob. Gen. 21.9. Was not Jacob hated and persecuted by his brother Esau?Joseph. Gen. 27.41. Joseph by his brethren? Gen. 37.4. and that because he brought unto his father their evil report, verse 2. Was he not afterwards cast into a pit by them? ver. 24. Then sold to the Ishmaelitish Merchants, who carried him into Egypt, ver. 28. There he was persecuted by his whorish Mistriss, Gen. 39.17, 18. Cast into prison, where his feet were hurt with fetters, and he was laid in irons, Psal. 105.18. But these were but small persecutions in comparison of those which followed. Th Israelites in Egypt.For when the Children of Israel were multiplied in Egypt, Pharaoh King of Egypt set over them Task-masters to afflict them with their burdens, Exod. 1.11▪ thinking thereby to eat up, and wear them out; and when that prevailed not, they made them serve with rigour, and they made their lives bitter with the hard bondage in Mortar, and in Brick, and in all manner of service in the field; all the service wherein they made them serve, was with rigour, ver. 13, 14. And when this prevailed not, the King commanded the Midwives, Siphrah and Puah, when they did the office of a Midwife to the Hebrew women, and saw them upon the stools, if they were delivered of a son, they should presently kill him, ver. 15, 16. and when these Midwives neglected his commands, he charged all his people that every son that was born to the Israelites, should be cast into the river Nilus, v. 22. Moses.Moses was persecuted by Pharaoh, who sought to slay him; which caused him to fly into the Land of Midian, Exodus 2.15. And when God sent him back into Egypt to deliver his people from the house of bondage, how did Pharaoh persevere and proceed in his per∣secuting the people of God: he caused straw to be taken from them, and yet the number of Bricks to be continued; and when the task was not done, the Officers of the Children of Israel were cruelly beaten, ver. 14. And when God had brought out his people with an high hand from under the Tyranny of the Egyptians, and carried them into the wilder∣ness, how did Satan stir up some sons of Belial against Moses and Aaron, even Korah, and his complicies, two hundred and fifty Princes, who cried out against them,Moses and Aa∣ron. Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy, even every one of them, Numb. 16.3. Afterwards when the children of Israel were setled in the land of Canaan, they were often grievously oppressed, and persecuted by the wicked and I∣dolatrous nations that lived amongst them, and round about them; as first by Chushan-Rishathaim, King of Mesopotamia, who tyrannized over them eight years Judg. 3.8. Then by Eglon King of Moab, who slew ma∣ny of them,Israel in the time of the Judges. and oppressed them eighteen years, v. 13, 14. Then by the Philistines, v. 32. Then were they mightily oppressed for twenty years together, by Jabin, King of Canaan, Judg. 4.2, 3. Then did the Midianites persecute them with so much cruelty, that they were forced to forsake their houses, and to make them Dens and Caves in the Mountains, to
shelter and hide themselves from them, Judg. 6.2. yea for seven years together they tyrannized over them; and when the Israelits had sowen their land, they came up in such multitudes, that they destroyed the in∣crease of the earth, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor oxe, nor asse, ver. 3, 4. Then the Philistines again, and the Ammonites Lorded it over Israel, and brought them into great distresse for eighteen years, Judg. 10.. After that the Philistines yet againe oppressed them for forty years together, Judg. 13.1. And afterwards they slew of them in two battels thirty four thousand, and carried away the Ark of God also, 1 Sam. 4.2, 10, 11. Then in Sauls time, these Philistines so distressed Israel,Jsrael in Saul's time. that the people were forced to hide themselves in caves and thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits; yea some of them forsook their own country, and fled beyond Jordan, 1 Sam. 13.6, 7. and the land was so en∣slaved to them, that there was not a Smith to be found in Israel, but the Philistines either slew them, or carried them away captives, so that the Israelites were fain to go to the Philistines to have their instruments of husbandry set in order, ver. 19, 20. How David was persecuted by Saul all his time,David. the Scripture doth amply set forth, 1 Sam 19. &c. and was not he persecuted grievously, when cursed and railed upon by Shimei, 2 Sam. 16.5, 6, &c. The Church of God was afterward persecuted under Rehoboams reign, by Shishak King of Egypt, who took Jerusalem,1 King. 14.25, 26. and carried away the Treasures of the Lords house, and of the Kings house into Egypt. And again under Asa, by Baasha King of Israel, 1 King. 15.16. and by Zerah the Ethiopian,Judah under the Kings. who came against Judah with an Army of a thousand thousand men, and three hundred chariots, 2 Chron. 14.9. Yea so malicious and subtile is Sa∣tan that he sometimes stirs up one Saint to persecute another; as he stir∣red up good King Asa to persecute the Prophet of the Lord who dealt plainly and faithfully with him, by casting him into prison,Asa persecutes a Prophet. 2 Chron. 16.10. Michaiah also was persecuted and imprisoned by Ahab,Michaiah. 2 Chron. 18.25, 26. Under Jehosaphat the Church of God was persecuted by the Moabites, Ammonites and Edomites,Gods judge∣ment on Per∣secutors. Elijah. Elisha. whom God destroyed by setting of them one against another, 2 Chron. 20.23. Elijah was persecuted by Ahab and Jesabel, 1 King. 18.10. and 19.2. The Prophets of the Lord were slain by Jesabel, 1 King. 18.13. Elisha was hated and persecuted by Jehoram. 2 King. 6.31. in the reign of this Je∣horam, the Philistines and Arabians mightily oppressed Judah, 2 Chro. 21.16, 17. Then Athaliah by murthering the Kings seed, usurpeth the King∣dom, and tyrannizeth five years, 2 Chro. 22.10. Joash in his reign slayeth Zechariah for reproving him, 2 Chron. 24.21.Zechariah. The Church was op∣pressed at the same time by the Syrians, ver. 23. and afterwards also in the reign of Ahaz, 2 Chron. 28.5. and about the same time the King of Israel slew of Judah a hundred and twenty thousand, and carried away captive two hundred thousand men, women and children.2 Chron. 28.8. Judah was also oppressed by the Edomites, ver. 17. and by the Philistines, ver. 18. and by the King of Assyria, ver. 20. and chap. 32.1. Manasses persecuted
the Prophet Isaiah for reproving him,Isaiah. and caused him to be sawn a sun∣der with a wooden saw. Josephus. Afterwards Pharaoh Necho tyranni∣zed over Judah, 2 Chron. 36.3. and after him Nebuchadezzar▪ v 6; &c. and so the sins of Judah being come to the full, the good figgs were car∣ried away captive to Babylon,Jer. 24.1, &c. and the land afterwards was wholly laid waste and destroyed: which being foretold by the Prophet Jeremiah, the wicked Jews,Jeremiah. first persecuted him with the tongue, Jer. 18.18. then was he smitten, and put into the stocks, Jer. 20.2. then was he indanger of death by the Preists and false Prophets, Jer. 26.8. then was he impri∣soned by Zedekiah, Jer. 32.2, 3. then he is beaten, and again put into pri∣son, Jer. 37.15. and after that cast into a dungeon, where he stuck in the mire, Jer. 38 6. then by the wicked Captains he was carried into Egypt, Jer. 43.6, 7. What grievous afflictions the Church and people of God endured about this time, see it set forth to the life in the book of the Lamentations. The 3 Chil∣dren.In the time of the Captivity, the three Children were persecuted by Nebuchadnezzar, and thrown into the fiery fornace, for refusing to wor∣ship his golden Image,Daniel. Dan. 3.23. Daniel was persecuted by Darius his Courtiers, and cast into the Lions den, Dan. 6.16. Mordecai was hated and persecuted by Haman,Mordecai. and a Decree procured for the murthering of all the people of God in one day, Esth. 3.13. Israel after the Captivity.After the return of the Jews from captivity, the people of the Land laboured to weaken the hands of the men of Judah, and troubled them in the building of the Temple, and hired Counsellors against them to accuse them to Cyrus, and Ahasuerus: they wrote also against them to Artaxerxes, that they were a rebellious people, and that if they should be suffered to build Jerusalem, they would neither pay toll, tribute, nor cu∣stom to the King, Ezra. 4.4, &c. and having by this malicious suggestion gotten authority, they came upon the poor people of God, and enforced them to give over thir worke. Yea▪ and afterwards, when by the com∣mand of the Lord, the Jews had again set upon the building, Tatnai and Shether-Bosnai came up to discourage and discharge them from it; and when this prevailed not, they wrote against them to King Darius. Again, when Nehemiah came to Jerusalem, and began to build the wall of the City, how were they scorned and jeered by Sanballat, Tobiah and Geshem?Nehe. 2.19. and . 2 3▪8. And when the work prospered in their hands, and jeers would not prevaile to stop it, they then conspired to fight against Jerusalem, and so to hinder it; but neither that prevailing, by reason of the prudent carriage of Nehemiah,Nehemiah. they then sought to entrap him, and by destroying him, to hinder the work, Nehe. 6.2. Then they accused the people of God of treason and rebellion, ver. 6, &c. Then they hired a false Pro∣phet to terrefie Nehemiah, ver. 10, 12. Then they corrupted, and held in∣telligence with some of the Nobles of Judah to betray him; notwith∣standing all which designes, God preserveth Nehemiah, and the building of Jerusalem is finished. And thus farre the sacred Scriptures of the Old Testament have given us a certain Register of the Persecutions, Martyrdomes and sufferings of the Church and children of God for
the space of about three thousand five hundred years; from the creation of the world, to the Restauration of the Jewish Polity under Nehemiah. CHAP. II. The Persecution of the Church from Nehemiah to Antiochus his time. AFter the death of Eliashib the High-Priest, Judas his sonne succeed∣ed, and after him John his sonne, which John had a brother called Jesus, who was much favoured by Bagoses, Generall of Artaxerxes, who promised him the Priesthood, which made him take occasion to quarrel with his brother John,The Jews per∣secuted by Ba∣goses. who thereby was so much provoked against him, that he slew him in the Temple; Bagoses being informed hereof, came with his Army to Jerusalem, and kept the Jews in bondage seven years, making them tributaries, so that before they could offer their daily sacrifice, they were compelled to pay for every Lamb, fifty Drachmes. After the death of John, Jaddus his sonne succeeded in the priesthood, in whose time Alexander the Great passed over the Helle∣spont, and having overcome the Lieutenant of Darius, he conquered ma∣ny countries in Asia minor, intending suddenly to come upon Jerusalem. Jaddus being informed of his intention, was sore afraid; he therefore offered sacrifice,Prayer in times of danger. and commanded the people to make their prayers unto God, for direction and protection in this common danger: and when he heard that Alexander approached, he caused the Priests and people to put on white garments, and himself, attired in his Priestly robes, went before them; when Alexander espied them, he himself marched be∣fore the rest of his company, and coming to the High-Priest, he fell down on his face before him: then did all the Jews circle him in round about, and with one voice saluted him. Alexanders chief Commanders were wonderfully astonished at this deportment of the King, and thought he was out of his wits: and Parmenio stepping to him, asked him what he meant thus to adore the High-Priest of the Jews, when as all other men adored him; Alexander answered, I doe not adore him, but that God whom the High-Priest worshipeth; for in my sleep I saw him in such an habit when I was in Macedonia, consulting with my self how I might conquer Asia; and he bad me to make no delay, as∣suring me that he would both guide me and my Army, and would deli∣ver the Empire of the Persians into my hands: Then gave he the High-Priest his hand, and went with him to the City, and comming to the Temple, he offered sacrifice according to the direction of the High-Priest; then did Jaddus shew him Daniels Prophecy, wherein his vi∣ctories over the Persians, and his Monarchy were foretold, which much rejoyced Alexander: then did he command the Jews to ask some fa∣vours at his hands; the High-Priest requested onely that they might
live after the Ordinances of their forefathers, and that every seventh year they might be exempted from taxes and tributes, which he fully granted: they besought him likewise that the Jews which were in Me∣dia and Babilon, might be permitted to live after their own Laws, which he willingly promised, and so departed: this was about the year of the world 3632. and before Christs nativity 332. After the death of Alexander, his Kingdom was divided amongst his Captains, amongst whom Ptolemy the son of Lagus held Egypt, who falling out with Antigonus that held Asia minor, there grew great wars between them, wherein Ptolemy won from him all Syria, and going to Jerusalem on a Sabbath day under pretence to offer sacrifice, the Jews suspecting nothing, he surprised the City, carrying away many of the Jews into captivity into Egypt: but after his death, his son Ptolemy Phi∣ladelphus at his owne cost redeemed an hundred and twenty thousand of them, paying twelve Crowns apeece for each of them, and sent them back into their owne countrey: He sent also by them fifty talents of gold for the temple, and obtained of Eleazer the High Priest, the Law of the Jews, and 72 Interpreters (out of every Tribe some) who tran∣slated it into Greek in 72 daies: and having finished their work, Pto∣lemy returned them with great rewards for themselves, and with many rich presents to Eleazer. Antiochus and Ptolemy being at war each against other, the Jews suf∣fered much by them, Mach. 1. Collected out of Josephus. CHAP. III. The persecution of the Church of God under Anti∣ochus Epiphanes, before the nativity of Christ about 168 years. AFterwards the Jews being divided amongst themselves, one part of them went to Antiochus, telling him that their purpose was to forsake the Religion and Ordinances of their forefathers,Apostates. and to fol∣low that of the Kings, and to live after the manner of the Greeks, en∣treating him to license them to live in Jerusalem; which Antiochus as∣senting to, they went to Jerusalem, where they behaved themselves very wickedly, but finding opposition from the other party of the Jews, they sent for Antiochus, who led his army against Jerusalem, and encam∣ped before it, and by his faction within, had the gates opened, and the City betraied to him,Antiochus en∣tred Jerusalem. about the year of the world 3796. and before the nativity of Christ 168. Being entred Jerusalem he slew many of the faithfull Jews, and ha∣ving taken great spoils, he returned back to Antioch.
Two years after he came to Jerusalem again, and having seen what quantity of gold was in the Temple, and what a huge number of Presents and precious Ornaments were in the same, he was so over∣come with covetousness, that he violated all conventions and conditions formerly made, equally raging against his own and the adverse party, sparing neither friend nor foe: then he spoiled the Temple, and carried away the Vessels dedicated unto God, the golden Table, the golden Candlestick, the Censers,Antiochus robs the Temple. &c. leaving nothing behind him of any va∣lue; yea, he inhibited the godly Jews from offering their usual and dai∣lie sacrifices to God; and having spoiled the whole City,Forbideth the daily sacrifice. he slew many of the Inhabitants, and carried the rest away into Captivity, with their Wives and Children, to the number of ten thousand: He also burned the fairest buildings of the City, and brake down the wals, and raised a Fortress in the lower City, and having inclosed it with high wals, he planted a Garison of Macedonians therein, with whom remained the scum of the Apostate Jews. He also caused an Altar to be erected in the Temple, on which he commanded swine to be offered in Sacri∣fice, contrary to the Law. He constrained the Jews to forsake God, and adore those Idols which himself vvorshiped; he forbad them to circumcise their Children▪His Cruelty. and appointed Over-seers to constrain them to fulfill his Commandments, so that many for fear of punishment conformed themselves to his will; But such as were of upright hearts, and valiant minds, little respected his menaces; whereupon they were beaten,Christian cou∣rage. and exposed to cruel pu∣nishment many days together, in the midst of which they yielded up the ghost; for after they were whipt, and maimed in their bodies, they were tortured and crucified; the women vvere strangled, and the cir∣cumcised children vvere hung up about the necks of their parents; and vvhere any books of the sacred Scriptures vvere found, they de∣faced, and burnt them, and such with vvhom they vvere found,The Scriptures burnt. vvere put to most cruel deaths. At this time there dvvelt at Modin (a Village of Jury) one vvhose name was Matthias, a Priest of the rank of Joarib, that had five sons, John called Gaddis, Simon called Matthes, Judas called Maccabeus, Ele∣azer called Aaron, and Jonathan called Apphas. This Matthias often complained to his sons of the miserable state of their Countrey, of the sacking of their City, the profanation of the Temple,Matthias his zeal. and the mise∣ries of the people, telling them, that it was better for them to die for the Law, then to live in Ignominy. When therefore the Kings Commi∣saries came unto Modin, and commanded the people to sacrifice ac∣cording to the Kings Edict; they first applied themselves to Matthias as to the most Honourable person amongst them, requiring him first to offer sacrifice, that others might follow his example, promising that the King vvould much honour him for it. Matthias ansvvered that he vvould by no means commit that Idolatry, assuring them,A noble Reso∣lution. that though all other Nations, either for love or fear, should obey the Edicts of Antiochus, yet that he, nor his children could be induced to forsake the
Religion of their fathers: As soon as he had thus spoken, a certain Jew stepped forth to offer sacrifice according to the command of the King, wherewith Matthias, inflamed with zeal, was so displeased, that he and his sons fell upon him,Zeal. and with their swords hewed him to pieces; he also slew Apelles the Kings Captain, and some other soul∣diers, who would have withstood him. Then he overthrew the Altar and with a loud voice, he said, If any one be affected to the Laws of their fathers, and to the service of God, let him follow me? and so he retired into the deserts with his sons; the like did the rest, with their wives and children, hiding themselves in caves and dens. The Kings Cap∣tains having intelligence hereof, with the Garison that was in the Ci∣tadel at Jerusalem, they pursued them into the desert, and having over∣taken them, they first endeavoured by perswasions to draw them to Idolatry; but the Jews absolutely refusing to yield to their wicked wils, resolved rather to die then to submit to them, and to commit such im∣piety;The Jews murthered, re∣fusing to fight on the Sabbath day. whereupon these bloody persecutors assailed them on the Sab∣bath day, and burned them in their caves, who neither resisted their enemies, nor closed up the mouths of their Caves, supposing it to be a violation of the Sabbath, if they should fight or work upon that day; some thousands of men, women and children were there stifled; yet divers escaped, who joined themselves with Matthias, and chose him for their Captain. Then did he inform them, that they ought to fight on the Sabbath day, if they were assailed by their enemies, and pre∣vailed with them not to be guilty of their own death, by their neglect to defend themselves; and so having assembled a sufficient number, he destroyed the Altars, and slew those that had forsaken their Religion: commanding others to circumcise their Children, and driving those from every place, whom Antiochus had set to see his Laws executed. But when he had thus governed one year, he fell sick, and perceiving his end to approach, he called his sons, and exhorted them to follow his steps in maintaining the Law of God,Matthias his sickness. and fighting for their Coun∣trey, telling them, that then they should have God for their Assister, who will not forsake those that love and fear him, but taking pleasure in their vertues, will once more grant them favour to recover their former peace and liberty; and saith he, God will establish you in the posses∣sion of your ancient Laws;His counsel to his sons. and though our bodies be mortal, and subject unto death, yet the memory of our virtuous actions is enfranchised by immortality; make therefore no difficulty to hazard your lives in so good a cause: But above all things I exhort you unto concord, and in whatsoever any one of you shall be found more naturally apt and fitted then another, let him prosecute the same without any contradiction from the rest: I charge you to obey your brother Simon (who is a Politick and valiant man) in whatsoever he shall coun∣sel you: but make Judas your Captain, who is both valiant and strong, for he shall revenge the injuries and out-rages which have been done to our Nation, and shall put our enemies to flight; second him therefore with men of valour,His death. and such as fear God, and by this means you shall be sure to prevail.
CHAP. IV. The Life of Judas Maccabeus. AFter Matthias his death, Judas took upon him the government of the wars, and by the help of his brethren, and other Jews, he drave the enemies out of the countrey, purgng the land of all the un∣cleaness that had been brought into it. But when Apollonius, who was Antiochus his Generall in Samaria, heard of it, he gathered his Army together, and invaded Judea, against whom Maccabeus went forth, and after a terrible battel, overthrew him,Apollonius slain. slew Apollonius and many of his souldiers; took his Camp, and therein a very rich booty; and Judas gat Apollonius his sword for his part in the spoil. Then Seron Governor of Caelosyria gathered all his forces together, and hired ma∣ny Apostate Jews to joyn with him, and so marched against Judas as far as Bethoron: Judas also advanced towards him, but when he per∣ceived that his souldiers were unwilling to fight, by reason of the in∣equality of their numbers, and for that they had eaten no meat, but had fasted for a long time, he encouraged them, saying, that the means to obtain the victory, consisted not in the greatness of their number, but in their devotion towards God;Judas encou∣raged his soul∣diers. whereof they had evident exam∣ples in their forefathers, who with a small number, had often defeated many thousands of their enemies, &c. Hereby he so prevailed with his souldiers, that, dreadless of the number of their enemies, they all together ran upon Seron, and after a cruel fight, routed his Army, and slew him together with eight hundred of the Syrians;Seron slain. The rest escaped by flight. Antiochus hearing of these things, was highly displeased, and there∣fore he assembled all his forces, and hired many mercenaries, but ha∣ving mustered his Army, he found that his treasure failed him to pay so great a multitude; whereupon he resolved, first to go into Persia, to gather up his tributes: and in the meane time he made Lysias his Vice∣gerent, a man of greate esteem with him, and one that governed all the countries from Euphrates to the borders of Egypt: with him he also left some Elephants, and part of his Army, commanding him ex∣presly, that when he had conquered Judaea he should make the inha∣bitants thereof his slaves,Antiochus his rpel com∣mand. and sell them to those that would give most for them, and that he should destroy Jerusalem, and utterly abolish that race. Lysias having received this commandment, sent Ptolemy, Nicanor, and Gorgias (men of great authority about the King) with an Army of forty thousand Foot, and seven thousand Horsemen; to in∣vade Jury; who marching as far as the City Emmaus, encamped in the field; and increased their Army with many Syrians, and Apostate Jews. There came also divers Merchants a long with them to buy the priso∣ners that should be taken, bringing gieues along with them to manacle
the prisoners withall. Judas having viewed the Camp, and number of his enemies, encouraged his souldiers, exhorting them to repose their confidence and hope of victory in God: he also appointed a Fst, that they might humble themselves, and call upon God, by supplications and prayers,Fasting and prayer before the battel. for success in such an extreame danger. Then he told them that God would have compassion upon them, and give them strength to stand against their enemies, and to put them to shame. The next day he marshalled his Army by thousands, and by hundreds, and sent away all that were newly married, or that had lately bought pessssi∣ons, according to the Law. And ten he said unto the rest: My coun∣trymen and companions,His exhortati∣on to his Army we never yet had any occasion more necessary, wherein we ought to express our courages, and contemn dangers, then at this present; for now if you fight valiantly, you may recover your liberties, which ought the more to be prised, because thereby you may win opportunity to sere God, and so live an happy life: but if ye prove cowards in the fight, you shall be branded with perpetuall infamy, and hazard the utter extirpation of our Nation. Think therefore, that if you fight not, you must die: and on the con∣trary, assure your selves, that in fighting for your Religion, Laws and Liberty, you shall obtain immortall glory: be ready therefore, that to morrow morning you may bid your enemies battel. Immediately news was brought him, that Gorgias with five thousand foot, and a thousand horsemen, was sent forth under the conduct of some fugitives, by night to fall upon him; whereupon he resolved the same night to break into the enemies Army whilest they were thus divided. Having therefore refreshed himself and Army, leaving many fires in his Camp thereby to deceive the ene∣my, he marched all night to seek them out. Gorgias finding that the Jews had forsaken their Camp, conceited that for fear they were fled into the mountains, and therefore he resolved to search them out diligently. But in the morning, udas accompanied only with three thousand men and those but ill armed because of their poverty, shewed himself to the e∣nemies that were at Emmaus, and having viewed their warlike discipline, and mighty number, and how well they were incamped, he encouraged his followers to fight vliantly, telling them, that God would deliver their enemies into their hands, and thereupon causing his Trumpets to sound, he rushed in upon his enemies with such fury and resolution, as altogether affrighted and discouraged them;A wonderfull vctory. and having slaine such as resisted, he pursued the rest as farre as the plains of Idumaea, &c. In this fight bout three thousand of the enemies were slain; yet would he not suffer his souldiers to take the spoil, telling them, that as yet they were to fight with Gorgias and his Army, but so soon as they had (through Gods mercy) with the lik valur beaten them, they might then securely enrich themselves by the prey of all their enemies. Gorgias with his Army being upon an hill, and discovering the flight of their friends,Gorgias flies. and the Jews readinesse to give them battell, were so affright∣ed, that they also fled; whereupon Judas with his men returned to ga∣ther the pillage, and having found great store of gold, silver, scarlet and purple,Thanksgiving. he returned to his dwelling with joy, praising God for their happy success.
Lysias hearing of this overthrow was much enraged, and presently assembled another army of neer sixthy thousand chosen foot, and five thousand horsemen, wherewith he went to invade Judaea and encamp∣ed in Bethsura: Judas hearing of it, came forth against him with ten thousand men, and seeing the number of his enemies so farre to ex∣ceed his, he earnestly cried unto God, that it would please him to fight with, and for him;Prayer. and then charged the vanguard of the ene∣my with so great force, that he discomfited, and slew about five thou∣sand of them, Lysias perceiving hereby the resolution of the Jews,Lysias beaten. who would rather die then lose their liberty, he returned with the rest of his Army unto Antioch, where he continued, and entertained many mercenaries, to make a greater Army for the conquest of the Jews: In the meane time Judas assembled the people, and told them, that having obtained so many victories, through the mercy of God, they ought now to go up to Jerusalem, and purifie the Temple that was desolate, and to offer unto God the sacrifices that were ordained by the Law.The Temple cleansed. Then going up with a great multitude of people he found the Temple desolate, the gates burned, and grass growing within the same: grieving therefore at so sad a spectacle, he began to weep, and all the people that were with him, and having chosen out some of his best souldiers, he commanded them to force the garisons which were in the fortresses, whilest himself purged the Temple. Then he caused to be made a Table, a Candlestick, and Altar for incense, all of gold; he put up a rail also, and set gates to the Temple: and having thrown down the Altar of burnt-offerings that was profaned by Antiochus,The service of God restored. he built a new one of stones neither hewed nor hammered: Then on the twenty fifth of Chasleu [September] were lights set in the Candlestick, per∣fumes laid upon the Altar, loaves set upon the Table, and sacrifices of∣fered upon the new Altar, which was the same day three years where∣in before the sacred service was changed into profane and hatefull im∣piety. Then did Judas with his country-men celebrate a feast unto the Lord for eight daies, praising God with Hymns and Psalms. He enclosed the City also with a wall, and built high Towers thereon, in which he planted Garisons against the incursions of the enemies. He fortified also the City of Betsura, that it might serve as a Fort against the enemy. But the nations round about them, being greatly displeased with this prosperity of the Jews, oppressed divers whom they surprised by am∣bushes and treachery;The Edomites overcome. whereupon Judas warred against them to hin∣der their incursions: he slew many of the Idumaeans, and brought a∣way a great prey out of their country, and shut up the sonnes of Baan▪ their Prince, who lay in waite for the Jews, and after a siege, he over∣came them, setting fire on their Towers, and killing all the men that where therein. After this he made warre upon the Ammonites, who had a mighty Army under the conduct of Timotheus:The Ammo∣nites overcome. with these he fought and overcame them, and took their City of Jazor, and burned it, leading their wives and children into captivity, and so returned into Judaea: But the neighbouring nations hearing of his departure, assem∣bled
themselves together against the Jews in Galaad, who retiring into the sort of Dathema, sent to Judas, requesting him to come and re∣lieve them; and whilest he was reading their Letters, other messen∣gers came out of Galile, informing him that they were assaulted by the inhabitants of Ptolomais, Tyre, and Sidon, and others there abouts. Here∣upon Judas commanded his brother Simon to take three thousand cho∣sen men, and with them to relieve those Jews that were assailed in Ga∣lile: and himself with his brother Jonathan, accompanied with eight thousand fighting men, marched into Galaad, leaving the rest of his forces under two other Captains, whom he commanded to have a watchfull eye over Judaea, yet not to joyn battell with any enemy till his returne.Simons victo∣ries in Galile. Simeon in Galile fought against his enemies, discomfited them, pursued them to the gates of Ptolemais, and slew about three thousand; and having gathered their spoils, he released many Jews that were pri∣soners, restored their goods to them, and so returned home. But Ju∣das having passed Jordan, and marched three daies journey, he met the Naathians, who told him that his brethren were besieged in their Castles and Cities, and some of them were already brought into great exrteamity and penury: Hereupon he first assailed the Inhabitants of Bosra,Judas taketh Bozra. tooke their City, set it on fire, and killed all the men that were able to bea arms: then marching all night, he came early in the morning to the Castle, where the Jews were besieged by Tymothies Army. The enemies were just then raising their ladders to scale the walls, and applying their engins for battery: Then did he incourage his men to fight valiantly for their brethren that were in danger, and causing his Trumpets to sound, he distributed his forces into three battalions, wherewith he assaulted the enemies, but they, hearing that it was Macabaeus,Overcometh Timothy, were struck with so great a fear, that immediately they fled: Judas with his men pursuing them, slew about eight thousand, and then marching to Malla [a City of the enemies] he surprised it, slew all the men therein, and burnt it with fire; after which he destroyed Chaspomo, Bosor, and divers other places. Shortly after Timothy leavied another great Army, hired many of the Syrians, and drew forth all his allies to his assistance; with these he marched to Jordan exhorting them valiantly to oppose the Jews and to hinder their passage over the river, telling them that if the Jews gat over, they were sure to be put to the worst: Judas hearing hereof, marched hastily against his enemies, and having passed the river, he presently set upon them,Timothy again overcome. killing some, and grievously affrighting the rest, who casting away their arms, immediately fled; some of them to save themselves fled into a Temple called Carnain, but Judas having taken the City and Temple, slew them and burnt the same. Then did he lead away with him all the Jews that lived in Galaad, together with their wives, children and substance, and brought them into Judaea. When he drew near to the town of Ephron, they had baricadoed up his way that he could not pass: then did he send Ambassadors to them, to desire them to open his passage; which when they refused,
he besieged the City, took it by assault, burned it down,Ephron destroy∣ed. Thanksgiving for victory. A miracle of mercy. and slew all the men that were therein. After having passed over Jordan, they came into Judaea with great joy and gladnesse, praising God, and offering sa∣crifices of thanksgiving to him, for the safe return of his Army; for that in all those battels and encounters, he had not lost one Jew. But whilest Judas and Simon were gone upon these expeditions, the two Captains which he had left to command the Garisons of Judaea,Vain-glory punished. being desirous to obtain the reputation of valiant men, tooke their forces, and went towards Jamnia; against whom Gorgias, Governor of that place, issued out, and slew two thousand of them; the rest fled to Judaea.The Idumaeans overcome. Afterwards Judas and his brethren warred against the Idumaeans, took divers of their Cities, and with a great booty returned home with great joy. Antiochus in the meane time being in Persia, heard of a wealthy City called Elymais, in which was a rich Temple of Diana, &c. thither he went, and besieged it, but the inhabitants sallied out, and with great losse drave him from thence, whereupon he returned to Babylon: there also news was brought unto him of the overthrow of his Captains in Judaea, and that the Jews were grown strong; which together with his former defeat, so wrought upon him, that he fell sick, and finding no hope of recovery, he called his most familiar friends to him, and told them that his sicknesse was violent and desperate, and that he was plagued with this grevous affliction, for that he had tor∣mented the people of the Jews, destroyed their Temple,Antiochus his horrible death. committed hor∣rible sacriledge, and contemned the reverence of God; but now he vowed, that if it would please the Lord to restore him, he would be∣come a Jew, and do many great things for the people of God; as also that he would goe through all the known world to declare the power of God. Notwithstanding which, the Lord knowing his hypocrisie continued to plague him after a terrible manner: he had a remedilesse pain in his bowels, and intollerable torments in all his inward parts: His body bred abundance of worms, which continually crawled out of the same: yea, he so rotted above ground, that by reason of the in∣tollerable stink, no man could endure to come near him, neither could he himselfe indure the same: and thus this vile person who had former∣ly in a proud and insolent manner protested that he would make Jeru∣salem a common burying place,Gods judge∣mente on Per∣secator. and the streets thereof to run with the bloud of Gods people; by Gods just judgement ended his life in extream misery: but before his death, he called Philip one of his chief Captains, and made him governour of his kingdom, requiring him to be very carefull of his son Antiochus. Then was Antiochus proclaimed King, and sirnamed Eupator:Antiochus Eupator. A∣bout which time the Garisons, and Apostates that were in the Fortress at Jerusalem, did much mischief to the Jews; for setting unawares up∣on those that came to the Temple to worship, and to offer their sacri∣fices, they slew them: Hereupon Judas resolved to cut off these Ga∣risons, and to that end he assembled all the people, and besieged them, and having made certain Engins, and raised divers Rams, he earnest∣ly
prosecuted the siege: but divers of those Apostates escaping by night, went to Antiochus, desiring him not to suffer them to perish, who for his fathers sake, had forsaken their Religion, &c. Then did Antiochus send for his Captains, commanding them to raise a mighty Army, which accordingly they did, gathering together a hundred thousand footmen, and twenty thousand horsemen, and thirty two E∣lephants; with these Forces he departed out of Antioch, and made Ly∣sias Generall of his Army:Bethsura be∣sieged. Then did he besiege Bethsura, a strong City, but the inhabitants valiantly resisted him, and sallying out, burned his Engines which he had prepared for battery. The King continuing the siege for a longe time, Judas hearing of it, raised his siege from before the Castle of Jerusalem, and marched towards Antiochus his Army, and when he came neer to the enemies Camp, he lodged his Army in certain streights, called Beth-zacharia. The King hearing thereof, raised his siege from Bethsura, and march∣ed to wards the streight where Judas with his Army was; The King first caused his Elephants to march thorow the streight; about each Elephant were a thousand Footmen, and a hundred Horsemen for his guard, each Elephant carried a Tower on his back, furnished with Archers: the rest of his Forces he caused to march two waies by the mountaines, commanding them with huge shouts and cries to assail their enemies, and to uncover their golden and brazen bucklers, that the reflection thereof might dazle the eies of the Jews; yet was not Judas at all amated, but entertained the Army with a noble courage, slaying about six hnundred of the forlorn hope: But Eleazer, Judas brother, seeing a huge Elephant armed with royall trappings, supposing that the King was upon him, he ran against him with a noble courage, and having slain divers that were about the Elephant, he thrust his sword into the belly of the beast,Eleazer slew, and is slain by an Elephent. so that the Elephant falling upon him, slew him with his weight. Judas seeing the great strength of his enemies, retired back to Jeru∣salem; and Antiochus sent back part of his Army against Bethsura, and with the rest, he marched on towards Jerusalem. The Bethsurites de∣spairing of relief, and their provisions failing them, surrendred their City,Bethsura sur∣rendred. having the Kings oath that no out-rage should be offered to them, yet he thrust them out of the City and placed a Garison in it. He spent also along time in besieging the Temple at Jerusalem, they within de∣fending it gallantly;The Temple besieged. for against every Engine that the King erected, they set up a contrary Engine: Their only want was of victuals, be∣cause (it being the seventh year) the Land had not been tilled; where∣upon divers of them fled away secretly, so that very few remained for the defence of the Temple. But behold the good providence of God! just then came tidings to Antiochus,A speciall pro∣vidence. that Philip coming out of Persia, intended to make himself Lord and Master of the country, Antiochus concluded to give over the siege and to march against Philip; but first he sent an Herauld to Judas, promising them peace, and li∣berty to live according to their Religion, which conditions Judas ac∣cepting
of, took an oath from the King for performance, and so sur∣rendred up the Temple. Whereupon Antiochus entred the same, and seeing it so impregnable a plce,Perfidiousness. contrary to his oah he commanded his Army to levell the wall that environed it, and then he returned to Antioch, leading away with him Onias, surnamed Mnalaus, the High-Priest, whom, by the counsell of Lysias, he put to death,A just judge∣ment. because he had advised his father to enforce the Jews to forsake their Religion: A just reward for so wicked a fact. Antiochus finding that Philip had already conquered much of his country, went straite against him, fought with him, and slew him. Presently after Demetrius the son of Seleucus took possession of Tripo∣lis in Syria, and setting the Diadem upon his own head, he leavied an Army, and invaded the Kingdom of Antiochus. The people general∣ly submitted themselves to him, and laying hold of Antiochus and Lysias, they brought them both to Demetrius,Antiochus slain by Demetrius who caused them to be slain. To this new King, divers Jews (banished for their impiety) toge∣ther with Alcimus their High-Priest, resorted, acusing their Nation,The wickednes of Apostates. and in particular Judas and his brethren for killing their friends, and banishing such as were friends to Demetrius. Demetrius was much mo∣ved with these reports, and therefore he sent a greate Army under Bac∣chides, a valiant and experienced Captain,Bacchides sent against Judas. with commission to kill Ju∣das and his confederates. Bacchides with his Army marched into Ju∣dea, sending an Herauld to Judas and his brethren, pretending peace, when he intended to surprize them by subtilty and treachery. But Ju∣das seeing that he came with so great an Army, found out his drift, and would not trust him: yet many of the people were deceived with his Proclamation of peace, and therefore submitted to live under his go∣vernment, first having received an oath from him, that neither they, nor any of their followers should be endamaged: but when they had committed themselves to him, he falsified his oath,Perjury. Perfidiousness. and slew sixty of them. Then removing his Army from Jerusalem, he came to the village of Bethzeth, where, apprehending many of the Jews, he slew them all, and commanded the rest in the country to obey Alcimus, with whom he left a part of his Army, and so returned to Antioch unto demetrius. Alcimus by his feigned and familiar deportment, drew many more of the wicked Jews to joyn with him,Alcimus his subtilty and cruelty. and then he went with his Army thorow the country, and slew all that took part with Judas. Judas per∣ceiving that hereby many upright men, and such as feared God were slain; he also with his Army went thorow the Land, and slew all the Apo∣states that were of Alcimus his faction. Whereupon Alcimus repaired to Demetrius, and made greivous complaints against Judas; who fearing that if Judas prospered, it would be prejudiciall to his estate,Nicanor sent against Judas he sent Nicanor to make warre against him, and having furnished him with a sufficient Army, he commanded him that he should not spare any one of that Nation.
Nicanor coming to Jerusalem; offered no act of hostility, endea∣vouring to entrap Judas by subtilty,His subtility. sending him a peaceable message, wherein he protested that he would do him no injury, and that he came only to express the good affections of Demetrius to the Nation of the Jews. Judas and his brethren being deceived with this glozing message entertained him and his Army. Nicanor then saluted Judas, but whilest he was conferring with him, he gave a sign to his souldiers to lay hands on him;Judas in dan∣ger. but Judas discovering the treason, brake from him, and escaped to his Army. Then did Nicanor resolve to make open war upon him, and bad him battel near to a Burrough called Capar-salama, where he obtained the victory, and constrained Judas to retreat into the Fortress at Jerusalem;Judas forced to retreat. there did Nicanor besiege him for a while, and then retired; at which time certain of the Priests and Elders met him, and having done their reverence, they shewed him those sacrifi∣ces which they intended to offer to God for the Kings prosperity; but he blaspheming, threatned them, that if they did not deliver Judas into his hands,Nicanors blasphemy. he would destroy the Temple at his return. Here∣upon the Priests wept abundantly, praying unto God to defend the Temple, together with those which called on his Name therein, from the outrage of their enemies. Nicanor coming neer to Bethoron, received a greate supply of souldi∣ers out of Syria. Judas also was about thirty furlongs distant from him not having above a thousand men, yet he exhorted them not to fear the multitude of their enemies, but to set couragiously upon them, expect∣ing help from God;A terrible battel. and so encountering with Nicanor, there was a very doubtfull conflict, yet Judas had the upper hand, and slew a great number of the enemies. Nicanor himselfe also fighting valiantly, was slain; whereupon his Army fled: but Judas speedily pursuing, made a great slaughter,Nicanor slain. and by sound of trumpet, giving notice to the neigh∣bouring places, the inhabitants thereof betook themselves to their weapons, and meeting those that fled, they slew them, so that no one escaped from this battel, though they were at least nine thousand men. Then ensued a little peace to the Jews. Shortly after Alcimus the High-priest, intending to beat down an old wall of the Sanctuary, was suddenly striken by God, became speechless, and fell to the ground, and having endured many grievous torments for many dayes,A just judge∣ment. he died miserably. Then did the people by a generall consent give his place to Judas: who hearing of the great power and victories of the Romans, sent two of his intimate friends to Rome, to intreate the Romans to be their Al∣lies and Confederates,Judas sends to the Romans. and to write to Demetrius to give over his wars against the Jews. The Embassadors coming to Rome, were intertained by the Senate, and friendship concluded betwixt them, upon these conditions; That none under the Romans should war against the Jews,A league be∣tween the Jews and Romans. nor furnish their enemies with Victuals, Ships or Silver: That if any enemies should
assail the Jevvs, the Romans should succour them to the uttermost of their povver; that if any made vvar upon the Romans, the Jevvs should succour them; that if the Jevvs vvould add or diminish any thing from this Association, it should be done vvith the common advice of the Romans; and that vvhat should so be ordained, should remain irre∣vocable. Nicanors death, and the discomfiture of his Army being reported to Demetrius, he sent another Army under Bacchides, vvho coming into Judaea, and hearing that Judas vvas encamped at Bethzeth,Bacchides sent gainst Judas twenty thou∣sand. he marched against him vvith tvventy thousand footmen, and tvvo thousand horse∣men. Judas had not in all above tvvo thousand men, vvho seeing the multitude of Bacchides Army, vvere afraid, so that some, forsaking the Camp, fled avvay, insomuch as there then remained vvith Judas but eight hundred men. His enemies also pressed so upon him, that he had no time to re-assemble his Forces, yet he resolved to fight vvith those eight hundred men, vvhom he exhorted to be of good courage, and to fight valiantly: but they answered, That they were not able to make head against so great an Army, and therefore they adviced him to retire, and stand on his guard, till he had gather∣ed more Forces: Judas replied,Judas his reso∣lution. God forbid that the Sun should see me turn my back upon the enemies; though I die, and spend my last blood in this battle, yet will I never soil my former worthy actions by an ignominious flight. And so having encouraged his souldiers, he commanded them without apprehension of danger, to bend themselves altogether against the enemy. Bacchides drew out his Army, arranged them in battle, placing his horse-men in the wings, his Archers, and light-armed men in the front, and then the Macedonian Phalanx, and so causing his Trumpets to sound, and his Souldiers to shout, he charged his ene∣mies. Judas did the like, and encountred Bacchides, so that there was a most cruel conflict, which continued till Sun-set.A terrible bat∣tel. Judas perceiving that Bacchides, and the flower of his Army fought in the right wing, he chose out the most resolute of his Souldiers, and drew them towards that quarter, and set upon them, brake their squa∣dron, and thrusting into the midst of them, he forced them to flie, and pursued them as far as to the mount Aza; but the left wing followed Judas, and so enclosed him on the back part. He seeing himself thus enclosed, resolved with his followers to fight it out to the last. He slew a great number of his enemies, till at last he was so wearied, that he fell to the ground, and was there slain: His souldiers seeing him dead, betook themselves to flight. Simon and Jonathan his brothers, by in∣treaty recovered his body, carried it to Modim,Judas slain. where they interred it, all the people weeping divers days for him; and Jonathan his bro∣ther succeeded him in the Government.
CHAP. V. The Martyrdom of the Maccabees. WHilst Antiochus Epiphanes was living, he thrust out Onias the High-Priest from his Office, and put into his room Jason his brother, whereupon Jason promised to pay him yearly three thousand six hundred and sixty Talents of silver. This wicked Jason presently forced all the people to forsake their Religion, and to build Baths: He hindered the defence and building of the Temple. Hereat God was very wroth, and stirred up Antiochus to go to Jerusalem, where he was gallantly entertained by the Jews. Then did he presently make an Edict, That whosoever of the Jews refused to offer Sacrifice to the gods,Antiochus his cruel Edict. he should presently be broken to pieces on the wheel. But those that were godly did little esteem that Edict. Antiochus perceiving that the rigour of his Edict prevailed little, and that many chose rather to die,Constancy. then to forsake their Religion, he sitting in an eminent place, and calling all the Jews together, caused swines-flesh to be sacrificed on the Altar, and to be offered to every Hebrew to eat. Amongst the multitude thus assembled, there was one Eleazer, a Priest a man that feared God, and one who was very aged, of a reverend countenance,Subtilty. and famous for his vertue; To him Antio∣chus said, Be advised by me, holy old man, to avoid those torments which are prepared for the obstinate; preserve thy reverend age, and contemn not the be∣nefit of life; take the sacrifice, and eat of the swines-flesh, for no wise man will credit the Jews opinion to refuse that meat which nature hath ordained for mans use, as well as any other: Why should this beast be more abominable then others? &c. Or, suppose your Laws are to be observed, yet will they ex∣cuse thee, seeing thou sinnest not voluntarily, but by compulsion? To whom Eleazer answered;Courage. We, O Antiochus, follow not vanity, but the verity of Religion, and fear of torments cannot make us embrace another: but suppose that the Religion left us by our fore-fathers had no firm ground, yet should not torments make me forsake it. Do not esteem it a small matter to eat forbidden meat, and to taste of that which is sacrificed to Idols; for it is a profane thing to touch things that are prophane, and we are taught by our Law to suffer with pati∣ence whatsoever, for Gods cause, is inflicted upon us, &c. And there∣fore I refuse this profane meat, well knowing what I ought to eat, as warranted by Gods Law, which I have learned to obey, &c. and herein will I persist, though with tyrannous hand thou pluck out mine eyes, or with a sharp knife rip up my entrails. Think not that because I am old, my body is feeble: If I must be sacrificed for Gods sake, thou shalt find me as lusty, and constant as a young man, and most joyfull in torments. Prepare an extraordinary fire, or what else thou pleasest, thou shalt find me more constant in the midst of all
torments, then I am now before they come, &c. The chaste, and pure company of Fathers shall receive me into their number, where I shall not fear (O impious King) thy threats, &c. Whilst Eleazer spake thus boldly,Eleazer cruelly beaten. the souldiers haled him to be tor∣tured, and stripping him naked, they hanged him up, and whipped him: and whilst on either side he was thus beaten, one cryed, Obey the Kings pleasure and command. But this worthy man was not over∣come by torment, but suffered as though he had been in a sleep: and fixing his venerable eyes upon Heaven, he knew in whom he believed, and to whom he sacrificed his life, and beholding the flesh on each side of his body rent and torn with stripes, and the bloud issuing out abun∣dantly, he admired his own patience, and thanked God the author of it: At last finding his own frailty, scarce able to endure such torments, he fell upon his face, which with stripes was all rent, and torne,His admirable patience. still glo∣rifying God, as he did before: Then a souldier, to gratifie the King like a mad man, did spurn, and tread upon him, to encrease his sufferings: but Eleazer, strong in body and minde, like a Champion of the true God, did never shrink at those pains, but by patience overcame the cru∣elty of his tormentors; so that his torturers admired that he should be able to bear them: Then the Kinges Officers said, How long wilt thou forbear to obey the King? eat Swines flesh and free thy self from all that thou endurest. Eleazer, though hitherto he had been silent in all his torments, yet could he not hear such profane counsel without answering, where∣upon he cryed out; We Hebrews are not so effeminate as to forsake the way of salvation wherein we walk to our old-age,His zeal. neither are we taught for feare of contumely, which will not long endure, to give others an occasion, and example to sin, &c. Wilt thou, O Tyrant, esteem of us if we should yield unto thee? nay, thou mightst justly reprove our inconstancy: Then did the souldiers, by the Kings com∣mand, cast him into the fire, and poured stinking, and loathsome li∣quors into his nostrils, all which he patiently suffered, till he was con∣sumed in the flames: Yet when nature began to fail, lifting up his daz∣led eyes to Heaven, he said, Thou, O God, art he from whom life, and salvation proceedeth: Behold I die for observing thy Laws: Be mercifull to this thy Nation,His prayer at death. and forsake not them whom hitherto thou hast protected in thy bosom, and under the shadow of thy wings, let my death end all misery, &c. and so he joyfully yielded up the ghost. Antiochus was but more incensed hereby, and therefore he caused seven Children of the Hebrews to be brought to Antioch, who being young, and therefore, as he thought, weak, and unable to endure tor∣ments, he presumed that either by perswasion, or fear, he should en∣force them to forsake their Religion. Then he commanded these seven, together with their mother Sala∣mona now aged, to be brought before him: They were of excellent beauty, and worthy children of so vertuous a mother. The Tyrant beholding them, with a merry countenance, craftily spake unto them:
I wish your good, O admirable young men, do not therefore like mad men resist my commands:Antiochus his subtilty. Avoid not only torments, but death also: I desire not only to exalt you to honour, but to encrease your riches, and possessions: Con∣temn therefore your own superstition, and embrace our Religion: If you re∣fuse this (as I hope you will not) I will devise all torments, that by a lin∣gring, and painfull death, I may consume you: And to terrifie them the more, he caused all sorts of Instruments for torment to be brought forth before them, as Wheels, Rods, Hooks, Racks, Cauldrons, Cages, Gridirons, &c. with Engines to torment the fingers, and hands, as Gauntlets, Auls, Bellows, Brazen-pots, and Frying-pans, &c. Then said he, Obey me, O prudent young men, for if I command that which is a sin, yet do not you offend, being compelled to it. But these holy young men, inflamed with a divine spirit, con∣temned these torments, and despised both threats and flateries, denying to eat of the sacrificed Swines flesh, and saying: Where∣fore,The seven bre∣threns courage O Tyrant, dost thou persecute us that are innocent? We de∣sire to die, and will, till death expels life, firmly keep that which God commanded and Moses taught us: and therefore seek not, O Tyrant to seduce us by protesting thy unfeigned love: Thou lover of in justice, master of cruelty, deviser of iniquity, the pardon thou pro∣ferrest is more painfull to us then punishments: We contemn death, and esteem not thy words, our master Eleazer having taught us to de∣spise them. Why dost thou expect such pusillanimity in us young men, when of late thou foundest such courage in an old man? Thou canst not know our minds except by tearing our bodies thou searchest them out: We will willingly for our God suffer any thing, and ex∣pect Heaven, whilst thou for thy cruelty to innocents, shalt be reser∣ved to eternal fire. The Tyrant greatly moved herewith, caused them to be beaten with Buls-pizels: first commanding Maccabeus the eldest to be stripped, and stretched out upon a Rack,Maccabeus his torments. and his hands to be bound, and so to be most cruelly beaten, who so wearied his tormentors by sufferring, that they rather desired to give over, then he requested it: Then was he put upon a Wheel, and a weight hanged at his feet, and so stretched round about it, that his sinews and entrails brake, yet all this while he called upon God:His resolute speech. and then said to the Tyrant: O bloudy Tyrant, who persecutest the Majesty of God; I whom thou thus tormentest, am no witch, nor murtherer, but one who dies for observing Gods Law: And when the tormentors, overcome with compassion, willed him to submit to the Kinges pleasure, he said; O ye wicked ministers of Tyranny! Your Wheels are not so sharp and cruel, that I there∣by will be forced to forsake Heaven, whereon my minde is fixed: Tear my flesh, yea if you please, rost it at the fire: torture each par∣cel of my body with severall cruelties, yet you shall not be able to force us young men to impiety. His Martyr∣dom.As he thus spake, a fire was kindled, & he thus racked on the Wheel, was thrown into it, and by flames was so burned that his bowels ap∣peared,
yet was his minde unmoved, and in the midst of his torments he cryed thus to his brethren; O beloved brethren, make me your example; despise the alluring baits of this world; obey God rather then this Tyrant,His speech at death. who can if he please humble the proud and migh∣ty, and exalt the dejected: Then was he taken from the fire; and slain alive; his tongue was pulled out of his head, and he put into a frying pan, and so he departed out of this life, to the admiration of his enemies, and the joy of his mother, and brethren. Then was the second brother, called Aber, haled by the souldiers; and the Tyrant shewed him all those instruments of torment, and as∣ked him if he would eat of the sacrifice? which he, denying to do,Abers tor∣ments. his hands were bound with iron chains, and being hanged up thereby, the skin of his body was slain from the crown of his head to his knees, so that the entrails in his brest were seen: Then was he cast to a cruel Libard, greedily thirsting after blood, but the beast smelling at him,Or Leopard. forgat his cruelty, and went from him, without doing him any harm: This increased the Tyrants rage, and Aber by his torments grew more constant, crying aloud, O how pleasant is that death to me, which is caused by all sorts of torments for Gods sake! yea,Hs speech at death. the more plea∣sant, because I know I shall be rewarded in heaven; Let these tor∣ments, O Tyrant, satisfie thy cruelty, for my pain is not increased by them, but my pleasure, as thou shalt find by my patience in these sufferings; I am more willing to suffer, then thou to punish, yet my pain is less in suffering, then thine by inflicting: I am tor∣mented for keeping the Law, thou by Gods Justice shalt be banished from thy Regal seat, yea, eternal torments are prepared for thee, which neither thy prophane mind is able to endure, nor thy power to decline, &c. And so shortly after he yielded up his soul to God. Then Machir the third son was brought, whom all pitied,Machir brought forth. and ex∣horted by his brothers examples to forsake his opinion, and so decline the punishment; but he being angry at such Counsel, replied, One Father begat us, one Mother bore us, one Master instructed us,His courage. &c. Therefore no longer prolong the time in vain; I came to suffer, not to speak, use all the Tyranny that possibly you can against my body yet have you no power over my soul. This so moved the Tyrant, that he devised new torments beyond the reach of humane wit; and com∣manding a globe to be brought, he caused him to be tied about it in such sort, that all his bones were put out of joint,His torments. hanging one from another in a most pitifull manner; yet was the holy Martyr nothing dismaid; then the skin of his head and face was pulled off, and then was he put upon the wheel, but he could be racked no worse, for all his bones were dislocated before; the blood issuing from him abun∣dantly, he said, We, O Tyrant, endure this torment for the love of God, and thou the Author of such cruelty,His speech at death. shalt be punished with everlasting pain; Then was his tongue cut out, and he being put in∣to a fiery frying pan, resigned his spirit unto God. Next followed Judas the fourth brother, whom all the people per∣swaded
to obey the King:Judas his cou∣rage. But he said, Your fire shall not separate me from the Law of God, nor from my brethren; To thee, O Tyrant, I denounce destruction, but to such as believe, salvation: Try me thou cruel wretch, and see if God will not stand by me, as he did by my three brethren now in glory, &c. The cruel Tyrant hearing this, was so inraged, that he leaped down from his chaire to torment this Martyr himselfe;His torments. He commanded also his tongue to be cut out, to whom Judas said, Thy cruelty will nothing avail thee, our God needs not by voice to be awaked,His speech at death. &c. he heareth such as call upon him with their hearts, and know's our thoughts afar off, &c. Cut out my tongue if thou please, would thou wouldst so sanctifie all the parts of my body, &c. and think not that thou shalt long escape un∣punished: Then was his tongue cut out, and he bound to a stake, was beaten with ropes ends, which torments he bore with admirable pati∣ence: After which he was put upon the wheel, where he ended his life, and went to the rest of his brethren. Then spake Achas the fift brother, Behold, O Tyrant, I come to be punished before thou commandest me,Achas his cou∣rage. therefore hope not to alter his minde that desireth to be tormented: The bloud of my innocent brethren hath condemned thee to hell, I shall make up the fift, that by it thy torments may be increased: What offence have we com∣mitted that thou thus ragest against us? &c. All that thou canst al∣ledge against us is, that we honour God and live in obedience to his Laws, and therefore we esteem not punishment, which is an honour to us; though no part of us be left untormented, yet we shall be the more rewarded by God. Then at the command of the Kings the executioner cast him into a brazen pot,His torments. where he was prest down with his head to his feet, and afterwards he sufferred all the torments inflicted on his brethren, but he was so far from being discouraged, that suddenly starting up,His speech at death. he said, Cruel Tyrant, how great bene∣fits dost thou (though against thy will) bestow upon us! yea the more thou ragest, the more acceptable to God shalt thou make us; therefore I shall be sorry if thou shewest me any mercy: by this tem∣porall death, I shall go to everlasting life. And having thus finished his sufferings, he died. Then was Areth the sixt brother brought, to whom the Tyrant proferred the choise of honour,Areth his cou∣rage. or punishment; But he being grieved at this profer, said, O Tyrant, though I be younger in years then my bre∣thren, yet the constancy of my minde is not inferiour; as we have lived, so we will die together in the fear of God: Hasten therefore thy torments, and what time thou wouldest spend in exhorting me, spend it in devising torments for me. Whereupon Antiochus in a rage, commanded him to be tied to a pillar with his head downwards: Then caused he a fire to be made at such a distance,His torments. as might not burn, but rost him: Then he made them prick him with awles, that the heat might pierce the sorer: In these torments much bloud, like froth, gathered about his head and face;His speech at death. yet said he, O noble fight! O valiant
warre! O strife between piety and impiety! My brethren have past through their Agonies, whose crown of Martyrdom is the punish∣ment of their Persecutors. I willingly follow them, that as by blood I am conjoyned to them, so by death I may not be separated from them. Devise, O Tyrant, some new torment, for I have overcome these already: O Master of cruelty, enemy of piety, and persecu∣tor of Justice! we young men have conquered thy power, thy fire is cold, and heateth not: thy weapons are bended, and blunted in our bodies; our God giveth us more courage to suffer, then thou hast to punish, &c. As he thus spake, they pulled out his tongue with an hot pair of tongs, and lastly frying him in a frying pan, he gave up the ghost. There being now only the youngest brother left, called Jacob, he,Jacob brought forth. Antiochus his subtilty. presenting himself before the Tyrant, moved him to some compassion, wherefore he called the Child to him, and taking him aside by the hand, he said, By the example of thy brethren thou seest what to expect if thou disobeyest me; therefore deliver thy self from these torments, and I will give thee what honour my Kingdom can afford: thou shalt be a Ruler, Gene∣rall of my Army, my Counceller &c. But when this prevailed not, he called his mother, who coming, and standing by her son, the Tyrant said to her, O worthy woman, where now are all thy Children? yet thou hast one remaining; advise him therefore not to ruine himself, and to leave thee childless by his obstinacy, &c. The mother bowing her self to the King, said to her child in Hebrew, that she might not be understood of others, Pity and comfort thy sorrowfull mother, O my son,His mother encourageth him. who bare thee nine moneths in my womb, gave thee suck with my brests three years, and with great care have brought thee up hitherto. I pray thee, dear son, consider the heavens and earth, and remember that God created them all of nothing, &c, fear not therefore these pains and torments, but imitate thy brethren, and contemn death, that in the day of mercy I may receive thee with thy brethren again in heaven. Then did he desire to be unbound, which being granted, he immediately ran to the torments,His noble cou∣rage. and coming where was a frying pan red hot, he said to the King; Cruel Tyrant, I now know thee, not only to have been cruel to my brethren, but even cruelty it self. Wretch that thou art, who gave thee these purple robes? who ex∣alted thee to thy Kingdom? Even he whom thou in us dost perse∣cute, whose servants thou tormentest and killest, for which thy self shalt suffer eternal torments; though thou art above others, yet he that made other men, made thee also of the same nature, for all are born, and must die alike. He that kils another, sheweth that he himself may be killed; thou tearest and tormentest thine own Image all in vain? In thy fury thou killest him, whom God created like thy self, &c. thou pullest out our tongues, tearest our bodies with flesh-hooks, and consumest us with fire; but they that have already suffered, have received everlasting joyes, and everlasting punishments attend thee. Think not that I expect any favour, I will follow my
brethren, and remain constant in keeping Gods Law. The Tyrant herewith inraged, caused him to be tormented; but his mother com∣forted him, and with her kind hands held his head, when through violence of the torturers,His torments. the blood issued out of his mouth, nose, and privy parts; the tormentors not ceasing till his life was almost spent; but then giving over, God gave him strength to recover, and to endure more then any of his brethren had done. At last his hands and arms being cut off, with his eyes lift up to heaven, he cryed, O Lord. His last words. Adonai. be mercifull unto me, and receive me into the company of my bre∣thren. &c. Then was his tongue pulled out, and he of his own accord going into the fiery frying pan, to the great admirarion of Antiochus, died. Salamona's zeal.The mother seeing all her Children dead, was inflamed with a holy zeal to suffer Martyrdom also; and despising the Tyrants threats, she offered her motherly brest to those torments which her Children had suffered before her. Indeed herein she excelled them all, in that she had suffered seven painfull deaths, before she came to suffer in her own person, and feared in every one of them, lest she should have been overcome. She alone with dry eyes did look upon them whilst they were torn in pieces, yea, she exhorted them thereunto, rejoycing to see one torn with flesh-hooks, another racked upon the wheel, a third bound and beaten, a fourth burned, and yet she exhorted the rest not to be terrified thereby; and though her grief in beholding their torments was greater then that which she had in child-birth, yet did she frame a chearfull countenance, as if it had been one triumphing, wishing ra∣ther the torments of their bodies then of their souls; for she knew that nothing was more frail then our lives, which are often taken away by Agues, Fluxes, and a thousand other ways. Therefore when they were first apprehended, she thus exhorted them in the Hebrew tongue, O my most dear and loving Children,Her speech to her Children. let us hasten to that Agony which may credit our profession, and be rewarded by God with eter∣nal life. Let us fearlesly present our bodies to those torments which aged Eleazer endured. Let us call to mind our father Abraham, who having but one only son▪ willingly sacrificed him at Gods com∣mand, and feared not to bring him to the Altar, whom with many prayers he had obtained in his old age. Remember Daniel, the three Children, &c. Antiochus being enraged against her, caused her to be stripped naked,Her torments and death. hanged up by the hands, and cruelly whipt: then were her dugs and paps pulled off, and her self put into the red hot frying pan; where lifting up her eyes and hands to heaven, in the midst of her prayers she yielded up her chast soul unto God. But God suffered not the cruel Tyrant to escape unpunished, for in his wars against the Persians,See more of this before. the Lord struck him with madness, his intrals were devoured with worms, and stinking like a Carrion, in the extremity of his tor∣ments he gave up the ghost. Concerning this Antiochus, Daniel, chap. 8.9, 10. &c. saw in the vi∣sion, that there came forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding great to∣wards
the south, and towards the East, and towards the pleasant Land, and it waxeth great even towards the host of heaven, and it cast down some of the host, and of the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them: Yea, he magnified himself even to the Prince of the host, and by him the daily sa∣crifice was taken away, and the place of the Sanctuary was cast down. And an host was given him against the daily Sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth to the ground, and it practised and prospered. Which afterwards is thus interpreted by the Angel unto Daniel, verse 23. &c. In the latter time of their Kingdom, when the Transgressors are come to the full, a King of fiery countenance, and understanding dark sen∣tences shall stand up, and his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power, and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, and shall destroy the mighty and holy people: And through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand, and he shall magnifie himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: He shall also stand up against the Prince of Princes, but he shall he broken without hand. Collected out of Josephus, and the Books of the Maccabees. Here place the first Figure.
CHAP. VI. The Persecution of the Church from Christs time to our present Age; and first of those mentioned in the New Testament HErod the great, hearing by the wise men of one that was born King of the Jews, and being informed by the chief Priests and the Scribes, that the place of his birth should be Bethlehem of Judah,Mat. 2.2, 5, 16. he sent forth souldiers, and slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, hoping thereby to have destroyed Christ: for which cruel fact the Lord gave him over to such a spirit of phrensie, that he slew his own wife, his Children,Gods Judge∣ment on Perse∣cutors. and nearest kins-folks, and familiar friends. And shortly af∣ter Gods heavy Judgement fell upon him by a grievous sickness, which was a slow and slack fire in his inward parts; and withal, he had a gree∣dy appetite after food, and yet nothing sufficed him; he had also a rot∣ting in his Bowels, and a greivous flux in his fundament; a moist and running humour about his feet,Herods misera∣ble death. and the like malady vexed him about his bladder; his privy members putrified, engendring abundance of worms which continually swarmed out. He had a short and stinking breath, with a great pain in breathing; and through all the parts of his body such a violent cramp, as humane strength was not able to endure. Yet longing after life, he sent for Physitians from all parts, by whose advice he went to the hot bathes of Calliroe; but finding no ease there∣by, his torments still encreasing, he sought to lay violent hands upon himself, if he had not been prevented by his friends, and so in extream misery, he ended his wretched life. Then Herod the less having married the daughter of Aretas, King of Arabia, put her away, and took Herodias, who had forsaken her husband Philip, brother to Herod; for which incestuous and adulte∣rous marriage, John Baptist plainly reproved him; whereupon at the in∣stigation of Herodias,John Baptist beheded. Mat. 14.10. Herod first imprisoned him, and afterwards cut off his head: but the Lord left not this murther long unpunished, for Aretas raising an Army against Herod, for that ignominious dealing with his daughter, in a pitched battel wholly overthrew him, and cut off all his hoast,Gods Judge∣ments on Herod for it. not longe after Herod falling into disgrace with the Roman Emperour, he, with his incestuous Herodias were banished to Vienna in France,Caius Caligula. where they ended their wretched lives with much shame and misery. After the ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, Peter and John, having
cured a man that was born lame, and preaching Jesus to the people, upon that occasion they were apprehended, and cast into prison by the Priests and Captain of the Temple, who the next day,Act. 4.1, 17. having ex∣amined them, threatned to punish them, if they spake any more in that name, and so dismissed them. Yet afterwards the high-Priests and the Sadduces again laid hands on the Apostles, and cast them into the common prison; but in the night time the Angel of the Lord opened the prison doors, and released them, Ast. 5.18, 19. The next day, as they were preaching to the people, they were again apprehended,The Apostles beaten. and carried before the Counsel, ver. 26, 27. at whose command they were beaten, and so dismissed, ver, 40. Then were false witnesses suborned against Steven, who accused him for speaking blasphemous words against Moses, and against God, Act. 6.11. for which being apprehended and brought before the Coun∣cel, he was there condemned, led out of the City, and stoned to death,Steven stoned. chap. 7.58. After this there was a general persecution raised up against the Church of Christ in Jerusalem, whereby all the faithfull were scat∣tered abroad throughout the Regions of Judea and Samaria, except the Apostles, chap. 8.1. Saul also made great havock of the Church, entring into every house, haling both men and women, and committing them to prison, verse 3. Then Saul, after his Conversion, preaching Christ boldly, the en∣raged Jews took Counsel, and lay in wait to kill him,Paul persecut∣ed. watching the Gates of Damascus, where he then was, both day and night; but the Disciples took him by night, and let him down over the wall in a bas∣ket, whereby he escaped, Act. 9.23, &c. Then rose up a third Herod, called also Agrippa, who, not taking warning by his predecessors calamities, fell to persecuting the Church of Christ, and sending for James, the brother of John, before him, he condemned him to be beheaded: Concerning whom Clemens reports,Act. 12.1, 2. that he which drew James before the Tribunal seat, when he saw him so cheerfully embracing the sentence of death, was exceedingly mo∣ved therewith, and voluntarily confessed himself to be a Christian, and so was condemned to be beheaded with him:A Persecutor converted. As they went in the way to execution, he requested the Apostle James to pardon him, who after a little pause, turning to him, said, Peace be unto thee; and kissed him, and so they were beheaded both together. Herod seeing that the death of James pleased the Jews, he took Peter also,James behead∣ed. and delivered him to four quaternions of souldiers to keep him in prison, intending after the passover to put him to death; But the night before he should suffer, as he was sleeping, bound with two chains to tvvo souldiers, and the Keepers watching before the prison doors, an Angel came and awaked him, causing his chains to fall off, and so going before him, he led him out of prison, causing the iron gate to open to them, and having brought him out of danger, left him. But this cruel persecu∣ting Herod scaped no better then his Predecessors had done,Peter escapeth death. for being
arraied in glistering and royal apparel, and sitting upon his Throne, he made an Oration to his people, who like flattering Court Parasites, gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a God, and not of a man: Where∣upon the Angel of the Lord immediately smote him,Gods Judge∣ment on Herod and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost, verse 21, &c. in the fifty fourth year of his age, and the seventh of his reign, and under Claudius Caesar. Then the wicked Jews stirred up the Gentiles against Paul and Bar∣nabas at Iconium,Paul and Bar∣nabas persecut∣ed. so that being in danger to be stoned to death, they fled into Lycaonia, Act. 14.2, 5▪ 6. Again at Lytra they stirred up the Gentiles against them, where∣upon Paul was stoned and drawn out of the City,Paul stoned. and left for dead, but it pleased God that he revived, and so escaped to Derbe, ver. 19.20. Afterwards Paul and Silas, for casting a spirit of divination out of a Damosel at Philippi,Paul and Silas whipt. were dragged before the Rulers, who caused them to be whipt, and cast into prison. But the Magistrates after∣wards hearing that they were Romans, were much afraid, as having done more then they could answer, and therefore they came to them, released them out of prison, and besought them to depart out of their City, Act. 16.2, 39. Presently after at Thessalonica, the Jews again stirred up the people against Paul and Silas,Paul and Silas again persecut∣ed. and raising up an uproar, they sought for them in the house of Jason, and not meeting with them there, they drew forth Jason himself, and some brethren before the Rulers, who giving secu∣rity for their forth-coming,Act. 17.5, 13, 14. were dismissed. Yet these wretched Jews followed Paul to Berea also, and there stirred up a persecution against him, whereby he was forced to depart. At Corinth also they made an insurrection, caught Paul, and brought him before Gallio, Deputy of Achaia,Sosthenes bea¦ten. and when he would be a Judge of no such matters, they took Sosthenes the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, and beat him before the Judgement seat, Acts 18.12, 17. Afterwards at Ephesus, Demetrius that made silver shrines for Diana, raised an uproar, and having caught Caius and Aristarchus, Pauls companions, they with them rushed into the Theatre; but this tumult being allayed by the wisdom of the Town-Clark, Paul hasted away into Macedonia, cap. 19.29, &c. Paul at last returning to Jerusalem, the Asian Jews finding him in the Temple, stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him; but as they were about to kill him, he was rescued by the chief Captain of the Romans, chap. 21.31, 32. Then being brought forth before the Counsel of the Jews, he was first smitten by the Command of the High-Priest, chap. 23.2. And afterwards being in danger of being pulled to pieces,Paul in danger he was again rescued by the Captain, ver. 10. Then above forty of those desperate Jevvs, bound themselves under a curse, that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed him, ver. 12, 13. Hereupon he is sent to Faelix at Caesarea, who kept him in prison till his Accusers came, ver. 24, 35. Then being accused by Tertullus,Acts 24.27. he clears himself; yet because he vvould not bribe Faelix, he
is kept prisoner still. Festus succeeding Faelix, the Jews importune him also for sentence against Paul, or that he might be sent for to Je∣rusalem, laying wait in the way to kill him, chap. 25.3. but when that was denied them, they went to Cesarea to accuse him there, whereupon he is forced to appeal to Caesar, ver. 11. Then he was sent to Rome, and there committed Prisoner to the Captain of the Guard, chap. 28.16. where he continued prisoner at large for two years, and then being re∣leased, he visited the Churches of Greece and Asia. Afterwads he preached in Spain and France, and at last returning into Italy, he was again apprehended, and imprisoned at Rome,Pauls Martyr∣dom. where also he suffered Martyrdom, as afterwards you shall hear. The Jews being much displeased that they could not reak their teen upon Paul, turn themselves against James the brother of Christ: him therefore they bring, and set them in the midst of them, requiring him publickly to renounce the faith of Christ: but he on the contrary made a bold and open confession of Jesus to be the Son of God, and the Saviour of the world. Then did they set him upon a Pinacle of the Temple, again requiring him in the audience of all the people, to tell them which is the way of Jesus crucified; to whom he answered, Why ask you me of Jesus the son of man, when as he sits at the right hand of God in Heaven, and shall again come in the clouds of the air? this so en∣raged the Scribes and Pharisees, that they threw him down head-long; but he not being dead with the fall, gat upon his knees, and said, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do: Then one taking a Fullers Club, struck him on the head, and brained him.The Martyr∣dom of James. This James was sirnamed Justus, of whom Aegesippus writes, that his knees were as hard as Camels knees,His constancy in prayer. by reason of his continual kneeling in prayer. But shortly after his death, Vespasian came into Judea, and subdued the Jews: and his son Titus destroyed Jerusalem, and the Temple. Andrew the brother of Peter, preached the Gospel to the Scythians,Andrews mar∣tyrdom. Sogdians, and Aethiopians, and was at last crucified by Aegeas, King of Edessa. Philip preached the Gospel in Phrygia, and at last was crucified at Hierapolis.Philips Mar∣tyrdom. Bartholemew preached to the Indians, and (as some say) was beaten with Cudgels to death: or as others, he was flaid alive,Bartholemew. and then be∣headed. Thomas preached unto the Parthians, Medes and Persians, &c, and in Indian he was slain with a dart.Thomas. Mathew preached to the Aethiopians, and at last by the command of the King, was ran thorow with a sword.Matthew. Simon Zelotes preached in Mauritania and Africk, and at length was crucified under Traian, being above 112 years old.Simon Zel. Judas the brother of James preached to the Edesseans, and at last was slain by the command of the King.Judas. Matthias preached first in Macedonia,Matthias. and afterwards coming into
Judea, he was by the Jews first stoned, and then beheaded. Mark the Evangelist preached in Alexandria, and the neighbouring Regions,Mark. and afterwards was burnt by the furious Idolaters. Nicanor.Nicanor, one of the Deacons, was martyred, together with two thou∣sand other faithful Christians. Collected out of the New Testament, and Dorotheus. THE PERSECUTION OF THE CHURCH UNDER THE Heathen Roman Emperors. CHAP. VII. The First Primitive Persecution which began An. Christi, 67. THis first Persecution was begun by Domitius Nero, the sixt Emperour, Anno 67. or thereabouts: the occasion whereof was this;Quinquennium Neronis. Nero having passed over the first five years of his reign somewhat plausibly, he then began to fall to all manner of prodigious impieties: and amongst other wicked designs, he had a great desire to consume the stately im∣perial City of Rome with fire; pronouncing King Priamus an happy man, because he beheld the end of his Kingdom and Countrey toge∣ther; yea, said he, let not all be ruined when I am dead, but whilst I am yet a∣live:Nero sets Rome on fire. and for the effecting of this villany, he sent divers to kindle the fire in sundry places; yea, some of his own bed-chamber were seen to carry Flax, Toe, Torches, &c. to further it: and when any attempted to quench it, they were threatned for it; others openly hurled fire∣brands, crying, They knew what they did, there was one would bear them out. This fire first began amongst the Oyl-men and Drugsters; The night-watch and Praetorian guards did openly cherish it; and when it was throughly kindled, Nero went up to the top of Maecenas Tow∣er, which over-looked the whole City, where he fed himself with the sight of infinite burnings, and sang to his harp, the burning of Troy. The Circus burnt down.Amongst other stately buildings that were burned down, the Circus, or race-yard was one, being about half a mile in length, of an oval
form, with rows of seats one above another, capable to receive at least a hundred and fifty thousand Spectators without uncivil shouldrings: but the particulars were innumerable, the damage inestimable; be∣sides which, many thousands of people perished; the flame and smoak smothered some, the weight of ruins crusht others, the fire consumed others; others threw themselves into the fire out of sorrow and de∣spair, and villains slew many. But Nero finding that this fire, which continued burning nine dayes, brought a great Odium upon him; to excuse himself, he transferred the fault upon the Christians, as if out of malice they had done it,Nero charged it upon the Chri∣stians. and thereupon he raised this first persecution against them. For there was at this present a flourishing Church of Christians in Rome, even before St. Paul's arrival there,Raiseth the first Persecuti∣on. and Nero's own Court was secretly gar∣nished and enriched with some of those Diamons, whose salutations the Apostle remembers in his Epistle to the Philippians. But whilst Nero with their blood, sought to quench and cover his own infamy, he pro∣cured to himself new envy; whilst many that abhorred Christians for their Religion, commiserated their sufferings as undeserved. Some he caused to be sewed up in the skins of wild beasts, and then worried them to death with dogs: some he crucified, others he burnt in publick,Several kinds of torments. to furnish his evening sports with Bonefires. Many he caused to be packed up in paper stiffened in molten wax, with a coat of sear-cloth about their bodies, bound upright to Axletrees, many of which were pitcht in the ground, and so set on fire at the bottom, to maintain light for Nero's night-sports in his gardens. Some of them were gored in length upon stakes, the one end fastened in the earth, the other thrust into their fundaments, and coming out at their mouths. Nor did this Persecution rage in Rome alone, but it was extended generally over the whole Empire,Beastly cruel∣ty. insomuch that a man might then have seen Cities lie full of mens bodies, the old lying there together with the young, and the dead bodies of women cast out naked in the open streets, without all reverence of their sex. Yea his rage and malice was so great, that he endeavoured to have rooted out the very name of Christians in all places. Whereupon Tertullian said, That it could be no ordinary goodness which Nero condemned; and, saith he, We glory on the behalf of our sufferings, that they had such a dedicator as he:Tertullians speech. but this great Persecution, like a blast, did spread the Religion that it blew, and ha∣ving continued four years from the first rising, is expired in two most shining blazes, viz. in the Martyrdom of the two great Apostles Peter and Paul: Peter was crucified with his head down-wards, which manner of death himself made choice of, and whilst he thus hung up∣on the Cross, he saw his wife going to her Martyrdom, whereupon he much rejoyced; and calling her by her name, he bad her remember the Lord Jesus Christ. At the same time, also Paul, before Nero, made a confession of his faith, and of the Doctrine which he taught;Peter and Paul martyred. where∣upon he was condemned to be beheaded, and the Emperor sent two of his Esquires, Ferega and Parthemius, to bring him word of his death:
they coming to Paul, heard him instruct the people, and thereupon desired him to pray for them that they might believe; who told them, that shortly after they should believe and be baptized: then the soul∣diers led him out of the City to the place of execution, where he prayed, and then gave his neck to the sword, and so was beheaded. This was done in the fourteenth, which was the last year of Nero. Collected out of the life of Nero Caesar, Eusebius, and the Book of Martyrs. CHAP. VIII. The second Primitive Persecution, which began Anno 96. AFter the death of Nero, there succeeded, first Vespasian, and then his son Titus in the Empire, under both whom the Church had rest, but Titus associating to himself his brother Flavius Domitian in the Government of the Empire; This wicked Monster, first slew his brother, and then raised the second persecution against the Church of Christ.Domitians cha∣racter. His pride was so great, that he commanded himself to be worshiped as God; and that Imaes of gold and silver should be set up for his honour in the Capitoll. His cruelty was unmeasurable. The chiefest Nobles of the Roman Senators, either upon envy, or for their goods,He destroyes Davids seed. he caused to be put to death. Having also heard some rumors of Christs Kingdom, he was afraid, as Herod had been before him; and thereupon commanded all of the linage of David to be sought out and slain; At last two poor Christians that came of Judas, the brother of Christ according to the flesh, were brought before Domitian, and accused to be of the Tribe of Juda, and of the line of David: Then did the Emperour demand of them what stock of money and possessi∣ons they had; To whom they answered, that they two had not above thirty nine Acres of land, out of which they payed Tribute, and re∣lieved themselves by their labour and industry, withal shewing him their hard and brawny hands, by reason of their labour. Then did he ask them of Christ, and of his Kingdom; to whom they answered, that Christs Kingdom was not of this world, but spiritual and celestial; and that he would come at the last day to judge the quick and the dead. Hereupon he despised them as simple and contemptible persons, and so dismissed them. He punished an infinite company of Christians that were famous in the Church, with exile, and loss of their sub∣stance. Under this persecution it was that St. John, the beloved Disci∣ple,St. John put in∣to boiling oyl. Banished into Patmos. was first put into a vessel of boiling oyl, and coming safe without hurt, out of the same, he was then banished into the Isle of Patmos, Anno 97. where he continued till after the death of Domitian, but was
released under Pertinax: At which time he returned to Ephesus, where he lived till he was a hundred and twenty years old. During his abode there, he was requested to repaire to some place not farre off, to order their Ecclesiasticall affairs; and being in a certain City, he beheld in the Congregation a young man, mighty of body,An excellent story f a young man. of a beautifull coun∣tenance, and fervent minde; whereupon calling the chief Bishop unto him, he said, I commend this man unto thee with great diligence, in the witness here of Christ and of the Church. The Bishop having received this charge, and promised his faithfull diligence therein, John spake the like words to him the second time also, after which he returned unto Ephesus. The Bishop having received this young man thus com∣mitted to his charge, brought him home, kept, nourished, instructed and Baptized him; and the young man so profited under him, that at last he was made the Pastor of a Congregation. But having by this means more liberty then before, some of his old companions began to resort unto him; who first drew him forth to sumptuous and riotous banquets; then inticed him to go abroad with them in the nights to rob and steal, and to much other wickedness. And he being of a good wit, and stout courage, ran like an unbridled horse to all manner of disorders and outrage: And associating to himself many loose and dissolute companions, he became their Head and Captain, in com∣mitting all kindes of murther and felonies. Not long after, upon some urgent occasions, St John was again sent for into those parts, where having decided those controversies, and dispatched those busi∣nesses for which he came, meeting with the afore-mentioned Bishop, he required of him the pledge, which before Christ and the Congre∣gation he had committed to his custody. The Bishop herewith ama∣zed, supposing that he meant it of some money committed to him, which yet he had not received, not daring to contradict the Apostle, he thereupon stood mute: Then John perceiving that he was not un∣derstood, said, The young man, and the soul of our brother committed to your custody, I do require. Whereupon the Bishop with many tears said, He is dead: To whom John replyed, How, and by what death? The Bishop answered, He is dead to God, for he is become a wicked and vicious man, and a thief, and now he doth frequent these mountains, with a company of thieves and villains like himself, &c. The Apostle, rending his garments with a great lamentation, said, I left a good keeper of my brothers soul; get me an horse and guide presently; which being done, he went strait to the mountains, and was no sooner come thither, but he was taken by the thieves that watched for their prey, to whom he said, I came hither for this cause, Lead me to your Captain: and so being brought before him, the Captain all armed, looked fiercely upon him, and soon coming to the knowledge of him, he was striken with such shame and confusion, that he began to flie, but the old man followed him as fast as he could, crying, My son why dost thou flie from thy fa∣ther? an armed man from one naked? a young man from an old man? Have pity upon me my son: and feare not, there is yet hope of salvation, I will an∣swer
for thee to Christ, I will die for thee if need be, as Christ died for us, I will give my life for thee; Believe me, Christ hath sent me. He hearing these things, first as in a maze, stood still, lost his courage, cast down his weapons, then trembled, and vvept bitterly, and coming to the old man, he embraced him with many tears, only his right hand he kept hid and covered. Then the Apostle, after he had promised and assured him that he should obtain pardon of our Saviour, falling upon his knees, he prayed for him, kissing his murthering right hand, vvhich for shame he durst not shevv before, and then brought him back to the Congregation, where he fasted and prayed continually for him, comforted and confirmed him with many Scripture-promises, and left him not, till he had restored him to his former Office, and made him a great example of Gods Mercy to repentant sinners. Simon crucifi∣ed.In this Persecution Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem, after many torments, was crucified to death: and an innumerable company of Mar∣tyrs suffered for the like testimony of the Lord Jesus, amongst whom vvas Flavia,Flavia banish∣ed. the daughter of Flavius Clemens, a Roman Senator and Consul, vvho amongst many others vvas banished into the Isle of Pontia. A cruel death.This Lavv also vvas made by the Roman Senate, Non debere demitti Christianos, qui semel ad tribunal venissent, nisi propositum mutent, that Christians should not be let go, that vvere once brought before the Tribunal seat, except they renounced their Religion. Yea, that vvhich stirred up the Emperor more to persecute the Christians, vvere those abominable lies, and malicious slanders raised against them by the Heathen Idolaters, as that they were a people that lived in incest, that in their nightly meetings,Christians slandered. putting out the Candles, they ran together in all filthy manner; that they killed their ovvn Children, and used to eat mans flesh: that they vvere seditious and rebellious, and refused to svvear by the fortune of Caesar;Charged with Sedition and Rebellion; and the causers of all publick Calamities. Christianos ad Leones. and vvould not adore his Image in the Market place, and in brief, that they were pernicious to the Roman Empire: yea, whensoever any thing happened amiss to the City of Rome, or to her Provinces, either by famine, pestilence, Earth-quakes, Wars, unseasonable Weather, &c. it vvas presently imputed to the Christians. Besides, also there vvere a number of vvicked Promoters and Accusers, that for lucre's sake, to have the possessions of the Chri∣stians, accused and persecuted them to the death. Also vvhen the Christians vvere brought before the Magistrates, they gave them an Oath,The Oath ex officio. requiring them to declare the truth, vvhether they vvere Christi∣ans or no, and if they confessed; then by the Lavv, sentence of death vvas passed against them. Yet vvere not these Tyrants content by death to destroy their bodies, but the kinds of death vvere divers and horrible; vvhatsoever the cruelty of mans vvitty and vvicked invention could de∣vise for the punishment of mans body, vvas practised against the poor Saints of God;Variety of tor∣ments. Imprisonments, Stripes, Scourgings, Rackings, Tear∣ings, Stoning▪ plates of iron burning hot, laid to the tenderest parts of their bodies, deep Dungeons, strangling in Prisons, the teeth of
wild Beasts, Gridirons, Gibbits and Gallows, Tossings upon the Horns of Bulls, &c. And when they were thus killed, their bodies were laid on heaps, and dogs left to keep them, that none might come to bury them;Burial denied them. neither could any prayer or entreaty obtain leave that they might be interred. Notwithstanding all which horrible punish∣ments, the Church of Christ daily increased, being deeply rooted in the Doctrine of the Apostles and Apostolical men, and watered plen∣teously with the blood of the Saints. Also in this persecution, Protasius and Gervasius were martyred at Millaine. Timothy was stoned to death at Ephesus,Protasius. Ger∣vasius. Timothy and Dionysius mar∣tyred. by the Worship∣pers of Diana. Dionysius Areopagita was slain with the sword at Paris, &c. CHAP. IX. The third Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 108. DOmitian being slain by some of his own servants, Nerva succeeded him, who was a good and mercifull man, stayed the persecution against the Christians, called them home from banishment, so that the Church enjoyed peace in his time, but he reigning only thirteen moneths, Trajan a Spaniard succeeded him,Trajans perse∣cution. who in the tenth year of his reign, raised the third persecution against the Church, which was far more cruel then either of the former; inasmuch as Plinius Secun∣dus, an heathen Philosopher,Pliny writes in the Christians behalf. seeing the lamentabte slaughter of the Christians, moved with pity, he wrote to Trajan concerning the same; that whereas there were many thousands of them daily put to death, there were none of them which did any thing contrary to the Roman Laws worthy of persecution, saving that they used to gather together in the morning before day, and sing Hymns to a certain God that they vvorshipped, called Christ; in other things they were godly and honest; and for proof hereof, saith he, I caused two Maidens to be laid on the rack, and with torments to be examined about the same; but finding nothing in them but only lewd and immoderate superstition, I resolved to surcease further en∣quiry, till I received further instructions from you about this matter.Christianity accounted su∣perstition. &c. Trajan having read this Epistle; returned answer, that it was his mind, that the Christians should not be sought after, but if they were brought and convicted, that then they should suffer execution:Tertullians speech. whereof Ter∣tullian, speaking, saith, O confused sentence! He would not have them sought for as men innocent, and yet would have them punished as men guilty: Now though upon this act, the rage of the persecution was somewhat aba∣ted, yet many evil disposed men, and cruel Officers there were, vvhich ceased not to afflict the Christians in divers Provinces: especially if any
commotion was raised in any of them, then presently were the Chri∣stians blamed for it. Trajan sent a command to Jerusalem, that who∣soever could be found out of the stock of David, should be enquired for,The stock of David sought for. and put to death; hereupon some Sectaries of the Jewish nation, accused Simeon the son of Cleophas, to come of Davids line, and that he was a Christian: of which Accusers it happened, that some of them were taken to be of the stock of David, and so most righteously were executed themselves who sought the destruction of others. In this Persecution suffered Phocas Bishop of Pontus,A just reward. whom Trajan, because he would not sacrifice to Neptune,Phocus Martyr. caused to be cast into a hot lime-kilne, and afterwards to be put into a scalding bath, where he ended his life in the cause of Christ: As also Sulpitius Servilianus, and Nereus, and Achilleus suffered Martyrdom in Rome,Sulpitius, Ne∣reus and A∣chilleus Mar∣tyrs. Sagaris in Asia; Then also Ignatius Bishop of Antioch was apprehended and sent to Rome, where he was devoured of wild beasts, and besides these, many thousand others. Adrian Emp. Alexander, Herenes and Quirius mar∣tyrs. Zenon.After the death of Trajan, succeeded Hadrian, who continued this third persecution against the Chrstians; at which time, Alexander Bishop of Rome, with his two Deacons, as also Hermes and Quirinus with their families suffered Martyrdom. Also about this time, Zenon a noble man of Rome, with above ten thousand more were slain for Christs sake.Ten thousand crucified. Also in mount Ararath were ten thousand Christians crucified, crowned with thorns, and thrust into the side with sharp darts, after the example of the Lords passion. Eustachius, a noble Cap∣tain,Eustachius Martyr. who Trajan had sent out to war against the Barbarians; after (through Gods Mercy) he had valiantly subdued his enemies, was re∣turning home with victory: Hadrian for joy, went to meet him, and to bring him home with triumph: but by the way, he would needs sacri∣fice to Apollo, for the victory obtained, willing Eustachius to do the same with him; but when by no means he could be perswaded thereto, com∣ing to Rome, he with his wife and Children suffered Martyrdom; by the command of the ingratefull Emperour.Monstrous in∣gratitude. Faustinus and Jobita Mar∣tyrs. Also Faustinus and Jobita, Citizen of Brixia, were martyred with many torments; which caused one Calocerius, beholding their admirable patience in the midst of their cruel torments, to cry out, Vere magnus est Deus Christianorum, Verily great is the God of the Christians; whereupon being apprehend∣ed,More. he was made Partaker of their Martyrdom. Also Eleutherius Bi∣shop in Apulia,Eleutherius, Anthea, and Symphorissa Martyrs. was beheaded, together with his mother Anthea. Also Symphorissa, a godly Matron, was often cruelly scourged, afterwards hanged up by the hairs of her head: at last had a huge stone fastened to her, and so thrown into the river; after which her seven Children in like manner,With her seven sons. with sundry and divers kinds of torments were all of them martyred by the Tyrant. These seven Children of Symphorissa, were fastened to seven stakes, then racked up with a pully, & afterwards thrust thorow; Crescens in the neck, Julianus in the breast, Nemesius in the heart, Primitivus in the navil, Justinus was cut in every joint of his body, Statteus run thorow with spears, and Eugenius
cut asunder from the breast to the lower parts, and then all of them were cast into a deep pit; Adrian being at Athens, sacrificed to the Idols after the manner of the Grecians, and gave free leave to whomsoever vvould, to persecute the Christians, which should refuse it: whereupon Quadratus bishop of Athens, a man of admirable zeal, and famous for learning,Quadratus his Apology for the Christians, and Aristides, and Serenus. exhibited to the Emperour a learned and excellent Apolo∣gy in defence of the Christian Religion: The like also did Aristides, an excellent Philosopher in Athens. There was also one Serenus Granius, a man of great nobility, who writ pithy and grave Letters to Hadrian; shewing that it was neither agreeable to right nor reason, that the blood of innocents should be given up to the rage and fury of the people, and be condemned for no other fault but for their opinions; Here∣upon the Emperour became more favourable to them, writing also in their behalf to Minutius Fundanus, Proconsul of Asia, that if they had no other crime objected against them, but their Religion, they should not be put to death. Yet notwithstanding all this, the rage of the heathen multitude did not disquiet and persecute the people of God; imputing to them whatsoever mischief and judgements befell them; yea, they invented against them all manner of Contumelies,Christians falsly accused. and false crimes to accuse them of, whereby many in sundry places vvere mo∣lested and put death. After Hadrian, succeeded Antoninus Pius,An. Pi. Emp. shews them a∣vour. vvho being informed of the cruel sufferings of the Christians, vvrote this Letter to his Com∣mons of Asia, forbidding them to persecute the Christians any fur∣ther, which Epistle he thus concludes, If any hereafter shall offer any vexation and trouble to Christians, having no other cause, but because they are such, let him that is appeached, be released, and freely discharged,An excellent Law. and let his Accuser sustain the punishment, &c. By this means then the tempest of persecution began in those days to be appeased, through the mercifull providence of God; who would not have his Church to be utterly overthrown and rooted up thereby: The rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the lot of the righteous, Psalm 125.3.
Here place the second Figure.
CHAP. X. The fourth Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 162. AFter the death of that quiet and mild Prince Antoninus Pius, his son M. Antoninus Verus succeeded in the Empire, a stern and severe man by nature, who raised the fourth persecution against the Chri∣stians; wherein a great number of them, who truly professed Christ, suffered most cruel punishments and torments especially in A∣sia and France, amongst whom was Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, who was burnt at a stake at Smyrna, together with twelve others that came from Philadelphia. Also Germanicus a young man,Polycarp mar∣tyr. did most constantly per∣severe in the Doctrine of Christ, whom when the Proconsul of Asia desired to remember his age, and to favour himself,Germanacus. Constancy. he would by no flatteries be with-drawn from his stedfastness, but remaining constant, was thrown to the wild beasts, whom he allured and provoked to come upon him, and devour him, that he might be the more spee∣dily delivered out of this wretched life. Also in this persecution suf∣fered Metrodorus, a Minister, who was consumned by fire;Metrodorus. Pionus Apol∣lggy and Mar∣tyrdom. and Pionius who after much boldness of speech, with his Apologies exhibited, and his Sermons made to the people in defence of the Christian faith, and after much relieving and comforting such as were in prisons and distress, at last was put to cruel torments, and then burned in the fire, Also at Pargamopolis in Asia, suffered Carpus, Papilus, and Agathonica, a woman, who after their most constant and worthy confessions,Carpus, Papilus and Agathonica. were put to death. At Rome, Felicitas with her seven Children were martyred, whereof her eldest son, after he vvas whipt and grievously scourged with rods,Felicitas and her seven chil∣dren. vvas prest to death with leaden weights: the two next had their brains beaten out with mawls: the fourth was thrown down head-long from an high place, and brake his neck: the three youngest were beheaded; and lastly, the mother was slain with the svvord. Also Justin Martyr, a man that excelled in learning and Philosophy, and a great Defender of the Christian Religion, who had deliver∣ed to the Emperor and Senate,Justin Matyas Apology and Martyrdom. an Apology in defence of the Chri∣stians, suffered Martyrdom in this persecution. There was in Egypt a certain woman married to a husband that was given much unto laciviousness, whereunto she her self also had been formerly addicted; but being instructed in the Christian Reli∣gion, she became a chast and godly Matron, and endeavoured to per∣swade her husband also thereunto: But he continuing in his filthy life, she resolved to be divorced from him; yet at the request of her friends: she forbore, to try if by any means he would be reclaimed: But he going to Alexandria, and living more licenciously then before, she
sued out a bill of Divorce, and so was separated from him; then did this malicious wretch accuse her to be a Christian,Malice. which was no lesse then death, whereupon she being in great perill, delivered up a suppli∣cation to the Emperour, craving but so much favour, that she might go and set her family in order, and then she would be ready to answer to all such crimes as should be objected against her: This petition the Emperour granted; Her husband perceiving that he was frustrated of his expectation, went and accused Ptolemaeus (who was her instructer in the faith of Christ) that he was a Christian.Ptolemaus. Ptolemaeus loving the truth, and not thinking it good to hide his profession, confessed it: Therefore being brought before Vrbicius the Judge, he was by him condemned to die;Lucius. Whereupon one Lucius a Christian, standing by, said to the Judge, What reason, I pray you, or equity is this, that this man, who is neither Adulterer, Fornicator, Murtherer, nor Felon, nor guilty of any other crime, should he condemned for his name, and profession of Christianity? These manner of Judgements (O Urbicius) are neither ho∣nourable for the Emperor, nor for the estate of the Senate of Rome: Then said Vrbicius,Note. Methinks thou also art a Christian, which Lucius con∣fessing, the Judge without any further delay, commanded him also to be had away to the place of Execution; to whom he answered, I thank you with all my heart, that hereby you release me from most wicked governors, and send me to my good and loving Father, who is God of gods, and King of Kings. Also a third man coming to the Judge, and using the like liberty of speech, had the like sentence of death, and was crown∣ed with the same crown of Martyrdom. Concordus.Also one Concordus, a Minister of the City of Spoleto, because he re∣fused to sacrifice to Jupiter, and did spit in the face of the Idol, after divers cruel torments sustained, was beheaded with the sword. Many others also suffered Martyrdom at the same time, because they sharply reprehended Idolatry, and refused at the Emperors com∣mand, to offer sacrifice to Idols, for which they were beheaded. Persecutions in France.Many Christians also suffered in France, the History of whom was written, and set forth by their own Churches, and directed to the bre∣thren of Asia and Phrygia; wherein they write, that Satans Instru∣ments were so maliciously active against them, that they could not be safe any where, neither in the Markets, Shops, nor their own Houses. Yea, they were forbidden to come into any publick places: But God in Mercy took out of the Tyrants hands,Gods Provi∣dence. such as were weak amongst the Christians, and sets up others, as Pillars, who are able to abide all sufferings, and valiantly to withstand the enemy, notwithstanding all the opprobrious punishments they could devise;Patience. yea, by their admira∣ble patience they shewed that all the sufferings of this present time were not to be compared with the glory which they expected to be re∣vealed in them. First they suffered whatsoever the frantick multitude could inflict upon them,Divers tor∣ments▪ by railings, scourgings, drawings and halings, flinging of stones, imprisonment, &c. Then were they led to the Mar∣ket-place, vvhere the Captain and other City-Officers, commanded
them to prison, after they had made confessions of their faith pub∣lickly, till the return of the chief Governor: Who being come back, he used all extremity that possibly he could against them. At which time a noble young man, called Vetius Epagathus,Vetius Epaga∣thus his zeal. being replenished with fervent zeal and love, both to God and the brethren, could not suf∣fer the wicked Judgement which vvas given against the brethren: Whereupon he desired the Governor to hear vvhat he had to say in their behalf, in whom vvas no impiety found: But the people cryed out against him, and the Justice denied his lawfull request, withal, asking him vvhether he himself vvere not a Christian? unto which, vvith a loud and bold voice he answered, I am a Christian; And thus was he received into the fellowship of the Martyrs▪ By this worthy ex∣ample the rest of the brethren were more animated to suffer Martyr∣dom: Yet some there were as yet weak, and not so well prepared for sufferings, of vvhom there vvere ten that fainted, vvhich filled the rest vvith great heaviness.Humane frailty. Their example also caused such as vvere not yet apprehended to be less forward in adventuring themselves; yet every day were some apprehended, which were worthy to fill up the number of them which vvere fallen. Against the Christians vvere their heathen servants examined, and being threatned vvith extream torments, they vvere enforced to con∣fess against their Masters,Christians slandered. that at their meetings they kept the feasts of Thiestes, and incest of Oedipus, and many other such like crimes, not fit to be named, which things being bruted abroad, every one began to exercise their cruelty against the people of God; yea, their fami∣liar friends disdained and vvaxed mad against them. Then vvas all manner of cruelty used against them, especially against Sanctus, Deacon of the Church of Viena, and Maturus, but a little before baptized, but yet a worthy souldier of Christ.Sanctus. Maturus. Attalus. Blandina. Also against Attalus and Blandina, concerning whom vve vvere all afraid, especi∣ally her Mistress, lest through vveakness she should not stand to her profession; but, through Gods Grace, she vvas so admirably replenished vvith strength and boldness,A miracle of Mercy. that they vvhich had the tormenting of her by course from morning till night, for very vveariness gave over, and fell dovvn, confessing that they could do no more against her, mar∣velling that she yet lived, having her body so torn and rent as it vvas:Tormentors, wearied. professing that any one of those torments alone had been sufficient to bereave her of life. But this blessed Virgin became stronger and stronger in her sufferings, and as often as she spake these vvords, I am a Christian, and have not committed any evil, she was vvonderfully comforted.Note. Sanctus also, who in his torments had endured more pains then the nature of man vvas able to stand under, when the wicked▪ thought to have heard him utter some blasphemous vvords, through the intolle∣rableness of his pains, abode notwithstanding so constant in mind, that they could neither extort out of him▪ vvhat Countryman he vvas, where brought up, what his name was, vvhether a bond-man, or a free,
but to every question he answered,Admirable constancy. I am a Christian: When therefore they had used all other kinds of torments, they clapped plates of brass red hot to the tenderest parts of his body, wherewith, though he was grievouslly scorched, yet shrunk he not for the matter; yea though his body was all drawn together with the scorching fire, so that he re∣tained not the proper shape of a man, yet did he draw comfort from Christ, so as to rejoyce in these tribulations. After a while they brought him again to new torments, hoping thereby to enforce him to a recan∣tation; at which time his body was so sore and swoln, that he could not suffer a man to touch him: but contrary to their expectation, his body in these latter torments was so suppled and restored, that he re∣covered the former shape and use of his members,A miracle of Mercy. so that these second torments, through the Grace of Christ, proved a soveraign medi∣cine to him. Satan also now thinking that he was sure of Biblides, who was one of those that had denied Christ, and hoping to prevail with her, a weak and feeble woman in the faith,Biblides. to damn her soul by blasphe∣ming God, brought her to the place of Execution; but she in the midst of her torments returning to her self, and by those pains remem∣bring the torments of hell, said to her tormentors, How should we Chri∣stians eat our own Children (as you report of us) when we eat not the blood of any beast? and so confessing her self to be a Christian, she was mar∣tyred with the rest. Yet here did not the rage of the enemies cease; for when the Chri∣stians were cast into prison, they were shut up in dark and ugly dun∣geons, and drawn by the feet in a rack, even unto the fifth hole: some of them were strangled and killed in the prisons; others remaining in pri∣son, destitute of all humane help, were so strengthned by the Lord, both in body and mind, that they were a great comfort to the rest: The younger sort, whose bodies had not yet felt the lash of the whip, were not able to endure the sharpness of their imprisonment, but died under the same. Photinus, Deacon to the Bishop of Lyons, about eighty nine years old,Photinus. weak and feeble, by reason of age and sickness, yet of a lively spirit and courage, by reason of the great desire which he had of mar∣tyrdom, being brought to the Judgement seat, and being there de∣manded of the chief Ruler, What was the Christian-mans God? he an∣swered, If thou beest worthy to know, thou shalt know: the Ruler being en∣raged herewith, caused him to be extreamly beaten: also such as stood next him, did him all the despight they could, beating and kick∣ing him without any regard to his reverend gray hairs; others that were further off, threw at him vvhatsoever came next hand; and thus whilst he vvas gasping after life, they threw him into prison, where af∣ter tvvo days he died. They also vvhich in the first pesecution had denied Christ, vvere apprehended, cast into prison, and made partakers of the others affli∣ctions; yea, they had twice so much punishment as the other had: and
whereas they which had been constant,Danger of A∣postacy. were refreshed with the joy of Martyrdom, with the hope of Gods Promises, and with the love of Christ, and his holy Spirit; the other Apostates being full of guilt, went out to death, with dejected and ill-favoured countenances, and were filled with shame, so that the very Gentiles reviled them as de∣generous persons, and worthy to suffer as evil-doers: whereas in the mean time, they which had remained constant, went to their Martyr∣dom with cheerfull countenances, adorned with glory and grace: yea, their very bonds wherewith they were tyed, set them out as brides when they are decked in gorgious aray: and withal they had such a re∣dolent smell, as if they had been anointed with some sweet balm: by which sights the rest were confirmed, and being apprehended, confes∣sed Christ without any staggering. The Martyrdom of the Saints was of divers kinds, as the offering to God a Garland decked with sundry kinds of colours and flowers. Maturus, Attalus, and Blandina, were again brought forth to the publick Scaffold, where Maturus and Sanctus suffered again all manner of torments, as if they had suffered nothing before: They were scour∣ged, torn of wild beasts, set in red hot iron chairs, in which their bo∣dies were dried as on a grid-iron, and their tormentors raged more and more against them, labouring to overcome the patience of the Saints: yet could they get nothing out of Sanctus's mouth, but that he was a Christian: These holy men having been thus made a spectacle all the day to the people, were at last slain. Then Blandina being fastened to a stake, was cast to the wild beasts, but they, as being more mercifull then men, would not come near her: then they cast her again into pri∣son, where she, though a weak woman, yet armed with invincible courage by Christ, mightily encouraged her brethren. Then was Attalus brought forth with this inscription, This is Attalus the Christi∣an, against whom the people were much enraged, but the Gover∣nour understanding that he was a Roman, remanded him to prison till he understood the Emperors pleasure: Many that had before denied Christ, through Gods Grace, recovered themselves again,Recovery after fals. and tasted the sweetness of him that desired not the death of a sinner, &c. and of their own accord came to the Judgement seat to be examined; then did the Judge, when a great concourse of people was met together, snd for all the Christian prisoners, and as many as were Free-men of Rome he beheaded, the Residue he gave to be devoured of wild beasts, amongst whom also they which had before denied Christ, joyfully suffered Martyrdom. Whilst the Christians were examining at the Bar, one Alexander, a Physitian, by signs, and becks,Alexander. perswaded those which were examined, boldly to confess Christ, which the people tak∣ing notice of, accused him to the Judge: who asking him what Religi∣on he was of, he answered, I am a Christian: whereupon he was imme∣diatly adjudged to be devoured of the beasts. The next day was Attalus and this Alexander brought forth to the Scafold, where they had all manner of torments inflicted upon them,
and having endured the greatest agony that possibly they could be put to, they were at the last slain: Alexander never so much as sighed, but prayed to, and praised God all the while he was tormented: Attalus, when he was set in the iron chair, and the frying savour of his burning body began to smell,Note. said to the people, Behold! this which you do is to eat mans flesh: for we neither eat men, nor commit any other wickedness: And being demanded what was the name of their God, he said, Our God hath no such name as men have;Blasphemy▪ then said they, Let us see whether your God can help you, and take you out of our hands. Then was Blandina again brought forth,Ponticus a boy of fifteen years old. and with her one Ponticus, a youth of fifteen years old, who defying their Idols, and constantly cleaving to Christ, were put to all the torments their enraged enemies could devise: the youth ha∣ving suffered all kinds of torments, at last gave up the ghost: Blandina was first pitifully whipped, then thrown to the wild beasts, then tor∣mented upon the grid-iron, then put into a net, and thrown to the wild Bull, and when she was tossed, gored, and wounded with his horns, she was at last slain, but was so filled with ravishing joyes of the H. Ghost, that she felt no pain during all her torments.Joy unspeak∣able. Such as were strangled in prisons, were afterwards thrown to dogs, and had keepers both day and night set to watch them, lest their bones and members should be buried. In the mean time the Gentiles extolled their Idols, mocking and flouting the Christians, saying, Where is your God that you so much boast of?Blasphemy. and what helpeth this your religion for which you give your lives? The bodies of the Martyrs were thus made a gazing-stock for six days in the open streets, and then were burned, and their Ashes thrown into the River. Justin Martyr. Alcibiades.Also in this persecution Justin Martyr, through the malice of Cre∣scens the Philosopher, suffered Martyrdom. Also one Alcibiades a man of a strict life, eating only bread and water, was cast into the prison where Attalus, and other Christians lay; and Alcibiades con∣tinued the same strict diet in prison: but it was from God revealed to Attalus, that he did not well in refusing the other good Creatures of God, and that it was scandalous to his brethren: whereupon he re∣formed, and ate of all things boldly with thanksgiving. About this time Clandius Apolinaris, Bishop of Hieropolis, and Melito Bishop of Sardis,Clau. Apolina∣ris and Melito Apologize for the Christians. eloquent and learned men, delivered to the Empe∣rour excellent Apologies written by them in defence of the Christian Religion, whereby they prevailed with him somewhat to stay the rage of his Persecution: which also was furthered upon this occasion: Marcus Aurelius, and Marcus Antonius the Emperors, going to War against the Quades, Vandals, Sarmates and Germans; their Army, by the mul∣titude of their enemies, was coopt up in some strait, dry and hot pla∣ces, where the souldiers having been destitute of water for five days together, were all like to perish. Hereupon a Legion of Christian souldiers being in the Army,The thun∣dring Legion. with-drew apart from the rest, and falling prostrate upon the earth, by ardent prayer, obtained of God a double relief: for the Lord sent the Romans such showers, as satisfied their
necessities, and flashed such lightnings against their enemies, that thereby they were discomfited and put to flight. This Miracle so plea∣sed the Emperor, that ever after he used the Christians gentler, wri∣ting also to divers Rulers, commanding them to give thanks to the Christians, as for their victory, so for the preservation of himself, and his Army. His letters was to this purpose, That whereas himself and Army, were invironed with nine hundred seventy five thousand fighting men, and were like to perish for want of water, the Christi∣ans praying to a God, that he knew not, obtained relief for him, and by hail and lightning, Destruction to his enemies; whereby he per∣ceived their God to be a mighty God. Hereupon he decreed that none should be punished for the Christian Profession, being guilty of no other crime,A good Edict. and that the Accusers of the Christians should be burned alive: Which degree he commanded to be recorded in the Senate-house, proclaimed publickly in the Court of Trajan, and sent diligent∣ly into all his Provinces, that all might take notice of the same. Yet not long after, Apollonius a noble Senator of Rome, was accused by his own servant before the Judge, for being a Christian;Apollonius. The Ac∣cuser, according to the the Decree, had his legs broken, and was put to death.A just reward of treachery. But Apollonius having rendred an accocnt of his faith before the Senate, was condemned to be beheaded, notwithstanding the De∣cree, because there was an old Law, that any that was arraigned for professing Christ, without a recantation, could not be released. Commodus the Emperor upon his birth-day, calling the people of Rome together, in a great royalty, clothed in his Lions skin, sacrificed to Hercules causing it to be proclaimed, that Hercules was the Patron of the City: whereupon Vincentius, Eusebius, Peregrinus and Pontentianus, learn∣ed men, and Pastors of the Congregations, being stirred up with zeal,Vincentius, Eu∣sebius, Peregri∣nus and Poten∣tianus. Zeal, went about from place to place, converting the Gentiles to the faith of Christ, and hearing of the madness of the Emperor and people, they reproved that Idolatrous blindness, exhorting them to believe in the true and living God, and that forsaking the worshipping of devils, they should honour God alone. The Emperor hearing thereof, caused them to be apprehended, and required them to sacrifice to Hercules, which they refusing to do, he caused them to be grievously tormented, and at last to be pressed to death with weights of lead. Julius a Roman Senator,Julius. having been converted by the preaching of these men, afterwards sent for Ruffinus a Minister, by whom him∣self and all his family were baptized, and burning with holy zeal,Zeal. he made an open profession of the faith of Christ, praying that he might not only believe, but that he might have the honour to suffer for his Name. The Emperor hearing that he was become a Christian, sent for him, to whom he said, O Julius, What madness possesseth thee thus to forsake the Religion of thy Fore-fathers, to embrace a new and fond kind of Religion of the Christians? Hereupon Julius made before him a free and open profession of his faith, affirming that the Roman gods were false gods, and that they that worshipped them, should be punished
with everlasting damnation. The Emperor hearing that he despised his gods, was much enraged, and committed him to Vitellius, a cruel and fierce man, to compell him, either to sacrifice to Hercules, or to slay him: But Julius nothing discouraged, and perswading Vitellius to ac∣knowledge, and serve the true God, was at his command with Cud∣gels beaten to death. CHAP. XI. The Fifth Primitive Persecution which began An. Christi, 205. COmmodus being dead, Pertinax succeeded in the Empire, under whom the Church enjoyed peace, and flourished exceedingly, so that many of the Nobles of Rome embraced the true faith, together with their whole housholds. Pertinax being dead, Severus succeeded, and in the first ten years of his reign he was very mild and gentle to the Christians:Severus Empe∣rour. But after∣wards, through sinister suggestions, and malicious accusations; he was so incensed, that by his proclamations he commanded that no Christians should any more be suffered to live. Hereby great pe∣secution was stirred up on every side, and an infinite number of Mar∣tyrs were slain. The crimes objected against the Christians were sedi∣tion,Christians charged with sedition and rebellion, &c. rebellion against the Emperor, Sacriledge, Murthering of Infants, incestuous pollutions, eating raw flesh, worshipping the head of an Asse, &c. but especially that they would not worship their Idols. The Places where this persecution most raged, were Africa, Capadocia, Alexandria and Carthage. The number of them that suffered, was innumerable, amongst whom was Leonides the father of Origen; with whom Origen his son,Leonides father of Origen. being but seventeen years old, would have suf∣fered, (such a fervent desire he had of Martyrdom) had not his mo∣ther privily in the night conveyed away his shirt and cloths, where∣upon,Zeal. more for shame to be seen, then for fear to die, he was constrain∣ed to remain at home. Origen was afterwards a Professor of Divinity at Alexandria, and out of his school,Plutarch. Serenus. Potamiena. Marcella and Rhais. one Plutarch suffered Martyrdom, as also Serenus his brother, who was burned, and another Serenus who was beheaded. Potamiena also, who was tormented with boiling pitch poured upon her, and afterwards with her mother Marcella, and Rhais burned in the fire. This Potamiena being a beautifull Virgin, was committed to Captain Basilides to see execution done upon her, and as he led her to the place of Execution, he repressed the rage of the multitude, who followed her with many railings and revilings, whereupon, to requite his kindness, she prayed to the Lord for his Conversion to the true faith, and so with admirable patience she suffered Martyrdom.
Shortly after Basilides being required to give an oath in the behalf of his fellow-souldiers, he denied the same,Bsilides his strange con∣version. plainly affirming that he vvas a Christian, and therefore he could not swear by the Idols, &c. They vvhich heard him, thought that he jested at first, but when he had constantly affirmed it, they had him before the Judge, vvho commit∣ted him to vvard: the Christians vvondring at it, vvent to him, and en∣quiring the cause of his Conversion, he told them that Potamiena had prayed for him, and so he savv a Crovvn put upon his head, adding that it should not be long before he received it, and accordingly the next day he was beheaded. As many suffered death in this persecution, so others there were, who through Gods providence, suffered great torments; and yet esca∣ped vvith life, of whom there vvas one Alexander, vvho for his constant confession, and torments suffered, vvas afterwards made Bishop of Je∣rusalem. Also Narcissus,Narcissus. False Witnes∣ses plagued by God. against vvhom three vvicked persons conspired to accuse him, binding their accusations vvith oaths and curses, one vvishing to be destroyed vvith fire, if it vvere not true; another to be consumed vvith a grievous disease; the other to lose both his eyes; Narcissus being unable to vvith-stand so vvicked an accusation, retired himself into a desert: In the mean time Gods vengeance follovved these perjured Wretches: for the first, by a small spark of fire, vvas himself vvith all his family, and goods burned: the second vvas taken vvith a grievous sickness vvhich tormented him from the top to the toe, where∣of he died: the third, being vvarned by these Judgements, confessed his fault, but by reason of his abundant sorrovv and vveeping, he lost both his eyes: Narcissus being hereby cleared from their false accusation, returned home, and vvas received into his Congregation again. Also one Andoclus vvas sent by Polycarp into France, vvho because he spread there the Doctrine of Christ,Andoclus. vvas apprehended by the command of Severus, and first beaten vvith staves and bats, and aftervvards behead∣ed. Asclepiades also, aftervvards Bishop of Antioch,Asclepiades. suffered much in this Persecution. Then did Irenaeus, and many others vvith him suffer Martyrdom; and shortly after Tertullian also. Perpetua and Felicitas,Irenaeus. Tertullian. Perpetua. Felicitas. Revocatus. Satyrus. Secundulus. tvvo godly vvomen, vvith Revocatus their brother, and Satyrus, vvere throvvn to the vvild beasts, and devoured by them. Saturninus vvas beheaded: Secundulus cast into prison, where he died: all these suffered Martyr∣dom at Carthage. Also Zepherinus, and after him Urbanus, both Bishops of Rome, vvere martyred in this Persecution:Zepherinus. Urbanus. This Urbanus by preaching and holiness of life, converted many heathens unto Christ; amongst vvhom vvere Tiburtius and Valerianus, tvvo noble men of Rome, vvho both suf∣fered Martyrdom: Also Cecilia a Virgin, vvho vvas espoused to Valerian▪ vvas apprehended & carried to the Idols to offer sacrifice,Tiburtius. Valerianus. Cecilia. vvhich she refusing to do, should have been carried to the Judge to receive the sentence of condemnation; but the Serjeants and Officers beholding her excellent beauty and prudent behaviour, began vvith many per∣svvasions to solicit her to favour her self, &c. but she so replied vvith
wisedom and godly exhortations,A great Con∣version. that by the grace of Almighty God, their hearts began to relent, and at length to yield to that Religion which before they persecuted; which she perceiving, desired leave to go home; and sending for Urbanus the Bishop to her house, he so grounded and established them in the faith of Christ, that about four hundred persons believed, and were baptized; amongst whom was Gor∣dianus a noble man. Afterwards this blessed Martyr was brought before the Judge, by whom she was condemned; then she was enclosed in an hot bath for twenty four hours, yet remaining alive, she was there be∣headed. Agapeus a boy of fifteen years old.At Preneste in Italy was one Agapetus of fifteen years old apprehen∣ded, and because he refused to sacrifice to Idols, he was first scourged with whips, then hanged up by the feet, and had scalding water pou∣red on him, then he was cast to the wild beasts; but because they would not hurt him,Gods judge∣ment on a per∣secutor. he was lastly beheaded. Antiochus that executed these torments on him, suddenly fell down from his judicial seat, crying out that all his bowels burned within him, and so he died mise∣rably. Calepodius, a Minister of Christ in Rome, was first dragged thorow the streets,Calepodius. and after cast into Tyber. Pamachius, a Senator of Rome, with his wife and Children, and other men and women,Pamachius. to the number of forty two, vvere all beheaded in one day, together with another noble man, all whose heads vvere hung up over the gates of the City▪ to deter others from the professi∣on of Christianity.Martina. Also Martina, a Christian Virgin, having suffered many other bitter torments, vvas at last slain vvith the sword. CHAP. XII. The sixth Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 237. THe Emperor Maximinus raised the sixth persecution against the Christians,Maximinus Emperor. especially against the Teachers and Leaders of the Church, thinking that if these Captains were removed out of the way, he should the easilier prevail against the rest. In the time of this Persecution, Origen vvrote his book De Martyrio, vvhich being lost, the names of most that suffered Martyrdom in those times, are buried in oblivion, yet were they very many: Amongst whom Urbanus Bi∣shop of Rome,Urbanus and Philip. and Philippus, one of his Ministers were banished in∣to Sardinia, where they both died. About this time one Natalius that had formerly suffered great per∣secution for the cause of Christ, was seduced by Asclepiodotus and Theodorus,Sectaries dan∣gerous. two Sectaries, to be the Bishop of their Sect, promising to
pay him a hundred and fifty crowns of silver every moneth, and so he joined himself to them;Note. but the Lord in mercy not intending to lose him that had suffered so much for his sake, admonished him by a vision to adjoin himself to the true Church again, which the good man for the present, blinded with lucre and honour, did not regard as he ought to have done: The night after he was scourged by Angels, whereup∣on in the morning, purting on Sack-cloth,Probably it was by the ter∣rors of his own consci∣ence. with much weeping and lamentation, he went to the Christian Congregation, praying them for the tender mercies of Christ, that he might be received into their Communion again; which request was accordingly granted unto him. Hippolitus was drawn thorow the fields with wild horses till he died; Many others were martyred and buried by sixty in a pit. CHAP. XIII. The seventh Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 250. DEcius the Emperor raised this seventh terrible persecution against the Christians,Decius Emp. which was first occasioned by reason of the trea∣sures of the Emperor, which were committed to Fabian the Bishop of Rome, who thereupon, by the command of Decius, was put to death,Fabian Mar∣tyr. and moreover his Proclamations were sent into all quarters, that all which professed the name of Christ, should be slain.A cruel Edict. In the time of this Persecution Origen suffered many and great torments for the cause of Christ, by Rackings, Dungeons, &c. Nicephorus, who writeth of this persecution under Decius, decla∣reth the horribleness of it to be so great, and that so many Martyrs suffered, That, saith, he, it is as easie to number the sands of the sea, as to set down the names of all those whom this persecution did devour. Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem, who was very aged, having go∣verned the Church forty years, was from thence carried to Caesarea,Alexander Martyr. where after a bold and constant confession of his faith, made before the Judge, he was cast into prison, and there died. Babilas Bishop of Antioch also died in prison,Babilus. and forty Virgins were martyred there about that time. And one Peter in the Country of Phrygia, being ap∣prehended by the Proconsul,Peter. suffered most bitter torments for the name of Christ, the like did divers others in Troada. From Babylon divers Christians were led away by Decius into Spain, and there exceu∣ted; the like sufferings had many in Caesarea, Dionysius Alexandrinus, writing of the Martyrs that suffered in Alexandria, saith thus, This Persecution began about a year before the Em∣perors Proclamation came forth, by reason of a wicked South-sayer,A South-sayer stirs up a per∣secution. who com∣ing to the City, stirred up the multitude of heathens against the Christians,
perswading them to uphold their Idolatrous services; wherewith the people being inflamed, obtained full power to prosecute their wicked purposes, con∣ceiving all Religion to consist in the destruction of the Christians. And first of all they fell upon a Minister,Metra Martyr. called Metra, whom they would have enforced to blaspheme Christ; which when he refused, they laid up∣on him with staves and clubs, and with sharp Reeds they pricked his face and eyes; and then, bringing him to the Suburbs, they stoned him to death.Quinta. Then they took an holy woman, called Quinta, and bringing her to the Idol-Temple, would compell her to worship there; which she constantly refusing, they bound her feet, and drew her thorow all the streets upon the hard-stones, whipt her with Whips, dashed her against Mil-stones,The Christian houses plun∣dred. and lastly stoned her to death. Then the en∣raged multitude breaking into the Christians houses, plundred them of all they had; the rest of the lumber they carried into the market-place, and burned it: The Saints in the mean time taking patiently and joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had a more enduring substance in heaven. Then they took an ancient Virgin, called Apollinia, whom they brought forth▪Apollinia leaps into the fire. and dashing all the teeth out of her head, they made a great fire, threatning to cast her into it, unless she would blaspheme and deny Christ; whereupon she, after a little pause, leaped into the fire, and so was burned. Then they took Serapion out of his house, whom they assailed with all kind of torments,Serapion. broke almost all the joynts of his body: and lastly throwing him down from an high loft, killed him. The poor Christians could no where shelter themselves, nor rest day nor night, the multitude crying out, that unless they would blaspheme Christ, they should all be burned. But, through Gods Mercy,Persecutors di∣vided amongst themselves. the miserable wretches at last fell out amongst themselves, turn∣ing their cruelty, formerly exercised against the Christians, upon their own heads, whereby the Church had a little breathing time. The danger of riches.Shortly after came forth the cruel Edict of the Emperor, which so terrified the Christians, that some, especially the rich, partly through fear, and partly by the perswasion of their Neighbours, came to those impure and idolatrous sacrifices:Zeal. Others came boldly to the Altars, declaring publickly, that they were not of that Religion: Of the rest some ran away, others were taken, enduring bands and torments constantly: Others again, after long imprisonment, and sundry tor∣ments,Apostacy. renounced their faith, whilst others more strong in the faith, valiantly endured Martyrdom: Amongst whom was Julianus, a man diseased with the gout, and not able to go, and Cronion, who were laid upon Camels,Julianus Mar∣tyr, and Croni∣on. and there scourged, and at last thrown into the fire, where, with much constancy, they were consumed. As Juli∣anus went to Martyrdom, a certain souldier took his part against those which railed upon him; Whereupon the people crying out against him, he was apprehended, and being constant in his profession, was presently beheaded. Macar. Epimchus.Also Macar a Christian Lybian was burned alive. Epimachus and
Alexander, having been long imprisoned,Alexander. Ammonarion. Mercuria. after innumerable pains and torments, with rasors and scourges, were vvith four women, con¦sumed with fire: Ammonarion a Virgin, Mercuria an aged Matron, and Dionysia, a mother of many Children,Dioysia. whom yet she loved not above the Lord, these, vvhen they could not be overcome by any torments inflicted on them by the cruel Judge, but rather were unsensible of them all, vvere at last slain vvith the svvord. Also three Egyptians, and a youth of fifteen years old, vvere brought before the Judge, who first began vvith the Child, by fair words,A boy of fif∣teen years old. seeking to entice him, then by torments to constrain him, which not prevailing, when he had tormented the other also he condemned them all to the fire; But the Judge wondring at the wise answers, and grave constancy of the child, dismissed him. Nemesion also an Egyptian,Nemesion. vvas first accused to be a companion of thieves, but being purged from that, he vvas accused of Christianity, tormented and scourged extreamly, and then amongst other thieves, burnt to death. A certain Christian being examined before the Judge, and through fear being ready to shrink back, there were by,Humane frail∣ty. certain souldiers of the degree of Knights, and an aged man named Theophilus, who were ready to burst for grief, making signs to him,Zeal. by their hands and ge∣stures, to be constant; vvhich being observed by the By-standers, they vvere ready to lay hold of them, but they of their own accord, pressing up to the Judge, professed themselves to be Christians,Courage. which much imboldened the weak Christian that vvas before the tribunal, and ter∣rified the Judge. This being done they departed away, rejoycing for the testimony that they had given of their faith. In other Cities many Christians were torn in pieces by the heathen. Ischirion, a servant to a noble man,Ischirion. vvas commanded by his Master to sacrifice to the Idols, vvhich vvhen he refused, and vvould by no means be perswaded to, his Master took a pike, and ran him thorovv. Multitudes of Christians vvandring in deserts and mountains, vvere devoured by hunger, thirst, cold, sickness, thieves and vvild beasts,The miseries of Christians. Cheremon. amongst vvhom vvas Cheremon, Bishop of the City of Nilus, and his vvife, vvho flying into the mountains of Arabia, vvere never heard of more. Dionysius also saith of himself, I speak the truth before God, and lie not, I having no regard of my own life,Dionysus. and not without the moti∣on of Gods Spirit, did flie,A miracle of Mercy. and avoid the danger of this persecuti∣an: Yea, and before that, when one was sent from the Governor te seek me, I remained three days at home to tarry for him; The messenger in the mean time narrowly sought for me by all ways, fields, floods and corners, where he thought I might hide my self, God striking him with such blindness, that he could not find my house. After these three days,Flight in per∣secution. the Lord God willing and commanding me to flie, and marvellously opening to me the way, I with my Children, and many other brethren, vvent out together, and so escaped. Also Agatha, a godly Virgin of Sicilie, suffered divers and bitter
torments of imprisonment, with beatings, famine, racking, as also rolling naked upon sharp shels, and hot coals, and having her breasts cut off her body. Also forty other Virgins, by sundry kinds of tor∣ments, were put to death about the same time. Decius erecting a Temple at Ephesus, compelled all in the City to offer Sacrifice to Idols, but there were seven Christian souldiers of his own Retinue, who refused, neither could the Emperor, by perswasions or threats,Courage of seven souldiers. induce them to it, yet he gave them respite till his return from the Wars; in the mean time they hid themselves in a cave in the mountain Celius. At the Emperors Return he made great inquisition for them, and at last hearing where they were, he caused the mouth of the cave so to be closed up, that they could not get out, and so they were famished there. There was also one Nicetas, a Christian souldier, whom when the Praetor could not by any torments remove from his stedfastness, he took another course with him,Nicetas his rae chastity. for he brought him into a most fragrant garden, flowing with all manner of pleasures and delights, where he laid him upon a bed of down, softly enwrapped in a net of silk, among the Lillies and Roses, the delicious murmure of the streams, and the sweet whistling of the leaves moved with a gentle wind, and so de∣parted: presently in comes a beautifull strumpet, and useth all the abo∣minable tricks of her impure Art, and whorish villanies, to draw him to commit wickedness with her; whereupon the young man fearing that he should now be conquered by folly, who was Conqueror over fury, bites off a piece of his tongue with his own teeth, and spits it into the face of the whore, and so prevented the hurt of sin by the smart of his wound. At Antioch, Theodora, a godly Virgin, refusing to sacrifice to the Idols,Theodora con∣demned to the Stews. Her strange deliverance. was condemned by the Judge to the Stews, which sentence being executed, there were many wanton young men ready at the door to press into the house where she was, but one of the brethren, called Di∣dymus, putting on a souldiers habit, would have the first admittance, and coming in, he perswaded her to change garments with him, and so she, in the souldiers habit, escaped away, and Didymus was left to the rage, and wondring of the people, when he was found a man: hereupon he was presented to the President, to whom he presently confessed the whole matter, professing himself to be a Christian, and so was condem∣ned; which Theodora hearing of, thinking to excuse him, she came, and presented her self to the Judge, as the guilty party, desiring that she might be condemned, and the other excused: but the cruell Judge, neither considering the vertue of the persons,Cruelty. nor the innocency of the cause, most inhumanely condemned them both, first to be beheaded, and then burnt, which was accordingly executed. Agathon, a man at arms in Alexandria, rebuking some lewd per∣sons who scornfully used the dead bodies of the Christians,Agathon. was ac∣cused to the Judge, and lost his head. In Troada, two Christians being delivered by the Proconsul to the
people, were first scourged, then drawn out of the City, and there tro∣den to death. Two Ministers with a Deacon were martyred in Rome,Two Mini∣sters. and two noble men were brought and accused to Decius for burying the dead bodies of the Christians, and being by him commanded to sacri∣fice to the Idols, and they refusing, he caused them to be cast to the wild beasts, but when they would not touch them, they were beheaded with the sword. Also Secundianus was accused to be a Christian, which he affirming, was commanded to prison;Secundianus. Zeal. by the way two Christians cryed to the souldiers, asking them, whether they carried the innocent man, where∣upon being apprehended and examined, they confessed themselves to be Christians, and were condemned; first they were beaten with cud∣gels, then hung up, and tormented with the gibbet, having fire set to their sides, & lastly were beheaded: But some of their tormentors were taken with evil spirits; others of them fell down suddenly, and died.Gods Judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. But the number of Martyrs of all ranks that suffered in this per∣secution was so great, that it is impossible to set them down all; Bi∣shops, Ministers, Deacons, &c. young, old, men, women, &c. Yet amongst this great number, some there were that fell away, as Serapion an old man, that for a long time had lived a sincere and godly life, who afterwards repenting of his Apostacy,Serapions Apo∣stacy, desired to be re∣admitted into the Church, but that was not granted: Shortly after he fell sick, and in it having remained dumb,and Recovery. and bereaved of his senses for twenty four hours, the day after, he began a little to recover, and calling his Nephew to him, he said, How long, how long do you detain me here? make haste that I may be absolved: Call me hither some of the Mini∣sters, &c. and so being absolved, he presently after died. In Troada, Nicomachus being grievously tormented, cryed out, I am no Christian; and so being let down from the Engine, he had no sooner sa∣crificed to the Idols, but being possessed by the devil, he was thrown on the ground, where he bit off his own tongue, and immediately after died; Many others which shewed the like cowardise,Danger of A∣postacy. were taken and tormented with wicked spirits: One was struck dumb: A maid taken with a wicked spirit, tore out her own tongue, and died with grievous torments in her belly, and inward parts: But though some did thus fall away, yet others there were, whom neither fear,Constancy. nor pain could remove from their stedfastness, but they continued glorious Martyrs to the end. Cyprian relates a story of one of his fellow-Ministers, who in the midst of his torments began to faint, being greatly afraid of death, and desired to be released:A Vision. at which time there appeared to him a young man of admirable beauty, and so bright, that mans mortal eye could scarce endure to behold him, who angerly said to him, Pati timetis, exire non vultis, quid faciam vobis? To suffer you dare not, to go out you will not, what would you have me do unto you?The begin∣ning of the Novatian schism. In this Persecution there sprung up the Novatian Schism, which made a great disturbance in the Church. This Novatus being a Minister under Cyprian in Carthage, by stirring up discord and factions, bred
much trouble to the Church, seeking to withdraw certain of the bre∣thren from the Bishop: And afterwards Novatus going to Rome, set up himself as a Bishop,Pride the cause of schism. against Cornelius, the then Bishop of Rome; And to further his design, he by subtilty allured to him three or four holy men that had been Confessors; Then he entised three weak Bi∣shops that lived in Italy, to come to Rome, and there perswaded them by imposing hands upon him, to make him Bishop; for which fact, two of them afterwards were suspended, and the third upon his repentance vvas re-admitted. Novatus being thus made a Bishop, grew proud, and sought by all means to with-draw the people from Cornelius to himself; yea, he made many of them to swear that they would not leave him to go to Cornelius. But the holy Confessors before mentioned, vvhen they perceived the crafty subtilty of Novatus, left him, and much grieving for their sin, were reconciled to Cornelius again. Novatus held this opinion, that they which once renounced the faith, and for fear of torments had offered incense to the Idols, although they re∣pented,A Synod against Nova∣tus. yet could never be re-admitted into the Church of Christ again. To suppress this error, there was a Synod called at Rome of sixty Bishops, Anno 255. who condemned it. Cyprian also relates of Aurelius, a godly and valiant young man, who for his constancy in the cause of Christ,Aurelius. suffered great and many torments, and afterwards was banished. And of Mappalicus, who the day before he suffered,Mappalicus. in the midst of his torments told the Pro∣consul▪ Videbis cras agonem, to morrow you shall see the running for a Wager, and accordingly the next day being brought forth to his Martyrdom, he with no less constancy then patience, endured faithfull unto the death. But Decius the Author of this persecution, escaped not the revenging hand of God, for warring against the Goths, and being overcome by them,Gods Judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. lest he should fall into their hands, he leaped vvith his horse into a whirlpit, where he was drowned, and his body was never found after. Yea, God avenged the blood of his Saints upon the whole Ro∣man Empire, by sending a general plague of pestilence upon it, which continued ten years together; and Dionysius saith, that in Alexandria, vvhere he vvas Bishop,A terrible plague. there vvas scarce any house clear; and though some Christians died in this plague, yet it fell most heavy upon the Gentiles. The Christians also in this plague shewed much brotherly love each to other, by visiting, comforting, and relieving one another. Whereas the Idolaters,The brotherly love of Chri∣stians. being stricken with extream fear of the plague, none considered his Neighbour, but every man shifted for himself, and of those that were infected, some they cast out of doors half dead, to be devoured of dogs and wild beasts, some they let die in their houses without all succour; others they suffered to lie unburied, and durst not come near them,A special Pro∣vidence. notwithstanding vvhich, the pestilence followed them whithersoever they vvent, and miserably consumed them; so that the most part of the Inhabitants were consumed by it in every Country, especially in those Provinces, where had been the greatest
persecutions raised against the Christians. After the death of Decius, there succeeded Gallus and Volusianus in the Empire, Anno Christi 255. who continued this persecution against the Christians; which fell most heavy upon the Pastors and Mini∣sters of the Congregations: for about this time Cyprian, and many other Ministers were banished: others were put into the mettal Mines, to whom Cyprian wrote an Epistle consolatory, wherein he writes thus, Wounds and scars are an Ornament to a Christians brest,Cyprians con∣solatory letter. such as bring not shame, but honoureth them before the Lord; and though in the Mynes there be no beds for their bodies to rest on, yet they have rest in Christ; and though their weary bones lie on the cold ground, yet it's no pain to lie with Christ. Their feet are fettered with chains, but he is bound of man, whom the Lord Christ doth loose; he lies tied in the stocks, whose feet thereby are made swifter to run to heaven; neither can any man tie a Christian so fast, but he runs so much the faster for his garland of life. They have no garments to save them from cold, but he that puts on Christ is sufficiently clothed. Doth bread fail to their hungry bodies? Man lives not by bread alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Your defor∣mity shall be turned to honour, your mourning to joy, your pain to pleasure, and felicity infinite. And if this grieve you, that you cannot serve God in your places as formerly, yet your daily sacrifice ceaseth not, which is a con∣trite and humble heart; and though your travel be great, yet shall your re∣ward be greater; for God beholding them which confess his name, appro∣veth their willing minds, in their strivings helpeth them, in their victory crowneth them, rewarding that in us which he hath performed, and crowning that which he hath in us perfected. Again he tells them that they are now in a joyfull journey, hasting apace to the mansions of the Martyrs, there to enjoy, after darkness, durable light, and comfort above all their sufferings, &c. About the same time also, Lucius Bishop of Rome was banished. After the death of Gallus and Volusianus, there succeeded Valerianus, who ceased the persecution, and carried himself exceeding friendly to the Christians; so that his whole Court was replenished with holy Saints and servants of Christ, whereby his house seemed a Church of God. But the Devil envying the peace of the Church, by the means of an Egyptian Enchanter, (who was hindred from doing his feats, by the presence of the Christians) stirred up the Emperor against them, who grew to such impiety himself,Persecution stirred up by a Sorcerer. that he sacrificed young infants to his Idols, quartered their bodies, divided the Entrails of young Children new born, &c. as hereafter follows.
CHAP. XIV. The eighth Primitive Persecution which began An. Christi, 259. VAlerianus being seduced by the Egyptian Inchanter, as is before related, stirred up the eighth persecution against the Church of Christ;Sin the Fore∣runner of per∣secution. concerning which Cyprian writeth thus; We must confess that this great calamity which hath wasted for the most part all our Churches, and still dayly consumes us, ariseth chiefly from our own wickedness, while we walk not in the way of the Lord, nor observe his precepts as we ought, whilst we are full of lucre, pride, emulation, dissention, void of simplicity and faithfull dealing, renouncing the world in word, but not in deed, every man pleasing himself, and dis∣pleasing others; and therefore we are thus worthily scourged: For what stripes do we not deserve, when the Confessors themselves do keep no Discipline; &c. Concluding, Non venissent fratribus haec mala, si in unum fraternitas fuisset animata; These evils had not happened to the brethren, if they had joyned together in brotherly unanimity. A little before this persecution began, God by a vision revealed it to Cyprian, saying to him, Be quiet and of good comfort, for peace will come;A Vision. albeit a little stay there is for a while, for that some remain yet to be proved and tried, &c. The crimes and accusations that were laid to the charge of the Christians,Christians charged as the causes of all plagues. by the Persecutors, were, that they refused to worship Idols, and the Emperors; and that they professed the name of Christ: Yet be∣sides, all the calamities and evils that happened in the world, as wars, famine, pestilence, &c. were imputed only to the Christians: But Cyprian and Tertullian confuting those slanders,Confuted by Cyprian and Tertullian. proved that the speci∣al cause of all those miseries which befell the Empire, proceeded from the cruel shedding of the innocent blood of the Christians. In this persecution, Cyprian was at last condemned to have his head cut off,Cyprian Mar∣tyr. who patiently and willingly submitted his neck to the stroak of the sword. Also about this time, Sixtus Bishop of Rome, with his six Deacons, were accused for being Christians,Sixtus and his Deacons. whereupon being brought to the place of Execution, they were all beheaded. Laurence also another of his Deacons, following Sixtus as he went to his Execution, complained that he might not suffer with him, but that he was secluded, as the son from the father: To whom the Bishop answered, that within three days he should follow him, bidding him in the mean time to go home, and if he had any treasures, to distribute them amongst the poor: The Judge hearing mention of treasures, sup∣posing that Laurence had great store in his custody, commanded him to bring the same to him: Laurence craved three days respite, promising
then to declare where the treasure might be had: In the mean time he caused a good number of poor Christians to be gathered together,The courage and constancy of Laurence. and when the day of his answer was come, the persecutor strictly charged him to make good his promise; then valiant Laurence stretching out his arms over the poor, said, These are the precious treasures of the Church, these are the treasure indeed in whom Christ hath his mansion,, &c. But oh! what tongue is able to express the fury and madness of the Tyrants heart! how he stamped, stared, ramped,The rage of Tyrants. and fared like one out of his wits: his eyes glowed like fire, his mouth foamed like a boar, like a hell-hound he grinded his teeth: then he cryed, kindle the fire, make no spare of wood: hath this Villain deluded the Emperor? away with him, whip him with scourges, jerk him with rods, buffet him with fists, brain him with clubs: Jesteth the Traitor with the Emperor? pinch him with fiery tongs, gird him with burning plates, bring out the strongest chains and fire-forks, and the grate of Iron, set it on the fire, bind the Rebell hand and foot, and when the grate is red hot, on with him, rost him, broil him, toss him, turn him upon pain of our high displeasure, do every man his Office, O ye tormentors. Immediately his command was obeyed, and after many cruel handlings, this meek lamb was laid, I will not say upon a bed of fiery iron, but on a soft down∣bed; so mightily God wrought for his servant, so miraculosly did he temper this Element of fire, that it was not a bed of consuming pain, but of nourishing rest unto Laurence. Not Laurence, but the Em∣peror seemed to be tormented, the one broiling in the flesh,In all these things we are more then Conquerors. the other burning in his heart: when this triumphant Martyr had been pressed down with fire-forks for a great space, in the mighty Spirit of God he spake to the Tyrant thus; This side is now rosted enough, turn up▪ O Tyrant great, Assay, whether rosted or raw thou think'st the better meat? By the constant confession of this worthy and valiant Deacon, a Roman souldier was converted to the same faith, and desired to be baptized, whereupon he was called before the Judge, scourged, and afterwards beheaded. About the same time Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, with his three Deacons, were brought before Emilianus,Dionysia. banished. who told them of the cle∣mency of the Emperor, and therefore required them to sacrifice to his gods, &c. to whom Dionysius answered, Divers men worship di∣vers gods, but we, only that one God who is the Creator of all things, making our prayers to him uncessantly for the health of the Empe∣ror, &c. Then said the President, Why can you not worship your own God and ours also? Dionysius replied. We worship only one God, as we have said; the President said, I see you are ingratefull persons, and regard not the Emperors clemency, therefore I banish you to Cephro in Lybia, and charge you that you convent no more your assemblies, nor be found out of that place at your peril, and though Dionysius was sick, yet would he not grant him one days respite before his depar∣true.
In Cephro he had a great Congregation, as well of those that follow∣ed him in his banishment, as of others that resorted to him out of E∣gypt; yea, though at first he was persecuted there, and stoned, yet af∣terwards a great number of the Inhabitants forsook their Idols,The power of the Word of God. and were converted unto God by his Ministry; and having accomplished his Ministry there, the Lord removed him to another place. For (saith Dionysius) Emilianus translated us from thence to a sharper place of Lybia, commanding us to meet all together at the City Mareota; in∣tending to separate us into several villages, or rather to take us by the way; when we came thither, I was commanded to Colluthion, a place which I had never heard of; yet was it some solace to me that the bre∣thren told me it was near to the City Paretonium: for as my being at Cephro gat me the acquaintance of many brethren of Egypt,Gods Provi∣dence. so I ho∣ped that the vicinity of that place to the City, might procure me the concourse of certain loving brethren from it, as it came also to pass, &c. He writeth moreover that the number of those which suffered Mar∣tyrdom about that time was great, men, women, young men, maidens, old wives, souldiers, and men of all sorts and ages; of whom some with scourgings,The cruel tor∣ments of the Christians. and fire, and some with the sword, obtained the vi∣ctory, and gat the Crown. Neither (saith he) to this day doth the Pre∣sident cease cruelly murthering such as be brought before him, tearing some with torments, imprisoning others, and commanding that no man should come to them: yet God with the daily resort of the brethren doth comfort the afflicted. In Palestine, Priscus, Malchus, and Alexander, three godly men, see∣ing the valiant courage of the Christians so boldly to venture,Priscus, Mal∣chus, Alexander con∣stantly to stand, and patiently to suffer in this persecution, as grieved with themselves,Zeal. began to accuse their own sluggishness and cowardise, to see others so zealovs and valiant, and themselves so cold and faint-hearted, in labouring for the Crown of Martyrdom: whereupon, agreeing amongst themselves, they came to Caesarea, and stepping to the Judge, they declared themselves to be Christians, and so they were sentenced, and given to the wild beasts. A certain woman also in the same place, formerly a Marcionist, being brought before the President, obtained the same Martyr∣dom. In Carthage three hundred Christians being brought before the Pre∣sident,Three hundred Christians put into a lime-kiln. were put to their choice, either to offer sacrifice, or to go into a lime-kiln: whereupon by mutual consent, they all chose the lime-kiln, in which, with the smoak of the lime, they were smothered. In another part of Africk, three godly Virgins had first vinegar and gall given them to drink,Three Virgins cruelly tor∣mented. then were they scourged, then tormented upon the gibbet, and rubbed with lime, then were they scorched upon the fiery grid-iron, then cast to the wild beasts, which would not touch them, therefore lastly they were beheaded. In Italy a godly man was first tormented with the rack, then cast
to the wild beasts, which not hurting him, he was burned in the fire. Fructuosus a Bishop in Spain, with his two Deacons, having wit∣nessed a good confession, were all of them burned in the fire.Fructuosus. But this cruel Emperor Valerian, who thus persecuted the Saints of God,Valerian Emperor. short∣ly after felt the revenging hand of God: for in an expedition that he made against the Persians, he was taken prisoner by Sapores the King, who made a foot-stool of him, every time that he gat upon his horse;Gods Judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. and at last by the command of the King he was flaied alive, powdered with salt, and so ended his wretched life. Also Claudius, a President and Minister of his persecutions, was possessed by the Devil, and bi∣ting off his tongue in small pieces, he ended his wretched life. Also there were great & terrible Earth-quakes, and many commotions and Rebellions in sundry parts of the Empire, insomuch as Galienus, the son of Valerian, and his fellow Emperor, began to relent towards the Christians, and set forth some Edicts in their favour: notwithstanding which, some there were that suffered in sundry places; amongst whom was one Marinus, a noble man, and valiant Captain in Caesarea,Marinus. who stood for an honourable office which of right fell to him, but his Com∣petitor to prevent him, accused him to the Judge to be a Christian. Hereupon the Judge examined him of his faith, and finding that in∣deed he was a Christian, he gave him three hours to advise and delibe∣rate with himself; then the Bishop of the place finding that he stood doubtfull in himself what to do, took him by the hand, and led him in∣to the Church, and laid before him a sword and a New Testament, bidding him take his free choice, which of them he would have. Ma∣rinus immediately ran to the New Testament, and chose that, and so being animated by the Bishop, he presented himself boldly before the Judge, by whose sentence he was beheaded. About the same time there was in Caesarea, Asyrius,Asyrius. a noble Senator of Rome and a Christian, and whereas the Gentiles in that place used to offer sacrifice by a fountain side, which sacrifice by the working of the Devil, used suddenly to vanish out of their sight, to the great ad∣miration of the deluded multitude;Satans subtilty Asyrius pitying their miserable ignorance, came amongst them, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, pray∣ed to God in the name of Christ,Power of pray∣er. that the people might no longer be thus seduced by the Devil, whereupon the sacrifice was seen to swin upon the fountain, and ever after that false miracle ceased. After the death of Galienus there succeeded Claudius, a quiet Em∣peror; and after him Quintilianus his brother,Peace in the Church. both which reigning nineteen years, the Church enjoyed peace in their time.
Here place the third Figure.
CHAP. XV. The ninth Primitive Persecution which began An. Christi, 278. AFter the death of Quintillian, succeeded Aurelian in the Empire, who was by nature severe and rigorous, and a strict punisher of dissolute manners, so that it grew into a Proverb, That he was a good Physitian, saving that he gave too bitter Medicines. In the beginning of his reign, he was a moderate and discreet Prince, and no great distur∣ber of the Christians, whom he neither molested in their Religion, nor in their Councels. But afterwards, through sinister suggestions of those which were about him, his nature being before inclinable to se∣verity, he was altered to plain Tyranny, which he first shewed in the death of his own sisters son, and afterwards he raised the ninth perse∣cution against the Church of Christ; but when he was about to sign a Proclamation or Edict for that persecution, it pleased God that a thun∣derbolt fell so near him, that all men thought he had been slain, and the Emperor was so terrified thereby,A special Pro∣vidence. that he gave over his Tyranni∣cal purpose, so that he rather intended, then moved persecution. Having reigned about six years, he was slain. After whose death divers other Emperors succeeded, in whose time the Church had peace for about the space of forty four years. During which time it did mightily increase and flourish: Yea, the more the Christians had suffered, the more they were honoured;Pace causeth the Church to flourish. In∣somuch as some of the Emperors did singularly favour them, prefer∣red and made them Governors of Provinces. Dorotheus, with his Wife, Children, and whole family, were ac∣cepted, and highly advanced in the Emperors Court. Yea, Gorgonius, and divers others, for their Doctrine and Learning, were with their Princes in great estimation. The Bishops were also in great favour with the Rulers and Presidents where they lived; so that innumerable multitudes and Congregations assembled together in every City, and there were great concourses of such as daily flocked to the publick places of prayer. But through this great prosperity, the Christians, by reason of the corruption of their natures, and the temptations of Satan,Sin the Fore∣runner of per∣secution. began to degenerate, and to grow idle and delicate, striving and contending amongst themselves, upon every occasion, with railing words bespat∣tering one another in a despitefull manner; Bishops against Bishops, and people against people, moving hatred and sedition each against other: Besides, cursed hypocrisie and dissimulation increased more and more; by reason whereof Gods Judgements brake forth against them, which began first to fall upon those Christians which were souldiers; but that touched the other very little, neither did they seek
to appease Gods wrath, nor to call for Mercy, but thinking that they should escape well enough, they heaped iniquities daily more and more,Contention amongst Chri∣stians. one upon another. The Pastors being inflamed with mutual contention each against other; Then did the Lord raise up adversaries against his people, that rased their Churches to the ground, burnt the sacred Scriptures in the open Market places, made the Pastors of the Church to hide themselves, and some with great shame were taken Prisoners, and were mocked of their enemies, and put to open reproach. CHAP. XVI. The tenth Primitive Persecution, which began Anno Christi, 308. DIoclesian and Maximian having many wars, associated to them∣selves two Caesars, Galerius, who was sent into the East against the Persians; and Constantius, who was sent into Britain, where he married Helena, the daughter of King Coel; a Maiden excelling in beau∣ty, and no less famous for her Studies and Learning, by whom he had Constantine the Great. These two Emperors having obtained many victories, were so puffed up with pride, that they ordained a solemn Triumph at Rome. After which, Dioclesian would needs be worshipped as God, saying, that he was brother to the Sun and Moon, and adoring his shoes with gold and precious stones,Pide. he commanded the people to kiss his feet. Then also did he raise a great and grievous Persecution against the Church of God: and the Feast of Easter drawing nigh, he command∣ed all the Churches of the Christians to be spoiled, and cast down, and the books of the holy Scriptures to be burnt,Bibles burnt. which was executed with all rigour and contempt that might be. Then he sent forth his Edicts for the displacing of all Christian Magistrates,Cruel Edicts. and put all others out of their Offices, imprisoning such of the common people as would not abjure Christianity, and subscribe to the heathen Idolatries. Then were cruel Edicts sent abroad for the imprisoning of the Elders and Bishops, and constraining them by sundry kinds of tor∣ments to sacrifice to the Idols; whereupon insued a great persecution against the Governors of the Church, amongst whom many of them manfully passed through exceeding bitter torments:Horrible tor∣ments. Some were scourg∣ed all over their bodies with whips: some with racks and tearings of their flesh, were exceedingly cruciated: some one way, others another way were put to death. Some were violently drawn to the impure sacrifices, and as though
they had sacrificed, when indeed they did not, were let go. Others neither coming to their Altars; nor touching any piece of their sacri∣fice, yet were born in hand by those which stood by, that they had sa∣crificed; and so being defamed by their adversaries, were let go.False Accusa∣tions of Chri∣stians. Others as dead men were carried out, and cast away, being but half dead. Some were cast down on the pavement, and trailed a great space by the legs, and the people made to believe that they had sacrificed; Others with-stood them, stoutly affirming with a loud voice, that they had not sacrificed; withal saying, that they were Christians, and glo∣rying in the profession of that name. Some cryed that they neither had, nor ever would be partakers of that Idolatry,Courage. who were buffetted on the face and mouth by the soul∣diers, that they might hold their peace. But if the Saints seemed ne∣ver so little to do what their enemies would have them, they were made much of;Humane infir∣mity. yet none of these devices prevailed against the con∣stant servants of Jesus Christ; but of the weaker sort, through frailty, many fell at the first brunt. When these Edicts were first set up at Nicomedia, a Christian, a noble man born, moved with an holy zeal, ran, and took them down,Zeal. and tare them in pieces, though the Emperors were present in the Ci∣ty; for which he was put to a most bitter death, which with great constancy and patience, he endured to the last. These furious Tyrants, Dioclesian in the West, and Maximian in the East, raged exceedingly against the poor Saints of Christ. But Dio∣clesian proceeded more subtilly,Subtilty. first beginning with the souldiers in his Camp: to whom the Marshal of the field proposed that they should either offer sacrifice, or leave their places and offices, and lay down their arms; whereunto the Christians resolutely answered, that they were not only ready to lay down their weapons, but to suffer death, if it was imposed upon them,Constancy. rather then so to sin against God. In the beginning of this persecution, few were tormented, but af∣terwards the Emperor grew to greater cruelty. It cannot be expres∣sed what number of Martyrs suffered; what blood was shed through all Cities and Regions for the name of Christ. In Tyre certain Christians were given to the most cruel wild beasts, which would not hurt them; and the Lions, Bears and Leopards,A miracle of Mercy. which were kept hungry for the purpose, would not touch them: Yet did they vehemently rage against those that brought the Christians into the stage, who though they stood, as they thought, without their reach, yet were they caught, and devoured by them. Afterwards these Martyrs were slain with the sword, and cast into the sea. Silvanus, Bishop of Gazenses, with thirty nine more, were slain in the Mettal-Mynes. Pamphilus of Caesarea, dyed a glorious Martyr.Silvanus. Pamphilus. In Syria, all the chief Pastors were first cast into prison, together with the Bishops, Elders and Deacons:Tiranion. Tiranion was throwen into
the sea.Zenobius. Zenobius a Physitian was slain with Brickbats. At Antioch two young Maidens were thrown into the sea. Also an aged Matron, and her two beautifull daughters, being sought af∣ter, and at last found, rather then they would be drawn to do sacrifice, threw themselves head-long into a river.Sylvanus. Sylvanus Bishop of Emissa, with some others were thrown to the wild beasts. The Christians in Mesopotamia were tormented divers ways: some of them were hanged up by the feet, and with the smoak of a small fire strangled. So out-ragious was the Emperor in the beginning of this Persecution, that in Nicomedia he slew the chiefest Princes of his Court, whom a little before he prized as his own Children. Also one Peter was hoisted up naked, and so beaten, and torn with whips,Peter. that his bones might be seen; then they poured upon him salt and Vinegar, and lastly rosted him with a soft fire. Dorotheus and Gor∣gonius,Dorotheus. Gorgonius. men of great Authority under the Emperor, after divers tor∣ments were strangled with an halter. Anthimus, Bishop of Nicomedia, with divers others,Anthimus. having made a good confession, were beheaded. Yea,Serena, Diocle∣sian's wife. Serena, the wife of Dioclesian the Emperor, was martyred for her Religion. Some others were bound hand and foot to a post, and so burnt. Also many Christians of all ages and sorts, being met together in a Church, to celebrate the memorial of Christs Nativity, Maximian the Emperor sent some to fire the Church, and burn them all; But first they commanded a Cryer to proclaim, that whosoever would have life, should come out, and sacrifice to Jupiter, otherwise they should be all burnt; then one stepping up boldly, in the name of all the rest, said, We are all Christians, and believe that Christ is our only God and King, and we will sacrifice to none but him; hereupon the fire was kindled, and some thousands of men, women and children were burnt in that place.Christians burnt in a Church. In Arabia many Martyrs were slain with Axes. In Phrygia, the Em∣peror sent his Edicts to a City, commanding them to sacrifice to the Idols: but the Major, and all the Citizens professed themselves to be Christians, whereupon the Emperor made his Army environ the City, and set it on fire,A Christian City burnt. whereby all the inhabitants were burnt together in it. Eustratius an Armenian, and skilfull in the Greek tongue, highly honoured and advanced by the Emperor,Eustratius, a Persecutor converted and martyred. who also had executed many Christians; beholding the marvellous constancy of the Martyrs, privately learned the Christian Religion, burned exceedingly with a desire of Martyrdom, and not staying for Accusers, professed himself to be a Christian, openly execrating the vanity and madness of the heathens; Being therefore apprehended, he was tied up, and bitterly beaten; afterwards he was parched with fire put to his bowels, then basted with salt and vinegar, then scraped and bemangled with sharp cutting shels, that his whole body seemed to be but one wound, yet af∣terwards, through Gods goodness, it was restored again whole. And lastly was he burned.
In Alexandria, Peter the Bishop,Peter. and his Deacons constantly suffered Martyrdom: as also many other Bishops in Egypt, together with many fa∣mous and excellent men, suffered about the same time. A whole legion of Christian souldiers, that lay at Thebes in Egypt, un∣der their Christian Col▪ Mauritius,A legion of Christians martyred. because they refused to sacrifice to I∣dols, were first tithed over by the Emperours command, once, and again and afterwards, by the exhortation of Mauritius, they died all together constant Martyrs. The persecution raged not only in Asia and Africa, but also in Italy, France, Spain, &c. in all which countries an innumerable company of Christians were martyred by sundry kindes of death. In Trevers were so many Christians slain, that their bloud ran like small brooks, and dis∣coloured great rivers; yet this sufficed not the Tyrant, but he sent abroad his horsemen to command all those which had apprehended any Christi∣ans, immediately to put them to death.Inhumane cuelty. At Collen also, and in Rhetia many were martyred: yea, this perse∣cution extended into our Britan, where all the Christians were put to death. Besides the kindes of death, the punishments were so great and hor∣rible as no tongue is able to express: as whippings, scourgings,Cruel tor∣ments. rack∣ings, horrible scrapings, sword, fire, shipboats, whereinto many were put and sunk into the sea: Also hanging upon crosses, binding some to the bodies of trees with their heads hanging downward, hanging others by the middle upon gallowses till they died of hunger: throwing others alive to Lions, Bears, Leopards, wilde Buls, &c. Pricking others with bodkins and talons of beasts till they were almost dead. In Thebaide, they hanged up women naked by one of their feet, the rest of their body hanging downwards, with many other sorts of punish∣ments most cruell to be thought of: Some were bound to the boughs of trees, and had their members torn asunder, others were mangled with axes, some choaked with smoak over a slow fire, some had their hands, ears, and feet cut off, others were scorched and broiled upon coals, yet not to death, but had the torment renued every day. In Pontus the Martyrs had other horible torments inflicted on them, Some had their fingers-ends under the nails thrust in with bodkins: Some were sprinkled all over with boiling lead, having their necessary members cut from them, others suffred most filthy and intolerable torments in their bowels, and privy members: what the outrage of this persecution was in Alexandria, Phileas a Bishop thus wri∣teth, Because (saith he) every man might torment the holy Martyrs as he listed, some beat them with cudgels, some with rods, some with whips,Hellish cruelty. some with thonges, some with cords, some having there hands bound behind them were lifted upon timber-logs, and with certaine instru∣ments had their members and joints stretched out, where their bodies hanging, were subjected to the will of the tormentors, who were com∣manded to afflict them with all manner of torments: on their sides,
bellies, thighs, legges, they scratched them with the claws of wilde beasts: some were hanged but by on hand one the engine, that they might feel the more grievous pulling out of the rest of their members: Some were bound to pillars, having no stay under their feet, that wth the weight of their bodies being drawn out, they might feel the greater torment: and these torments endured all day long; the Judge com∣manding that they should not be let down, till either by the extremity of torment, or by the cold, they were near death; and then they were let down, and haled upon the ground. They devised also another greater torment, for when the Christians were lamentably beaten, they had a new kinde of rack, wherein they lying upright, were stretched by both the feet above the fourth hole, with sharp shels strawed under them. Others were cast down upon the pavement, where they had so many torments inflicted upon them, that their sufferings cannot be imagined what they were: In the midst of which torments some died,Admirable pa∣tience. their enemies being confounded with their singular patience. Some half dead were thrust into prisons, where, with their wounds and pain they ended their lives: Others being cured of their wounds, were again put to their choice; whether they would sacrifice to the Idols, and have their liberty, or have the sentence of death pass upon them, who did willingly chuse death for Christs sake, rather then to sin against him. In Nicomedia, a Christian pulling down, and tearing the Emperors Edict, was stript and beaten till the bones appeared, and then washed in salt and vinegar, under which torments he died. Yet notwithstanding the horribleness of these tortures, the Christian Martyrs were so farre from being dismaied,Courage and constancy. that they were confirmed and strengthned there∣by, merrily and joyfully undergoing whatsoever was inflicted upon them. Eusebius saith, that himself saw the cruel Persecution in Thebade, where the swords of the Persecutors were blunted with the great slaugh∣ter of the Christians,Tormentors wearied. and they sat down with weariness to rest them, whilest others took their places. Yet still the Christians shewed their willingness, and with courage, joy and smiling, received their sentnce of death from the Judge, and to the last gasp, sang Psalms and Hymns of praise to God. In Alexandria the holy Martyrs led with the love of better rewards, did not only bear the menaces of the cruel souldiers, wherewith they threatned them, but also whatsoever torments they could devise for their destruction: Yea saith Sulpitius; then the Christians with more greedy desire pressed and sought for Maryrdom,Humane infir∣mity. then now they do for Bishopricks. Yet some through infirmity in this Persecution fell back, for which they were excommunicated by the Church. Damasus and others witness, that there were slain in thirty daies, seventeen thousand persons, besides a great number that were condem∣ned to the Metall-mines and quarries, with the like cruelty.
In Alexandria were slain with axes three hundred:The story of Mauritius and his legion. At Collen three hundred. Mauritius with his Christian legion, six thousand six hundred sixty six, whose story, deserving perpetually to be remembred, is this: Maximian sent for his Mauritius with his legion of Thebane soul∣diers, under a pretence of imploying them against his enemies: When they came to Rome, Marcellus, the Blessed bishop, laboured to confirm them in the truth, to whom they promised perseverance in the faith unto the death. Then they followed they Imperial army into France, and when they were cowe thither, Maximian offered sacrifice to the devils, and called all his souldiers to the same, strictly charging them to fight against his enemies, and against the Christians which were enemies to his gods. These Christian Thebans resolved rather to die▪ then to sacrifice, or to bear arms against the Christians, wherewith the Tyrant being enraged, commanded every tenth man of the legion to be put to the sword, hereupon they strove who should submit their necks to the stroke. Mauritius encouraged them greatly hereunto, and being called before the Emperour, he said; Wee, O Emperour, your soul∣diers, and yet the servants of God, owe thee service of war,A most Chri∣stian speech. but to him innocency; of thee we receive wages, but of him life; therefore we cannot obey thee to deny God our Lord and yours also, will ye nil ye: We are ready to obey you, if you enforce us not to disobey him: Otherwise we will rather obey him then you: We offer here our hands against any other enemies, but to defile our hands with the bloud of innocents, we may not: These hands of ours have kil to fight against wicked enemies, but not to murther godly friends, &c. We have engaged our faith to God, we cannot be true to you, if we break covenant with him, &c. We see our brethren and fellows in arms, cruelly put to the sword, which we rejoyce in, that they have been counted worthy to suffer for Christs sake, &c. Behold here we cast down our weapons, and had rather to be killed, then to kill, and to die guiltlesse then to live guilty: We are ready to suffer what more you shall appoint, yea bth fire, sword, or any other torments. We confesse our selves, to be Christians, wee cannot persecute Christians, nor sacrifice to your devillish Idols. The Em∣perour being highly incensed with this answer commanded the second time the tenth man to be slain, which being accomplished, when the Christian souldiers would not yet condescend to his minde, he set up∣on them with his whole host, both of foot and horse, charging them to kill them all; the Christians made no resistance, but throwing down their arms, offered their naked necks to the persecutors, and so were all slain. At that time, one Victor, an old souldier, that for his age was dis∣missed, coming to the Army, as they were banquetting and making mer∣ry with the spoils of the Martyrs, was bidden to sit down with them, but he asked them what was the cause of there mirth, and understanding the trut, he detested them, and refused to eat with them;Christian cou∣rage. and being there∣upon demanded whether he were a Christian? he answered that he was and ever would be. Then they rushed upon him; and made him partaker, of the lik Martyrdom and honour.
When Dioclesian and Maximian, notwithstanding all the slaughter which they made, saw the number of Christians rather increased then diminished, so that they were out of all hope of utter rooting them out, and having now even their fill of blood, they ceased at last of their own accord from putting any more Christians to death:The mercies of the wicked are cruelty. Yet of a great multitude, they thrust out their right eies, and maimed their right legs at the ham, with a searing iron, condemning them to the Metal-mynes, not so much for their labour, as desirous to afflict them there∣by: and so having raigned together about one and twenty years, Di∣oclesian divested himself of the imperial Dignity, and lived a private life, and the like did Maximian also, resigning the Empire to Galerius Maximinus, and Constantius. Maximinus was of a cruel Nature, a great Enchanter, vicious in his life, and a great enemy to the Christians, and therefore continued the Persecution of them, yet at length was revoked from his cruelty by the just Judgement of God upon him; For he was suddenly taken with an horrible and filthy disease,Gods judge∣ments on per∣secutors. which first began outwardly in his flesh: and then proceeded more inwardly: his privy members putrified with a botchy corrupt boil, and a fistula consuming, and eating up his En∣trails, whence swarmed forth an innumerable company of lice, with such a pestiferous stink, that no man could abide him; he being also very gross, his fat putrified, and stank intollerably; and because his Physitians could not abide the stink, he commanded them to be slain: others of them, because they could not cure his incurable disease, he put them to cruel deaths. At last being told that his disease came from God, he began to be∣think himself of all the cruelty which he had shewed to the Saints, confessed his offences to God, and gave command that the Persecuti∣on against the Christians should cease; requiring his Officers likewise to re-edifie their Temples,Hypocrisie. and requesting them to pray to their God for him. This Edict much comforted and refreshed the Christians, who thereupon gathered together in every City, called their Synods and Councels; yea, the Infidels themselves extolled and magnified the true God of the Christians. But this Tyrant Maximinus scarce suffered this peace to continue six moneths together, but again he forbad the Christians to meet, and privately stirred up the Athenians to petition him that none of them might be suffered to live in their City: Also a Conjurer in Athens made an Image of Jupiter, which uttered these words, Jupiter commandeth the Christians to be banished out of this City and Suburbs, because they are enemies to him. Also certain harlots were suborned to say, that they formerly were Christians, and privy to the wicked and lascivious acts which they exercised amongst themselves, upon Sabbath daies, &c. And thereupon the Emperor commanded that they should put them to death by all means possible. Then did the Persecution grow as great as ever it was, and the Governors of every Province fell upon
the Christians▪ banishing some, and putting others to death. Silvanus Bishop of Emissa, a very old man, and three others with him, were condemned to death. So was Lucianus,Silvanus. Lucianus. Peter. Quirinus. an Elder at An∣tioch. At Alexandria, Peter the Bishop was beheaded. Quirinus Bi∣shop of Scescanus had an hand-mill tied about his neck, and was thrown head-long into a river: where yet he floted a great while, exhorting the lookers on not to be dismaid with his punishment, and so with much ado, was at last drowned. At Rome, many Bishops, Ministers and Elders were put to death. In sundry other places very many others suffered martyrdom with fire, wild beasts, drowning in the sea, &c. Some were crucified, some were slain with the sword;Cruel torments some endured the cutting and burning of their members; some had their eyes thrust out; some were starved in prisons, and whatsoever other cruelty the Magistrates could devise; All which the people of God endured, rather then they would offer sacrifice to the Idols. The like miseries did the women also endure, for being inticed to the filthy use of their bodies, some rather chose banishment, and others to prevent it, killed themselves. Neither could Christians live safely in the wilderness, but even from thence they were drawn to torments and death. And whereas the Tyrant in his Edict had boasted of the plenty and prosperity of all things in the time of his persecuting of the Saints, God to confute him, presently sent great drought,Gods judge∣ments on perse∣cutors. famine and pesti∣lence, besides the wars with the Armenians; by which calamities, the people were miserably wasted; corn was sold at an unreasonable rate, so that exceeding great multitudes died of hunger in the Cities, but far more in the villages; most part of the husband-men dying of famine and the pestilence. Divers brought out their best treasure,A terrible fa∣mine. and gave it for any kind of sustenance, though never so little. Others ha∣ving sold their possessions for food, fell into extream misery: Some did eat grass, others fed upon unwholsom herbs, whereby they hurt and poisoned their bodies: Many women were driven to leave the Cities, and beg up and down through the countrey: some through faintness fell down in the streets, and holding up their hands, cryed miserably for some scraps or fragments of bread, being ready to give up the Ghost; and being able to say no more, they cryed, Hungry, hungry. Some of the richer sort being tired with serving such multitudes of beggers, began to grow hard-hearted, fearing lest themselves should fall into the like misery: By reason whereof the Market-places, streets, and lanes, lay full of dead corpses, and naked bodies were cast out un∣buried, many of which were devoured by dogs, whereupon they which lived, fell to killing of the dogs, lest running mad, they should fall upon them, and kill them. The pestilence also scattering through all houses, killed very many, especially those of the richer sort, which escaped the famine, whereby innumerable Magistrates,Pestilence. Princes and Presidents were quickly dis∣patched, so that all places were filled with mourning, and nothing
was seen or heard but weeping and wailing every where. Death so reigned in every family, that two or three dead bodies were carried out of one house together. But notwithstanding that these miscreants had been so cruel to them,Charity of Christians▪ yet the Christians were very diligent and charitable to them in all their extremities, travelling every day, some in curing the sick; some in burying of their dead; others called the multitude together, which were ready to famish, and distributed bread unto them, whereby they occasioned them to glorifie the God of the Christians, and conessed them to be the true worshippers of God, as appeared by their works: and hereby the Lord wrought wonderfully for the peace of his Church, for after he had corrected them, he again shewed thm mercy. Constantine succeeding his father, overcame Maxentius the Tyrant in Rome, and he together with Licinius set forth Edicts in favour of the Christians: See Constantines life in my second part of lives. Yet Maxi∣minus continued his persecution in the East, whereupon Constantine and Licinius wrote to him to favour the Christians, and he finding that he was too weak to encounter with them, sent forth his Edicts to stop the persecution: yet afterwards he picked new quarrels with them, and began to persecute them again: whereupon Licinius went against him, and overthrew him in a battell: Then did Maximinus kill many of his enchanters and conjurers that had encouraged him, and promised him victory. Shortly after the Lord striking him with a grievous disease, he glorified the God of the Christians,Gods judge∣ments on per∣secutors. and made a Law for the safety and preservation of them: yet not long after by the vehemency of his disease, he ended his life. Hypocrisie.Licinius, that for a long time had pretended to the Christian religion, and lived in great familiarity with Constantine, who had given him his sister Constantia to be his wife, began afterwards to discover his hypocri∣sie, and the wickednesse of his nature, secretly conspiring the death of Constantine: but the Lord discovering and preventing his conspiracies, he then fell out with him, and manifested his hatred of the Christian religion, being puffed up with the victory that he had got against Maximinus. He quarrelled with the Christians, because as he said, they praied not for him, but for Constantine: and thereupon he first banished them all from his Court: then he deprived all the Knights of their honou∣rable order,Wicked Laws. except they would sacrifice to devils: then he command∣ed that the Bishops should have no meetings to consult about their Ec∣clesiastical affairs: nor that any Christians should come to the Church∣es, or hold any assemblies: then that men and women should not meet together to pray, that women should not hear the Bishops, but chuse out women to instruct them: then that none should help or succour those that were in prison, nor should bestow any alms upon them, though they should die for hunger, and that they which shewed any compassion to those which were condemned to death, should suffer the
like punishment themselves; then he persecuted the Bishops, and slew those which were the most eminent of them: the flattering officers also which were about him, thinking to please him thereby, slew many Bi∣shops without any cause: yea many of their bodies they cut into gobbets, and threw them in to the sea to feed fishes: Some were banished,Crulty. others had their goods confiscated; many noblemen and gentlemen were privily made away: and Licinius gave their unmarried daughters to wicked varlets to be defloured, himself also violated many women, both wives and maidens. This cruelty made many godly persons voluntarily to forsake their houses, and to live in woods, mountains, and desarts: He caused The∣odorus to be hanged upon a crosse, to have nails thrust into his arm-pits,Theodorius. and afterwards to be beheaded: Divers other Bishops had their hands cut off with a fearing iron. In Sebastia fourty Christian souldiers in the vehe∣ment cold winter were cast into an Horse-pond, where they ended their lives: the wives of these fourty men were carried to Heraclea, where, to∣gether with a Deacon of that place, after they had suffered innumerable torments, they were slain with the sword. Constantine being informed of all this wickednesse, raised an Army, went against him, overcame him twice, and at last caused him to be put to death, as you may see in Constantines life in my second part: whereby the Church obtained a generall peace. Yet in this tenth Persecution many other eminent Christians suffered Martryrdom, besides those before-named. Galerius in his time invaded Antioch, intending to force all Christi∣ans to renounce Christ, at what time they were assembled together, whereupon one Romanus ran to them, declaring that the wolves were at hand, which would devour them, yet he exhorted them not to fear by reason of the perill; and, through Gods grace, the Christians were greatly encouraged by him, so that old men and matrons, fathers, mothers, young men and maidens were all of one minde, being wil∣ling to shed their bloud in defence of their profession: A band of armed men were sent against them, which were not able to wrest the staff of faith out of their hands: hereupon they sent word to their Captain, that they could not inforce the Christians to deny their faith, by rea∣son of Romanus who did so mightily encourage them: then did the Captain command that he should be brought before him, which was done accordingly; What (saith the Captain) art thou the author of this sedition? art thou the cause that so many lose there lives? By the Gods I swear thou shalt answer for them all, and shalt suffer those torments that thou encouragest them to undergo; Romanus answered, Thy sentence, O Em∣perour, I willingly embrace, I refuse not to be sacrificed for my brethren,Romanus's no∣ble courage. and that by as cruel torments as thou canst invent. &c. The Captain being much enraged with this his stout Answer, commanded him to be trussed up, and his bowels drawn out, whereupon the Executioners said, Not so Sir, this man is of noble parentage, and therefore he may not be put to so ignoble a death: Scourge him then (quoth the Cap∣tain)
with whips with knobs of lead at the ends: but Romanus sang Psalms all the time of his whipping, requiring them not to favour him for nobilities sake; Not the bloud of progenitors, (saith he) but the Christian profession makes me noble:True nobility. then did he earnestly inveigh against the Captain, and derided their Idoll gods, &c. but this further enraged the Tyrant, so that he commanded his sides to be lanced with knives, till the bones were laid open: yet still did the holy Martyr preach the living God, and the Lord Jesus Christ to him: then did the Tyrant command them to strike out his teeth, that his speech might be hin∣dered; also his face was buffeted, his eye-lids torn with their nails, his cheeks gashed with knives, the skin of his beard pulled off by litle and little,Note. &c. yet the meek Martyr said, I thank thee O Captain, that thou hast opened to me so many mouths as wounds, whereby I may preach my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: look how many wounds I have, so many mouths I have, lauding and praising God: The Captain astonished at his constancy, bad them give over tormenting him: yet he threatned to burn him, reviled him,Blasphemy. and blasphemed God, saying, thy crucified Christ is but a yesterdaies God, the gods of the Gentiles are of greatest anti∣quity: But Romanus taking occasion from hence, declared to him the eternity of Christ, &c. withall saying, Give me a child of seven years old, and thou shalt hear what he will say; hereupon a pretty boy was called out of the multitude, to whom Romanus said, Tell me my pret∣ty babe, whether thou think it reason that we worship Christ, and in Christ one Father, or else that we worship infinite gods? the child answered, that certainly what we affirm to be God must needs be one, which with one, is one and the same; and inasmuch as this one is Christ, of necessi∣ty Christ must be the true God: for that there be many gods, we children cannot beleeve: The Captain amazed at this, said, thou young villain and traitor, where, and of whom learnedst thou this lesson? of my mother, said he, with whose milk I sucked in this lesson, that I must believe in Christ: The mother was called, and she gladly appeared: the Tyrant commanded the child to be horsed up,A child tor∣mented. and scourged: the standers by beholding this mercilesse act, could not refrain from tears; the joyfull and glad mother alone stood by with dry cheeks, yea, she rebuked her sweet babe, for desiring a cup of cold water, charging him to thirst after the cup that the babes of Bethlem once drunk of; She willed him to remember little Isaac, who willingly proferred his neck to the int of his fathers sword, &c. Then did the cruell tormen∣tor pull off the skin, hair and all from the crown of the childes head: the mother crying, Suffer my child, anon thou shalt passe to him that will adorn thy head with a crown of eternall glory: thus the mo∣ther councelleth and encourageth, the childe is encouraged, and re∣ceiveth the stripes with a smiling countenance. The Captain seeing the childe invincible, and himself vanquished, commands him to be cast into the stinking prison, whilest the torments of Romanus were renewed and encreased: Then was Romanus brought forth again, to receive new stripes upon his old sores, the flesh being torn, and the
bare bones appearing: yet the cruell Tyrant raging like a mad man, quarelling with the tormentors for dealing so mildely with him, com∣manding them to cut, prick, and pounce him: and then he passed sen∣tence upon him, together with the childe to be burned to death: to whom Romanus said, I appeal from this unjust sentence of thine to the righ∣teous throne of Christ, that upright Judge,An appeal to Christ. not because I fear thy cruell tor∣ments, and mercilesse handling, but that thy Judgements may be known to be cruell and bloudy. When they came to the place of execution, the tormentors required the childe of his mother, for she had carried it in her arms from the prison;The childes Martyrdom. She kissing it, delivered it to them, and as the executioner was striking off his head, she said, farewell my sweet childe: All laud and praise, with heart and voice, O Lord we yeeld to thee: To whome the death of all thy Saints, We know most dear to be. The childes head being cut off, the mother wrapt it in her garment, laid it to her brest, and so departed. Then was Romanus cast into a mighty fire, which being quenched with a great storm, the Tyrant com∣manded his tongue to be cut out, and afterwards caused him to be strang∣led in the prison. Gordius, a Centurion in Caesarea, in the heat of this persecution, left his charge, living a solitary life in a wilderness for a long time:Gordius. at last when a solemn feast was celebrated to Mars in that city, and multi∣tudes of people were assembled in the Theatre▪ to see the games, he came, and gat up into a conspicuous place, and with a loud voice said, Behold, I am found of those which sought me not, &c. the multitude here∣upon looked about to see who it was that spake this, and Gordius being known, he was immediatly brought before the Sheriff, and being as∣ked who, and what he was, and why he came thither? he told him the whole truth, professing that he believed in Christ, valued not their threatnings, and chose this as a fit time to manifest his profession in: then did the Sheriff call for scourges, gibbets, and all manner of tor∣ments: to whom Gordius answered, that it would be a losse and da∣mage to him,Courage. if he did not suffer divers torments and punishments for Christ and his cause: the Sheriff more incensed hereby, commanded all those torments to be inflicted on him: with which Gordius could not be overcome, but sang, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me: and I will fear no evill, because thou Lord art with me, &c. then did he blame the tormentors for favouring him; pro∣voking them to do their uttermost:Flattery. then the Sheriff not prevaling that way, sought by flattery to seduce him, promising him preferment, riches, treasures, honour, &c. if he would deny Christ: but Gordius derided his foolish madness, saying, that he looked for greater preferment in heaven, then he could give him here upon earth: then was he condemn∣ed, and had out of the city to be burnt: Multitudes followed him,Constancy. and some Kissing him, with tears entreated him to pity himself, to whom
he answered, Weep not I pray you for me, but for the enemies of God, which fight against the Christians; weep I say for them which prepare a fire for us, purchasing hell-fire thereby for themselves in the day of vengeance: and cease I pray you thus to molest my quiet and setled mind: for truly for the name of Christ I am ready to suffer a thousand deaths, &c. Others perswa∣ded him to deny Christ with his mouth, and to keep his conscience to himself▪ My tongue (saith he) which by Gods goodnesse I have, cannot be brought to deny the author and giver of the same; for with the heart we beleeve unto righteousnesse, and with the tongue we confesse unto salvation: and thus perswading and encouraging the people to be willing to die in the like cause, with an unappalled countenance, he willingly gave him∣self to be burnt. MenasAlso Menas an Egyptian, and a souldier by profession, in this persecuti∣on, forsook all, and went into a desart, where he gave himself to fast∣ing, prayer, meditation, and reading of the Scriptures: at last returning into the city of Cotis, when the people were at their pastimes, he with a loud voice proclaimed himself to be a Christian, and thereupon was carried before the President, and being demanded of his faith, he said, Convenient it is that I confesse God in whom is light, and no darknesse; for with the heart we beleeve to righteousnesse, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation: Then was he pinched and excruciated with sundry torments:Note. But (said he) there is nothing in my minde that can be com∣pared to the Kingdom of heaven, neither is all the world, if it were weighed in a balance, comparable to the price of one soul; and further said, Who can separate us from the love of Christ? can tribulation, or anguish? &c. and again, I have learned of my Lord Christ not to feare them that can kill the body, and have no power to kill the soul, &c. Having endured manifold torments, he received the sentence of death, and at the place of execu∣tion, he said, I give thee thanks, my Lord God, which hast accepted me to be a partaker of thy precious death, and hast not suffered me to be devoured of my fierce enemies, but hast made me constant in thy true faith unto the end: and so he lost hi head, but found a crown. Basil relates a story, that the Emperours officer brought the Edict against the Christians to a place to be published, and then privily sub∣orned some to detect and accuse the Christians: then he caused the sword, gibbet, wheel, and whips to be brought forth, at the sight whereof the hearts of all the beholders did shake and tremble: Some for fear fled, others stood in doubt what to do: Some again for fear denied their faith,Humane infir∣mity. others suffered cruell torments, but at last vanquish∣ed by the intollerable pain, they made shipwrack of their consciences, and lost the glory of their confession. Fourty young gentlemen.Amongst others, fourty young gentlemen that were souldiers, free∣ly and boldly confessed themselves to be Christians, declaring to the Marshall their names, who amazed at this their boldnesse, stood in doubt what to do: then he assaied with fair words and flatteries to win them, perswading them to consider their youth, and not to change a pleasant life for a painfull and untimely death,Tentaion of flattery. promising them ho∣nour,
money, &c. But they boldly answered, that they neither desired, money, honour, nor life, but only the celestiall Kingdom of Christ, for the love of which they were ready to endure the wheel, crosse, fire, &c. The Marshall being much offended herewith, devised a new torment; for spying a pond in the street that did lie open to the Northen winde, it being in the cold winter time, he caused them to be put into it all night; but they being merry, comforted one another as they put off their clothes, saying, We put not off now our cloths, but our old man, corrupt with the deceit of concupiscence, for which we blesse and praise God: for by meanes of the serpent we once put on the old man, but by the means of Jesus Christ we now put him off: and being brought naked to the place, where they felt the vehement cold, they were put into the pond, so that all their members were stark and stiffe with it: and as soon as it was day, they hauing breath yet remaining in them, were brought to the fire, wherein they were consumed into ashes, which ashes were thrown into the floud. It happened that one of the company being more lively,A mother en∣courageth her son to die. and not so near death as the rest, the executioners pitied him, and delivered him to his mother who stood by, to save his life: but she led him to the piles of wood where the other starved creatures lay ready to be burnt, admonishing him to accomplish the blessed journey he had taken in hand, which accordingly he did, and was burnt with his companions. Syrus a Physician of Alexandria, in this persecution fled into Syria, where he lived a private life,Cyrius. John. Athanasia. unto whom one John a souldier adjoined himlelf: but not long after one Athanasia with her three daughters, be∣ing virgins, were cast into prison at Canope in Egypt for the profession of their faith: Cyrus being of their acquaintance, fearing lest through in∣firmity they should fall, he together with his partner John went thither to the prison to comfort and confirm them, for which he was accused to the President, who thereupon condemned them all, and so they were beheaded. Sebastian also borne in France, and Captain of the avaunt-guard of the Emperour,Sebastian encouraged many Martyrs by his exhortations unto con∣stancy, and kept them in the faith, for which being accused to the Em∣perour, he caused him to be brought forth into the open field, where by his own souldiers he was thrust through with arrows. Basil also maketh mention of one Barlaam,Barlaam: who having endured all sorts of tortures to the point of death, was then by the tormentors laid upon the altar, and they put fire and frankincense in his right hand, hoping that the burning of the fire would have forced him to scatter the incense upon the altar, and so to have sacrificed: but his hand, endu∣ring the fire, remained steady, the Martyr in the mean time singing, Blessed be the Lord my God which teacheth my hands to fight, &c. Ambrose mentioneth one Agricola and Vitalis his servant, who agreed betwixt themselves, to give their lives, with other Martyrs,Vitalis▪ for the name of Christ; Vitalis first offering himself to Martyrdom,
the persecutors laboured by all means to draw him to deny Christ, but not prevailing,Constancy. they exercised upon him all sorts of torments, so that he had no whole skin left on all his body: Vitalis in the midst of his sufferings, having by prayer commended himself to God, gave up the ghost. Then was Agricola set upon by the tormentors, whose vertuous life and gentle conditions,Agricola. had won him such respect, that they delayed tormenting of him, but he provoking them to make quicker speed, they fastened him to the crosse, where he finished his Martyrdom. Augustine writes of one Vincentius a Spaniard, who by Dacianus the President was first laid upon the rack,Vincentius. till all the joints of his body crackt, then were all his members slasht and indented with deadly wounds; then they miserably scratched all his body with iron combs, filed very sharp;Horrible cru∣elty. then they laid his body, being all out of joint, upon an iron grate, opened it with iron hooks, seared it with fiery plates, and then besprinkled it with hot burning salt: lastly they drew him, and cast him into a vile dungeon, the floore whereof was thick-spread with the sharpest shels, his feet were fast locked in the stocks, and so left him without all wordly comfort;Joy unspeak∣able. but the Lord his God was with him, the holy Spirit of God, whose office it is to comfort the afflicted, filled his heart with joy unspeakable; so that he there ended his life with much comfort. Procopius.Also Procopius in Palestine, after his conversion, brake his Images of gold and silver, and distributed them amongst the poor; where∣upon he had all sorts of torments inflicted on him, racking, cording, tearing of his flesh, firing, goring, stabbing, and lastly had his head cut off. Georg. Zeal.George, a young man of Cappadocia, stoutly inveighing against the impious Idolatry of the Emperor, was apprehended, torn with hooked irons, burnt with hot lime, stretched out with cords, after had his hands and feet cut off, and lastly was beheaded. Hermogenes.Hermogenes the President of Athens, being converted by beholding the patience and constancy of two Martyrs in their torments, suffered himself for the same faith. In Portugall a noble virgin named Eulalia, not much above twelve years old,Eulalia. had profers of great marriages made unto her, but she seeing the frious rage of this Persecution, had a great minde to join her self to the number of the Martyrs, for which end she poured out her heart in prayer to God for strength and faith to enable her thereunto: But her godly parents fearing that her ready minde to die for Christs cause, might make her guilty of her own death, they kept her close at their country-house, a great way from the City; there she lived quietly for a while; but at last, detesting to make such dealy, she stole out of her fathers house in the night, and travelled all alone through by∣waies, with much difficulty and wearinesse towards the City, whi∣ther she came in the morning, and going before the Judge▪ she with a loud voice said,Zeal. I pray you, What a shame is it for you thus wickedly to kill
mens souls, and to breake their bodies in pieces, to compell them to deny the omnipotent God? Would you know what I am? I am a Christian, and an enemy to your devilish sacrifices, I spurn your Idols under my feet, I con∣fesse God omnipotent with my heart and mouth, &c. Go to therefore thou hangman, burne, cut and mangle these my earthly members; thou maist easily break a brittle substance, but thou canst not hurt my inward minde by any thing thou canst doe. The Judge enraged herewith, said to the hang∣man, Take her and pull her out by the hair of her head to torments, let her feel the power of our gods, and know what we can do: But yet, O sturdy girl, I would fain have thee, before thou diest,Tentation. to revoke thy wickednesse: Remember the honourable house of which thou art come, and thy friends tears; Wilt thou kill thy self in the flower of thy youth, so near honourable marriages? Doth not the glistering pomp of the bride-bed move thee &c. Behold here the engines pre∣pared for thy death; either thou shalt be beheaded with the sword, or torn with wilde beasts, or consumed with fire to ashes, &c. yet this thou maiest escape if thou wilt; What greate matter is it for thee, with thy fingers to put a little incense into the censers? yet thereby thou shalt be delivered. To this Eulalia answered not, being in a great passion,Eulalia. but spit in the Tyrants face, and spurned abroad the heap of incnse. Where∣upon without further delay, the hangmen with both their strengths pulled out her joints, scratched her with the talons of wilde beasts to the hard bones, she singing and praising God in the mean time; saying,Horrible cru∣elty. Behld O Lord, I will not forget thee: What a pleasure is it for them, O Christ, that remember thy triumphant victories, to ataine to these high dignities! &c. Yea, when as out of a warm fountain, her fair and white skin was discoloured with the purple bloud that flowed from her torn members, she wept not, but chearfully sang praises unto God; then they gored her mangled body with the iron grate, terribly har∣rowed her flesh, and burned her brest with flaming torches, then setting fire to her long hair, which covered her naked body, when it came to her face, she opened her mouth, and sucked in the flame, and so peaceably slept in the Lord. Also Agnes a young virgin being accused for a Christian, was brought before the Judge, who first laboured by flatteries,Agnes. Tentation. then by threatning her with cruell torments, to draw her to the deniall of her faith; but she being strengthened by Christ,Courage. told him that she feared not his torments, which she was willing to undergo, yea and death it self for Christs sake; then said the Judge, if it be so easie with thee to undergo torments, yet I know that thou prizest thy virginity there∣fore it is fully determined, that except thou sacrificest to the gods, thou shalt be put into the common Stews. Then did many youths flock together, craving that Agnes might be exposed as a prey to there filthy lusts, to whom she said, Christ is not forgetfull of those that are his, neither will he leave me destitute of his help,Faith. nor suffer my unspotted chastity to be defiled by you, &c. you shall willingly bathe your swords in my
blood, but you shall not defile my body with filthy lust for any thing that you can do. Then the Judge commanded that she should be et naked at the corner of a street; whereupon the multitude sorrowed, and were ashamed to see so shamelesse a sight, turning away their face, and so departing,A remarkable judgement. but one amongst the rest looking upon her in a shamelesse manner, behold a flame of fire, like a flash of lightining struck out both his eies, and he falling down wallowed in the kennell dirt, whereupon Agnes sang praises unto God. Then the cruel Tyrant en∣raged hereby, commanded the executioner to draw out his sword, and dispatch her: She seeing a sturdy souldier coming towards her with a naked sword, rejoyced saying, This, O this is he that I love, I will make hast to meet him;Faith. and no longer protract my longing desires; I well willing∣ly receive the length of his sword into my breast: O eternall father, vouch∣safe to open the gates of heaven to my soul that seeketh thee; and so kneeling down, and praying unto Christ, the executioner with his bloudy hand, finished her hope. Julitta An excellent story.Basil in one of his Orations, relates a story of one Jullitta, from whom one of the Emperours officers tooke all her goods, lands and servants, contrary to all equity; whereupon she complained to the Judges, and a day of hearing was appointed, where the spoiled wo∣man lamentably declared her cause: But the wicked villain that had robbed her, said that her Action was of no force, for she was an out∣law, for not observing the Emperours gods, and that she was a Chri∣stian: His allegation was allowed, incense was prepared for her to offer to the gods, which if she refused, she should neither have pro∣tection nor benefit of the Emperours Laws, nor continue her life. She hearing this,Strength of Faith. in the mighty strength of God, said, Farewell riches, welcome pouerty, farewell life, welcome death▪ All that I have were it a thousand times more, would I lose, rather then speak one wicked word against God my Creator. I yield thee most hearty thanks, O my God, for this gift of grace, that I can contemn and despise this frail and transitory world, e∣steeming the profession of Christ above all treasures: And thenceforth when any question was proposed to her, her answer was, I am the servant of Jesus Christ.Tentation. Constancy. Her kindred and friends earnestly sollicited her to change her minde, but she constantly refused, with detestation of their Idolatry. Then did the cruel Judge condemn her to be burnt, which sentence she embraced joyfully, as a thing most sweet and de∣lectable; and so she addressed her self to the flames, in countenance, gesture and words, declaring the joy of her heart, coupled with singu∣lar constancy, and so embracing the fire, she sweetly slept in the Lotd. Barbara.Barbara a noble woman in Thuscia, after miserable imprisonment, sharp cords, and burning flames put to her sides, was as last beheaded, together with many others. Here place the fourth Figure.
CHAP. XVII. The Persecution of the Christians in Persia, under Sapores, about the same time. THE Idolatrous Magicians in Persia,Magitas str up persecution. taking counsell together a∣gainst the Christians, accused them to Sapores for keeping corres∣pondence with, and favoring the Roman Emperour, which was Constan∣tine the Great. The King being much moved herewith, took occasion to oppress them with taxes and tributes, to their utter undoing, and killed there Ministers with the sword.Simeon. Then he called before him Simeon their Bishop, who remaining constant and valiant, he commanded him to be led forth to torment, yet did he neither shrink for fear,The Persion King requed Divine wor∣shp. nor make any humble suit for pardon, which the King being offended at, requi∣red him either to worship him after the countrey manner, or else he would destroy him and all other Christians in his land: But Simeon, neither allured with promises, nor terrified with threatnings, could be induced to the Idolatrous worship, for which cause he was sent away to prison, and as he was going, there was sitting at the Court-gate an Eunuch, an old Tutor of the Kings, named Usthazares, once a Chri∣stian, but now fallen from his profession, who seeing Simeon led by,Usthazares. rose up and did him reverence; Simeon on the contrary, rebuked him, crying out against him for revolting from his profession: Whereupon,Zeal. the Eunuch burst forth into tears, layd aside his costly apparell, and put on black mourning weeds, and sitting at the Court-gate weeping, he said to himself, Wo is me, with what face hereafter shall I look upon God, seeing Simeon disdaineth with one gentle word to salute me?Recovery after fall. This being carried to the Kings ears, he was exceeding angry, and sending for him, he first with gentle words and large promises, spake him fair, and asked him why he mourned? Whether there was any thing in his house that was denied him? &c. Whereunto Usthazares answered,Tentation. that there was nothing in that earthly house that was detained from him: Yea▪ said he, O King, would God any other grief or calamity in the world had hap∣pened to me, rather then this for which I justly sorrow:Repentance. For this is my grief, that I am alive this day, who should have died long since, and that I see this sun, which dissemblingly, to pleasure you, I have seemed to worship, for which I have deserved a double death: First for dissem∣bling with you; secondly for that thereby I have denied Christ: withall vowing that he would never hereafter forsake the Creator to worship the creature, &c. Sapores was much astonished hereat, and doubted whether to use him gently or with rigour, but at last in his mood; he commanded him to be beheaded: But as he was going to execution, he requested an Eunuch that attended on the King, to desire him for all the old and
faithfull service that he had done to his father and him, that he would cause it to be proclaimed openly at his death, that he was beheaded, not for any treachery against the King or Realm, but for that he was a Chri∣stian, and would not deny his God; this the King yielded to, and so it was performed; and this he desired, because by his former Apostacy he dad discouraged many Christians, and therefore he sought by his pro∣fession and example to encourage them to the like sufferings.His Martyr∣dom. Simeon in prison hearing of his death, much rejoyced and praised God for it,Simeon be∣headed. and the very next day, he, with above an hundred more Christians were beheaded likewise. There was present at their Mar∣tyrdom one Pusices an officer to the King, who beholding an aged Minister to tremble when he saw the others beheaded before him,Pusices. said unto him, O father! shut thine eys for a little moment, and be strong, and shortly thou shallt see God in glory. Hereupon Pusices was apprehended, and carried before the King,His Martyr∣dom. in whose presence he made a bold confession of his faith, for which cause they made a hole in his neck, and pulled out his tongue backward, and so he was put to death, together with one of his daughters that was a virgin. The year after, when the Christians were met together to celebrate the memoriall of Christs passion, Sapores sent forth a cruel Edict, that all they should be put to death that professed the Name of Christ; and this he did at the instigation of the wiked Magicians, whereupon an in∣numerable company of Christians,Magicians au∣thors of perse∣cution. both in Cities and Towns were slain by the sword, some being sought for, others offering themselves will∣ingly least they should seem to deny Christ: In this Persecution many of the Kings own Court and houshold-servants suffered Martyrdom; a∣mongst whom was Azades, an Eunuch, whom the King entirely loved, insomuch as hearing that he was slain, he was so offended and grieved, that he commanded that thenceforth no more Christians should be slain, but only the Doctors and Teachers of the Church. About this time the Queen fell very sick, upon which occasion the wicked Jews and Magicians accused two of Simeons sisters, which were godly virgins,Simeon sisters. that by charms and enchantments they had procured her sickness to revenge the death of Simeon:Slanders. This accusation being beleived, they were both condemned, and with a Saw cut in sunder by the mid∣dle, whose quarters were hung upon stakes, the Queen going betwixt them, thinking thereby to be freed of her sickness. Then ensued a great Persecution against the Bishops and Ministers, who were daily dragged forth to the slaughter;Bshops and Minstes per∣secuted. but first they cruelly scourged them, and put them to other great torments, because they would not worship the Sun. Miserable and almost innumerable were the slaughters under this Sapores, of Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, and other religious men and holy virgins, so that the Persians themselves reckon up above sixteen thousand men and women that suffered Martyrdom. The report of the miserable condition of the Christians coming to the ears of Constantine the Great, put the good Emperour into great
heaviness, who studying how to relieve them, it so fell out, that about that time there came Ambassadors to him to Rome, from Sapo∣res, whom he entertained courteously, and granted all their requests, and then by them wrote his Letters to Sapores in the behalf of the Christians, whereby he did something mitigate the heat of the Per∣sian Persecution: Yet afterwards it was renewed again: at which time suffered Andas the Bishop, and Hormisda a noble mans son of great re∣putation amongst the Persians,Andas. Hormisda. whom when the King understood to be a Christian, and resolute in his profession, he condemned him to keep his Elephants naked: afterwards the King looking out, and seeing him all swart, and tanned with the sun, he commanded that a shirt should be put upon him, and that he should be brought before him; Then did the King ask him if he would yet deny Christ? Hormisda hearing this, tare off his shirt, and cast it from him, saying▪ if you think that I will deny my faith for a shirt, have here your gift again.Constancy. &c. whereupon he was banished the Countrey. Also Suenes, a noble man that had under him one hundred servants, because he would not deny his Christian Profession, was so hated by the King, that he made the worst of his servants Lord over him, and over all that he had, and coupled his wife to him, and made Suenes himself to serve him.Suenes. Also Benjamin a Deacon was thrust into prison, where he was kept two years, but at the length, at the request of the Roman Ambassadors,Benjamin. he was released, yet afterwards, when contrary to the Kings Com∣mandment, he preached and taught every where the Gospel of Christ, he was again apprehended, and miserably tormented, having twenty sharp reeds thrust under the nails of his fingers and toes, but he laugh∣ing at it, had a sharper reed thrust into his yard, with horrible pain, and lastly, and a long ragged thorny stalk thrust through his fundament in∣to his bowels, whereof he died. These Primitive Persecutions are collected out of Eusebius, So∣crates Scholast. Evagrius, Nicepho. Theod. the Imperial History, and the Magd. History.
CHAP. XVIII. The Persecution of the Church under Julian the Apostata, Anno Christi, 365· IUlian was Nephew to Constantius the son of Constantine, and was by him made Caesar, and sent against the Germans, where after some smaller victories having overcome his enemies in a great and bloody battel, he was by his Army made Augustus, and after Constantius his death, succeeded in the whole Empire, both of the East and West. He was brought up in the Christian Religion, and was endowed with excellent parts;His Apostacy. but when be came to the Empire, he Apostatized from his former profession, and turned Heathen, and became a deadly enemy to the Church of Christ, and a great persecutor of it. The first thing that he did, was to open the Idol Temples; shut up by his Predecessors, and to suffer the Gentiles to commit their super∣stitious Idolatries, and publickly to adore their Idols: Then his next design was to supplant the true Christian Religion, being induced thereto by the devil and his own wickedness: And the better to effect the same, he practised a means never before used by any, which was to shew himself pitifull, and not cruel; perceiving that by means of the torments inflicted on the Martyrs,Devilish sub∣tilty. the holy Christian Faith was greatly increased; and therefore he took a contrary course, and sought by gifts, favours, flatteries, and by bestowing offices and dignities, to draw them to renounce the Christian Faith, and to sacrifice to false gods, and by this means there were not a few, who being covetous and ambitious, desiring to be rich and honoured, fell from their Christian profession. Then did he make Laws and general Decrees, that no Christian should be Master of any Arts or Sciences,Christians might not stu∣dy. neither should study in any Schools, that so through the desire of Learning they might turn Ido∣laters, or else they should remain ignorant and illiterate, and so be in∣sufficient to preach the Christian faith. He also ordained that no Christian should have any charge, or hold any office of Justice,They may be in no Offices. neither should be a Captain in the Wars, nor enjoy any other dignity. Thus he used all the inventions that possibly he could devise, to make War against Jesus Christ, without shedding any Christian blood, that so he might take the Crown from the holy Martyrs,The most dan∣gerous persecu∣tion. which they formerly obtained by the persecution of the sword: and indeed this was the greatest and most dangerous Persecu∣tion that ever the Church endured. Amongst other of his subtill devises to bring Christianity into con∣tempt,Christans made the ob∣ject of scorn. this was one; He entertained about him many witty, but wick∣ed persons, who made it their business to scoff at, and deride the Chri∣stians
with all manner of base jears; and those which excelled most in this wicked practise▪ he most loved and honoured, advancing them to offices, both in his Court and Army. During his short reign, though himself put none to death, as is be∣fore specified; yet the heathen Idolaters, in sundry places, proceeded far otherwise; especially in Palestine, where they burnt many Chri∣stians alive, others they stripped naked, and tying cords to their feet, dragged them up and down the paved streets,Barbarous cru∣elty. till their flesh was torn from their bones; Upon others they poured scalding water: Some they stoned, or beat out their brains with clubs: and having thus murthered them, they burnt their bodies, and then took their bones, and mingled them with the bones of Camels and Asses, that they might not be known for mens bones. The Christians in Alexandria were most cruelly used by the Eth∣nicks, or Pagans: Some were slain with the sword, some were fastned to the Cross, some brained, some stoned; and such was their rage against Christianity, that one brother spared not another, nor parents their children, nor children their parents. Emilianus was burned in Thracia. Domitius was slain in his cave. Theodorus for singing a Psalm at the removing of the body of Babilas,Emilianus. Domitius. Theodorus. being apprehended, was examined with exquisite torments, and so cruelly excruciated from morning till almost noon, that hardly he escaped with life, and being afterwards asked by his friends how he could endure such extream torments, he said, that at first he felt some pain, but afterwards there stood by him a young man,A miracle of Mercy. who as he was sweating with the pain, wiped away his sweat, and oft-times so re∣freshed him with cold water, wherewith he was so delighted, that when he was let down from the Engine, it grieved him more then before. Artemius also, a Captain of the Egyptian souldiers,Artemius. Two brethren Martyrs. was beheaded for his Religion, though other causes were pretended. Two Christian brethren were dragged through the streets, and murthered by the Ido∣latrous people of Gaza. But the cruelty of the wicked Arethusians exceeded against the Christian Ministers and Virgins,Barbarous cru∣elty. whom they set forth naked before the multitude to be scorned by them. Then did they cover them with hogs-meat, and ripping up their bellies, put barly into them, and so caused their bowels and flesh to be devoured by their hungry swine. Their cruelty most raged against Marcus Arethusius,Marcus Ar∣thusius. the Christian Bishop of that City, who formerly, by the command of Constantine, had pulled down their Idol-Temple, and set up a Church for the Chri∣stians in the room thereof; The Arethusians knowing how Julian hated him, accused him as a Traitor and enemy to the Emperour: Where∣upon at first he prepared himself to fly, but when he perceived that some of his friends were apprehended in his stead, he returned,Courage. and of his own accord offered himself to those that thirsted for his blood:
Whom when they had gotten, neither pitying his old age, nor reve∣rencing his holy and blameless Conversation, they stript him naked, and pitifully beat him; then they cast him into a foul, filthy sink: then they caused Boies to thrust him in with sharp sticks to augment his pain:Barbarous cru∣elty. Lastly, They put him into a basket▪ anointed him with hony and broth, and so hung him abroad in the heat of the sun, to be meat for wasps and flies to feed upon; and this they did to enforce him, either to build up their Idol-Temple again, or to give them money to pay for the doing of it, but he stoutly refusing both; they profered to forgive one half, if he would pay the other; which he still refusing, and con∣temning all their torments, they at last demanded of him but a small sum of money, but he answered, It is as great wickedness to confer one half-penny in case of impiety, as if a man should give the whole. Whereupon, despairing to prevail, they left him, and went their ways. CyrillusAlso Cyrillus, a Deacon in Hieropolis, who in Constantines time had broken in pieces the Images of the Gentiles, they took him, ript up his belly, drew the liver out of his body, which with barbarous inhu∣manity they chawed with their teeth: But the Lord suffered not this brutishness to go unpunished,God's judge∣ment on Perse∣cutors. for their teeth shortly after fell out of their jaw-bones, and their tongues rotted in their mouths, and they fell stark blind. Julian when he came to Constantinople, offered sacrifice in the Ca∣thedral Church to the Goddess Fortune; about which time Maris, Bishop of Chalcedon in Bythinia, being blind, caused himself to be led to the Emperour,Maris oldly reproveth Ju∣lian. whom he rebuked sharply, calling him an impious person, an Apostate, and an Atheist; he on the contrary called the Bishop, Blind fool, saying further, Thy God of Galilee will not restore thee thy sight again!Blasphemy. Maris replied, I thank God which made me blind, lest that ever I should set mine eies upon so ungracious a face as thine is. In the Market-places of the Cities, Julian set up his own Image, amongst the Images of the heathen gods, to the end that whosoever should do civil reverence to his Image,Devilish sub∣tilty. might also seem to worship the gods of the Gentiles; and that they who would not bow to the Idols, might seem to refuse due reverence to the Emperour. When he di∣stributed gold to his Captains and souldiers, he erected an Altar near to his Throne, with coals burning upon it, and incense on a Table by, & none might receive the gold before he had cast incense on the coals up∣on the Altar, by which subtilty he circumvented many, who discerned not his purpose to intangle them with the rites of Idolatrous services. All about Antioch he dedicated all the fountains to the goddesses of the Gentiles, and caused all the Victuals that were sold in the Market to be sprinkled with heathenish holy water:Christian wis∣dom. yet did the Chri∣stians without scruple drink of the water, and eat of the meat accord∣ing to that rule, Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, and ask no question for conscience sake, &c. Juventius and Maxentius.Juventius and Maxentius, two brave Captains, used much boldness
and liberty in reproving him for his heathenish superstition, which so enraged him, that he caused them to be put to death. In Caesarea, the Inhabitants being most Christians, had formerly overthrown the Temples of Jupiter and Apollo; and now in Julians time, they overthrew the Temple of Fortune, which so enraged him,Christian cou∣rage. that he disfranchised them, exacted of them three hundred pounds weight of gold, and compelled their Clergy to serve in War-fare, threatning further to put to death all the Inhabitants thereof at his return, but it pleased God that his own death prevented it. About this time, Julian going to enquire of the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, there came down fire from heaven, and destroyed the Temple, and beat the Image of Apollo in pieces,Apollo's Image broken with lightning. like to the smallest powder or dust. When he came to Antioch, there was a noble woman, called Publia, who had the Education and government of divers young virgins, these she caused, as Julian passed by her house, to sing with a loud voice, The Idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the works of mens hands, &c. This so angred the Emperour, that he sent them a command to sing no more as he went that way; but Publia was so far from fearing him, that the next time he came, she made them sing the same verse, and to add to it, Let God arise, and his enemies shall be scattered, &c. This so incensed Julian, that he sent for her to him, scoffed at her, and caused her to be clapt on the cheeks in a disgracefull manner; but she looked upon it as a great honour thus to suffer reproach for Christs sake; and coming home, she caused her maids still to sing Psalms of the Emperours fury and madness. Afterwards the Emperour intending to war against the Persians,Christians fined. set a great fine upon every ones head that would not sacrifice to the Idols, whereby he much enriched himself by the spoil of the Christians. Then were false Accusations forged against Athanasius, so that he was forced to flie; yet he thus comforted himself and friends,Athanasius dri∣ven away. Nubecula est, cito pertransibit, This persecution is but a little cloud, and will soon pass away. In his flight, he took a ship upon the river Nilus to fly to Thebais, but Julian sent an Earl after him, to bring him back again, who pursuing him with sails and ores, had almost overtaken his ship, whereupon the Marriners would have run her ashore, and fled into a wilderness that was hard by, to whom Athanasius said, Quid turbamini filii?Courage. quin in occursum eamus persecutori nostro, ut intelligat, quia longe major est qui nos defendit, quam qui persequitur: My sons, why are you thus af∣frighted? Let us rather turn and meet our pursuer, that he may know, that he is greater which defends us, then he that follows to apprehend us. Hereupon the Marriners turned back again, and the Earl suppo∣sing nothing less then that Athanasius was in the ship that came to∣wards him, he only called to them,A special pro∣vidence. and enquired whether they had not heard of Athanasius? they answered, that they had seen Athanasius a
little before; whereupon he hastned forward to overtake him, and Athanasius in his ship returned back privately into Alexandria, where he lay hid till that persecution was over. Julians Officers in exacting the fines of the Christians, demanded more then they were assessed at, and sometimes tormented their bo∣dies also, of which wrongs when they complained to the Emperour▪ he scoffingly answered them,Blasphemy. Its your part, when you are injured, to take it patiently, for so your God commandeth you. At Meris in Phrygia, the Governor Commanded the Idol-Temple to be set open and cleansed, and began himself to worship the Idols: Whereupon some Christians, inflamed with zeal, in the night time, brake into the Temple, threw down the Idols, and stamped them to powder.Zeal. The Governour being wonderfully incensed herewith, purposed to execute some Christian Citizens which were innocent and guiltless; whereupon the Authors of their own accord, presented themselves before him, chusing rather to die for the truth, then that others should suffer for their sakes;Courage. Thereupon the Governor com∣manded them to sacrifice to the Idols, or else he would severely pu∣nish them; but they, setting at nought his threats, prepared themselves to suffer what he could inflict; Then did he assay them with all kinds of torments, and at last laid them on the grid-iron, and broiled them to death, to whom they said, If thou long, O Tyrant, for broiled meat, turn up the other side, lest in eating, the blood run about thy teeth. When Julian went against the Persians, of very malice and hatred against the Christians, whom scornfully he called Galilaeans, he made a vow, that if he obtained the victory, he would sacrifice to his gods the blood of those Christians which would not sacrifice to the Idols: But what the issue of that exepdition was, See in my second part, in the Life of Jovianus. Collected out of the imperial History, and Socrates Scholasticus, Theodor. and the Magd. Hist. Cent. 4. CHAP. XIX. The Persecution of the Church under the Arrian Hereticks, which began, An. Christi, 339. COnstantine the Great, dying, divided his Empire amongst his three sons, Constantius, Constans and Constantine. Constantius that go∣verned the East, was seduced by an Arrian Presbyter, who had been in his fathers Court, with his Aunt Constantia; So pernicious a thing it is to have deceitfull Hereticks lurking in Princes Courts,Note. and Ladies Chambers.
This Presbyter complained to Constantius that the Return of Atha∣nasius from banishment was very dangerous to the peace of the Com∣mon-wealth: Yea, he so far incensed the Emperour against him,Athanasus ac∣cused of sediti∣on. that he sent a Captain with five thousand armed men to slay him; but the Lord delivered him miraculously out of their hands, for the armed souldiers being placed round about the Church where he was, he went safely through the midst of them undiscerned,His miraculous deliverance. though many Ar∣rians were present on purpose to point him out to the souldiers, as a sheep ordained for the slaughter. But neither in banishment could he enjoy peace and safety, for this Arrian Emperour sent to all the officers in his Army to search him out, wheresoever he was,His banish∣ment and dan∣ger. proposing a great Reward to those that could bring Athanasius to him, either alive or dead; whereupon he was for∣ced to hide himself in a deep pit, where he lay six years never so much as seeing the light of the Sun, till at last a Maid that used to carry him his food, was corrupted by those which sought for him, to betray him to them;His miraculous deliverance. but it pleased God by his Spirit to reveal to him his danger, whereby he escaped a little before they came to apprehend him. Afterwards Constans forced his brother Constantius, though much against his will, to restore Athanasius to his Church at Alexandria:He is restored for a time, and again banished. But after the death of that good Emperour Constans, Constantius drave him into banishment again; yet the Lord stirred up a godly woman to hide him in her house, till the death of Constantius. In Alexandria in the room of Athanasius, was George an Arrian Bishop placed, who also was furnished with armed souldiers to assist him in his devillish devices. Thereupon he caused a great fire to be made, took many Christian Virgins, caused them to be stripped naked, re∣quiring them to renounce their faith, or else they should be burned: but when the sight of the fire could not terrifie them,Christian vir∣gins shame∣fully abused. he caused their faces to be so dashed with strokes, that their countenances were dis∣figured; yet like patient souldiers of Christ they endured all kind of rebuke for his names sake. Thirty Bishops, of Egypt and Lybia, were slain in the fury of this Arrian Persecution. Fourteen Bishops were banished,The Arrians cruelty. whereof some of them died in the way, the rest in exile. Forty Orthodox Christi∣ans in Alexandria were scourged with rods, because they would not communicate with the Arrian Bishop George, and so pitiously handled, that some pieces of the rods were so deeply fixed in their flesh, that they could not be drawn out, and many through excessive pain of their wounded bodies, died. The like cruelty did the Arrians exercise in Constantinople. Paul the good Bishop was banished to Cucusus,B. Paul ba∣nished. where he was strangled by the Arrians. Macedonius a notable heretick was placed in his room, who used no less cruelty in forcing men to communicate with him, then was used formerly to force them to sacrifice to Idols. These Hereticks used also great diligence in procuring Councels toSubtilty.
establish their Errors. But not long after the Emperor died, sorrowing much that he had changed the form of the Nicene faith. After the death of Jovian, Valentinian succeeded in the Empire, who associated to himself his brother Valens,An. Christi 364 and made him Empe∣ror of the East. This Valens was an Arrian, and raised up a cruel Persecution against the Orthodox:Persecution raised by Va∣lens. Concerning which Greg. Nazian∣zen in his Oration of the praise of Basil, thus writeth, Insurrexit re∣pente nebula grandine plena, & perniciose stridens, quae omnes Ecclesias in quas incidit, contivit, & postravit, Christi Cultor, pariter & osr, qui post persecutorem persecutor fuit,He succeeded Julian. & post Apostatam, non quidem Apostata, sed nihilo tamen meliorem se Christianis praebens: Christi nomen prae se ferens, Christum mentiebatur. Miletius Bishop of Antioch he banished to Ar∣menia.Miletius. Eusebius. Pelagius. Eusebius Bishop of Samosata, to Thrace. Pelagius Bishop of Lao∣dicea, to Arabia. He was exceedingly filled with wrath against the Bishops assembled in the Counsel of Lampsacum, because they adhered to the Nicene faith. In Constantinople he banished all the Orthodox. In Edissa, he commanded them all to be slain as they were assembled together in the Church. The Lieutenant that had received this charge from him, being more mercifull then his Master, gave private notice to the Chri∣stians,An admirable story. that they should not assemble at that time; but they, neither re∣garding his advice, nor fearing his threats, flocked to the Church in great companies: and whilst the Lieutenant, with many armed soul∣diers, hasted thitherward to fulfill the Emperors command, a wo∣man leading a child in her hand, all in haste, brake the ranks, and thrust into the armed troops; the Lieutenant being moved therewith, called the woman before him, saying, Thou fond and unfortunate woman, whi∣ther runnest thou so rashly? Thither (said she) whither others hasten; Hast thou not heard (said he) that the Lieutenant will slay as many as he finds there? I heard it (said she) and therefore I make the more haste to the place.Courage. But whether (said he) leadest thou this child? That he also (said she) may be accounted in the number of Martyrs. Hereupon the Lieutenant returned back to the Emperor, and told him that all the Christians from the highest to the lowest prepared themselves to die in the defence of their faith,Gods Provi∣dence. and withal he shewed him what a rash thing it was to murder so great a multitude, &c. and so with his rea∣sons perswaded the Emperour, that he appeased his wrath, and pre∣vented the mischief at that time. In Constantinople the Arrians, favoured by the Emperor, crowed insolently over the Christians, they scourged, reviled, imprisoned, amerced, and laid upon them all the intollerable burthens they could devise. Hereupon eighty godly Ministers, in the name of all the rest, addressed themselves to the Emperour, complaning of the out-rages that were done to them,Eighty godly Ministers burned. craving some relief: But this cruel Tyrant commanded Modestus the General of his Army, to embark them all in a ship, as if he would have sent them into banishment, but secretly he gave direction to the Marriners, to set the ship on fire, and to retire
themselves into a boat, and so these holy Martyrs glorified the Name of Christ, by patient suffering of a double death, burning and drowning. In all the Eastern parts he tormented many with sundry sorts of grievous torments, put many to death, drowned many in the sea,Cruelty of he∣reticks. and in rivers. About this time he consulted with Necromancers, to know who should succeed him in the Empire: The devil answered ambiguously, that his name should begin with Th. Whereupon he put to death as many as were called Theodorus, Theodotus, Theadosius or Theodulus. Athanasius being dead at Alexandria, there succeeded him a god∣ly and holy man, named Peter,Peter. but the Emperour presently sent soul∣diers, which clapt him in prison, and the rest of the Ministers were banished, some to one place, some to another. After this he sent forth an Edict for the persecuting of all the Or∣thodox in Egypt: Whereupon many were stript of their raiment,Cruelty. scourged, fettered in prisons, crushed in pieces with stones, beheaded, driven into deserts, where they wandred in sheeps-skins and goats-skins, destitute of aid and succour; Many hid themselves in mountains, in dens, caves and hollow rocks. Terentins and Trajan, two worthy Captains, used some liberty in admonishing the Emperour to abstain from persecuting of the inno∣cent; but the Lord was minded to destroy him,The Emperour refused admo∣nition. and therefore he could receive no wholesome admonition; For many of the Goths, whom he entertained as souldiers to assist him against his enemies, turned against himself, so that he fled, and was overtaken in a village, which the Goths set on fire, whereby he died miserably,Gods judge∣ment n perse∣cutors. leaving none to suc∣ceed him, and his name a curse and execration to all ages. Collected out of Magd. Hist. Socrates and Theod. The Persecution by the Donatists. ABout the year of our Lord 410. there sprang up in Africk the Do∣natists and Circumcellions, who first made a great Schism in the Church, and afterwards raised up a great persecution against the Or∣thodox: concerning which, St Austine complains in sundry places; And in his 50. Epistle to Earl Boniface, he thus writes of it, In hoc labore multi Catholici, & maxime Episcopi, & Clerici horrenda & dura per∣pessi sunt, quae commemorare longum et, &c. In this disturbance,Bloody schis∣maticks. the Orthodox, especially the Bishops and Ministers, suffered hard and horrible things, the particulars whereof are long to recite; for some of them had their eies put out: Some Bishops had their hands and tongues cut off, and some were slain out-right. To speak nothing of the cruel slaughter of others that were sound and sincere: of the plun∣dering of their houses, of the out-ragious burning, not only of their
private habitations, but of their Churches also; yea, so vile and violent were they, that they sticked not to burn the sacred Scriptures. Profane Schis∣maticks.Optatus in his second book tells us, that when Julian the Apostate came to the Empire, the Donatists preferred a petition to him, where∣in they desired leave to return to their places in Africk, from whence formerly they had been banished. Julian knowing what furious and turbulent spirits they were of, and how prejudicial their Return would be to the Catholick Church, easily assented to their petition, and so they returned full fraught with malice and revenge, and presently imployed all their abilities, partly by subtilty to seduce the common people, partly by violence to oppress the Orthodox Bishops and Mi∣nisters,Turbulent Schismaticks. of whom, some they thrust out of their Churches, others they slew. Some of their chief Bishops, taking armed souldiers with them, went to the Castle of Lemella, where finding the Church shut against them, they commanded their attendance to get upon it, to uncover the roof, and so having broken into it, they set upon some Deacons, whom they found there, wounded some, and slew two of them out∣right. In all places where they came, they profaned all holy things; The Sacramentall bread they threw to their dogs; but behold the just judgement of God against these profane schismaticks; those very dogs shortly after running mad,Profane Schis∣maticks. Gods Judge∣ment on them. Impure schis∣maticks. fell upon their own Masters, and tore them in pieces. Virgins they defloured, and wives they defiled. So usual a thing it is for those which adulterate the holy truths of God, to be given over to corporal uncleanness. These furious persons dispersed themselves all over Africk, and would not suffer the Orthodox to preach the truth against their Er∣rors: By their violent assaults, thieveries, rapines, burnings and mur∣thers, they destroyed many, and afrighted all, &c. CHAP. XX. The Persecution of the Church in Africk, by the Arrian Vandals, which began Anno Christi, 427. THE cruel Vandals, passing out of Spain into Africk, under Genserick their Captain, finding the Province peaceable and quiet, set upon the flourishingest part of the land, wasting and destroying all before them with fire and sword, not sparing so much as the shrubs and bushes which bare fruit, lest they should minister relief to those poor Christians which hid themselves in dens, in mountains, and steep cliffs:Profane Here∣ticks. But especially they raged against the Churches and Temples
of the Saints, burning all them to the ground, and where they found any of them shut they brake them open with their Maces.Cruelty of He∣reticks. The Bishops and Ministers they destroyed especially, with many kinds of torments, seeking by tortures to force them to deliver up whatsoever gold and silver they had of their own, or belonging to the Church; and where they gat any, they still tormented them afresh, to inforce them to confess more. The mouths of some they wrested open with iron, thrusting into them stinking mire and dirt:Prodigious Some they tormented by wresting their fore-heads and legs with bow-strings, till they crackt again; Into the mouths of others they poured sea-water, vinegar, with the dreg of oyl and grease; and neither weakness of sex, nor respect of nobility, nor reverence of their Ministry, mitigated their cruel minds; yea, their fury most abounded where there appeared any dignity or worthiness. Many of the Ministers and Nobles they loaded with mighty bur∣thens, as if they had been Camels or Horses,Ministers loaden with burthens. and made them carry them after them; and if they went slowly, they hasted them with iron pricks and goads, so that some of them under their burthens, gave up the ghost. Reverend gray hairs found no priviledge of Mercy; guiltless Infants felt their barbarous rage, whom they dashed against the ground,Cruelty to In∣fants. violently pulling little ones from their mothers breasts to brain them; of others, by wide stretching of their tender legs, they tore them in pieces, from the fundament; the stately buildings they burnt down, and levelled with the earth: The chief Churches in Carthage they imployed to their own heretical worship. Where any strong Castles were held against them, they brought multitudes of Christians, slew them, and left their bodies lying about the Castles, that by the stench thereof they might force them to surrender. Who can express the number of Ministers that were by them tor∣tured!Pampinian. Pampinian the Bishop of Mansuetus was tortured with burning plates of iron all over his body. The Bishop of Urice was burnt to death. Then did they also besiege the City of Hippo, where St. Augustine was,Hippo besieged. who before that time had compiled two hundred thirty two Books, Epistles innumerable besides his Expositions on the Psalms and Gospels, and his Homilies to the people. See more of this in my first part of lives in the life of St. Austine. When they had taken the Regal City of Carthage, they enslaved the Citizens and Senators, publishing a decree that they should pre∣sently bring forth whatsoever gold, silver, precious stones, or rich ap∣parel they possessed, and thereby dispoiled them of all in one day; Then did they take the Bishop and all the Ministers of that City, and thrust them naked into weather broken-ships, and so banished them, whom yet the Lord of his great Mercy directed, and brought in safe∣ty to the City of Naples.A special pro∣vidence. The Senators and Nobles they first banished from the City▪ and then drave them beyond-sea. The dead bodies of the Christians they would not suffer to be buried but in the night, and without any solemnity.
The Bishops and Ministers through all the Province, being dispoil∣ed of all their substance, and turned out of their Churches, assembled together, and presented a petition to Genserick, that they might, at least in private,Pride. be suffered to instruct their people to whom he proudly an∣swered, I have decreed that none of your profession shall remain in the coun∣trey, how then dare you prefer such a request? and withal, he would at that instant have drowned them all in the sea, but that the importuni∣ty of some about him, stopt him. There was also a noble Earl, called Sebastian, a man of great wis∣dom and courage, whom Genserick much feared, and therefore sought occasion to put him to death: which that he might the better effect, he moved him to be re-baptized by one of his Priests, and to turn Arrian: the Earl therefore requested him to call for a fine manchet, which being done, he said, This loaf, that it might be fine and white, hath been boulted from the bran,A noble Earl martyred. moistened with liquor, and baked: but if you now cause it to be broken in pieces, steeped in water, kneaded and baked again, if it come out better, I will do as you would have me. Genserick understand∣ing his meaning, could not tell what to answer for the present, yet af∣terwards he caused him to be put to death. If any Minister in his Sermon occasionally did but mention Pharaoh, Nebuchadrezzer,An evil con∣science. Herod, &c, presently it was laid to his charge that he meant it by the King, and thereupon he was banished. Yet notwithstanding all this cruelty, the people of God stood fast in their holy profession,Constancy. and rather increased then otherwise. Afterwards at the request of Valentinian the Emperour, Genserick suffered the Orthodox in Carthage to choose them a Bishop, which they did; and not long after Genserick with his Vandals took the fa∣mous City of Rome,Rome sacked. carrying away with him, not only all the treasure that of a long time had been stored up there, but many of the people also; who, when they were brought into Africk, were shared between the Vandals and the Moors, so that husbands were separated from their wives, parents from their children; which this godly Bishop hearing of, he caused all the gold and silver vessels belonging to the Church, to be sold for their Redemption,Charity. that so married persons, and parents, and children might enjoy the comfort of their relations: Then also did he provide food and lodging for them, and night and day went amongst them himself, to see how they did, to minister to their wants, and comfort them; But this procured him such hatred amongst the Arrians, that they sought to slay him; but the Lord about this time took him to himself, whereby he escaped their malice. Gods provi∣dence.One of the Gensericks Colonels, having some Christian slaves, and a beautifull and a godly Virgin amongst them, he took occasion to vex them with fetters and torments, thereby to force them to re-baptiza∣tion, which they constantly refusing, he caused them to be stripped, and beaten with ragged cudgels till their flesh was torn in pieces, &c. At last they were banished to Capsur, an heathen Kingdom of the Moors, where it pleased God so to bless their labours,A special Pro∣vidence. that many of them
were converted, and sending for an Orthodox Minister,Moors conver∣ted. were baptized. This coming to Gensericks ears, he commanded these servants of God to be drawn at a Chariots tail thorow thickets of thorns,Cruelty of He∣reticks. till they were torn in pieces, and these newly converted Moors, he caused their naked bodies to be haled backwards and forwards, thorow bushes and brambles, and others of them to be tied to wild beasts, and so to be rent in sunder; the poor Christians saying thus each to other, O brother pray for me, God hath fulfilled our desire, O this is the way to the kingdom of heaven. Genserick further raging against the Orthodox, sent one Proculus in∣to the Zeugian Province, to dispoil all the Churches of their Orna∣ments, and the Ministers of their books, that thereby they might be disabled to holy services; which command was executed with all rigour: and whereas the Bishop of Habensa refused to deliver them up, he was expelled the City,The Bishop of Habensa. and all men at great penalty were for∣bidden to harbour him, so that, being above eighty years old, he lay naked for a long time, under the open skie. About Easter, when the Christians were met together in a Church, to celebrate the remembrance of Christs Resurrection, the Arrians with a great power of armed men, set upon this innocent company, who with their naked swords slew many: The Minister that was preaching, they shot through the throat with an arrow:Christians murthered at a Sermon. and such of them as escaped death, were by the command of the King, executed by sundry kinds of torments. In other places, when the Christians were administring the Sacra∣ment, the Hereticks rushed in amongst them, taking the bread and wine, and trampling them under their profane feet.Horrible pro∣faness. Then did Genserick command, that none but Arrians should bear any office, either about himself or his children: And a Bishop called Armogastes, they took, and first nipped his fore-head and legs with bow∣strings; then did they hang him up by one foot,Armogastes tormented. with his head down∣ward, yet did he seem to all men as if he slept in a feather-bed, which so enraged Theoderick the Kings son, that he commanded him to be beheaded, but some about him disswaded him from it,A special pro∣vidence. because said they, he will be accounted a Martyr. Then was he banished to dig in Mynes; yet afterwards he was sent for again, and made a Cow-heard near to Carthage, that he might be a continual object of scorn. There was also one Saturus, a noble man, eminent for holiness, whom the Tyrant much laboured to draw to the Arrian profession, but he refusing, the King told him, that if he presently consented not,Saturu's noble courage. he should forfeit his house and goods, that his Children and slaves should be sould, and his wife should be given to the Camel-driver: Yet no menaces could shake his faith. His wife hearing of her doom, went to her husband as he was praying, with her garments rent, her hair disheveled, her Children at her heels, and a sucking infant in her
hands, whom she cast at her husbands feet, and took him about the knees,Tentation. saying, Have compassion (O my sweetest) of me thy poor wife; and of these thy Children; look upon them, let them not be made slaves; let not me be yoaked to a base Marriage, &c. that which thou art required to do, thou dost it not willingly, but by constraint, and therefore it will not be laid to thy charge: He gave her an answer in the words of Job, Thou speakest like a foolish woman:Resisted. thou actest the devils part; if thou lovest thy husband, thou wouldst never seek to draw him to sin, which will procure the second death. I am resolved therefore as my Lord com∣mands me, to forsake wife, children, lands, house, &c. that I may be his Disciple; and accordingly he was dispoiled of all, and turned out a begging, yet all were forbidden to harbour him. Gensericks death.Genserick having reigned thirty seven years and three moneths, died. Genserick being dead, his son Hunrick succeeded him, who at first was more moderate to the Christians, insomuch as they began to hold their meetings as before time. The Manichaean Hereticks he sought out, and though most of them were of his own Religion, yet he burnt some,Manichaeans punished. and banished others. At the request of the Emperour Zeno and Placidia his wife, he suf∣fered the Church of Carthage to chuse their own Bishop, having been destitute of one for twenty four years. Then they chose Eugenius, an humble,Eugenius cho∣sen Bishop. holy and charitable man, whose fame increasing, the Arrian Bishops much envied him, and put into the Kings head to forbid him to preach, and not to suffer any to enter into the Church, that were at∣tired after the manner of the Vandals;Envy. To which command Eugenius thus answered, The house of God is free for all: those which enter, no man may drive forth. The King being incensed with this answer, placed tortures at the Church door, who when they espied any man or wo∣man in a Vandals habit, about to go into the Church, clapping flesh-hooks on their heads, and twisting them in their hair, with a strong twitch they pulled off hair,Cruelty of He∣reticks. scalp and all, whereby some lost their eies, and some their lives. The women, besides these torments, they carried thorow the streets, to be made a publick laughing-stock, yet could they not force them to altar their Religion.Constancy. Then did Hunrick ordain, that none of his Countries which dis∣sented from his Religion, should receive their ordinary pensions and salaries. Then did he send many of them who had been delicately brought up, to Utica, in the parching heat of the sun, to dig the land for corn; yet they went cheerfully, and comforted themselves in the Lord. Then did he command that no man should be a Knight, or bear any publick office except he turned Arrian: whereupon very many with invincible courage,Constancy. forsook their honours and offices, rather then their faith. Barbarous cru∣elty.Many Virgins he caused to be proved by the Midwives in a most shamefull manner; hanging them up from the ground with mighty
weights at their feet, and putting to their sides; breasts, back and bel∣lies, red hot plates of iron, to compell them to confess that their Bishops and Ministers lay with them, that so he might from thence have an occasion to persecute them. Many of these died under the pain, and others remained lame and crooked all their lives after, yet would they not confess any such thing. Then did he banish into the wilderness, of Bishops, Ministers, Dea∣cons, and other Members of Christ, four thousand nine hundred seventy six; some of them being lame with the gout, others blind with age:Multitudes ba∣nished. Amongst whom also was Foelix Bishop of Abiris, possessed with a dead palsie, and therefore unable, either to go or ride;Foelix. which the cruel King being informed of, and requested that he might be suffered to stay; he answered, if he be not able to ride, let wild bulls be coupled to drag him to the place appointed: So that they were fain to carry him on a Mules back across, as if he had been a sack. Then were all these holy Confessors, brought to the City of Sicca, where the Moors were to receive them, and transport them thence to the wilderness. Thither came two Arrian Earls,Tentation. and with great subtil∣ty sought to withdraw them from their stedfastness, saying, What mean you to be so obstinate, as not to obey the Kings Laws, whereas by complying with him, you may be preferred to honour? Then did they all cry out, We be Christians, we be Catholicks, we believe, and confess the Trinity in Unity. Hereupon were they shut up in a grievous prison. Many mothers also voluntarily followed their little children, much rejoycing that they had born Martyrs: Others sought to draw them to rebaptization by the Hereticks but, through Gods grace, they could not prevail.Constancy. As they passed on the way travelling more by night then by day, because of the excessive heat, a woman hasted after them,An excellent story. leading in her hand a little child, encouraging him, saying, Run Sirra, seest thou all the Saints how merrily they go forwards, and hasten to their Crown? One of the company rebuked her, and asked her whether she went? To whom she answered, Pray for me, I go with this little boy, my nephew, to the place of banishment▪ least the enemies finding him alone, should seduce him from the way of truth into the way of Error. The enemies being more enraged because of their constancy, when they came to their lodgings, penned them up in narrow places. Then was denied to them all the comfort of access of their friends, for per∣mitting whereof formerly, their Keepers had been beaten with staves. These blessed Saints were tumbled one upon another, as grains of corn,Cruelty of He∣reticks. neither could they have means of stepping aside to ease nature, so that the stink of their excrements exceeded their other pain. Then were they brought forth, their garments, heads and faces be∣smeared with dirt in a pitifull manner, and by the clamorous Moors they were hastened forward in their journey; yet they went singing with great joy unto the Lord, Loe, This honour have all his Saints. Then came to them the blessed Bishop Cyprian,Cyprians sym∣pathy. who to their singular
consolation, comforted every one of them with fatherly affection, and with streams of tears was ready to lay down his life for the brethren, and would fain have accompanied them, if he might have been suf∣fered:Charity. He bestowed all that he had amongst them, for which he af∣terwards suffered imprisonment and much hard-ship, and at last had his hearts desire in being banished. There came great multitudes from sundry Countries and Cities, to behold these servants of God, and many casting their Children at their feet; cryed thus, To whom will you leave us wretches whilest you go forward to your Crown? Who shall baptize our infants? instruct and administer the Sa∣craments to us? our hearts serve us well to go with you if we might. But now none were suffered any more to go with them for their comfort, but they were pressed forwards, and made to run. When any of the aged, or tender Children fainted, they were first punched forwards with staves:Barbarous cru∣elty. Then were the Moors commanded to tie ropes to the feet of such as were unable to go, and to hail them thorow the rough places, so that first their garments were rent, then their flesh, and their heads were dashed against the sharp edges of rocks, whereby very many of them died. The rest that were stronger came at last to the wilderness, where, like beasts, they had barly given them for their food; there were also abundance of venemous serpents and scorpions in that place, whose sting was deadly, yet, thorow Gods great Providence, none of these servants of Christ gat any hurt thereby.A special pro∣vidence. Hunrick in the seventh year of his reign, directed his Mandate to Eugenius Bishop of Carthage, and told all other Bishops in Africk, that they should by such a day meet at Carthage to defend by disputation their faith against the Arrian Bishops;Subtilty of He∣reticks. but withal, by the tenour of the decree, they perceived that he would not suffer any of them to live within his dominions, which caused great heaviness amongst them. Eugenius returned answer, that since it was the common cause of all the Christian Churches, it was but equal that Bishops out of other Countries should be requested to be there present also; and this he did, not because they suspected their own abilities to defend the truth, but because he knew that strangers might use more liberty of speech then they could, and that other Bishops might be witnesses of their sufferings, but this request did but more enrage this unreasonable Tyrant. The appointed day approaching, many Bishops resorted to Carthage, worn out with afflictions and sorrows, yet for many days after their coming, there was no mention of disputing, till in the mean time the King had singled out the learnedest and skilfullest of them, that by sundry Calumniations he might make them away: Amongst whom was Laetus, a stout and learned man, whom he first impri∣soned, and then burnt him in the fire, that so he might strike a fear into the rest. At last the Disputation began, and the Orthodox, to avoid tumult,
chose out some to answer for all the rest. The Arrians placed them∣selves upon lofty Thrones,Pride of Here∣ticks. whilest the Orthodox stood below upon their feet; Whereupon they said, Conference is to be taken in hand, not where proud superiority of power bears sway, but where, by common consent, the Disputants upon equal tearms debate the controversies, that truth may come to light, &c. Then were all the Catholicks commanded to have an hundred stroaks a piece with a cudgel, given them for this speech:Unjust cruelty. Whereupon Eugenius said, The Lord from heaven behold the violence which we suffer, and consider the tribulation which we sustain from our perse∣cutors. Then did the Orthodox Bishops desire the Arrians to pro∣pound what they intended; But the Arrian Bishops seeing them ready to dispute with them, sought out tergiversations, and declined the dispute. Hereupon the Orthodox drew forth a declaration of their faith, excellently well penned, and exhibited it with this Protestati∣on, If you be desirous to know our belief,A confession of aith. the faith which we hold is herein com∣prised. The Arrians stormed exceedingly at this, giving them out∣ragious language, and presently by false Calumnies they accused them to the King, and so incensed him, that by an Edict in one day he caused all the Christians Churches through Africk to be shut up,A wicked E∣dict. giving to the Arrians all the goods and Churches of the Orthodox. Then did he command that all those godly Bishops that were met together at Carthage,Crulty of He∣reticks. should be spoiled of all that they had in their lodgings, and so driven out of the City-gates; having neither ser∣vant, nor beast, nor garment to sift them in, left unto them; and all men were forbidden either to harbour them, or give them any suste∣nance, the King threatning to burn him and all his family that should relieve them. The Bishops being thus turned out, lay in the open fields round about the Wals: and when the Tyrant went forth to the fish-ponds, they met him, saying, Why are we so afflicted? what evil have we done? If we be called to dispute, Why are we spoiled of all we have? Why are we slandred? Why are we forced to remain here amongst the dung-hills, affli∣cted with hunger and nakedness, far from our Churches and houses? Herewith the Tyrant was so enraged, that he commanded his horse∣men to ride over them, whereby many of them were sore bruised and wounded, especially the aged and weak men: Then did he command them to meet him at the Temple of Memory: and when they came thi∣ther, they had this writing delivered to them; Our Lord King Hun∣rick, lamenting your obstinacy in refusing to obey his will, and to em∣brace his Religion, yet intends to deal graciously with you, and if you will take this oath, he will send you back to your Churches and houses: Then they all said with one consent, We are all Christians, and Bishops, and hold the Apostolical and only true faith; and thereupon they made a brief confession of their faith;Devillish sub∣tilty. But the Kings Commissioners urged them without any further delay to take the oath contained in that paper; Whereupon they answered, Do you think us bruit beasts, that we should so easily swear to a writing, wherein we know not what is con∣tained?
Then was the Oath read unto them, which was this, You shall swear that after the death of the Lord our King, his son Hilderick shall succeed him in the Kingdom, and that none of you shall send letters beyond the seas. If you take this oath, he will restore you to your Churches. They that were plain-meaning men amongst them, were willing to take it; but others that saw further into the subtilty of it, refused it. Then were those which would take it, commanded to separate them∣selves from the other, which being done, a Notary presently took their names, and of what Cities they were: he did the like also by the Refusers; and so both parties were committed to ward, and short∣ly after the King sent them word; first to those that would have taken the oath: Because that you, contrary to the rule of the Gospel, which saith,A wicked sen∣tence. Thou shalt not swear at all, would have sworn: The Kings Will is, that you shall never see your Churches more, but shall be banished into the wilderness, and never perform any Ministerial office again; and there you shall till the ground: But to the Refusers of the oath, he said, because you desire not the reign of our Lords son, you shall therefore be immediately sent away to the Isle of Corse, there to hew timber for the ships. He also sent abroad through all Africk, his cruel tormentors: So that no place, no house remained free from lamentation, screeching and out-cryes. They spared neither age nor sex, but only such as yielded to their will. Some they cudgelled with staves; some they hung up, others they burned. Women, and especially gentlewomen, they openly tortured stark naked without all shame: Amongst whom was Dionysia, whom when they saw bolder, and more beautifull then the rest,Dionysia. they first commanded her to be stript naked, and made ready for the cudgels, who spake boldly to them, saying, I am assured of the love of my God,Impudence of Hereticks. vx me how you will, only my woman-hood disclose you not; But they, with greater rage, set her naked upon an high place for a publick spectacle: Then did they whip her till the streams of blood flowed all over her body: Whereupon she boldly said, Ye Ministers of Satan, that which you do for my reproach, is to me an honour. And beholding her only son,Courage. that was young and tender, and seemed fear∣full of torments, checking him with a motherly Authority, she so en∣couraged him, that he became much more constant then before. To whom in the midst of his terrible torments, she said, Remember, O my child,She encourag∣eth her son. that we were baptized in the name of the holy Trinity: Let us not lose the garment of our salvation, least it be said, Cast them into outer darkness, where is weeping▪ and wailing and gnashing of teeth: For that pain is to be dreaded, that never endeth; and that life to be desired, that alwayes lasteth: The youth was so encouraged hereby, that he persevered patient in all his sufferings, till, in the midst of his torments, he gave up the Ghost. Many by her exhortations and example were gained to God, and animated in their sufferings.The benefit of good examples. Not long after, Cyrillas the Arrian Bishop at Carthage, stirred up the Tyrant against the Christians,Slanders. telling him, that he could never
expect to enjoy his Kingdom in peace, so long as he suffered any of them to live, Hereupon he sent for seven eminent Christians from Capsa to Carthage,Tentation. whom he first assaulted with flattery and large pro∣mises of honour, riches, &c. if so be they would imbrace his faith: But these servants of Christ rejected all those profers▪ crying out, One Lord, one faith, one Baptism; saying also,Courage and constancy. Do with our bodies what you please, torment them at your will, its better for us to suffer these momentary pains, then to endure everlasting torments. Hereupon they were sent to prison, loaded with great iron chains, and thrust into a stinking Dungeon: But God stirred up the hearts of many godly persons (by great bribes to the Jayler) to procure daily access to them, and by their exhortations,Gods Mercy. they were so corroborated in the faith, that they much desired to suffer the like things for Christ with these men, and would willingly have laid down their necks to the Persecutors swords. The Tyrant hearing of it, was exceedingly enraged, caused them to be kept closer, loaden with more chains, and to be put to great tor∣ments. Then did he cause a ship to be filled with combustible matter, commanding that these holy Martyrs should be put into it,Many burned in a ship. and fast bound in the same, and fire to be set to the ship in the sea, that they might be burned to death. When they were brought out of the prison, the multitude of Gods people accompanied them to the ship, who as innocent Lambs were led to be sacrificed, looking upon their weighty irons, as rare Jewels and Ornaments. With chearfulness and alacrity they went towards the place of execution, as if they had gone to a banket,Admirable courage and comfort. singing with one voice unto the Lord, as they went along the street, saying, This is our desired day, more festival then any feivity: Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of salvation! when for the faith of our Lord God, we endure death, that we may not loose the garment of obtained faith. The people also with one voice cried; Fear not, O servants of God, neither dread the threats of your enemies: Die for Christ, who died for us, that he might redeem us with the price of his saving blood. Amongst these was a pretty boy, to whom a subtil Seducer said, Why hastest thou, my pretty boy, unto death: let them go,Tentation. they are mad; Take my counsel, and thou shalt not only have life, but great advancement in the Kings Court: To whom the lad answered, You shall not get me from the fellowship of these holy men,Constancy of a boy. who bred me up, with whom I lived in the fear of God, and with whom I desire to die; and with whom I trust, I shall obtain the glory to come. And so being all put into the ship, they were burned to∣gether. After the death of Hunrick, Gundabund succeeded in the Kingdom, who continuing in the steps of his cruel predecessors, afflicted the Christians grievously by sundry kinds of persecution, during the space of twelve years, at the end whereof he died, and Thrasamund
succeeded him, a man that excelled all his Predecessors in magnani∣mity and courage. His manner was by perswasions, flatteries, promises and rewards, to seek to draw the Christians to his Arrian Heresie; but they which would not be prevailed with hereby, he no way punished or molested them. In his time there were great Wars between the Moors and Vandals, the Moors had one Cabaon for their General, who commanded all his souldiers to use abstinence in their diet,An excellent example of an Heathen. and to abstain from women, and from all Injury and wrong-doing. The women he enclosed with∣in trenches by themselves, commanding that under pain of death no man should have access to them. Then did he send forth a certain company of Moors, commanding them privately to follow the Camp o the Vandals, and that wheresoever the Vandals profaned any Church of the Christians, presently after their departure, they should follow and purge the same; For (saith he) if the Christians God be a good God, then will he assist them that are devoted to him, and punish the Blasphemers. These men in counterfeit base attire, followed the Van∣dals Camp; and whereas the Vandals where ever they came, took up the Christians Churches for their Horses and Beasts of burthen,Profaness of Hereticks. carrying themselves very insolently against God and his House: beating and abusing the Ministers and Church-Officers, making them to attend upon them as their slaves. After their departure the Moors on the contrary, cleansed the Churches, carried out the dung▪ kneeled down to, and reverenced the Ministers, and distributed money to the poor, and thus they did continually. Then did Cabaon prepare to give his enemies battel; and whereas the Vandals were all Horse-men, and very well mounted, their Horses were so afrighted at the sight of the Moors Camels, that they were presently put into disorder, and the Moors with darts and arrows did so pelt them, that they put them to flight, and slew many of them, whereupon Thrasamund shortly after died of grief. Then did Ilderick the son of Hunrick succeed in the Kingdom, who was equally mild and gentle, both to the Vandals and Christians, and one that kept very fair correspondence with the Emperour Justi∣nian. But Gilimer, a cunning and ambitious man, deposed him, and usurped the Kingdom to himself. Whereupon Justinian sent against him that brave and gallant General Billisarius,The destructi∣on of the per∣secuting Van∣dals. who overcame him in several battels, took him prisoner, freed the Christians from persecu∣tion, and subverted the Empire of the Vandals in Africk, after they had reigned there for the space of ninety years, wherein for the most part they had been cruel persecutors of the true Church of God. Sin the fore∣runner of perse∣cution.Salvian, who was Bishop of Masilia, and lived at the same season, complaineth, that before these brutish Vandals came into Africk, the Church of God there was much degenerated from its ancient purity, and the power of Godliness was much decaid; insomuch as they
which lived exactly according to the Rule of Gods Word, were hissed at as they went in the streets, as if they had been monsters: Where∣upon, saith he, the passage of the Vandals into Africk, was not to be imputed to Gods rigour, but to the Africans wickedness, &c. Collected out of a Book written by Victor Bishop of Utica, who lived at the same time, and was himself a Sufferer under this persecution. Here place the fifth Figure.
THE PERSECUTION OF THE CHURCH UNDER THE PAPACY. CHAP. XXI. The Persecutions of the Waldenses, which began Anno Christi, 1160. WHen the darkness of Popery had overspread the Christi∣an world, so that Kings and Princes imploied their Authority to establish the Romish Idolatry, appointing to slaughter such as denied Transubstantiation, Adora∣tion of the Host, bowing the knees before it, &c. this occasioned many Christians to detest this superstition as unknown to the Apostles and primitive Church.The fst Re∣formers▪ And first of all God raised up Berengarius, presently after the year one thousand, who boldly and faithfully preached the Truth, and against the Romish Er∣rors, continuing his Ministry, till about the time that William the Con∣queror came into England, whereupon the Gospellers were called Be∣rengarians, till about the year 110. At which time common notice being taken of their separation from the Church of Rome, and their disagreeing from so many of their Tenents, they were branded with the odious name of Hereticks, And twenty years after, when they were grown into a very great multitude, they had one Peter Bruis for their most famous Preacher, who taught long, and publickly at Tho∣louse, under the protection and favour of a noble Earl, called Hilde∣phonsus, whereupon in those parts they were called Petro-Brusians. For Peter Bruis, Anno Christi, 1120. published their Tenents in a book called Anti-Christ, wherein he declared both the ground of their Doctrine, and the causes of their separation from the Romish Church. Twenty years after this, they were grown into a mighty multitude about Anno Christi, 1140. whereupon the Popes of Rome now began to lay about them for their Extirpation: For which end he stirred up his most learned followers to write against them; and warned Princes to take heed of them, and to banish them out of their Territories.
Anno Christi, 1147. they had Henry of Tholouse for their most eminent Preacher, whereupon they began to be called Henericians; and because they were well red in the Scriptures, especially in the Epistles of St. Paul, whom by way of eminency they called the Apo∣stle, alleadging Texts out of him, nnd would admit of no Testimo∣nies for the proof of Religion, but only out of Scripture, they were cal∣led Apostolicks. And shortly after God raised up Peter Valdo a Citizen of Lions in France,Peter Valdo. who shewed himself most couragious in opposing the Popish inventions, withal taxing divers other innovations which were crept into the Church of Rome, and he was the more eagerly hearkened unto,Charity. because he was in high esteem for his Learning and Piety, and his liberality to the poor; for besides the nourishing of their bodies, he did also feed their souls, by exhorting them to seek Jesus Christ, and salvation by him. The Arch-Bishop of Lions being informed that Valdo used thus to instruct the people,Popish malice. boldly taxing the vice, luxury, and pride of the Pope, and his Clergy, forbad him the same upon pain of Excommunication, and proceeded against him as an Heretick; Valdo replied,Christian cou∣rage. that he could not be silent in a cause of so great importance, as the salvation of mens souls, wherein he must obey God rather then man: Then did the Arch-Bishop seek to have him apprehended, but could not effect it, Valdo having many great friends, and being generally beloved, whereby he continued (though closely) in Lions three years. Pope Alexander the third being informed that divers persons in Lions questioned his soveraign Authority over the whole Church, cur∣sed Valdo, and his Adherents,Pope Alexander raiseth persecu∣tion. commanding the Arch-Bishop to pro∣ceed against them by Ecclesiastical censures to their utter extirpation; whereupon they were wholly chased out of Lions. Valdo and his fol∣lowers were called Waldenses, which afterwards spread themselves in∣to divers Countries and Companies. The opinions of these Waldenses for which they were so declaimed against, and cruelty persecuted by the Romanists, were these. 1. That holy oyl is not to be mingled in Baptism. 2. That all such prayers are superstitious and vain which are made over the oyl, salt, wax, incense, boughs of Olives and Palms, Ecclesi∣astical garments, calices, Church-yards, and such like things. 3. That time is spent in vain in Ecclesiastical singings, and saying the Canonical hours. 4. That flesh and eggs may be eaten in Lent, and that there is no merit in abstinence at such times. 5. That when necessity requires, all sorts of persons may marry, Ministers as well as others. 6. That auricular confession is not necessary. 7. That Confirmation is not a Sacrament. 8. That Obedience is not to be performed to the Pope. 9. That Ministers should live upon Tithes and Offerings. 10. That there is no difference between a Bishop and a Minister.
11. That it is not the dignity, but deserts of a Presbyter that makes him a better man. 12. That they administer the Sacrament without the accustomed form of the Roman Church. 13. They say that Images are to be taken out of Churches, and that to adore them was Idolatry. 14. They contemned the Popes indulgences, and say, that they were of no vertue. 15. They refused to take any oath whereby they should be en∣forced to accuse themselves, or their friends. 16. They maintained their Ministers out of their own purses, think∣ing it unreasonable that such should be diverted from their stu∣dies, whilst they were forced to get their livings with their own hands. 17. They held that the Miracles done in the Church of Rome, were false Miracles. 18. That the Religion of the Frier Mendicants was invented by the Devil. 19. That the Pope of Rome was not to be obeyed. 20. That whoredom and stews were not to be permitted under pre∣tense of avoiding Adultery and Rapes. 21. That there is no Purgatory wherein the souls of the deceased are to be purged before they be admitted into heaven. 22. That a Presbyter, falling into scandalous sin, ought to be sus∣pended from his office till he had sufficiently testified his Repen∣tance. 23. That the Saints deceased are not to be worshiped, and prayed unto. 24. That it matters not for the place of their burial, whether it were holy or no. 25. They admitted no extream unction amongst the Sacraments of the Church. 26. They say, that Masses, Indulgences, and prayers do not profit the dead. 27. They admitted no prayers, but such as did correspond with the Lords prayer, which they made the rule of all their Prayers. 28. Lastly, Though their adversaries charged them with holding, that every lay-man might freely preach to the people, yet they had Bishops, and orders amongst themselves; as the Order of Bulgarie, the order of Druguria,; and they who were their Ministers were or∣dained thereunto, though they were not of the Romish Institution, as Nicolus Viguierius, and others report of them. God Provi∣dence. Persecution spreads the Gospel. King of France perse∣cutes them.Valdo himself went into Dauphiney, conversing in the mountains of the same Province with certain rude persons, yet capable of receiving his belief: his Disciples also spread into Picardy, whence they were called Picards: against whom afterwards K. Philip (enforced by the Ecclesiastical persons) took arms, and overthrew three hundred gen∣tlemens
houses that followed their part, and destroied some walled Towns, pursuing them into Flanders, whether they fled, and causing many of them there to be burnt to death. This persecution caused many of them to flie into Germany, and Al∣satia, where they spread their Doctrine; and shortly after the Bi∣shops of Mayence and Strasburg, raised up a great persecution against them, causing five and thirty Burgesses of Mayence to be burnt in one fire, and eighteen in another▪ who with great constancy suffered death. At Strasburg eighty were burnt, at the instance of the Bishop; yet multitudes of people received such edification by the exhortations, constancy, and patience of the Martyrs, that Anno 1315. in the County of Passau, and about Bohemia, there were above eighty thousand persons that made profession of the same faith.Many burnt. Anno Christi 1160. some of them came into England, and at Ox∣ford were punished in the most barbarous and cruel manner as ever were any Christians for Religion-sake before the time,The spreading of the Gospel. as you may see in my English Martyrologie. And three years after in the Council of Turon, or Towers in France: viz. 1163. Pope A∣lexander the third, made a decree, that these Gospellers, and all their favourers should be excommunicated, and that none should sell them any thing, or buy any thing of them, according as it was fore-prophesied, Rev. 13.17. But notwithstanding all these devises they had goodly Churches in Bulgary, Croatia, Dalmatia, and Hungary.Malicious slanders. The Popish Monks to make them odious, and to have the better occasion to persecute them, raised up many foul slanders of them, as they were sorcerers, bug∣gerers, &c. that they assembled themselves in the night time, and that the Pastors commanded the lights to be put out, saying, Qui potest capere, capiat, catch who catch can, whereupon they committed abominable incest, the son with the mother, the brother with the sister, the father with his daughter,Vindication. &c. they charged them also with many foul and false opinions: from which accusations they by a pub∣lick Apology and vindication cleared themselves, which they pub∣lished both in French and their own language. Rainerus the Monk saith of them, that amongst all those which have risen up against the Church of Rome, the Waldenses were the most dan∣gerous, in regard of their long continuance, for some say, that it hath continued from the time of Pope Silvester; and some say, from the Apostles time; and because this Sect (saith he) is more general, and there is scarce any Countrey in which it hath not taken footing: and because it hath a great appearance of piety, for they carry themselves uprightly before men, and believe rightly touching God in all things, holding all the Articles of the Creed, only they hate and revile the Church of Rome,The greate en∣cease of the Waldenses. and therein (saith he) they are easily believed of the people. Cesarius saith, that this Heresie so encreased, that in a short time it in∣fected usque ad mille civitates, a thousand Cities. Parsons saith, that they
had an Army of seventy thousand men to fight for them; yea, they were so spread in Germany, that they could travel from Collen to Mi∣lan in Italy, and every night lodge with Hosts of their own profession. Hereupon the Pope hath always used all his art for their utter ex∣tirpation, by his Thunder-bolts, Curses, Canons, Constitutions, Decrees, and whatsoever else might make them odious to Kings, Princes, and people,Popish rage and malice. giving them over to Satan, interdicting them all Communion and society with others, making them incapable of any charges, ho∣nours, profits, to inherit lands, to make wills to be buried in Church-yards, yea, confiscating their goods, dis-inheriting their heirs, and where they could apprehend any of them, they condemned them to be delivered to the secular power, their houses to be razed, their lands and goods to be confiscated, commanding Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Consuls, and people, to make an exact inquisition, to shut the City-gates, to ring the Toll-bell, to arm themselves, to apprehend, kill, or use any other violence to them, giving to their Accusers a third part of their Estates, condemning all favorers of them to the same punishment. Anno Christ, 1163. came some of these godly persons to Collen in Germany out of the parts of Flanders, where they secretly remained for a time in a barn near the City:Five burnt at Collen. But the diligence of the Popish Clergy found them out by their not coming to their Church, and so caused, them, to be apprehended, and brought before them; and af∣ter examination because they constantly adhered to the truth, and would by no means be brought to recant the same, they condemned them, and delivered them to the secular power: who carrying them out of the City, (being four men, and one young woman) they first bound the four men to a stake, and set fire to them: The people much pitied the young woman, and would fain have saved her, hoping that the burning of her companions would have wrought her to a re∣cantation; but she perceiving their drift, strugled out of the hands of those that held her, and voluntarily leaped into the fire, whereby she was burned with them. Godfridus Monachus. A bloody Edict against the Waldenses.Anno Christi, 1194. Aldephonsus King of Arragon (probably by the instigation of Pope Celestine, and mis-information of his Clergy) published this evil Edict against them. Aldephonsus by the grace of God King of Arragon, &c. to all Arch-Bishops, Bishops, and the rest of the Prelates of the Church in his Kingdom, to Earls, Vi∣counts, Knights, and all the people of his Kingdom, and to all that are in Au∣thority, health, &c. Because God would have us to be over his people, it is a wor∣thy and just thing that we take continual care as far as in us lies of the salvati∣on, and defence of them: Wherefore being imitators of our Predecessors, and in obedience to the Canons, we judge that all Hereticks cast out of the sight of God and of all Catholicks, are to be condemned, and persecuted every where, namely the Waldenses, or poor men of Lyons, whereof there is no number, who being cursed by his holy Church: We also command to depart, and flie from all our Kingdoms, and places within our power, as enemies to the Cross of Christ, our selves, and this Kingdom. Therefore from this day forward
shall presume to receive the foresaid Waldenses into their houses, or to hear their doleful preaching, or to give them meat, or any other relief, let him know, that he hath incurred the indignation of God, and of us, and that he shall be punished as a Traitor, and all his goods shall be confiscated without remedy or appeal. And this our Edict we command to be published upon Sundays by Bishops, and all Rectors of Churches, &c. through all our Dominions. And we command that the foresaid punishments be inflicted upon all Transgressors of it by our Bailyffs, Justices, &c. And if any of the foresaid naughty, people whether noble, or ignoble, shall presume to stay three days after the publication hereof, and not hast their removal, we will, and command all men to bring upon them all mischief, disgrace, and agrievance (except death, or cutting off their members) which shall be gratefull and acceptable to us, neither shall they fear any punishment for the same, &c. But this same Aldephonsus that made this cruel Edict by the just retribution of God, the very next year lost part of his Kingdom to the Moors, and his son having also fifty thousand of his men slain in one battel. Hoveden. The Popelings exercising such cruelty against the Gospellers,They defend themselves by Arms. they began to defend themselves by arms, repelling force with force: and when, being overpowred by multitude, they could defend themselves no longer, they left their places, and became souldiers abroad, and many of them became very helpfull to our King Henry the second in his Wars, when he was molested about Arch-Bishop Beckets death: Also our King Richard the first at his return out of the Holy land, (as they called it) made good use of them (who though they were curs∣ed by the Pope, yet were they blessed by God) for the recovery of his right, and for the defence of his people. Valdo notwithstanding all the curses of the Pope, continued to pub∣lish, that the Pope was Anti-Christ, the Mass an abomination,Valdo's Zeal and Courage. the Host an Idol, and Purgatory a fable: whereupon Pope Innocent the third, Anno, 1198, seeing that the other remedies were not sufficient to sup∣press these Hereticks, as he called them, authorized certain Monks Inquisitors, who by process should apprehend and deliver them to the secular power, by a far shorter, but much more cruel way then was used formerly; for by this means the people were delivered by thou∣sands into the Magistrates hands, and by them to the Executioners, whereby in a few years all Christendom was moved with compassion, to see all those burnt and hanged, that did trust only in Christ for salvation. The Pope seeing that this suppressed not, but rather increased the number of his enemies,Sangi Marty∣rum, semen Ec∣clesia. sent certain Bishops and Monks to preach in those places of the Waldenses, but their preaching converted not any of them from their former opinions. Amongst those Monks was Dominick, who was a zealous persecutor of these Saints of God both in word and deed,Dominicans instituted. who seeing himself to be in Authority▪ instituted an Order of begging Monks, called after his name Dominicans, which order was confirmed by the Pope, for their
zealous assisting of him against the Waldenses, and this Dominick labour∣ed in the inquisition with such contentment to the Popes, that from that time forward the Monks of his order have always been imploied in the inquisition. The power of these Inquisitors was without limitation, they could assemble the people by the sound of a bell when they pleased, proceed against the Bishops themselves,Inquisitors be∣gun, An. Chri. 1176· they could imprison and re∣lease without controul: Any accusation was sufficient with them: A sor∣cerer▪ a whore was a sufficient witness in the case of pretended Heresie: It mattered not who accused, or whether by word of mouth, or ticket thrown in before the Inquisitors: for process was thereby framed with∣out party,Injustice. without witness, or without other Law, then the pleasure of the Inquisitors. To be rich was a crime near to Heresie, and he that had any thing to lose, was in the way to be undone, either as an Heretick, or as a favou∣rer of them: yea, bare suspition stopped the mouths of parents, kins∣folk, and friends, that they durst not intercede each for other. If any did but convey a cup of cold water,Prodigious cruelty. or a pad of straw to the poor Saints that lay in stinking dungeons, he was condemned as a favourer of the Hereticks, and brought to the same or worse extremities. No Advocate durst undertake the defence of his nearest kinsman, or friends: no Notary durst receive any Act in his favour; yea, death it self made not an end of their punishment, for sometimes they passed sentence against the bones of the dead, to dis-inter and burn them, it may be thirty years after the death of the party accused. Such as were heirs had nothing certain, for if their fathers or kindred were accused they durst not undertake the defence of their own right, possess their own inheritance, without the crime or suspition of Heresie. The greatest and richest amongst the people were constrained even to adore these Monks Inquisitors, and to give them great sums for the building of their Convents & houses, for fear to be accused of Heresie. And the better to keep the people in aw, these Inquisitors would sometimes lead in Triumph their prisoners in their processions, enjoyn∣ing some of them to whip themselves, others to go in their shirts bare-foot and bare-headed, having a With about their necks; and a torch in their hands for the greater terrour to the beholders, seeing persons of all estates and sexes in so miserable a condition. Some of these accused persons were sent into the holy Land, or en∣rolled for some other expedition against the Turks and Infidels, where they were to serve for a certain time at their own charge: in the mean time these Fathers Inquisitors took possession of their houses and goods, and when they returned home, they must not so much as enquire whether these Monks had in their absence lain with their wives, lest they would be condemned as back-sliders, and unworthy of favour. Anno Christi, 1201. A gallant Knight that was one of these Wal∣denses, called Enraudus, whom Henry, Earl of Nivers had made Go∣nour of his land,A Knight burned. was accused of Heresie, and brought before the
Popes Legat, who called a Common Council at Paris against him, consisting of the Arch-Bishop, Bishops, and Ministers of Paris, who after examination of witnesses, condemned him for an Heretick, and so delivered him to the secular power, by whom he was burned in the flames. Chron. Rol. Altissiodorensis. In Octo. Anno Christi, 1207. in the Town of Mont-royal near Carcasson in the Earldom of Tholouse,A Disputation between the Popelings and the Waldenses. there was held a famous dispu∣tation between Didacus Bishop of Oxon, a Spaniard: Frier Dominick; Peter of the New Castle, the Popes Legat, and Raph his Colleague on the one party, and Arnold Hot, Pastor of the Albingenses, with some other of his fellow-labourers on the other party: The Arbi∣trators were two noble men, viz, Bernard de villa nova, and Pernail of Arras; and two Plebians, viz. Raimond Godius, and Arnold Ribe∣ria, The Questions disputed upon were these: First, that the Church of Rome is not the Spouse of Christ, nor an holy Church, but an impure one, and instructed by the Doctrine of Satan. Se∣condly, That their Ecclesiastical Polity is not good, nor holy, nor established by Jesus Christ. Thirdly, That the Mass, as it is cele∣brated therein, was not instituted by Christ, or his Apostles. The Bishop undertook to prove the contrary: but after three days disputa∣tion, he desired fifteen days to commit his Arguments to writing; and Arnold Hot required eight days to put in his Answer. At the day appointed the Bishop brought in a very long writing; and Hot desired to answer by word of mouth, intreating his Auditors that he might not seem troublesom to them, if he were long in an∣swering so long a discourse; and it was granted that he should be heard with patience without interruption, and so he discoursed for divers hours four days together, to the great admiration of all that heard him, and so ready was he therein, that all the Bishops, Abbats, Monks, and Priests, wished themselves elsewhere: For he framed his answer to each point in order, as it was set down in the writing, and that with such plainness and perspicuity, that he gave all that were present to understand, that this Bishop, though he had writen much, yet had he concluded nothing that might truly turn to the ad∣vantage of the Church of Rome against his Assertions: Then did Arnold request, that forasmuch as the Bishops, and himself in the beginning of the conference, were bound to prove whatsoever they affirmed by the Word of God only, it might now be imposed upon the Bishops, and Priests to make good their Mass as they sing it, part by part, to have been instituted by the son of God, and so used by the Apostles, &c. But the Bishops were not able to prove that the Mass, or any part of it was so ordained or used, whereupon they were much discontented, and ashamed. Arnold pro∣ceeded to prove that it was not instituted by Christ or his Apo∣stles.The Popelings bafled. For (said he) if the Mass were the holy Supper instituted by our Saviour, there would remain after the consecration, that which was in the supper of our Lord, viz. Bread: But in the Mass there is no bread;
For by transubstantiation the bread is vanished, therefore the Mass is not the holy Supper of the Lord: &c. The Bishops, Legats, Monks, and Priests having nothing to answer to these things, retired themselves: not being willing to here any more: and fearing least these Gospellers should work such an impression on the hearts of those that were present, as might shake their beliefe touching the Masse, they dessolved the A∣ssembly. Nich Vignerius. Between the years 1176. which was the time when this Inquisition was first erected, to the year 1228. there was so great a havock made of poor Christians, that the Arch-Bishops of Aix, Arles, and Narbonne, being assembled at the request of the said Inquisitors, to conferre with them about divers difficulties in the execution of their offices,Horrible cru∣elty. had com∣passion of the great number that were accused & cast into prison, saying, We hear that you have apprehended such a multitude of the Waldenses, that it is not only impossible to defray the charge of their food, but to provide lime and stone to build prisons for them, we therefore advise you to forbear this rigour till the Pope be advertised, and direct what he will have done in this case, &c. Yet notwithstanding all this cruelty, there was in the year 1260. according to the report of George Morrel in his memorials,The number of the Waldenses. p. 54. above eight hundred thousand persons that made profession of the faith of the Waldenses. Besides the Churches that they had in Valentinois, where their faith was propagated from the father to the son, their religion spread also beyond the Alps into the valley of Pragela, within the jurisdiction of the Arch-Bishop of Turin, from whence were peopled the Waldensian Valleys of Piedmont, La Perouse, S. Martain, Angrogne, &c. This valley of Pargela was one of the safest retiring places that the Waldenses had, being environed on all sides with mountains almost inaccessible, into the caves whereof they retired themselves in the times of persecution: and though they were weakned on all sides, environed with enemies, and in danger of being apprehended if they looked but forth of their doors; yet was there never any wordly respect that had power to alter their holy resolution from the father to the sonne,Their godly lives. to serve God, taking his Word for the rule of their faith, & his Law for the rule of their obedience: yea, no sooner were the infants weaned from their mothers breasts, but their parents took a singular delight to instruct them in the Christian faith. Good Pastors.There Pastors also did not only preach to them on the Sabbath daies, but went in the week daies to instruct them in the villages and hamlets, not sparing themselves for the roughnesse of the rocks, the coldnesse of the ayr, and the cragginesse of the country, where they were fain to climbe up high mountains to visit their flocks. There was also holy Discipline exercised amongst them: The people praied with fervency at night when they went to their rest, and in the morning before the went about their labour: They had Schools wherein their children were taught and nurtured. Bt whilest they thus busily sought the advancement of Gods glory and their own salvation,Persecution raised. the devil raised up a persecution against them.
Anno 1380. by a Monk Inquisitor, called Francis Boralli, who had a commission to enquire after the Waldenses in Aix, Arles, Ambrun, Viene, Geneva, Aubone, Savoy, the Venetian County, the Principality of Orenge, the City of Avignion, &c. which commission he received from Pope Cle∣ment the seventh. This Monk cited to appeare before him at Ambrun, all the Inhabi∣tants of Frassiniere, Argentire, and of the valley Pute upon pain of ex∣communication: but they appeared not, whereupon they were con∣demned of contumacy, and excommunicated:Popish cruelty▪ and for the space of thirteen years, as he caught any of them, he delivered them up to the se∣cular power to be burnt at Grenoble, the number of whom was an hun∣dred and fifty men, divers women, with many of their sons and daugh∣ters; besides about eighty persons of Argentire. The Inquisitors also adjudged to themselves two pars of all their goods▪ and the third part to the temporal powers: they forbad all their bordering neighbours also to assist, receive, visit, or defend them or to converse with them in any sort upon pain of being attainted, and punish∣ed as favourers of Hereticks, &c. The Waldenses of the valley of Pragela,In Pragela. Anno 1400. were assaulted by their enemies on the side of Susa in Piedmont: but most of their assaults proved in vain, because these Waldenses retired into the high moun∣tains, hiding themselves in the caves and hollow places thereof, from whence they much endamaged those that came to assail them. Their enemies seing this, came upon them in the depth of winter, when those poor people never suspected it, all the mountains being covered over with snow:Popish malice. and thereupon they retired into the highest mountain of all the Alps, together with their wives and children, the mothers carrying some in their cradles, and leading others by the hand: yet the enemy followed them till night, and slew many before they could recover the mountain: and they which were so slain had the better bargain: for night coming on, these poor people being in the snow, without any meanes to make a fire for their infants, many of them were benummed,Infants star∣ved to death. and in the morning above eighty of them were frozen to death in their cradles, and most of their mothers died also, and divrese others were giving up the last gasp: The enemies lay all night in these peoples houses, which they ransacked and pillaged, and so returned to Susa, but by the way, meeting with a poor Waldensian woman,Popish cruel∣ty. they hanged her upon a tree, and so departed. The VValdenses of the valley of Frassiniere,Frassiniere▪ were greatly persecuted by the Arch-Bishop of Ambrun, Anno 1460. who made a Monk cal∣led John Vayleti his Commissioner against them, which Monk pro∣ceeded with such diligence and violence, that scarce any person could escape his hands, but that he was either apprehended for an Heretick,Popish cruelty. or a favourer of them, whereby many Papists suffered amongst the rest, which caused them to petition King Lewis the eleventh of France, by his authority to stay the course of that persecution:The King for∣bids the perse∣cution. and thereupon the King wrote his Letter to the Governour of Dauphine, signifying, that whereas the Inquisitors had daily sent forth their processe against many
poor people in those parts without reasonable cause, putting some to the rack, and condemning them for matters whereof they were never guilty, and which they could not prove by any witnesse: and of others they had exacted great sums of money, and divers waies had unjustly vexed, and molested them: he therefore decreed that for the time to come all such processe should be void, and of none effect, nor any wrong done to them in body, goods, or good name, except there were any that obstinately maintained and affirmed any thing against the holy Catholicke Faith. Yet the Arch-Bishop conti∣nues it.But the Arch-Bishop was so far from ceasing the persecution upon this Edict, that he grew more violent by reason of the last clause, pre∣tending that he did not any thing contrary to the Kings precept, see∣ing they which were cited, appeared not to justifie themselves, &c. He also suborned many Priests, which were his own Officers, to depose, that all they which had petitioned the King were VValdenses:Popish malice. Slanders. He also hired one John Pelegrin to accuse them for assembling themselves in dark places to commit whoredom, &c. and then he sent to the Court to justifie himself from the complaint made to the King against him, that he had persecuted the Waldenses rather out of covteousness to get their goods, then out of zeal to the Catholick Faith: but this single witness prevailed but litle, seeing there were many other who deposed, that they had never seen any such villany amongst the Waldenses, nor any the least appearance of the same. Yet did not the Archbishop cease to prosecute them to the utter∣most of his power, so that he caused most of them to flie away, only one James Pateneri stood to it, averring before the Court that he was unjustly vexed,Ja Pateneri contrary to the Kings Letters, demanding a copy of the proceedings, that he might right himself by Law: hereupon the Archbishop left him, and fell upon those that wanted the like cou∣rage, citing the Consuls of Frassiniere to answer for themselves, and all the inhabitants of their valley: But they refused, saying, that they had nothing to say before the Archbishop, seeing their cause was now depending before the King and his Council,The Arch-Bishops cruelty. protesting against the Archbishops power, and demanding a copy of the Kings Letter: But the Archbishop, notwithstanding this protestation, sent them to the fire, without any other indictment. Yet the Lord left not this cruelty long unrevenged, for shortly after the Archbishop died by the stroak of Gods justice,Gods judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. and so ended his Persecution▪ Anno Christi 1487. One villany of the Inquisitor Valeti may not be forgoten, which was this: When he examined any of the Waldenses, Whether he be∣leeved that the bread in the Sacrament, after the consecration, was changed into the reall and naturall body of Christ which hung upon the crosse? If the Waldenses answered, No; he set down his answer thus, That he beleeved not in God. When he asked, Whether we ought not to pray to Saints?Popish lies. If they answred, No; he set down, That the railed upon, and spake evil of the Saints. When he enquired, Whether we
ought not to pray to the Virgin Mary in our necessities? If they answer∣ed No; he set down, That they spake blasphemy against the Virgin Mary, &c.Gods provi∣dence. And by Gods providence these Records were kept in the Arch-bish∣op of Ambruns house, till the City and their Records fell into the hands of the Protestants an hundred years after, and so God brought all their knavery to light. Anno 1488. Pope Innocent the eight sent Albert de capitaneis, Arch-Deacon of Cremona against these Waldenses, who craved aid of the Kings Lieutenant of Dauphine, against them. This Lieutenant for his service levied troops of men, and at the Arch-Deacons request,Popish subtilty led them against the Waldenses in the valley of Loyse, and to colour his proceedings with a pretence of justice, he took a Counsellour of the Court along with him. But when they came to the valley, they found no inhabitants, for they were all retired into their Caves in the high mountains, having carried their little children, and all their provision of food with them. Then did this cruel Lieutenant cause much wood to be laid to the mouths of the caves, and set it on fire,Barbarous cru∣eltie.. so that some were choaked with smoak, others burnt with the fire, others cast themselves headlong from the rocks, and were broken in pieces; and if any stirred out, they were presently slain by the souldiers. In this Persecution,A girevous per∣secution. there were found within the Caves four hun∣dred infants stifed in their cradles, or in the arms of their dead mo∣thers: and in all, there perished above three thousand men and women at that time, so that there were no inhabitants left in all that valley: And to prevent the coming of any more of them thither, the Lieutenant gave all their goods and possessions to whom he pleased. Then did he march against the Waldenses of Pragela, and Frassa∣niere, but they, providing for their own safety, attended him at the passages and narrow straits of their vallies,The Lieute∣nant repulsed. so that he was forced to retire. After a while Albert de Capitaneis, being called to another place, he substituted a Franciscan named Francis Ploieri, who Anno 1489. began anew to informe against the Waldenses of Fressaniere, citing them to appeare before him at Ambrun, and for non-appearing, he ex∣communicated them, and condemned them for Hereticks, to be de∣livered to the secular power, and there goods to be confiscated; and in this judgement, their assisted one Ponce, a certain Counsellour of Dauphine. These men afterwards caught two of their Pastors [Fran∣cis Gerondin, and Peter James] who being asked why the Waldenses in∣creased so fast, and spread so far; they answered,Plain dealing. Because the Popish Priests live so dissolutly, and because the Cardinals are so covetous, proud and luxurious, it being commonly known that there is neither Pope,Popish un∣cleannesse. Cardi∣nall, nor Bishop, but keeps his whores, and few or none but had their youths for Sodomy besides; And therefore it is easie for the Waldensian Pastors to perswade the people, that their religion could not be good, whose fruits were so bad, &c This Persecution grew exceeding hot, the Inquisitor and Councel∣lor
sending as many as they could catch to the fire without admit∣ting any appeal: and if any interceded for them, though the father for the childe, or the child for the father, he was presently committed to prison,In Dauphine. and indicted as a favourer of Hereticks. Anno 1594. Anthoni Fabri, and Christopher de Salience had Comis∣sions sent them from the Pope,The weaknesse of a woman. to commence suit against the Walden∣ses in Dauphine, who apprehending the widow of one Peter Berand, they imprisoned, and oft examined her, and thereby drew from her whatever she knew of the Assemblies of the Waldenses, of the persons that frequented them, and of the places and times of their meeting, which afterwards brought great trouble to the said Churches of Christ, and of gain to the Inquisitors. King Lewis the twelfth succeeding King Francis, Anno 1598. the inhabitants of Frassaniere petitioned him to take some order for the resti∣tution of their goods, which by the Inquisitors were deteined from them. The King referred it to his Chancelor, who procured a Commissary from the Poppe, and Commissioner from the King, to be sent down to examine the businesse; These accordingly, having examined divers wit∣nesses against the Waldenses,The innocen∣cy of the Wal∣denses. and finding their innocency, did at last ab∣solve them; the Kings Commissioner publickely professing, that he de∣sired to be but as good a Christian as the worst of those of Frassaniere were: and returning to the King, they made report to him of that which they had done: The King thereupon ordered that the goods of the Wal∣denses should be restored▪ When the Kings order came to Ambrun, it was the opinion of most men, that seeing most of these goods were in the possession of the Arch-Bishop, that therefore he should give a good example in begin∣ing to restore them, but the Arch-Bishop answered, that the goods which he held were annexed to his Arch-Bishoprick,Popish subtilty and injustice. and incorporated to his Church and, therefore it was out of the Kings jurisdiction, and he did not beleeve that the King would meddle therein: Yet being willing to please the King, he profered to restore them their Vineyards, provided that the Lords of Dauphine would restore the goods which they had; but there was not one that would restore what they had so unjustly gotten, so that the poor people where wholly frustrated of their expectation. Then did the summon the Arch-Bishop and those refusers before the King, but these great ones having more friends and favour at Court, then the poor people had, their excuse was admitted, which was, that they could not restore the goods, before the Pope had ab∣solved those of Frassaniere from the sentence of excommunication. Anno 1560. The President of Provence made a speech to the assembly of Estates to root out these Waldenses: Whereupon they raised an Army for the effecting of it; but as soon as the men were in Arms, it pleased God,A speciall pro∣vidence. by the death of King Francis, to put an end to that design, whereby the Waldensian Churches in Dauphine enjoyed peace, and were well furnished with godly Pastors, who held them in the ex∣ercise
of religion, though they were in continuall danger of being per∣secuted to the death for the same. The Waldenses in Dauphine, many years before being multiplyed, so that the countrey could not feed them, dispersed themselves abroad into divers parts, whereof some went into Piedmont,In Piedmont. who lived in great love with those of Daphine, and though they were alwaies op¦pressed with troubles, yet with hearty love and charity, they ever-succoured one another,Love. not sparing their lives and goods for their mutuall conservation. The first Persecution in Piedmont were occasioned by the Preists, who complained to the Arch-Bishop of Turin,Popish malice. that these people lived not according to the manner and belief of the Church of Rome; that they offered not for the dead, cared not for Masses, Absolutions, or to get any of theirs out of the pains of Purgatory, &c. Hereupon the Arch-Bishop persecuted them, complaining of them to their Princes to make them odious: But the Prince enquiring of their neighbours, heard that they were of a good conversation, fearing God, without deceit or malice, loving plain dealing, alwaies ready to serve their Prince with alacrity, &c. He therefore purposed not to molest them: But the Priests and Monks gaining nothing by their belief, charged them with an infinite number of calumnies,Slanders. and ever and anon catch∣ing one or other of them, they delivered them to the Inquisitors, and the Inquisitors to the executioners,Persecution in Piedmont. so that there was scarce a Town or City in Piedmont, wherein some of them had not been put to death. At Turin one of them had his bowels torn out of his belly,Cruelty. and put into a bason before his face, and then was he cruelly martyred, At Revel in the Marquisat of Saluces, one Catelin Girard being on the block whereon he should be burnt,Cat. Girard. requested his Executioner to give him two stones, which he refused to do, fearing least he would throw them at some body, but he protesting the contrary, at last they gave him two stones, which he held in his hands, and said, When I shall have eaten these stones, then shall you see an end of our Religion, for hich you now put me to death, and so he threw them on the ground, and died cheerfully. Thus they burnt many of them in the fire, till Anno 1488. and then they resolved to assault them by open force, because they saw that otherwise they should never be able to extirpate them: besides,Popish malice. their constant sufferings converted many to the faith. Hereupon they levied an Army of eighteen thousand men, besides many inhabitants of Pied∣mont, who ran to the pillage from all parts. These marched all at once to Angrogne, Lcerne, La Perouse, &c. They raised also forces in Dau∣phine, where with they over-ran the Valley of Pragela, so that they be∣ing put to defend themselves, could not assist their friends in Piedmont. But the enemy by this division of his forces, being weakned, was every where beaten, especially in the Valley of Angrogne, where the VVal∣densians having been informed of the levies of their enemies against them, prepared themselves to receive and resist them, keeping
the strait passages, where few men might defend themselves against many. They defended themselves with long Targets of wood, whereby they covered themselves from the hurt of their enemies arrows. Whilst they were thus bickering with their enemies, the women and children upon their knees cried out, O God help us. The enemies made them∣selves merry with this fight,Prayer. and amongst them, one Capt. Saquet, who as he was imitating the woman,Profanenesse. A just judge∣ment. was slain, and tumbled down into a ve∣ry deep valley. Another Captain, crying out to the women in derision, was killed with the shot of an arrow in the throat. Hereupon the souldiers be∣took themselves all to their heels, and the greatest part slew themselves, by tumbling down from the rocks. Another providence of God was this, that the enemies approaching to the stongest entrance by nature, might their have fortified them∣selves,A specall proui∣dence. and so made themselves masters of that Valley: But God sent so thick a cloud, and dark a fog, that they could scarce see one ano∣ther, whereby they wanted opportunity to discover their advantage, and therefore departed: which the VValdenses seeing, couragiously pursued them,Gods judge∣ment on per∣secutors and by that means the enemy being dispersed, and not seeing which waies they went, the greatest part fell headlong down the mountains, quitting their arms and booty which they had gotten at their first entrance into the Valley, by which means the Waldenses recovered it again, Then it pleased God to move the Princes heart (which was Philip the seventh, Duke of Savoy; and Lord of Piedmont) with pity towards these poor people,Gods mercy. saying, That he would not have that people which had been alwaies true, faithfull and obedient to him, to be unjustly destroyed by Arms; being content that twelve of the Principall should come to him to Pignerol to crave pardon for all the rest, for ta∣king arms in their own defence, without his authority: These he en∣tertained lovingly, forgiving all that was past, during the warre. And having been informed that all their children were born with black throats,Slanders. with foure rows of teeth, and all hairy, he caused some of them to be brought to him, and seeing them fair and perfect creatures, he was much displeased with himself for beleeving so easily the reports which were brought to him against them, giving command that none should hereafter molest them, but that they should enjoy all the pri∣viledges which they rest of his subjects in Piedmont did. Notwithstanding which, the Monks Inquisitors daily sent out pro∣cesse against them, lay in wait for them, and as they could aprehend any of them, delievered them over to the secular power. This Perse∣cution lasted to Anno. 1532. at which time the Waldenses ordered that there exercises of religion should be performed no more in covert, as formerly they had been, but in publick, that every one might know them,Zeole and cour∣ageth. and that their Pastors should preach the Gospell openly, not fear∣ing any persecution that might happen unto them.
The prince being advertised hereof, was highly offended with them, and thereupon caused one of his Commanders to hast with his Troops into the said Vallies,Persecution renued. which was performed with such dili∣gence, that he was entred with five hundred horse and Foot, before they were aware, ransacking, plundering and wasting all before them. Then did the Waldenses leave their ploughs, putting themselves into passes, and with their slings charged their enemies with such multi∣tudes of stones, that they were constraned to flie, and to abandon their prey, many remaining dead upon the ground. This news was presently carried to the Prince, and withall he was told, that these people were not to be subdued with Arms, they know∣ing bettter the straits of their Country, then the assailants, and that the skin of one of the Waldenses would cost him the lives of a dozen of his other subjects: where upon he vsed Arms no more against them, but as any of them was caught in Piedmont, he put them to death, if they changed not their belief. Notwithstanding with rigour, they persisted in their resolution,Constancy. and that things might be carried on in the better order, they assembled out of all their Vallies to Angrogne, Anno 1535. viz. the heads of all their families, with their Pastors, where they heard that their bre∣thren of Provence, and Dauphine had sent two of their Pastors, George Morrell, and Peter Masson into Germany, to confere with Oecolampadius Bucer, and others, about their relief, which they had held from fa∣ther to son, time out of minde. Where also the Germane Divines ac∣knowledged that God had been very mercifull and gracious to them, in preserving them undefiled,The antiquity of the Faith. in the midst of so many superstitions which had defiled all Christendom under the tyranny of Antichrist; encouraging and exhorting them not to bury those Talents which God had given them: onely they blamed them for delaying so long to make a publick profession of their adhering to the Gospel▪ and cau∣sing it to be preached publickly, leaving the success to God, &c. Then were the Letters of Oecolampadius and Bucer, which they sent to them, openly read, together with the Propositions and Articles of Religion which they had agreed upon, which were all approved, sign∣ed and sworn to by all the assistants with one consent, to perform,Unity. ob∣serve, beleeve and retain amongst them inviolably, as being confor∣mable to the Doctrine which they had been taught from their fore-fathers for many hundred years, and all taken out of the Word of god. When this Agreement came abroad to the ears of the Priests, they were much astonished, despairing to see these people reclaimed and brought back to the Church of Rome; whereupon they retired from amongst them without speaking a word. The Waldenses, because they had only the New Testament and some books of the old, amongst them in the Waldensian Tongue,Zeal. resol∣ved speedily to send the whole Bible to the Press, all their books hi∣therto being but Manuscripts, and those but a few. They sent there∣fore
some to Newcastle in Suitzerland, where they gave 1500. Crowns in gold to a Printer, who brought to light the first Impression of the Frech Bible that was seen in France.The first French Bibles printed. They sent also to Geneva to make a large supply of books fit for the instruction of the people; but their messenger, as he passed over the hill de Gap, was apprehended for a spy by the Lord of Champelion, and as soon as they knew him to be a Waldensian, they sent him to Grenople, where he was first imprison∣ed;One of them drowned. and then in the night drowned in the river, least he should speak of his belief before the people. Shortly after there happened warres between King Francis the first, and the Princes of Piedmont, which, through Gods grace, turned to the great peace and quiet of these poor people;A speciall pro∣vidence. which peace continu∣ed till Pope Paul the third sollicited the Parliament of Turin to perse∣cute them as pernicious Hereticks: Whereupon the Parliament caused a great number of them to be burnt at Turin.The Pope stirs up persecution. Then these Waldenses petitioned the King that they might not be persecuted for their Religi∣on, in which they and their Ancestors had lived for many hundred years. But the King reiected their petition, commanding them to live according to the Laws of the Roman Church, upon pain of being punished as Hereticks: adding, that he did not burn the Lutherans through his whole Kingdom of France, to let them amongst the Alps escape. Hereupon the Parliament of Turin commanded them presently to send away all their Ministers, and receive the Priests to sing Masse. &c.Courage. To which they answered, that they could not receive any such commandment, it being contrary to Gods Word, whom they would rather obey then men.A special pro∣vidence. But through Gods mercy, the King had other imploiments elsewhere; whereby they wanted leasure to prosecute these servants of Christ, and therefore they only proceeded by the In∣quisition, receiving such as the Monks condemned to the fire. Bar. Hector.Anno 1555. They increased the persecution, condemning to the fire Bartholmew Hector a Stationer, to be executed at Turin, who died with admirable constancy, and so edifying the spectators, that they wept and compassionated him, justifying him in their speeches, and praying for him. Hereupon the Parliament resolved wholly to extir∣pate them, and for that end sent two men with authority, either to re∣form, or root them out. These persons went first to Perouse, where by Proclamation in the Kings name, they command all to go to Masse upon pain of loosing their lives.Persecution. renewed. Then they went to Pignorol, where they cited many to ap∣pear before them: and amongst others, a poor simple labouring man appeared, whom the President commanded to have his childe re-bap∣zed by a Priest: The man requested respite to pray to God before he answered him,Profanenesse. which with great laughter was granted: Then fal∣ling down on his knees, he prayed unto God, and when he had done, he said to the President; I will cause my child to be rebaptised, up∣on condition that you will give me a bill, signed with your own hand,
that you will discharge me of the sin which I shall commit hereby,Prudence. and bear one day before God the punishment and condemnation which should befall me for the same, taking this iniquity upon you and yours: The President hearing this, commanded him out of his presence, and pressed him no further. The President framed diverse Indictments against sundry persons in the Vallies, and collected whatsoever he thought might hurt them: and going to one of their Churches, he caused a Monk, that he brought along with him, to preach in the presence of the people; and when he had ended, the people desired that some one of their Pastors there present might answer his discourse, but that was denied by the President, whereupon there was such a murmur amongst the people, that the President, without any more speech, gat him away to Turin, where he reported all to the Parliament, and withall told them, that if they sought by violence to reclaime this people, they were resolued to defend themselves; and that the places of their abode, were of such strength, that it was a work for a King of France to root them out. Thereupon, this report and the Indictments were sent to the King, who having other occasions, returned no answer that year: Only the Inquisitors proceeded as they could catch any, to deliver them to the secular power. At the years end, the King commanded the Parliament to cause them to do that by force,Popish malice. which they would not by words be brought to. Then did the Parliament send the President again to Angrogne, where he commanded them in the name of the King, to go to Masse upon pain of forfeiting their lives and goods; but they answered, that they could not obey such commands against the command of God. Then he commanded that twelve of the Principal of them, together with all their Ministers and Schoolmasters, should presently yeeld up their bodies to the prisons of Turin, &c. They answered, that they could not obey that command or appear at Turin, because they should thereby endanger their lives. The Parliament was so incensed at this answer, that as many as they could apprehend, they burnt, amongst whom was Jeffery Varnegle Minister of Angrogne, Anno 1557. by whose death the people that were present were much edified, seeing his constancy of invocating God to the last. The Protestant Princes of Germany hearing of this great Persecuti∣on, interceded in their behalf to King Henry the second of France.The German Prince inter∣ceds for them. Who promised to have regard to this request of theirs, and indeed they enjoyed peace afterwards, till the peace was concluded betwixt the Kings of France and Spain, and that the Duke of Savoy was resto∣red to his Estate, which was Anno 1559. The year after, the Popes Nuntio reproved the Duke, for that with all his power he had not per∣secuted the Waldenses, and that if he did not now endeavour to reduce them to the Romish Church, or to root them out, his Holinesse should have cause to suspect that he was a favourer of them.Popish malice. Hereupon the Duke presently commanded them to go to Mass, upon the pain of their
lives: But the not obeying him he set upon them by open force, and yet at the same time,A great perse∣cution. he caused them to be pursued by the Monks Inquisitors also: So that a great Persecution was raised against the poor Christians: Some were taken and burnt, who shewed invincible constancy in all their torments and death. To recite all the outrages, cruelties and villanies practised against them, would be too tedious: Many fled, and their houses and goods were ransacked and spoiled: One of their Ministers was apprehended, and put to a shamefull and cruell death, but he shewed such admirable patience therein, as astonished his very adversaries. Some also were taken and sent to be Gally-slaves: Yet some, through weakness, yeelded to the adversaries, and were more cruelly handled then those that re∣mained constant in the truth.Humane infir∣mity. Three of the most cruel persecutors of these faithfull servants of Jesus Christ, were, first Thomas Jacomel a Monk, an Apostate, that had renounced the known truth, and persecuted mortally and maliciously the poor Christians against his own conscience: he was a whoremon∣ger, and given over to all villanies, and filthy living, a Sodomite, &c. his delight was to spoil, rob, and torment the captives of these Walden∣ses. The second was a collaterall, called Corbis, who in the examination of the prisoners was very rigorous, and burnt many of them: but in the end feeling a remorse in his conscience, he protested that he would meddle with them no more: The third was the Provest of Justice, who lay in wait in the high waies to apprehend them when they went abroad in the morning, or as they went to the Market. The Monks also of Pignorol vexed the Churches near about them grievously,Popish malice. some they took prisoners, and kept them in their Abbies: then they assembled a company of Ruffians, sending them to spoil the Churches, and to take prisoners, men, women, and childen; of whom some by torments they forced to abjure, others they sent to the Galleys others they burnt. The gentlemen of the valley of S. Martin vexed their tenants grie∣vously: spoiling some of their goods, imprisoning others, and vexing them by all means: Two of those gentlemen getting some Ruffians to them in the night time, set upon a village called Renclaret, which the Inhabitants perceiving, fled into the mountains covered with snow, naked, and without victuals: in the morning these villains took a Mi∣nister of that Valley, who was coming to visit these people of Renclaret, and burnt him: but three nights after they of Pragela, pitying their friends of Renclaret,A speciall pro∣vidence. sent four hundred men against the Ruffians, who fought with them, and without the losse of one man, put them to flight, and restored their friends to their houses. A year after, one of these gentlemen called Truchet, with a company of Ruffians, arrested the Minister of Renclaret, as he was at his sermon: but the people were so moved at his outragious dealing, especially the women, that they had almost strangled Truchet, and so canvased the rest of his company, that they had no minde to come any more.
Shortly after they took another Minister as he was going to preach in a parish a mile from his house, but the people hearing of it, speedi∣ly pursued them, and recovered their Minister again; but when the vil∣lains saw that they were like to lose their prey, they so wounded him, that they left him for dead.Treachery. The Monks of Pignerol sent some Ruffians by night to the Ministers house of S. Germain, who were conducted by a Traitor that knew the house, and formerly had frequented it; this fellow knocking at the door, and the Minister knowing his voice, opened the door, but per∣ceiving himself to be betrayed, he fled at a back-door, yet was quickly taken, and sorely wounded, notwithstanding which, they pricked him with halberds to hasten his pace, as they carried him away: they also slew and hurt many others: The Minister, after sore imprisonment,Prodigious vil∣lany. en∣dured a cruel death with much constancy: at his death the Inquisitors caused two poor women that they kept in prison, to carry faggots to burn him, and to say to him their Pastor, Take this, thou wicked Heretick▪ in recompence of that naughty Doctrine that thou hast taught us: To whom he replied, A good women, I have taught you well, but you have learn∣ed ill. In brief, they so persecuted these poor people, that they forced them to forsake their houses, and to fly into the mountains, loosing all their estates, so that many that had lived well, and relieved others, were now fain to crave relief and succour of others. The Monks with their Troops of Ruffians continued thus to molest and persecute these poor people, They asked of their Ministers, Whether it were not lawfull for them to defend themselves against such violence? The Ministers answered, that it was, only they advised them to avoid blood-shed as much as might be. This question being resolved, they of Luserne and Angrogne sent some to aid their friends of St. Germain against the Monks. In June, divers of these Waldenses went out into the country to reap their harvest, and in sundry places were all taken prisoners,A miracle of Mercy. not know∣ing of each others calamity, but God so wrought, that miraculously they all escaped out of prison, to the great astonishment of their ad∣versaries. At the same time also, others who had been long in pri∣son, and longed for nothing but death, through Gods providence, were delivered after a wonderful sort. In July, they of Angrogne being at their harvest on the hill side of St. Germaine, perceived a company of souldiers that were spoiling the inhabitants of St. Germain; whereupon they made an out-cry, upon which the people of Angrogne ran presently thither-ward, some by the valley, others over the mountain: they which went by the valley being above fifty men, met with the spoilers, who were a hundred and twenty men well appointed, with whom they fought, and gave them a great overthrow; some were hurt, others drowned,A special pro∣vidence. and but few hardly escaped; not one of Angrogne being hurt in the fight. The Monks were so affrighted with this defeat, that they ran away
from their Abbey to Pignerol, to save their Reliques and Images, which they carried thither; and if the Ministers would have suffered their people to have attempted it, they might easily have freed their brethren which were imprisoned in the Abbey.Popish subtilty. After this these Monks, being assisted by a Captain, took many of the inhabitants of the valley of Luserne prisoners, spoiling their goods, driving away their Cattel; and in the end ransomed them for great summs of money. About this time a Gentleman of Campillan promised his Neighbours that if they would give him thirty Crowns,Popish dissi∣mulation and perfidiousness. he would secure them against trouble; but when he had got the money, he caused some soul∣diers to come to his house, and in the night sending for the poor men which suspected no danger, he trayterously endeavoured to deliver them into the hands of their mortal enemies: but God, who succours his in their greatest necessity, discovered to one of them the danger they were in, whereby they all fled, and escaped. Then were strict commands sent through all the Country to banish all the Waldenses, together with the Gospel, out of the mountains and vallies of Piedmount; but the people still desired that they might have leave to serve God purely according to the Rules of the Word. In the end of October, a rumour was spread abroad, that an Army was raising wholly to destroy them: yea, and such malefactors as were in prisons or banished, were pardoned, upon condition that they should take arms to destroy the Waldenses: Hereupon the Ministers met toge∣ther to consult what was to be done in so great an extremity. And first they enjoyed a general and publick Fast to seek unto God for Di∣rection,Fasting and Prayer. and in the end concluded that they should not defend them∣selves by arms, but that forsaking their houses, and taking their best movables with them, they should retire unto the high mountains, but if their enemies pursued them thither, that then they should take such advise as God should please to give them. This Counsel all the people submitted to, and for eight days space, were as busie as Ants in summer, to remove their goods and provisi∣ons, which though they did in great danger, yet with great courage and alacrity, praising God and singing Psalms, every one cheering up another. But other Ministers hearing of this resolution, wrote to them that they thought it strange that in such an extream necessity, they should not rather resolve to defend themselves against violence, pro∣ving that it was lawfull for them so to do, to defend the true Religion, and the lives of themselves, wives and children, knowing thar it was not the Duke, but the Pope that thus stirred him up against them. During this time, their Adversaries cryed nothing, but To the fire with them, to the fire with them, and presently by proclamations set up every where, Angrogne was exposed to the fire and sword: The Army also approached to their borders, and the people retired into the mountains: But when they saw some horse-men not only spoiling their goods, but taking some of their brethren prisoners, they came
back, and set upon them, in which bickering some of the enemies were slain, and the rest retired to their camp; not one of the Waldenses was slain or hurt. But two of these horsemen that fled, galloping away before the rest, when they came neer to the Army, cryed out, They come, they come: Whereupon the whole Army was so astonished,A special pro∣vidence. that every man fled away, none pursuing, and the Captain could not all that day get them into order again. The next day the Army under the Lord of Trinity, was mustered in a meddow, near to Angrogne; They of the Town had sent some to stop the passages that the Army should not enter, and in the mean time they retired into the meddow of Toure, not expecting the Army so soon, so that there were but few that kept the Passages, but when those few perceived their enemies preparing themselves to fight, they all fell down upon their knees, praying earnestly unto God to pity them, and not to look on their sins,Power of Prayer. but on the cause that they main∣tained, to turn the hearts of their enemies, and so to worke that there might be no effusion of bloud, but if it were his will to take them, their wives and infants out of this world, that it would please him mercifully to receive them into his Kingdome. Their prayers being ended, they perceived their enemies to come through the Vines to win the top of the mountain: Whereupon the combat began in divers places, and continued untill night: The poor Waldenses being but few, and only armed with slings and cross-bows, were much oppressed by the multitudes of their enemies, so that at last they retired to the top of the mountain, where they defended themselves till night. But having found a place where they might withstand their enemies, they turned again and slew divers of them. At Even the enemies began to encamp themselves, which the Wal∣denses perceiving, they fell to prayer, desiring God to assist and suc∣cour them, for which the enemies flouted and laughed them to scorn.Profaneness. The poor people devised to send a Drum into a valley hard by; and as they were at prayer, the Drum beat up in the valley; whereupon the Lord of Trinity caused his souldiers to retreat, which was a great ad∣vantage to the Waldenses, who were weary, thirsty,A special pro∣vidence▪ and in great pe∣rill if God by this meanes had not given them some rest: Of the Wal∣denses there were but three slain, but many of their enemies, and more hurt, of whom few recovered. This combat much encouraged the Waldenses, and as much terrified their enemies, who in their retreat, burnt many houses, and destroyed the Wines that were in the Presse. Then did the Lord of Trinity encamp in the vally of Luserne, by a Village, the people whereof had alwaies hated the Waldenses, and much rejoyced at this hurt that was now done to them, but they were paid back in their own coyn, being all destroyed by the Army.A just reward. Then did the Lord of Trinity place four Garisons in four severall Fortresses, so that the poor Waldenses found themselves in a sea of troubles: Whereupon they first betook themselves to prayer,Prayer. then
sent to their friends for aid, who sent them all that they could make. Then did the Lord of Trinity send his Army to Villars and Tailleret: The lesser part went towards Villars; the people seeing their enemies approaching, called upon God with fervent prayer, then set upon their enemies, slew some, hurt others, and the rest fled. The other company going towards Tailleret, they of that place were but few in number, yet making their prayers to God, and commending their cause to him, they set valiantly upon their enemies; during which bickering, they of Villars, encouraged by their late success, came to help their friends, and set so lustily upon their enemies, that they put them to flight: but in the pursuit of them they fell into an ambush, and were environed by their enemies, yet, through Gods mercy, they all escaped without the losse of one man;A speciall pro∣vidence. on the enemies side there were so many slain, that they were laid together by whole Cart-loads. Another party of the enemies going to spoil a rich mans house, some of his neighbours, not being above seventy, set upon them, put them to flight, took away their Drum, and recovered their booty from them. Then did the Lord of Trinity send to them, telling them how much the Duke and his Dutchesse favoured them,Popish subtilty and promised him∣selfe to mediate for them that they might live in peace: But whilest by these pretences, he sought to make them secure, he sent part of his Army to get the hill of Tailleret, and another part had already gotten the way that led to the meddow of Tour, whereby the Angrognians might have been easily enclosed; but they perceiving it, immediatly sent some to encounter with their enemies, who gat the victory, pursu∣ed them to their camp, and slew very many of them, without the losse of one man. The Lord of Trinity cunningly excused this attempt, and sent to them to draw up a supplication to the Duke, which was accordingly done, wherein they promised to render all honour and reverence unto God, according to his Word, and all due obedience to the Duk, &c. But in the mean time Trinity grievously vexed them of Tailleret,Perfidiousness, upon pretence that they had not presented themselves to treat of this agree∣ment, taking their arms from them, and causing them to ask pardon on their knees. But presently after news was brought them, that the enemies had gotten to the top of the mountaine, and had taken all the passages, whereat they were sore amazed, and ran with all speed to defend their wives and children: some they saved, but the most of their goods were already in the enemies hands, who at this time did them much mischiefe. Yet after this, the Lord of Trinity sent word again to them that were fled, that if they would return, he would receive them to mercy: The poor people most of them trusting to his promise, returned, but the next morning the enemies came to apprehend them and their Mi∣nisters,Papist trechery
besetting the place on every side: Then they that were swift of foot, escaped, all the rest were taken; yet God miraculously de∣livered them: for an old man that could not run so fast as the other, was espied by a souldier,A notable story. who ran with a naked sword to have slain him, the old man seeing the iminent danger, caught him by the legs, overthrew him, and drew him by the heels down the hill; the souldier cryed, Help, help, this villain will kill me;A speciall pro∣vidence. hereupon his fel∣lows ran to his rescue; but in the mean time the old man escaped; and the rest seeing what the old man had done, though they had lost their weapons, yet took heart of grass, and with stones and slings, drave away their enemies, and thereby they all escaped. The next day the souldiers went again to Tailleret, robbing, spoil∣ing, and carrying away all that they could find, but most of the peo∣ple were retired towards Villars; Then did the souldiers range all about, and took divers prisoners, whom they used cruelly,Barbarous cru∣elty. and one souldier bit off one of their ears, saying, I will carry the flesh of this wicked Heretick with me into my Country: They found also two women, the mother and the daughter, in a cave, whom they wounded to death: and in another cave, an old man of an hundred years old, with his grand-daughter of eighteen years old that fed him; the man they slew, the maid they would have ravished, who flying from them, tumbled down the mountains, and died. About the same time there was one John Martin that made his boasts every where, that if he could meet with the Minister of Angrogne. he would slit his nose; but shortly after a wolf met him, and setting upon him, bit off his nose, whereupon he ran mad, and died mi∣serably. A certain souldier promised the Lord of Trinity to bring to him the Minister of Tailleret, and accordingly never ceased till he found him,Gods judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. but as he was pursuing of him, some out of the mountains rescued the Minister, and slew the souldier with stones. These souldiers were so extream abusive to women, that many Pa∣pists that lived by,Uncleannesse. sent their daughters into the mountains to the Wal∣denses to preserve their chastity. Then did the Lord of Trinity promise, that if they would pay him eight thousand Crowns, he would with-draw his Army, and be gone; They being desirous of Peace, sold their Cattel to raise the money,Popish Perfidiousness. but when he had received it, he continued his Army there still. Then did the Lord of Trinity require them to send away their Mi∣nisters till the matter were determined before the Duke, or else by his Army he would force them to it; whereupon by mutual consent they agreed, that the Ministers should with-draw for the present,Their Mini∣sters sent away. till the Army was retired, which was not done without great sighs, and lamen∣tations and tears. At that time there fell an extraordinary snow, so that the people with great difficulty, were fain to make way for their Ministers to pass. But the Army hearing that the Ministers were gathered together, they sent out a company of harquebushers to ap∣prehend
them, who came but one hour too late to have taken them: Then did they search every cave, house and chest, to seek them; where∣by they robbed the poor people of all their best things. Then did they beset the Ministers house of Angrogne, to whom the Lord of Trinity had promised safety, but it pleased God that he escaped; the souldiers pursued him into the mountains, but could not overtake him; whereupon they plundred his house, burnt his books and writings, and so returned. The next morning command was given to the Rulers of Angrogne within twenty four hours to deliver up their Minister, or else Angrogne should be put to fire and sword; They answered that they knew not where he was, for the souldiers had driven him over the mountains. Then did the souldiers burn houses, break the mils, spoil the people, and do all the mischief they could, and so departed. The Lord of Trinity left Garisons in the Fortresses, and caused the poor Waldenses to maintain them, who, not content with their wages, pillaged and robbed all about them; and having taken fourteen men, they bound them, and were leading them away prisoners, but their wives and children pursued them so fiercely with stones,Cruelty. that they were glad to let their prisoners go, and had much ado to save them∣selves. Two others that they caught, they hung up by the heels and hands, and having tormented them almost to death, at last released them for a great sum of money. Another Garison in the night went to Tailleret, brake in at the windows and tops of houses, spoiling all, and took also fourteen prisoners, whom they bound two and two together, and were carrying them to the Fortress, but two of them getting loose, so valiantly assaulted the souldiers, and beat them with stones, that they forced them to let go their other prisoners. Yet two others they took, and carried them to the Fort; one was but a child, whom the Captain strangled with his own hands; the other was sixty years old,Barbarous cru∣elty. whom they bound, and took a crature that lives in horse-dung, and put into his navel, covering them with a dish, which in a short space did eat into his belly, and killed him. The Waldenses were in great perplexity, by reason of these Garisons, but especially for the want of their Ministers: whereupon they resol∣ved to call them back, yet to have preaching only in private, because they would not imbitter the souldiers, till their messengers returned from the Duke. These messengers were cruelly handled at the Court, and at last sent back with a command that they should entertain Priests to say Mass, &c. When this Report was made to their brethren that sent them, there was wonderfull lamentation, weeping and mourning. Then did they send two of their Ministers to the Church of Pragela, to shew them of the pitifull condition of the Churches in Piedmont, and to ask their advice, how to prevent the danger: and in the next place they all fell to prayer,Prayer in dan∣ger. and having long called upon God for counsel and direction in so great a strait; they resolved upon debate, that the people in Piedmont and Dauphine should joyn in a League toge∣ther,
wherein they promised, through Gods grace and assistance, to maintain the pure preaching of the Gospel, and administring the holy Sacraments, to yeeld obedience to their superior, so farre as they were commanded by the Word of God, and one to be aiding and assisting to the other; that none should conclude any thing touch∣ing the estate of Religion,A League. without the consent of the rest of the Vallies. During this Treaty, all the housholders were required to be present at Masse, and such as would do it, should live in peace, but such as re∣fused should be condemned to be burnt, or sent to the Gallies, so that the people were constrained to fly, die, or renounce the Gospel: The first they would have chosen, but could not do it by reason of the great snow; Whereupon they exhorted one another saying, We shall be all called for to morrow, to renounce God, and to return to Idolatry, let us therefore make a solemn protestation, that we will live and die in the confession of Gods holy Word; let us in the morning hear a sermon, and then cast down to the ground, all the Idols and Altars:A good reso∣lution. and to this all agreed. In the morning they put their resolutions into execution, beating down the Images, and casting down the Altars: Then they went to Villars to do the like there; but by the way they encountred with a band of souldiers, who where going to spoil a village,Images demo∣lished. and to fetch away the inhabitants prisoners: These souldiers seeing them so ill provided, mocked them, and discharged their guns at them; but they taking courage, with stones beat the souldiers, pursuing them to the Fortresse. Then did they go to Villars, and having destroyed the Idols and Altars there, they returned to besiege the fortresse, demanding the prisoners that were therein. The Judge, with many Gentlemen, came that day to enroll their names that would go to Masse, but seing the resolution of the people, they fled into the Castle, where they were besieged for ten daies: Then did the Captain of Tor go with a company of souldiers, think∣ing to raise the siege; but by those which kept the passages, some of them were slain, the rest were driven back again: Then came they back with three bands, which caused a furious fight, wherein ma∣ny of the souldiers were slain and hurt, and not one of the besiegers was hurt.A speciall pro∣vidence. The Waldenses attempted often to have taken the Fortresse; but without Ordinance it was impossible: also the Lord of Trinity was come back with his army, and the next day would have raised the siege: But it pleased God that very night that the souldiers in the Cast∣le, desired leave to depart, with bag and baggage, which was easily granted to them: and the souldiers whih before had so cruelly persecu- the Ministers, were now fain to request them to protect their lives, and to conduct them to a place of safty, which the Ministers did willingly, and the souldiers were very thankfull for it: that night the Fort was razed to the ground.
The next day the Lord of Trinity cunningly sent to them of An∣grogne,Popish subtilty. that if they would not aid the other, they should be gently dealt with, but they knowing his fraud, agreed with the rest to de∣fend their Religion with their lives, and that no one should make an agreement with out the consent of the rest. Then did the Lord of Tri∣nity assay with his Army to enter into the borders of Angrogne by certaine streights, but the people having raised up some breast-works, valiantly defended themselves and offended their enemies. Trinities souldiers being weary, fresh ones were brought in their stead, so that the fight endured untill night, wherein many of the enemies were slain, more hurt, and but two of the Waldenses; and so the battell ceased for the present. The next day the Army marched towards Angrogne five severall waies, and there were none to resist, but only a few that kept the Watch, who valiantly fought for a space, but seeing themselves in dan∣ger to be inclosed, they retreated to an high place, where the combate was renued with greater fiercenesse then before: The Lord of Trinity seeing the losse of many of his men, sounded a retreat, and went to Angrogne, but the people were fled into the medow of Tour; therefore he burned and spoiled all before him: He also oft set fire upon the two Churches, where the word used to be preached,A special pro∣vidence. but could not burne them, and so he did to the Ministers house, and yet it remained whole. Amongst them of Angrogne, there were but two that were enemies to the word of God, and they were both slain that day. Then did the Lord of Trinity send some to burn Rosa; but the soul∣diers were driven back four daies together, by them that kept the pas∣sages; whereupon he sent his whole Army, yet they valiantly with∣stood them from morning till night; At last a party gat behinde them, over a mountaine, so that the poor people seeing themselves environed, saved themselves by running through the midst of their enemies, and others of them gat into the rocks. The enemies being entred Rosa de∣stroyed all with fire and sword: The people fled by secret waies toward Luserne, wandring all night upon the mountains full of snow, laden with their stuff, carrying their infants in their arms, and leading others by the hand with great pain and travell:Gods Provi∣dence. They of Luserne seeing them, ran to them, praising God for their deliverance; and they all were very chearfull, notwithstanding their extremities. Shortly after the Lord of Trinity went to Luserne by three waies; they which kept the passages resisted their enemies valiantly, but when they saw themselves assaulted on every side, they fled into the moun∣tains. Then did the souldiers sack and burn the houses, staying all they could finde: When they which were fled to the mountains saw their houses on fire,Joy in tribula∣tions. they praised God, and gave him thanks, that thus accounted them worthy to suffer for his Name: Then did the souldiers pursue them to the mountains, but after they had called upon God, a few of them beat back their enemies, whereupon the Army retired.
They in the meddow of Tour, perceiving a company of souldiers burning the rest of the houses in Angrogne, they sent six harque-bushiers against them, who from the higher ground, discharging all their guns together, the souldiers ran all away, when none pursued them. Shortly after, as the Watch was hearing a Sermon, they spied a company of souldeirs marching up the hill, whereupon they ran to encounter them, and easily discomfited them: But whilest they pur∣sued the chase, some cried to them, that another company was entred into the meddow, whereupon they left the chase: or else not one of their enemies had escaped. Presently other companies came other waies, which the Ministers and people seeing, were much discouraged, and therefore they fell to prayer, and ardently called upon God, with sighs and teares untill night. And whereas seven spies were sent before the souldiers,Prayer in dan∣ger. there went out five of the Waldenses against them, and took some, and chased the rest: Then went out eight more against the whole company, and pursued them with an undaunted courage from rock to rock, and from hill to hill, and then went out twelve more, who joining with the other, made a great slaughter of their enemies. Another company from Luserne, having a Minister with them, as they used alwaies to have; after they had made their prayers to God, set upon another company of souldiers, whose hearts were so taken from them, that they presently fled: One of the Waldenses, a very young man, carried a greate staff in his hand,Speciall pro∣vidences. with which he laid so lustily at his enemies, that he brake his staff, and slew many of them, he also brake four of their own swords, in pursuing of them: Also, a boy of eighteen years old, slew the Lord of Monteil, Master of the Camp, which much dismaid the enemies: Another threw down Charles Truchet, and then leaped upon him, and slew him with his own sword; upon which all the rest fled, and were pursued till night hindred. The Minister seeing the great effusion of bloud, and the enemies fly∣ing, cried to the people that it was enough, and so exhorted them to praise God: They that heard him obeyed, and fell to prayer. In this battell they gat much armour, which was a great advantage to them af∣terwards. Thanks were returned unto God in every place, every one sa∣ying, Who sees not evidently that God fighteth for us.Thanksgiving▪ Presently after, the Lord of Trinity returned to burn the Villages, but especially to pursue the poor people in the mountains. And one com∣pany with many horsemen ascended the mountain of Comb by an un∣suspected way, where were no Warders; but they which were next, seeing them, called upon God for aid, and though they were but thirty in number, yet they valiantly beat them back twice; many of the enemies were slain, and not one of the Waldenses. Trinity seeing his men thus beaten back, sent out most of his Army to assist them,A speciall pro∣vidence. which were about one thousand five hundred men: And there came
about a hundred to help the Warders: The combat was very cruel; at last the poor men were fain to retreat with the losse of two of their men; at this the enemies exceedingly rejoyced, blowing their trum∣pets and triumphing: but the people crying all together to the Lord, returned again, with greater violence, assaulting them with their slings; So that the enemies being weary, rested themselves, and the while the Waldenses betook themselves to prayer, which more affrighted their ene∣mies then any thing else.Prayer. Then did the souldiers charge again furiously, but by the hands of a few they were driven back; yea little children, fervently calling upon God, threw stones at their enemies, as also did the women: Such as were unfit for war kneeled on the ground with their faces towards heaven, crying,The enemies every where beaten. Lord help us. Then came one running that brought word, that the Angrognians were coming to help them, which the enemies hearing, pre∣sently retreated. Another party of the Army of an hundred and fourty, went ano∣ther way; but by seven men they were strongly resisted and driven back: A third party was met by the Angrognians and driven back. The Lord of Trinity intending to be revenged upon them in the med∣dow of Tour, assembled all the Gentlemen of the country, and an Army of about seven thousand: and when the poor people saw them coming, glittering in their harnesse, and so many in number, they were at first astonished, but pouring out their prayers unto God to succour them,Prayer in dan∣ger. and to have regard to the glory of his Name, &c. They marched to encounter with their enemies, and seasonably by the way, they met with some aid that was coming to them from Luserne, so that uniting themselves, they soon discomfited their enemies. The Captain of the enemies had in the morning promised to do great matters that day, but in the evening he was carried back, weak and wounded, and not like to live: Whereupon a Papist said to him, Mon∣sieur, there religion is beter then ours. Another part of the Army set upon an house in a passe, wherein were but five men, yet they lustily defended it, drave out their enemies that had entred, and kept the place, till some of their friends came to relieve them. Another half of the Army, assaulted another Bulwork on the side of the mountaine; And they within suffered them to come very near, but then with slings and guns, they slew many of them, others rouled down great stones, which killed divers, so that when they had attempted all waies to take it, they were forced to retire; the Lord of Trinity weeping to see his men slain so fast, and at last, having lost very many of his men, he was forced to retreate; many of the Army crying out, God fight∣eth for them, and we do them wrong. In all that conflict there were but two of the Waldenses slain, and two hurt;A speciall pro∣vidence. whereas they never shot at their enemies but they killed some, and sometimes two at one shot: The souldiers confessed that they
were so astonished that they could not fight: Others said, that the Ministers by their prayers, conjured and bewitched them. It was a wonderfull work of God, that shepherds and cowherds should en∣counter with so mighty a power of strong and brave souldiers▪ well furnished with ammunition, and themselves having nothing but slings, stones, and a few harquebushes, and yet should beat them, and in all those fights, they lost not above fourteen men. Shortly after a company of souldiers went to Angrogne to destroy the Vines, &c. and mocking the Waldenses, they said,Scorners puni∣shed. that they were valiant men behinde their bulworks, but if they came into the plain, how they would beat them: Then came thirty of the Waldenses, and set upon them in the plain, and fought with them a long time, hand to hand, slew many of them, and at last forced them to run away, and that with the losse of one only man of their own. The night after, some thought that it would have been an easie mat∣ter to take the Lord of Trinity, and to have spoiled his whole Army, but the Waldenses would not do it, least they should offend God, and passe the bounds of their vocation, intending only to defend them∣selves. Then did Trinity betake himself to his old shifts of entertaining a treaty for agreement; but in the Interim,Subtilty. Peridiousnesse. he sent a company of Spani∣ards one way, and other companies other waies, to surprise the meddow of Tour. The Spaniards were entred the meddow, before they were perceived: but when the people spied them,The Spaniards epulsed. they betook themselves to prayer, then winded their horns, and so prepared for resistance: The first that opposed themselves were but twelve men, who yet stop∣ed them in a Passe, and others rolled down stones from the mountains upon them, whereby many of the Spaniards were slain, the rest were forced to retreat. Shortly after the Ministers and chief Rulers of the Waldenses, re∣quested the Lord of Raconis to deliver a petition, which they had drawn up to the Dutches of Savoy, wherein they declared the equity of their cause, protesting all due obedience, &c.▪ and at last, through Gods mercy, they came to a good agreement, and according to the promise of God, all things turned to the best to those that feared him, that were called according to his purpose. After the death of the Duke and Dutchesse of Savoy, Charles Em∣manuel their son succeeded,Peace obtained who maintained them in peace according to the treaty formerly made: Yet the Inquisitors were alwaies watch∣full to apprehend one or other of them: and amongst others, one Bartholmew Copin of Luserne, being at Ast in Piedmont, with his Merchandize, and at evening supping with some other company,Bar. Copin one began to speak much to the disgrace of the Waldenses for their Religion. Copin thought that he was bound not to be silent when he heard such blasphemies: Whereupon he began to argue in their defence. Are you then a Waldensian, said the other to him? he answered, Yea.Zeal. And do you not beleeve that God is in the Host? No, said Copin▪
Fie upon you, said the other, what a false Religion is yours? My Religion, said Copin, is as true, as it's true that God is God, &c. The next morning Copin was called before the Bishop of Ast, who told him, that he must either recant the opinions he held over night, or be punished: Copin said, he had been provoked to that discourse; yet he said nothing but what he would maintaine with his life: Adding that he had some goods, and a wife and children, yet he had lost the affe∣ctions that he bare unto those things,Christ best of all. neither were they dear to him, to the prejudice of his conscience. Yet said, that behaving himself ho∣nestly, he ought not to be molested▪ when he came about his merchandize, the Turks and Jews being permited to come to Fairs without molestation. Notwithstanding which the Bishop presently sent him to prison. The next day the Bishops Secretary went to him, professing great love, and telling him, that except he acknowledged his fault, he was in great danger of his life: Copin answered, That his life was in the hands of God, and he desired not to preserve it to the prejudice of his glory; and having but a few paces to walk in his journey to heaven, his hearty prayer to God was, to give him grace not to turn back. Some few daies after he was examined by an Inquisitor in the pre∣sence of the Bishop, who exceedingly tormented him with sweet and gentle perswasions,Tentation. by fair words seeking to draw him to an abjurati∣on: But Copin alwaies convinced him by the word of God: alleadging that if he should be ashamed of,Constancy. or deny Christ before men, Christ would be ashamed of, and deny him before his heavenly Father. Then said the Monk, Go thy waies thou cursed Heretick to all the devils in hell, and when thou shalt be there tormented by them, thou wilt remember this good and holy counsel that we have given thee, &c. After many violent encounters, they caused his wife and son to come to him, promising if he would confesse his fault, he should have liber∣ty to depart with them; They suffered them also to sup together, which time he spent in exhorting them to patience,His exhortati∣on to his wife and children telling them that God would be more then a husband and father to them: for his own part he was not bounde to love wife or childe more then Christ; and that they should esteem it their happiness, that God was pleased to do him the honour to be a witnesse to his truth, with the losse of his life, &c. He enjoyned his wife to bring up his children in the fear of God: his son he commanded to obey his mother, he desired them to pray for him, that God would strengthen him against all tentations, and so taking leave of his wife, and blessing his son, he dismissed them, his wife and son shedding fountains of tears, and crying out in so lamentable a man∣ner as would have moved the hardest hart to compassion. The Bishop knew not well what to do with him: If he let him go, he feared a scandall, and that many would be encouraged by his im∣punity: If he punished him, he offended against the agreement be∣twixt the Duke and the Waldenses. And thereupon he sent his indict∣ment to the Pope, to know his pleasure. Shortly after Copin was found dead in prison,Copin mur∣thered it appearing manifestly that he was strangled:
and after his death, he was condemned to be burnt, which was accord∣ingly executed. CHAP. XXII. The Persecution, of the VValdenses in Ca∣labria. ANno Christi 1370. The Waldenses of Pragela and Dauphine grew so numerous, that they sent their younger people to seek some other country to inhabit. In their travell, they found in Calabria, some wast and untilled lands: yet seeming very fertil,Gods provi∣dence. fit for corn wine, oyl and chestnuts, and that the hils were fit for cattel, and to fur∣nish them with fuell and timber; they came therefore to the Lords of those places to treate with them touching their abode there. The Lords received them lovingly, agreed to orders much for the advantage of these new inhabitants; agreed about rents, tenths, tolls, penalties, &c. and so assigned to them certain parts of the Countrey. Then did they return to their parents, shewing how it fared with them, and so receive what they pleased to bestow upon them, and many of them marrying, they returned into Calabria, where they built some Towns and Cities, as St Xist, la Garde, &c. The Lords of those Countries thought themselves happy in that they had met with such good subjects as peopled their waste lands,Their holy lives. and made them to abound with all manner of fruits; but principally be∣cause they were honest men, and of good conscience, yeelding all those duties and honours which they could expect from good subjects. Only the Priests complained of them, that they lived not after their religion, made not their children Priests and Nuns; loved not Tapers, Masses, &c. that they adorned not their Churches with Images, went not on Pilgrimage, &c. Hereupon the Lords feared, that if the Pope should take notice, that so near his Seat, there were people that contemned his Laws, they might chance to lose their subiects: They therefore perswaded the Priest to be silent, since in other things they shewed themselves ho∣nest men, inriched the Country, yea and the Priests themselves, by their Tithes. These Lords also stopped the mouths of their neigh∣bours, who exceedingly murmured, because by no means they could draw them into alliance with them, and because all that they had,Their godly conversation▪ prospered exceedingly: They were wise and temperate, not given to drinking, dancing, swearing, &c. and living in a Country, where the inhabitants were given to all manner of wickednesse, they were as pre∣cious stones in a common sink. Thus they were preserved in peace by their Lords, till Anno 1560.
At which time these Waldenses resolving to make a publick profession of their Religion; sent for two Ministers from Geneva, who did much establish the exercise of Religion amongst them. The Pope per∣secutes them.Pope Pius the fourth hearing of this, presently concluded their utter ruine and extirpation, giving the same in charge to Cardinal Alexandrino, a violent man, who chose two Monks Inquisitors of his own humour, and sent them, first to begin with the inhabitants of St. Xist; There they assembled the people, gave them good words, promising that they should receive no violence, if they would accept of such Teachers as the Bishops should appoint, which if they refus∣ed, they would lose their lives, goods and honors, and would be con∣demned for Hereticks: And further to prove them, they appointed a Mass to be sung: but the people with their wives and children, pre∣sently quit their houses, and fled into the woods. From thence the Monks went to la Garde, where they caused the Town-gates to be locked, and the people to be assembled, telling them that they of St. Xist had adjured their Religion,Popish lies. and went to Mass, &c. promising that if they would do the like, no man should injure them. These poor people, believing what was told them, were content to do what they would have them; but when they heard that their friends of St. Xist refused to go to Mass,Humane frailty and were fled into the woods, they were exceedingly grieved at their own revolt, and re∣solved with their wives and children, to go to their brethren. In the meane time the Monks sent two companies of souldiers after them of St. Xist,Popish cruelty. who ran after them as after wilde beasts, crying, kill, kill, and so slew divers: but such as could get to the top of the moun∣tain, called to the souldiers, beseeched them to have pity on them, their wives and children, telling them that they had been inoffensive in their conversations, &c. yet if they would not suffer them to continue in their habitations, that at least they would license them to depart, either by sea or land, that they might retire themselves whether the Lord should be pleased to conduct them, beseeching them also, for Gods sake, not to force them to defend themselves- But this more enraged the souldiers, who presently violently assaul∣ted them: Then did they so defend themselves, that by Gods assi∣stance,A speciall pro∣vidence. they slew the greatest part of the souldiers, and put the rest to flight. Hereupon the Inquisitors wrote to the Viceroy of Naples, speedily to send some Companies of souldiers to apprehend the Hereticks of St. Xist and la Garde, whereby he should do a work very pleasing to the Pope, and meritorious for himself. Then did the Viceroy come himself with his Troops, in the mean time the Waldensian women came home to seek for food for their hus∣bands and children that were in the woods- The Viceroy proclaimed through all Naples, that all such banished persons as would come to fight against the Hereticks of St. Xist, should be pardoned all their offences: Whereupon great numbers resorted to him, and were conducted to the woods, where they chased these
poor people, slaying some, wounding others, the rest fled into caves,Barbarous cru∣elty. where most of them died of famine. Then were they of la Garde cited before the Inquisitor, and many fair Promises were made unto them if they would appeare; but con∣trary thereunto, thirty of them were apprehended, and put to the rack. One Charlin was racked with such violence, that his bowels brake out of his belly, and all to extort from him a confession, that in the night, the candles being put out, they committed whoredome, and abominable incest, yet would he never confesse any such wick∣ednesse. Another with extreame pain upon the rack, promised to go to Masse, the Inquisitor seeing that he had shewed such weaknesse,Prodigious wickednesse. urged him to confesse the forementioned wickednesse, which, because he refused, he left him eight hours together upon the rack, yet could he not get from his mouth so foul a slander. Another was stripped stark naked, whipt with rods of iron, drawn through the streets, and burnt with firebrands: One of his sons was killed with knives: Another thrown down from an high Tower, be∣cause he would not kisse a Crucifix: Another was condemned to be burnt alive, and as he went to the fire, he threw to the ground a Crucifix, which the executioner had fastened to his hands,Zeal. where∣upon they covered him all over with pitch, and so burnt him. The Inquisitor Panza cut the throats of eighty,Horrible cru∣elties. as butchers do their sheep's; then causing them to be divided into four quarters, he set up stakes for the space of thirty miles, and appointed a quarter to be fast∣ned to every stake. Four of the principall men of la Gard he caused to be hanged. Another young man, because he would not confesse himself to a Priest, was thrown from an high tower. The Vice-roy passing by before he was dead, and hearing him implore Gods mercy, kickt him on the head, saying, Is this dog yet living? take him and cast him to the hogs. Sixtly women were racked so violently, that the cords pierced into their arms and legs, and being then cast into prison, they died there, only nine of the handsomest be∣ing delievered to the fathers of the Inquisition, were never heard off after. Many others were delivered to the secular power to be burnt,Their totall extirpation. and if any interceded for them, he was presently put on the rack as a favourer of Hereticks. Pope Pius the fourth sent the Marquesse of Butiane, promising that if he would wholly cleare Calabria of these Waldenses, he would make his son a Cardinall: But he was put to no great pains to do it, for the In∣quisitors and the Vice-roy of Naples had by sundry deaths killed all the men, women and children that they could light of. One of their Ministers was famished in prison: Another was carri∣ed to Rome, where he was condemned to be burnt; The Pope and his Cardinals would needs see that pleasing spectacle: But the Minister
spake so many things out of Gods Word, against the Pope, that the Pope gnashed his teeth for anger, wishing that he had been some where else. And thus were these godly people wholly rooted out of Calabria. CHAP. XXIII. The Persecutions of the Waldenses in Pro∣vence. THese came from Piedmont, when their vallies were over-peo¦pled. The country of Provence, at their first arrival, was a de∣sert, but within few years, by Gods blessing upon their labours, it-abounded with Corn, Wine, Oil, Chesnuts, and other fruites. There Habitations being near to Avignion (many times the Popes seat) they were exposed to sundry persecutions, as Anno 1380. and at other times: but the greatest of all began about the year 1360. in the time of King Lewis the twelfth; who being informed that in Provence was a certain kind of people that lived not according to the Laws of the Church of Rome, but were an accursed people, committing all kindes of wickednesse and villanies:Devilish slan∣ders. He gave Commission to his Par∣liament in Provence to take cognizance of it, and to punish them accord∣ing to their demerits. The Court prosecuting this order with rigour; and the King hearing that diverse innocent persons were put to death, he sent his Master of Requests, and Confessor into Provence, to finde out what kinde of per∣sons these were, who at their return, certified him that all the former suggestions were untrue, that they were neither Socerers, nor Whore∣mongers, but lived honestly, did hurt to none; caused their children, to be Baptized, taught them their Belief, and the ten Commandments and that they carefully kept the Lords day, and had the Word of God purely expounded to them: Whereupon the King swore an oath, That they were honester then himself, and his Catholik subjects. Upon this in∣formation he sent and staed the Persecution.Note. Then did the Waldenses send two of their Ministers [George Morrell and Peter Masson] to Oecolampadius, Capito, Bcer and Haller, to confer with them about matters of Religion, and to have there advice in many things. In their return, Masson was apprehended at Dijon; where he was condemned and put to death for a Lutheran.P. Masson mar∣tyred. Morrell escaped with his Letters and Papers, and came safe to Provence, where he much com∣forted and confirmed the Churches. Yet all this while did the Parlia∣ment of Aix apprehend one or other of them, condemning some to the fire, others to the gibbet; they which scaped best, returned with marks in their forheads.
Anno Christi 1540. The inhabitants of Merindoll were summoned, and some of the chief appearing for the rest, they were all con∣demned to be burned alive, their children and families to be out∣lawed, and that the place of their habitation should be laid waste,A cruel decree. the woods cut down two hundred paces round about, and so left desolate. The King being informed of the rigour of this Edict,K. Francis the first. and of the in∣nocency of the people, countermanded the execution of it: but his Letters were suppressed, and the Cardinall of Tournon obtained for a great some of money, the revocation of them. Anno 1545. The President of Opede proclaimed war against them both at Aix and Marseilles: Divers companies of souldiers were listed,Called Miirs and five bands of the old souldiers of Piedmont were joyned with them, and presently they began to set fire on the Villages of Cabrieres, Pepin, &c. The poor people without any resistance were slain, women and their daughters ravished, some great with child murthered;Barbarous cru∣elty. the breasts of many women were cut off, after whose death their poor infants di∣ed of famine. Opede also proclaimed, that on pain of death no man should give any relief or sustenance to them. All their habitations were pillaged, sacked and burnt, and none of their persons spared, but such as were re∣served for the Gallies. Opede comming to Merindol, found none there but one simple lad, who had yielded himselfe prisoner to a souldier, and promised two Crowns for his ransom; but Opede paid the money to the souldier, and caused the lad to be shot to death; then he utterly razed the Town, and laid it levell with the ground. Then did he march against Cabrieres, and with the Cannon battered the wals: There was within only about sixty poor sick Pesants, who sent him word that he needed not to spend powder to batter the wals, for they were ready to open the gates, and quit the Country, if they might but have leave with their wives and children to go to Geneva, or Germany▪ and to leave all their goods behinde them▪ Opede entring the Town,Prodigious cruelty. caused all the men to be brought into a field, and to be cut in pieces, the souldiers striving who should shew the best manhood in cutting off heads, arms and legs: The women he caus∣ed to be locked in a barn with much straw, and so put fire to it, where many women great with childe were burnt: One souldier moved with pity, opening a hole in the wall, that some of them might come out; but Opede made them to be beaten back againe into the fire with Pikes and Halberts. Some of them that came forth he slew with his own hands, ripping open their bellies, so that their children came forth, whom he trod under his feet: many were fled into cellers and caves, whom he caused to be dragged out, had into the field, stripped stark naked, and then slain. Others were bound by two and two together, and slain by the Captains, who rejoyced in their bloudy butchery. Then did this Tyrant (worse then Herod) command one of his
Captaines to go into Church, into which many women, children and infants were fled; and to kill them all, which the Captain at first refused, saying, that it was a cruelty unbeseeming men of warre: Whereat Miniers being displeased, charged him upon pain of rebelli∣on against the King to do it. The Captain fearing what might be the issue, entred with his souldiers and destroyed them all, sparing neither young nor old. Other souldiers that ransacked the houses, found ma∣ny poor persons who had hid themselves in secret places, whom they flew upon, crying, Kill, kill, the souldiers without the Town killed all they could meet with, so that above a thousand men, women and chil∣dren were slain in this place. Many persons which were escaped into the mountains, sent by some that had most interest in Miniers, to desire him to give them leave to go whither the Lord should please to leade them, with their wives and children, though they had nothing but the shirts on their backs: to whom he answered, tha he knew what he had to do, he would send them to dwell in hell amongst the devils. A bloody speech.Then did he send part of his Army unto Costa, which they over∣came, and committed there great slaughter: Many of the inhabitants fled into an Orchard, where the souldiers ravished many women and maidens, and having kept them there a day and a night, they used them so beastly, that the women with childe, and younger maidens died presently after. Many of these Merindolians hid themselves in rocks and dark caves, where some were famished, others were choaked with fire and smoak set to their caves mouths. Many more were the outrages and cruelties which this wicked Opede committed: but the Lord found him out at last,Gods judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. striking him with a strang kinde of bleeding at the lower parts, neither was he able to void any urine, so that by degrees his guts rot∣ted within him: No remedy could be found for this terrible disease, worms bred in his bowels, which continually gnawed him. Then did he send to Arles for a famous Chyrurgion, who cured him of his difficulty to make water, after which, desiring all to depart the room, the chyrurgion in private exhorted him to repent of his former cruelty and bloud-shed, telling him that this his strange bleeding was Gods just hand upon him for shedding so much innocent bloud: But these words pierced the impure conscience of this wicked wretch, and more trou∣bled him then the torments of his disease, so that he cryed out to lay hands on the Chirurgion as an Heretick: Whereupon he conveyed himself away, and returned to Arles. Miniers his horrible death.Yet not long after he was sent for again, and great promises were made for his security: But when he came back, he found Miniers past cure, raging and casting out most horrible & blasphemous words, feel∣ing a fire within him which burnt him from the navel upwards, which was accompanied with extream stink of his lower parts, and so he end∣ed his wretched life. In the beginning of this Persecution, there was one John de Rom, a
Monk, who gat a Commission to examine those whom he suspected to be Hereticks; whereupon he afflicted the faithfull with all kindes of cru∣elty: Amongst other horrible torments that he used, this was one; he filled boots with boiling grease, and put them upon their legs, tying them backwards over a form, and their legs hanging down over a soft fire: Thus he tormented very many, and in the end most cruelly put them to death. Francis the French King being informed of the hellish cruelty of this wicked Monk, sent to his Parliament at Provence that they should ap∣prehend and condemn him: but he being informed of it, fled to Avig∣nion, where he hoped to enjoy all that wealth which so mercilesly and unjustly he had extorted from the poor Christians: But shortly after he was robbed of all that he had, by his own servants; and then he fell sick of a most horrible and strange disease unknown to the Physi∣tians: He was intollerably tormented with pains all over his body, so that no means could give him ease for one minute of an hour;Gods judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. neither was their any man that could tarry near him, no not of his nearest friends; so great was the stink that came from him: Then was he re∣moved to an Hospital: but the stink and infection so encreased, that no man durst come near him no; nor he himself was able to abide the horrible stink of his own body, full of ulcers and sores, and smarwing with vermine, and so rotten, that the flesh fell from the bones by piece-meal. In these torments he often cried out in great rage. O who will deliver me? VVho will kill and rid me out of these intollerable paines, which I know I suffer for the oppressions which I did to the poor men? Oft-times he himself endeavoured to destroy himself; but he had not the power. In this horrible anguish, and fearful despair he miserably ended his ac∣cursed life. When he was dead no man would come near to bury him; till at last a young novice caught hold of his stinking carcase with an iron hook, and so dragged him into an hole that was made for him. In the time of this Persecution the Bishop of Aix, with some other Bishops and their courtizans, walking along the streets of Avignion,Popish un∣cleannesse. saw a man selling baudy Images and Pictures, with filthy rimes and ballades annexed to them: All these goodly Pictures the Bishops bought up. When they had gon a little further, there was a Book-seller that had set to sale certain Bibles in French▪ which the Prelates were greatly moved at, saying to him, Dar'st thou be so bold as to sell such merchandise in this Town? The Book-seller replied, Is not the holy Bi∣ble as good as these goodly Pictures that you have bought for these gentle-women? Then said the Bishop of Aix, I renounce my part in Paradise, if this fellow be not a Lutheran, take him away to prison.Profanenesse. Then did his attendants cry out, A Lutheran, a Lutheran, To the fire with him, to the fire with him; and one gave him a blow with his fist, ano∣ther pulled him by the hair, another by the beard,A godly Book-seller burnt. so that the poor man was all imbrued in bloud, before he came to prison. The next day he was brought before the Judge, where, by the instigation of
the Bishops, he was condemned to be burned the same day, and so was carried to the fire with two Bibles about his neck, one before, and another behinde, where he made a most Christian end. The Waldenses were dispersed also into several other Countries, as Bohemia, Austria▪ Germany, Flanders, England, Poland, Italy, Spain, Dalmatia, Croatia, Sclavonia, Grecia, Philadelphia, Livonia, Sarmatia, Bulgaria, &c. In all which places at one time or other they suffered per∣secutions; concerning which there is not much left upon Record, and something will be spoken again of it in other places of this book, and therefore this may suffice for the present. CHAP. XXIV. The Persecution of the Albingenses. THese were the same with the Waldenses, differing only in name from their habitation in the Country of Albi. Divers of Waldo's disciples going into this Country, and amongst them one Arnold (from whom they were called Arnoldists) laboured with so good successe, that in a short time there was scarce any found that would go to Masse. Pope Alexander the third was much moved to anger, when he saw many great Provinces to shake off his Antichristan yoak, and there∣fore he condemned them for Hereticks in the Councel of Lateran: Yet did they so multiply, that Anno 1200. they possessed many and great Cities; yea, they had many great Lords that took part with them, as Earl Remund of Tholouse, Remund Earl of Foix, the Vicount of Bezieres, &c. Pope Innocent the third pretended a great desire to re∣claime them by preaching and conference; and thereupon there was a famous Disputation at Montreall, wherein the Popish Doctors were shamefully baffled by Arnold: But the Popes pollicy was thus to rock them asleep whilest he raised Armies against them to destroy them:Popish subtlity The pretended occasion whereof was this; There was one Frier Peter that was slain in the dominions of the Earl of Tholouse; whereupon the Pope sent preachers abroad through all Europe to assemble men to∣gether to take vengeance on the Hereticks, for the innocent bloud of Friar Peter, slain amongst them; promising Paradise to all that would come to this warre, and bear arms for fourty daies. This he called the holy warre, and gave the same Pardons and Indulgences to those that came to this war, as to those which went into the Holy land against the Saracens. Then did he thunder against Earl Remund, charging all Arch-bishops and Bishops through their Diocesse to pronounce him accursed and excommunicated,Popes rage a∣gainst Earl Remund. and that with the sound of a Bell, and extinction of Candles every Sabbath and festivall day, for murthering of a good servant of God▪ He also absolved all his subjects from their oaths of
allegiance to him; commanding every good Catholike to pursue his person, and to take and possesse his land, &c. He also wrote to all Chri∣stian Princes to stirre them up to get this pardon, rather by fighting against these Albingenses, then by going against the Turks. Earl Re∣mund hearing of all these preparations against him, sent to the Pope, humbly beseeching him not to condemn him before he was heard, assuring him that he was no way guilty of the death of Frier Peter, but that he was slain by a Gentleman, who immediatly fled out of his Country, otherwise he would have severely punished him for it. But all was in vain, for presently came Armies of crossed souldiers to pour down their vengeance on him and his lands. Amongst these were many noble men, and Ecclesiasticall persons, Arch-bishops, Bishops, Abbots, &c. to all which the Pope promised Paradise, but gave them not a peny. The Earl of Tholouse perceived that he must either prepare for de∣fence, or submit; the latter he thought the safer, and therefore he went presently to the Popes Legate at Valance; to whom he began to say,He goes to the Popes Legate. that he thought it strange that so many armed men should be brought against him, who used no other arms for his defence but his own inno∣cency: And that concerning the death of the Frier, they should first have enquired the truth of the fact, before they thus moved heaven and earth against him; yea, if he had been guilty, yet there was an ordinary course of justice to be used against him, and not to wreak their anger on his innocent Subjects: and therefore Sir (said he) since I come voluntarily to you, armed only with the testimony of a good conscience, what further use is there of these armed Pilgrims? pray you therefore countemand these souldiers before they go to make any fur∣ther spoil in my territories: for my own person may serve for a sufficient pledge, &c. The Legate answered, that he had done well in coming to him, yet could he not send back the souldiers, except he would put seven of his best castles into his hands, which should serve for a hostage; Now did the Earl when it was too late see his own folly in putting himself into the Legates hands, and thereby making himself a prisoner, but there was no remedy, now he must take Laws from him that had him in his power, and therefore be told him that both his person and pos∣sessions were at his disposall, beseeching him that his Subjects might receive no more damage by the Souldiers. The Legate presently sent to put Garisons in those seven Castles, commanding all the Consuls of every City presently to appear before him: and when they were come, he told them that Earl Remund had delivered up his Castles to the Pope, and therefore they were to take notice of it, that so they might acknowledge themselves lawfull Sub∣jects to his Holinesse, in case the Earl should falsifie his Oath to the Pope. The Consuls were much astonished thus to see their Lord devested of all his possessions: but that which most afflicted them was, to see him
led to S. Giles to be reconciled to the Church, where the Legate com∣manded the Earl to strip himself stark naked all but his linnen draw∣ers:The Earl whipt naked. then did he put a cord about his neck, whereby he led him nine times about the grave of Frier Peter, scourging him with rods all the while: The Earl demanded satisfaction for so sharp a penance seeing he was not guilty of the fact: the Legate answered, that he must submit if he would be reconciled to the Pope, yea, he must be thus scourged before the Earls, Barons, Marquesses, Prelates, and all the people: he made him also to swear to be obedient all his life to the Pope and Church of Rome: and to make irreconcileable warre against the Albingen∣ses, &c, Then did the Legate make him General of the crossed Souldiers for the seige of Beziers: The Earl knew not what to do: For to conduct an Army to fight against the Albingenses, was to sin against his conscience, and if he should fly away, it would furnis them with new matter of persecution against him and his subjects. In this extremity he stayed in the Army a few daies, and then went towards Rome to reconcile himself to the Pope. Then did the Army come before the City of Beziers, and provided all manner of Engines for battery,Beziers besie∣ged. reared up ladders for a general Es∣calado: this the Earl of Beziers beholding, and judging it impossible to defend the City, he went out: and cast himself down at the Legates feet, beseeching him not to punish the innocent with the nocent, which must needs be, if the Town were taken by storm: he told him, that there were in the City great numbers of good Catholicks, which would be subject to the same ruine with the Albingenses: he desired him also to commiserate him now in his minority that was a most obedient servant to the Pope, and had been brought up in the Romish Church, in which he would live and die: The Legate told him that all his ex∣cuses prevailed nothing, and that he must do as he may: The Earl re∣turned into the City, assembled the people, and told them that he could obtain no mercy from the Legat, except all the Albingenses would come and abjure their religion, and promise to live according to the Laws of the Church of Rome: The Popish party requested the Albin∣genses to yield to this, but the Albingenses answered, that they would not forsake their religion for the base price of their frail life: that God was able, if he pleased, to defend them, but if he would be glorified by the confession of their faith▪Faith and cou∣rage. it should be a great honour to them to die for his sake: that they had rather displease the Pope, who could but kill their bodies, then God, who could cast both body and soul in∣to hell, &c. Then did the Popish party send their Bishop to the Legate, beseech∣ing him not to include them in the chastisement of the Albingenses: and that the best way to win the others was by gentle means, not by rigour: the Legate grew into great choler at this, swearing that if all the City di not acknowledg their fault, they should all taste of one cup without distinction of religion, sex or age: and accordingly he summoned the
City presently to yield to his discretion, which they refusing, he caused that his Engines should play, and that a generall assault should be given. It was impossible for them within the City to resist so great violence,Beziers storm∣ed. being assaulted by above an hundred thousand Pilgrims: so that the e∣nemies entred, and slew a great multitude, and set the City on fire,Barbarous cru∣elty. and burnt it to ashes: When the City was first taken, the Priests and Monks came forth of the great Church with Banners and Crosses, singing, Te Deum laudamus; but the Souldiers, who were commanded by the Le∣gate to kill all, ran upon them, made their heads and arms to fly about the streets, so that they were all cut in pieces. In this City of Beziers they slew sixty thousand persons, the Popes Legate saying to the Captains and souldiers, Caedite eos omnes, novit enim Dominus qui sunt ejus, Kill them all] Catholicks and Hereticks] for the Lord knoweth who are his. Then were these Pilgrims presently conducted to Carcasson before the fourty daies of service, which they had vowed to the Church of Rome, were expired. The Earl of Beziers when he saw that he could obtain no favour of the Legate, before the City was taken, left his charge to the Bishop, and went to Carcasson, endeavouring to prepare and furnish it for a long siege: but the Legates Army followed him presently, unto which there came a new supply of crossed souldiers out of sundry Countries, so that his Army now consisted of three hundred thousand fighting men. Near to the City of Carcasson was a Town of the same name: the City was seated on an hill, and fenced with a double wall; yet the Pil∣grims thought to take it at the first sight,Carcasson be∣sieged. and therefore ran with great violence upon the first Rampier, filling the ditch with fagots, but they were beaten back with such courage, that the ground was covered with their dead bodies: The young Earl of Beziers won much honor in this first encounter, encouraging his men, and telling them, that it was bet∣ter to die fighting, then to fal into the hands of such cruel and merciless enemies, &c. The Albingenses much encouraged hereby, swore to him that they would spend their lives for the preservation of the City. The next morning the Legate commanded a general assault to be made upon the Town of Carcasson which was two miles from the City: & The people valiantly defended themselves, but being oppressed with multitudes, the souldiers entred the Town,Popish cruelty. putting all to the sword and fire, as they had done at Beziers. Then came the King of Arragon to the Camp, and told the Legate that he understood that his kinsman the Earl of Beziers was in the City, and that with his leave, he would go to him, not doubting but that he should prevail with him to do his duty to the Pope and Church: The Legate gave him leave, and the King approaching to the Rampier, cal∣led for the Earl, who came to him: then said the King, that he desired
to know of him what moved him to shut up himself in that City a∣gainst so great an Army of Pilgrims? the Earl answered, that it was to defend his life, goods and Subjects: that he knew well that the Pope, under the pretence of religion, resolved to destroy his Uncle Remund, and himselfe: that he saw the cruelty which they had used at Beziers even against the Priests themselves: adding also what they had done to the Town of Carcasson, and that they must look for no mercy from the Legate or his Army: and that therefore he rather chose to die, de∣fending himself with his subjects, then to fall into the hands of so in∣exorable an enemy as the Legate was: that though he had in his City some that were of another religion, yet they were such as had wrong∣ed none, and were come to his succour in his greatest extremity, and for their good service he was resolved not to abandon them, and that his trust was in God the defender of the oppressed, that he would as∣sist them against that world of ill advised men,A brave speech who forsook their own houses to burn, sack, and ransack, and kill in their houses other men without reason, judgement, or mercy. The King returning to the Legate, told him, that his cozen was much discontented with his former dealings against his Subjects of Be∣ziers & Carcasson, that he believed, seeing they spared not the Romish Priests, their war was not for Religion, but a kinde of theevery: that he would not yield himselfe to the descretion of such mercilesse men, &c. The Legate, after some debate, told the King, that for his sake he would receive the Earl of Beziers to mercy,Popish cruelty, and unlean∣nesse. and that with him, twelve more might come out with bag and baggage, but for the rest he would have them wholly at his discretion, and that they should all come forth stark naked, men, women, maids, and children, without shirts, smocks, or other covering, and that then they might hope well of his mercy, he being the Popes Legate, &c. The King much distasted this propositions, yet reported it to the Earl of Beziers,Carcasson stor∣med. who returned answer, that he would not come forth upon such unreasonable and unjust propositions, but would defend himself and his Subjects, as God should enable him. Then did the Legate cause all his Engines to play, commanding, that they should take the City by storm,The Pilgrims repulsed with great losse. but he was little pleased when he saw the losse of a great number of his Pilgrims: for they in the City threw down stones, fire, pitch, brimstone, and boiling water, where∣with they so galled the assailants, that the earth s covered, and the ditches filled with their deads bodies, which  a wondrous noy∣som stink both in the City an Camp. This overthrow caused divers of the crossed souldiers, having ac∣complished their fourty daies service, and thereby gained Paradise, to refuse to conquer more after so faire a purchase, and therefore they returned home. The Legate being much troubled to see his Army so decreased, thought of this Stratagem, he sent for a gentleman, telling him that he might do a piece of service, whereby he might not only merit heaven,
but gain a great reward here: which was by going to the Earl of Be∣zires, endeavouring to put him into great fears, and then to perswade him to have recourse to the Legates mercy, and withall that he should perswade him with great Oaths and Execrations (whereof he could absolve him at his pleasure) to come with him to the Legate,Popish Pro∣faanenesse and perfidiousness. with as∣surance that he should be dismissed safe and sound. This Gentleman plaied his part so well, that he brought the young Earl with him: The Legate presently told him, that he was now his prisoner till Carcasson was taken, and till his Subjects had better learn∣ed their duty: the Earl astonished hereat,The Earl made a prisoner. cried out that he was betrai∣ed, and that faith was violated with him, &c. but this nothing prevail∣ed, for he was presently committed to the guard and custody of the Duke of Burgonne. The inhabitants of Carcasson understanding this,A speciall pro∣vidence. brake forth into tears, and were so astonished, that they now thought of nothing but how by flight to escape the danger, but that seemed impossible, being environed with such an Army: at last one told them, that he heard some old men say, that there was a certain vault under ground, great and large, which went to the Castle of Cameret three leagues off: Then were all the Citizens imploied to search for this vault, and having at last found it, they began their flight in the evening, with their wives and children, carrying with them only some victuals for a few daies. This departure was accompanied with much sorrow thus to leave all their worldly enjoyments: The next morning they came to the Castle, and from thence dispersed themselves, some to Arragon, others to Ca∣talonia, others to Tholouse, whether it pleased God to conduct them.Carcasson taken In the morning the Pilgrims were strangely astonished, hearing no noise nor seeing any man stirring in the City, yet they approached the wals with much fear, lest it should be but a stratagem to endanger them, but finding no opposition, they mounted the wals, crying out, that the Albingenses were fled, and thus was the City with all the spoils tak∣en,Simon of Mont∣fort made Ge∣nerall. and the Earl of Beziers committed to prison in one of the strongest Towers of Carcasson. Then did the Legate call all the Prelates, and great Lords of his Ar∣my together, telling them, that though it was requisite that there should be alwaies a Legate in the Army, yet it was likewise necessary that there should be a secular General, wise and valiant, to command in all their affairs, &c. This charge was first proffered to the Duke of Bur∣gonne, then to the Earl of Ennevers, and to the Earl of S. Paul: but they all refused it: Lastly, it was proffered to Earl Simon of Montfort, who after some excuses, accepted of it. The Earl being made general, settled himself at Carcasson with four thousand Pilgrims, all the remainders of that huge Army. After this Earl Remund of Tholouse, went to the French King for his Letters of commendation to the Pope, to be by him fully cleared from the death of Frier Peter, and the Pope thereupon received him courte∣ously,
gave him full remission and absolution, and thereby declared him sufficiently justified. Shortly after the Earl of Beziers died in prison, and Earl Simon was put into possession of his lands,Eearl of Bezi∣ers dieth. whereupon all that bordered upon him began to fear him, for that he gave it out that the Spring follow∣ing he would have a great Army of Pilgrims, wherewith he would chastise those that had not acknowledged his authority given him by the Church. Upon this occasion Castris sent unto him the keys of their City; the Castle of Pinies yielded to him, and so did all round about Carcasson: But the King of Arragon secretly encouraged the Gentle∣men of the Vicounty of Beziers,The King of Arragon en∣courageth the Albingenses. telling them that his Pilgrims would be uncertain, and would not stay long with him, and that if in the mean time they would but keep themselves in their Garisons, when he was weak by the departure of his Pilgrims, they might then set upon him, and reduce him to reason. These messages gave such encouragement to the Gentry, that the Earl Simon being gone to Montpelliar, they took arms to shake off his yoak, besieging some of his souldiers in a Tower near to Carcasson: the Earl hearing of it presently returned to succor them, but the Tower was taken before he came, which affront brought him into some con∣tempt: Then Captain Boucard belonging to Earl Simon, attempted to surprise the strong Castle of Cabeet, making his approach thereto as secretly as he could: Captain Roger commanding therein for Earl Re∣mund, was come forth with eighty horse to forrage: Boucard on the sudden charged him: but Roger doubled the charge in so furious a man∣ner, that he overcame Boucards party, and brought him prisoner into that Castle that he came to surprise. Gerad of Pepios took part with the Albingenses, so that the warre grew hot:Earl Simons pride abated. but all the men that Earl Simon took, he caused a great fire to be made, and cast them into it: neither did his men escape scot-free, when they fell into their enemies hands. The City of Carcasson was hereupon stricken with great fear, ha∣ving little hope to defend themselves, but by flight, being environed on all sides by their enemies. About this time Earl Simon wrote to all the Prelates through Europe, that if in the Spring following they did not send him good store of Pilgrims,Prodigious cruelty. he could hold out no longer against his enemies, having since the last departure of his Pilgrims, lost above fourty Towns and Castles; And whilest that he waited for these new succours, he surprised the Castle of Beron, where he pulled out the eyes of above a hundred Albingenses, and cut off their noses, leaving only one with one eye to guide the rest to Cabaret. Anno 1210. Earl Simon being shut up in Carcasson for want of soul∣diers, heard that his wife was comming from France with many Pil∣grims, whereupon he went out to meet her: These Pilgrims he im∣ployed against the Castle of Menerbe,Menerbe taken. which at last was yielded up to him for want of water. This Castle was defended by Remund, Lord of Termes, and was scituated in Narbonne: one argument which Earl
Simon used to stirre up his crossed souldiers to fight manfully against it, was, For (that saith he,) there hath been no Masse sung in it since the yeare 1180. which is now thirty years, Upon the surrender of the Castle they laboured to draw this noble Lord to recant his religion, and turne Papist; but finding him immovable, they shut him up in a straight prison, where shortly after he died: they also took his wife, sister, and daughter, who was a maid, and other Noble women, with whom they laboured to withdraw them from the truth both by flattery and frowns, by faire speeches, and cruell threats, but when they saw that nothing would prevaile, they made an huge fire, casting them into the same, and burning them: God fridi Annales. Also af∣ter his taking of the said Castle, he caused a Frier to preach to the people, and to exhort them to acknowledge the Pope and Church of Rome: but they not staying till he had done▪ cried out,Courage and constancy. We will not for∣sake our faith, you labour but in vain, for neither life nor death shall make us abandon our beliefe. Then did the Earl and Legate cause a great fire to be made, and cast into it a hundred and fourscore men and wo∣men, who went in with joy, giving God thanks for that he was plea∣sed so to honour them, as to die for his Names sake: They also told Earl Simon that he would one day pay dear for his cruelties. All that saw their valour, and constancy were much amazed at it. Then did the Earl besiege the Castle of Termes, which also at last was taken for want of water; yet they within the Castle,The Castle of Termes taken. when they perceived that they could hold out no longer, one night quit the place and passed away undiscovered. The Castle de la Vaur, was also be∣sieged, in which there were many godly people: Thither came ma∣ny Pilgrims to the Legate, from all Countries; and amongst others,Six thousand Pilgrims slain. six thousand Germanes, of whose coming the Earl of Foix hearing, he laid an ambush for them, overthrew and slew them all, not one e∣scaping but an Earl that carried the news to Earl Simon. After six moneths siege the Castle of Vaur was taken by assault,Horrible cruel∣ty. where all the souldiers were put to the sword save eighty Gentlemen, whom Earl Simon caused to be hanged, and the Lord Aimeri on a gibbet higher then all the rest, the Lady his sister was called Girauda, was cast into a ditch, and there covered with stones. And for the rest of the people a very great fire was made, and they were put to their choise, whether they would forsake their opinions, or perish by the flames: There were scarce any of them found that would doe the first, but exhorting one another, they went into the kindled fire of their own accord, saith Altisiodore, but more probably they were forced into the same, where joyfully they resigned up their spirits unto God: Some say that they were about foure hundred persons that thus perished by fire. After the return of the Earl Remund from the Pope, the Legate still fought to entrap him,Popish subtilty but the Earl would not come againe within his reach. Then did the Legate send the Bishop of Tholouse to him, who pretended a great deal of love and friendship to the Earl, and by his
subtilty at last prevailed with him to profer his strong Castle of Nar∣bonnes to them to lodge in as they passed that way: but as soon as the Legate and his company were entred, they seised upon it, and put into it a garison, which was a continuall vexation to all his subjects. Then did the Legate resolve upon the utter extirpation of Earl Remund,The Legate dies. and all his house, as the head of the Albingenses; but presently after this Legate dying, Earl Simon was frustrated of this hope. About this time the English who now possessed Guienne, which bor∣dereth upon the Earldom of Tholouse began to help the Albingenses, be∣ing stirred up thereto by Reinard Lollard,The English help the Albin∣genses. a godly, and learned man, who by his powerfull preaching converted many to the truth, and defended the faith of the Albingenses; for which they were so eager∣ly pursued, and constantly suffered Martyrdom: And this they did the rather, not only for their neighbour-hoods sake, or for that Simon Earl of Lecester was a rebell, and traitour to their King, but because this Remund Earl of Tholouse, whom they so cruelly whipped, and o∣ther wise abused, and had now also excommunicated, was brother in law to King John. For his former wife was Joane sometimes Queene of Sicilie, which Joane was Kng Johns sister, and bare to the Earl of Tholouse, Remund, who succeeded his father both in the Earldome, and in his troubles. John le Maier much commendeth this Lol∣lard, saying that he foretold many things by Divine Revelation, which (saith he) came to passe in my time, and therefore he putteth him into the rank of holy prophets: And for his learning it is evident by his comment upon the Revelation, where he setteth forth many things that are spoken of the Roman Antichrist. This worthy man was afterwards apprehended in Germany; and being delivered to the secular power, was burnt at Collen. Anno 1211. A new Legate called Theodosius was appointed to suc∣ceed who excommunicated Earl Remund,Popish pride and the Bishop of Tholouse thereupon sent the Earl word that he must depart out of the City, for that he could not say Masse whilest an excommunicated person was in the City: The Earl returned this answer, being netled at his in∣solency,Popish hypo∣crisie. that he (the Bishop) should presently depart out of his Ter∣ritories, and that upon pain of his life: accordingly the Bishop de∣parted, and took with him the Canons of the Cathedrall Church, with the Crosse, Banner, and Host, and all of them barefooted in Procession: Coming thus to the Legates Army, they were received as persecuted Martyrs, with the teares of the Pilgrims, and generall applause of all. Then the Legate thought that he had sufficint cause to prosecute Earl Remund, as a relapsed and impenitent man; but first he sought by craft to get him into his power, and with his fair flatering letters, he at last drew him once again to Arles: The Earl had requested the King of Arragon to meet him there. When they were both come, the
Legate commanded them upon the pain of his high indignation, that they should not depart, but with his leave: Whilest they were there, the Earl was privately shewed by a friend, The Articles of the Legate to which he would enforce him to subscrib,Articles a∣gainst Earl Remund. which were these. 1. That the Earl of Tholouse should presently dismiss, and cashiere all his men at Armes, not restraining one. 2. That he shall be obedient, and subject to the Church: and re∣paire all the costs, and damages which the Church hath been at. 3. That in his lands, no man should eat of more then two sorts of flesh. 4. That he shall expell out of his territories all the Hereticks, and their allies. 5. That he shall deliver into the hands of the Legate, and of Earl Simon, all those persons that shall be named unto him. 6. That no man in his lands whether noble, or ignoble, shall were any costly apparell, but black course clokes. 7. That All his Castles of defence shall be razed to the ground. 8. That no Gentlemen of his shall live in any City, or Castle, but in country houses, or villages only. 9. That he shall not levie in his land any taxes, or tolls, but such as in old time were accustomed. 10. That every Master of a family shall pay yearly four Tholousian pence to the Legate. 11. That when Earl Simon shall passe through his countries, he shall beare their charges. 12. That after his performances of these things, he shall go into the Holy land to fight against the Turke, and never return againe into his owne country, but by the leave of the Pope, or his Legate. Remund having read over these Articles shewed them to the King, who advised him presently to mount on horseback, least seising upon him, they might the better become masters of all his e∣state which accordingly he did. The Legate was much troubled that he had thus lost his prey, and despairing to do any more by subtilty, he resolved to set upon him by force: and thereupon he besieged the Castle of Montferrand, where Baldwin,Earl Remund in danger. the brother of the Earl of Tholouse was governour: Baldwin, at least pretending inability to de∣fend the place, yielded it up, and abjuring his opinions turned Papist. The Earl of Tholouse seeing himselfe thus betrayed by his brother, lamented exceedingly:His brother betrays him. but a greater mischiefe soone after befell him: For the Legate, and Earl Simon wonne from him by their subtilty, the King of Arragon, his only prop under God: and that by this meanes they agreed that the King of Arragons daughter should be married to Earl Simon's eldest son, in consideration whereof the King of Arragon invested Simon in the Earldom of Beziers: and now they intend jointly to besieg Tholouse: For which end the Bishop
of Tholouse was sent to levy souldiers in France, and at his returne hasted to Tholouse: which Earl Remund hearing of, sallyed out of the City with five hundred horse, and some foot, marching to the bridg which goeth over the river of Garenne not far from Tholouse,Tholouse be∣sieged. hoping either to gaine it, or to breake it down: but being overpowered by multitude, he was forced to make a retreat, and the enemie pursued him to the very gates of Tholouse: But Earl Remund seeing their insolency, sal∣lyed out againe with a greater strength, and charged them so gal∣lantly, that he beat them back to the bridge, which being but nar∣row, he slew almost all of them there: and took prisoner a∣mongst them,The Pilgrims beaten. Aimery the son of Earl Simon. Earl Simon hearing of this loss, hasted with all his army to the City, and gave a furious assault to it, but the ditches were soone filled with the dead bodies of the e∣nemie beaten from their scaling laddars: and the Earl himselfe was beaten from his horse. In the middest of this assault, came the Earl of Campeigne soon enough to be well beaten for his welcome,The siege rais∣ed. Earl Simon finding such stout resistance from the Citizens, caused his Pilgrimes to spoil the Orchards, Gardens, and Vineyards about the city, which being perceived; the President of Argeves issued out of the City suddenly, and slew a number of the Pilgrims, and on another part, the Earl of Foix slew as many as he could meet with. The Earl of Bar seeing the disorder of the Popish Army cried out a Bar, a Bar, but the Citizens of Tholouse charged him so bravely, that being dis∣comfited, he was faigne to fly amongst the rest. After this victory Earl Remund returning to Tholouse caused publike, and solemne thanks to be returned unto God, for the same. Earl Simon after this lead his Army into the country of the Earl of Foix, who was now sick, where he took some townes: also the Legat with another part of the army went to Roquemaur, and in his way took the To∣wer of Cassas;Popish perfidi∣ousness, and cruelty. and caused above an hundred men that were found there∣in most cruelly to be burned alive, and levelled the Tower to the earth. Earl Remund being much afflicted for the loss, and alienation of his an∣cient friend the King of Arragon, studied how he might regaine him, and for that end propounded a match betweene his only son, and heire, and the King of Arragons daughter, which motion the King readily im∣braced, and so their amity was againe revived. Not long after the King of Arragon sent a letter of defiance to Earl Simon, who sent the same all over Christendom to stir up Pilgrims to assist him for the destruction of the King who (as he said) was now be∣come the Captaine of the Albingenses: and in the meane time the Popes Legate raising an army in France, went speedily into the Earl∣dome of Foix, and took some Towns, putting all to the sword without distinction of sex or age, and taking also St. Anthonies, he caused thirty of the principall men to be hanged in cold blood, after he had granted them their lives. Anno Christi 1213. Peter King of Arragon with a great army of Ar∣ragonois, and Tholousians besieged Muret, a strong Towne scituated
upon the river Garronne near unto Tholouse: There was in his Army the Earls of Tholouse: Comminges, and of Foix; but the night following, the Popish Bishops sent two Friers to him, desiring him to take pitty on the Church: and not to undertake the defence of the Hereticks, but they laboured in vaine, for the King would not desert them, where∣upon they prepared the next day to give him battle, and whilest Si∣mon Montfort was encouraging his souldiers, the Bishop of Tholouse carryed a crucifix in his hand, whereupon the Captains a lighting, ado∣red it with and humble kiss. Then the Bishop of Comminges, getting upon an high place took the crosse in his hand, and blessed the Army with it, promising forgivenesse of all sins to all that dyed in that quarrell: Hereupon Simon divided his army into three Bat∣talia's in the name of the Trinity, and so joyning battle, they fought very gallantly on both sides▪ till at length the King of Arragon was slaine, and so God (who doth not alwayes prosper the best cause) gave the victory to the Popelings, and they were slaine in the fight, and pursute about two millions of the Albingenses, as their enemies re∣ported. The Albingenses attributed this loss to Gods judgement up∣on the humane confidence of the King, who trusted too much in his great numbers, and was feasting whilest his enemies were plotting, After this victory the Popes agents sent abroad their letters into divers countries for a new supply of Pilgrims utterly to root out the Hereticks. With this victory Earl Simon was so puffed up, that he sum∣moned the Earls of Tholouse, Foix and Comminges, and the Prince of Bearn, to deliver to him the keyes of those Cities and Castles which they possessed: They returned no answer, but each of them be∣tooke himself to his own Territories, to provide the best they could for their affairs. Earl Remund retired to Mntalbon, writing to them at Tholose, that understanding that the Bishop of Arras was coming with a great Army of Pilgrims against them, and that he was altogether disabled to defend their City, he had advised them therefore that they should make the best terms they could for themselves with Earl Simon, yet de∣sired them to reserve their hearts for him, till God should give him meanes to free them from those miseries. In the interim, the Earls of Foix, Comminges, and the Prince of Bearn did what they could to infest the enemies Armies. Upon the former advice the Citizens of Tholouse sent some Deputies to Earl Simon, to profer him the keyes of their City,Popish perfidi∣ousnesse. whom he received honourably, and presently wrote to Lewis son of King Philip, that the City of Tholouse was offered to him, but his desire was that he should come and have the honour of taking it: The Prince went thither im∣mediately, and had Tholouse delivered to him: Yet the Legate re∣solved that the pillage of it should be given to his Pilgrims, and the City dismantled, which was presently executed, though contrary to the promise made to the Citizens, that no wrong should be done to the City.
Then came there a new Legate of the Popes called Bonaventure with those that had taken on them the Crosse. Viz. the Earle of Saint Paul, the Earle of Savoy, the Earle of Alenzon, the vicount of Melun, Mathew de Montmorency,Subtilty and other great Lords. The Legate seeing so many Pil∣grims, feared least Prince Lewis should take upon him to dispose of divers places held by the Albingenses, to the prejudice of the Church: Where∣upon he presently sent to all those places Absolution and protection, so that when the Prince came against them, they shewed that they were un∣der the protection of the Church: Yea the Legate told the Prince, that since he had taken upon him the Crosse, he was to be subject to his com∣mands; because he presented the person of the Pope, whose Pardons (saith he) you come to obtaine by obeying the Church, and not by com∣manding as the son of a King. The Prince dissembled his displeasure at this audaciousnesse; and the poore Albingenses were so op∣pressed by new Armies of Pilgrims, that they sunk under the burthen of it. Prince Lewis retires.The Prince, when his fourty daies service were expired, retired him∣self, being much discontented to see so much tyranny exercised against the Albingenses. Then did Earl Simon besieg the Castle of Foix, but having lain ten dayes before it, he found to his cost that the place was not to be won by him: For where as Earl Simons brother quartered at varilles, the Earl of Foix dislodged him, and slew him with his launce, putting to flight all his men. News hereof being brought to Earl Simon he swore that he would drive the Earl of Foix behinde the Pyrenaean Mountaines:Earl Simon beaten. but presently he had intelligence that a great Army of the Arrogonois, and Catalunians were come into the Earldom of Beziers, threatning to be revenged on him for the death of their good King, where upon he levied his siege in hast, and marched thitherwards: But the Earle of Foix, who knew the passages better then he, lay in ambush for him in a place fit for his turne, and suddenly setting upon his Pilgrims, slew a great number of them: only Earl Simon with a few others escaped, and went to Carcasson: but before he came thither, the Arrogonois were gone, else might they easily have discomfited him, yet shortly after they returned again, and Earle Simon was foundly beaten by them, so that he was forced▪ to shut himself up in Carcasson till he had a new supply of Pilgrims. Shortly after came Remund the son of Earl Remund out of England, where he had been bred under his uncle King John,Young Re∣munds successe. with an Army, and quickly made himself Master of the City of Beaucaire, and almost famish∣ed them that held the Castle, so that they yeelded it up to depart with their baggage. There Earl Simon lost a hundred Gentlemen that he had laid in ambush neer unto the City, whom young Remund in a sally cut in pieces. Earl Simon ho∣noured.Anno 1214. The Legate called a Councel at Montpelier, for renuing of the Army of the Church, and to confirm the authority of Earle Simon; where they declared him to be Prince of all the Countries conquer∣ed
from the Albingenses, which title was confirmed to him by the Pope also. Who stiled him the active and dexterous soldier of Jesus Christ, and the invincible defender of the Catholick Faith. But whilest Earl Simon was in the Council receiving this his new honour, a great ru∣mour was heard in the City, and a messenger brought word that the peo∣ple, hearing that Earl Simon was there, betook themselves to their Arms, purposing to kill him; whereupon he stole away by the walls of the City on foot, without any company, and so escap∣ed; so that in one houre he saw himself honoured as a God, and flying disguised, hiding himself like a base scoundrell,And disgraced. for feare of the rascall multitude.A Council a∣gainst the Al∣bingenses. Anno Christi 1215. Their was a Councill held by the Pope at Lateran, where they gave the Inquisitors such power against the Gospellers, that poor people were every where horribly tortured that were but suspected for Heresie, and (as Tritemius saith) Frier Conradus of Marpurg,Popish cruelty the Popes Inquisitor, if he but suspected any as guilty of Heresie, vsed to trie them by the judgment of red hot irons, and such as were burned by the irons he delivered as Hereticks, to the secular power, to be bur∣ned in the flames: whereupon most of those that were accused were by him condemned to be burnt, few escaping the hot irons: In so much as Noble, Ignoble, Clerks, Monks, Nuns, Burgesses, Citizens, and countrymen were under the name of Heresie (by too headlong a sentence of the Inquisitor on the same day where on they were accused) cast into the cruell flames, no refuge of appeale or defence doing them any good▪ By the same Lateran Councill, Earle Simon had the forementioned lands of the Albingenses confirmed to him, and thereupon he hastened to the King of France to receive investiture, and as he went (saith the Monk of Sernay) in every City and towne the Popish Clergy, and people met him, crying, Blessed is he that commeth to us in the name of the Lord, and every man thought himself happy that could but touch the hem of his garment. When he had recived his Investiture from the King of France, being attended with an hundred Bishops that had preached the Crosse in their Diocess, and with an exceding great Army of Pilgrims he hasted to make himself Lord of all those countries, which the Pope had given him. So that all men trembled at his reproach, and with this great Army of Pilgrims he took in divers places, using great cruelty,A new Army of Pilgrims. putting men women and children to the sword. Then was he marching to Tholouse, purposing to pillage and raze it to the ground:Cruelty. But by the way his wife sent him word that he must speedily come to her relief, being besieged in the Castle of Narbonnes, by the Earl of Tholouse; but by this time many of his Pilgrims were returned into France. Yet Earl Simon hasted to the relief of his wife, and being come be∣fore Tholouse, the people by their frequent sallies made that place too hot for his abode.A popish brag. The Legate perceiving that he was much astonish∣ed at it, said unto him; Fear nothing, we shall quickly recover the City,
and then we will destroy all the inhabitants; and if any of our Pilgrims are in the fight, they shall, as Martyrs, immediately passe to Paradise. here∣upon one of Earl Simons great Captains said, Monsieur Cardinall, you talke with great assurance, but if the Earl believe you, it will be little for his profit, for you, and other Prelates have been the causers of all this evil, and will be of more, if he believe you. Then was it resolved that the City should be besieged on the side of Gascon, but the Citizens made such a blunt salley, that they put their enemies to flight; and presently the Earl of Foix coming with new supplies, fell upon Earl Simon▪ chased him to the river Garonne,E. Smon beaen where many of his Pilgrims were drowned, and the Earle with his horse fell into the river, and hardly escaped. The Earl Remund caused publick thanksgiving to God for this happy victory.Thanksgiving. Earl Simon being in great perplexity, a Bishop bid him be of good comfort, for that the Cardinal had sent messengers throughout the world to raise him succours, and so he was inforced to wait, with much impatiency, the coming of these new supplies, Anno 1218. There came to him a hundred thousand Pilgrims, and he was resolved that they should earn their pardons, knowing that at the end of fourty daies they would vanish: Whereupon the next morning they were ordered to give a generall assault to Tholouse: But Earl Remund perceiving in the night that they were very secure, be∣cause of their great multitude, he sallied out upon them, and that with so good successe, that ere morning all the field was covered with their dead bodies,Many Pilgrims slaine. and the Earl with his men being weary with killing, re∣turned into the City to give thanks unto God for his assistance. Then did Earl Simon enter into the Castle of Narbonnes to see if he could discerne any way to enter into the City, but finding none, it much troubled him, whereupon two Lords gave him Coun∣sell to come to some honourable agreement: yet the Cardinal Be∣trand told him that there was no need for him so to do; To whom one of them answered, Monsieur Cardinal, pray you where finde you that you should take from Earl Remund, and his son that which belongs unto them: If I had known as much as I know now, I had never taken upon me this business. After nine moneths siege the Citizens of Tholouse made another sally, killing as many of the crossed souldiers as they encountered with; and Earl Simon coming in to the reliefe of his men, had his horse shot in the head with an arrow, which caused him to run away with him, which one of the Albingenses seeing, with his Cross-bow he shot him thorow the thigh;E. Simon slain by a woman. Simon perceiving that he lost much bloud, was la∣bouring to get out of the presse, but just at that present, a woman discharging an engine from the walls of Tholouse, a stone parted his head from his shoulders; and thus by Gods just judgement, he that had been the deflourer and murtherer of many women, was himselfe slaine by a woman.
Upon his death, the Legate and all the Bishops fled, never staying till they came to Carcasson, the Pilgrims disbanded and returned to their homes, and Earl Remund caused a publick Thanksgiving to be returned to Almighty God for this so signall a deliverance. Afterwatds, at the instigation of the Pope, Prince Lewis of France went, and besieged Tholouse, but finding the business too hot for him, he returned without doing any thing of note:Prince Lewis his cruelty. yet in this iourney he tooke the towne of Miromand, wherein he cruelly put to the sword men, women, and children to the number of five thousand. Upon his returne the Legat Bertrand being weary of these warres, wrote to Pope Honorius the 3. desiring to be recalled because of his age: yet with all, he signified a necessity of continuing these warrs Otherwise (saith he) not only the lands of the Albingenses wilbe lost, but the Church of Rome itself will be ruined, the Doctrin of the Al∣bingenses shaking the authority of the Popes themselves: And (saith he) this war hath cost us very deare, for within less then fifteene years there hath dyed above three hundred thousand Crossed soldiers: and therefore all wilbe lost, except these Hereticks be utterly de∣stroyed. This occasioned the Pope to send a new Legat [Conradus Bishop of Portua] Also he granted to all Crossed soldiers that fought against the Albingenses the same in dulgences as to those that went to fight against the Saracens in the Holy land: Moreover he tooke King, Philip of France into his protection, and made peace betwixt him, and young King Henry the third of England: so that Philip wholly bent himself to roote out the Gospellers. Anno Christi 1220. Earl Guido of Monfort, son,Earl Guido slaine. and heire to Earl Simon went against the Albingenses, but was soone after slaine by the E. of Sant Giles as he besieged a Castle in Tholouse: Then did his brother Almerick besieg the same Castle, and swore that he would never depart from it till he had taken it: But after a while, his hoped-for aides fail∣ing him, he was faigne to leave the siege and depart. After whose departure the Albingenses recovered many places. Anno Christi 1221. the young Emperor Frederick, by the instiga∣tion of the Pope, published a cruell,The Empe∣rours cruell edict against them and bloody Edict against the Gos∣pellers with in his Dominions, where in he damned them with perpetuall ignominy, and declared them publick enemies: Commanding their goods to be confiscated, without redemption; and their sons to be disinherited. As also that all of them that were apprehended by the Inquisitors or others, should be kept in Prison, till they were kil∣led with an abomminable death: The like punishment he commanded to be inflicted on all such as should aide, or assist them. Also he tooke away all benefit of appeale from such as were receivers, or favourers of them. And further he commanded that their houses, and the houses of such as should receive, defend, or favour them, either where they have taught, or where they have laid on hands, should
be plucked downe,The Gospellers dispersed and never more repaired. Also the same yeare some of these Albingenses going into Bosina and Dalmatia drew many of the people to imbrace their faith, whereupon the Bishop of Collen was sent thither by Pope Honorius as his Legate, and required to force them to returne to the Catholick faith (as they called it) either by perswasion, or by the arms of the Crossed soul∣diers, but where neither prevailed, he being a weary of the work, left it to the Frier predicants to see if by arguments they could convince and convert them,Persecuted. Columminus the King assisting them: and (saith mine Author) when they had got footing, they burnt with fires those that were obstinate in their Heresies, and purged the Churches which were defiled by them: Leander de viris illust. ordinis praedica∣torum. Anno Christi 1223. Bartholmew, the Bishop of the Albingenses of Tholouse,The Gospellers encrease. ordeined a Bishop for Bulgary, Croatia, and Dalmatia, where their faith spread so fast, that Bishops themselves were drawn to be of their opinion, whereupon Conradius Bishop of Portua, the Popes Legate wrote to the Arch-Bishop of Roan, and his Suffragan Bishops, to meet, with others Bishops at a Councill to be held at Sens against the said Bartholmew: who (saith the Legate) in his letters, stiles himself servant of the servants of God: and runs about, Creating Bishops, and endeavoring perfidiously to gather Churches. Mathew Paris. Anno Christi 1226. (saith the same Author) the Crosse was preached all over France by Romanus the Popes Legate,The King of France against them. against the Albingenses, where in he commanded all that were able to beare arms to signe them selves with the signe of the Crosse against the Earl of Tholouse, and his people: and at his preaching, a great multitude of Prelates, and Lay men tooke upon them the signe of the Crosse, yet more for fear of the King of France, and for favour of the Legate, then induced by the justness of the cause. But the King of France being signed with the Crosse, would not take upon him the expedition, unlesse the Pope would forbid the King of England under paine of excommu∣nication to move war against him for any land that he possessed at that present, either iustly or unjustly: which accordingly the Pope did, and our King Henry the third upon receipt of the Popes letters assembled his Nobles to consult with them what he should do upon this inhibition, at which time their was present one Mr William Perepund, skilfull in Astronomy, who constantly affirmed before the King; That if the King of France took upon him this expedition, he should either never returne alive, or else should meet with as greate confusion as might be, both of his person, estate, and followers. The King of France having thus settled his affaires at home, he to∣gether with the Legate, appointed a Peremptory day for the Crossed-souldiers to come to a rendevous with their horses, and Arms at Lyons, from which at the time appointed he began his expidition with an huge Army which was accounted Invincible, whom the Legate
followed with Arch-Bishops; Bishops &c. In the Army there were reckoned to be fifty thousand Knights, and men at Arms on horsback, besides an innumerable company of footmen; and then did the Le∣gate publickly excommunicate the Earl of Tholouse, putting all his favourers, and lands under Interdict. The King thus marching with his glittering Arms; and terrible Army on Whitson-Eve came to Avignion, the first City in Tholouse, pur∣posing to destroy the whole land of the Earl, from one end to the other, and utterly to root out the Inhabitants thereof: yet very cunningly the King and the Legate sent to the Citizens, only desiring passage through the City, that they might follow their iourney the neerest way; The Citi∣zens consulting together, returned answer, That they suspected fraud, nei∣ther would they admit them into the City, where upon the King in a great rage, swore that he would not depart thence till he had taken the City. The Citizens valiantly defended themselves so that the sieg lasted long, and the Earl of Tholouse being a skilfull warrior,Avignion be∣sieged. before the comming of the French Army, had withdrawne all kind of victualls together with the women, children, and cattell into places of safety: Hereupon the Kings Army fell into great wants, so that multitudes perished by famine: Their horses and beasts also were starved; for the Earl had caused all the meddowes to be plowed up in the whole country so that they had no fodder but what was brought out of France: And their wants daily increasing, many Legions went out of the Kings Camp to seek for food, and fodder,A Famine in the Kings Ar∣my. but the Earl of Tholouse with a flying Army, many times lay in am∣bush for them, and cut off multitudes of them. They also that lay in the siege before the City were miserably wasted by darts, and stones shot in ingines from the walls by the Citizens valiantly de∣fending themselves; and a generall famine overspread all, but it raged most amongst the poorer sort, who had neither food nor money: Also out of the dead carkasses of men, and beasts their bred certaine great, and blackflies,A dreadfull Judgement which comming into there tents by swarms with an horible humming, infected their meat, and drink, and when they were not able to drive them from their cupps, and dishes, many of the Pilgrims perished suddenly by their meanes. But the King and Legate were especially troubled, and confounded to think what reproach it would be to them, and to the Church of Rome, that so gallant, and numerous an Army should vndertake such an expedi∣tion, and be able to effect nothing: Then the chiefe Princes, and Cap∣tains being weary of the long siege amongst so many deaths, sollicit that a generall storme might be given to the City, hoping by their multitudes to oppresse the Citizens, which being resolved upon, such a great multitude of Armed men thronged upon the bridge that goes over the river of Rhodanus, that the bridge breaking under them, three thousand of them were drowned in that swift river.Many of them drowned. Presently after as the French were one day at dinner the Citizens dis∣covering there carlesness, suddenly sallied forth,The French beaten. & violently setting upon
them, suddenly slew Twenty thousand of them with out any losse to themselves, and so retired: and the King of France commanded the dead bodies to be throwne into the River affording them no other buriall:The Kng removes further from the City. Then did he also remove his sieg to afarther distance, and to prevent the like attempts, caused a great ditch to be cast up between the City and his camp: and the Legate with his Prelates not knowing how otherwise to reveng themselves, Anathematized the Earl of Tholou∣se, and all the subjects: But whom they cursed, the Lord blessed: For shortly after he sent a very great plague into the French campe, so that king Lewis, to escape the same, retired himself into the neighbouring Abbey of Monpensier, where he resolved to remain till the City should be taken unto whom came Henry,A plague in the French Cam Earl of Compaigne, desiring to be dismissed, having now sereved his fourty daies: but the King denyed his request. To whom the Earl said, that having performead what was injoyned, he neither might nor would be staid any longer: The King being very angry hereat, swore that if he departed, he would wast his whole land with fire, and sword: yet the Earl, according to his former resolution, went his waies: and shortly after the Lord struck the King with sickness whereof he dy∣ed:The King of France dyeth. The Legate, and great Captaines concealed his death for a month together, and in the interim sent messengers laboring to draw the Citizens to a composition, and Commissioners, being sent to the Camp, the Legate perswaded them to resigne up their City to him upon promise, that they should injoy their lives estates, and liberties in a better manner then they had formerly: but they answered, that they would not live under the power of the Frenchmen, whose pride, and insolency they had often tryed. After along Parlee the Legate desired that himself and the Praelates, might be admitted into the City, swearing with a great oath that he had continued the sieg so long only that he might seek the salvation of their souls. The Citizens giving credit to his promise, not suspecting his treachery, after mutuall Oaths given on either side, admitted him with the Praelates, and their followers into the City: but contrary to their oaths the Frenchmen followed, violently rushing into the City when the Gates were open,Avgnion ta∣ken by treache∣ry. and seizing upon the Citizens they bound them, plundered their houses, and slew many; and having thus by treachery made themselves Masters of the City, they brake downe the walls, and the strong towers of that noble City. During this sieg their perished more then 22000. of the Pilgrims, by famine, sword, pestilence, and other waies: and so the rest returned to their owne homes. Anno Christi 1228. The Pope [now Gregory] being implacably bent to rout out the Albingenses, stirred up the young King of France against them, who sent a great Army into Provence vtterly to destroy them, which Army hearing that the Earle of Tholouse was in the castle called Saracen,The young ing of France persecuts them. they purposed to besieg him as being there shut up: But the Earl having notice of their intent, with strong troopes he lay in ambush in a wood through which they were to passe: & when they were come to the place, he gallantly assaulted them & after a bloudy fight, slew many, took two hundred Knights,His armies bea∣en. & about two thousand men at Arms: The Knights
he imprisoned: but of the other he caused some of their eyes to be pulled out, others to have their noses cut off and so dismissed them. That summer the King of France sent three Armies against them, all which were either put to flight or taken, and imprisoned by the said Earl. Mathew Paris. Yet the same yeare, Imbert of Beavim went against them with a great Army of Crossed souldiers, amongst whom were three Arch-bi∣shops, every one with the Pilgrimes of his Jurisdiction: And the Earl of Tholouse (being as it semes unprovided) was faigne to shut up him∣selfe within the wals of Tholouse,Tholouse besieg∣ed. where he was strongly besieged by the Pilgrimes, who also wasted, and spoiled his country, and har∣vest, far and nere on every side: And the siege continuing, the Ci∣tizens suffered great Famine, and when they were brought to this ex∣tremity the Abbat of Grandsylue went from the Popes Legate to offer peace to Earl Remund, and the Tholousians:A great Famine Some of the Earls Cap∣tains disswaded him from it, knowing the perfidiousnesse of the Papists, but the cries of the hunger starved multitude prevailed, so that a Truce was agreed upon for certaine daies, and Earl Remund upon the day appointed went to the place where the peace should be con∣cluded. But when he came thither, the Abbat perswaded him that it was necessary that the agreement should be perfected in the pre∣sence of the Queen Mothers, who was regent of France,Popish treache∣ry. and pawn∣ed his faith to him, that if he would go to her, she should go; and re∣turne in safety. The Earl overcome by these promises assented, and Meaux was the place chosen by the Queen for their meeting. But as soone as Earl Remund came thither, contrary to all oaths, and en∣gagements, he was made a prisoner, and had a guard set upon him that he might not start aside; and instead of a treaty, he must submit to whatsoever should be enjoyned▪ It was a lamentable thing (saith the Historiographer of Languedock) to see so brave a man, that for so long a time was able to resist the whole power of France, to come in his shirt, and linnen breeches bare∣foot, and bare-leged to the Altar in the presence of the Cardinals, and their to accept of such hard, and unreasonable conditions as they were pleased to impose upon him: Amongst which these were some:Unreasonable terms put upon the Earl of Tholouse. that he should abjure the Heresie which hitherto he had defended; That for the future he should be subject to the Church of Rome. That he should cast all the Hereticks out of his dominions: That he should give his only daughter Joane in marriage to one of the King of France his brethren: That he should pay a yearly stipend to six Popish Professors of the liberall Arts, and to two Grammarians at Tholouse: That he should take upon him the Crosse, and for five years wage warre against the Sa∣racens, and other enemies of the Faith, and Church: And lastly, that he should levell with the ground the walls of the City of Tholouse, and the walls of 30. other Cities, and Castles at the appointment of the Legate, and fill up their ditches, and so remaine a prisoner in the Louver at Paris, till his daughter Joane was discovered to the Kings messengers at Carcasson.
Pope Gregories Counsells a∣gainst them.Anno Christi. 1229. diverse Councils were held against the Albin∣genses: One at Tholouse, the Acts whereof were proclaimed in that City by Romanus, the Popes Legate, another at Narbonne, where more, and more cruell decrees were made against them. A third at Beziers exceeding in rigour both the former: and amongst the rest an oath of abjuration, whereby all persons, Males at fourteen yeares old, Fe∣males at twelve yeares old, were to abjure all Heresie as they called it, and to swear that they would keep the Faith, and defend the Ca∣tholike Church, and persecute all the opposers of the same: and that all that took not this oath within fifteen daeis, should be held sus∣pected of Heresie, and proceeded against accordingly: also another Article was in these words: Item we forbid the use of the Old, and New Testament to the Lay people: Forbidding expressely that they have not the said books turned into the vulgar tongue. Also the same yeare on Munday, Thursday, Pope Gregory proclaimed Ecclesastical censures against them, and sent the prime Inquisitors of Dominicks order into France to put the same in execution, he wrote also to Lewis King of France to cast all those Hereticks out of France, and to cause the Earl of Tholouse to do the like in his Dominions, and to place new counsel∣lors about him that might instruct him in the Catholike Faith, and Man∣ners, and to cast all such from about him as might corrupt him. And whereas the Kingdom of Arragon was infected with Here∣sie, Pope Gregory gave the Arch-Bishop thereof, and his Suffragans power to erect an inquisition against them. Anno Christi. 1232. Died Fulco Arch-Bishop of Tholouse, who had labored twenty six years in extinguishing the Gospellers whom, Remund of Fulgaerio succeeded,Persecution continued. and so manfully behaved himself, that in his first year he caused nineteen of the Albingenses to be apprehended and put to cruell deaths within his Diocess. Anno Christi. 1233. Queen Blanch, and the Popes Legate, so o∣ver awed the Earl of Tholouse, that they caused him to make cruell edicts against his owne subjects of the Albingensian Religion:A cruell Edict against them. That they should be persecuted, searched out, and taken: That whoso∣ever could apprehend any one of them, should have a Mark for each of them so taken: that all that were suspected to be of their Religion should be excluded from office bearing, that all houses should be pul∣led downe, wherein any of them should be found, that all their goods and inheritances should be confiiscated: That the like should be done to all that should aid or abett them, or that should hinder, or not assist the Inquisitors in the execution of their office: That whoso∣ever should be suspected of their Heresie, should have an oath given him to keep the peace, and the Catholike Faith: That the houses of such as should be detected of Heresie after their death should be pul∣led downe. That whosoever should refuse to weare the Cross should have his goods seized on. &c. The bones of one of them burnt.The same year the Inquisitors were informed that in the territories of Brixia there had lately lived one Guido de Lacha, who was much
honoured for his austerity, and integrity of life, but that he dyed out of the communion of the Church of Rome, having been infected with Heresie, whereupon they ordered his bones to be digged up, and burned. The Earl of Foix, and Comminges, and the Prince of Bearne yet re∣mained to be conquered: and the Popes Legate thought that the Earl of Tholouse was the fittest person to deale with them,A brave answer where∣upon he caused him to write to them to perswade them to embrace the Catholike Faith, &c. But the Earl of Foix returned answer; That he could not forsake his faith in such a time wherein men might think that he did it rather out of feare then from any good grounds, and that it was fitter for them to convince him of the truth of their way then to allure him by promises, or force him thereto by Armes: And that if they brought that world of Pilgrims against him which they threatned, he trusted in God that he should make them know the Justice of his cause, and repent of the rashnesse of their vow. But the Earls subjects fearing that their Lord, being aged, and without wife and children, should leave them to the mercy of the first Con∣queror, intreated him to come to a composition with the Legat, where∣upon he began to treat, and at last yielded up diverse Castles into the hands of the King of France, upon promise that he would rule with justice and equity. Anno Christi. 1234. the opinions of the Albingenses were much spread abroad in the parts of Spai, and other adjacent countries:Albingenses in Spaine. and they had Bishops among them who boldly preached against the Romish errors, and especially against Transubstantiation: where∣upon a Croisado was preached against them, and a very great Army of Pilgrims being assembled together were by Pope Gregory sent a∣gainst them, who slew them all with their Bishops,Persecuted and destroyed. seized of their City and plundered them, whereby (saith Mathew Paris) they re∣turned rich, and joyfully into their own countries. Also about the same time another Army of these Pilgrims went a∣gainst others of them on the borders of Germany, who retiring into a Fenny place for there security, were their all slaine. But the same yeare the Lord raised up Trancavel, the natural son of the Earl of Beziers deceased, who was encouraged,Trancavell and others defend them. and assisted by a number of valiant Captaines, as Oliver de Fumes, Bertrand Hugon de Serrelong, Bertrand de villenense, & Jordaine de Satiat, who told him that they would assist him to revenge the outrages done to his father, who was deprived of his land, betrayed, imprisoned, and poiso∣ned, whereupon he resolved to recover by the sword what was so unjustly taken from him: and before the enemies had notice of his designe, he took in diverse strong Castles, so that the Popes Legate, and Bishop of Tholouse were much astonished to see these men stand up for the Albingenses, whom they supposed to have been utterly suppressed. Then did the Popes agents cause the cross to be preach∣ed, and the Bishop of Narbonne animated the people of his
Diocess to go against them, and to make an end of the poor remain∣der of the Albingenses. An army being raised, the Popes Legate led it to Tholouse, and when the Citizens appeared upon their ramparts, he told them that he was come thither for their preservation: They thanked him, but withall told him, that if he did not instantly retire himselfe, they would give him the chase.He prevailes exceedingly. And presently came Trancavell, who so bravely, and valiantly set upon the Legates Troops, that he quick∣ly overthrew them, and chased them to the very gates of Carcasson, and the Legate had much adoe to save himselfe, but that which most angered the Legate was, that Trancavell found intertainement in some part of Carcasson, so that the Pilgrims durst hardly peep out of the City gates: and when he heard of any more Pilgrims com∣ming to the Legate, he used to meet them, to lay Ambushes for them, so that usually overthrowing them, their designes were marred. This man kept the field till the year 1242. and still prevailed a∣gainst all the crossed souldiers that came against him, whereupon Ame∣line the Popes Legate wrote to the Pope, that if he caused not the cross to be preached in many parts of Europe, the Church was like to sustain much damage by this enemy: For (saith he) he is more cruell, and subtile, then any before him. But a little before the Bishop of Tholouse was informed of a certain Matron, who having her children, brethren, and friends about her, was dying an Heretick, whereupon he ran to her, and found it even so by the confession of the woman her selfe: who desired to die in the faith of the Albingenses, and doubted not to be saved: then did the Bishop condemne her, and delivered her to the secular power, who presently carried her forth in the bed wherein she lay sick,A dying wo∣man burnt. and burn∣ed her. Anno Christi. 1235. Earl Remund getting from Paris, returned in∣to his owne country, and forbad the Citizens of Tholouse to company with the Friers predicant, and shortly after expelled them the City: And the Monastery of Narbonne belonging to the same order of Friers was pulled down by the Albingenses.Earl Remund escapes. And in June following Pope Gregory the ninth made new Inquisitors against the Albingenses in Arra∣gon, and France. Anno Christi. 1236. King Lewis of France wrote to the Pope that Earl Remund had violated the Covenants which he had made with the Church: and had cast the Bishops Clergy, and Friers out of Tho∣louse,He is forced to submit. and brought Hereticks into their roomes, whereupon he desired that he might be reduced into order &c. And indeed by the power of the Pope, and King, he was forced to recall the Popish Clergy, and to banish the Albingenses, and to take upon him the signe of the Cross for the aid of the Holy land, by way of Penance for his former deeds. The same year many imbracing the faith of the Albingenses be∣beyond
the Alps, Inquisitors were sent against them; especially one Frier Robert, who caused many of both sexes to be apprehended, and when they continued constant in the true faith,Persecution in Italy. and would not renounce the same, in the space of two or three moneths, he caused fifty of them (saith Mathew Paris) either to be burnt, or burned alive. Anno Christi 1239. the King of France having garisoned divers Castles within the country of Albingenses who greatly oppressed them, they betook themselves to Armes, besieging those Garisons, where∣upon they sent to the King of France, craving that present aid might be sent to them.1240. Then did the King of France send the Lord Iohn of Bellemont, with a great Army to aid them, who,Earl Remund prospers. comming into that Country, besieged the strong Castle of Mont-reall, and at last took it, together with divers others belonging to the Albingenses, whereby the were suppressed for that ime. But the year after the Earl of Tholouse took Armes againe, and assaulted the Earl of Provence, who presently sent to the French King for aid: and the French that were about Avignion hasted to the reliefe of the Earl of Provence, which the Earl of Tholouse hearing of, he lay in Ambush in their way,Persecution in Millan. and sud∣denly setting upon them, slew many, and dispersed the rest, and the war so prospered in his hand, that in a short space he recovered to his former dominion above 20. Castles from the French, and Earl of Provence, and sharply punished his Rebels.Earl of Pro∣vence beaten About the same time the Citizens of Millan, being provoked there∣unto by the Pope, and Emperor: burnt many of the Albingenses, who were their fellow-Citizens. Anno Christi 1241. The Earl of Tholouse continuing his warrs against the Earl of Provence, almost beat him out of his country,A great Perse∣cution. so that the Earl of Provence was feigne to send to the Kings of England and France (who had married his second daughters) to mediate for him, and they writing to the Earl of Tholouse, obtained peace for their Father in law. Anno Christi. 1242. the Bishops of Narbonne, and Albium, and the Seneschall of Carcasson apprehended two hundred of the Albingen∣ses in a certaine Castle of Tholouse, who had Bernard Martine of Cathavell, and Raimund Agulbuerus, for their Pastors, and Ministers: All these up∣on examination, adhering constantly to the true faith without wa∣vering, were cruelly burnt in the flames. Vignier, Hist. Eccles. And the year following there were 224. more of them burnt likewise.Pope Urban Persecutes them▪ Shortly after, it pleased God, that great contentions arose between the Pope, and Emperor, whereby the Gospellers enjoyed some breath∣ing time from their former miseries: yet, Anno Christi. 1262. Pope Vrban hearing that through that peace their Doctrine was spread exceeding∣ly, he made a Decree in this tenour. Albeit we be bound by our of∣fice alwaies to endeavour the rooting out the deadly poison of Hereticall pra∣vity from all parts in the Christian world, yet now in a speciall manner this duty is incumbent upon us, when we perceive this plague to be growne up
in our neighborhood through the iniquity of the times to the detriment of the Catho-Faith. That therefore the office of the Inquisition may be the more effectually ex∣ecuted against the Hereticks in the province of Lombardy: and parts adja∣cent, we enjoyne you, upon remission of your sins, that you doe your uttermost en∣deavours for the extirpation of it, and that you see that all Papall and Imperi∣all Lawes be executed against them: and for my owne part I will implore the aid of Christian Kings, and Princes, that Heaven, and Earth may be moved a∣gainst them. Anno Christi 1270 Petrus Cadarita, and Gulielmus Calonicus, were sent as Inquisitors from the Pope into the Kingdom of Arragon,Another Perse∣cution. severely to punish those that had imbraced the Faith of the Albingenses, and a∣mongst others they condemned Arnaldus Castlebonius the viscount, and his daughter Ermesenda, Countess of Foix: They also decreed their me∣mory to be detestable, commanding their bones to be digged out of their graves, and to be burned: They also called Roger the nephew of Ermesenda, into judgement for the same crime. Anno Christi. 1281. There was a great persecution raised against the Gospellers in the Country of Albi, by one William de gurdon, Captain and president of Carcasson under Phillip the French King, who by a procla∣mation commanded all the Albingenses to be extirpated, and search∣ed out of their dens and lurking holes,A cruel Edict. and all such as favoured them to be utterly rooted out, as also that the innumerable company of their children, which would not be reduced to the Catholike faith, and unity of the Church of Rome, should not be admitted unto the City of Realmont, or the territory thereof, nor to the place of any honour or of∣fice: That such likewise as favoured or concealed any of them, should be banished forever from the City of Realmont, and their goods wholly confiscated, and their children be excluded from all honours and dig∣nities. Yet notwithstanding the severity of this Edict, God hid and pre∣served many of them even in Realmont it selfe, as Diamonds in dung∣hils, though many of them fled into Arragon, and Sicily, where they might enjoy more freedom of Conscience.They increase, and are perse∣cuted. Anno Christi. 1285. Gareldus and Segarellus of Parma, and Dulcinus of Noudria, preached and spread the Doctrine of the Albingenses in Par∣ma, and in many cities of Lumbardy; whereupon Pope Honorius by a pub∣lick Edict condemned their Doctrine, and commanded them to be rooted out. Bzorius. Anno Christi. 1300. Pope Boniface commanded Guido, the Inquisitor, to dig up the bodie of Hermanus (one of the Albingenses) and to con∣demne and burn it in Ferrara twenty yeares after his death. Anno Christi 1315 The Friers Inquisitors raised a great persecution against the Gospellers in Passaw in Austria, and burned many of them; who continued very constant in the faith, & took their death very chere∣fully: Amongst the rest one of them that was burnt at Vienna, confessed that their were eighty thousand of them in Bohemia, and Austria at that time, their cheifest Ministers were Bartholomew Faustus, Iames Iustus, Bononatus, William, and Gilbert: of whom James was murthered between
two walls by the Mercilesse Inquisitors; Bononatus was burned alive, and William, Gilbert, and Bartholomew were condemned after their death, the house where they used to preach was pulled to the ground, and all that adhered to them were Anathematized. Anno Christi. 1322. Lollard Walterus (from whom our English pro∣fessors were called Lollards) was taken at Collen, where he had private∣ly preached,Lollard. and through Gods blessings drawne many from ignorance and errors to imbrace the truth, & persisting constantly in his opinions, he was condemned, and burned alive. Yet notwithstanding all cruelties used against them, their enemies could never prevail to a totall extirpation of them, but they still lay hid like sparkles under the ashes, desiring and longing to see that, wich now through Gods grace their posterity do injoy, viz. The liberty to call upon God in purity of conscience, without being inforced to any superstition and idolatry: and so instructing their children in the ser∣vice of God, the Lord was pleased to preserve a Church amongst them, in the middest of the Romish corruptions, as a Diamond in a dung∣hil, as wheat amongst chaff, as gold in the fire, till it pleased God to disperse the Gospell in a more generall and publick way, by the Mi∣nistry of Luther, and his associates and fellow-labourers in the Lord, at which time these Albingenses received with greediness the Doctrine of the Gospel, and so became more eminent in their profession of piety then they were formerly. Laus Deo. Collected out of a Book called Luthers Forerunners, and out of Cades Justification of the Church of England, and diverse other Authors.
Here place the sixth Figure.
CHAP. XXV. The Persecution of the Church of God in Bohemia, which began Anno Christi 894. THe Bohemians were Heathens and Idolaters, till their Duke or Captain Borivoius going into Moravia, Anno Cristi 894. by a strange providence of God was converted to the knowledge and faith of Christ, whereupon he together with thirty other Palatines was baptized; At his return into Bohemia, he took along with him Methudius Bishop of Moravia, by whose Ministry,Christianity brought into Bohemia. Ludomilla the Dukes wife was converted and baptized. Borivoius, busying himself in erecting divers Schooles and Churches, it pleased God that in a short time a great harvest was gathered, many of the Nobility and Commons being daily converted and baptized: but Satan envying the progresse of the Gospel, presently raised up persecu∣tion against the Professors of it: For first of all Borivoius was banished by the wicked faction of the Idolaters, and then compelled to resign his Dominion to his Eldest Son, who being dead, his younger son Borati∣slaus succeeded,Persecution begun. who was a very holy man yet was drawn to marry Dra∣homira, famous for nobility and beauty, but a Heathen: yet she promised, after instruction, to be baptized, and during her husbands life she cunning∣ly concealed her hatred against Christians, but he being dead, the grandmother Ludomilla educated the elder son Wenceslaus, and Draho∣mira took the younger, Bolislaus, and usurped the government, com∣manding the Christian Churches to be shut up,Tyranny. the exercises of their worship to cease, prohibiting Ministers from instructing the people, and Schoolemasters from teaching youth: such as disobeyed were imprisoned, banished, and put to death. At Prague, the Magistrates were changed,Persecution in Prague. and cruell Idolaters substi∣tuted in the rooms of Christians, by whose incitements the poor Christi∣ans were secretly, openly, and unworthily murthered and abused: whilest the murtherers went away with impunity: but if any Christian killed a Heathen though in his own defence, ten Christians were massacred for that one. Yet the insatiable cruelty of Drahomira was not satisfied herewith, but that she might destroy all the Christians, she dealt with one Balloius, a cruell wretch, whom she had set over the City of Prague, ear∣nestly entreating him by fraud or force to effect it, promising him a great reward if he did it. He thereupon arms six hundred Conspirators at his own house,A speciall pro∣vidence. with whom he hastens to those that were designed for slaughter: but the plot, through Gods mercy,The Christians prevaile. being discovered to the Christians, four hundred of them met to defend their own lives: the issue of the fight was victory to the Christians,Subtilty. the streets being polluted with the bloud of eight hundred that were slain. Then did Drahomira
pretend that she was much displeased with the tumult, commanding that the Arms of both parties should be brought in to the City magazine, severely forbidding any man to walk with dart or sword: the Christians, though suspecting her fraud, yet that they might not seem disobedient, brought their arms to the Magazine, the enemies pretending also to do the like.300. Christi∣ans slain. This being done, Drahomira imploies her cut-throats in the night to set upon the unarmed Christians, whereby above three hun∣dred of them were slain in one night; This Drahomira much rejoyceth at, but yet not satisfied, she commands the Major of Prague to destroy all the Christians: whereupon he besets all the streets, and passages, and slaies all that he meets withall: till the Christians gathering them∣selves together, encounter with him, put him to flight, and in the pur∣suit slew this wicked person.Gods judge∣ment on per∣secutors. This so enraged Drahomira, that she com∣manded the two Churches to be burnt down, in one of which her hus∣band was interred. Whilest she thus raged against the Christians, Wenceslaus now grown to years, by the advice of his grand-mother, and the Christian Nobility,Wenceslaus reigns took upon him the government, and the better to establish peace, he assigned the City of Bolislavia, and the ad∣jacent parts to his mother, and younger brother. Drahomira yet laid not aside her hatred and bloudy designs against the Christians, which she first shewed against holy Ludumella, substi∣tuting two wicked villains in the night to murther her, these fellows finding her at her prayers in her Oratory, strangled her: Some there were that much provoked Wenceslaus to revenge that wicked act,Ludomilla mur∣thered. which he refused, because he judged it contrary to that duty which he owed to a mother, and to the modesty and patience of a Christian. But he was shortly after ill requited by this unnaturall monster, who affecting domination, began to defame Wenceslaus as sluggish and unfit for go∣vernment, but when she perceived that his subjects loved him excee∣dingly, she waited a fitter opportunity, which thus fell out. Bolislaus having a son, she invited Wenceslaus to the baptising of this his Nephew at Bolislavia, he going thither, she entertained him with much dissembled love: but in the night as he was making his prayers to God: His brother Bolislaus assaults him, and beeing assisted with some other cut-throats slew him,Wenceslaus murthered. Anno 929. Bolislaus having by this fratricide obtained the government, threatned imprisonment and death to all the Ministers and Christians if they did not presently depart Bohemia: his mother added, that their dead bodies should not be bu∣ried: Hereupon many fled, others were seized on, and tormented to death diverse waies▪ but God suffered not Drahomira to escape his reven∣ging hand,Gods judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. for in that place, where the ministers bones lay unburied, the earth opened of it self, and swallowed her up alive with her Chariot, and all that were in it, which place is to be seen before the Castle of Prague to this day. Others also who were her instruments in massacring the innocent Christians, some of them ran mad, and threw themselves down from high places, others slew themselves with their own swords, where∣with
they had murthered the innocent men, and the place where Wen∣ceslaus blood was shed, could never be washed off, but remained as a perpetuall witnesse of that villany. These things so affrighted Bolislaus, that he became more milde to the Chistians. Anno. 970. Woytich the second Bishop of Prague, labouring seri∣ously in converting the reliques of the Gentiles,Woytich ba∣nished. and reforming their wicked lives: they raised so great a sedition against him, as enforced Woytich to a voluntary banishment: Then did the Pagans rise up against his brethren, and murthered five of them, and then conspired against their prince, but were overcome in battel, &c. Not long after the Pope having usurped domination over other Churches, sought to obtrude his superstitions upon the Bohemians also: but especially he commanded that all their sacred service should be in the Latine tongue and that they should not have the cup in the Sacra∣ment: the Bohemians sent two Ministers, and four others to Rome,The Pope u∣surps over the Bohemians. Anno 977. to the Pope, desiring to be eased of these grievances, and at last obtained their request. Yet afterwards they were againe inhibited the use of their own lan∣guage in holy services, whereupon Urateslaus Duke of Bohemia (who shortly after for his valiant service to the Roman Empire, was created King) sent Embassadors to Rome, requesting a confirmation of the Liberties formerly granted to them; but the Pope [Hildebrand] abso∣lutely refused it. Anno 1197. Pope Celestine sent a Cardinall into Bohemia, to inhibit Ministers marriage, and to divorce such as were married, but the Bi∣shop and Ministers almost stoned him to death. Also when afterwards the cup was taken away in the Sacrament, there were many that opposed that sacriledg, and amongst the rest John Melicius of a noble family and fervent spirit, much honoured for his rare learning and holinesse of life;John Melicius. in his ministry he earnestly exhorted his auditors to a frequent communicating in both kindes: at last he was much moved in spirit to go to Rome, and there to testifie that the great Antichrist was come, and did then reign. He prayed unto God, with fasting and teares,The Pope An∣tichrist. desiring that unlesse these thoughts came from Gods Spirit, he might be delivered from them: but when yet he could finde no inward quiet, he went to Rome, and wrote upon the Cardinals doors, Antichrist is come, and sitteth in the Church. He also in his conferences with many, asserted the same: For this the Pope imprisoned him, and excommunicated both him, and his auditors.Melicius im∣prisoned. Mr. Mathias of Prague also, was a zealous defender of the Commu∣nion in both kindes. Anno 1375.M. Mathias He with some other learned men went to King Charles that then raigned, requested him to call a Oecu∣menicall Counsel, for the reformation of the Church. Charles sending to the Pope about it, he was so incensed at the message, that he com∣manded the King to punish those rash and Hereticall men: Whereupon
Mathias was banished the Kingdom;Mathias ba∣nished. and then was the use of the Sa∣crament in both kindes prohibited through all Bohemia: so that the godly could not administer and receive it but in private houses, in woods and caves, and yet neither so, but with the hazard of their lives: for they were set upon in the high-waies, plundred, beaten, and drown∣ed in rivers, so that at last they were necessitated to go together in companies, and armed: and this continued to the daies of John Husse. Concerning the persecution of John Husse,John Husse, Jerome  Prague. and Jerome of Prague, See in my first part their lives: But when these holy men of God were so unjustly burned at Constance: the adversaries were not satisfied with their bloud, but took further counsell for the destruction of the whole Nation: for when fifty eight of the chief Nobles of Bohemia, in the name of all the Commons, Anno 1416. had sent Letters from Prague to the Council, complaining that their Pastor, an innocent and holy man, and faithful teacher of the truth was unjustly condemned: the Council instead of answering them, wrote their Letters to some violent Papists who were in authority, to assist their Legate in oppressing the Hereticks. Thus the Bohemians were incited more and more to mutuall conten∣tions: the Priests daily from the Pulpits divulged their excomunica∣tions and execrations against the Hussites, and to stir up the greater ha∣tred against them, they used lying signs; for, putting dirt about the wicks of their Tapers, when the flame had burned the wax to the dirt, the Taper went out:Popish malice, and subtilty. Then cried they out, That God by miracles de∣clared his hatred of those wicked Hereticks, who were unworthy to enjoy the light: and thereupon they persecuted them all manner of waies, and they used such violence, as raised a tumult at Prague Anno 1419. wherein the enraged multitude threw twelve Senators of Prague with the Maior, out of the windows of the Senate-house, who fell up∣on the points of spears. After this the Pope publikely excommunicated the Bohemians at Flo∣rence,The Pope ex∣communicates the Bohemians. exciting the Emperour, Kings, Princes, Dukes, &c. to take up Arms against them, entreating them by the wounds of Christ, and their own salvation, unanimously to fall upon them, utterly to extir∣pate that cursed generation, promising universal remission of sins to the most wicked person, if he did but kill one Bohemian: Hereupon great wars were raised against them but it pleased God still to give them the victory under that brave Captain Zisca: Whereof see more in my second Part, in Zisca's Life. Yet still as the Popish party prevailed at any time, they exercised all manner of cruelty upon the poor servants of Christ, insomuch that at Cuttenburg, where were deep mettall-mines, Anno 1420. they threw into one of them a thousand and seven hundred persons,Multitudes martyred. and into ano∣ther a thousand thirty eight, and into a third a thousand three hundred thirty four persons. Also a Merchant of Prague coming to Preslaw in Silesia, the Empe∣rour and Popes Legate being their, was in his Inne drawn into dis∣course, where pleading for Husse, and the Sacrament in both kindes, he
was cast into prison, the next day a Student of Prague was cast into the same prison: The Merchant exceedingly encouraged him, saying, Oh my Brother! What an honour is it, that we are called thus to bear witness to the Lord Jesus? Let us undergo the trouble with cheerfullnesse;Encouragment. the fight is but short, the reward is eternall: Let us remember the Lord, what a cruel death he under went for us, and with what guiltlesse bloud we are redeemed, and what torments the Martyrs have patiently endured, &c. But when they were brought to execution, and the ropes by which the horses were to drag them through the streets, were fastened to their feet; the Student affrighted with the terrors of death,Apostacy. and allured by the fair promises of the Legate, recanted: But the Merchant, like an unshaken rock, told them, that their hopes of any recantation from him were but vain; I am ready to die (saith he) for the Gospell of the Lord Jesus: And so being drawne slowly through the streets,Constancy. he was brought to the place of execution, and there burnt, Anno 2420. Pichel the chief Magistrate of the City of Litomeritia, having taken twenty four of the chief Citizens, and amongst them his son in law, put them in an high Tower, and at last he brought them out, half dead with hunger and cold, and adjudged them to be drowned. When they came to the river Albis, their wives, children, and friends great∣ly mourning; the Majors own daughter came wringing her hands, and falling at her fathers feet, beseeched him to save her husbands life; but he, harder then a rock, bad her give over, saying, What? can you not have a worthier husband then this?Unnaturall cruelty. To whom she answered seeing his inexorablenesse, You shall never more espouse me to any; and so beating her breast, and tearing her hair, she followed amongst the rest. When the Martyrs came to the river, whilest Ferries were preparing, they with loude voices call heaven and earth to witnesse their innocency, and so taking their leave of their wives, children and friends, exhort∣ing them to constancy and zeal for the truth:Many drowned they were carried and cast into the middest of the river, with their hands and feet bound together and so drowned; and if any were driven to the banks, they were stab∣bed with iron forks and pikes. The Majors daughter seeing her hus∣band thrown into the river, leaped in to him, caught him about the middle, but being unable to draw him forth, they were both drowned;A loving wife. the next day they were found embracing one another, and were both buried in one grave, Anno 1421. About the same time a company of souldiers going towards Prague, seized upon a godly Minister, and four other men, and four boys, the eldest not being aboue eleven years old, for administring, and receiving the Sacarament in both kindes, and carried them to their Colonel, the Colonel sent them to the Bishop who required, them to abjure, or else he would burn them; the Minister stoutly answered, But the Gospel teacheth otherwise, so that you must either approve what we do, or blot it out of your Bible. Hereupon one of the troopers smote him so violently on the face with his gantlet, that the bloud ran out of his mouth and nose.Cruelty. The Bishop made this Minister the subject of his mirth and scorn all
that night,A Minister and others burned. and the next day being the Sabbath, he burned them all in one fire; and when the Bishop would have perswaded them to ab∣jure the Cup in the Sacrament, the Minister answered, That he would rather suffer a thousand deaths, then deny a truth so clearly revealed in the Gospel. Another Captain violently entring into a Church where many god∣ly people were met together, he killed some, and took others priso∣ners; and going to the Communion Table, he took the Cup, being full of wine,Profanenesse and blasphemy. and drunk to his horse, who having pledged him, he said, his horse was now one of the communicants in both kindes. About the same time also a Godly Tayler was burned at Prague. Also one Martin Loquis should have suffered the like death, but his life was begged by the Thaborites.Martin Loquis. Afterwards, taking another associate with him, he was travelling towards Moravia, but by the way, they were taken by a Captain, who manacling them with irons, examined them about the Sacrament: Martin answered, The body of Christ is in heaven, and he hath but one, not many bodies: Hereupon the Captain gave him a box on the ear, as not enduring such blasphemy, and would have had him presently burned. Then did a Priest beg him to see if he could convert him: but when that succeeded not, he thrust them into a dark, stinking dungeon for two moneths: Then did he torment them with fire,Prodigious cruelty. till their bowels came forth, to extort from them who were their companions: Afterwards they were both shut up in a tub, and so burned Anno 1421. A godly and eloquent Preacher in Prague, was, together with twelve more,Some beheaded. apprehended by a Captain, carried into the common-hall, and there privately beheaded, but their bloud running out, caused a great tumult in the City, wherein some of the Senators were slain, and others saved themselves by flight. Not long after there sprung up a Schism amongst those that were called Hussites,Schism. for some of them began in other things to comply with the Pope, only they insisted upon the Cup in the Sacrament, whence they were called Calixtines:Calixtines. Others of them stuck close to Husse his doctrine, and cried down all superstition: And this contention was cun∣ningly fomented and increased by some that sought thereby the ad∣vancement of the Pope and Emperour: And to make the professors of the pure Doctrine odious,Popish subtilty. they branded them with the hatefull name of Piccards, by which name the Waldenses in Piccardy were called. Yet both these parties, when they were assaulted by the Emperour, joyned together in opposing him, and obtained many great victories against him: Yet Anno 1444. the Thaborites were utterly oppressed by fraud and force.Thaborites de∣stroyed. Anno 1459. There were divers godly people in Bohemia, Mini∣sters, Nobles and Commons, who being much pressed in conscience about the superstitions in the Church of Rome,Reformation begun. obtained of their King [George Pogiebracius,] a place in the hilly Countrey near to Silesia to in∣habit, where throwing off all superstious practices, they applied
themselves to the form of the Primitive simplicity, calling them∣selves Brethren and Sisters. The beginning of this Church displeased the Devil, and therefore he raised a sudden and violent tempest to overthrow it:Popish malice. For the same of it being spread abroad, the Priests in every pulpit stirred up the ha∣tred of the people against them, crying out, Blow out these sparks, blow them out before they grow into a flame. Anno 1461. One of their Ministers with some others of them com∣ing to Prague, to visit their friends, were betrayed, and some Officers coming to apprehend them, said to them, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, therefore come forth, and follow us to prison, which they did. The King believing the slanders that were raised against them, as that they were attempting some sedi∣tion, &c. he commanded the aged Minister to be tortured,A Minister racked. but he fal∣ling into an extasie, felt no pain at all; the tormentors supposing him to be dead, took him down from the rack, but after some hours, he came to himselfe, and by the intercession of a friend, was dis∣missed. Presently after their came forth from the King an Edict,A wicked Edict. forbidding all Pastors to administer holy services without ceremonies: and with∣all, threatning death to those that should administer to the brethren, called now by the hateful name of Piccards. The brethren hereupon were brought into great extremity, being like sheep destitute of shep∣herds. Yet presently came forth a new Edict that none of them should be suffered to live either in Bohemia, or Moravia. Hereupon they were dispersed amongst the woods and mountains, dwelling in caves;Popish cruelty. where yet they were scarce safe, so that they were forced to make no fire, nor dresse any meat, but in the night time, least the smoak should betray them. In the cold winter nights, sitting by the fire, they ap∣plied themselves to the reading of the Bible, and holy discourses. When in the snow they went abad to provide them necessaries, they went close together, and lest their foot-steps should betray them, the hindermost of them did draw after him a great bough, to cover the prints which their feet had made. These brethren chose by suffrage, certain Elders,Elders chosen. to whom they promised obedience: and by the advice of these Elders, the chiefest of the brethen in Bohemia and Moravia, were called together in a Sy∣nod, in the mountaines to ordain Ecclesiastical Laws, whereby they should be governed;A Synod. they appointed also sundry daies of Fasting and Prayer for themselves, and their dispersed friends; taking counsell from Gods Word, concerning those things which were required to the fuller Reformation, both of life and doctrine. That which most afflicted them was for want of Pastors, not knowing where they should have new ones, after those were dead, who then lived with them; but after debate, they resolved, that Christ had given this au∣thority to his Church, that such as were ordained themselves, might ordain others: Yet some scruple arose, whether such as were but
Presbyters, might ordaine without a Bishop: For which cause they met together, and with fasting, prayers and teares, they sought unto God to reveal his will to them in this difficulty; and afterwards ma∣king a scrutiny by lot,Ordination of Ministers. the Lord answered them, that it was lawfull for Presbyters to ordain Presbyters, which occasioned great joy unto them. Then did these Brethren deliberate among themselves, whether they should joyn with the Waldenses in Moravia and Austria;The Waldenses· and so be one people with them, and one Church: The purity of their Do∣ctrine and Christian Conversation did much please; but again, it much displeased them, that they concealed the truth, not openly professing it as they ought, but to avoid persecution, they frequented the Churches of the Papists, and so communicated with Idolaters. There∣fore they concluded to admonish them of this evil; and for this end they sent some able men to them,Admonition. to acquaint them with it: The Waldenses answered, that to be in unity with them was very gratefull, and for the evils objected against them, they were not ignorant of them, nor would defend them, but rather would labour to amend them: Concluding that they desired to have a sixt day of meeting with the Brethren, in which they would take some further order about this businesse. The Waldenses persecuted.But before the time came, the Papists having some intelligence of it, raged so violently against the Waldenses, that they burnt one of the chiefest of them at Vienna, and so persecuted the rest, that they were fain to provide for their own safety by flight. Anno 1468. There came out a new Decree against these Brethren, requiring all the Nobles of Bohemia, within their severall jurisdi∣ctions, to apprehend as many as they could, and to proceed against them. Many therefore were apprehended and put into prison, where they were kept for a long time:The Church increaseth. But thrgh the wonderfull working of God, the more the enemies laboured to put out this spark, the more it brake forth into a great flame, for many of their Peers submitted to the Discipline of the Brethren, building Churches for them in their Towns and Villages, so that Anno 1500. they had in Bohemia, and Mo∣ravia about two hundred Churches. After the death of Pogiebracius, Uladislaus, a Polonian succeeded in the Kingdom, to whom the Brethren wrote an Apology, by reason of many foul accusations that were carried to him against them: This so exasperated their enemies, that they endeavoured by a most impu∣dent invention, to stir up the hatred of all men against them. The way they used was this.Popish subtilty. They suborned a wicked villain, to say that he came from amongst them, and that he had been an Elder, but had therefore forsaken them, because in their meetings they used to blas∣pheme God, the Virgin Mary, and the Saints, to traduce the Sacra∣ments,Slanders. to mingle themselves incestuously, after the manner of the Adamites, to commit murther▪ and practise witchcraft, &c. This
man they led through the Townes and Cities as a spectacle; they brought him to their Church, where he must abjure his errors, and be∣seech the people to pray for him, a most miserable sinner, and to take heed, by his example, of the wicked Piccards. They also published his confession in writing, being confirmed with the seals and subscripons of some Deans and Priests, causing them to be read in the Churches to the people. But the devil was befooled herein, for the Brethren, by publick writings did confute these lies;Confession. and the villain trembling so often to forswear himself in the sight of the people, confessed at last that he was suborned to do what he did, and that he knew not any of the Pic∣cards: Yet thus far it made for good, that some to make experience of so great villanies, began privately and disguised, to frequent the Assemblies of the Brethren, and finding it to be farre other wise then it was reported, did associate themselves with them, as with true Christians. Anno 1488. Mathias King of Hungary,The Brethren banished. banished the Brethren from Moravia, which caused some hundreds of them, taking a Minister along with them, to go into Moldavia; Whereupon the Brethren in Bohemia sent one of their Elders to them, to exhort them unto patience under this persecution, which was for the truth. Shortly after the restless enemies of God and his Church,Persecution. raised another persecution against the Brethren in Bohemia; for some Bishops consulting together, suborned the Queen, great with childe, so that they conceived that the King would deny her nothing in that state, to request of him, that he would severely punish the Piccards: The King displeased at her request, only nodded his head, but gave no answer at all: Yet the Bishops, in his presence, began to draw up the Edict.Popish malice. The King going into his chamber, fell down on his knees, and with tears besought God to forgive the guilt of those bloudy counsels, and to grant no successe to them: and God heard his prayers, and shewed some examples of his severe judgements on the Authors of this con∣spiracy. The Queen who proposed to her fancy,Gods judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. what gratefull spectacles she should have in seeing the Piccards brought to Prague, and there, some burnt, some beheaded, and others drowned in the water, pre∣sently fell in travell, and when she was not able to bring forth, the Physitians advised that the childe should be cut out of the mothers womb, which was accordingly done, whereby the childe lived, but the mother died. Two years after, the Bishops by their importunity prevailed with the King that sharp remedies should be used against those growing evils, as they were pleased to call them;Anno 1510. A cruel Edict. whereupon an Edict was sent forth that all the Piccards, without distinction of sex, age or quality, should be slain. This Mandate was brought to the Assembly of States at Prague, by two Bishops, but divers of the chiefest Nobles opposed it, so that eighteen moneths were spent in debate, before any thing
was done; but at last, by the cunning artifice of the Chancellor, and his bloudy associates, it was confirmed by the greatest part of the Nobility, in the presence of the King; and a mutuall confederacy was entred into,Devillish wickednesse. that it should be prosecuted with an armed power, but God following some of the chiefe contrivers of it with sundry judgements, it almost came to nothing. Yet in these troubles most of the Ministers were turned out of their places, so that they durst not preach nor pray, but in private. And a certaine Noble man, having apprehended six of the Brethren, cast them into prison, and when they were brought forth to be burnt, they went chearfully to the fire; and when the chief officer, taking affection to one of them, offered him his life, if he would recant his error, pro∣fering him withall to give him a years time to consider of it; he paw∣sed a while,Tentation re∣sisted. but by and by answered, It is too much by such a delay, to lose my Brethrens company, and so going along with them, they were burned together. Shortly after the Chancellor that had procured the passing of the Edict against the Brethren, as he returned from the Parliament, visit∣ing a certaine Noble man by the way, he with great pleasure reported to him what was agreed upon against the brethren: The Noble man having a servant by, that was much edicted to the discipline of the Brethren, asked him how he liked it; the servant answered, that all were not agreed: The Chancellor suspecting some new conspiracy, asked him who durst oppose the States of the Kingdom, &c? the ser∣vant said,Gods judge∣ment on per∣secuors. In heaven there is one, who if he were not present at your counsels, you have consulted in vain: The Chancellor replied, Thou knave, thou shalt finde that as well as the rest: And rising up in fury, immediately a Carbuncle rose upon his foot, which turned to a disease, called Ignis sacer, whereof he died miserably. Another of the great sticklers in this businesse, returning home∣wards, as he was a lighting out of his Chariot to make water, he struck his member on a sharp nail that was in the boot, whereby he drew out his entrails with him, and not long after he gave up the ghost. Also D· Augustine, who by slanderous libels had endeavoured to stirre up the King against the Brethren, died suddenly as he was at supper. Another Noble man of these persecutors, as he was hunting, his horse threw him, and his arrow ran into his thigh, and came out at his loins, whereby he died a most paineful death. Many others of them felt the like judgements of God; so that it grew into a proverbe amongst them: If you be weary of your life, attempt something against the Piccards, and you shall not escape a year to an end. About this time God stirred up in Germany, undaunted Luther, the thunderbolt against the Pope,Anno. 1523. Luther which occasioned many of the Calix∣tines to resolve to embrace the purer Doctrine of the Gospel, and to seek for the Ordination of their Ministers from Wittenberg, rather then
from Rome. But amongst these there was one Zahere, an Apostate,Zahere an A∣postate. who to ingratiate himselfe with the King and Pope, would enforce the Pastors and Citizens of Prague to subscribe to sundry Articles, or else they must be proscribed. And first of all six Pastors were ba∣nished, then sixty five of the chiefest Citizens: Then to colour greater cruelty, a rumour was spread abroad of a conspiracy made by the Brethren against the Calixtines; and to extort a confession hereof, three Citizens were brought to the rack, who rather chose to suffer all torments, then falsly to accuse the innocent:Popish lies and slanderous. Yet divers were per∣secuted: Amongst others, a Cutler that had found an Orthodox Book about the Sacraments, was whipped openly in the market-place, and banished: Another was branded in the forehead; a third was thrust in∣to prison, and there murthered. Then in the Assembly of Estates it was decreed,Persecution. that the Mandate of the King should be put in execution against the Piccards: Where∣upon a new persecution was raised against the Brethren, their Churches being shut up, and their Exercises forbidden. Anno 1526. A godly and learned man, together with his Hostesse with whom he lodged, a widow of sixty years old,Two burnt. were both burnt in the fire for Picardism, together with the books that were found a∣bout them. Another godly woman being brought before the Magistrate, made a hold profession of her faith, and then being required to prepare her garments to be burnt in, she answered, They are ready, leade me away when you please. The Crier declaring openly that she had blaphmed,A godly wo∣man burnt. she with a loud voice denied it, saying, It is false, I am condemned because I deny the Reall presence of Christ in the Sacrament; give no credit to these Priests, they are dissembling Hypcrites, Adulterers, Sodomites, Epicures, &c. Being commanded to pray to the Crucifix, she turned her back to it, and lifting up her eyes to heaven she said, There is our God, thither we must look, and so chearfully mounting the pile, she was burned, Anno Christi 1527. The year after two German tradesmen were caught at Prague, ac∣cused by the Monks of Lutheranism, and condemned to be burnt:Two godly men burnt. As they went to execution, such gracious words proceeded out of their mouths, as drew tears from the spectators eyes: When they came to the pile, they exceedingly encouraged one another; on of them say∣ing, Since our Lord Christ hath suffered such grievous things for us, let us chearfully suffer for him,Comfort in death. and rejoyce that we have found so much favour with him, that we are counted worthy to die for the Law of God: The other said, I in the day of my marriage found not so much inward joy as I do now. When fire was put to them, with a loud voice they said, Lord Jesus, thou in thy sufferings prayedst for thine enemies, therefore we also do the like. Forgive the King, the men of Prague, and the Clergy, for they know not what they do, and their hands are full of bloud; and so they slept in the Lord. But one of their chief persecutors,Gods judge∣ment on per∣secutors. who wish∣ed that all the Piccards were hanged, beheaded or burnt by his own
hands, had all these befall himself by Gods just judgement: For being much in debt, he hanged himself, and when his friends had privately buried him; the common people hearing of it, digged up his carcasse, and cast it away, which by the Magistrates command was ordered to be burnt; but when the woodstack was consumed, and the carcasse only scorched, his head was stricken off. Zahera the Apostate, when under colour of an Inquisition against the Piccards, he raised up civil commotions, was by the King ba∣nished, where he died miserably: The like befell another of those cruel persecutors. Anno 1535. Ferdinand the first succeeding in the Kingdom, the Popish party cunningly stirred up the Calixtines to persecute the Bre∣thren:A new persecu∣tion. Whereupon, they suffering many grievous things sent a peti∣tion, together with a confession of their Faith to Ferdinand at Vienna, subscribed by twelve Barons and thirty three Knights, complaining how unjustly they were accused by their enemies, and that the Priests ordinarily cried out that the Piccards might be slain without controul, and that a lesse sin was thereby committed,Popish malice. than if one killed a dog, Ferdinand returned answer, that he had not leisure to consider of their Papers, yet promised that nothing should be done either against law or equity, till he had further knowledge of the cause. In the mean time the Brethren being much encouraged by letters from Luther, Bucer and Capito, went on constantly, and through Gods mercy, a great nummber was added to the Church, till that fatal year 1547.Charles the fifth warres a∣gainst the Pro∣testants. At which time Charles the fifth putting in execution the decrees of the Counsell of Trent, raised warres against the Protestant Princes in Germany: At which time his brother Ferdinand sollicited the Bohemians for aid, but they refused it in regard of their ancient league with the house of Saxony. But the German Protestants being overcome in warre,A great perse∣cution. Ferdinand entred Bohemia with an Army, seizeth on Prague, imprisoneth the principall Nobles, Barons, and Citizens, some he scourged, some he beheaded, and upon others he laid grie∣vous Fines, and of others he sequestred all their Estates: Also he disarm∣ed the City of Prague, took away their privileges, banishing some, whilst others went into voluntary exile. Then did the Devil raise up some to lay all the blame upon the Bre∣thren, to which malicious suggestions the King giving heed, first by open Proclamation commanded all their Churches to be shut up, and then he took away their Peers, and banished them all out of his Realms. When this Thunderbolt came abroad, the brethren agreed amongst themselves that they would be more faithfull to God and their consci∣ences then they had been:Persecution causeth re∣formation. and so by common consent, dividing them∣selves into three companies, they went into Poland: and all of them had experience of an admirable divine protection in their journey: escaping some that might, and would have robbed them, but that they were re∣strained by God:A speciall pro∣vidence. as also in most places where they came, they found Christian commiseration and liberality of men towards them, and
courteous entertainment in Poland, though most of them were Papists▪ Yet not long after the Bishop of that part where they were, got a Man∣date from the King to drive them away: Then were they forced to goe into the farthest parts of Prusia,Popish malice. whereby D. Albert Brandenburg they had a place of habitation alloted to them, and one Paul Speratus, a Pro∣testant Bishop, having conferred with them about their faith, was ve∣ry courteous and charitable to them. The next Edict that Ferdinand set forth against the brethren, was for the apprehending of all their Ministers,Ministers per∣secuted. whereupon some of them re∣tired into Moravia, others, that they might be near their flocks, hid themselves in private places, & in the night-time they visited the faith∣full, which continued for some years,A speciall pro∣vidence. but at last three of them fell into their enemies hands: yet one of them, through the admirable provi∣dence of God, escaped out of a deep dungeon in the Castle of Prague, and fled to his brethren in Borussia, and he sometimes passing through Polonia, and preaching the Gospel, through Gods mercy,Conversion. many of the Nobility, and others were converted by his Ministry: so that in a few years he erected twenty Churches in Poland.John Augusta. The enemies having imprisoned John Augusta, they much rejoyced at it, because he was a chief Minister amongst the Brethren, and as Lu∣ther in Germany against the Pope, so he, both by his Ministry and wri∣tings had mightily confuted the Calixtines, and thereupon they laid to his charge his refusall to raise Forces for the assistance of Ferdinand, and intentions of bringing in John Frederick,Popish lies and slanders. Elector of Saxony to be King in Bohemia, and for the discovery of this pretended conspiracy he was cruelly racked three times, but when they could draw nothing from him, they yet kept him in prison seventeen years. Anno 1549. Ferdinand published another decree for the extirpating both of the brethren, and Lutherans:A wicked Edict. Two hundred Ministers ba∣nished. and the Ministers that had recei∣ved Ordination in Germany, or that were married, were banished out of the Kingdom to the number of about two hundred. Also the Baron of Schanow, a man of much experience and learning, being apprehended under the pretence of some conspiracy against Fer∣dinand, was imprisoned, examined, and then laid on the rack:The Baron of Schanow. he with an heroical indignation cut out his tongue, and cast it away, and being asked why he did it, he wrote on the wall, I did it because I would not by any tortures be brought to say any thing falsly against my selfe or others. He also in a writing taxed the Tyrannical proceedings against himselfe and other innocents, citing the King and his Counsellors to appear and answer it before the Tribunall of God, and so shortly after died. About that time Ferdinand brought Jesuites into Prague,Jesuites first brought into Prague. and built a stately College for them, who sought by all means to overthrow the Church of Christ, and added fuell to the fire of persecution. After the death of Ferdinand Maximilian succeeded Anno 1562. who being of a peaceable disposition could by no means be induced that any should suffer for their faith.Maximilian Emperour.
Rodulphus Em∣perour.After him Rodulphus succeeded, Anno 1676. who treading in his Fa∣ther steps, the Church of Christ enjoyed peace under him, yea, pure religion so flourished through the whole Kingdom, that there was scarce one amongst an hundred that did not professe the Reformed Re∣ligion: But alas! with liberty of Religion, by little and little men be∣gan to be licentious in their lives,Sin the fore∣runner of per∣secution. and carnal security so encreased, that some began to presage that an horrible tempest should again over∣whelm them. After the death of Rodulphus succeeded Mathias, who comming into Bohemia, Anno 1617. he called an Assembly of the States, but it being harvest time,Mathias Em∣perour. few appeared: To them that did appear, Mathias, com∣plained, that since he had no issue he would adopt Ferdinand for his son, commendeth his vertues, and desires that he may be crowned: The Orders assembled, affirmed, that a matter of that consequence could not be done in the absence of the united Provinces: Caesar urged, that what Bohemia should do would be confirmed by all the rest, that he grew faint, and it could not be deferred till another time. In brief, the Oorders protested, that the Term of Receiving him King, was new, that he ought first to be chosen, and then received: and some perceiving that there was no place for a free voice,Ferdinand for∣cibly made King of Bohe∣mia. departed: others, partly allu∣red by promises, and partly deterred by threats, staid, and were present at the Cronation of Ferdinand, after which he presently went into Moravia, Silesia, and Lusatia, requesting to be received for their King. The Persecution of the Church in Bohemia, which began Anno Christi, 1617. FErdinand the second Emperour of Germany, being thus obtruded upon the Bohemians for their King, contrary to the ancient constitu∣tions and customes of the Kingdom, and not lawfully elected thereun∣to,Ferdinand a Usurper. as he ought to have been, retired presently into Germany: And thereupon the enemies of the truth began to crow, and openly to threa∣ten the Protestants: and it appeared sufficiently that Ferdinand sware to the Orders with his mouth, but in his heart to the Pope, and present∣ly after his departure, the popish Bishops, Clergy, and Nobles, began to vex his Subjects for Religion, contrary to that assurance which the King had given to them: They attempted also the like in Prague, the Jesuites daily threatning that their Liberty in Religion should not last long.Popish malice. The first Arti∣fice. Then did they strictly prohibit the Protestants from printing any thing unlesse licensed by the Chancellor of the Kingdom, themselves in the mean time divulging their own slanderous pamphlets and dan∣gerous writings against the Protestants.The second Artifice. Then instructions were given to the Captains and Judges that they
should suffer no meetings in Churches except themselves were present, and except they had a Popish Priest to administer only in one kinde. Then the Burgrave, who had the custody of the Crown,The third Artifice. and privi∣ledges of the Kingdom, was apprehended; because in the late Parlia∣ment he had stood for the free election of a King, and delivered priso∣ner to one of the bitterest enemies of the Protestants. In other places they destroyed the Churches of the Protestants. In the begining of the year 1618 The Governors of the Univer∣sity and Consistory met together,The fourth Artifice. having formerly had power given them so to do, and choosing six persons, two Barons, two Knights, and two Citizens: to consult what was best to be done in this time of their enemies insolency; there presently came an injunction in Caesars name to inhibit them to call any together, and that if any man was called, he should not dare to appear upon the pain of high Treason.The States in∣hibited their meeting. Notwithstanding which, the major part of the States met, and when as new prohibitions and threats were spread abroad, and the States were informed that those thunderbolts came not from the King, but from the castle of Prague, their abused patience was turned into seve∣rity, and being guarded with a great Troop, they went to the Castle, and apprehended two of the chief Authors of these troubles, and threw them headlong out of the Castle windows, together with their Secre∣tary that was privy to all their designs: but God intending to preserve them to be the Bohemians scourges, they caught no hurt in the fall, fal∣ling upon the grasse, and greate store of papers. Hereupon a great tumult was raised in Prague,The Jesuites banished by the States. but the States appeas∣sed it; & the first thing they did was to banish the Jesuits out of Bohemia, as the chief contrivers of these mischiefs: then did they write to Caesar, that they had no intention against his Royall Majesty, but only to bring to punishment the disturbers of the publick peace, being authorized thereto by his Majesties Letter, and bound by their protestation: yet he resolved to revenge this Treason (as he called it) by force of Arms, and the Bohemians on the other side resolved to defend themselves, and for that end they chose thirty Directors,An Army rais∣ed against the Bohemians. and the Moravians and Silesians resolved to joyn with them, when they perceived Religion to be the cause of the quarrell. And indeed this was that which the enemies aim∣ed at, and therefore they provoked the Bohemians by all waies, that so they might make a conquest of Bohemia, and for this end an Imperial Army presently entred the Kingdom under Dampier, and a Spanish Ar∣my under Bucquoy. In the mean time the States resolved not to admit Ferdinand to be their King, who was so open an enemy both to their Religion and Li∣berties, and who was obtruded upon them without a due election: They sent also Embassadors to Franckford, where the Electors were met to∣gether to choose a new Emperour, desiring that Ferdinand might not be admitted amongst them as King of Bohemia, notwithstanding which,
he was admitted and chosen Emperour: The Bohemians in the mean time choosing Frederick Elector Palatine,Frederick cho∣sen King of Bohemia. for their King; This more en∣raged their enemies, so that, they sent another Army under Maximilian of Bavarie, which took two Protestant Towns by storm, and put all to the sword, and every where made great slaughter of the Protestants: Then the Imperiall Armies came to Prague, which being struck with a Pannick fear, the Protestant Army being overthrown in a set battell under the wals, and their new King fled, they delivered up the City to them,Anno 1620. Novemb. 8▪ Prague taken. the Conqueror promising to keep Articles agreed upon, but per∣forming nothing lesse. For they did more mischief to the Church of Christ by their subtile and slow proceedings, then lately by their out∣ragious fury, when the sword fire, and wheel were the instruments of their rage against the faithfull. For a little before, when it was debated at Rome how they should deal with the Bohemians, and Germans after the Conquest; it was agreed, that seeing their former strong purges which they had used to expell Hereti∣call humours,Anno 167. Popish subtilty had not proved effectuall: they therefore resolved not to put them to death wherein they did glory as in Martyrdom, but ra∣ther to weary them and to change the hatefull name of Inquisition into the milder name of Reformation.The fifth Ar∣tifice. And whereas there was a debate amongst the Imperialists at Prague, whether all the protestants should be presently banished, the negative was resolved on, because they would then carry much away with them, and so spoil the Province,The sixth Ar∣tifice. and indure their banishment with greater ease, & therefore they concluded that they must first be squeezed, and depriv∣ed of their goods: and for this end the souldiers at Prague were author∣rized to plunder the houses of Noblemen and Citizens, yet this was done at several seasons,The seventh Artifice. and mostly in the night, by which meanes, as the ene∣mies boasted, they took from the Protestants some millions of gold: For indeed hither were all their riches brought in the time of war, as to a place of the greatest security: But as this fell to the Commanders shares, so the neighbouring places were exposed to the fury of the rest, the com∣mon souldiers robbing and spoyling Villages,Plundering. Towns, and Churches, burning and killing without any restraint: The souldiers that were pla∣ced in Garrisons would not only have Free-quarter, but extorted mony from their Landlords every day. The eight Ar∣tifice.Then were Comissions sent abroad, promising security to those Noblemen, Knights, Corporations, and Ministers, that would bring in a good Sum of money to pay the Army, which yet they would not receive as a free gift, but only desired to borrow it. Caesars protection was also promised to those that were liberall, the rest were threatned to be plundred by the souldiers. They set down also what sums they expected from every one within such a time:The ninth Ar∣tifice. they promised also that when that was paid, the Souldiers should be removed, which made every one to bring in their Plate, Mo∣ney, and Jewels the more willingly. The tenth Ar∣tifice.Then were Commissioners sent to require certain Cities, that belong∣ed
to the Protestant Noblemen, to mantaine the standing Forces of the Kingdome, and to contribute corn for their publicke granaries: but whilest they were fed with a vaine hope of lessening and removing the souldiers, there were more listed, which raised the taxes so high as was impossible for the people to pay:Apostacy re∣warded. and where as some were allured to de∣ny the truth that they might be eased of taxes, and quarterings of soul∣diers, this was not performed, whereupon they complained that pro∣mise was broken with them, but the Jesuits answered them, that they had no cause to complain, for they had provided for their souls, and therefore they ought cheerfully to help the King by contributions and quarterings of souldiers, and that Hereticks must be dealt with,Popish perfi∣diousness. as mad men and children, from whom f you desire to get a knife, you must shew them some∣thing else, though you never intend to give it them. Thus the Kingdom being emptied of gold and silver,The eleventh Artifice. counterfeit and adulterate money was coined in great abundance, that so the com∣mon people might rejoyce in their plenty; but in the mean time the soul∣diers would recive none but good money. Gold and silver also was raised to ten times the price of it, and on a sudden the Emperour diminished the value;The twelfth. Artifice. making every piece of mo∣ney to be worth but the tenth part: whereby the Bohemians were more impoverished suddenly, then if they had lain under the burden of an Army ten years. Then was it ordered that the creditor should lose all the money that he had lent in the time of the rebellion, as they called it,The thirteenth Artifice. And thus they were first impoverished, after which the enemies insulted over them by infa∣mous books, insolent pictures, and proud words. Then did they send abroad their Commissioners of Reformation,The four∣teenth Artifice. who in every Town and Village endeavored to bring Protestantism in∣to disgrace, and highly to magnifie and set abroad their owne cause: The most eminent men for honour and estates are invited to Apostasie, the inferiour sort are either fooled by their examples, or compelled by thretnings. Then was there an High-Court of reformers set up,The fifteenth Artifice. from which there was no appeal In the next place the souldiers exercised barbarous Tyranny against the Ministers of Jesus Christ. One aged minister lying sick in his bed,The sixteenth Artifice. they shot him to death as he lay: The next day they robbed and murther∣ed another; Another as he was preaching to his people,Ministers per∣secuted. they came into the Church; and shot him to death. Another Nobleman, and a Minister hearing of souldiers that were coming that way, conveighed them∣selves away into a place of safety the souldiers when they came, caught a Schoolmaster, and binding him in cords, examined him where the Lord of that place, and the Minister were, and where they had hid their treasure; he professed, that he knew neither the one nor the other, whereupon they beat him, first with their fists, then with cudgels,Barbarous cru∣elty. then stripping him naked, they so extreamly singed him with fire, that at last he promised to bring them where the treasure was, shewing them
a ditch full of stones, which for greediness of gold they emptied, but finding nothing, they beat him afresh, and when he professed that he knew of no treasure, though through pain he had said so much, they cud∣gelled him, and with clods beat him into the ditch, and buried him un∣der the stones. Presently after they lighted on another godly Minister, whom they so miserably tortured that he ied within five daies, shamefully abusing his daughters also whom they led away with them. Another godly Minister for a moneth together they excruciated with new invented mockeries: they spit in his face, buffeted him with their fists, exposed him to be beaten by every vile rascall: They with a knot∣y cord twisten about his forehead, with a stick so strained his head, that his very eyes were ready to start out: Then they let loose a wilde horse upon him, which yet leaped quite over him, and did him no harm: at last,Gods provi∣dence. with much adoe he redeemed himself with five hundred Flo∣rences. Another Pastor they lighted on, and because he had a better estate then the former, they tormented him more, sometimes covering him over with hot burning coals, sometimes with Ice, till they had forced him to pay a thousand five hundred Florences for his ransome, though shortly after through extremity of the pain, he died. Another Minister they fetched from his house, and miserably tortu∣red him by twisting a cord about his head, then tied they his hands be∣hinde him, and his legs with a small cord, intending the next morning to torture him with fire, but in the night time as he was earnest at his prayers, repeating those words, In thee O Lord is my trust, he percei∣ved his hands and feet miraculously to be loosned,A speciall pro∣vidence. Whereupon get∣ting up, he went to the gate, where were three Watchmen, one of them standing with his hand on his sword, yet he passed by them undiscover∣ed: When he came to the Town-gate, he was known by the Souldier that stood Sentinell, but he, being a Bohemian, was overcome by entrea∣ty,Cruelty to Mi∣nisters. and let him passe over the bridge, whereby he escaped. Another Mi∣nister together with his wife they cruelly burnt: Another was hanged upon a crosse-beam, and making a fire under him, they broiled him to death: Another they cut into small peeces: Another Minister they sought for, but he being escaped, they took a young man in his house, laid him on his back,Prodigious cruelty. filled his mouth with gunpowder, which set∣ting fire to, they miserably tore his jaws in pieces, and then killed him. When some souldiers came to the house of another, he entertain∣ed them courteously, and made good provision for them, but when they knew he was a Minister,Ingratitude. they first beat him cruelly, then killed him, stripped, and plundered his house; they also burnt his Library, and would not suffer his body to be buried for seven weeks, during their abode there. Another aged Minister and his wife, were so sorely burned by a souldier that demanded money of them, that presently after they died.
Another was hung up by the privy members, being seventy years old, and his own books burnt under him, and at last was shot through, and slain. Another was first assessed at seven hundred florences, then had his house plundred, and lastly himself was murthered. Another they caught and wounded, cutting his neck half through: but being after∣wards carried by some friends to a Chirurgion, he lived about two years, but in much pain and torment. Another being above seventy years old, they carried into the mar∣ket-place, where laying him upon a fire, they burnt him to death: An∣other was beaten so, that he died three daies after.Anno 1622. The Jesuites laid wait for one Pescinus, a man eminent for learning and piety, at last they suborned an Apostate to betray him,Pescinus▪ who dis∣covering him as he rode in a Coach with a Nobleman, fourty horse∣men came suddenly, and took him away: but by the importunity of some Noblemen, he was ransomed for four thousand Florences, and ended his life in banishment. Another being bound to a Tree, was made a mark for the Musquetiers to shoot at, and though they did not hit him, yet by reason of the affrightment he died within three daies. Another being met by a notable Papist, was ran thorow with a spear: But all this was done through military licentiousnesse; Now we come to what was acted by processe of Law. Anno 1621.The seven∣teenth Artifice Six Articles were exhibited to the Protestant Congre∣gations in Prague. 1. That they should lend some thousands of pounds to Caesar for the paiment of his Army. 2. That they should publick∣ly renounce the coming in of Frederick. 3. That they should bring into the Church the Popish Rites and Ceremonies. 4. That their Ministers should be ordained anew. 5. That the Ministers should leave their wives, or get a dispensation from the Archbishop. 6. That such as would renounce their Ecclesiasticall functions, should have publick promotions, and the favour of Caesar. But they answered unanimously, that they would doe nothing against their consci∣ences. Then came forth an Edict,Ministers charged with treason. wherein the blame of all the former re∣bellion (as they called it) was laid upon the Ministers of Prague, because they had stired up, by their seditious and lying Sermons (as they pleased to stile them) and by their writings, not only the com∣mon people, but the Nobles also against Caesar; and that they were the authors of the choice of Frederick, and that they still laboured to stirre up in the people an hatred against Caesar. Thereupon all the Mini∣sters within Prague, were required within three daies to depart out of Prague, and within eight daies to depart out of all the Kingdom, and the Provinces belonging thereto, and never to return again; and if any under what pretence soever, should stay or returne again,Ministers ba∣nished. or if any should pre∣sume to harbour or conceal any of them, that both the one and the other should suffer death: this was Anno 1621.
Then were their Churches in Prague given to the Jesuits. It can not be expressed what lamentations and mournings there were amongst the people,The eighteenth Artifice. when thus they must leave their Pastors, and that for ever. Yet the German Ministers, whereof there were two, were suf∣fered to continue in favour to the Duke of Saxony. Then did as many as understood Dutch, flock to their Congregations, which so vexed the Jesuits,The German Ministers ba∣nished. that they obtained, not a banishment, but a gracious dis∣mission of them as they would have it called. Multitudes of people fol∣lowed them, with great lamentations and tears, and in the field they heard their farewell sermon. The next design was, to remove the Ministers out of other free Ci∣ties, and the Commissioners of Reformation were imployed herein: One of them with a Troop of horse coming to Slana, and going to Church, the Minister (a godly and learned man) was reading the Gospel: The Commissioner sent a souldiers to him to bid him give over, but the Minister still going on, himself went to him with his sword drawn,Blaspemy. crying out, Thou foolish Preacher, leave off thy babling, and withall he dashed the Bible out of his hand with his sword: The Mini∣ster with eies, hands, and voice lift up to heaven, repeated often, Woe, woe unto you, you enter not into heaven your selves, and forbid them that would; Woe, woe, woe unto you. But they mocking at these words, presently laid hands on him, justling him to and fro, whereupon he said, I for the name of my Lord Jesus Christ am ready to suffer all this, and what else you shall impose. The people were much affrighted, but the chief Magistrates and many good women interceding for him, he was at last dismissed, provided that he should depart the City with∣in three daies; and thus was this faithfull shepherd, not without the greate lamentations of his people, banished, where, about three years after he died. In a neighbouring City, the Minister for fear of these barbarous pro∣ceedings, went a way of himself, yet the Commissioners extorted a great summe of money from his Church, and banished him in his absence. In another place they commanded the Minister to depart from his Parish within three daies, and from the City within eight daies; he modestly asking the reason of his banishment, they told him Caesar by conquest was Master of all the Churches, and that therefore he would put into them whom he pleased. But, into the rooms of these godly Preachers, were put in unclean men,Illiterate per∣sons put into the places of Christs Mini∣sters. wicked, blasphemers, and men illiterate, and of no worth; and yet they could not provide for all places: so that one of their hirelings supplied divers Churches, and in stead of the wholesome food of Gods Word, he fed them with poison. Then brought the ignorant Monks out of Poland, unprofitable burthens to the earth, yet fit enough to be scourges to unprofitable and common Gospellers. Then a Commissioner, with some Troops of horse, entring into Ctutenburg, a place famous for maintaining the Orthodox Faith, cals before him the Ministers, casts them out of their places, and puts Je∣suits
into their Churches: And these Jesuits urging it, the Ministers were commanded to depart out of the City gates before break of day, and out of the Kingdom within eight daies: Hereby were twenty one Ministers driven away, many Citizens accompanying them:Twenty one Ministers ba∣nished. One of them at the parting, preached upon that Text, They shall cast you out of the Synagogues; exhorting them to perseverance. All the multitude much bewailed their losse, and with great lamentations, wailing and kissing each other, they recommended themselves to the blessing and protecti∣on of the Almighty. In every place the Ministers were cast out of their livings, some im∣prisonned, and after a while dismissed, and all commanded to depart the Kingdom, upon pain of death. Some were stifled with stink whilest they lay in prison. At last, Anno 1624. an other Decree came forth from the King, whereby all the Ministers of the Gospel were commanded to depart the Kingdom, by a peremptory day prefixed, because, as was alledged,Ministers charged with sedition. they were seditious men, and seducers of the people: Yet herein they used this Artifice, that in most places this Edict was concealed, till the time was almost or altogether elapsed, so that by this means the Mini∣sters not having time to communicate their counsels together, went into severall Provinces, and some were faigne to hide themselves in caves & dens, and those either returned privately, and visited their auditors, or comforted such as came to them in the mountains and woods, preach∣ing and administring the Sacraments to them. But as soon as the enemies understood it, they presently published a new decree, wherein a punishment was preposed to those that should conceal the Ministers, and a rewarde to such as should betray them: Whereupon some of the Ministers were taken and cast into prison: Then by the Jesuits were they by all waies sollicited to Apostacy; and fear of death, hunger, cold,Tentation. the stink of the prison &c. prevailed with some to renounce their Ministery: But most bore up couragi∣ously against all storms, and at last some by paying great fines,Constancy. others by giving it under their hands, that they would never returne into Bohe∣mia, were dismissed. One godly Minister was examined by tortures, when, where,A Minister Martyred. and to whom he had administred the Sacraments of Baptism or the Lords Supper, &c. he answered, that he had neither laide down, nor slacked his Ministry, which he received from Christ, and not from Caesar: Being profferred life if he would change his Religion he answered, This body of mine is subject to corruption, and now it begins to decay already, Why Would you have me hinder it? Being brought forth to execution, the Crier with a loud voice proclaimed that he was guilty of sedition: But he with a loud voice said, I suffer for the truth of Christ. None of the Citizens were suffered to accompany him, yea they were threatned to be shot, if they did but look out at their windows: And that his voice might not be heard, the Drums and Trumpets sounded conti∣nually. As he was passing on, he chearfully said: This day shall my
soul be with Christ: The Captain said, With the devil in hell: The Martyr replied, But you with your impious crew will run headlong thither, except ye repent. Then was his right hand cut off, wherewith he gave the Cup in the Sacrament: Then was his head cut off, his bowels taken forth, and wrapped in his shirt, his quarters set upon four stakes, and his head upon the fifth.Popish cruelty. Then did the Commissioners go into Moravia, to a Noble Baron called Charles de Zerotina, a man for wisdom and vertue famous through all Europe, a constant professor of Religion, and one who maintained twenty four Ministers of the Brethren within his jurisdicti∣on: They told him that they had an express command from Cardinall Ditrichsteine to expell all those Ministers out of the Country:The Vice-roy. He an∣swered, That in matters of Religion he ought not to be subject to the Cardinall▪ and therefore from him he appeals to Caesar. Then did they grant him fourteen daies to prosecute his appeale, but the Baron being not in health; could not go in that time to Caesar, Then they came again to him, an told him that it should be in his choice whether he would send them a way himself,Courage and Constancy. or suffer them to do it; the Baron answered, that he could not banish those whom he knew to be the servants of Jesus Christ, nor could consent that they should do it: Yet that night they sent abroad their citations to require all the inhabitants of that Village to appear before them the next morning, at which time the Minister and people came; then did they read to them Caesars Edict, asking them if they would submit to it; they answered that they wholly relied upon the will of God, whom they served in the Gospell of his Son, and therefore they were resolued to undergo what punish∣ment they should inflict, seeing they suffered only for the Name of Jesus Christ, and not for any ill deeds: Then they demanded of them, whether the would forsake their heresie, and returne to the Catholick Church; which they unanimously denied. The Commissioners would have given them time to consider of it, but they all answered, that in so religious a cause as this,Couage, and Constancy. they needed no deliberations; Hereupon in Caesars name they banished them, commanding them to depart within eight daies: These godly persons obeyed, and by the Baron, at his own charge they were conveyed into Hungary. The like they did in other places, so that the Ministers of the Gospel through all Bohemia and Moravia, were thrust out, and ignorant and illiterate per∣sons set in their rooms. The nineteenth Artifice. Summa Papa∣vera. The chiefest Nobles impri∣soned.The next design of the enemies was against the Nobles: The crime was for taking up arms for Frederick their lawfull King, against an Usurper: For though hope of pardon was granted, if laying down arms they would submit to Caesars mercy, yet divers of them were ap∣prehended: And first they seized upon some that were of the rank of Defenders of the Kingdoms Liberties, and then all those whom they knew to have done any thing for the common good of Religion and Liberty; or feared that they might be able to do for the time to come, and all such as feared to break their faith given to Frederick. These
were about the number of fifty men, famous for learning, skill in mili∣tary affairs, and prudence in government, who were the light, delight and safeguard of their Countrey. All of these in one night, and at one hour, were apprehended in their houses, when they suspected no danger, and by the Captains were commanded to get up into Wagons, and so some of them were carri∣ed to the Castle of Prague, others to the Majors house. The next day Proclamation were issued out, requiring all those that had hid them∣selves, or departed the Kingdom, to appear within six weeks; but they not appearing, sentence was pronounced, that all such as were guilty of Treason, should forfeit Goods, Honours and Lives, and then their names were set upon the Gallows: The next day sentence was pronounced against their Heirs, that all their Goods should be con∣fiscate to the King. Then did they proceed to the triall of the Noble men whom they had taken:The Nobles examined. Two Appostate Civilians were appointed to examine them, with some of the Nobility, who tired them out with a thou∣sand impertinent questions, labouring to extort that from them where∣of they were never guilty: Which one of them not able to endure, renting his garments, and opening his breasts, said, Tear into a thou∣sand pieces this body, and search into my heart, and you shall finde nothing there but what is expressed in my Apology.A brave speech The love of Religion and Liberty made us unsheath our swords; but seeing God would have Caesar prevail, and hath delivered us into your hand, his will be done. Others of them also stoutly maintained that their cause was not the worse, because of the successe.Success no sign of a good cause After some time when none of these Noble men would yeild, or acknowledge themselves in an errour, or sue unto them for mercy, they proceed to execution; their judgements were committed to such as were sworn enemies to the Gospel. After sentence was passed, it was sent to Caesar to consider of it: And he was so troubled, that he slept not that night, and the next morning calling his Confessor, he said to him, I adjure thee upon thy conscience to tell me whether I may with a safe conscience pardon these that are con∣demned, or whether I should suffer execution to passe on them? The Con∣fessor answered, O Caesar, both are in thy power. Then did he with his pen pardon some, and left others to execution, with a great addition of shame and ignominy. Presently after they were brought out singly to hear their sentence, wherein some were condemned to death,Their con∣demnation. others to perpetuall impri∣sonment, others to banishment, and some were reserved to Caesars fur∣ther pleasure. Then were each sort of prisoners carried to their severall prisons; the Noble men into the inward prison of the Castle, the Citizens to the Majors house; and as they went,Profane blas∣phemy. some villains were suborned to insult over them, saying, Why doe they not now sing, The Lord reigneth?
Then did the wives, children and kinsfolk of the condemned per∣sons, humbly petition for their lives; but answer was made, that all the favour which could now be granted to them, was, that they should have leave to bury the corps of their friends. In the evening, the condemned men, which were twenty seven in number, had notice given them of the day wherein they were to suf∣fer; and therefor they were advised to send for Jesuits, or Capuchins, or a Minister of the Augustine Confession, for the good of their souls; but they must expect no Minister of the Brethren, for that would not be granted to them. The Jesuits and Capuchins not staying till they were called for,Tentatn re∣sisted. flocked to them, using many perswasions, promising life, &c. if they would turn; but God so strengthened them, that all those endeavours of Satans imps were in vaine. Then were some Mi∣nisters of the Augustine Confession sent for, who spent that time which remained in Religious exercises, conferences, prayer, and singing of Psalms, and lastly by administring the Sacrament to them. They which were of the Brethren, willingly admitted these Mi∣nisters, protesting that they acknowledged them for Brethren, though they differed from them in some things; only two of them did not partake of the Sacrament for fear of some false accusati∣on, comforting themselves with that saying, Beleeve, and thou hast eaten.Crede quod habes & habes. They which were prisoners in the Majors house, being called to supper, the night before they were to suffer, comforted themselves, say∣ing, that this was their last supper on earth, but to morrow they should feast with Christ in his Kingdom; whereupon a great Papist flouted, say∣ing, Hath Christ Cooks for you in heaven? Blasphemy.When it was told them that the Noble men were coming to the Scaffold in the Market place, where they were to suffer, they hasted to the windows, and entertained their fellow Martyrs, with singing the 44. Psalm. The night after they spent in Psalms, prayer, godly discourse,Joy in tribula∣tion. and mutuall exhortations, that since it pleased God to call them before others, to this honour of Martyrdom, they hoped by their constancy to confound the world, to glorifie Christ, and to leave a good example to others; and singing the 68. Psalm, where in Da∣vid praies to God, to shew some token of good upon him; one of them said, Shew therefore some token of good upon us O God, whereby we thy servants may be strengthened by thy goodnese, and our enemies con∣founded: And being full of faith, he said further, Be of good chear, for even in this God hath hard your voice, and to morrow he will shew some wonderfull signe,Faith. whereby he will witnesse that we suffer for his cause. Early in the morning they washed their faces, and put on clean clothes, as if they had been going to a wedding; and cut off the collars of their dublets, that when they came to the Scaffold, there should need no new making ready. Then did they earnestly pray to
God,Prayer. that he would be pleased to confirm and strengthen both them∣selves and the people concerning their innocency. Presently after the sun rising, a beautifull bow appeared, and com∣passed the heavens, the Ministers, souldiers, and many others looking upon it: The Martyrs looked out at the window, and saw a Rainbow of an unusuall colour, the heavens being very clear, and no rain of two daies before, whereupon falling upon their knees, they lifted up their voices and hands, praising God for this sign that he shewed from heaven. Then presently was a Gun discharged, which was a warning for their bringing forth to execution; whereupon those Champions of Christ encouraged one another,Courage. praying that each of them might be strengthened, &c. Then Troops of horse and foot came to fetch them, the streets, market-place and houses, being filled with multitudes of spectators. The Martyrs being called forth one by one, went to their death with and undaunted courage, hasting as if they had been going to a banquet: When one was called for, he thus took his leave of the rest, Farwell most loving friends, God give you the comforts of his Spirit, pa∣tience and courage, that what formerly with your mouths you have professed,The Martyrs mutual far∣well. you may confirm by your glorious death: Behold I go before, that I may see the glory of my Lord Jesus Christ; you will follow me that we may together see the face of our heavenly Father. At this houre all sorrow departs from me, and joyfull eternity shall succeed it. Then did the rest answer, God above to whom you are going, prosper your journey, and grant that you may passe happily from this vale of misery, unto that heavenly Country; The Lord Jesus send his Angeles to meet you: Go, dear brother, into thine and our Fathers house, and we will follow after, presently we shall meet in the hea∣venly glory, and this we are confident of through him in whom we have be∣leeved. The first was the Lord Schlik, a man of admirable parts, about fifty years old: When he was condemned to be quartered,The L. Schlik. and his parts to be scattered here and there; he said, The loss of a sepulchre is easie: Being exhorted by a Minister to courage, he said, I have Gods favour so; that no fear of death doth trouble me;His faith and courage. I have formerly dared to oppose An∣tichrist, and I dare now die for Christ. The Jesuites troubling him when he came to the Scaffold, he shaked them off, and seeing the sun shining bright, he said, Christ thou Son of righteousness, grant that through the darknesse of death, I may passe into eternall light; and so having end∣ed his prayers he constantly received the stroak:His Martyr∣dom. His right hand and head were hung on the high Tower upon the Bridge. The Lord Wenceslaus was next, about seventy years old,The L. Wen∣ceslaus. famous for Learning, Religion, and his travels through divers countries: His house was formerly plundered, even to his wearing apparell, he only saying, The Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken away. Being asked why he would engage himselfe in Fredericks cause, he said, My conscience pressed me to do what I did; I am here, my God,His patience. dispose of me thy servant as seems good in thine eyes; I am full of years, take me out of this life,
that I may not see that evill that is coming on my Country. Afterwards holding forth his Bible, he said, Behold my Paradise, it never yeelded me so much Nectar and Ambrosia as now. When he was sentenced, he said to the Judges,Psal. 119.92. You have a long time thirsted after my bloud, but know withall, you will finde God a revenger of innocent bloud, for whose cause we suffer. A Frier saying to him, You are deceived in your opinion, he answered, I rely not on opinion, but on the infallible truth of God, for I have no other way but him who said, I am the way, the truth, and the life. On the Scaffold, stroaking his long beard, he said, My gray hairs, be∣hold what honour remains for you, that you should be crowned with Martyr∣dom: And so praying for the Church, his Country, his enemies, and commending his soul to Christ,His Martyr∣dom. his head was cut off, and set on the Tower. The next was the Lord Harant, a man that had gained much expe∣rience by his travels in Asia, Africa,The L. Harant and Europe; his crime was that he had taken an oath to be true to Frederick, and durst not violate it. As he was going to suffer, he called the Minister to him, and told him that he much feared his wives inconstancy in Religion,His message to his wife. and therefore desired him to exhort her to constancy, and not to suffer her self to be drawn from her Religion by any allurements, assuring her that it is the infallible way to salvation. Then to exhort her to use more cle∣mency to his subjects, rather easing then over-charging them with burthens. Lastly to require her to have a care of his children, and to bring them up in the pure Religion, &c. Being called to execution, he said, I have travelled through many Countries, through many barbarous Nations, escaped many perils by sea and land, and now suffer innocently in my own Countrey, and by them for whose sake I, and my forefathers have spent our Estates and Lives; Father forgive them. Then he said, In thee O Lord have I hoped, let me not be confounded. On the Scaffold he said, Into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit: In the O Lord have I trusted from my youth; I am confident that I shall be accepted by that igno∣minious death of my Saviour; and falling upon his knees, he said, To thee O Lord I commend my spirit, for thou O God, just and true, hast redeemed me:His Martyr∣dom. and so he received the fatall stroke with the sword. Sir Casper Kaplitz.The next was Casper Kaplitz a Knight, of eighty six years old: When the Minister came to him after his condemnation, he said, See me a miserable old man, who have often intreated my God that he would have mercy upon me, and take me out of this miserable life, but have not obtained it, for God hath reserved me to be a spectacle to the world, and a sacrifice to himselfe, Gods will be done: My death indeed is disgracefull in the eyes of men, but glorious in the sight of God; for God will account that death precious in his sight, which I suffer for his glory and truth: And when it was told him that he might have his life, if he would ask pardon; he answered,His courage and constancy. That he would ask pardon of him against whom he had committed many sins all his life, but he never offended the Prince, and therefore would not give occasion to suspect that he had committed
some crime, for which he had deserved death, &c. God forbid therefore, said he, that I should be separated from this holy company of Martyrs. As he was going to the Scaffold, being feeble with age, he said, Oh my God strengthen me, lest I fall down, and become matter of scorn to the enemies. Being crooked with age, and hanging down his head, the executioner could not well come at his neck, whereupon the Minister said to him, My noble Lord, as you hae commended your soul to Christ, so now offer up your heavy head chearfully to God, and lift up your sele towards heaven. Then lifting up his head as well as he could, he said, Lord Jesus into thy hand I commend my spirit,His Martyr∣m. and so is head was cut off. The next was Procopius Dorzecki,ropus Dor∣zecki. who after his condemnation said to the Minister, I hae had a great contention all night with old Adam, so that it made me sweat againe; but thanks be to my God, by whom my soul hath overcome all tentations: saying further, O Almighty God, strengthen thy servant that I may not be made a derision to mine enemies by any fear of death; and as thou wa wont to encourage thy holy Martyrs,His prayer and . so I trongly beleee thou wilt comfort me. When he was called forth to execution, he said, Thanks be to my God, who doth now call me to himselfe, to him I have lived, and for him I will die; for my Saviour hath therefore died and risen again, that he might be Lord both of the living and the dead: I know that my soul shall lie, and my body shall be raised like to his glorious body. Upon the Scaffold he said to the Imperill judges, Tell Caesar that we are now under his udgement, bu he shall undergoe a more grievous, yet just judgement of God: And seeing a gold Medal hanging about his neck, wherein was ingraven the Coronation of Frederick, he delivered it to one that stood by, saying, I require hee,His fielity to hs Pince. that when my dear King Frede∣rick shall recover the Throne of this Kingdom, thou deliver him this, and tell him, that for his sake I wore it till my death,His Martyr∣dom. and that now I lay down my life willingly, for God and my King, and so presently after he lost his head. The next was the L. Frederick de Bile,L Frederick de Bile. who suffered death likewise patiently and piously. The next was the L. Hen. Otto. a man of great judgment, who having received the sentence of condemntion, said, O Caesar, do you indeed e∣stablish your Throne by our bloud?L. Hen. Otto. but what account will you make to God of it in the day of judgement? &c. kill my body dispse my members whi∣ther you please: yet d I beleee hat my Saviour will gather them together againe, and clothe  so that with ths eyes I shall see hm,His aith. with these ears I shall hear him, with his togue I shall praise him, and re∣joyce with this heart freer. Afterwards when the Minister came to him, amongst other  he sai, I was roubled, but now I feel a won∣derfull refreshing in m heart, adding, with his hands lift up to hea∣ven, I give thee thanks O most mercifull Saviour,Joy unspeaka∣ble. who hast ben pleased to fill me with so much  now I fear death no longer, I will die with joy: As he was going to the cafold he said to the Ministr, I am sure that Christ Jesus will meet my soul with his Angels, that he may bring it
to an everlasting marriage, where I shall drink of a new cup, a cup of joy for ever: This death I know shall not separate me from him: Up∣on the Scaffold lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said, Behold I see the Heavens open, pointing with his hand to the place, where others also observed a certain brightnesse which dazled their eyes: after he had prayed silently,His martyr∣dom. he said, Into thy hands O Lord God I commend my spirit, have pitty on me through Jesus Christ, and receive me that I may see thy glory: and so he received the stroak of the sword. The next was Dionysius Zervius formerly a Papist, but being told of the promises made to the people of God concerning the pardon of sins,Dion. Zervius. and assurance of salvation to those that believe in Christ, he struck his breast, and with tears in his eyes, cried out, This is my faith, and in this I die, I rest in the grace of Christ, and I trust in my God, that he will graciously accept my contrite spirit: When upon the Scaffold the Jesuites exhorted him, he listned not to them, but turned from the Crucifix, and falling down on his knees he prayed softly: Then look∣ing up towards heaven, he cried, They can take away the body, but they cannot take away the soul: O Lord Jesus I commend that unto thee: and so he ended his life being fifty six years old.His Martyr∣dom. The next was an aged man about seventy years old, that had been long lame:An aged man. his crime was that he had assisted Frederick with his coun∣sel and wealth: at the time of his death, he said, O Lord Jesus, who being in∣nocent didst undergo death,His martyr∣dom. grant that I may die the death of the righteous, and receive my soul into thy hands. The Lord of RugeniaThe next was the Lord of Rugenia, a man of excellent parts, and full of zeal for God; when he was iudged to die, he said, that it was more welcome to him then if the Emperour had given him life, and restored him to his estate with addition of more: afterwards he said to the Mi∣nister:His excellent speech. God is our witnesse, that we fought for nothing but the Liberty of Re∣ligion: and in that we are overcome and condemned to die, we acknowledge, and finde that God will not have his truth defended by our swords, but by our bloud, &c. When he saw divers called out before him, he said, What is the matter my God? thou knowest that I resign my self wholly unto thee: Ah do not despise thy servant, but make haste to take me away: and when the Sheriff came for him, he rejoyced, and said, Praised be my God, that I shall now be taken out of the world, that I may be with Christ: and so he went to meet him:His martyr∣dom. On the Scaffold he comforted himself with that promise, Father, I will, that where I am, my servants may also be, to behold that glory which thou gavest me: Therefore (said he) I make haste to die that I may be with Christ, and see his glory, and so he suffered Mar∣tyrdom couragiously. Val. Cockan.The next was Valentine Cockan of about sixty years old: During his imprisonment, he was full of heavenly discourse, and at the Scaffold he said, Grant me O God to passe through this valley of death, that I may pre∣sently see thee, for thou knowest my God that I have loved thy word, bring me O God through the paths of life,His Martyr∣dom. that I may see fulnesse of joy in thy presence: and kneeling down, he said, into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit, and so holily ended his life.
The next was Toby Steffick a man of a composed temper,Toby Steffick. and sincere in Religion: he spent most of the time of his imprisonment in silent sighs and tears: Before his Execution he said,His prayer. I have received many good things of the Lord all my life long, shall I not therefore receive this cup of affliction? I imbrace the will of God, who by this ignominious death makes me conformable to his son, and by a narrow way brings me to his hea∣venly Kingdom: I praise God who hath joyned me undeservedly to these ex∣cellent men, that I might receive with them the crown of martyrdom: When he was called to die, he said: My Saviour being about to die, said, Father, not as I will, but as thou wilt: thy will be done. Shall I there∣fore who am but a worm, yea, dust, and a shadow contradict his will? far be it from me: yea, I come willingly my God, only have mercy on me, and cleanse me from my sins, that no spot or rinckle may appear in me, but that I may appear pure in thy sight, and so he lifted up himself full of sighs, yet full of hope,His Martyr∣dom. and as he was praying he rendered up his spirit unto God. Then was Jessenius, a Doctor of Phisick, called forth,D. Jessenius. a man famous for piety and learning all over Europe: Having hard his sentence, he said, You use us too cruelly and disgracefully: but know,A Prophecy. that our heads shall be buried, which you ignominiously expose for a spectacle: which after∣wards came to passe, Anno 1631. when the King of Sweden with his Army took prague, and caused the Martyrs heads to be taken from the Tower, and solemnly and honourably buried. When the Hangman required his tongue to cut it off, he willingly put it out, and falling up∣on his knees, as he was praying, his head was cut off,His Martyr∣dom. his body quar∣tered and set upon four stakes. The next was Christopher Chober who much encouraged his fellow-Martyrs, and then cited the words of Ignatius, I am Gods corn,Christ▪ Chober. and shall be ground with the teeth of wilde beasts: So we (saith he) are Gods corn, sown in the field of the Church,His excellent speech. and that we may be for our Masters use, we are now to be torn by beasts: but be of good chear, the Church is founded in bloud, and hath ever encreased by bloud: God is able to raise up a thousand worshippers of himself out of every drop of our bloud: for though truth now suffers violence, yet Christ reigns, and no man shall throw him from his Throne: Being called to execution, he said, I come in the name of my God, neither am I ashamed to suffer these things for his glory, for I know whom I have beleeved: I have fought the good fight of faith, and finished my course, &c. then praying, into thy hands Lord I commend my spirit,His Martyr∣dom. he received the Crown of Mar∣tyrdom. John Shultis was next, who on the Scaffold, said, Why art thou so sad O my soul? Hope thou in God for thou shalt yet praise him: &c.John Shultis. The righteous seem to die in the eyes of fools, but indeed they go to their rest: Lord Jesus thou hast promised that whoso comes to thee, thou willt not cast off: Behold I now come, look on me, pity me, pardon my sins, and receive my soul, to thy self: then kneeling down, he said, Come come, Lord Jesus, and doe not tarry, and so he was he headed.His Martyr∣dom.
Maxim. Hosti∣alic▪The next was Maximillian Hostialick, a learned, and pious man: after his condemnation he was sadder then the rest, and being asked by the Minister the reason of it, he said, The sins of my youth doe now come into my minde: for though I know that nothing remains to condemn them which are in Christ Jesus: yet I know that God exer∣ciseth justice as well as mercy towards his own: Being called to death, he said, Look upon me O Lord my God, and lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death; and lest mine enemies say, We have prevailed. Afterward repeating the words of Simeon, Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, he was beheaded. The next was John Kutnaur, who when the Jesuites began to speak to them,His Martyr∣dom. John Kutnaur. Hs speech to the Jesuits. said, Pray you trouble not our consciences; we are suffici∣ently furnished against the fear of death, we need none of your help: and when they would have proceeded, he said, Why do you create unprofitable labour to your selves, and trouble to us? Then said they one to another, they are hard rocks, and will not suffer themselves to be removed: to whom he answered, You sa true, Christ is an hard rock, and we are firmly fixed on him. Afterwards he said to his fellow-Mar∣tyrs, I understand that I must be hanged, but whether by the neck, middle or feet, I know not, nor cae not; this only is my grief, that my bloud may not be mingled with yours, that we might be made one sa∣crifice to God: When he was called forth to execution, he was be∣sprinckled with the tears of his friends, to whom he said, Play the men, brethren, and refrain fron weeping, I go before, but it is but a short time and we shall meet in the heavenly glory; When he was upon the ladder, he said,His speech at death. I have plotted no Treason, committed no murder, I have done nothing worthy of death; but I die because I have been faithfull to the Gospel, and my country? O God pardon my enemies, for they know not what they do: but thou O Christ have pity on me, for I commit my soul unto thee,His Martyr∣dom. Sim. Sussickey. and so he slept in the Lord. The next was Simeon Sussickey, who when he saw the Jesuites com∣ming, he said to his companions: These birds of prey are flying hi∣ther, but they shall not feed on these carcasses, but return hungry; For God hath promised to perserve his own as the apple of his eye, and therefore he will not suffer us to be seduced. The last night he had a great conflict with the flesh, because the Scripture saith, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree:Tentation. but when the Minister told him that that curse was taken away by the death of Christ, he was well satisfied: He went to his death praying and singing, and being hanged next to Kut∣naur which was his son in law,His Martyr∣dom. after he was dead, he turned towards him, and so near that their mouths touched each other: so that their enemies said, These were such obstinate Rebels that they cease not to plot after death. The next was Nathaneel Wodnianskey, who when the Jesuites solli∣cited him to Apostacy,Nath. Wodni∣anskey. His speech to the Jsues. he said to them: You take away our lives under pretence of Rebellion, and not content with that, you seek to destroy our souls? Glut your selues with sight of our bloud, and be satisfied with that,
but we shall leave a sting in your consciences: Afterwards his own son say∣ing to him, My Father, if hope of life should be proffered you, upon condition of Apostacy, I pray you be mindefull of keeping your faith to Christ: He an∣swered, It is very acceptable to me my son,His counsel to his son. to be exhorted to constancy by you, but what makes you to suspect me? I rather advise and exhort you to fol∣low your fathers steps, and to exhort your brethren, sisters, and children,His Martyr∣dom. to that constancy whereof I shall leave you an example: and so he patiently ended his life upon the Gallows. The next was Wenceslaus Gisbitzky,Wen. Gesbitzky to whom were given great hopes of life: but the Minister fearing Satans stratagems, advised him to take heed of security, and to prepare himself for the encounter of death: Upon the Scaffold, seeing his hopes frustrate, he fell on his knees, and said: We are prostrate before thee, O eternal Father, do not forsake us,His prayer. have pity on us through Jesus Christ: We would say more, but we are not able to expresse it: Into thy hands doe we commend our souls, perfect that which thou hast begun to work in us. Render to us our in∣heritance that we may sing Holy, Holy, Holy,His martyr∣dom. &c. and so in the midst of his prayers he ended his life. There was also one Martin Fruin, an eminent Citizen of Pague,Martin Fruin. who being taken in his own house, was scoffed at by the souldiers, bea∣ten with their fists, and afterward cruelly tortured, and so burnt in the privy parts, that for six moneths he was troubled with most grievous pain: he was shut up in prison from all company,He is murther∣ed. and at last was found dead in the Castle ditch under the Tower. Presently after the execution of these holy Martyrs, all their goods were confiscated, as also of those that were driven into banishment.Their goods conscated. Then was a Proclamation published, wherein a generall pardon of all crimes was offered to all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, only their goods were confiscated, either in whole or in part, which must be brought into his Majesties Treasury, to pay his debts which were con∣tracted by this necessary war: besides which, they were to make a con∣fession of their faults in a form prescribed before Cardinall Lichtenstein, who was Caesars Viceroy, and if any did not appear,Recantation prescribed. he should lose this favour. Hence it was that the enemies publikely boasted that none were pu∣nished but such as were convicted by their own confession. Then by Edict all were forbidden to diminish, or waste their goods,The twentieth Artifice. by selling them, or conveying them over to others: and if any man should send away his goods to another place, all should be lost: and whoso∣ever received such goods, should pay so much of his own to the Em∣perour. Yet the merry Judges turned all this to a jest, saying to divers that pleaded their innocency from having any hand in bringing in Frederick, That though they had not actuall sins, yet they were infected with the Original sin of heresie and wealth, and therefore could not be exempted from pu∣nishment. Then did they proceed to take from the Protestants all their Castles,The Prote∣stants beggered.
Towns, and Villages, whereby they were deprived of their liveli∣hoods, and driven into strange places: Some were forced to cast them∣selves upon their Popish friends, others to become servants to their own destroyers. Afterwards all their personall Estates were sequestred, scarce leav∣ing so much as a garment for them wherewith to cover their nakedness:Their debts and money seized on. And lest any man should should have money at use, they commanded all to bring in all their bonds, upon pain of losing all their debts, if they concealed the least: And when any considerable sum was brought in, the Kings Treasurers were at hand, who protesting that the Emperour had need of it to defray his charges of war, took it away, giving to the party a note that so much was due to him from the Emperour, which yet was never repaied. And thus the Protestants being commanded to depart the Kingdom, the Popish party divided their confiscated goods and lands amongst themselves:The suldiers get most. and as it lay commodious for any of them, they added this or that Village, Town, Castle, or Lordship to their own, but the greatest part fell to strangers shares, Spaniards, Italians, or Germans which were Commanders in the Imperiall Army, instead of their pay. If any widows or Orphans had lands or goods not taken away, their popish neighbours would either circumvent them by craft, or weary them▪ out by quartering souldiers upon them, and so enforced them to sell them their lands, at what prices themselves listed to make thereof, and yet afterwards not paying that neither. The one and twentieth Ar∣tifice. Charles de Zerotine. Another Obe∣di.Then did the Emperour call for the ancient Charters of the King∣dom, which he immediately rent, and threw into the fire. The Ministers being all banished, the noble Lord Charles de Zerotine did yet not onely retain his houshold-Chaplaine; but he sustained also many others privately in their Caves with bread and water; and not fearing man, he did not only give liberty to his own subjects, but to divers others in neighbouring places to resort to the holy exercises which were performed in his Castle. The two and twentieth Artifice. Protestant Tutors ba∣nishedThen did the enemies by a new Edict publish, that all such Barons, Noblemen, and Citizens, as kept any Protestant Tutor for their chil∣dren, should presently dismisse him: otherwise he should be taken and punished. Then by another Edict all the Protestants were cast out of protecti∣on of the Laws, and were to have no benefit by them. The enemies being every day puffed up with their successes and vi∣ctories, made a Decree that all the Protestant Noblemen should pre∣sently depart out of the Kingdom,Successe makes the enemies proud. and the Emperour published a Pro∣clamation, that to prevent all divisions which were dangerous to the Kingdom and Magistrates, therefore he was resolved no longer to tollerate any of the inferiour, much lesse of the superiour estates of ei∣ther sex, who was infected with hereticall errours: And withall he granted to the superiour States the term of six moneths, to learn the holy Roman Catholick faith: and for that end he appointed Commis∣sioners
of Reformation to instruct them requiring them, to be obedient to his will, and to be diligently instructed by them, otherwise they should not be suffered to stay in the Kingdom, much less to possesse their goods: and therefore he required all those which at the end of that term of six moneths did not turn Catholicks,The Prote∣stants all ba∣nied. immediately to depart the Kingdom and never to returne again. Hereupon they which loved Religion at their hearts, did presently separate themselves by banishment: Others sollicited Caesar by petiti∣ons, either to change the decree, or to grant them a longer time: Others there were that thinking to deceive the Emperour and Pope, did buy false testimonies of the Priests, that they had been at Confessi∣on, and communicated in one kind,False testimo∣nies bought. and so made shew of a dissembled Apostacy, thereby to avoid banishment. Then was the fore-named Act extended unto widows, and the Pro∣testants children were commanded to be delivered to the care and in∣struction of Chatholicks, or else to be shut up in Monasteries:Protestants chidren taken from them. and this caused extream grief and groanes, when Noble-mens sons, and daugh∣ters, even maids that were marriageable, were pulled from their pa∣rents, and friends, and thrust into Jesuites Colleges, or Monks Cels: their Goods being taken also from them, and committed to Pa∣pists. The cunning craftinesse of those seducing Reformers, deceived many unwary persons, whilest they told them that they might hold their for∣mer opinions;Popish subtilty only for order sake they must acknowledge the Roman Bishop to be the visible head of the Church: Hereby the simpler sort, thinking that they were not constrained to any other faith, but what they had formerly learned, thought that they might with a safe consci∣ence promise that outward obedience. And if these seducers saw any one of more Nobility then ordinary, they presently suggested to them how much it grieved Caesar that those ancient families which had formerly been the ornaments and props of the Kingdom, should cast themselves out into banishment through there unadvisedness,Tentation. Many seduced. when they might remaine and flourish under the favour both of God and Caesar: and this ruined many of the Protestants Nobility, who preferred their earthly, before the heavenly country. Yet above a hundred Families, leaving their inheritances, and all their possessions, went away: Amongst these was the Lord de Zerotine,Lord de Zero∣tine goeth into exile. who might have lived in his countrey if he would have deprived him∣self of the worship of God, by the losse of his Minister, or if he would have used it covertly, yet he rather chose to suffer affliction with the peo∣ple of God, then to continue the enjoyments of his earthly posses∣sions. And whereas many of these Protestants were gone into Silesia, and Lusatia, the Emperour set forth a Proclamation, wherein he protested, that it was not his intention to remove them out of Bohemia and Mora∣via, and to suffer them in the incorporated Provinces,A cruel Edct. and therefore he commanded them to depart from thence also, or else they should be
brought to punishment: requiring them also to send back their children which they had carried with them, upon penalty of losing all the goods which any of them could demand in his countrey. Presently after he published another Edict wherein he required all the Protestant wives of the Catholicks, either to reform, or to go into banishment: But when many of the chief Officers of the Kingdom had Protestant wives,Protestants wives bnished from their hus∣bands. and they would not indure that they should be thus divorced from them, he set forth another Edict, whereby they were tolerated till the death of their husbands, and then they should be excluded from their inheritances, and sent into banishment: And requi∣red that in the mean time they should absent themselves from all festivall and nuptiall solemnities, or else should take the lowest places af∣ter the Catholicks. The exiles sought after.And whereas some of the Protestants did privately teturn, or stay to make the best of that little that did remain unto them: Proclamation was sent out that all such should be apprehended and imprisoned: and to warn all such as had harboured any of them, upon their allegiance, to appear before the chief Officers in the Castle of Prague: requiring that if any knew where any of them lay hid, they should secretly and sud∣denly attach them, and bring them to prison. The three and twentieth Artifice. Laws repealedThen did the Emperour repeal, and disannull diverse of the ancient Statutes of the Kingdom, that made most for the peoples Liberties, as concerning their free Election of a King, &c. that he might the better every where oppresse them. The four and twentieth Ar∣tifice.Then in all the free Cities men of base and mean quality were ap∣pointed to determine al businesse, and to be the chief Officers, and to these were added some of the chief of the souldiery, the better to pro∣cure subjection. These Cities also they impoverished by taxes and contributions, which continued divers years, and were extorted by the Souldiers power.Apostates promoted. Then Masse-Priests were put into the places of godly Ministers, and people were compelled to frequent the Masse: Marriages were forbid∣den, except amongst the Catholicks: Such as turned Apostates were promoted to all places of Magistracy in the Cities, though men of no judgement, nor experience. Then were these Articles given to the Captains of Distresses. The five and twentieth Ar∣tifice.1. That whosoever is not of the Kings Religion, all traffick and com∣merce shall be debarred him. 2. Whosoever shall suffer private Preaching, Baptism, or Matrimo∣ny in his house, shall pay a great Fine, or suffer six moneths impri∣sonment: but if he harbour a Preacher, he shall lose goods and Life. 3. If any shall work upon Catholick holidaies, he shall be imprisoned, and pay ten Florences. 4. It shall not be lawfull for any Non-Catholick to make a Will: if he do, it shall be null.
5. No youth shall be bound Apprentice, or learn any Art or Trade, unlesse he learn the Catholick Religion. 6. The poor people in Hospitals, except they be converted by such a day, shall be turned out, &c. After the taking of the City of Prague, Papists were examined upon oath to declare what they knew or heard that the Protestants had spo∣ken or done against Caesar. Then was an Act published to the rest of the Citizens, that though they had forfeited their whole estates, yet they should not be wholly sequestred, but every one should contribute part of his Estate to support the Army: all men also were required up∣on oath to discover what their Estates were: according to which they were injoyned to pay a ransome to obtain a pardon: yea all trading inhibited to such as were not Catholicks. In the City of Kutterberg were abundance of silver mines, and the In∣habitants generally were zealous professors: hereupon so soon as they began to be molested for Religion, the Kings Revenue began to dimi∣nish, most of the workmen giving over the work: The King seeing this, he farms his Revenues to the Citizens for ten years,The Prote∣stants in the silve Mines had a promise of favour. Popish perfi∣diousness. promising that in the interim they should not be troubled with souldiers, nor for their Religion: and hereto he set his hand and seal: But Satan envying their place and liberties, stirs up the Jesuits, to move the King to break his Covenant within four mouths after: and the souldiers were sent thither again, and they began again to be questioned about their religi∣on: The Citizens astonished at this manifest breach of Covenant, hum∣bly petition that no violence might be offered to them, which would overthrow the mettall-works: But instead of answer,Souldiers quartered upon them. the Major and chief Aldermen had twenty Musquetiers apiece put into their houses upon free quarter, till they had shriven themselves to a Priest: the Soul∣diers domineered exceedingly, wasting these mens estates by their pro∣fuseness, and abusing them divers other waies at their pleasure: yet the patience of the one, overcame the tyranicall behaviour of the other: These godly men so long as they had it, provided for the souldiers, but when all was gone, some of them withdrew themselves from danger by flight; others resigned their houses and goods to these domineering villains: delivering the keys to them, and so departing. When yet this prevailed not,Don Martins cruelty. the task of reforming that City was committed to Don Martin, who accompanied with a Troop of Curi∣assiers, and himself brandishing a naked sword, entred into the City, the Citizens trembling at his coming, hearing of the cruelty which he had exercised in other places, whereupon that very night multitudes of them betook themselves to flight, thinking to hide themselves in neigh∣bouring villages, this caused Don Martin to get an Edict that none should harbour exiles upon a great penalty. The year after a Senate at Kutterberg was elected out of the Apo∣states: the Major being a base and illiterate person, so that all the Ci∣tizens being still oppressed with the souldiers, either fled with their wives and children, leaving all behinde them, or else were fain to
submit their necks to the Antichristian yoke. The Bolislavi∣ans persecuted.The next City whither these reformers went, was Bolislavia, where the Orthodox Religion had continued for two hundred years, and it was the Principall seat of the brethren. The Ministers being ejected, they placed in their rooms two crafty Friers, that by all means sought to pervert the people, but when this prevailed not, they brought in three companies of souldiers to quarter upon them. Then were some of the Citizens banished, others cast into prison, and three of the principal was sequestered to strike a terror into the rest; the cause pretended was, because they said, as was alledged, That none had power to command their consciences, &c. But when yet the Citizens remained constant,Constancy. they were all warned to appear in the Court, and being come, they were shut up in severall rooms, and called out and exami∣ned one by one. The first was the Town-clerk, a weak and timorous man, and therefore they had set a Ruffian in a corner, with a sword in his hand, whom the fearfull man seeing, was so terrified, that he pro∣mised to turn Catholick;Apostacy. they so rejoyced at this beginning, that they dismissed all the rest, bad them consider of it, and do as the Town-clerk had set them an example. Amongst these there were two Burgomasters, learned men, who exhorted their fellow Citizens not to be affrighted with these imagina∣ry terrors. Afterwards one of them being called for, was partly with threats, & partly with flatteries so wearied out, that at last he tooke time to consid∣er of it: The other being called for, & an old man proposing the others example to him, he spit in his face, saying, Traytor is this your constancy? And so both he,Constancy. and the rest of the Citizens remained as unmoveable as a Rock. The first Burgomaster considering what he had done, and be∣ing ashamed of it,Recovery. came and gave them such a positive answer, as that with the rest he was sent to prison. One Bartholomew Lang told them to their faces, that he had rather die by the sword, then deny his faith; whereupon with divers others he was thrust into a stinking dungeon, where they kept them prisoners for seventeen weeks, their houses in the meane time being possessed by the barbarous souldiers. One of these godly persons died in prison: And about that time Bethlem Gabor warring with the Emperour, and Count Mansfield en∣tring Silesia,Bethlem Gabor. with the King of Denmarks Army, these Tyrants were struck with such a terrour, that presently Proclamations came forth, that it was not his Majesties pleasure that any man should be forced to the faith, by violent meanes;Gods provi∣dence. by which Proclamation the inhabitans of Bolislavia had some respit. But the year after, when Gabor was retired, and the King of Den∣mark beaten out of Silesia, their tyranny againe revived and a new Pro∣clamation came forth to inhibit the Protestants all Trade and Com∣merce▪ and to command them to abjure their Heresies under pain of the severest and inevitable punishment. Hereupon some were banished,
others voluntarily went into exile, others were denied traffique,A new perse∣cution. the Friers taking away such commodities as they set to sale, so that the Ci∣tizens which stayed, were forced to take the mark of the Beast, that they might buy and sell. In the City of Litomericia, Anno 1517. there was an unanimous a∣greement amongst the Citizens,In Litomeric. that none should be made free amongst them, but such as professed the reformed Religion: and that whoso∣ever should move for the nulling of this act should be disfranchised; This continued inviolate for a hundred years till two Jesuites sued to be made free men of the City, which being denied, they entred their complaint in the Chancery, whether some of the principall Aldermen were summoned, and kept for nine weeks space, till by threats they had obtained from them to make these two men free.Popish subtilty Five moneths after one of them is made an Alderman, that so they might have their spies in every place; there were also cunning seducers sent thither to withdraw the people from their Religion. But when this prevailed not, Anno 1625. they took the names of every Citizen, commanding them constantly to come to the Masse, and every one to sew his name to the Sexton, that they might know that all were there present, or else for every omission they should for∣feit five pound. Then bringing in more souldiers, they commanded all the inhabi∣tants to be present at their idolatrous Procession, and because the Re∣corder came not, they sent a whole company of souldiers to plunder his house, who also abused and threatned his wife. The year after they brought more in souldiers, quartering them in the principall mens houses, in some ten, in some twenty, and in others thirty, who abused them fearefully, but, through Gods assistance,Patience in persecution. they bore it with such admirable patience that the enemies were weary with plaguing them, and began to be more moderate; yet they pub∣lished an order, that whosoever would not turn Catholick, should, with their wives and children, depart the City & Kingdom by a certain day, wherevpon many of them removed into Misnia. At the City of Radecium they drave away the Ministers,In Radecium. and placed there a merry Archdeacon, who protested that all violent means were displeasing to him, and therefore he entertained the Citizens with jests and merry speeches, and would draw them to Taverns and Game∣ing houses: But when after four years triall,Tentation re∣sisted. he found that he had not converted any one of them by these means, he brought in souldiers for his help: Then did he assemble the people, requiring them to go in Procession with him, but when none would follow, the souldiers rushed in amongst them with their drawn swords; whereupon the people ran, some one way, some another,Popish cruelty▪ others were forced to fol∣low the Procession whether they would or no, and some for refusing were slain. Then was a whole Regiment of souldiers sent thither, with expresse charge not to depart, till the City was reformed. The Archdeacon
taking some of these, went to a Physitian that had been lame for some years, and asketh him whether he would become a Catholick? which he stoutly refused,Constancy. saying, that he had rather his half rotten carkasse should be drawn through the fields, and torn in pieces, then to do any thing against his conscience. Then were all the inhabitants called to∣gether: the City gates shut, and the people grievously threatned if they would not turn, and such as refused, were thrust into prisons, and souldiers were sent to their houses, who raged and domineered over their wives and children; wherupon they ran to their husbands with tears and intreaties,Humane infir∣mity. and prevailed with many of them to desire time to be given them to learn the Romish religion, only twenty eight of them, together with their wives and children forsook their earthly Estate,Constancy. and went into banishment to preserve their consciences clear. At Bidsove.Don Martin went also to Bidsove, ten-miles from Prague, attended with his souldiers, and assembling the Citizens, he made an Oration to them to turn Catholicks, they answered, that they could not un∣learn that in an hour, which they had been learning all their life, this so enraged Martin, that he assaulted the man that answered for all the rest,Popish cruelty. with a club, beating him extreamly, and then he commanded the chief Officer to carry him out of the City, not suffering him so much as to visit his house before his departure: This so terrified the rest, that they promised to be taught within a certaine time; and where∣as some of them thought to save themselves by flight, sending their wives and some of their goods privately before, with whom went also some godly widows; Martin having intelligence of it, sent some soul∣diers after them, that stript them of their goods, and brought them back and cast them into fetters, refusing to release them, till both they and their husbands turned Catholicks. At Zaticum.At Zaticum, another City, famous for religion, the Minister being banished, Friers were put into his place, who being assisted with soul∣diers used to cane those that would not bow to the Host, and because the Major and some of the Aldermen were absent at a solemn Pro∣cession, they sined them. Then came thither Don Martin, and pro∣claimed,Bibles burnt. that whosoever had any Bibles, or other Evangelicall bookes; if they brought them not in , they should be fined at a hun∣dred florences, or suffer five weeks imprisonment. As also whoso∣ever refused to come to Masse, should pay five Florences, and three pounds of wax: All the books that were so brought, he burnt them without the wals; and for such as still stood out, he quartered Troop∣ers upon them, which extorted mony from them day by day: Here∣upon many forsook their houses, and betook themselves to the hard∣ship of a banished life. Then did he proclaim that without his leave none should go out of the gates upon pain of death: The next day he arrested the Major, and would not release him, but upon the promise of Apostacy. Two of the Aldermen he bound with iron chains for refusing to adore the Host,Don Martins cruelty. and for fourteen daies together tormented
them grievously, till he had forced their consent to the like Apostacy. Then assembling the whole Senate, he commands them presently to submit to Caesars will, to go to auricular confession, and to commu∣nicate in one kinde, promising that such as obeyed should be eased of souldiers, that the others should have their burthens doubled, requi∣ring every one in order to answer for himselfe, whether he would pro∣mise to perform this within three weeks: One of them modestly pleading to be excused, in regard of his conscience: the furious beast fell upon him, beat him about the head, and abused him with cursed words, saying, Thou art an unworthy knave to be in this place, I will have thee bound hand and foot, and cast into a deep dungeon, and when thou hast vomited out thy wicked soul, I will deliver thee to the hangman to be buried, &c. Then he cals to his souldiers for chains and fetters, with which they bound his hands and feet, and put an iron coller about his neck, with a thick chaine, and so brought him to the Dungeon, where he was tormented for three weeks, neither wife nor children being suffered to come to him, and fed with bread and water; the Je∣suites also were daily molesting him: Then was he sentenced to death, which he chose before Apostacy. Then said one of the Jesuites, he is possessed with the devil, & therefore he commanded him to be bound more straitely, whereby at last he was forced to go to auricular con∣fession, but by that means getting out of the Prison, he fled into Misnia to escape their tyranny. All the best Citizens did desire banishment,Exile denied to the Prote∣stants. but the City gates were kept strictly, least any should get out, or carry out their housholdstuff; whereupon many escaped by the mines of the wall, and among these, a Lords wife, leaving all her rich housholdstuff behinde her, crept out at the common sewer, to follow her husband into banish∣ment. Many of the exiles in Misnia, having spent all that little which they carried with them, were forced to seek alms in Bohemia, where being betrayed, they were cast into prison, and so tormented, till some of them were almost distracted, and then they were sent away to other places; some of these were persons of good quality. At Tusta a chief Officer of the Kingdome sollicited the Citizens to turn Catholicks, which they refusing to do,At Tusta. he complained of it to the Je∣suites at Prague, whereupon Don Martin is sent thither, who entring the City, sends his souldiers into the Senators houses, licensing them to abuse them at their pleasure, so that in a short time many were forced to Apostasie. Then did that other Officer set a great fine upon the City,Apostacy. because they turned Catholicks for another mans sake, and would not do it for his: And thus the poor Protestants were abused on every hand to satisfie the lusts of these Tyrants. Then did another Noble man, with a band of souldiers, go to the City of Rokizan, and tyrannically abuse them for their Religion, for∣bearing no kinde of insolency that they could think of:At Rokizan. Amongst other projects this was one; He caused all the Citizens to write their names
in three books:Popish subtilty In the first such as were already Catholicks (which were but six late Apostates) In the second the names of such as would become Apostates within a fortnight, which were very few: In the third such as absolutely refused, and so were opposite to God and Caesar, and in this were almost all the names, which so enraged him, that he re∣solved to use all manner of cruelties,Constancy. saying, that they deserved the crosse, the wheel, yea and hell it self. Then did he command all the Citizens to come to the Church the next day, to receive the Sacrament in one kinde; but when, coming himself to Church, he found few or none there, he runs through the streets, and into the houses, driving all that he met with to the Church with his stick. When he came thither again, he espied one John Foe∣lix,John Foelix. Barbarous cru∣elty. a chief Citizen, but a Calvinist, he therefore fell upon him with a knotty club, beating him about the head, shoulders and hands, till he was all gore bloud, and then he said to him, Get thee hence thou beast, with thy cursed Calvin-bloud. Then did he rage against the other Citizens cursing them, beating some, and spitted in the faces of others: and from one of the grave Citizens he pulled off his beard, and strewed it on the floor. After this he again sent word to Foelix, that except he changed his minde by the morrow,Foelix escapes. he would act a new tragedy with him, but that night he escaped, leaving behinde him his dear wife and children, and an aged mother of eighty years old. Then did the Earl imprison his wife, and sequestred his estate, and enforced the rest of the Citizens to subscribe that they did freely, and with all readinesse of minde, imbrace the Catholick religion. One Martinitz was appointed to reforme the City of Slana, who substituted one Hansbursky,At Slana. an Apostate, to see this work done. This man that he might ingratiate himself with the Jesuites, appointed a solemn Procession, and either by fraud or force, brought to it most of the Citizens:John Blyssa. Amongst others, he required one John Blyssa to ac∣company him, but he refused, saying, As oft as I have received the Lords Supper, so oft have I obliged my self to God, and against these abomina∣tions: Then said the other, Thou shalt not resist the Emperours plea∣sure: But said he, In those things which belong to Caesar, I will not, but here Gods business is in hand: Then said the other, Thou shalt be forced to it: God, replied he, seeks willing, not forced worshippers; whereupon he was presently committed to prison, for nine weeks and so was another godly Citizen,Banished. and fined, and then together with his wife, driven out of the City. Afterwards also was Blyssa and his wife banished, for procuring his childe to be Baptized by a Protestant Minister privately, and his estate was sequestred, having nothing left him to support him in his banish∣ment. Then by divers kindes of torments he compelled some to a forced obedience; as he did fifty men whom he shut up in a narrow room, where they could neither stand, sit, nor lie, nor have leave to go forth
to ease nature: So that after three daies enduring of this pain and stink, they were forced to promise to learn the Roman religion. The like dealing he used to divers women in his own chamber: but so soon as they could, most of them went into voluntary ba∣nishment. The City of Prachatice they entred by force, and slew the Major, who was bringing to them the keys,At Prachatice. Prodigious cruelties. together with a thousand six hun∣dred men, women and children, sparing none but such as fled, or hid themselves in secret places: The karcasses they left unburied for divers daies, all dirty, and shamefully naked. Afterwards when the City began again to be inhabited, the Commissioners of Reformation came thither, promising them that if they would turn Catholicks, they should have their Liberties restored to them, but if they refused, they should be restrained from all trading, and when this prevailed not, they thrust men and women, young and old into prisons, where they miserably a∣fflicted them for four whole moneths. The like cruely they used to all other Cities, where they shewed and used all manner of impostures, deceits, tyrannies and impudent practices, till they had rooted out the reformed Religion, and set up their idolatrous and superstitious worship in the stead of it. The godly Ministers being generally removed,The twenty sixth Artifice. the next design of the enemies was to take all Bibles, and other profitable books out of the peo∣ples hands, that so the heat of Religion might in time grow cold: The Friers also which were placed in the Churches: did not presently thunder, but dealt fairly, beseeching and confirming the truth of their Religion with oaths, and dreadfull cursing of themselves,Popish subtilty promi∣sing also the Emperours favour, and easing of their burthens; yea they sought by works of charity to oblige the poorer sort to them. One Frier promised a bushell of Wheat to every one that would come to Confession; but when his Garners began to waste, he gave but half the measure, whereupon one flang away in anger, saying, What, is my soul viler then the rest? But when they perceived that they gained but few by their Fox-like subtilty, they returned to their Wol∣vish cruelty, compelling men to come to Masse, and taking the names of all such as absented themselves; and if any went to private religious meetings, they were fined, imprisoned and whipt. Some godly persons being met together with a Minister, in a private Chappel, two Colonels, with some troops came upon them, encom∣passed the Church, rusht in with their drawn swords, took the Mini∣ster from the Communion-table, stript off his cloaths,Popish pro∣fanenesse. Christians stript. and sent him away to prison, then they cast the bread upon the earth, poured out the wine, and trampled upon it: Then they fell upon the people, stripping men and women naked, it being fst and snow, so that many of them died; some were wounded, others so affrighted that they fell in∣to diseases: Modestly forbids to tell how they used the women,Popish un∣cleannesse. even in the Church.
Then came out an Edict that whosever refused to turn Papist, whe∣ther men or women, young or old; bond or free, their names should be returned to the Council of State, who would give instructions what should be done with their persons and estates. Marriage, Buriall and Baptism were forbidden to the Protestants, and if any did it privately,The twenty se∣venth Artifice. they were imprisoned, and not dismissed without Apostasie, or a great fine. Then was all trading inhibited, or means of getting their living, and at last buying of food, so that the poor people being oppressed with hunger and want, were either forced to fly, or to Apostatize. The countrymen they fetched out of their houses, yea out of their beds,Prodigious cruelties. by troopes of souldiers, driving them like beasts before them in the sharpest cold, and filled the common prisons, towers, cellers, sta∣bles, yea and hogsties with them, where they were killed with hunger, cold and thirst. A godly Chirurgion, with others, was cast into a place full of snakes. Another company was thrust into a stable, and all the windows stopt up, that the were almost stifled for want of breath. In some places they shut them up in privies, that they might be poisoned with the stink. In some places they mad holes, and knockt them full of iron spikes, wherein those that were shut, could neither sit nor stand, but bending and crooked: It was not possible that any man could endure this posture above two or three hours, their sinews in the mean time trembling and their members quivering, and their▪ hearts ready to faint with anguish; so that some were forced to promise to turn Catholiks, others that refused were brought back to torture. Then the devised a prison upon the water, very narow, and not a∣bove a cubit and an half in length, wherein the prisoner could by no meanes lay himself at length, and if he turned himself unawares, he must fall into the water. The twenty eighth Artifice.Another design was, first to assault men of greatest authority, to make them an example to the rest. In the town of Minion the Commissioner demanded of the people a positive answer,At Minion. whether they would turn Catholicks: And one of them in the name of the rest saying, that conscience neither would nor could be forced, he was presently laid upon the ground and beaten, and still denying to turn Catholick, when he could hardly speak, he was torn in pieces; The rest affrighted at this terrible spectacle promis∣ed obedience if time were given them. In another place the Senator refusing to turn Apostates, the cheifest of them was made to ride the wooden horse, in the market-place, for six hours space, though he was very ancient, so that he was lame and half dead, when he was taken off. Popish malice.When any desired to die, raher then to forsake their Religion, it was answered: that the Emperour did not thirst after their bloud, but rather after the welfare of their souls:Death denied them. To others they said, Oh, you affect the glory of Martyrdom, but you are base knaves, and are
unworthy to have any thing to glory in. There were many who would have died in the maintenance of their Christian faith, but there were none that would inflict death upon them; for these cruel Tyrants brought up in the devils school,Prodigious▪ wickednesse. would not kill the body but the soul, and therefore they sought by lingring and continual punishments to bring them first to stagger, and then to deny the truth. When any man desired to be convinced by Scripture,Blasphemy. they answer∣ed with scoffs and jears, accusing the Scripture of imperfection, of obscurity, of ambiguity, saying that it was the Fountain of Heresie, the Sanctuary of Hereticks, and that Laymen had nothing to do with it: They called the Bible Wiblia, which in the Bohemian language, signifies vomit. They took away all Orthodox books from the people, that thereby they might be the more easily led into error. In some places they shut up the people in the Church and forced them to receive in one kinde;Prodigious wickedness. and if they would not fall down to the Host, they used to beat their legs with clubs, till they fell down: Some they imprisoned and racked severall times to force them to auricular confession. Of others they set open their mouths with gags, and thrust the Host down their throates. In other places they forced the people, not only to abjure the Cup, but to throw it down, and to spit upon it, and tread it under oot. If any to avoid this Tyranny fled into the woods and secret places hunger drave them out again, whereby they became a prey to their, adversaries; if they went to neighbouring places, some or other would betray them. Edicts also were published, forbidding all to entertain such as fled upon pain of forfeiting a hundred pieces of silver for every nights en∣tertainment. Yet these miserable people could not go out of the Kingdom, not being acquainted with any other language: besides, they were told that ere long the like tragedy should be acted every where Four men of Kossenberg continuing constant after long imprison∣ment, they were first exposed to cold for five weeks together in the depth of winter: Then for nine daies they were pined with hunger, they having only a small portion of bread that kept life and soul toge∣ther, and drinking their own urine, and when they were threatned harder usage, if they turned not, they answered, We willingly imbrace all afflictions of famin, hanging, burning, or any thing, rather then we would sin against God. Thereupon,Constancy. only twice a week there was given them a mouthfull of bread, and a draught of water. Then were they parted asunder, one thrust into the sink of the prison, another into a furnace; and none permited to visit them; and when nothing would prevail, they set a fine upon them, and banished them. Others were kept in prisons and bonds till they died. One was kept in a filthy prison till his feet rotted off, and yet he passed away the time with singing of Psalms, as if he injoyed all manner of deligths.Comfort in fflictions.
Another man being tired out with imprisonement, promised to turn Catholick, and was released, but presently (as himself wrote after∣wards) God chastened him for this his fault, holding his conscience captive for an whole year together,Danger of Apostacy. so that he could have no hope in Gods mercy: Yet he recalled to minde former sinners, who upon their repentance obtained mercy of God: Thereupon he cried unto God a whole year together, night and day watering his bed with his tears, because he thought himself damned; but at last God (saith he) sent his Angel to me, and I saw this glory brighter then the sun, and I had gods Spirit bestowed upon me, &c. After which he was appre∣hended, beheaded and quartered. Bibles burnt.The pictures of John Husse and Jerom of Prague they defaced; all the Bibles that they could meet with, they burned; the graves of the Mini∣sters they opened, took out their bones and burnt them. The Statutes of King Frederick they beat in pieces, and trampled them under their feet. One man they fined at five hundred Dollars, for giving his son the name of Frederick, Before these calamities befell the Bohemians, God gave them warn∣ing by sundry Prodigies.Prodiges. In severall places divers Suns were seen to∣gether. At Prague the Sun seemed to dart out bals of fire: Also a fly∣ing Dragon, flaming horribly, was seen throughout all Bohemia and Silesia. Also a spring flowed with bloud for an whole moneth toge∣ther. In another place a Fish-pond was wholly turned into bloud for the space of three daies. A great flock of Crows and Daws, fought together for a whole daies space, whereby multitudes of them were slain. At Prague it rained brimstone, and the Image of the crucifix being set up, was struck down with a thunderbolt. The gates of some Ci∣ties opened of their own accord. Many Bibles being thrown into a great fire, were untouched, only the margin a little scorched. Gods judg∣ment on Apo∣states.Many Apostates tormented by the sting of conscience, cried out, They were damned. Some to avoid these terrors hanged themselves; others drowned themselves. Some died in fearfull despaire, others died suddenly▪ One as he was about to abjure, was stricken dumb, and being carried home was possessed with a great trembling all over, and gnawing his own tongue, he died miserably. Dr Knapper a great persecutor was slain by the appointment of his wife an adultresse,Gods judge∣ment on perse∣cutors. for which she was afterwards hanged. Another vomited out his ungodly soul with bloud. Another ran mad, and cast him self down from the top of his house, and so roaring fearful∣ly he breathed his last. Another shot himself to death with his own Pistoll. Another ran mad, fell into such a disease, that none could come near him for stink, and at last was choaked with vomiting up abundance of bloud. Another being taken with a sudden disease, waxed as black as a cole, uttered his speech like the barking of a dog, and within three daies died with terrible pains. Another, by the break∣ing of a great gun, was torn all to pieces. Another had a terrible dis∣ease
in his throat, his tongue rotted, many holes were eaten in his throat, whereout his food and medicines came, so that he died my∣serably. Collected out of a Book called Historia Persecutionum Ecclesiae Bohem. written by some Bohemian exiles. HAving thus given you a brief Narrative of the Persecutions of the Church in Bohemia, from the first planting of the Gospel amongst them, to our present times: Before I proceed any further, let us a little look back to see how God fought for them, against their Popish adversaries, and thereby after a wonderfull manner plagued their persecutors. Much may be read hereof in my second Part, in the Life of Zisca; but after his death, there was a great fear, and sorrow seized on his Army, and the souldiers being divided amongst themselves, one part of them chose for their Captain Procopius Magnus, who still retained the name of Thaborites. The other part, thinking none wor∣thy to succeed Zisca, named themselves the Orphanes, by reason of the losse of their Captain; yet whensoever their Popish adversaries came against them, they both joyned together to defend themselves, and the liberty of the Gospel in Bohemia. About this time Pope Martin perceiving the Gospel and the Pro∣fessors of it to increase daily in Bohemia,The Pope stirs up persecution. he sent the Cardinall of Win∣chester an English man, into Germany, to stirre up the Emperour and German Princes to make war against the Bohemians. Hereupon three Armies were levied, one under the Duke of Saxony; the second under the Marquesse of Brandenburg, the third under Otho Archbishop of Trevers: These three Armies entred Bohemia three waies, and at last joyning all into one, besieged the City of Misna, which but the night before was won from the Papists by one Prichicho, a learned and zea∣lous Protestant, and therefore the Popish Armies resolved to take that place before they marched any further:Gods judge∣ments on per∣secutors. The Popish Army flies. But so soon as news came that the Protestants had raised an Army, and were hasting to the relief of Misna, they speedily fled before they ever saw an enemy, leaving all their Engines of warre, and a great booty behinde them. The Cardinall meeting them in their flight, used all the arguments that possibly he could to the Nobles and Captains, to turn them back again, magnifying their number and prowesse, and vilifying their ene∣mies, but when nothing would prevail, himselfe was fain to accom∣pany them in the flight. Presently the Bohemians pursuing, fell upon their rereward, which made their flight much more fearfull and dis∣ordered then it was before, neither did they leave flying till the Bohe∣mians left pursuing of them.
The Emperour hearing of this shamefull flight, went to Noremberg and by the assistance of the Cardinall, a new Army was raised under the Command of Frederick Marquesse of Brandenburg, which entred Bohemia one way,A new Army raised. and another great Army under Albert Arch-Duke of Austria, which entred another way. In these two Armies were all the chiefest Nobles and Bishops in Germany, being above fourty thou∣sand horsemen, besides foot. The Bohemians as soon as they heard of their enemies approach, ga∣thered their Host with all speed to encounter them: But God marvel∣lously fought for them, for before the Bohemians came near them, the Popish Army was struck with such a marvellous sudden fear, that they began most shamefully to run away;They fly when none pursues. the Cardinall wondering at it, went up and down to the Captains, exhorting and encouraging of them, telling them that they were to fight for their Lives, Honour, Religion, and the salvation of souls, &c. but notwithstanding all that he could say and do, the Ensignes were suddenly snatched up, and every man ran headlong away, so that the Cardinall was forced to do the like: The Protestants encouraged hereby, speedily pursued them, and obtained a very great booty. This so astonished both the Pope and Emperour, that afterwards they sought rather by subtilty to entrap them, then by force to compell them to forsake their religion, as we have seen in the foregoing story.
CHAP. XXVI. The Persecution of the Church in Spaine, which be∣gan Anno Christi, 1540. ANno 1540. there was one Francis Romane,F. Romanes Conversion. sent by the Spanish Mer∣chants of Antwerp, to Breme to take up some money that was due to them; where, being at a Sermon (through the marvelous working of Gods Spirit) he was so effectually wrought upon, that after the Sermon he went to the Preacher, and repeated the contents of his whole Sermon to him, and then betaking himself to the searching of the Scriptures, and conferring with learned men, in a short space he had attained to a great measure of knowledge in the Word of life; which the Minister observing, and withal finding him of a fervent spirit, he directed and exhorted him to circumspection in his carriage, more and more instruct∣ing him in the knowledge of the Gospel, which he so greedily received as one that could never be satisfied. This made him give over seeking af∣ter temporal treasure, and instead thereof he bought good books, by reading of which, and conference with the Minister, he much impro∣ved his knowledge in all the chief Articles of Religion. Then did he write letters to his countrey-men at Antwerp, wherein he first gave thanks to God for revealing his truth to him;Zeale. then did he bewaile the grosse ig∣norance of his countrey-men, beseeching God to open their eyes to un∣derstand the word of salvation, and so promised shortly to returne to them to conferre with them about the grace of God, which he had recei∣ved; and lastly he declared his purpose of going into Spaine to acquaint his parents and friends with that wholesome Doctrine which God had communicated to him. Then wrote he other letters also to the Emperour Charles the fifth, o∣pening to him the miserable state of Christs Church, desiring him to ten∣der the good thereof; especially to reforme the grosse corruptions of the Church of Spaine; he wrote also a Catechisme, and some other Treati∣ses in the Spanish tongue. The Merchants at Antwerp having received his Letters, sent for him, pretending much good will, but secretly practising his destruction: For against his coming, they suborned some Friers, who so soon as he was a∣lighted from his horse, seized upon him, rifled his books,Subtilty. and carrying him into a Merchants house, examined him;Treachery. But he mightily confuting them, they bound him hand and foot, calling him Lutheran; they also burnt his books before his face, threatning to burn him likewise. Then was he sent Prisoner to a Tower six miles from Antwerp, and cast into a deep dungeon, where he endured much misery for eight moneths, at the end whereof, the Merchants, supposing that he would be better advised for the time to come, released him. Then did he go to Lovain, where he had much conference with Driander, who advised him to continue in his cal∣ling
of a Merchant,Good counsel. wherein he might have many opportunities of doing good; and for Religion, that he should do nothing for favour of men, whereby the glory of God should be diminished. He advised him also to take heed of inconsiderate zeal, lest he should do as some, who going be∣yond the bounds of their vocation, thinking to do good, and to edifie, they destroy and do harme. For said he, it is God that takes care of his Church, and will raise up faithful Ministers for the same: neither doth he approve such as rashly intrude themselves into that function without any calling thereto.Note. This advice Francis willingly hearkned unto, promising to follow the same. Not long after going to Ratisbone, where the Emperial Diet was held,He goeth to the Emperour. having opportunity, he boldly stept to the Emperour, beseeching him to deliver his countrey and subjects of Spaine from false Religion, and to restore them to the sincerity of Christs doctrine, protesting that the Protestants of Germany were in the truth; and that the Religion of Spaine was greatly dissonant to the Word of God, &c. The Emperour all this while heard him gently, promising him to consider of the matter, and so to do therein as he trusted should be for the best. Francis being encouraged with this answer, went again to the Empe∣rour a second and third time, and still received a quiet answer as before; yet not satisfied herewith, he went a fourth time, but was repulsed by some Spaniards about the Emperour, who were so incensed against him, that immediately they would have thrown him headlong into the river Danu∣bius, if the Emperour had not restrained them, willing that he should be judged by the Lawes of the Empire: Then was he cast into prison, till the Emperours voyage into Africk,Is imprisoned. Carried into Spaine. at which time he, with some other Captives, was carried into Spaine, and there delivered unto the Inquisi∣tors, who cast him into a dark prison under ground; He was oft examined, loaden with many reproaches and contumelies, yet ever remained firme and unmovable, so that at last they condemned him to be burnt for an he∣retick.Condemned by the Inquisitors. As he was led to the place of execution, they put upon him a Miter of paper, painted all over with ugly Devils; as he passed by a wood∣den crosse, they required him to worship it, to which he answered, that the manner of Christians was not to worship wood: Being laid upon the pile of wood, when he first felt the fire, he lifted up his head towards heaven; whereupon the Inquisitors thinking that he would recant,Burned. caused him to be taken down, but when they found his constancy, they threw him on a∣gain, where he slept in the Lord. Then did the Inquisitors proclaime that he was damned, and that none should pray for him, and that they were hereticks whosoever doubted of his damnation. There was also dwelling at Saint Luca in Spaine one Rochus, a skilful graver of images:Rochus. but the Lord pleasing to enlighten him with the sa∣ving knowledge of his truth, he gave over making of idolatrous images, and imployed himself in making of seals: only he kept standing on his stall an image of the Virgin Mary, artificially graven for a signe of his oc∣cupation. An Inquisitor passing by, and liking the image, asked the price of it:
Rochus set him a price, but was not willing to sell it: the Inquisitor bade him half so much: the other answered that he could not afford it so, and that he had rather break it than sell it; yea, said the Inquisitor, let me see that if thou darest? with that Rochus with a Chisel cut off the nose of the image; whereupon the Inquisitor presently commanded him to prison, and within three dayes he was condemned to be burnt. At the place of execution he poured out his fervent prayers to Almighty God,Condemned. and so made a blessed end, Anno 1545. Divers other godly persons being by the Inquisitors cast into loath∣some dungeons, ended their lives there. Anno 1550. At Validolid, the Inquisitors brought forth thirty priso∣ners together, of high and low estate, as also the Coffin of a certain noble woman with her picture lying upon it, she being dead long before, to e∣ceive judgement and sentence: for the solemnities whereof they had erect∣ed three great stages; the first for the Kings sister, the Lady Jane, and his eldest sonne Prince Philip, with other States: The second for the Fa∣thers Inquisitors: And the third for the Prisoners. Multitudes of people being assembled together, these dear servants of Jesus Christ, clothed with Sambito's, a yellow cloth hanging down before and behind,Thity Chri∣stians condem∣ned. powdred with red crosses, and having burning tapers in their hands, and Miters up∣on their heads painted with Devils, were placed in their rankes: Then was a Sermon preached, after which an Oath was administred to the Princes and Nobles by the Inquisitors, that they should favour the holy Inquisition, and consent to the same, and that they should employ their uttermost endeavour to see all them executed which should swerve from the Church of Rome, and adhere to the Lutherans, without respect of per∣sons, of what degree, quality, or condition soever;A wicked Oath. and that they should compel their subjects to submit to the Church of Rome, and to obey all its lawes, &c. Then was Doctor Cacalla called forth, a man of excellent learning, who had often preached before the Emperour whilst he was a Friar;Cacalla con∣demned. but being now accounted to be the Standard-bearer to the Luthe∣rans, he was called forth to hear his sentence, which was, that he should be degraded, and presently burnt, and his goods confiscated. The like sentence of condemnation was pronounced upon his brother Francis, a Preacher also, who having spoken boldly against the Inquisi∣tion, they so stopt his mouth that he could not speak a word. Then Blanch their sister received the like sentence, and so did most of the other, only some few of them were condemned to some years imprisonment, and to wear their Sambito's all their life time, &c. Then was the Coffin of the dead Lady with her picture it upon con∣demned likewise to be burnt. This good woman, whilst she lived, was a worthy maintainer of the Gospel, of great integrity of life, and one that had divers assemblies in her house for the true preaching of the Word of God; wherefore her house was also sentenced to be razed down,Popish malice. and a Pillar to be set up in the place thereof, with an inscription shewing the cause. Then were all these that were sentenced to death,Malice. together with the
Coffin, delivered to the secular Magistrate, and so every one of them be∣ing set upon an Asse with their faces towards his taile, they were guarded by many souldiers to the place of execution: at which place there was for each of them a stake set up,Many burnt together. to which every of them were bound, and so they were first strangled, and then burnt to ashes; only one of them, who had been most vehement against them, was burnt alive, and his mouth stopped that he should not speak to the people. All men marvelled at their constancy and quiet end. At the same time also there were in prison at Validolid thirty seven o∣thers, which were reserved for another Tragedy and Spectacle of the bloody Inquisition. But seeing much mention is made of the Spanish Inquisition, and of the cruelty exercised thereby against the poor servants of Jesus Christ, I shall here set down the first Original, and Progresse thereof, as hereafter followeth. CHAP. XXVII. The Original, Progresse, and Practice of the Spanish Inquisition. WHen King Ferdinand and Isabel had expelled the Turks out of the City and Territories of Granata,The Spanish Inquisition. and other places of Spaine, who had lived there seven hundred, seventy, and eight years, they set upon the Reformation of Religion; and granted the conquered Moors liberty to stay, & to enjoy all their goods, provided that they would turn Christians; and whereas also there were very many Jews, who had continued there since Titus conquered Jerusalem, they gave them leave to stay upon the same condition; but all such as refused, were commanded presently to de∣part out of Spaine. Yet afterwards, finding that those Persons were only Christians in name, and had submitted only to save their estates, instead of providing godly Ministers with meeknesse to instruct them, and to draw them from their errours;Invented by Dominicans. (by the advice of the Dominican Friers) they erected the Inquisition; wherein the poor wretches in stead of in∣structions, were robbed of all their estates, and either put to most cruel deaths, or else suffered most intolerable torments by whipping, &c. and leading the rest of their lives in ignominy and poverty; Neither was this only inflicted upon such as blasphemed Christ, but for the observation of the least Jewish, or Moorish ceremony, or the smallest errour in the Chri∣stian Religion. But this Inquisition at first erected against Jews and Moors, was afterwards turned against the faithful servants of Jesus Christ, and for the suppressing of the Gospel, and the Profession of it; and thus briefly you have the Original of it; let us now see what their practice and exer∣cise is. As soone as information is given in against any one, though but for a very small matter, they do not presently cite the person to appear before
them, but they suborn one of their Officers, called a Familiar, to insinu∣ate himself into his company, who taking occasion to meet the paty accused, uses thus to greet him; Sir, I was yesterday by accident at my Lords Inquisitors, who said that they had occasion to speak with you about certain of their affairs, and therefore they commanded me to sum∣mon you to appear before them to morrow at such an hour: The party not daring to refuse, goes to the place, sends in word that he is come to attend them, and so when he is called in, they ask him what suit he hath to them? and when he answers, that he comes upon summons, they enquire his name. For, say they, we know not whether you be the same man or not: but since you are come, if you have any thing to inform this Court of, either concerning your self or any other, you may let us hear it, for the discharge of your own conscience; The Parties safest way is constantly to deny that he hath any thing to declare to them. But if through simplicity he doth accuse himself, or any other they rejoyce, as having attained their desires, and so presently commit him to prison. If nothing be confessed, they dismisse him, pretending that for the present they know not whether he be the Party or no: after his depar∣ture they let him alone for some space, and then send for him again, ex∣horting him that if he know, or hath heard any thing that concerns their holy Court, to disclose it to them; For (say they) we know that you have had dealing with some persons suspected in Religion, and therefore remember your self well; if you confesse you shall fare the better,Subtilty. and you shall but do therein as a good Christian ought to do. If still he re∣fuse, they threaten, and so dismisse him. Yet they have alwayes one or other to keep him company, to creep into his bosome, and grope his conscience: who under the colour of friendship shall visit him daily, and have an eye to all his dealings, ob∣serve what company he keepeth, with whom he conferres, &c. So that without Gods special assistance, it is not possible to escape their snares; The Inquisitors also if they meet him, speak courteously to him, promise to befriend him, &c. and all to make him more carelesse of himself, that they may undo him before he be aware. But if the Party be a stranger, or one that is like to make an escape;Their dealing with strangers. or that they hope to gain any thing by his confession, they presently clap him up in prison: in which prison great numbers die, either starved with hunger, or by extremity of rack∣ing of them, &c. If any one that is accused chance to make an escape, they have many devices to finde and fetch him again. They have store of searchers, to whom besides the common signes, they give his lively picture, whereby they may easily know him:Their Famili∣ars. An Italian at Rome having wounded an Ap∣parator, fled to Sivil: the Familiars were sent to seek him, and when they had found him, though they had his counterfeit, yet by reason that he had altered his habit, they were doubtful whether it was he or no, the rather because he had changed his name, whereupon they followed him only upon suspicion: but one day as he was walking, and earnestly
talking with some Gentlemen, two of these Familiars suddenly called him by his old name: The Party earnest in talk, and not minding it, look∣ed behinde him, and made answer, whereupon they presently apprehen∣ded him, clapt him in irons for a long time, then whipt him, and condem∣ned him to the Gallies during his life. So soone as any is arrested by the Familiars, they take from him all the keyes of his locks or chests whatso∣ever, and then they take an Inventory of all his goods, leaving them with some man that will undertake to be accountable for them: but in the se∣questring and rifling the houses, if they have any gold, silver, or Jewels, these Familiars,Sequestration. which usually are bawds, theeves, shifters, and the vilest of people, will be sure to filch some of it; and the reason of this seque∣stration is, that if the Party be condemned, the holy Inquisition may en∣joy his whole estate. As soone as the Prisoner is entred within the first gate of the Prison, the Jailor asketh him if he have a knife about him, or money, or ring, or Jewels;Stript of all in prison. and if a woman, whether she hath knives, rings, chains, brace∣lets, or other ornaments, and all these the Jailor strips them of as his fee: And this is done that the poor prisoners may have nothing to relieve themselves with, during their imprisonment; They search them also to see whether they have any writing or book about them, which like∣wise they take from them: then they shut them up in a Cabin, like to a little-ease, where they have little room for cleanlinesse, and but little light. Some are thus kept all alone for two or three moneths, some as long as they live, others have company, as the Lords Inquisitors please. When the Party hath been in prison a week or two, the Jailor perswades him to petition for a day of hearing, telling him the sooner the better, and that it will much further his cause,Subtily. and bring it to some good effect, &c. whereas it were farre better for him to stay till he be called for; for then he hath nothing to do but to answer their objections: But the poor Priso∣ner, not knowing this mystery, is usually ruled by his Keeper, intreating him to stand his friend to procure him a day of hearing, whose suit is easi∣ly heard, and the Prisoner is brought into the Consistory. Then do the Inquisitors ask him, what is his request? the Prisoner answereth, that he would gladly have his matter heard;How Inquisi∣tors deal with the prisoners. then they labour by threatning him with worse usage if he conceal the truth, to cause him to confesse the thing whereof he is accused, and if they can but draw him to this, they have their desires; for usually they draw more from him than they could have proved against him: Then they advise him to let it come from him∣self, promising that if he acknowledge his faults, he shall presently be re∣leased, and sent home: If yet he stand mute, they then charge him to dis∣burthen his conscience, and in the mean time to return to his prison, till he hath better bethought himself, and then he may sue for a new day of hearing, and so they dismisse him. Then after some dayes they call for him again, asking him he be ye determined to confesse ought? but whether he plead his innocency, or confesse some little, they still urge him to disburthen his conscience, per∣swading
him that they advise him for the best, and in love and com∣passion to him; but if he now refuse the favour proffered, he shall finde them afterwards sharp Justices, &c. and so send him back again to prison. The third time he is called for, they use the like subtilty to draw him to confession, telling him that if he refuse, they must use extremity, and do what they can by law; by which word they mean extream tormenting and mangling of him; Then if the Party confesse any thing; Nay, say they, we are not yet satisfied, we have not all you can say, you keep back some∣thing on purpose, and so they remand him to prison. Having thus excruciated him day by day, if they can yet get nothing out of him, they then require an oath of him, and hold a Crucifix o Crosse before him, whereby the poor Christian must at last neeeds shew himself: for knowing that he ought to swear by God alone, who hath reserved his honour to himself, he must refuse the oath; which if he do, then they read a large enditement against him, wherein they lay to his charge things that never no man accused him of, and which it may be, him∣self never thought of; and this they do to amaze him, and so to try if he will confesse any of these misdemeanours, or if they can trip him in his an∣swers, and so catch him in their net. Then they put him to answer to eve∣ry article particularly ex tempore, without any time of deliberation: Then they give him pen, ink, and paper, requing him to set down his answer in writing, to see if they can find any difference betwixt his former an∣swer and this: and if the Partie chance to confesse ought, then thy en∣quire of whom he learned it, and whether he hath spoken of it before o∣thers, and who they are, and hereby many are brought into trouble; for whether they liked it or not, they are sure to be questioned, because they did not come and declare it to the fathers Inquisitors. Then pretending to shew him favour, they appoint him an Advocate to blind the peoples eyes, as if they proceeded according to the rules of Justice; but this Ad∣vocate dares not tell his Client any point of Law, that may do him good, for fear of angring the Inquisitors; neither may he speak privately with his Client, but either before an Inquisitor, or a Notary. Two or three dayes after the Party hath had the Copy of his accusati∣on, he is called into the Court, where his Advocate is, as if he intended to defend his cause; but indeed he dare say nothing to the purpose for fear of angring the Inquisitors; only he chears up his Client, and bids him tell the truth in any case, as the only way to prevail in that Court, and then is the Prisoner sent back again who hopes that now his cause will be heard, and his businesse dispatched, whereas usually these good fathers let him lie, two, three, or four years in prison, without ever calling for him again; and if through loathsomnesse and intolerablenesse of the prison any sue to come to hearing, it may be with much ado he obtains it, but usually that favour is denied him: yet at length when they please, they call for him to hear the depositions of the witnesses against him: which yet is not done till the poor Prisoner by his grievous imprisonment is brought so low, as that they think he will rather choose death than such a life, and
therefore will be willing to tell all, that so he may be rid out of his mise∣ry. Then between rebuking and a gentle admonition, they tell him, that though he hath stood out so long, yet at length they would have him wiser to confesse the truth; but if he yet refuse to be his own accuser, then the Fiscal produceth the depositions, which are delivered to the Prisoner, but they are drawn up so intricately and ambiguously, that he knows not what to make of them; and this they do to conceal the wit∣nesses, lest he should except against them, and to set him on guessing, that so if he chance to reckon up any others to whom he spake any thing a∣bout any of those matters, they may thereby get more grists to their mill. For they presently out-law such persons as favourers of hereticks, for suffering an heretick to sow such pestilent seeds amongst them, without complaining thereof to the Inquisitors. The Keeper of the Prison also is examined what he hath seen and ob∣served of him in the Prison, and his testimony is as good as two witnesses to take away the Prisoners life. They have also Promoters to bring in accusations, who are admit∣ted, though frantick Bedlams, or the veriest Varlets that be: and in their informations, if they chance to want words of weight, the Inquisitors will help them out, and prompt them word by word. Then after three or four dayes the Prisoner is called again to put in his answer to the de∣positions; but in the interim his Advocate never comes at him to assist or direct him, but he is left to himself without all help, save of God a∣lone. His answer being viewed, he is remanded to prison again with this Item, that if he confesse not the truth, they will extort it out of him by extremity. After two or three moneths more, he is called for once again, and re∣quired to speak what he hath for himself, or else they must draw to an end: and if he still shrinks not, but stands firme in his own Justification, they proceed to other dealings, in comparison of which all their former proceedings are not only sufferable, but seeme very reasonable and full of gentlenesse. For their future actions farre exceed all barbarousnesse, the Devil himself being not able to go beyond them in their monstrous ty∣ranny: For not long after the Prisoner is called in before the Inquisitors, who tell him that they have deeply considered his whole case, and found out that he doth not declare the whole truth, and therefore they are re∣solved that he shall be racked, that by force they may draw from him what by fair means he will not acknowledge: and therefore they advise him rather to do it voluntarily, and thereby to avoid▪ the paine and peril that yet attends him▪ yet whether he confesse or not confesse, all is one, for to the Rack he must go; Then is he led into the place where the Rack standeth,They proceed to the Rack. which is a deep and dark dungeon under ground, with many a door to passe through ere a man come to it, because the shreekes and cries of the tormented should not be heard: then the Inquisitors set themselves upon a scaffold hard by the Rack, and the torches being light∣ed, the Executioner comes in, all araied from top to toe in a sute of black canvas, his head is covered with a long black hood that covereth all his
face, having only two peep-holes for his eyes: which sight doth more af∣fright the poor soul, to see one in the likenesse of the Devil to be his tormentor. The Lords being set in their places, they begin again to exhort him to speak the truth freely and voluntarily: Then with sharp words they command him to be stripped stark naked, yea though the modestest maid, or chasest Matron in the City:Their privy parts ae only covered with linnen. whose grief in regard of the Rack is not half so great as to be seene naked in the presence of such manner of persons: For these wicked villains without any regard of honesty, will not by any Prayers of godly Ma∣trons, or chast Maidens forbear one jot of that barbarous impudence: as if a shirt or smock could hinder the violence of the Rack from sufficient∣ly tormenting them. The Party being thus stripped, the Inquisitors signifie to the Tormen∣tor▪ how they would have him or her ordered. The first kind of torment is the Jeobit, or Pully; but first one comes behind him, and binds his hands with a cord eight or ten times about, the Inquisitors calling upon him to strain each harder than other; they cause also his thumbs to be bound extream hard with a small line, and so both hands and thumbs are fastened to a Pully, which hangs on the Jeobit:The Jeobit. then they put great and heavy bolts on his heels, and hang upon those bolts, between his feet certain weights of iron, and so hoise him, or her up from the ground; and whilst the poor wretch▪ hangs in this plight, they begin to exhort him a∣gain to accuse himself, and as many others as he knows of; Then they command him to be hoised up higher to the very beam till his head touch the Pully. Having hung thus a good while,Inhumane cruelty. they command him to be let down, and twice so much weight to be fastened to his heels, and so hoised up again, and one inch higher if it may be: Then they com∣mand the hangman to let him up and down, that the weights of the iron hanging at his heels may rent every joynt in his body asunder. With which intolerable pains if the Party shreek or cry out, they roare out as loud to him to confesse the truth, or else he shall come down with a vengeance. Then they bid the hangman suddenly to slip the rope, that he may fall down with a sway, and in the mid-way to stop; then give him the Strappado, which being as soon done, it rends all his body out of joynt, armes, shoulders, back, legs, &c. by reason of the sudden jerk, and the weights hanging at his legs. If he yet remain con∣stant, they adde more weight to his heels the third time, and the poor wretch already half dead is hoisted up the third time, and to encrease his misery, they raile upon him, calling him Dog, and Heretick, telling him that he is like there to make his end.Railngs. And if the poore creature in his pangs call upon Christ, intreating that he would vouchsafe to aid and as∣sist him, thus miserably tormented for his sake;Scoffs. Then they fall to mock∣ing and deriding him, saying, Why callest thou on Jesus Christ? Let Je∣sus Christ alone and tell us the truth; what a crying out upon Christ ma∣kest thou? &c. But if the Party desire to be let down, promising to tell somewhat, that's the eady way to make him to be worse used, for now they think that he begins only to broach the matter: for when he hath
done they command him to be haled up again, and to be let down as be∣fore: so that usually these torments▪ are exercised upon him for three hours together. Then they ask the Jailor if his other torments are rea∣dy, to affright the poor soul; the Jailor answereth that they are ready, but he hath not brought them with him: Then the Inquisitors bid him to bring them against the morrow; for say they, we will try other ways to get the truth out of this fellow: and so turning to him that lies in mi∣serable pain, having all his joynts out; How now, Sirra, say they, how like you this gear? have you enough of it yet? Well, see that you call your wits to you against to morrow, or look to die then; for what you have yet felt is but a flea-biting in comparison of what is behind; and so they depart.Threats. Then the Jailor plays the bone-setter so well as he can, setting his joynts, and so carries him back to prison, or drags him by the armes or legs most pitifully; If they mean to rack him no more, after two or three dayes they send for him again, and cause him to be brought by the Rack, where the hangman stands in the likenesse of a Devil as be∣fore, the more to affright him. When he comes before the Inquisitors, they fall a perswading him to confesse the truth at last: and if he confesse any thing, he may chance to go to the Rack again, whereby they hope to extort more; and when indeed they intend to rack the Party again, then at three dayes end, when the ach in his joynts is most grievous and painful to him, they send for him, requiring him to declare all his here∣sies, and to peach all such as he hath had conference with, about them, and all such as he knows to be of that minde: or else he must prepare himself for the Rack; and if he continue constant, he is again stripped of his cloths, and hoisted up with weights at his heels as before, besides which,Another cruel tormen. as he hangs at the Pully, they bind his thighs together, and legs about the calf with a small strong cord, and with a short piece of wood they twist the cord till it be shrunk so deep in the flesh that its past sight, which is an extream and terrible torment, worse than any that he hath yet endured, and in this plight they let the poor soul lie two or three hours: the Inquisitors in the mean time not ceasing to exhort, perswade, threaten and scoffe at him. Yea sometimes they proceed to another kind of torture called the A∣selli, which is after this manner; There is a piece of timber somewhat hollowed on the top like a trough,The trough. about the middle whereof there is a sharp barre going a crosse, whereon a mans back resteth that it cannot go to the bottom: its also placed so that his heels shall lie higher than his head: then is the naked Party laid thereon: his armes, thighs and legs bound with strong small cords, and wrested with short truncheons, till the cords pierce almost to the very bone.Divellish cru∣elty. Then they take a thick fine lawn cloth, laying it over the Parties mouth as he lies upright on his back, so that it may stop his nostrils also; then taking a quantity of water, they pour it in a long stream like a threed, which falling from on high, drives the cloth down into his throat, which puts the poor wretch into as great an Agony as any endure in the pains of death, for in this torture he
hath not liberty to draw his breath, the water stopping his mouth, and the cloth his nostrils, so that when the cloth is drawn out of the bottome of his throat, it draws forth blood with it, and a man would think that it tore out his very bowels. This is iterated as oft as the Inquisitors please, and yet they threaten him with worse torments if he confesse not; and so he is returned to his prison again. Yet many times after he hath lain there a moneth or two, he is brought again to the rack and used as before, yea sometimes five or six times, even as oft as they please, for their lust is a law.Torment with fire. And yet they have another torment with fire, which is no whit inferiour to the former; They take a Pan of burning charcole, and set it just over against the soles of the Parties feet, just before he goes to the Rack, and that the fire may have the more force upon them, they bast them with lard or bacon. But if all the extremity of torments wil not force him to confesse what they de∣sire, nor to deny the truth, they use other means by subtil interrogatories,Subtilty. and frequent questionings to draw him into some snare or other: Yea, if yet they cannot prevaile, then some one of the Inquisitors comes to him in private, and shews himself much affected with his misery, weeps with him, comforts him, gives him advice, seems to impart such a secret to him as he would scarce impart to his father, or dearest friend alive: and this they use most with women, whereas they are but faire baits upon deadly hooks, whereby they seek to destroy them; whereof we have this example. At Sivil there were apprehended, a godly Matron, two of her daugh∣ters, and her Neece,A woman, and her tow daugh∣ters, and neece. who all of them underwent the forementioned torments with manly courage and Christian constancie, because they would not betray each other, nor other godly Persons in that City. Then one of the Inquisitors sent for the youngest maid oft to his cham∣ber, pretended much compassion towards her, spake much to comfort her, told her what a grief it was to him to see her torments; then used fa∣miliar and pleasant communication to her, then told her that he would advise her the best way to free her self,A Judas. mother and sister from these troubles: That he would undertake the ordering of their businesse; and then perswaded her to disclose the whole truth to him, and he bound himself with an oath that he would stop all further proceedings against them, and procure their dismission. Having thus outwitted the poor maid, who gave too much credit to him, she told him of some points of Religion which they had wont to confer of amongst themselves, and so when he had gotten out of her what possibly he could, like a perfidious Villain, contrary to his vows, promises, and oath,Perjury. he caused her to be racked again to get more out of her, yea they put her also to the intole∣rable pain of the trough, and through extremity of pangs and torments they at last extorted from her a betraying of her own Mother, Sisters, and divers others, which were immediately apprehended, tortured, and at last burnt with fire. But when they were brought in great pomp upon the Scaffold, and had the sentence of death passed upon them, this maid went to her Aunt, who had instructed her in the principles of Re∣ligion,
and boldly without change of countenance, gave her hearty thanks for that great benefit which she had received by her means▪ in∣treating her to pardon her for what she had offended her at any time, for that she was now to depart out of this life. Her Aunt comforted her stout∣ly, bid her be of good cheere, for that now ere long they should be with Christ. This woman was openly whipt, and kept in prison during her life; the rest were all presently burned. Another device that they have is this: when they think that Prisoners which are together do talk together of Religion, exhorting and comfort∣ing one another as they have occasion or opportunity, the Inquisitors com∣mit to prison under a colour,Flie. a crafty knave whom they call a Flie: who after two or three dayes will cunningly insinuate himself into the bosoms of the other Prisoners, and then pretending a great deal of zeal to Religion, he will proffer discourse to them, and by degrees get out of their mouths something whereof he may accuse them. Then doth he move for a day of hearing, and so getting to the Inquisitors, he peaches the Prisoners, who shall be sure afterwards to hear of it to their smart. Yea these Flies, as soone as they are out of one prison, for the hope of gain, will be content presently to be put into another, and then into a third, where they will lie in chains, as the other Prisoners do, enduring hunger, cold, stink, and the loathsomnesse of prison, and all to betray others. And this mans accusation is as strong and valid as the testimony of any other witnesse whatsoever. Other Flies also there be that serve the ho∣ly Inquisition abroad, slily insinuating themselves into the companies of the common people, who are suspected to be Lutherans, and when they can pump any thing out of them, they presently be∣tray them. They have yet this other device, when they can catch a∣ny man that is noted for Religion, or a Minister that hath instructed o∣thers, after he hath been in prison awhile, they give it out that upon the Rack he hath discovered all his disciples, and acquaintance, and they suborn others to averr that they heard it, and this they do to draw the simple people to come of their own accord, and to confesse their faults to the Inquisitors, and to crave pardon, whereupon they promise them favour. The Inquisitors and their Officers use to call their Prisoners Dogs and Hereticks:Their cruel prisons. and indeed they use them much worse than most men do their Dogs. For first, the place where usually each of them is laid, by reason of the straitnesse, ill air, and dampnesse of the earth, is liker a grave than a prison: and if it be a loft, in the hot weather, it is like a hot Oven or Fornace: and in each of these holes usually two or three are thronged together, so that they have no more room than to lie down in; in one corner is a stool of easement, and a pitcher of water to quench their thirsts. In these Cels they have no light, but what comes in at the Key-hole, or some small crany: other some there are much worse, not being long enough for a man to lie in, so that such as are put into them, never likely come out till they be half rotted away▪ or die of a consumption.
Their diet is answerable to their lodging: The rich pay large fees to the holy house, and every Prisoner is rated as the Inquisitors please: but such as are poor, the King allows them three pence a day, out of which the Steward, Landresse, and some other necessary charges are deducted, so that one half of it comes not to the Prisoners share; and if any be moved with compassion to relieve them, it is counted such an hainous offence, that it will cost him a scourging till blood come at least. It once happened that there was a Keeper appointed for their prison, in the Castle of Triana in Sivil, that was of a courteous disposition by na∣ture, who used the Prisoners well, and closely, for fear of the Inquisi∣tors, shewed them some favour: at which time there was a godly Ma∣tron and her two daughters committed to prison, which being put into several rooms, had a great desire to see each other for their mutual com∣fort in their distresses; whereupon they besought the Keeper to suffer them to come together, if it were but for one quarter of an hour: the Keepe yielded, and so they were together about half an hour, and then returned to their former prisons. Within a few dayes after, these women being racked in a terrible manner, the Keeper fearing lest they would con∣fesse that little favour which he had shewed them, of his own accord went to the Inquisitors, confessed his fact, and craved pardon; but they deemed this so hainous an offence, that they presently commanded him to be haled to prison, where by reason of the extremity shewed him, he fell mad. Yet this procured him no favour: for after he had been a whole year in a vile prison, they brought him upon their triumphing stage,All pity denied them. with a Sambenito upon him, and a rope about his neck, and there they censu∣red him to be whipt about the City, and to have two hundred stripes, and then to serve in the Gallies for six years. The next day one of his mad fits coming upon him, as he was set on an Asses back to be scour∣ged, he threw himself off, snatched a sword out of the officers hand, and had slain him, if the people had not immediately laid hold on him; whereupon he was bound faster on the Asses back, had his two hundred stripes, and was for this offence condemned four years longer to the Gallies. Another Keeper at another time had a maid, who seeing how mise∣rably the prisoners were used, pitying their distressed condition, who were hunger-starved, and almost pined, she would sometimes speak to them at the grate, exhort and comfort them as well as she could,A maid whipt for shewing them favour. and sometimes would help them to some good and wholsome food: yea, by her means the Prisoners came to understand one anothers condition, which was a great comfort to them. But this at last coming to the in∣quisitors ears, they enjoyned her to wear the Sambenito, to be whipped about the streets, to receive two hundred stripes, and to be banished the City for ten years, with this writing on her head, A favourer, and aider of Hereticks. And whereas all other sort of persons in prison and bon∣dage are allowed to recreate and refresh themselves with singing at their pleasure,The prisoners denied leave to sing Psalmes. these poor souls are forbidden this small solace in their great misery: for if any of them sing a Psalm, or openly recite any portion of
Scripture, the Inquisitors take it very hainously, and presently send to them, requiring them to be silent, upon the pain of Excommunication: and if the prisoner make light of this warning, he shall have a bit set on his tongue to teach him obedience: and this they do, both to deprive the poor souls of all kind of solace, and to keep other Prisoners from know∣ing how their friends do: So that it often falls out that a man and his friend, the Father and Sonne, yea the husband and wife shall be in one prison-house two or three years together, and not know of each others being there till they meet upon the scaffold upon the great day of tri∣umph. By reason of this cruel usage many of the Prisoners die, some, of their torments, others, of the stink of the prison, and others, of diseases contra∣cted by hunger, cold, ill diet, &c. They have also an Hospital, unto which they remove such as fall sick in their prisons,Their hospital where yet they are not dealt more gently with in any thing, save that they have Physick al∣lowed them for their healths sake: But none are suffered to come to them but the Physician, and the servants of the Hospital: And as soon as the Patient is on the mending hand, he is carried back to the place whence he came. If the Prisoner be half naked, or want something to lie on, and there∣upon pray the Inquisitor that his necessity may be considered▪ The answer which he receives is this, Well, now the weather is warm, you may live full well without either cloaths or couch; And if it be winter time, his answer is: True, it hath been a great frost of late, but now the cold is come down again, and it will be more seasonable weather. Care you for the garments wherewithal you should cloath your soul,Cruel mercy. which consisteth in uttering the truth, and dischar∣ging your consciene before this holy house: And if the Prisoner desire to have some good book, or the holy Bible to enable him to passe that troublesome and careful time to some profit; The Inquisitor answers him, that the true book is to speak the truth, and to discharge his consci∣ence to that holy Court, and that he ought to be occupied in laying open his wounds to their Lordships, who are ready to give him a plaister: whereby it appears that all their care and desire is, that the poor Prisoner may have nothing to look on or think on but his present miserable state, that the grief thereof grating upon him, may force him to satisfie their requests. The last act of the Tragedy remaineth, wherein both Parties are plea∣sed and have their desire;Their con∣demnation. the Inquisitors in obtaining their prey, the Prisoners in finding some end of their miserable usage; but two or three dayes before the solemnity, they use severally to call before them, all such whose estates are confiscated, examining them what lands or goods they have, where they lie, charging them upon great penalties not to conceal one jot, telling them, that if any thing be afterwards found, felony shall be laid to their charge, and he with whom it is found, shall pay foundly for it, and when all is confessed, they are returned to prison a∣gain. The night before the Festival, they cause all the Prisoners to be
brought into a large roome, where they are informed of the several kinds of pennances that they are to do the next day: The next morning very early, the Familiars come and attire the Prisoners in their several habits, in which they are to appear before the people:Their habits. Some in Sambe∣nito's, which is a long garment painted all over with ugly devils: on his head he hath an high-crown'd hat whereon a man is painted burning in the fire, with many devils about him, plying him with fire and fagots. Besides, their tongues have a cleft piece of wood put upon them, which nips, and pincheth them that they cannot speak; they have about their necks, cords, and their hands fast bound behind them. On this sort come these constant Martyrs disguised, first to the stage, and then to the stake; and in the like sort do all the rest come forth, arraied as the other, and set forth with the like notes of infamy, either more or lesse, as the Inqui∣sitors please to disgrace them in the sight of the people. On each hand of every Prisoner goeth a Familiar, all armed, to guard him: as also two Friars with every one that is to die, who perswade him tooth and nail to deny that doctrine that formerly he hath professed, now at their going out of this world; which wicked importunity is a great grief to the poor servants of Jesus Christ. The Inquisitors also passe in great pomp from the Castle of Triana to their scaffold: And when all are set in their places, a Sermon begins, framed on purpose in commendations of the holy house, and in confuta∣tion of such Heriticks as are presently to suffer: but the greatest part is spent in slanderous reproaches, wherewith they vilifie and disgrace the truth, and the Professors of it. The Sermon being ended, the sentences against the Prisoners are read; First, against such as have easiest punish∣ments, and so in order to the greater; Which sentences are commonly these, Death without mercy; Whipping in such extremity that the Persons seldome escape with their lives; Condemnation to the Gally; Forfeiture of all their estates, &c. Then doth the chief Inquisitor absolve all such as have forsaken Christ, and are come home to the Church of Rome, from all the errours for which they shewed themselves penitent; but though hereby they are absolved from the fault, yet not from the punishment; for notwithstan∣ding their Recantation, they must abide the punishment without mercy. And whereas multitudes of people resort to this spectacle, some co∣ming twenty Leagues to see it; The Inquisitors have this trick to up∣hold their Kingdome, They cause all the people present,A wicked oath to take an oath to live and die in the service of the Church of Rome, hazarding both life and goods against any that shall oppose it; as also to their power, to up∣hold and maintain the holy Inquisition, and to defend all the officers thereof, &c. Then if there be any amongst the Prisoners to be degraded, they pro∣ceed after this manner. First, they apparel him in his massing Robes▪ then they despoil him again of every part thereof; then are his hands,Degradation. lips, and the Crown of his head scraped with a piece of glasse, or a sharp
knife till they bleed again, to scrape off the holy oyle, wherewith he was anointed at his ordination. In the end of their sentence which is pronounced upon such as are to be burned, they use this abominable hypocrisie: They bequeath him to the secular power, with this humble request to them,Hypocrisie. to shew the Prisoner as much favour as may be, and neither to break any bone, nor pierce the skin of his body: This shews their great impudence, that having already given sentence on him to be burned, they yet should pretend such mercy and clemency towards him, whom all along themselves have used with such extream cruelty. They use also this trick further, that in reading the crimes for which he is condemned, they do not only misreport such things as he confessed upon his examination, but they devilishly father upon him such things as he never spake, or thought of in all his life: and this they do to disgrace him, and to make him and his opinions more abhorred of all men, and to encrease their own estimation and credit, as being ne∣cessary officers to rid the world of such pestilent persons; and all this while the Prisoners tongue hath a cleft piece of wood upon it to his in∣tolerable pain and grief, that he cannot answer for himself, nor gainsay that they charge him with. All these things being finished, the Magistrate takes them into his hand, and conveys them presently to the place of execution, with divers instruments of Satan about them, calling and crying to them to forsake the truth; and when they cannot prevail, after the Prisoner is tied to the stake, they break his neck in a trice, and then they report amongst the common people that they recanted their heresies at the last houre,Abominable lyes. and so came home to the Church of Rome, and therefore they felt no pain in the fire at all, which made them take it so patiently. Such as are not condemned to die, are carried back to prison, and the next day brought out to be whipt, after which some of them are sent to the Gallies, others kept in prison all their life time: but all have this special charge given them,Their cruelty concealed. that they never speak of any thing that they have heard, seen, or felt, during their imprisonment in the Inquisition; for if the contrary be ever proved against them, and that they utter any of their secrets, they shall be taken for persons relapsed, and be punished with greatest severity, their judgement being death without Redemption; and hereby they keep in all their Knavery and Tyranny close and se∣cret to themselves: And if any of them be released because their faults were but small, they are yet so careful lest their cruelty should come to light, that they inhibit them the company or conference with any other, than such as they shall appoint and allow them; neither will they suffer them to write to any friend, except they first have the perusing of their letters. Sometimes also, after they have imprisoned men in such a miserable state, for a year or two, and can extort nothing out of them by their tor∣ments, nor prove any thing against them by witnesse, so that they must necessarily dismisse them, they then call them into the Court, and begin to flatter them, and tell them what a good opinion they have of them, and
that they are resolved to send them home, for the which fatherly favour extended towards them in saving their lives & goods,Flattery. they are to account themselves much beholding to their Lordships, &c. And so at last they dismisse him with special charge of silence: and when he is gone, they have special Spies abroad to see how he takes the matter; and if they find that he complains of his punishments, or discloses their secrets, they pre∣sently commence a new suit against him. On a time the Inquisitors at Sivill apprehended a noble Lady; the cause was, for that a Sister of hers,A Lady impri¦soned. a very vertuous Virgin, who was afterwards burned for Religion, had confessed in the extremity of her torments, that she had sometimes had conference with this her sister about matters of Religion: This Lady when she was first apprehended, was gone with child about six months, in respect whereof they did not shut her up so close at first, nor deal so se∣verely with her as they did with others; But within foure dayes after she was brought to bed, they took the child from her; and the seventh day fter, they shut her up in close prison,Their crel u∣sage o her. and used her in all things as they did other Prisoners; the only worldly comfort that she had in her misery, was, that they lodged her with a vertuous maiden that was her fellow-Prisoner for a time, but afterwards burned at the stake: This maid whilst they were together, was carried to the rack, and so sore strained and torn thereon, that she was almost pulled in pieces, then was she brought back and thrown upon a bed of flags, that served them both to lie on; the good Lady was not able to help her, yet shewed singular tokens of love and compassion towards her. The maid was scarce recovered when the Lady was carried out to be served with the same sauce, and was so terribly tormented in the trough,They torment her in the trough. that by reason of the strait straining of the strings, piercing to the very bones of her armes, thighs and shins, she was brought back half dead to her prison, the blood gushing out of her mouth abundantly, which shewed that something was broken within her: but after eight dayes the Lord de∣livered her from these cruel Tygers by taking her mercifully to himself.She dyed. Upon one of their dayes of triumph there was brought out one John Pontio, of a noble Family, a zealous Professor of the truth,John Pontio. and one of an holy and blamelesse life, and well learned; he was eminent also in works of charity, in which he had spent a great part of his estate: Being apprehended for the Profession of the Gospel, he was cast into Prison, where he manfully maintained the truth in the midst of all their cruel dealings with him; At last they cast into prison to him one of their flyes, who by his subtilty and craft, so wrought upon him that he drew from him a promise to yield obedience to the Romish Church.Humane frail∣ty. But though God suffered him to fall a while to shew him his frailty, yet af∣terwards in much mercy he raised him up again with double strength to that which he had before, and before his execution he manfully de∣fended the truth against a subtil Friar. The things which he was con∣demned for, were these; That he should say,Recovery. that from his heart he ab∣horred the idolatry which was committed in worshipping the Host: That he removed his houshold from place to place, that he might shun
coming to the Masse: That the Justification of a Christian resteth only in the merits of Jesus Christ apprehended by faith, &c. That there was no Purgatory: That the Popes pardons were of no value, &c. And for my self,His speech at death. (saith he) I am not only willing but desirous to die, and ready to suffer any punishment for the truth which I have professed: I esteem not of this world nor the treasures of it more than for my necessary uses, and the rest to be∣stow in the propagation and maintenance of the Gospel: And I beseech God dai∣ly upon my knees for my wife and children, that they may all continue in this quarrel even to the death. And when he came to his execution, he pati∣ently and comfortably slept in the Lord. At the same time there was also brought forth one John Gonsalvo, for∣merly a Priest,John Gonsalvo. but by his diligent study of the Scripture it pleased God to reveal his truth to him, so that he became a zealous Preacher of it, labouring in all his Sermons to beat into mens minds the true way, and means of our Justification to consist in Christ alone, and in stedfast faith in him:Tormented in prison, for which he was apprehended and cast into prison, where he endured all their cruely with a Christian courage; At last with two of his Sisters he was condemned: His mother and one of his brothers were also imprisoned with him for the truth, and executed shortly after: When he with his sisters went out at the Castle gate, having his tongue at liberty, he began to sing the 106. Psalm before all the People, who had oft heard him make many godly Sermons: He also condemned all hypocrites as the worst sort of People:with a cleft stick. Whereupon they stocked his tongue: Upon the stage he never changed countenance, nor was at all daunted. When they all came to the stake, they had their tongues loosed, and were commanded to say their Creed, which they did chearfully: when they came to those words, The holy Catholick Church, They were commanded to adde, Of Rome, but that they all refused: whereupon their necks were broken in a trice: and then't was noised abroad that they had added those words, and died, confessing the Church of Rome to be the true Catholick Church. There was in Sivil a private Congregation of Gods people, most of which the Inquisitors consumed in the fire,A Church in Sivil. as they could discover any of them; amongst others that were apprehended, they took four women, famous above the rest for their holy and godly conversation, but especi∣ally the youngest of them, who was not above one and twenty years old, who by her diligent and frequent reading of the Scriptures, and by confe∣rence with godly and learned men, had attained to a very great measure of knowledge: so that whilst she was in Prison, she non-plus'd and put to shame many of those Friars that came to seduce her. Another of these women was a grave Matron, whose house was a School of vertue, and a place where the Saints used to meet, & serve God day and night; but the time being come wherein they were ripe for God, they, together with other of their neighbours, were apprehended and cast into prison,Some of them cast into prison where they were kept in dark dungeons, and forced to endure all the cruel and extream torments which are before mention∣ed: At last they were condemned, and brought forth to the scaffold a∣mongst
other Prisoners: The young maid especially came with a mer∣ry and cheerful countenance, as it were triumphing over the Inquisitors, and having her tongue at liberty, she began to sing Psalms to God, whereupon the Inquisitors caused her tongue to be nipped by setting a Barnacle upon it: After sentence read,A cleft stick. they were carried to the place of execution, where with much constancy and courage they ended their lives: Yet the Inquisitors not satisfied herewith,Their death▪ caused the house of the Matron where the Church used to meet, to be pulled down, and the ground to be laid waste,Malice. and a pillar to be erected upon it with an inscri∣ption shewing the cause. There was also apprehended another worthy member of the same Congregation called Ferdinando;Ferdinando. he was of a fer∣vent spirit, and very zealous in doing good: A young man, but for in∣tegrity of life very famous: He had spent eight years in educating of youth, and had endeavoured to sow the seeds of Piety in the hearts of his Scholars, as much as lay in him to do in a time of so great persecuti∣on and tyranny; being at the last apprehended for a Lutheran, he was cast into prison, and terribly tormented upon the Jeobit, and in the Trough,His torments. whereby he was so shaken in every joynt, that when he was taken down, he was not able to move any part of his body; yet did those cruel tor∣mentors draw him by the heels into his prison, as if he had been a dead dog: But notwithstanding all his torments,A special Pro∣vidence. he answered the Inquisitors very stoutly, and would not yield to them one jot. During his impri∣sonment God used him as an instrument to recal and confirme a Monk, who had been cast into prison for confessing the Gospel openly: But by means of the Inquisitors flatteries and fair promises he had somewhat relented: Gods Providence so ordering it,Humane infir∣mity. that Ferdinando was cast in∣to the same prison, and finding the Monk wavering, he rebuked him sharply; and afterwards having drawn him to a sight of, and sorrow for his sinne, he at last strengthned him in the promises of free grace and mercy; Hereupon the Monk desired a day of hearing, where, before the Inquisitors, he solemnly renounced his recantation,Recovery. desiring that his for∣mer confession might stand, whereupon the sentence of death passed a∣gainst them both: after which the Inquisitors asked Ferdinando whe∣ther he would revoke his former heresies; to which he answered, That he had professed nothing but what was agreeable to the pure and perfect Word of God, and ought to be the profession of every Christian man, and therefore he would stick to it to the death:Execution. Then did they clap a Barnacle up∣on his tongue, and so they were burned together. There was also one Juliano, called, The little, because he was of a small and weak body, who going into Germany, was there conversant with di∣vers learned and godly men,Juliano. by which means he attained to the know∣ledge of the truth, and became a zealous Professor of it, and earnestly long∣ing after the salvation of his Countreymen,Zeale. he undertook a very dange∣rous work, which was to convey two great dry Fats full of Bibles printed in Spanish, into his own Countrey: In this attempt he had much cause of fear, the Inquisitors had so stopped every Port,A special Pro∣vidence. and kept such strict watch, to prevent the coming in of all such commodities; but
through Gods mighty protection, he brought his burden safely thither, and, which was almost miraculous, he conveyed them safe into Sivil, notwithstanding the busie searchers and catch-poles that watched in e∣very corner. These Bibles being dispersed, were most joyfully and thankfully received, and through Gods blessing wrought wonderfully amongst Gods people to ripen them against the time of harvest. But at last the matter broke out by the means of a false brother, who going to the Inquisitors played the Judas,A false brother. and betrayed the whole Church to them. So that there were taken at Sivil at one time, eight hundred Chri∣stians,Twenty burnt. whereof twenty of them were afterwards roasted at one fire. Amongst these, this Juliano was one of the first that was apprehend∣ed and sent to prison, where he lay without any company laden with irons above three years; yet was his constancy so great and wonderful, that the tormentors themselves were sooner wearied in inflicting,Juliano's tor∣ments and constancy. than he in suffering torments; and notwithstanding his weak and wearyish body, yet he remained undaunted in mind in undergoing all their tyran∣nies, so that he never departed from the rack more dejected than he came to it; neither threatnings, nor pains, nor torments made him shrink or yield one jot to them: but when he was drawn back to his prison, he would tell his fellows how he had conquered and confounded his ene∣mies, saying, They depart vanquished, they depart vanquished; The wolves flie with shame, they flie with shame. In the day of their triumph, when he was brought out to be apparel∣led (with his other fellow Prisoners) in all their shameful habits, he ex∣horted them with a cheerful countenance, saying: My Brethren, be of good cheere, this is the houre wherein we must be faithful witnesses unto God and his truth before men, as becomes the true servants and souldiers of Christ, and ere long we shall have him to witnesse with us again: and within a few houres we shall triumph with him in heaven for ever; But hereupon they presently clap't a Barnacle upon his tongue that he should speak no more, and so he was led to his execution;His death. but though he could not speak, yet by his countenance and gestures he shewed his cheerful and quiet minde: Then kneeling down, he kissed the step whereon he stood, and being tyed to the stake, he endeavoured by his looks and gestures to encourage his fellow Martyrs in their sufferings, and so they quietly and patiently re∣signed up their spirits unto God. There was also John Leon, a Tailor by Trade, who out of a blinde de∣votion to serve God,John Leon. resolved to enter into a Monastery, but by Gods Providence it so fell out that he entred into a Cloister at Sivil, wherein most of the Monks were well affected to the true Religion, amongst whom in two or three years space, he was so grounded in the principles of Religion, that he resolved to leave that kinde of life, which according∣ly he did, and went into the Countrey, yet after a time he had a great mind to conferre with his former Schoolmasters: but when he came back to the Cloister, he found that they were all fled ino Germany; hereupon he resolved to follow them, and through many dangers and perils, it
pleased God at last after a long and tedious journey, to bring him safe to Franckfurt, where he met with some of his old acquaintance, and with them he travelled to Geneva: About which time Queen Mary suddenly dying, and Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory succeeding her, the English Exiles that lived in those parts were called home: whereupon divers Spaniards that sojourned at Geneva, thinking England a fitter place for their Congregation, resolved to accompany the English men▪ and for this end they dispersed themselves into several companies that they might travel with the more safety: The Inquisitors took the departure of these Monks so ill, that not sparing any cost,Leon goeth to∣wads England. they sent their Flies a∣broad to apprehend them, who way-laid them, especially at Collen, Franckfurt, Antwerp, and in all the ways that led from Geneva. This John Leon had got him a companion, with whom he travelled towards Eng∣land, who being discovered at Argentine, were dogged into Zealand, and as they were ready to take ship, they were apprehended. John Leon took his arrest very composedly, never changing countenance at it: They were presently carried back into the Town,Is apprehen∣ded. where they were miserably acked to discover their fellows, and not long after were shipped for Spain, having great irons, wrought like a net, that covered both head and face, within which also was another piece of iron made like a tongue, which being thrust into their mouths took away their speech;Sent to Spaine. they were also loaden with other engins and fetters of iron, wherewith they were bound hand and foot, and in these continual pains and torments they lay a ship∣board till they came into Spain, and then John Leon was sent to Sivil, and his companion to Validolid, where afterwards in defence of the truth he suffered Martyrdome: But John remained long in prison, where he tasted of the Inquisitors tyranny, suffering both hunger and cold, and en∣during all their torments one after another,Tormented. and at last was brought out in their solemn shew, arrayed after their usual manner; It was a sad sight to see such a ghost as he was, his hair so grown, his body so lean, that he had nothing but skin and bones left on him, and his pain much en∣creased by having a Barnacle upon his tongue: After sentence of death pronounced upon him, they set his tongue at liberty hoping that he would have recanted, but he made a stout and godly Confession of his faith, and so quietly ended his life in the flames. There was also burned at the same time a godly Virgin, that had formerly been a Nun, but be∣ing, through Gods grace, converted, she left her Cloister,Martyred. and joyned her self to the Church of Christ:A mads suffer∣ings, and mar∣tyrdom▪ Being apprehended by the Inquisitors she was intreated as others had been before her: and at last was brought out to the Scaffold, where with a manly courage she put the Inquisitors to a foul foil, not only constantly affirming the truth, but sharply rebu∣king those fathers, calling them dumb dogs, a generation of vipers, &c. being brought to the stake, with a cheerful countenance she underwent the pains of death, and so quietly slept in the Lord. There was also one Christopher Losada, a Physician, a learned man and very well studied in the Scriptures,Christopher Lo∣sada. as also of a very holy conversa∣tion, insomuch as he was chosen Super-intendent of the Church of Christ
in Sivil, which at this time was very great, though dispersed into cor∣ners: At last he was apprehended by the Inquisitors, before whom he made a good Confession of his faith, for which he endured had and sharp imprisonment, with most cruel torments, and the open infamy of their solemn shew, and lastly was adjudged to the fire: As he stood at the stake, the Barnacle being taken from his tongue, he disputed notably with some Monks that came to seduce him; and when they spake Latin that the common People might not understand them, Losada also began to speak in Latin so copiously and eloquently,His constancy. as was strange to hear that he should have his wits so fresh when he was ready to be burned: af∣ter which he patiently resigned up his spirit unto God in the fire.Death. Arias.There was also in Sivil one Arias, a man of a sharp wit and well-stu∣died in Divinity, but withal of a crafty wit and inconstant nature; which vices he yet covered with a cloke of Religion, whereby he de∣ceived many: About this time there were also in that City two sorts of Preachers, and both had a great number of Auditors: The one taught School-Divinity, and were continually calling upon their hearers to of∣ten fastings, mortification, self-denial, frequency of Prayer, humility, &c. But themselves practised nothing lesse than these things: and in∣deed all their Religion consisted in works and bodily exercises, as run∣ning to Masses, hallowed places, shrift, &c. The other sort dealt more sincerely with the holy Scriptures: out of which they declared what was true righteousnesse, and perfect holinesse: by means whereof that City above all others in Spain, bore the name for just and true dealing; and it pleased God that the brightnesse of this light did discover all the counterfeit holinesse, and Pharasaical devotion of the other party; The chief Labourers in this harvest were Constantino, Aegidius, and Varquius, all Doctors, and sober, wise, and learned men; who by this kind of preach∣ing procured to themselves many enemies; but above all others, Arias was the most spiteful and malicious;He turns perse∣cutor. yet he carried it so cunningly, that he still kept up his reputation with these men; but it was not long before he discovered himself: and that upon this occasion; There was one Ruzi∣us, a learned man, questioned before the Inquisitors, for something that he had delivered in a Sermon about the Controversies in Religion; The Inquisitors appointed him a day of hearing; and two or three days before, Arias met him, saluted him courteously, and discoursed familiar∣ly with him; then did he pump out of him, all those Arguments where∣with he intended to defend himself before the Inquisitors: When the day came, and Ruzius appeared, Arias went on that side where his op∣ponents were, which much amated Ruzius, and in the disputation, Arias be∣ing prepared, did so wittily enervate all his Arguments, that Ruzius had nothing to say for himself, and so was fain to yield the cause, and Arias went away with the honour of the field, though he got it by treachery. Yet did this Arias, being of Saint Isidores Monastery, preach so practical∣ly, that a great light began to dawn in that dark place; for the whole scope of his Sermons was to overthrow all their Profession; he taught
them that singing and saying of their Prayers day and night was no ser∣vice of God, that the holy Scriptures were to be read and studied with diligence, whence alone the true service of God could be drawn, and which alone teach us the true obedience to his Will, to the obtaining whereof we must use Prayer as a means, proceeding as well from a sense and feeling of our own infirmities, as grounded upon a perfect trust and confidence in God. By laying these foundations, through Gods blessing, he began to make them out of love with their Monkish Superstition, and much provoked them to the study of the holy Scriptures. Besides also his Sermons, he read daily a lecture upon Solomons Proverbs very learnedly, and made ap∣plication thereof with good judgement and discretion; also in his pri∣vate conference he did much good. The Lord also so ordered it in his wisdome, that he met with Schollers that were very tractable, such as were not greatly wedded to their Superstitions. And such was the force and might of Gods Election, that these few good seeds so fructi∣fied, that in the end they brought forth a great encrease of godli∣nesse. For divers of the Monks, that hereby had their consciences awakened and cleared to see their former hypocrisie and idolatry, sought out for further instructions, and, through Gods mercy, they light upon those Preachers which taught the truth with more sin∣cerity:A special Pro∣vidence. of whom they learned the Principles of pure and perfect Re∣ligion, so that by degrees they left that evil opinion which they had formerly conceived against the Lutherans, and were desirous to read their books: And God miraculously provided for them, that they had all sorts of books brought them that were extant at that time, either in Geneva or Germany: whereby it came to passe that there were very few in all that cloister but they had some taste of true Religion and Godlinesse, so that instead of mumbling their mattens, they brought in Divinity-lectures, &c. Vain fasting was turned into Christian sobrie∣ty, neither were any taught to be Monkish, but to be sincerely and tru∣ly religious. But considering that when this should be once known they could not live in any safety, they resolved amongst themselves to forsake their nest, and to flie into Germany, where they might enjoy more safety of their lives, and freedome of their consciences; But how to get thither was all the difficulty; If one or two should go first, the rest would be exposed to danger: if many should go together, a thousand to one but they would be taken again, being to travel from the furthest part of Spaine into Germany: yet upon debate they concluded, that they must all ei∣ther speedily depart, or shortly be apprehended by the Inquisitors, who now had got some inkling of the matter; And God seeing them in this distresse, shewed them a means how, under an honest pretence, a dozen of them might depart together within a month, and each betake him∣self a several way towards Geneva, where they appointed, by Gods assi∣stance, all to meet within a twelve month; The rest which were but young novices were left behind, who yet not long after were so
strengthned by God, that they endured the brunt of persecution when it came, three of them being burned, and divers others diversly punished. The aforementioned servants of Jesus Christ forsook that place where they lived in honour, ease and plenty, and by undertaking, for Christs sake, a voluntary exile, exposed themselves to shame, ignominy, wants, yea and were in continual danger of their lives also: And under God, Arias was a great means of this, who, by his ministry, had first in∣lightned them with the knowledge of the truth: for which he was often complained of to the Inquisitors, and was convented before them, where he so cunningly answered the matter, that he was still dischar∣ged; But his last apprehension, through the mercy of God, brought forth in him the fruits of true repentance; for he did so deeply and unfainedly bewail, and repent of his former with-holding of the truth in unrighteousnesse,Arias his Recovery. that whereas he used to be exceeding fearful of the Rack, he being brought to it and upon it, with a marvellous con∣stancy withstood the enemies of Gods truth, and took up the Inquisi∣tors roundly:His courage. withal telling them that he was heartily sorry, and did most earnestly repent him, for that he had wittingly and willingly in their presence impugned the truth against the godly defenders of the same: Many other sharp rebukes he gave to the Inquisitors so often as he came to his answer: But at last he was brought forth arraied in their accustomed manner upon their day of triumph, at which time he also made a notable Profession of his faith, and so was led from the stage to the stake with a merry and chearful countenance, where, by the notable example of his repentance at his death, he made sa∣tisfaction to the Church of Christ for all his former unfaithful and hypo∣critical dealing with them,His Martyr∣dome. and so quietly slept in the Lord. The Life of Doctor Aegidio. DR. Aegidio, who is before mentioned, was brought up in the U∣niversity of Alcala,Scriptures con∣temned. where he took all his degrees, and was a hard Student in School-divinity: but the study of the holy Scriptures was there so neglected and contemned, that if any one read it, he was in contempt and scorn called a good Bibler;Grosse igno∣rance. Afterwards being publick Reader of Divinity in that University, he grew famous all over Christen∣dome, and was sent for to Sivil to be Divinity-Reader in the Cathedral Church, where he was so highly esteemed, that soon after he was chosen Sub-Deane, yet did he not attempt to preach openly, nor had once so much as opened the Bible to read and study the Scriptures: And therefore the first time that he came into the Pulpit, contrary to all mens expectations, he was found so unfit for such a function, that he grew out of conceit with himself, and was contemned by o∣thers, insomuch as they fell to repent themselves, the one for ad∣mitting him so unadvisedly, the other for taking upon him that office
so arrogantly: But having passed over some time, it so fell out that he met with a plain man, which gave him such instructions, that after a few hours conference he learned by him what the office and duty of a Preach∣er was, and by what means he might attain thereto; and, through Gods blessing, his advice was so effectual, that now Dr. Aegidio was quite al∣tered and become a new man, thinking all his former life and labour ill spent, and therefore he resolved to steer another course; He also fell in∣to acquaintance with Doctor Constantino, a man excellently well learned, by whose conference and advice he profited marvellously in his studies, fell to the reading of good Authors, and grew to profound knowledge in the holy Scriptures: so that after a time, he began to preach as learnedly, godly, and zealously, as he had before done coldly, foolishly, and unskilfully: Then did his hearers finde the marvellous force of that doctrine, which was taught them by these three worthy men, Aegidio, Constantino, and Varquia,Ministers ho¦noured. so that the more they crept out of their former ignorance and grew in knowledge, the more they esteemed and honoured them. Hereupon there were daily complaints made against them to the In∣quisitors, especially against Doctor Aegidio, who did more openly than the rest inveigh against the adversaries of the truth. But it so fell out by Gods Providence, that just at the same time the Emperour Charles the fifth, in respect of his singular learning and integrity of life, elected him to the Bishoprick of Dortois:Aegidio chosen Bishop. Then did those hypocritical Inquisi∣tors bestir themselves on all hands, citing him to come before them, where articles were exhibited against him, and thereupon they cast him into prison, and examined him. But the Emperour,He is persecu∣ted. Imprisoned. who had elected him to the Bishoprick, and the whole Chapter of the Cathedral Church in Sivil, became very earnest Sutors to the Inquisitors in his behalf. It fell out also that just at the same time, whilst Aegidio was in prison, three of his greatest adversaries amongst the Inquisitors, and the prime enemies against the truth, sickned, and died shortly one after another,Gods judge∣ment on Per∣secutors. whereby he was released, and lived foure or five years after; at the end whereof he was sent upon an Embassie, in which journey he visited the brethren that professed the truth in Validolid,Released. and much comforted and confirmed them; but in his return home, his aged body being sore sha∣ken in that long journey, having not been used to travel of a long while before, he sickned, and within a few days departed out of this trouble∣some life to everlasting rest. But within three years after, the new Inquisitors thinking that the for∣mer had dealt too gently with him, digged him out of his grave, and buried in his place a puppet of straw; then they brought his corps upon the Scaffold, and used it in the same sort as they would have used him∣self if he had been alive.
The life of Doctor Constantino. Doctor Constantino of whom mention hath been made before, was a most famous Divine, and endued by God with such rare abilities as the like were hardly found in that age; he was a man of a very pleasant wit, and wondrous facetious, which he especially used against the hy∣pocritical Monks and Friars; and though he lived in a barbarous age, wherein all good learning was almost lost, yet by his wit and industry he attained to a great deal of skill both in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and was also an excellent Oratour: and studied the Scriptures so hard, that he grew very exquisite therein; He was also so eloquent in his own language, that all his Auditors were brought into a great admiration of him;His excellent vertues. He was very discreet in all his do∣ings: which parts he attained to, both by his study and long practice and experience, but especially by profound knowledge in the holy Scriptures. Whensoever he preached, there was so great a resort to his Ser∣mons, that three or foure houres before he began, there was scarce a place in the Church to be gotten. He was farre from covetousnesse and ambition, insomuch as having a good Canonship in the Church of Toledo proffered him, he refused it, together with divers other Preferments. In his Ministry in Sivil he did so plainly set forth, and so sharply rebuke those hucksters that sold indulgences, pardons, &c. That they were much incensed against him, fearing that he would prove a plague to the whole generation of them, so that they hated him dead∣ly, yet could finde nothing whereof to accuse him, but what would re∣dound to their own shame. But for all this he neglected not to preach the truth faithfully, though he knew that they lay at catch, waiting for an opportunity to ensnare him;Zeale. And it was the singular Providence of God that that City should enjoy such preaching, when there were so many pow∣erful and malicious enemies to oppose it. For at this time Var∣quio read upon the Gospel according to Matthew, and upon the Psalmes: Aegidio preached daily; and Constantine, though not so often, yet to as great fruit and edification, thus continuing till God sent storms to try each mans faith; In the midst of which tempest Varquio dyed, and Constantine was sent for by the Emperour to be his houshold Chaplain: only Aegidio was left alone, like a Lamb amongst wolves, to be the object of their fury,He goes to the Emperour. of whose end we have heard before; af∣ter whose death Constantine left the Emperours Court, and returned to Sivil, where he preached the Gospel with as much zeale as e∣ver he did before:His return to Sivil. Then was he chosen to preach every other day in the Cathedral, which he refused, because of a great fit of sick∣nesse which had made him very weak, but he was forced to un∣dertake it, though he was so weak a creature, that sometimes he was fain to be carried to Church,His weaknesse. and by reason of his faintnesse was
necessitated once or twice in a Sermon to drink a draught of wine to refresh himself. About this time there was one Scobario, a man fa∣mous for life and learning, chosen by the Magistrates of the City to the Government of the Colledge of Children, who out of his zeal to promote the Gospel converted his Stipend, to the erecting of a Divinity-lecture in the Cathedral Church; and Constantine,Chosen Divi∣nity-Lecturer. having recovered his health, was chosen to read it; who performed it excellently well, beginning with the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Canticles; which having passed through very learnedly, he began upon the book of Job, and proceeded to expound more than half of it. But some evil spirit envying the Progresse of the Gospel in that City, under a pretence of fervent zeal, caused him to forsake this course, and encombred him so many ways, that he was never clear of those trou∣bles to his dying day. For not long after he was brought before the Inquisitors, and had ma∣ny things laid to his charge; yet by his quick and ready answers he easily avoided them, and they could not by any means bring him to make an o∣pen Protestation of his faith, by which all their hope was to circumvent him; and so he might have escaped, had not God, by a special Providence, compelled him as it were briefly and plainly to confesse his faith; The oc∣casion was this. There was one Isabel Martin apprehended, in whose house Constantine had hid some special books for fear of the Inquisitors: This womans goods being sequestred, her son conveyed divers chests of her best goods away to another place. This coming to the Inquisitors ears by means of an unfaithful servant,A strange Providence. they sent their Officer immediately to demand those Chests: The womans sonne supposing that the Officer came for Constantines books, said unto him, I know what you come for, and therefore if you will promise me upon your honest word to de∣part quietly, I will bring you to them: the Officer supposing that he meant the Chests, promised him so to do: Then did he carry him into a secret place, and plucking forth a stone or two in the wall, shewed him Constantines Jewels; of paper indeed; but farre more precious than gold or pearle; the Officer astonished to finde that which he looked not for, told him that he came for no such thing, but for certain Chests of his mothers goods, which he had purloined from the Se∣questrators; and that notwithstanding his promise, he must carry both him and his books to the Inquisitors: Thus came Constantines wri∣tings into the Inquisitors hands, out of which they quickly found matter enough against him. Then did they send for him before them, and demanded if he knew his own hand; he shifted it off at the first, but afterwards perceiving that it was the Will of God that he should bear witnesse to the truth, he confessed it to be his own writing, protesting openly that all things therein contained were full of truth and sincerity; Therefore, said he, trouble your selves no further in seeking Witnesses against me, seeing you have so plain and apert a Confession of my judgment and faith,Courage. but deal with
me as you shall please; Then was he cast into prison, and kept there two whole years,Imprisoned. where partly by occasion of his corrupt dyet, but chiefly of grief to see such havock made of the poor Church of Christ, which himself and his brethren had with so great pains and care planted and watered, he began first to be crazy, and then not being able to endure the extream heat of the Sunne, which made his prison like an hot house, he was forced to strip himself to his very shirt, wherein he lay day and night, by occasion whereof he fell into the bloody flux,His death. and within fifteen days died in the stinking prison, rendring up his soul to Christ, for promoting of whose glory he had oft times manfully adventured it. He never indeed felt those cruel torments which the Inquisitors used to inflict upon others, but it was not because they regarded such a man of eminency as he was, but because they intended to delay his punish∣ment by keeping him long in prison, not expecting that he should so suddenly have been taken out of their hands. Yet did these Imps of Satan spread abroad a report, that before his death upon the Rack he had confessed to them who were his disciples; and this they did to make men come in and accuse themselves, upon hope to finde the more favour with the Inquisitors; They reported also that he ope∣ned one of his veins with a broken glasse whereof he died, that so he might avoid the shame and punishment of his heresies. And against the day of their solemn triumph, his corps was taken out of his grave, and set in a Pulpit, with one hand resting on the Desk, and holding up the other, just as he used to do when he preached: Then they passed sentence upon him,His Corps burned. and so afterwards caused him to be burned. Thus we have seen in some few examples the rage of these bloody Inquisitors against the poor Saints and Servants of Jesus Christ, whereof a great number were cruelly murthered in a few years space in that one City of Sivil, whereby we may partly guesse how great numbers have suffered in all other places, since the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ brake forth, untill this day under their cruel and bloody tyranny. Collected out of a book called, The Discovery of the Spanish Inqui∣sition, &c. First written in Latin by Reynold Gonsalvius Monta∣nus, and afterwards translated into English. The Persecution of Nicholas Burton Englishman▪ by the Inquisitors in Spain, Anno 1560. THis Burton was a Citizen of London, who being about his mer∣chandise at Cadiz in Spain,Nicholas Bur∣ton. there came to his lodging one of the Familiars, desiring to take lading to London in the ship which Burton had fraited; and this he did, that he might learn where his
goods were; Presently after came a Serjeant who apprehended Burton, and carried him away to the Inquisitors, who, though they could charge him with nothing spoken or written against them since he came to Spain, yet they sent him to the filthy common prison, where he remained in irons fourteen dayes amongst Thieves: In which time he so instructed the poor Prisoners in the Word of God, that in short space he had well reclaimed many of those ignorant and superstitious souls: which being known to the Inquisitors,God Provi∣dence. they presently removed him, laden with irons, from thence to Sivil, and put him into the more cruel prison in the Castle of Triana,He is sent to Sivil. where the Inqui∣sitors proceeded against him after their accustomed cruel manner, by racking, &c. Neither could he get leave to write to, or speak with any of his Countreymen: Afterwards they brought him forth with ma∣ny other godly persons upon their publick day of triumph, in his Sam∣bito painted all over with ugly devils tormenting a soul in flames of fire, and with a Barnacle upon his tongue, where he received sentence of death,Condemned. and so with the rest was carried to the place of execution to be burnt; and he endured the flames with so much patience and cheerfulnesse of countenance, that his Popish adversaries said, that the Devil had his soul before he came to the fire, whereby his sense of feel∣ing was taken away: They also sequestred all his goods, which could never be recovered out of their hands, though great means were used for the same. This was in Queen Maries days. There was burned with him at the same time another Englishman: and not long after two more, called John Baker and William Burgate:John Baker. Will. Burgate. Will. Burges. Will. Hooker. And about the same time William Burges, Master of an English ship was burned there also: and William Hooker, a youth of about sixteen, was there stoned to death for the bold profession of his faith.
Here place the seventh Figure.
CHAP. XXVIII. The Persecution of the Church of Christ in Italy, which began, Anno Christi, 1155. ANno Christi, 1155. Adrian the fourth, an English man, being Pope, there was one Arnald of Brixia, who coming to Rome, prea∣ched boldly against the corruptions which were crept into the Church, and found great favour amongst the Senators, and people, insomuch as when the Pope commanded this Arnald to be driven away as an Heretick, they resisted his command, and defended Arnald, till at last the Pope interdicting the whole City, at the importunity of the Cler∣gy, the Senators and Citizens were forced to send him away: and shortly after he was apprehended by the Popes Legat, Cardinal of St. Nicholas, out of whose hands he was rescued by the Vicounts of Campa∣ny, with whom he remained, and to whom he preached the Gospel of Christ, and was had in such esteem that he was accounted a Pro∣phet. Shortly after, Frederick Barbarossa the Emperour, coming unto Italy to be crowned, the Pope sent some Cardinals to him, requesting that he would deliver Arnald of Brixia into their hands, whom the Vi∣counts of Campania had taken from his Legat at Otriculi, whom they held for a Prophet in their Countrey, and greatly honoured him. The Emperour receiving these commands from the Pope, presently sent forth his Apparitors, and took one of the Vicounts prisoner, where∣with the other were so terrified, that they delivered up Arnald to the Cardinals; and this the Emperour did to gratifie the Pope that was to set the Imperial Crown upon his head. Not long after the Pope being in his Ruff, marching with a brave Army into Apulia, commanded his Prefect at Rome to do execution upon Arnald, who accordingly most cruelly, first hanged, and then burned him for an Arch-heretick at the appointment of the Pope. This Arnald was born in Italy, and was trained up under Peter Abai∣lardus in France: His heresies were, that he preached against the Pride and Covetousnesse of the Clergy and Monks: That he in∣veighed against the corruptions which were crept into the Sacraments, &c. He first Preached in Brixia, and expounded to the people the sa∣cred Scriptures, who earnestly embraced his doctrine; whereupon the Bishops and Monks of that City complained of him to the Council that was held at Rome by Pope Innocent, who (to prevent the spreading of his Doctrine) injoyned him silence, and banished him Italy. Then did he go beyond the Alps into a Town of Germany called Turengum, where, for a time he preached the truth, and did much good, till he
heard of the death of Pope Innocent his old Adversary: at which time he returned into Italy, and went to Rome, where what his successe was we heard before: after his body was burnt, they gathered up his ashes, and threw them into the River Tybur. Otho Frising. Encenas.Anno Christi, 1546. There was one Encenas, or Driander, a Spa∣niard, born in Bruges, who in his youth was sent by his superstitious Pa∣rents to be educated in Rome, where in process of time, through God mer∣cy, he came to the knowledge of the truth, and thereupon manifesting his dislikes of the impure doctrine of the Church of Rome, he was betrayed by some of his own Countrymen and houshold friends,Treachery. and by them carried before the Cardinals, who committed him to strait prison: and after∣wards, being called forth to declare his judgement in matters of Religi∣on,Courage. he gave a notable testimony to the truth before the Cardinals and the Popes whole retinue, whereupon they cried out upon him that he should be burned; yet the Cardinals proffered him life, if he would wear the Sambito: but he constantly refused to wear any other badge, save the badge of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was, to seal his Professi∣on with his blood: Hereupon he was condemned to the fire, and suf∣fered Martyrdome with great patience and constancy.Constancy. Francis Ence∣nas. His brother Fran∣cis Encenas, a very learned and godly man as any was in Spain, being in the Emperours Court at Bruxels, offered to Charles the fifth the New Testament translated into Spanish, for which he was cast into prison,  remained in great misery for the space of fifteen months, looking for nothing but present death: but at last, through the marvel∣lous Providence of God, at eight a clock at night he found the pri∣son doors standing wide open, and a secret motion in his minde to make an escape,A special Pro∣vidence. whereupon going out of prison with a leasurely pace, he went without interruption, and so from thence went strait into Germany. Faninus.Anno 1550. There was at Ferrara one Faninus, who by reading of good books, was through Gods grace, converted to the knowledge of the truth, wherein he found such sweetnesse, that by constant read∣ing, meditation and prayer, he grew so expert in the Scriptures, that he was able to instruct others: and though he durst not go out of the bounds of his calling to preach openly, yet by conference and private exhortations he did good to many: This coming to the knowledge of the Popes Clients, they apprehended and committed him to prison, where by the earnest solicitations of his wife and children, and other friends,Humane infir∣mity▪ he was so overcome, that he renounced the truth, and so was dismissed out of prison. But it was not long before the Lord met with him: so that falling into horrible torture of conscience, he was near un∣to utter despair for his Apostacy,Danger of A∣postacy. and for preferring the love of his kindred and friends before the service of Jesus Christ, neither could he possibly by any means be free from these terrours, before he had fully resolved to adventure his life more faithfully in the service of the Lord. Wherefore being thus inflamed with an holy zeal, he went a∣bout all the Countrey,Recovery af∣ter his fall. doing much good wheresoever he came,
whereupon he was again apprehended, and cast into prison, and con∣demned to be burnt:A prophesie. but he told his Judges that his time was not yet come, and so it fell out; for shortly after he was removed to Ferrara, where he continued in prison two years; Then was he again condem∣ned by the Popes Inquisitors; and yet his time being not come, he remained a good while after in prison: in which time many godly people came to visit him, which caused the Pope to commd him to be kept more strictly: Then was he kept close Prisoner for eighteen moneths, wherein he endured many and great torments: After this, he was brought into another prison, where were many Nobles,A special Pro∣vidence. great Lords and Captains for stirring up sedition, who when they first heard him speak, set him at naught and derided him: and some of the gravest of them, supposing it to be but a melancholy humour, exhorted him to leave his opinion, &c. Faninus gave them thanks for their friendly good will, but withal, modestly and plainly he declared to them, that the doctrine which he professed was no humour nor opini∣on of mans braine, but the pure truth of God held forth in his Word, which truth he was fully resolved never to deny, &c. With which in∣structions they were, through the mercy of God, clean altered in their carriage and judgement, highly admiring and honouring him now, whom a little before they derided and contemned; Then did he pro∣ceed still to impart the Word of grace to them, declaring, that though he knew himself to be a miserable sinner, yet through faith in Jesus Christ and his grace, he was fully perswaded that his sins were forgiven; assuring them likewise that if they did repent and believe on our Lord Jesus Christ, they also should have their sinnes remitted unto them. There were in that prison also some that having formerly lived very delicately, could not now endure the hardship of prison, to whom he administred much comfort in this their distresse, inso∣much as they rejoyced in hese their sufferings, by which they had learned a better kind of liberty than ever they had before. His Kinsfolk hearing of his imprisonment, his wife and sister came to him,Tentation re∣sisted. pitifully weeping and intreating him to consider and remem∣ber his poor family, &c. To whom he answered, that his Lord and Master had commanded him not to deny his truth for his fami∣lies sake: and that it was too much that once for their sakes he had fallen into that Cowardise, which they knew of: Therefore he desired them to leave him, and not to solicit him any further in that kind, for he knew that his end now drew near, and so he commended them to the Lord. Presently after, the Pope sent a command that Faninus should be executed, whereof when an officer brought him word, he much re∣joyced at it, thanking the Messenger: Then did he begin to make a long exhortation to his fellow-prisoners about the felicity of the life to come.
He had life proffered him if he would recant, and he was put in mind what a sad condition he would leave his wife and children in;Proffer of life refused. whereupon he answered that he had committed them to an Overseer that would sufficiently care for them; and being asked who that was?Faith. he answered, Even the Lord Jesus Christ, a faith∣ful Keeper of all that are committed to him; the next day he was removed into the common Prison, and delivered to the secular Magistrate. In all his words, gestures and countenance, he shewed such mode∣sty, constancy, and tranquillity of mind, that they which before ex∣treamly hated him, and thought that he had a devil, began now favou∣rably to hearken to him, and to commend him: yea with such grace and sweetnesse he spake of the Word of God, that many of the Magi∣strates wives which heard him, could not abstain from weeping: yea the Executioner himself wept. As he was going to execution, one that saw him so merry and chear∣ful, asked him what was the reason of it, whereas Christ before his death sweat blood and water?Comfort in death. To whom he answered, that Christ su∣stained all the sorrows and conflicts with hell and death that were due to us,Note. that by his sufferings we might be freed from the sorrow and fear of them all. At the place of execution, after he had made his most earnest prayers to the Lord, he meekly and patiently went to the stake, where he was first strangled,A special Pro∣vidence. and afterwards burned; And during the time of his burning there came a most fragrant and oderiferous smell to the Spectators, the sweetnesse whereof did so delight and refresh their senses, as his words would have done, if they had heard him speak. There was also one Dominicus, sometimes a souldier under Charles the fifth in Germany,Dominicus. where he received the first taste of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, after which by his confrence with learned men he much increased in knowledge, insomuch as he was able to instruct others; whereupon he returned into Italy, and in the City of Naples, he taught the Word of God to many, Anno 1550. From thence he went to Placentia, where he instructed the People also in many of the funda∣mentals of Religion, promising that he would next speak to them of Antichrist, whom he would paint out in his colours; but when he came the next day,Apprehended. he was apprehended by the Magistrate, whom he readily obeyed, saying, that he wondered the devil had let him alone so long: and being asked whether he would renounce his doctrine, he answered,Constancy. that he maintained no doctrine of his own, but the doctrine of Christ,Thanks for sufferings. which also he was ready to seal with his blood, giving hearty thanks to God for accounting him worthy to suffer for his name. Then was he committed to a filthy and stinking prison, where he remained some moneths, and was often solicited to revoke his opi∣nions, or else he must suffer death: but, through Gods mercy, nothing could remove him from his constancy: being therefore condemned
to death, he was brought forth into the market-place, where he most heartily prayed for his enemies, instructed the People, and then was hanged, resting in peace in the Lord. In Saint Angelo, there was an house of Augustine Friars, to whom there often resorted a Friar from the City of Pavia, who was a man very expert in the Scriptures, and of godly conversation, by whose la∣bours not only divers of the Friars, but other Townsmen were brought to the knowledge and love of Gods Word; and amongst the rest, one Galeacius Trecius, a Gentleman of good quality,Galeacius Tre∣cius. very weal∣thy and bountiful to the poor, was wrought upon to embrace the truth, and was afterward much confirmed and strengthened by Caelius Secundus, who being persecuted from Pavia, came to this place. After some time Galeacius having much profited in knowledge, was in∣flamed with a godly zeal to promote and propagate the knowledge of the truth unto others; But a light shining in such darknesse could not be long hid: Insomuch as Anno 1551. he was apprehended and carri∣ed before the Bishop, by whom he was kept in bands, having only a pad of straw to lie on; and though his wife sent him a good bed and sheets, yet did the Bishops officers keep them from him,Cruelty. dividing it as a booty amongst themselves. Thrice he was brought before the Commissioners, where he boldly rendred a reason of his faith, answering all their interrogatories with such evidence of Scripture and constancy of mind as astonished all that heard him: yet afterwards at the importunity of his friends and kindred, he was by much perswasion brought to assent to certain Po∣pish points. But, through the mercy of God, he was after a while,Humane infir∣mity▪ Recovery. brought to such repentance and bewailing of this fact, that afterwards he became more valiant in the defence of Christs quarrel; neither did he desire any thing more than to have occasion to recover again by con∣fession that which he had lost by denial: affirming that as he never had felt more joy of heart then when he constantly professed the truth, so he never tasted more sorrow in all his life, then when he turned from the same by dissimulation: Professing to his Christian friends, that death was much more sweet to him with testimony to the truth,Note. then life with the least denial of it, and violation of a good conscience thereby. So that afterwards, through Gods mercy, he was so full of comfort, that divers which talked with him, continued all day without meat or drink, and if they might, would have stayed all night too, they were so delighted with him. Galeacius thus waiting for some occasion to manifest his Recovery,Joy unspeaka∣ble. it so fell out that the Inquisitors came into the Prison to him, supposing that now he would have confirmed what before he had granted unto them, requiring him so to do; But Galeacius on the contrary re∣tracted that, and boldly asserted the truth with more courage than he did before: and hereby his mind was greatly refreshed, and his ad∣versaries went away ashamed: yet did they condemn and deliver him to the secular Judge to be burned; Then was he brought forth in the
morning to the market-place, and bound to a stake, where he was left till noon to be a gazing stock to all the people: during which time ma∣ny came to see him, exhorting him to recant, and not so wilfully to cast away himself,Tentation re∣sisted. and thereby to undo his loving wife and young children, &c. But nothing could alter the firme mind of this constant Martyr, and therefore at length fire was put to him, and so he quietly slept in the Lord. A little before his execution, he hearing that there was a contro∣versie between the Bishop and Major of the City,Note. which of them should be at cost to buy wood for his burning, he sent to them to end that quarrel, for that he himself would be at the cost of it, out of his own goods. The life of John Mollius. THere was at Rome one John Mollius, who at twelve years old was placed by his Parents in the house of the Gray-friars, where being of an excellent wit, in a short time he so profited both in the knowledge of the Arts and Tongues, that at eighteen years old he was made a Priest:His education. Then was he sent to study at Ferrara, where he so profited in six years time, that he was made Doctor and Reader of Divinity in that University,His enmity to the truth. and by his Sophistry shewed himself an utter enemy to the Gospel. From thence he went to Brixia, and the year follow∣ing to Millaine, where he read openly; Then by Francis Sforce he was brought to the University of Papia, to be the Philosophy Profes∣sor, where he remained four years; Then was he called to the Univer∣sity of Bononia: about which time it pleased God so to inlighten him with the knowledge of his truth,Conversion. Zeale. that he began secretly to expound The Epistle of Paul to the Romanes to a few, but presently his Auditors in∣creased so fast, that he was compelled to read openly in the Church, where the number of his Auditors daily increased, and withal, they shewed such fervency of mind, that most of them came with pen and ink to write what they heard, taking great care to come so early that they might have room to hear him. This was Anno 1538. Hereup∣on Cardinal Campeius set up one Cornelius, an arrogant Babler, to ex∣pound the same Epistle, who cried up the Pope and his traditions; as John on the contrary commended and extolled Christ and his merits to the People: But Cornelius his Auditors quickly decreased, and the others increased exceedingly: This angred Cornelius, insomuch as by Cardinal Campeius his advice, they came to an open disputation, and when they could not agree, as John was returning home in a narrow place where his friends could not come to his rescue,His apprehen∣sion. he was appre∣hended and clapt up in prison; but this caused such stir in the City, that Cornelius was faine to hide himself; Then did the Bishop send word to John in prison, that he must either recant or be burnt: To the first
he answered that he would by no means condescend; only it grieved him that he should be condemned, and his cause not heard;Constancy. yet by the medi∣ation of a friend he was released out of prison, upon condition that with∣in three moneths he should appear at Rome:Hs Release. some of his friends disswa∣ded him from going to Rome, advising him rather to go into Germany, and they would give him mony to bear his charges; but he refused,Courage. say∣ing, that he must preach the Gospel at Rome also. When he came thither, he requested of the Pope that he might have a publick hearing, but that was denied him, and he was commanded to write his opinion: which accordingly he did, About Original sin,His appering at Rome. Justification by faith only, Free-will, Purgatory, &c. All which he confirmed by the Authority of Scripture and Fathers, and so exhibi∣ted it to the Pope, who referred it to some Cardinals: and they di∣sputed with him three dayes upon those points, but could not confute them; then was he answered, That it was truth which he said, yet not meet for the times; and therefore he was commanded to abstain from preaching,Note. Hs return to Bonony. and to returne to Bonony to be the Philosophy Pro∣fessour. When he came back, all men longed to hear how he had sped, and in the Pulpit he openly declared the whole proceedings to them, giving God thanks for his safe return. But this so offended the Cardinal, that by order from the Pope, he was removed from Bononia to Naples: There also his doctrine was so distasted by the Viceroy, that he laid wait to take away his life; yet,A special Pro∣vidence. through Gods mercy, he escaped, and wandred up and down Italy, preaching the Gospel of Christ wheresoever he came: At last he was called back to Bonony, where privately he expounded Pauls Epistles, which could not be long concealed; whereupon he was apprehended and carried to Faventia, where he was cast into a filthy stinking prison,He is again ap∣prehended. and lay there foure years, no man being suffered to come to him: yet at last by the mediation of some friends he was again released,His Release. and went to Ravenna, where he preached the Gospel of Christ with such affecti∣ons, that he never spake of Jesus Christ,Love to Christ but tears dropped from his eyes. After a short time he was again cast into prison; but foure persons of quality proffering to be his Bail, through Gods mercy, he was re∣leased; after which so many flocked to him,Manfold affli∣ctions. that his adversaries consul∣ted to kill him, lest his doctrine should spread further: and apprehend∣ing him, they sent him bound to Rome, where again he was cast into prison for eighteen moneths, in which time he was often assaulted, sometimes with flatteries and faire promises,Constancy. sometimes with terrible threats: but his constancy could not be shaken by either; whereupon he, with some others, were brought forth to receive the sentence of con∣demnation, at which time with great earnestnesse, he confirmed his for∣mer doctrine, affirmed the Pope to be Antichrist,His Martyr∣dme. &c. citing them to ap∣pear before the Tribunal of Christ. Being condemned and carried to the place of execution, he exhorted
the People to have no Saviours but Christ alone, the only Mediatour be∣twixt God and man, and so he was first hanged, and then burned. This was Anno Christi, 1553. Francis Gamba.The year after, Francis Gamba, born in Lombardy, having, through Gods grace, received the knowledge of the Gospel, went to Geneva, where he was much confirmed in the truth, and received the Sacra∣ment with them; then returning into his own country he was apprehen∣ded and cast into prison, whither many Nobles, Doctors and Priests resorted to him, labouring by all means to disswade him from his opinions; But he disputing with them, constantly affirmed that what he held was consonant to the Word of God,Constancy. and the evident doctrine of Jesus Christ, and necessary for all men to believe if they would be saved; Assuring them that rather than he would be found false to Christ and his Word, he was there ready to shed his blood: He was long assailed by the intreaties of his friends and threatenings of his ene∣mies,Tentations e∣sisted. but could by no means be discouraged, yea he gave thanks to God for accounting him worthy to suffer rebukes and death for the testimony of Jesus Christ: and so by order of the Senate of Millain he was had forth to execution. He went with a great deal of chearfulnesse; and when a Crosse was brought him by a Friar,Comfort at death. he said, that his mind was so replenished with joy and comfort in Christ, that he needed neither his Crosse nor him: then, because he declared many comfortable things to the people, his tongue was bored through, and he was first strangled, and then burnt, undergoing death with admirable patience and con∣stancy. Anno 1555. There was one Algerius, a Student in Padua, a young man of excellent learning,Algerus. who having attained to the knowledge of the truth, ceased not by instruction and example to inform others that he might bring them to the saving knowledge of Christ; for this he was accused of heresie to the Pope; by whose command he was ap∣prehended and cast into prison at Venice, where he lay long; during which time he wrote an excellent letter to the afflicted Saints, wherein, amongst many other excellent expressions, he thus writeth; I cannot but impart unto you some portion of my delectations and joyes which I feel and find: I have found hony in the intrals of a Lion; Who will believe that in the dark dungeon I should find a Paradise of pleasure?Joy in afflicti∣ons. In a place of sorrow and death, dwells tranquillity and hope of life· In an infernal Cave, I have joy of soul: where others weep, I rejoyce: where others shake and tremble, there is strength and boldnesse, &c. All these things the sweet hand of the Lord doth minister to me. Behold, he that was once far from me, is now present with me: whom I could scarce feel before, now I see more apparently: whom once I saw afarre off, I now behold near at hand: whom once I hungred for, he now approaches and reaches his hand to me: he doth comfort me, and fills me with gladness: he drives away all sorrow, strengthens, encourageth, heals, re∣fresheth and advanceth me: O how good is the Lord, who suffers not his ser∣vants to be tempted above their strength! Oh how easie and sweet is his yoke,
&c. learn therefore how amiable and merciful the Lord is, who visiteth his ser∣vants in tentations, and disdains not to keep them company in such vile and stinking dungeons, &c. And in conclusion he subscribes his letter, From the delectable Orchard of the Leonine prison, &c. After this the Pope sent for him to Rome, where, by manifold perswasions and allurements,Note. he was tempted to desert and deny the truth, which not prevailing, he was ad∣judged to be burnt alive,Tentation re∣sisted. which death he most constantly endured to the great admiration of all that beheld him. Anno 1559. John Aloysius, being sent from Geneva to be a Pastor in Calabria, was thence sent for by the Pope to Rome,John Aloysius. where he suffered Martyrdome. Also James Bovellus; a godly Minister in the same place, and at the same time was sent for by the Pope, by whom he was sent to Messina,Iames Bovellus. and there Martyred. Pope Pius the fourth raised an hot persecution against the people of God in all the Territories of the Church of Rome, whereby many con∣stant Christians suffered Martyrdome. Yea,Persecution raised by the Pope. this persecution was so hot in the Kingdome of Naples, that many Noblemen with their wives, and divers others, were there slain; Anno 1560. A Papist writing to a Noble Lord about the cruelty shewed to some Christians, hath these expressions: When I think upon it, I verily quake and tremble:Horrible Cruelty. for their manner of putting to death may fitly be resembled to the slaughter of Calves and Sheep; for eighty eight of them being thrust up together in one house as in a sheepfold, the Executioner cometh in, taketh one and blindfoldeth him, and so leads him forth to a larger place adjoyning, where commanding him to kneel down, he cuts his throat: and leaving him half dead, he takes his Butchers knife and muffler, all gore blood; and goeth back to the rest, and so leading one after another, he dispatches them all: How sad this spectacle was, I leave to your Lordship to judge; for my own part I cannot but weep to think of it; neither was there any of the Spectators which seeing one to dye, could endure to behold another: But truly so humbly and patiently they went to their death, as is almost incredible to believe:Patience of the Saints. All the aged Per∣sons went to death more cheerfully, the younger were something more time∣rous: I tremble and shake to remember how the Executioner held his bloody knife between his teeth, with the bloody muffler in his hand, and his armes all gore blood up to the elbows, going to the fold, and taking every one of them one after another by the hand, and so dispatching them all, no otherwise than as a Butcher doth kill his Calves and Sheep. This was in Calabia, Anno Christi, 1560. Persecution raised by the Pope in Venice. THe City of Venice was a long while from the cruel Inquisition, whereby the face of a Church was discerned there, from the year 1530. to the year 1542. yea, and multitudes of good Christi∣ans
flocked thither from other parts, which so provoked the Divel to envy, that he stirred up the Pope to send Inquisitors, which erected an Inquisition in that City, and for divers years the Pope sent them money to distribute amongst their Flies, and such persons as would betray the faithful to them: By this means many of the worthy servants of Jesus Christ were apprehended, imprisoned, and after a while sent to Rome to be there butchered. Then was a new-found manner of death inflicted upon divers o∣thers, never till then heard of, whereby they were drowned in the bot∣tome of the Sea; The manner of it was thus; After any of them had re∣ceived the sentence of death by the Inquisitors, an iron chain was fast∣ned about their middle, with a very heavy stone tyed thereto, then were they laid upon a plank between two boats, and so rowed to an ap∣pointed place in the Sea, where the boats parting asudder, the Martyrs presently sunk into the bottome of the Sea and were drowned. Yet notwithstanding this cruelty, many godly persons ceased not to assemble together in a place appointed for that purpose, where they talked and discoursed of heavenly matters for their spiritual edification, and made collections for the relief of the poor amongst them. And Anno 1566. they called to them a Minister of the Gospel, and constituted a Church, where they enjoyed all the Ordinances with much comfort: but some false brethren creeping in amongst them, after a while be∣trayed them; then were many apprehended, cast into the Sea and drowned: Others were sent to Rome, where they were cast into prison till they rot∣ted and dyed there. Amongst others that were condemned to be drowned at Venice, was one Mr. Anthony Ricetto: to whom after his condemnation, his sonne, a youth about twelve years old,Anthony Ri∣cetto. Tentation resisted. came, beseeching him with tears to yield, that his life might be saved, and himself not left fatherlesse: To whom he answered, A good Christian is bound to forgoe children, goods, yea, and life it self for the maintenance of Gods honour and glory: For which cause (said he) I am now resolved to lay down my life, the Lord assisting me. The Lords of Venice offered to restore to him his Patrimony, which was partly morgaged, and partly sold, if he would submit to the Church of Rome; but he resolutely refused that condition. Not long after came a Captain to him, and told him of one Francis Sega, his prison-fellow, that wa resolved to recant: To whom he answered, What tell you me of Sega?Constancy. I am resolved to performe my vows to the Lord my God: Then was he carried forth bound to the boats, and by the way a Priest pre∣sented him with a wooden Crosse, exhorting him to recant, &c. But he on the contrary perswaded him and others to come out of the snares of the Divel, and to cleave to Jesus Christ, and to live, not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit; For, said he, otherwise your unbelief will bring you into the lake of fire that never shall be quenched. When he came to the place where he was to suffer, the Captain lastned the chain and stone to him, whereupon, lifting his eyes to heaven, he said,
Father forgive them, they know not what they do. Lord Jesus, into thy hands do I commend my spirit; and so in the sea he ended his life. A few dayes after one Mr. Francis Spinola was apprehended and com∣mitted to prison, and when he was brought forth before the Inquisitors,Francis Spinola they shewed him a Treatise about the Lords Supper, demanding whe∣ther he was the Author of it, which he acknowledged, avouching that the doctrine that was contained therein was agreeable to the holy Scrip∣tures. Then was he return'd to his prison, where the aforementioned Sega was, who waiting for his coming, as he passed by, saluted him by his name; after which they conferred together about the doctrine of the Gospel;Sega. and Sega having heard that Spinola had stood stoutly in the Confession of the truth, he was much comforted, saying, that God had reserved him for such a time as this to make him Partaker of so great consolation. Shortly after the Jailor told Sega that he was to die one hour within night, at the hearing whereof he entreated Spinola to pray with him, and after prayer he said, that his soul was heavy unto death. Spinola an∣swered, Fear not, for it will not be long before your soul shall partake of those joyes which shall endure for ever. At the appointed time he was fetched out of the dungeon, where he took his leave of Spinola and the o∣ther Prisoners: As he went into the boat, a Friar perswaded him to return to the Church of Rome; Sega answered, that he was already in the way to our Lord Jesus Christ, and so passing on, he called upon the name of God: He seemed to be a little amazed at the fastning of the chaine and stone to his body, yet presently recollecting his spirits, he took it patient∣ly, and so commending his soul into the hands of God,Sega's Martyr∣dome. he quietly slept in the Lord. Spinola being again called before the Inquisitors, he boldly reproved the Popes Legate, and the other Judges, for that contrary to their con∣sciences they persecuted the truth of God, calling them the off-spring of the Pharisees, &c. The third time that he was called before them, they asked him if he would not recant his errours? he answered, that the doctrine which he maintained was not erroneous, but the same truth which Christ and his holy Apostles taught, and for which all the Martyrs, both in former and later times, did willingly lay down their lives,Humane infir∣mity. and endured the pains of death. Yet after all this, Spinola by the crafty perswasions of some seem∣ing friends, began to strike saile and to faint; but, through Gods good∣nesse, he soon recovered again, and being called before the Judges,Recovery. he openly confirmed the truth, and so had sentence passed upon him that he should be drowned as an Heretick. To which he answered, I am no Here∣tick, but the servant of Jesus Christ;Spinola's Mar∣tyrdome. at which words the Popes Legate commanded him silence, and told him that he lyed; the night after he was conveyed into the sea, and there drowned, praising and blessing God with invincible constancy. Anno 1595. There was at Rome a young Englishman,An English man at Rome. who going
into a Church, and seeing their grosse idolatry, was so inflamed with zeal that he could not endure the sight of those horrible impieties, and therefore he went out into the Church porch, and as the Procession pas∣sed by him, he waited till the Bishop came that did bear the Host, and then stepping forwards, he plucked it out of his hands, threw it to the ground, saying aloud, Ye wretched Idolaters, do ye fall down to a morsel of bread?An heroical act This so provoked the People that they had almost torn him in pieces, and yet they spared him and sent him to prison. Complaint being made to Pope Clement the eighth, he was so incen∣sed that he appointed him to be burnt the same day; but some of the Cardinals advised that he should rather be kept in prison, and examined by exquisite torments to find out his abettors and setters on. This accor∣dingly was put in practice, yet could they draw nothing from him but these words,His cruel tor∣ments. Such was the will of God. Then was he adjudged to be led from the Capitol, naked to his middle, and to wear on his head the form of a Devil, his breeches to be painted over with flames of fire, and so to be carried all about the City, and then to be burnt alive. When he heard this sentence, he lift up his eyes to heaven, and im∣plored the help of Almighty God. As he passed through the streets he was mocked and derided of all the People, but he continued his fervent Prayers to God; At last he spake something against the filthy lives of the Cardinals, which so enraged them, that they caused him to be gagged, which cruelty he patiently endured. When he came before the Church where he cast down the idol, the hangman cut off his right hand, and set it on a pole in the Cart to which he was tied; then did two Tormentors with flaming torches scorch and burn his flesh all the way as he went through the City of Rome, all which he bore with admirable patience; By that he came to the place where he was to be executed,Patience. his body was all over scorched, blistred and bloody, having no part free but his head; Then was he taken from the Cart, and seeing the Post to which he should be tied, he went of himself to it, and kneeling down, kissed the chains which should bind him to it; The Friars urged him to worship an idol which they presented to him, but he turning away his face shewed his de∣testation of it, holding on his Christian course unto the end: and when the flames of fire seized on him,His Martyr∣dome. he bowed his head, and quietly yielded up his soul to God. The same year there was an old godly man that had long lain in the Inquisitors dungeons, who was at last brought forth and condemned; af∣ter which the Friars brought to him a Crucifix, importuning him to kisse and adore it; He seeing their impudence, said unto them; If you take not this idol out of my sight, ye will constrain me to spit upon it; The Friars hearing this,Idolatry de∣tested. sent him away immediately to the fire, where with great courage and constancy he resigned up his spirit unto God.
CHAP. XXIX. The Life and Martyrdom of William Gardiner in Portugal, Anno Christi, 1552. WIlliam Gardiner was born at Bristol, and well educated, and when he was grown up, was placed with one Master Paget, a Merchant, by whom when he was twenty six years old, he was sent into Portugal to Lisbone, the regal City, to be a Factor: there he learned the countrey language, and became a profitable servant both to his Master and others. He was careful to keep close to God,His going to Lisbone. and to avoid the su∣perstitions of that countrey, and there being divers good men in that City, he associated himself with them, used good conference, and often bewailed to them his own weaknesse, as being neither sufficiently hum∣bled for his sins, nor yet enflamed with a love of godlinesse as he ought:Humility. he had also good books which privately he made much use of. Now whilst he was here abiding, it so fell out that a great marriage was to be solemnized betwixt the King of Portugals sonne, and the King of Spains daughter. Great preparations were made for it, and a great con∣course there was of Persons of all Ranks that came to it; and upon the wedding day they went to Church in great pomp; and amongst mul∣titudes of Spectators, William Gardiner made one, rather for the novelty of the businesse, than for any desire that he had to see their Ceremonies, and going to Church early in the morning, he got a convenient place to hear and see in. When all were come to Church, a Cardinal began to say Masse: The People standing with great silence and devotion: The fight of these superstitions did wonderfully grieve the mind of William Gardiner, not so much to see the folly of the common People,Zeal. as to see that the King himself, and so many sage Nobles should be led away with such abo∣minable idolatry; wherewith he was so exceedingly moved in his spirit, that he had much ado to refrain himself from doing some∣thing whereby he might manifest his dislike; but the great throng that he was in, hindred him, that he could not come neere to the Altar. When all was ended he returned home very sad, seeking out solitary places, where falling down prostrate before God, with many tears he be∣wailed the neglect of his duty, and studied how he might revoke that People from their impiety and superstition. At length his mind was ful∣ly setlet not to defer the matter any longer, whereupon he renounced the world, exactly made up all his accounts, both what he owed, and what was owing to him to a farthing. Then did he continue night and day in Prayer unto God, and in continual meditation of the holy Scriptures,Prayer. so that he would scarce take any meat by day, or sleep by night, as one Pen∣digrace his bed-fellow testified.
The Sabbath following Masse was to be celebrated with the like so∣lemnity; Whereupon William Gardiner went early in the morning handsomely apparalled to Church, setting himself neer to the Altar; After a while the King and States came; Gardiner with a New Testa∣ment in his hand, stood near the Altar, privately reading it all the while. A Cardinal began the Masse, consecrated the Host, lifted it up an high, shewed his God to the people,Grosse idolatry they adored it: yet Gardiner contained himself all this while. Then the Cardinal took the Host, tossed it to and fro about the Chalice,An heroical act made divers circles, &c. With that Gardi∣ner stept to him, took the Host out of his hand, and trampled it under his feet, and with his other hand overthrew the Chalice. At first all that were present stood amazed; then arose a great tumult, and one drawing his dagger wounded Gardiner in the shoulder, and as he was about to have slain him,His danger. the King commanded him to forbear, whereby his life was saved for the present; the tumult being ceased, the King demanded of him what Countryman he was? He answered, Most noble King, I am not ashamed of my Countrey, I am an Englishmam by birth and Religion,His speech to to the King. and came hither as a Merchant, and seeing so great idolatry committed in this famous Assembly, I neither ought, nor could any longer suf∣fer it: neither could I forbear doing what you have seen: which thing, most noble Prince, was not done in contempt of your Presence, God is my witness, but to seek the salvation of this People. The King hearing that he was an Englishman, and considering what alteration of Religion King Edward had made, presently conceited that he was suborned by some body to do this in scorn to their Religion; wherefore he asked him who was the Authour and procurer of this act? Gardiner answered that he was not moved thereunto by any man, but only by his own conscience; For, saith he, there is no man under heaven, for whose sake I would put my self into such manifest danger, but that I owed this service first to God,Courage. and then to your salvation: and if I have done any thing which is dispeasing to you, you ought to impute it to no man, but to your self, who so ireverently use the ho∣ly Sacrament of the Lords Supper to so great Idolatry, &c. Whilst he thus stoutly spake to the King, by reason of the losse of much blood by his wound, he was ready to faint. Whereupon Chirurgions were sent for to cure him, that he might be reserved for further torments. Then were all other Englishmen in the City clapped up in prison, especially his bed-fellow, who was grievously tormented and exami∣ned more then all the rest, and scarcely delivered after two years im∣prisonment; the rest got off sooner. They searched also all his writings and letters, to see if they could find out any confederates; then they went to him seeking by torments to extort the Author of this fact. They also invented a new kind of tor∣ment, exceeding Phalaris his brazen Bull; which was this: They made a ball of linnen cloth,He is tortured. which with violence they thrust down his throat to the bottom of his stomack, and with a string fastned to it, they pul∣led it up again; and this they did divers times, which caused as bitter
pains as the pains of death; but when by this means they could get no confession from him, they asked him if he did not repent of his wick∣ed fact? whereto he answered, that he was so far from repenting, that if it were to do again he should do it: yet was he somewhat sorry that it was done in the Kings presence, to his disturbance, but they were not to blame him for it, but the King was rather to be blamed, who having power, would not prohibit so great Idolatry. When they had used all kinds of torments, and that he was so weak∣ned thereby, that he was not like to live long, they first cut off his right hand, then carried him into the market-place, where they cut off his other hand also: then fastning a rope about his middle, with a Pully they hoisted him up an high, and making a great fire under him, they let him down,His crul Mar∣tyrdome. so that his feet only felt the fire, and so often pulling him up and down, they burned him by degrees: and yet in all these great torments he remained constant, and the more terribly that he burnt, the more earnestly he prayed; When his feet were consumed, they asked him whether he yet did not repent him of his deed?Constancy. exhorting him to call upon our Lady and the Saints. He answered that what torments soever they used, the truth was the same: that which he had confessed in his life, he would not deny at his death; and that when Christ ceased to be our Advocate he would pray to our Lady, &c. And when they laboured to stop his pay∣ing to, and praising of God, he with a loud voice reheased the 34. Psalm: which being almost ended, the rope was burned in sunder, so that his body fell down into the fire, where he changed his momentany pains for eternal rest. But the Lord suffered not this cruelty to go altogether unpunished in this life; for a spark of the fire wherewith he was burned,Gods judgment on persecutors. was dri∣ven by the wind into the Haven, where it set on fire one of the Kings great ships, and consumed it: The new-married Prince also died within half a year, and the King himself not long after. The Martyrdom of a Christian Jew in Constan∣tinople, Anno Christi, 1528. THis Jew dwelling ar Constantinople, through Gods grace, was there converted, baptized, and became a good Christian; which the Turks understanding, were vehemently exasperated against him for it, fearing lest his conversion should prove very prejudicial to their Mahu∣metan Religion, and therefore they apprehended and cruelly murthered him, and for his greater infamy they cast out his dead body into the open streets, forbidding all strictly to bury it.A special Pro∣vidence. Thus his dead body lay in the streets nine dayes; yet, through the power of God, it corrupted not at all, yea there proceeded from it a certain delectable sent or odour, which much astonished the Turks, so that at last they took it up, and carried it out of the City, and buried it.
CHAP. XXX. The Persecution of the Church in Germany, which began, Anno Christi, 1523. The Pope stirs up the Emperor to persecute the Potestants.THe Gospel being spread abroad in Germany, by the means and ministry of Luther, and his fellow-labourers, the Pope having tried all other means for the suppressing of it, and finding them ineffe∣ctual, he at last provokes the Emperour Charles the fifth by war to de∣stroy the Protestants, and for that end gives him two hundred thou∣sand crowns in money for the maintenance of these Wars, and ties him∣self at his own cost to maintain twelve thousand foot and five hundred horse for six moneths; yea out of his zeale for the cause, he allows the Emperour the one half of the Revenues of the Clergy, and gives him leave to sell off Abby-lands to the value of five hundred thousand crowns, whereupon great preparation was made for this War both in Germany, Spain, and Italy, the consideration wherereof caused the confederate Pro∣testant Princes to raise a great Army also for their own defence; upon which occasion they were proclaimed guilty of high treason by the Em∣perour. The two Armies lay near together, and the Protestants offered battel to the Emperour, but he refused, assuring himself that they could not long continue together: The Army of the Protestants was com∣manded by the Duke of Saxony, and the Lantgrave of Hessen, who did not concur very well in their counsels; besides they wanted both victu∣als and money, so as they were forced to dislodge and retire further off: the Emperour following, forced the Elector to fight with disadvantage; and God who doth not alwaies prosper the better cause, gave the victo∣ry to the Emperour,Duke of Saxony and the Lant∣grave taken prisoners. A cruel perse∣cution. the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgrave being taken prisoners, Anno 1547. Presently after ensued a great persecution in many places: authority armed with laws and rigour, striving against simple verity: It was lamentable to hear how many poor men were troubled, both Ministers and Christians; some tossed from place to place; others exiled out of their own Countryes; some driven into Woods, and forced to dwell in Caves; some tormented upon the Rack, and some burned with fire and faggot; Amongst others, two young men were burnt at Bruxels, viz. Henry Voes and John Esch,Henry Voes, John Esch. formerly Augustine-Friars; When they came before the In∣quisitors they were examined what they did believe? they answered, the books of the Old and New Testament, wherein were contained the Ar∣ticles of the Creed. Then were they asked whether they did not believe the decrees of the Councels and Fathers: they answered such as were agreeing to the Scriptures, they believed, &c. When they were con∣demned, they gave thanks to God their heavenly father, which of his great goodnesse had delivered them from that false and abominable
Religion, making them Priests to himself, and receiving them to him∣self as a sacrifice of a sweet odour; They went joyfully to the place of execution, protesting that they died for the glory of God and the doctrine of the Gospel as true Christians, and that it was the day which they had long desired; They joyfully embraced the stake, and en∣dured patiently the torments of the fire, singing Psalmes, and rehear∣sing the Creed in testimony of their faith; whereupon one said to them,Comfort and joy in death. that they should take heed of glorifying themselves so foolishly; but of them answered, God fobid that we should glory in any thing but in the Crosse of our Lord Jesus Christ; When the fire was kindled at their feet, one of them said, Methinks you do strow Roses under my feet;A miracle of mercy. present∣ly after they quietly slept in the Lord. Henry being before demanded if Luther had seduced him: he answered, Even so as Christ seduced his Apostles. The year after there was one Henry Sutphen, who,Henry Sutphen. having been with Luther, came to Antwerp, from which he was driven for his Religion; Then did he go to Breme, where he was requested by some godly Ci∣tizens to preach to them, and the Citizens hearing him preach the Gospel so sinrely, they were so in love with his Doctrine, that they requested him to tarry amongst them to be their Minister; but the Popish Clergy presently complained of him to the Magistrates, accusing him of Heresie, and desiring that he might be banished the town; but not prevailing there, they complained to the Archbishop, and sent their Chap∣lains daily to his Sermons to entrap him in his words:Popish malice. but it pleased God so to work upon them by his Ministery,Some that came to catch were convert∣ed. that most of them were converted, and did openly witness that he taught nothing but the truth of God. Not long after he was set for to Meldorp, to preach the Gospel to them also; wherefore he thought good to try what God would work by him there; but the Citizens of Breme were very unwilling to part with him, because the Gospel had not as yet took much deep root a∣mongst them, and because the persecution was very great, &c. Yet Sutphen alledged, that in Diethmarch there was more need of his labours, the people being as sheep amongst Wolves, and that with a safe con∣science he could not deny their request, and that he did not intend ut∣terly to forsake Breme, but only for a moneth or two, after which he would return to them again. So having made all things ready, he went into Diethmarch to Meldorp, were he was joyfully received. But be∣fore he began to preach,Popish subtilty and malice. the Divel and his instruments began to fret and fume, and consulting together, they resolved to hinder him from preaching, fearing that if the people once heard his doctrine, it would be too late to stop it; Hereupon they grievously complained to the Magistrates, telling them that if they suffered this Heretick to preach, he would infect all the Country as he had done at Breme, and that it would be a most gratefull service if they would put him to death. This so far prevailed with these ignorant men, that they resolved that he should be put to death unseen and unheard: They wrote also to for∣bid
him to preach, whereunto, he answered, that since he was come at the request of the whole Parish to preach, he resolved to answer that call, and rather to obey God than man, and that if God had determined that there he should lose his life,Courage. there was as near a way to heaven from thence as from any other place; assuring himself that sooner or later he must die for the Gospels sake: And accordingly the next day he preached, and the people so liked him, that they resolved to have him for their Preacher, and to defend him to their power; in the afternoon he preached again; afterwards also he preached a third time with such a spirit and grace, that all men admired him, praying God earnestly that they might long enjoy such a Preacher; But his enemies were not all this while idle: for going to the Rulers of the Country, they procured some of them to joyn with them,Implacable malice. and privately raised five hundred men, with whom they went in the night time to Meldorp, brake into the house where Sutphen lay, pulled him out of his bed naked, and in their rage had almost pulled him to pieces: they then bound him, and asked him for what cause he came into Diethmarch? he gently declared it to them, yet they led him away barefoot: so that his feet being pitifully cut with the ice, he desired a horse to ride on, for which they jeared him, saying, Must we provide an horse for an Heretick? thou shalt go on foot whether thou wilt or no: Afterwards they bound him with chains, and set him in the stocks: Then was he removed to another place and shut up in a Cupboard; The next day binding him, hands, feet and neck, they carried him forth to be burned.He is condem∣ned unheard. Then a certain woman came to them, and proffered her self to suffer two thousand stripes, and to give them a great summe of mony if they would but respite his life till he had a publick hearing, but they threw her underfoot and trod upon her;Popish cruelty They also fell upon Sutphen, cutting and mangling of him in seve∣ral parts: The fire was often kindled, yet would not burn; then they fell upon him again, cutting and slashing him, and at last bound him to a ladder, and threw him into the fire, and when he began to pray, one of them him struck, saying, Thou shalt first be burnt, and then pray and prate thy fill;His Martyr∣dome. another trode upon his breast, and another endeavoured to strangle him: another ran him through with an Halberd: another struck him on the breast with a Mace till he died: and lastly they rosted him upon the coals, and so he finished his Martyrdom. About the same time many other godly persons were thrown into the River of Rhene and drowned,Many drow∣ned. and in the Town of Diethmarch another faithful servant of God suffered Martyrdom. In Hala a godly preacher was slain by a company of cut-throats, set on by the Friars. And not long after the Town of Miltenburg was taken, sacked,Miltenburg sacked. many slain, and others imprisoned for maintaining Caralostadius to be their Preacher: Two other godly persons were burned at Vienna. Also a godly Minister for reproving sin in his Prince sharply, was condemned to be hanged,A Minister condemned to be hanged. and a cruel Gentleman with a Troop were sent to apprehend and hang him: The Gentleman when he came to
his house saluted him friendly; pretending that he came to make good cheer with him, for he was a good house-keeper, and the Gentlemen of the Country used oft to resort to him; The Minister in a short time prepa∣red▪ a sumptuous banquet for them, whereof they ate freely. Dinner being ended, the Gentleman said to his men, Take this Priest our host and hang him without delay: his servants astonished hereat, abhorred to do the deed, saying, God forbid that we should commit such a crime,Ingratitude. as to hang a man that hath used us so courteously, its a wicked act thus to render evil for good, &c. But the Gentleman still provoked them to accomplish his command: Then did the Minister say, I beseech you shew not such cruelty upon me, rather lead me to purge my self to my Prince, before whom I doubt not to purge my self from any thing wherewith I shall be charged, neither so violate ye the lawes of hospi∣tality which I have shewed to you and to other noble men, which used to resort to my house; besides consider what a sting this act will leave in your consciences: for I have faithfully and truly taught the doctrine of the Gospel, and that's the principal cause that my Prince bears me this ill will, &c. But whatsoever this good man could say in his own behalf, the wicked Gentleman continued resolute, provoking his ser∣vants to accomplish that which he commanded them, withal saying to the Minister, You shall gain nothing by your preaching in this sort, for I am fully determined that the Princes will shall be fulfilled. At last the servants took the Minister, and with great lamentation and mourn∣ing, hanged him upon a beam in his own house,He is hanged. the Gentleman standing by and looking on. Also about the same time there was a godly learned Minister,Peter Spengler. called Master Peter Spengler in a town called Schlat, who faithfully discharged the duty of his place, and was much beloved for his affable and courte∣ous carriage: he was also a great peace-maker, and very prudent in com∣posing differences, well studied in the Scriptures, whereby he saw that persecution was at hand, the enemies of the truth beginning now to rage, and proudly to lift up their heads; yea shortly after he saw many bodies of the Saints cruelly tormented, beaten, exiled, drowned and burned; and to the end that he might not defile himself with fornication, he mar∣ried his maid, who was one that feared God, and by whom afterwards he had many children.The rising of the Anabap∣tists. About this time there was a great commotion of the Boores, who went to Abbies and Monasteries, robbing, plundering, and spoiling what they could not carry away; one company of them came to his house, whom he entertained kindly, yet they ransacked and robbed him of all, even to his very apparel, not leaving him so much as a pair of stockings, though he laboured to convince them of their wick∣ednesse; As they were going out of his house he fell a weeping,He is robbed by them. and said to them, I tell you that this your wickednesse will in the end bring much mischief upon your selves; you pretend the Gospel, but walk contrary to the rules of it,His good counsel. &c. But for his good counsel they requited him with scoffs and jeers. It pleased God not long after, that this faithful Pastor in the night-time
was taken by a company of Popish souldiers, who bound him hands and feet with a great rope,Popish cruelty and so carried him away to Friburg: It would have grieved any heart to hear the barbarous and despightful taunts and scoffs that they gave him; From thence they carried him to another place, where they cast him into prison, cruelly tormented him in his pri∣vy members, and other parts of his body, and at last adjudged him to death; As he was going to execution, he said, I shall be an acceptable sacri∣fice to my Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath given me a quiet conscience, as know∣ing my self innocent from the crimes objected against me:A Christian speech at his death. For my death, it is all one whether I die thus or no; for if you had let me alone, I must shortly have forsaken this skin, which already scarcely hangs to my bones. I know that I am a mortal and corruptible worme, I have long desired my last day, and have oft prayed that I might be delivered out of this mortal body, to be joyned with my Saviour Jesus Christ, &c. Then was he cast headlong into the river: which afterwards for a certain space was as red as blood.A miracle. Another godly man there was, who (after the commotion raised by the Anabaptists was quieted) was apprehended under pretence that he was one of them, and cast into prison, in which he was long detained, and at last they hoisted him up with a cord, with a great stone fastned to his feet,Popish cruelty where they kept him six hours, so that the sweat that dropped from his body, through pain and anguish, was almost blood: at last his strength ailing, they let him down with great violence: where he lay as a stock almost dead, only they perceived him to breath; Then did they use means to recover him, and gave him some food, af∣ter which they let him down into a deep dungeon: There he continued eighteen dayes, in the end whereof they took him forth, and examined him of divers things, which he denied: Then did they devise sundry kinds of torments to force him to accuse himself falsly, yet he con∣stantly denied it: Afterwards they hired an hangman who left no kind of cruelty unpractised upon him: yet at length he was constrained to give over his cruelty, and pronounce the man innocent, in that he had constantly endured so many and grievous torments: Then did they again cast him into the dungeon, and in the mean time suborned two false witnesses against him,False witnesses. whereupon they condemned him un∣heard, and having let down a cord, they drew him up out of the dunge∣on to his execution; As he was going to it, a Friar perswaded him to confesse his sins in his eare, and he would absolve him, and so he should go to heaven: To whom he answered, Thou wicked Friar, get thee from me, I have long since bewailed my sins to God, and obtained absolution at the hands of my Saviour Jesus Christ, and therefore I have no need of thy abso∣lution,His constant death. &c. At the place of execution, after he had made his Prayer to God, and vindicated his own innocency, his head was cut off. These were writ∣ten by Oecolampadius. Wolfgang Scuch coming to Hippolitus in Lorrain, was chosen to be their Pastor,Wolfgang Scuch where through Gods blessing upon his Ministry, he migh∣tily prevailed with the People to bring them from darknesse to light, so that they forsook their former idolatry,Idolatry re∣formed. and abolished the Masse,
and other superstitious practices from amonst them, which much enraged their Popish neighbours about them, so that they complained to the Duke that they had not only fallen from the Pope, but went about to cast off their obedience to him, and to shake off his authority: This so provoked the indignation of the Duke,Popist rage. that he threatned utterly to de∣stroy the town with fire and sword; Wolfgang being informed hereof, wrote to the Duke in most humble wise, defending his Ministry and the do∣ctrine which he taught, and the whole cause of the Gospel; he also ex∣cused the People as innocent and guiltlesse, confuted the slanders of their malicious adversaries, and professed their ready and willing subjection to that authority which God had placed over them; But this Epistle pre∣vailed nothing by reason of the virulent accusations of their enemies;He goeth to the Duke and is imprisoned. Whereupon to save the town from ruine, he went of his own accord to the Duke to render an account of his doctrine, thereby deriving all the Odium and danger upon himself. As soon as he came thither he was apprehended and cast into a straight and stinking prison▪ where he was most cruelly handled by the churlish Jailor: In this plight he remained a whole year, and yet would not shrink from his constancy, though besides his hard usage, he had a wife and five or six small children to care for: Then was he called to justifie his faith, which he did wittily and learnedly confuting all that did oppose him: and though they called him Heretick, Judas, Divel,He is reviled. &c. yet he regard∣ed it not, but went on confirming his doctrine by the Scriptures: But when his adversaries could not make their part good against him,His Bible burnt. they took his Bible and burned it, and proceeded to condemn him to be burn∣ed; which sentence when he heard pronounced against him, he sang the 122. Psalm. When he came to the place of his Martyrdom, they ask∣ed him if he would have his pain shortned, he answered No: for saith he, God that hath been with me hitherto,His faith. I trust will not now leave me when I have most need of him. When faggots were heaped about him,His Martyr∣dome. he sang the 51. Psalm, and so continued singing till the flame and smoak took away his voice and life. Shortly after the Commendator that sate as chief Judg upon him,Gods judge∣ments on Per∣secutors. died suddenly: Also his fellow Judge hearing the sudden noise of some guns that went off at the coming of the King of Denmak into the town, was so overcome with fear, that he suddenly fell down and died. One John Huglin, a Minister, was burned at Mersperg for Religion,John Huglin burned▪ Anno Christi 1526. At Munchen in Bavaria,George Carpen∣ter. one George Carpenter was apprehended and cast into prison for his Religion, and at last was brought forth before the Judges, where he stoultly defended the truth, refusing to recant; Then came a Schoolmaster to him, saying, My friend, dost thou not feare death? wouldst thou not fain return to thy wife and children? To whom he answered, Were I at liberty, whether should I go but to my dear wife and children? Then said the Schoolmaster, Recant your errours and you shall be set at liberty: George answered,Christ prefer∣red before wife and children. My wife and my children are so dear to me, that they cannot be bought from me with all the riches and possessions of the
Duke of Bavaria: but for the love of my Lord God I willingly forsake them all. When he went to execution, being again perswaded to recant, he said, I will confesse Christ this day before the whole world, for he is my Sa∣viour, and in him do I believe. When he was bound to the Ladder, some Christian brethren desired him, that as soon as he was cast into the fire, he would give them some sign of the truth of his faith; to whom he said, This shall be my signe,His signe▪ His Martyr∣dome. that so long as my tongue can wag I will not cease to call upon the name of Jesus. He never changed his countenance, but chearfully went to the fire, and crying continually Jesus, Jesus, he joy∣fully yielded up his spirit unto God. Also one Leonard Keyser, a Bavarian, being a Student at Wittenburg, was sent for to come home,Leonard Keyser. his father lying upon his death-bed; but so soon as he was come, he was apprehended at the command of the Bishop; and though the Duke of Saxony,Popish malice. and his own friends solicited very earnestly to the Bishop for his life, yet he proceeded to condemn him, and deliver∣ed him over to the secular Magistrate.His Martyr∣dome. As he was led to the place of ex∣ecution, he said, O Lord Jesus, remain with me, sustain and help me, and give me strength; When the fire was ready to be kindled, he cryed out with a loud voyce, O Jesus, I am thine, have mercy upon me, and save me, and so he quietly slept in the Lord. The Martyrdome of a godly Minister in Hungary. A Cruel Bishop in Hungary took a godly Minister for preaching the truth;A Minister worried. and caused Hares, Geese, and Hens to be tied round about his naked body, and then set dogs upon him, that cruelly rent and tore whatsoever they could catch,Gods judge∣ments on Persecutors. so that he died thereof; but God left not this cruelty unrevenged; for shortly after the Bishop fell mad, and ra∣ving, died miserably. CHAP. XXXI. The Persecutions of the Church in the Low-Countries, IN Holland there was a grave widow called Wendelmuta, to whom it pleased God to reveal his truth, and she became a zealous Professour of it, for which she was apprehended and cast into prison, and after∣wards brought forth at the Sessions, where many Monks perswaded her to recant, but could not prevail. Many also of her kindred and other women were suffered to perswade with her, amongst which was a noble Matron, who coming to her, said, My Wendelmuta, Why dost thou not keep those things which thou believest secret in thy heart,Tentation. that thou mayest prolong thy life? To whom she answered, Truly you know not what you say; for
with the heart man beleeves to righteousnesse, but with the tongue confession is made to salvation. Then was she condemned to be burnt to ashes, and her goods to be confiscated, which sentence she took patiently and quietly. At the place of her execution a Monk brought her a Crosse, and bade her to kisse and worship her God, to whom she said,Ignorance. I worship no woodden God, but only that God which is in heaven; and so with a merry and joyful countenance she went to the stake, desiring the Executioner to knock it in fast that it might not fall; Being bound to it, she ardently commended her soul into the hands of God; when she was to be strangled she modest∣ly closed her eyes, and bowed down her head as one that went to sleep; after which she was burned to ashes.Her Martyr∣dome. Anno 1529. There were two godly and learned men apprehended in Colen, and cast into prison, where they were kept a year and an half, and the sweating sicknesse raging exceedingly at that time in Germany, the Popish Clergy preached that the way to pacifie Gods wrath,Popish malice. and to remove the plague, was to cut off Hereticks,Two godly men burnt. whereupon these two god∣ly men were brought out, and condemned, and presently after burned. Also one Nicholas, a godly man, was apprehended at Antwerp, bound up in a sack, cast into the river and drowned.Nicholas drowned. Also Pistorius, a learned and godly Preacher, coming from Wittenburg into Holland, preached against the Masse, Popish pardons,Pistorius. &c. Where∣upon he was cast into prison amongst. Malefactors, whom he instructed, and much comforted in their distressed condition; and one of them be∣ing half naked, he gave him his gown;Charity. His father visiting him in pri∣son, encouraged him to constancy: At last he was condemned and carri∣ed forth to execution with a fools coat on his back; when he was tied to the stake, he said, O death, where is thy victory?His Martyr∣dome. and so he was first stran∣gled, and then burned. Another for speaking against the Masse and Reliques, was hanged in Suevia.One hanged. Another godly Minister being commanded to go to sixteen men that were to be beheaded, to counsel and comfort them at their death: when they were executed, was himself bidden to kneel down,A Minister be∣headed. and so they cut off his head. Also George Scherter, a godly Minister, that took great pains in in∣structing his people in the knowledge of the Gospel in a town near Salizburg, was apprehended and cast into prison,George Scher∣ter. where he wrote a Confession of his faith, and afterwards was condemned, first to be be∣headed, and then burned. As he went to the execution he said to the Spectators, That you may know that I die a true Christian,A Miracle. I will give you a signe: and accordingly when his head had been cut off, so long as whilst a man might eat an egge, his body all the while lying upon the belly, it turned it self upon the back, crossing the right foot over the left, and the right hand over the left: by which miracle many were induced to believe the Gospel.
Another godly man was burned at Dornick. Ministers Martyrs.Anno 1539. A godly minister not far from Basil, was murthered in his own house by a Popish Priest, whom he had kindly entertained; many other Ministers about that time, were, some drowned, some be∣headed. Anno 1543. Notice was taken that there were divers godly persons in Lovain, whereupon an Inquisitor came from Bruxels thither, and having gotten a company of souldiers,Popish cruelty in the night time he brake into their houses, plucking men and women out of their beds from their children, and casting them into prison: Thither the Doctors of Lovain came, thinking either to convert them or confound them; but the spi∣rit of God assisting his Saints,Vincit eritas. the doctors went away confounded them∣selves: Then did they cruelly torment every one of them by themselves; amongst these an aged Minister of about sixty years old was condemned to perpetual imprisonment in a dark and stinking dungeon, where he could neither read nor write, nor might any man come to him, and he was fed onely with bread and water. Two were burnt alive in the fire; an aged man was beheaded: Two aged women were buried quick: others for refusing to do pennance, were burned also; All which took their death very patiently and cheer∣fully. The year after in the same University of Lovain, was one Master Persival,Mr. Persival. a very learned and godly man, cast into prison, and because he could by no means be brought to recant, he was adjudged to perpetual imprisonment,Cruelty. and there to be fed only with bread and water: neither would they suffer the Citizens to send any relief to him: shortly after he was made away in prison. Also one Justus Insberg in the same city, for having a New Testament and some of Luthers Sermons found in his house,Justus Insberg. was cast into prison, and command given that none should speak with him. At the same time there were prisoners, in a room under him, Aegidius and En∣cenas metioned before,A special pro∣vidence. whose door being left open accidentally, they went to this poor man▪ and much confirmed and strengthned him in the faith, insomuch as when the Lovain Doctors came to perswade him to recant, he before them all made a bold confession of his faith, from which he would not be disswaded, whereupon he was condemned and beheaded. About the same time there was one Giles Tilleman, a Cutler at Brux∣els,Giles Tilleman. Conversion. who by diligent reading of the Scriptures, through Gods grace, was converted, and became very zealous for the truth; he was also very humble, mild, and merciful; whatsoever he could spare from his own necessity,Charity. he gave it to the poor, living by his trade himself; Some he refreshed with meat, others with cloathing; to others he gave shooes, to others houshold-stuffe; to others he ministred godly exhortations for their edification. One poor woman being delivered of a child, and wanting a bed to lye on, he sent her his bed; and himself was content to lie on the straw; At last he was discovered and cast into prison;
where much pains was taken to bring him back to Popery,Constancy. but alwayes his adversaries went away with shame; After eight months imprisonment he was sent to Bruxels to be judged, in which place he comforted many that he found in prison there, exhorting them to constancy that they might attain the Crown; Most of his food he divided amongst them, con∣tenting himself with some few scraps: He was so ardent in Prayer, kneel∣ing by himself in some secret place, that often he forgat himself;Earnest Prayer and be∣ing many times called to his meat, he neither heard, nor saw them that stood by him till he was lifted up by the armes. Divers Friars coming to reduce him, he would still request them to go their wayes, for he was at a point; and when they reviled him,Meeknsse. he would not answer them again, insomuch as they reported abroad that he had a dumb Devil in him. But when they spake of matters of Re∣ligion, he answered them freely, mightily confuting them by the Scrip∣tures; Often he might have escaped, the prison doors being set open, but he would not, that he might not bring his Keeper into trouble;Fght refused▪ Af∣terwards he was removed to another prison, where they sought by tor∣ments to enforce him to recant: and when all would not prevail, he was condemned to the fire; which when he heard of, he gave hearty thanks to God for that the hour was come wherein he might glorifie his name. Seeing a great pile of wood prepared for his burning,Constancy. he desired that most of it might be taken away and given to the poor;Note. for a little, said he, will serve to burn me: and seeing a poor man by that lacked shoos, he gave him his: Being tied to the stake the hang∣man would have strangled him, but he refused, saying, It needs not, I fear not the fire,His Martyr∣dome. and so in the midst of the flames he gave up the Ghost. Anno 1543. and 1544. There was a great persecution all over Flanders,A great perse∣cution. so that there was neither town nor City in all the Coun∣trey, wherein some were not banished, beheaded, or condemned to per∣petual imprisonment: neither was there any respect either of age or sex: But especially at Gaunt, many of the chief men were burned for Re∣ligion. Also at the Emperours going to Bruxels, there was a terrible perse∣cution and slaughter made of Gods People in Brabant, Artois, &c. so that two hundred men and women were apprehended at one time, whereof some were drowned, some buried quick, some privily made a∣way: others sent to perpetual prison; yea so many others were put to death, that the hands of the hangman were tired with slaying of men. Anno 1545. There was one Martin, at Gaunt, a Fishmonger,Martin con∣verted in his old age. who lived very dissolutely to his old age; but it pleased God by a Sermon that he heard, to bring him to the knowledge of the truth and to re∣pentance for his former sins, whereupon he left Gaunt, and sought out the company of godly Christians, who used much reading of the Scrip∣tures, by whom he was further instructed and grounded in the truth; Then after three moneths he returned to the City again, where he visi∣ted
the Captives in prison, comforted them in persecution, and confirm∣ed them in the truth which were led to the fire. The Friars seeing this, though formerly he had been very bountiful to them, yet now they conspired against him, whereby he was laid in bands, and by sharp and cruel torments they would have enforced him to recant, but not prevailing, he was condemned, and his goods confiscated; as he stood at the stake,He is condem∣ned. a Friar said to him, Martin, except thou dost turn, thou shalt go from this temporal to everlasting fire, to whom he answered, It is not for you to judge me;His Martyr∣dome. and so he quietly slept in the Lord. The next day after two other men were burned, and a woman buried alive for the same cause, who joyfully and cheerfully suffered Mar∣tyrdome. At Delden two Virgins of a noble stock, who frequently and dili∣gently attended Sermons,Two godly Virgins. being apprehended and examined, couragiously confessed and maintained the truth, whereupon they were condemned, and the younger was first burned; In the fire she prayed so ardently for her enemies,Burnt. that the Judges greatly marvelled at it; Then did they ex∣hort the elder, that if she would not recant, yet at least that she would petition to have her punishment changed into beheading instead of bur∣ning, whereupon she answered, that she held no errour of which she had cause to repent,Constancy and courage. but the truth which was consonant to the Scriptures, in which she trusted to persevere unto the end: And for the kind of her pu∣nishment she feared not the fire, but would rather follow the example of her dear sister, and so being put into the fire she quietly slept in the Lord. But this was marvellous, that after their death, the bodies of them both remained white,A Miracle. and unhurt by the fire, whereupon some Christians pri∣vily in the night buried them. Anno Christi, 1545. There was in Mechlin one Andrew Thiessen, who had three sonnes and a daughter,Andrew Thiessen. whom he carefully brought up in the knowledge of the truth; after which he went into England, and there died; Two of his sonnes went into Germany to study there, and after a time returned home again, instructing their mother, brother, and sister in the right knowledge of Christ, which being taken notice of, they were all carried before the Magistrate, and exhorted to returne to the Church of Rome again; The younger brother and sister, being not so throughly grounded in the truth by reason of their yeares, yielded something and so were sent home again: the mother, who remained constant,Constancy. was adjudged to perpetual imprisonment: the two elder bre∣thren defended the truth stoutly against the Friars; Disputation not pre∣vailing,Popish cruelty they proceeded to torments, endeavouring to know of them who was their Master, and what fellows they had? they answered that their Master was Christ, who bare his Crosse before them; and for fellows they had innumerable, dispersed in all places. At last they were condemned to the fire; and at the place of execution, they began to exhort the people, whereupon bals were put into their mouths; which through vehemency in desiring to speak, they thrust out again, intreating them for the Lords sake that they might have leave to speak;
and so singing with a loud voice, they were fastened to the stake, where they prayed for their Persecutors, exhorted one another,Joy and com∣fort at death. and endured the fire patiently: One of them feeling the violence of the flame, said, O what a small pain is this compared with the glory to come! and so, commit∣ting their spirits into the hands of God, they finished their race. Anno 1545. There was a great persecution in Dornick; and amongst others there was one Adrian Tailor and his Wife apprehended,Adrian Tailor and his wife. and up∣on their examination, the man being somewhat timorous, relented something, and so was beheaded: but the woman, being more constant was put into an iron grate and so buried alive. There was also one Master Peter Bruly about the same time, some∣times a Preacher in Strasburg,Master Peter Bruly. but now at the request of the faithful in Dornick, a diligent Preacher there; He used to preach in houses, the door standing open; the Magistrate hearing of it, laid wait for him, shutting up the City gates, and searching three days for him; but the brethren in the night time let him down in a basket over the wall▪ and when he was down, one of them leaning over the wall to bid him farewel, unawares threw down a loose stone, which falling upon his leg, brake it in pieces; He com∣plaining of his hurt, the watchmen heard him and apprehended him.A special Provi∣dence. Then did he give thanks to Almighty God, who by that providence staid him there to bear witnesse to his truth: whilst he was in prison, he ceased not to instruct and confirm all them that came to him in the Word of grace: after four moneths imprisonment he was condemned to be burnt, and his ashes to be cast into the river;Popish malice and cruely. The Friars took care that he should have but a small fire, that his pain might be the more increased, yet he constantly and chearfully suffered Martyrdom. God made the Ministry of this good man very powerful to many; amongst others there was one Peter Mioce,Peter Mioce. who had lived long in all manner of wickedness and licenciousness; but being, through Gods grace, converted,His conversion he excelled all the rest of the brethren in zeale and ho∣linesse; at last he was apprehended, and being asked whether he was one of Peter Brulies disciples: he said that he was, and that he had re∣ceived much benefit by his Doctrine: withall professing that his do∣ctrine was consonant to the holy Scriptures; whereupon he was let down into a deep dungeon full of Toads and other vermine:Put into a dun∣geon amongst Toads. After∣wards he was brought forth before the Senate, who had provided some Friars to convert him: To whom he said, When I lived an ungodly life in all manner of vice and wickedness, you never said word to me;Note. but now for savouring and favouring the Word of God, you seek my blood. Then did they examine him about sundry Articles of Religion, to which whilst he was making a full answer, they cut him off, bidding him answer in two words, Yea, or No; Whereupon he said,Zeale. If you will not give me leave to answer fully to things of such importance, send me again to my dungeon a∣mongst the Toads and Frogs, who will not interrupt me whilst I talk with my Lord my God: Shortly after he was condemned to be burned: and ha∣ving a bag of powder hung about his neck, when the fire came to it, it gave a crack: whereupon the Friars told the People,Popish lies. that the Divel
came out of him and carried away his soul to hell. A godly Mini∣nister martyr∣red.A tyrannous Prince in Germany apprehended a godly Minister, and for his constancy in the truth, put out both his eyes, and kept him a long time in prison, afflicting him with divers kinds of torments; Then did he cause him to be degraded, shaving the skin off his head, and rubbing it with salt till the blood ran down his shoulders, and paring off the ends of his fingers; so that four days after he patiently yielded up the Ghost. Not long after there was a godly Minister in Antwerp, called Christo∣pher Fabri,Christopher Fabri. A Traytor. that was betrayed by a woman, who pretended a great zeal to Religion, and was cast into prison, where he lay for a long time, and endured much misery: at last he was brought forth and condem∣ned to be burnt alive. And when the Margrave brought him forth to execution, the people having first sung Psalmes, fell to casting of stones against the Executioner, so as the poor Prisoner being bound, and fire set to him, the Margrave durst stay no longer but ran away, and so did the executioner; but before he fled, by the command of the Margrave,The people drive away the Executioner. he took a hammer and beat out Fabrie's brains, and stabbed him into the back with a dagger, so that the people running to save him from the fire found him dead: after which by the command of the Margrave,His Martyr∣dom. he had a great stone tied about his neck, and was thrown into the river. Anno 1549. One Nicholas and Barbara his wife, and one Austin and Marrian his wife, Germans by birth, went to Geneva, where they li∣ved for a space;Two men and their wives. then returning through Germany they intended to go into England, but having passed through Dornick, they were discove∣red to the Lieutenant thereof, who speedily pursuing them, overtook them; yet at that time God delivered Austin out of their hands: but Ni∣cholas and the two women were apprehended and carried back by the souldiers; Coming to an Inne by the way, at table Nicholas gave thanks: whereat the wicked Captain swearing grievously, said, Let us see,Blasphemy. thou lewd Heretick, if thy God can deliver thee out of my hand; Nicholas replyed, Hath Christ ever offended you that by your blasphemous swearing you thus tear him in pieces? Pray you if you have any thing against Christ, ra∣ther wreak your anger upon this poor body of mine, and let the Lord alone; Then did he bind them hands and feet,Zeal. and carried them to Burges, and cast them into the dungeon. Divers Friers coming to them, Nicholas in disputing with them so confounded them,Vincit veritas. that they went away ashamed, saying, that he had a divel, crying, To the fire with the Lutherane. Afterwards the Magistrate sought to pump out of Nicholas what acquaintance he had in that City: but not prevailing with him, he went to his wife, and by flattering speeches and fair promises,Popish subtil∣ty. he wrought so upon her weaknesse, that he gat out all that she knew, whereupon ensued a great perse∣cution. Shortly after Nicholas was condemned to be burned, at the hearing of which sentence,Courage. he blessed the Lord who had counted him worthy to
be a witnesse in the cause of his dear and wel-beloved Son Jesus Christ; At the place of execution hew a commanded not to speak to the Peo∣ple, for if he did, he should have a woodden ball thrust into his mouth; yet as he was binding to the stake, forgetting the com∣mand, he cryed out, O Charles, Charles,Meaning the Emperour. how long shall thy heart be hard∣ned? With that one of the Souldiers gave him a great blow: Then he said, Ah miserable People, who are not worthy that the Word should be preached to you; The Friars crying out that he had a Divel, he answered them in the words of David, Depart from me all ye wicked, for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping;Nte. and so commending his spirit into the hands of God, he ended his life in the midst of the flames. Marrian was condemned to be buried quick; and when some earth was thrown upon her, the hangman stamped upon her with his feet till she died. Afterwards Austin that had before escaped, was apprehended, and being examined,Austins cou∣rage. though by nature he was a very timorous and weak man, yet did he stand to the defence of the truth valiantly, and answered his adversaries very boldly. Being condemned to be burnt, as he was going to execution, a Gentleman drank to him in a cup of wine, exhorting him to pity himself, at least not to destroy his soule: Austin thanked him, saying,Tentation. What care I have of my soule you may see by this, in that I had rather give my body to be burned,Zeal. then to sin against my conscience. Being tyed to the stake and fire set to him, he heartily prayed to the Lord, and so patiently departed. Anno 1551. The Emperour Chales the fifth, having obtruded the Interim upon Germany, many godly Ministers were persecuted and dri∣ven from their places for opposing the same, as may be seen in my first part of Lives. The city of Magdenburg also for refusing it, had an army sent a∣gainst it, which besieged it for a whole year together,Magdenburg besieged; whereby many of the godly Citizens lost their lives, and others endured great miseries. But at last, Gods providence so ordering of it, warre arose betwixt the Emperour and the King of France, whereupon peace was granted unto Magdenburg upon good terms,And delivered. and the inhabitants enjoyed their former Religion quietly. Anno 1555. There was one Hostius born at Gaunt,Hostius. who for some time was a member of the French Church here in London in King Edwards days: but in the beginning of Queen Maries reign, he went vvith his family to Norden in Frizeland: and aftervvards having some businesse to Gaunt, he went thither, where he instructed many of his friends in the truth; and hearing that a Friar used to preach good doctrine, he went to hear him; but the Friar that day defended transubstantiation, which so grieved him,Zeal. that he could scarce refrain from speaking till the Sermon was ended. When the Friar was come down from the Pulpit, he charged him for preaching false doctrine, perswading the peo∣ple by the Scripture, that the bread was but the Sacrament of the Lords body; but the people making a tumult, carried him out of the Church in a croud; and he had not gone far before he was apprehended by an Officer, and carried to prison; Then came divers Friars to reason with
him; and he stood to the trial of the Scriptures only, which they re∣fused. During his imprisonment he wrote a consolatory letter to his wife,His letter to his wife. exhorting her to bring up his children in the fear of God. Being condemned, he was commanded not to speak to the people; being bound to the stake,His Martyr∣dome. he prayed for his enemies, and was first strangled, and then burnt. The same year there was at Dornick one Bertrand, who to enjoy the freedome of his conscience went to Wesell;Bertrand. but being desirous to draw his wife and children thither, he went thrice to Dornick to perswade her to go with him; yet could he by no means prevail with her; Then did he set his house in order, desiring her to pray that God would establish him in the work that he went about; and on Christmas day he went to the great Church at Dornick; and the Priest being at Masse, when he was about to elevate the Host,An heroical act. Bertrand took the cake out of his hand and trampled it under his feet, saying, that he did it to shew the glory of that god that they worshipped, or rather what little power he had; labouring to perswade them that the cake was not their Saviour; At first the people stood amazed, but presently they raised such a tumult that Ber∣trand hardly escaped with life. The Governour hearing of it, was exceedingly enraged, and sent for Bertrand into the Castle, asking him whether he was sorry for his fact, and whether he would do it if it were to do again? Bertrand an∣swered, That he would, and if he had a hundred lives to lose, he would lose them all in that quarrel;Courage. Then was he thrice put to the rack and tormented cruelly to draw from him who were his setters on;Cruelty. yet could they get nothing from him: Then was he condemned, and drawn from the Castle to the Market-place with a Ball of iron in his mouth: There he was set upon a stage, and had his right hand wherewith he did the fact,Barbarous cruelty. crushed between two hot irons with sharp edges, till the form of his hand was quite changed; Then did they bring other red hot irons for his right foot, which they used as they had done his hand, which he with marvellous patience and constan∣cy underwent, putting out his foot of his own accord to them; Then taking the ball of Iron out of his mouth,Admirable patience. they cut out his tongue: not∣withstanding which, he continually called and cryed unto God, which caused them to thrust in the ball of iron again; Then was he let down in an iron chaine upon the fire and pulled up again,A special Pro∣vidence. and so they conti∣nued pulling up and letting him down till he was burnt to ashes, which ashes they threw into the river. From Locrane in Helvetia the Ministers were banished, but were en∣tertained by the Tigurines. Zurich.Two other good men born in Dornick, went into divers reformd Churches, where they increased much in knowledge and godlinesse, and at last resolved to return to Dornick, to do what good they could in their own Country; and it so fell out that on a day when many good people were gone to a wood to hear the Word of God preached to them by a Minister of Jesus Christ, their Adversaries having intelli∣gence
of it, followed them thither, and took about thirty of them, amongst whom were these two men, who fell to singing of Psalms,Thirty taken at a Sermon. supposing that they should be presently burned; but afterwards they were condemned to be beheaded; and so they comfortably ended their lives. Also divers godly men and women suffered Martyrdome at Valence, amongst whom was James Faber, an old man, who,James Faber his excellent answer. when they argued with him about his religion, said, Though I cannot satisfie you by reasoning, yet I can constantly abide and suffer for the truth of the Gospel. Also one Godfride, being condemned at Dornick for an Heretick;O urnay Godfride. Nay said he, Not an Heretick, but an unprofitable servant of Jesus Christ. When the Hangman would have strangled him to ease his pain in burn∣ing, he refused, saying,Courage. that he would abide the sentence of death which was passed upon him. Besides these, there were both in the upper and lower Germany many others secretly made away; some drowned: some bured quick;A Minister poisoned. some murthered in prison, &c. A godly Minister was also poisoned by a Priest at Erford for preaching the truth of Christ; Besides many others. In the city of Lile the Gospel was secretly preached for three years together, sometimes in houses, then in woods, fields,in Lile. and Caves of the earth, not without hazard of their dearest lives if they had been disco∣vered; yet did not dangers cool the zeal of Gods people; but what was preached, was accordingly practised amongst them; works of mercy and charity were their exercise, not only towards those of the houshold of faith, but towards those which were without also;Christian cha∣rity. so as many by means hereof were drawn and brought to the knovvledge of Christ. This so enraged Satan and his instruments, that Anno 1556, the time being come wherein God had given them power to try and exercise the faith of his people, they neglected not to shew their cruelty upon them: and for that end one night about ten of the clock, the Provost of the City with his armed Sergeants made search to see if they could find any met together; but, by Gods Providence, there was no meeting of Gods People at that time; then went they to the house of one Robert Oguire,Robert Oguire and his  carried to pri∣son. which was a little Church; for all in it, both small and great, were famili∣arly instructed in the knowledge and fear of God. Being violently entred into the house, seeking up and down for their prey, they found certain books which they took away with them: but Baudizon the son of Robert, whom they principally sought after, was not then at home,Baudizon. being gone abroad to confer of the word with some of the brethren. Before the Provost was departed, Baudizon came home, and knocked at the door. Martin his younger brother, who watched for his coming, bade him presently to be gone: but he thinking that he had mistaken him for some other, continued knocking, saying, It is, I open the door. Then came the Sergeants and opened the door, and laying hold on him, said, Ah Sir, you are well met, and with that
the Provost arrested him in the Emperours name, withall causing the Father, Mother, and two sons to be bound, and so carried them away towards the prison; As they went through the streets, Baudizon said a∣loud: Oh Lord, assist us by thy grace, not only to be prisoners for thy names sake, but to confess thy holy truth in all purity before men, so far as to seal the same with our blood, for the edification of thy poor Church; they were all cast into several prisons, yet remained chearfull, praising God for ac∣counting them worthy to suffer for his truth;Joy in tribula∣tion. and after a few dayes they were all brought forth before the Magistrates, who speaking to Robert Oguire said;They are exa∣mined. We hear that you never come to Masse; That you dis∣swade others from it; That you keep Conventicles in your house, where erroneous doctrine is preached, &c. Robert answered, I indeed refuse to go to Mass, because the death and precious blood of Christ is utter∣ly abolished there, and troden under foot, &c. And I cannot deny but there have met together in my house honest people, fearing God; Not with intention to harm any, I assure you, but for the advancement of Gods glory, and the good of many, &c. Then one demanded what they did when they met toge∣ther; To which Baudizon ansvvered, When vve meet together in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to hear the Word of God,An holy pra∣ctice. vve first, falling on our knees before God, in the humility of our spirits, do make confession of our sins before his Divine Majesty: then we pray that the Word of God may be rightly divided, and purely preached; then we pray for our Soveraign Lord the Emperour, that the Common∣wealth may be peaceably governed to the glory of God; yea we for∣get not you whom we acknowledge our Superiours, intreating our good God that you may maintain this City in tranquillity, &c. Thus you hear what we do in our Assemblies: and if you will not be offended to hear the summe of our prayers, I am ready to recite the same unto you. One of the Magistrates wished him to go on, whereupon kneel∣ing down,Fervent prayer he prayed before them all with such fervency of affection, and ardency of zeal, that it forced the Magistrates to break forth into tears; Baudizon rising up, said, Your Masterships may hereby take a scant∣ling how we are imployed in our meetings. Being further examined, every one of them made an open Confessi∣on of his faith, and so were returned to prison again; And not long after they were tortured upon the Rack to make them confesse who they were that met at their house:They are tor∣tured. but they would discover none but such as they knew were at that time out of their reach. Four or five dayes after, the men were again convented before the Magistrates, who asked them if they would submit themselves to the will of the Magistrates: Robert and Baudizon said they would; but Martin the younger sonne said, he would not submit thereto, but would accompany his Mother,Robert and Baudizon con¦demned. and so he was sent back to prison; and the Father with his eldest son were presently adjudged to be burnt alive. Sentence being pronounced, one of the Judges said, This day shall you go to dwell with all the Divels in hell fire; Then were they returned to prison, praising God, and by their patience and constancy, conquer∣red
the rage and fury of their enemies; In prison there came some Friars to them,Popish malice telling them that the hour was come wherein they must finish their dayes: They answered; Blessed be the Lord our God, who now delivering our bodies out of this vile prison, will receive our souls into his glorious and heavenly Kingdom. Then said one of the Friars, Father Robert, thou art an old man, I intreat thee in this thy last hour think of saving thy soule; and if thou wilt give ear to me, Ile warrant thee thou shalt do well; Robert answered, Poor man, how darest thou as∣sume that to thy self which belongs to God alone, and so rob him of his honour? &c. Another wishing him to pity his soul, he said, Dost thou not see what pity I have on it, when for the name of Christ I am willing to give my body to the fire, hoping to day to be with him in Paradise, &c.Note. Then said a Friar, Out Dog, thou art not worthy the name of a Christi∣an: thou and thy sonne are resolved to damne your soules with all the Divels in hell. Then would they have severed the Father from his son, which Bau∣dizon perceiving, said, Pray you let my Father alone, he is an old man, hinder him not from receiving the Crown of Martyrdome. Another Friar said, Away Varlet, thou art the cause of thy Fathers perdition. Whilst Baudizon was stripping and fitting himself to be sacrificed, some of the Friars had fastned a Crucifix in the old mans hands, per∣swading him that it would please the People, and that for all that, he might lift up his heart to God, &c. But so soon as Baudizon saw it, he said, Alasse Father, what do you now? will you play the Idolater at your last hour? and so pulling the Idol out of his hand,Zeal. he threw it a∣way. At the place of execution they were set upon a Scaffold, and Baudi∣zon desired leave to make a Confession of his faith: answer was made, that he might confess himself to a Friar if he would, which he refusing, was readily haled to the stake, where he began to sing the 16. Psalm; then said a Friar, Do you not hear what wicked errors these Hereticks sing, to beguile the people withall? Baudizon hearing him, replyed:Blasphemy. Thou simple Idiot, callest thou the Psalms of David errours? but no mar∣vel, for thus are ye wont to blaspheme against the Spirit of God. Then see∣ing them about to chain his Father to the stake, he said to him, Be of good courage Father, the worst will be past by and by. Then did he often breath forth: Oh God, Father everlasting, accept the sacrifice of our bodies for thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ his sake. A Friar cryed,Faith and cou∣rage. Out Heretick thou liest; God is none of thy Father; the Divel is thy Father. Baudizon fixing his eys upon heaven, said to his Father, Behold, I see the heavens open, and millions of Angels ready to receive us, and rejoycing to see us thus bearing witness to the truth in the view of the world. Father, let us rejoyce and be glad, for the joys of heaven are opened to us. Then said a Friar, I see Hell open, and millions of Divels are ready to carry you thither. A poor man in the croud cryed out, Be of good comfort Baudizon, stand to it, thou fightest in a good quarrel, I am on thy side; which words so soon as he had spoken, he departed, and so hastened himself from danger.
The fire being kindled, Baudizon oft said to his Father, Yet a very little while and we shall enter into the heavenly mansions; the fire encreasing, the last words which they spake, were, Jesus Christ thou Sonne of God, into thy hands we commend our spirits, and so they sweetly slept in the Lord.Their Martyr∣dome. After the death of these worthy champions of Christ, many of the Popish rabble were sent,Martin and his Mother. if possible, to seduce the Mother and son re∣maining in prison; and coming to them, the first subtilty they used was to separate them asunder;Popish subtil∣ty. then they set upon the woman as the weaker vessel, and so wrought upon her that she began to waver and let go her first faith; this the adversaries much rejoyced in; and the poor flock of Christ in that place hearing of it,Humane frail∣ty. were as much afflict∣ed with the news; but God left them not in this mournful condition long: For a Monk one day going to her, perswaded her to draw her sonne Martin to the same recantation with her self, which she promi∣sed to do; but when they came together, Martin perceiving the grie∣vous Apostacy of his Mother, bewailed it with many tears, saying to her, Oh Mother, what have you done? have you denied him that redeemed you? Alas what injury hath he done you that you should requite him with so great an injury and dishonour? Now am I plunged into that woe which I most feared; Ah good God that I should live to see this, which pierceth me to the very heart? His mother hearing his pittiful complaints, and seeing him drowned in tears for her sake, began again to renew her strength in the Lord, and with tears cryed out, Oh Father of mercies, be merciful to me miserable sinner,Recovery. and cover my transgression under the righteousnesse of thy blessed Son: Lord enable me with strength from above to stand to my first confession, and make me to abide stedfast therein even to my last breath. Presently in came the seducers, hoping to finde her in the same minde that they left her; but she no sooner saw them, but cryed, Avoid Satan, get thee behind me, for henceforth thou hast nether part nor portion in me; I will by the help of God stand to my first Confession, and if I may not sign it with ink, I will seal it with my blood: and so after this time, through Gods gracious assistance, she grew stronger and stronger; Then were they both condemned to be burnt alive, and their ashes to be sprinkled in the aire. When the sentence was passed, as they return∣ed to prison, they said; Now blessed be God who causeth us thus to triumph over our enemies. This is the wished hour, our gladsome day is come;Joy in tribula∣tion. let us not therefore forget to be thankfull for that honour that God doth us in thus conforming us to the image of his Sonne. Let us remember those that have troden this path before us; for this is the high-way to the Kingdom of heaven, &c. Hereupon some of the Friars, being ready to burst for anger, said unto Martin that was most valiant, We see now Heretick that thou art wholly possest body and soul with a Divel, as were thy father and brother, who are now in hell. Martin answered, As for your railings and cursings, God will this day turn them into blessings in the sight of himself and all his holy Angels.Faith and pa∣tience.
When they came into prison, there came to them two persons of great quality, of whom one of them said to Martin, Young man,Tentation. I have compassion on thee; if thou wilt be ruled by me, and return to the Church of Rome, thou shalt not only be freed from this shameful death, but I will also give thee an hundred pounds; Martin presently replyed, Sir, you pre∣sent before me many temporal commodities: But alas!Resisted. do you think me so sim∣ple, as to forsake an eternal Kingdome for the enjoyment of a short temporal life? No Sir, its now too late to speak to me of worldly commodities; I will hearken to no other speech but of those spiritual commodities which I shall en∣joy this day in Gods Kingdome, &c. Soon after Martin and his mother were carried to the place of their Martyrdome, and being bound to the stake, the woman said: We are Christians, and that which we now suffer, is not for murther nor theft, but because we will believe no more than the Word of God teacheth us. The fire being kindled, the heat of it did nothing abate the fervency of their seal, but they continued crying,Their Martyr∣dome. Lord Jesus into thy hands we com∣mend our spirits, and so they blessedly slept in the Lord. A Friar at Gaunt called Charles Coninck, being through Gods mercy converted to the truth, left his Friars weed,Charles Coninck and joyned himself to the brethren; for which he was apprehended; and remaining constant, was condemned: then came a special friend perswading him to recant, and he would procure him a Cannonship: To whom Charles answered, Sir,Tentation re∣sisted. I thank you for your good will and kind offer, but I cannot accept them without offending God; and that rest is no true rest and quietnesse, which is obtained a∣gainst the peace of a good conscience: Shortly after his death, one of his ad∣versaries which had the greatest hand in procuring of it;ods judge∣ment on a Persecutor. fell into grievous terrour and horrour of conscience, whereof within a few dayes he died. The Persecution of the Duke de Alva in the Netherlands. WHen the light of the Gospel was much spread abroad in the Netherlands: King Philip of Spaine sent the Duke de Alva with a great Army to root out the Professors of it, who exercised unpa∣ralell'd cruelty against all sorts of persons, both of the Nobility and Commons,Barbarous cruelty. permitting his souldiers to ravish honest Matrons and Vir∣gins, many times causing their husbands and Parents to stand by and be∣hold it. This Duke on a time boasted at his own table that he had been dili∣gent to root out heresie: for that beside those which he had slain in war, in the space of six years he had put into the hands of the common hang∣man above eighteen thousand persons. His sonne also Don Frederick being sent by him to Zutphen, was re∣received
by the Bourgers without any opposition, yet was he no sooner entred,Don Fredericks cruelty to Zutphen. but he fell to murther, hang and drown a number of the inha∣bitants, with infinite cruelties shewed upon wives and virgins; yea, not sparing the very infants. From thence marching to Naerden in Holland, the inhabitants made an agreement with him,At Naerden. and he entred the town peaceably; but never did Turks or Scythians, or the most barbarous and inhumane Nations in the world, commit more abominable cruelties than Don Frederick did in this town; for when the Bourgers had given the best entertainment that they could to him and his souldiers, he caused it to be proclaimed, that they should all assemble themselves together in the Chappel of the Hospital, where they should be made acquainted with such Laws, according to which they should hereafter govern themselves; but when these poor people were thus assembled, he commanded his souldiers to murther them all,Treachery. without sparing any one; the men were massacred, the women were first ravished, and then murthered most cru∣elly, the children and infants had their throats cut, and in some houses they tied the inhabitants to posts, and then set fire on the houses, and burnt them alive; so that in the whole town, neither man, wife, maid, nor child, old nor young were spared; and then the town was wholly ra∣zed to the ground without pity or mercy. After this Don Frederick besieged Harlem, which held out against him for a long time, but at last, their Provision being spent, they made bread of Linseed of Turnups,The siege of Harlem. and lived upon the flesh of horses, dogs, cats,A Famine. and such like: and this also in the end failing them, they were enforced to surrender the town upon composition, by which they were to pay two hundred and fourty thousand florins to redeem themselves and town from spoil.The town sur∣rendred. Don Frederick having thus got the town into his hands, commanded that at the tolling of the great bell, all the Bourgers and Souldiers should bring their armes into the state-house, that the townsmen should go into the Cloister of Zyel,Popish perfi∣diousnesse. the women into the Cathedral Church, and the souldiers into another Church, this done, all the Ensigne-bear∣ers were singled out and imprisoned, and whilst the poor Bourgers were guarded in the Church, the perfidious Spaniards plundered their houses; The next day this bloody Don Frederick caused three hundred Walloons to be hanged and headed: the next day Captain Riperda and his Lieutenant were beheaded,A Minister hanged. and a godly Minister called Stembach, was hanged, and two hundred fourty seven souldiers were drowned in the sea of Harlem; the next day a great number were executed, and the day following three hundred more Souldiers and Bourgers lost their heads,Another be∣headed. and with them a godly Minister called Simon Simonson: presently after three of the principal men lost their heads, and shortly after all the English and Scots were beheaded, and to fill up this sea of blood,Barbarous cruelties. all the wounded and sick were beheaded before the Hospital door. In the mean time a Party of souldiers that lay without in a sconce, were all starved to death.
Not long before, the strong town of Valenciennes in Henault, having set up the free exercise of the reformed Religion amongst them,Valenciennes besieged. were pre∣sently besieged by an army under the Signior of Noircarmes; the siege lasted about three months, and the Citizens having no hope of relief, at last treated and surrendred the City upon good conditions; but Noircarmes being entred,Popish perfi∣diousnesse and cruelty. he kept the City gates shut for divers dayes, and most perfidiously and barbarously hanged up all the French souldiers, with all the Ministers and Protestant Merchants, and confis∣cated their goods. But besides these generals, let us also view some particulars. Anno 1560. There was in Flanders one John Herwin,John Herwin. a souldier of a very dissolute life: but God having a purpose to shew him mercy, put it into his heart to go into England, and accordingly he came to London in the beginning of Queen Elizabeths reigne, and by Gods good Pro∣vidence was entertained in a Brewers family,A special Pro∣vidence. where both master and ser∣vants feared God: His Master caused him often to go to the Dutch Church, where, by the Ministry of the Word he first began to tast,His conversion and afterwards more and more to increase in the saving knowledge of Christ. After a while he returned back into Flanders, and at Furne he was presently laid wait for by the Popish Bailiffe; This occasioned his removal to Honscot; and yet there also the Bailiffe being informed of him, went in the night with his Sergeants, and apprehended him; By the way they met some drunkards in the streets; whereupon the Bailiffe said, We have, as they say, many Gospellers in this town, but it little appears by these disorders. Herwin hearing him, said, Is drunkennesse a sin Master Bailiffe? The Bailiffe answered, what of that? Herwin re∣plyed, Why then do you not commit these men to prison,Herwin impri∣soned. seeing it is your of∣fice to punish vice, and to protect them that fear God? To this the Bailiffe answered not. In the prison Herwin behaved himself so vertuously, that every one admired him. Being somewhat long before he was called before the Magistrate, he was much troubled at it, his heart being inflamed with an holy zeal to confesse Jesus Christ before his Judges.Zeale. Yet many of the brethren were very fearful of him, considering what his former life had been, and what a novice he as yet was in the Profession of the Gospel. At last he had his hearts desire, being brought before the Sheriffe; there a Priest was provided to dispute with him, to whose questions Herwin answered with such soundnesse of judgement and modesty, that it easily appeared that he had profited well in Christs school. Be∣ing asked of Christs real presence in the Sacrament, he answered, That the highest dwelleth not in Temples made with hands, &c. Where∣upon he admonished his Judges to examine the doctrine of the Church of Rome by the true touchstone of Gods Word, whereby they might easily see how contrary it is to the Scriptures, &c. And having made a free Profession of his faith, he craved Justice one way or other;Courage. but they still urged him to recant, to which he answered,Constancy. My faith is not
built upon mans opinion, but the Lord hath taught me to eschew evil, and to do good▪ Then was he returned to prison again. During his imprisonment he was dangerously assaulted by some sub∣tile and cunning Friars, who alledged the sayings of diverse of the Fa∣thers, to prove their transubstantiation; but he, through Gods mercy, holding close to the Word of Christ, overcame them. In prison he u∣sed to recreate himself by singing of Psalms,Vincit veritas. and the people used to flock together to the prison door to hear him; This so angred the Popish Clergy, that they sought to hinder him from singing, and for this end they caused two desperate Malefactors to be put into the same room with him;Popish malice▪ and subtilty. but within a few dayes, these Villains brake prison and escaped, leaving opportunity to Herwin to escape also; but he, fearing that his flight might be prejudicial to other godly persons in the City, upon whom it would be charged,Flight refused. resolved rather to remain there, than to flie: Presently after news was brought him that sentence of death was passed upon him, whereupon he thanked God for advancing him to so high an honour as to be accounted worthy to suffer for his name: Testifying the inward joy which he felt in his soul by a letter that he wrote to the bre∣thren,Thanks for sufferings. wherein he exhorted them to constancy and perseverance in the doctrine of the truth which they had received from God: Within a few dayes after he was carried forth to hear his sentence, at which time the Magistrate by earnest intreaties and large promises sought to bring him to a recantation,Tentation re∣sisted. and to worship their breaden God, promising that there∣upon he should be presently released: but Herwin refusing their offer of life upon those termes, was bound and carried into a Chappel where they celebrated the Masse; at which time, to shew his detestation of their ido∣latry, he turned his back, winked with his eyes, and stopped his eares. At the elevation of the Host one asked him if Jesus Christ was not now between the Priests hands?Zeale. To which he answered, No, he is in heaven at the right hand of his Father: Then was the sentence of death read a∣gainst him. As he was going to execution, he said to the people, See here how this wicked world rewards the poor servants of Jesus Christ: whilst I was a drun∣kard, a player at Cards and Dice, living in all dissolutenesse and ungodly be∣haviour,Whence perse∣cution ariseth. I was never in danger of these bonds; yea, I was then counted a good fellow, and at that time, Who but I? But no sooner began I, through Gods grace, to seek after a godly life, but presently the world made war upon me, and became mine enemy, &c. yet this discourageth me not; for the servant is not better than his Lord; seeing they persecuted him, no question but they will per∣secute us. At the place of execution, one gave him his hand, and com∣forted him: then began he to sing the 30. Psalm, whereupon a Friar in∣terrupted him, saying, Oh John turn, there is yet time and space; the Mar∣tyr disregarding his words, turned his back upon him; and some of the company said to the Friar, Turn thou, thou hypocrite; and so Herwin quiet∣ly finished his Psalm; many joyning with him in singing of it; then said the Friar, Be not offended good people to hear this Heretick to sing of God; The people answered, Hold thy peace thou Balaamite, here is no body
offended. There were present at least four hundred that encouraged the Martyr to continue to the end, as he had well begun; To whom he an∣swered Brethren, I fight under the Standard, and in the quarrel of my great Lord and Captain Jesus Christ. Then he prayed,His Martyr∣dome. and so went into his Ca∣bin made with fagots, saying to the people, I am now going to be sacri∣ficed; Follow you me when God of his goodnesse shall call you to it: and so he was first strangled, and then burnt to ashes. Anno 1561. There was apprehended in Antwerp one John de Boscane,John de Boscane▪ who for his constancy in Religion was condemned to death: But the Magistrate fearing an uproare if he should put him to death publickly, knowing that he was a man free of speech, and beloved of the people, he resolved for this cause secretly to drown him in the prison; and for this end a tub with water was provided, and an Executioner sent to drown him; but the water was so shallow, and the Martyr so tall, that he could not possibly be drowned therein;His cruel Mar∣tyrdome. whereupon the Executioner gave him many wounds and stabs with a dagger, and so this holy Martyr ended his life. About the same time another servant of Jesus Christ, having made a bold Profession of his faith, was in the same City sentenced to death;John de Buisons beheaded in prison. and because they dust not execute him publickly, they privately sent and be∣headed him in prison; his name was John de Buisons. The godly in this City of Antwerp, being desirous to take all oppor∣tunities to meet together in the fear of God, on a day when the Popish party was met to behold great triumphs,The Church of Antwerp perse∣cued. they withdrew themselves out of the City, and went into a Wood, where their Minister preached the Word of God to them; The Drosart of Marksem being advertised hereof, took his officers and went thitherward▪ by the way he met with some poor boyes that were cowherds; to whom he promised new cloaths if if they would bring him to the place in the Wood where their assembly was; which they undertaking, he sent some of his offi∣cers along with them into the Wood, who coming to the place like wolves, the sheep of Christ began to flie: the Minister seeing their fear, admonished them not to stir; The Persecutors were not above five or six, and the persecuted four or five hundred, so that they might easily have resisted them, but they would not. The officers chiefly aimed to apprehend the Minister, and having caught one of the As∣sembly, they thought him to be the man, crying one to another, Hold the Priest fast, striking him with their Pistols and staves, and so car∣ried him to the Drosart; they caught also two or three more, which afterwards made an escape: the man only that remained with the Dro∣sart whose name was Bartholomew, was often set upon to be turned aside from his holy Profession; Why, say they,Bartholomews constancy. cannot such a young man as thou art content thy self with our Religion and glorious Church, adorned with gold, silver, precious stones, in which there is such melodious musick,The Church of Rome a glo∣rious strumpet. both of voices and instruments, but thou must needs joyn thy self to that Church that is hated, despised, and exposed to all manner of contempt? Bartholomew overcame all these tentations by the power of the Almighty, saying,
That which is greatly esteemed amongst men, is altogether abominable in the sight of God; Then was he condemned and beheaded; by which death he glorified God. Anno 1568. There were apprehended in Antwerp, one Scoblant, John de Hues,Scoblant, John Hues, Joris Coomans. and Joris Coomans, who being cast into prison were very oy∣ful, confessing that nothing befell them but by Gods divine Providence, as they acknowledge in a letter which they wrote to the brethren, where∣in they thus write, Seeing it is the will of God that we should suffer for his name, and in the quarrel of his Gospel, we certifie you, dear bre∣thren,Joy in tribu∣lation. that we are joyful; and however the flesh continually rebels against the spirit, counselling ever and anon according to the advice of the old Serpent: yet we are well assured that Christ, who hath bruised, will still bruise the Ser∣pents head, and not leave us comfortlesse; we are indeed sometimes pricked in the heele, yet we are not discouraged, but keep our faith close to the promises of God,Faith▪ &c. Be not therefore dismayed for our bands and imprisonment; for it is the good Will of God towards us, and therefore we pray that he will give us grace to persevere constantly unto the end. Shortly after Scoblant was brought to his trial, where he made a good confession of his faith, and so was condemned. Returning to prison, he earnestly requested the Jailor that he would not suffer the Friars to come and trouble him; for, said he, they can do me no good, seeing the Lord hath already sealed up the assurance of my salvation in my heart, by his holy Spirit.His excellent speech. I am now going to my Spouse, and putting off this earth∣ly mantle, to enter into his celestial glory, where I shall be freed from all superstitions. Would to God that I might be the last that these ty∣rants should put to death, and that their thirst might be so quenched with my blood, that the poor Church of Christ might henceforth enjoy rest and quiet. When he was to go forth to execution, he sung the fourtieth Psalme with his fellow prisoners,Scoblants Mar∣tyrdome. then said the Lords Prayer, and so kissing each other, they commended one another unto God with many teares. Being tied to the stake, he was burned alive, calling upon the name of the Lord. John Hues died in prison, whereupon Joris wrote thus to his friends; Brethren,John Hues died in prison. I am now left alone, whereas we were three in number. John Hues is now dead in the Lord; and yet I am not altogether alone, seeing the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob is with me; he is my exceed∣ing great reward, and will not fail to reward me so soon as I shall have laid down this earthly tabernacle. Pray unto God that he will streng∣then me to the end; for every hour I expect the dissolution of this house of clay. When he was brought forth before the Judges, and examined of his faith, he answered freely, and proved what he said by the holy Scriptures; and being asked whether he was resolved to die for the faith which he professed? he answered, I will not only venture to give my body, but my soul also for the confirmation of it;Courage. Joris his Mar∣tyrdome. and so being condemned, he was shortly after burned, dying with much comfort.
The persecution growing hot in Flanders, one Giles Annik, and John his sonne removed to Emden;Giles, and John Annik. but by reason of their sudden departure they could not take their wives with them; whereupon in the year 1568. they returned back to fetch their wives, who were at Renay; yet in regard of the danger, they durst not go into the town openly, but took up their lodging in the evening, at an honest mans house called Lewis Meulin. Now it so fell out that that very night the enemies had appointed to make a secret search after such as professed the Gospel,A special Pro∣vidence. and so passing by this house, and seeing the light of a candle in it, expecting their prey, they forced open the door, and took these two, together with their Host pri∣soners, God having appointed them to bear witnesse to his truth: After they had been in prison awhile, they were all three condemned for Here∣ticks; and presently after Giles, the father, was burned. John, the son, being fetched to execution,Their Martyr∣dome. when he saw the man that first apprehended him, he called him to him, saying, I forgive thee my death, and so he, with Lewis Meulin, were both beheaded.Lewis Meulin. About the same time there was also a godly widow apprehended and cast into prison, her crime was,A widow for that about two years before she had suffered a Minister to preach in an out-house on the backside of her dwelling. She was very charitable in relieving the poor, and every way shewed forth the fruits of a true saving faith:Charity. After seven moneths im∣prisonment she was condemned to die, and a Priest coming to her, to hear Confession, she spake to him with such a divine grace, and with a spirit so replenished with zeal, that he went from her with teares trickling down his cheeks, saying, I came to comfort you, but I have more need to be comforted of you: when she was carried forth to execution,Her Martyr∣dome. she went with much boldnesse and joy of heart, and having her head cut off, she sweetly slept in the Lord. There was also one Christopher Gauderin, that at first was brought up under the Abbat of Hename; but the Abbat dying,Christopher Gauderin. he betook himself to the weaving of linnen, and quickly grew expert in his trade; But ha∣ving been trained up in a bad schoole, when the Sabbath came, he spent riotously what he had gotten all the week by his labour: Now, through Gods mercy, it so fell out that a godly man working with him, would often tell him of the danger of his present condition, exhorting him ra∣ther to distribute his gettings to the poor, assuring him that if he spent his money so wastfully, God would call him to an account for it: These with the like exhortations so wrought upon him through the grace of God, that he began to change his course,His Conver∣sion. and in stead of frequenting Ta∣verns, he became a diligent hearer of Sermons, and gave himself much to reading of the holy Scriptures; so that not long after he was called by the Church to the office of a Deacon, which he discharged carefully and faithfully. Shortly after having occasion to go to a place called Audenard, to di∣stribute some almes to the poor there, he was apprehended; and the Bailiffe that had formerly seene him in the Abbats house, asked him
how he came to turn Heretick? Nay, said he, I am no Heretick, but a right believing Christian,His imprison∣ent. and what I learned of him I am now ashamed to remember. In prison he had many disputes about his faith, which he so maintain∣ed and defended by the Word of God,Vincit veritas. that he silenced all his adversaries. Some told him that he would cast away himsef in his youth, being but thirty years old, to whom he answered, That mans life consisted but of two dayes, viz. The day of his birth, and the day of his death, and there∣fore he must needs die once, And for my part, said he, I am now willing by death to passe into eternal life.Mans life but two days. When news was brought him in the evening that he must die the next day, he retired himself, and poured out his soul in prayer unto God till ten a clock; and after his rest, the like he did the next morn∣ing:Prayer. Having ended his Prayer, he put on a clean shirt and washed himself; saying to his fellow-prisoners, Brethren, I am now going to be mar∣ried, I hope ere noon to drink of the wine of the Kingdome of heaven; When he came down he found three other prisoners that were to suffer with him. These four exhorted and encouraged one another to suffer pati∣ently and constantly; Then came a Friar, saying, that he came to con∣vert them,His Zeale. To whom Christopher said, Away from us thou seducer of souls, for we have nothing to do with thee; The Hangman coming to put gagges into their mouths; one of them said, What? shall we not have liberty at this our last hour to praise God with our tongues? Christopher an∣swered, Let not this discourage us, the more wrong our enemies do to us,His faith. the more assistance we shall finde from God; and so ceased not to comfort them till himself was gagged also; Their sentence was that they should be hanged for hearing Sermons: and so with admirable con∣stancy they yielded up their souls to God; One of them being a woman was condemned to be beheaded,Martyrdome. because she had sung Psalms, and exhorted her neighbours out of the Word of God, at a womans upsit∣ting: Her body was grown very feeble, so that she was caused to sit on a stool,Admirable constancy. where she received three blows with a sword overthwart her teeth: yet did she constantly sit still till she received the Crown of Martyrdom, Anno 1568. About the same time there was in a town a mile distant from Gand, a Minister whom it pleased the Lord to illuminate with the saving knowledge of his Gospel,Giles de Meyer whereupon he became a diligent and faith∣ful Preacher of it, both in his life and doctrine; yea, he went from house to house exhorting and comforting every one as he had occa∣sion out of the Word of God; and above all, labouring with them to beware of the abominable superstitions of the Papacy. The Popish Clergy of Gand having intelligence hereof, fearing lest by this means, their doctrine and authority would come into contempt, cau∣sed him to be apprehended and cast into a deep and dark hole, where he remained bearing his affliction patiently,His imprison∣ment. and calling upon God night and day, praising him for accounting him worthy to suffer for his names sake. Whilst he lay there, many good people came to visit
him, receiving such instructions and consolation from him, that they could not be drawn to leave him till necessity enforced, neither then could they depart without abundance of tears. The Priests and Friars sought by all means to draw him to a recan∣tation, but to no purpose,His constancy. for he still kept himself close to the Word of God, which so vexed them, that at last they procured his condem∣nation to be hanged. The Spanish souldiers which carried him to exe∣cution, would needs have him burned, binding and straining him ex∣ceedingly with cords, and in the way abused him shamefully with mocks and scoffs, thrusting him forwards and striking him; the Captain also gave him a blow on the face with his Gantlet,Popish malice and cruelty. which much disfigured him; yea they used him worse then a dog, being the more enraged against him, because of his patient and meek carriage; At last they thrust him into a little Cabin piled with Fagots, and so burnt him,His Martyr∣dome. continually calling upon God till he resigned up his Spirit to him. Anno 1568. There was a Goldsmith dwelling in Breda, who had long been a Deacon of the Church in that place, his name was Peter Coulogue: in his house the Church often met for the service of God;Peter Coulogue and Betkin his maid. the Popish adversaries being much enraged hereby, cast him into pri∣son, which the faithful much grieved at, and endeavoured to visit and comfort him: This the enemies taking notice of removed him into the Castle; during his abode there, though all others were exclu∣ded from him, yet his Maid-servant brought him his food daily, never ceasing to confirm and comfort him out of the Word of God, as well as she was able, for which at length they imprisoned her also: This she was right glad of, thinking her self happy to suffer for righteousness sake. Not long after Peter was put to the torment, which he endured pati∣ently; then did they fetch Betkin also to it, whereupon she said, My Ma∣sters, wherefore will you put me to this torture,Their tor∣ments. seeing I have no way offended you? if it be for my faiths sake, you need not torment me, fos as I was ne∣ver ashamed to make a confession thereof, no more will I now be at this pre∣sent before you, but will, if you please, freely shew you my mind therein; Yet for all this they would have her to the Rack, whereupon she again said, If I must needs suffer this pain,Prayer. I pray you give me leave to call upon my God first: This they consented to: and whilst she was fervently pouring out her prayers unto God, one of the Commissioners was surprised with such a fear and terrour, that he fell into a swoon, and could not be recover∣ed again, by which means the poor maid escaped Racking. Shortly after,Gods judge∣ment on a Per∣secutor. these two innocent persons were condemned to be burn∣ed, and as they were led to execution, there was much lamentation amongst the people. Peter and Betkin prayed earnestly unto God to strengthen them, and perfect the good work that he had begun in them, and to assist them till they had finished their course. The courage and constancy of the maid did so work upon many of the people, godly men and women, that not considering the dan∣ger,
they brake through the multitude, embracing the Prisoners, and praising God for their constancy, saying to them, Fight manfully, for the Crown is prepared for you: At the place of execution Betkin with a chear∣ful and amiable countenance spake thus to the people: Dear brethren and sisters, be alwayes obedient to the Word of God, and fear not them that can kill the body, but have no power over the soul: as for me, I am now going to meet my glorious Spouse the Lord Jesus Christ; Then falling upon their knees they prayed to the Lord with great devotion; And the executio∣ner fastening them to the stake, strangled Peter, Betkin encouraging him till he yielded up the Ghost,Their Martyr∣dome. and till the fire had taken hold of her self; and in the flames she was heard to magnifie the Lord, till she yielded up her spirit into his hands. About this time multitudes of persons were murthered in Flanders by the bloody Inquisition, whose dead bodies were cast out to be gazed upon in every place;A great perse∣cution. and multitudes of believers, both men and women were cast into prisons, where they languished till many of them died. In the City of Valence there were executed fifty seven persons, most of them Burgesses, only because they clave to the true faith of Je∣sus Christ. The Martyrdom of William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange. THe Estates of the United Provinces, having declared the King of Spaine to be fallen from the Government of of those Countries, they chose William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, to be their Captain General,The Prince proscribed. whereupon he was proscribed by the King of Spain, and a great summe of mony promised to him that should slay him; Not long after a desperate villain called Joanville was suborned to do the feat; for which end he was directed to charge his Pistol with two bullets,Joanville sub∣orned to kill him. and to shoot him behind in the head; the day appointed for this execu∣tion was March 18. 1582. upon which day the Prince was to be at a great feast at the Duke of Anjous Court; but the presse being great there, Joanville chose rather to do it at the Prince of Oranges own house as he was at dinner; the Villain being thus desperately resolved, a Ja∣cobin Friar came to confess him, fortifying him in his resolution with many sweet words, perswading him that he should go invisible, for which end he gave him some characters in paper, and little Frogs bones,Popish subtil∣ty. and other conjurations. Being thus assured, he drunk a cup or two of Malmsey, and so ac∣comxanied with his Ghostly father, he went to the Princes Court; at the stair-foot the Friar gave him his blessing, encouraged him, and so left him; The Prince of Orange was set at dinner, with the Earles of Laval, Hohenlo, and many other Noblemen; Joanville came into the dining-room, attired like a Frenchman, so that he was taken for a ser∣vant
to some of those French Noblemen; He thrust forward twice or thrice to come behind the Prince to shoot him in the head, as he was directed, but was still repulsed by the Princes Gentlemen that stood about him; Dinner being done, the Prince was going to his retiring chamber, whereupon this Villain gat before a window in the Hall, close by the door of that room into which the Prince was to go; As the Prince passed towards it, he was shewing the Earle of Laval the cruelties that the Spaniards had exercised in the Low-Countries, which were wrought in the hangings; and having his face turned, this mur∣therer discharged his Pistol at him; but the Prince,A special Pro∣vidence. as God would have it, turning at the same instant, the bullet entred in at his throat under the right chap, being so near that the fire entred with the bullet into the wound, burning his Ruffe and Beard; it brake out one of his teeth, pierced the jugular vein, but hurt not his toungue, and so came out at his left cheek hard by his nose; the blow being given, one with an Halberd could not contain himself, but thrust the Villain through, and slew him. The Chirurgions being sent for, found that the fire which entred the wound, had cauterized the jugular vein, and had done him much good, so that the wound was not mortal. The Friar was afterwards apprehended and executed. Anno 1584. The Spaniards thinking they had no greater enemy in the world than the Prince of Orange, and that if he were dead they should quickly attain their desires in the Netherlands; they suborned one Baltazar Gerard, an high Burguignon, to murther him,Beltazar Ge∣rard suborned to kill him. who bought a good paire of Pistols, and on the tenth of July watched when the Prince should go down into the Hall to dinner at Delpht in Holland, and as he passed by, he demanded a Pasport of him; the Princesse ob∣serving that he spake with an hollow and unsetled voice, she asked her husband who he was? saying that she did not like his countenance; the Prince answered that he demanded a Pasport, which he should pre∣sently have: After dinner the Prince going out of the Hall, the mur∣therer stood behind a Pillar in the Gallery, and as the Prince passed by, suddenly shot him from the left side to the right, through the stomack and the vital parts, who said no more, but O my God, take pity of my soul, I am sore wounded; my God, take pity of my soul and of this poor people;The Prince his death. and presently after he gave up the Ghost. Collected out of Sleidens Commentaries, and the History of the Nether∣lands, &c.
CHAP. XXXII. The Modern Persecutions of the Church in Germany, since the year, 1630. THe Swedes being possessed of a Town called Pasewalck, the Im∣perialists took it by storm, beat, killed, and drave out the Swedes, and not content therewith, they fell to torturing of the townsmen, ravish∣ing women and gilrs in the open streets and Church-yards,Abominable villanies. yea women in child-bed; then they killed the men, fired their houses, and burnt many in them; thrust straw into Cellars where children were hidden, and so burnt and smothered them; Then they burnt the Churches, and massacred the Ministers, and at last burn down the whole Town. Magdenburg burnt.The like cruelty was used against the City of Magdenburg, famous for Religion, which being taken by Tilly and Pappenheim, Anno 1631. was in twelve hours space wholly turned into cindars, except one hundred thirty nine houses, by which fire six godly Churches were burnt down;Cruelties used there. no mercy was shewed to any age, sex, or condition; a∣bove twenty thousand persons were slain, burnt, and smothered to death; six thousand were drowned in the river Elve; Ladies and Gentlewomen, like beasts were yoked together all about the Country, and driven into woods to be ravished; and such as resisted were stript stark naked, whipt, had their ears cropt, and so were turned up. Anno 1634. The Popish Army having taken the town of Hoxter, they spared neither man,Cruelties at Hoxter. woman nor child, most inhumanely butchering and hewing in pieces all, without respect of age, sexe, or condition; and what the sword could not spoile, they caused the fire to consume, and the dead corpses they cast into the Weser. At Griphenburg they kept the Senators shut up in a Chamber, mace∣crating and tormenting them so long with hunger and smoak,Griphenburg. that divers of them died. In Heidleberg they shut up divers Reverend Ministers and Bourgers in prison,Heidleberg. allowing them nothing to eat but bread and water. Frankendall being surrendred upon Articles, contrary to Covenants, the grave Counsellors and other Electoral Ministers,Frankendal. were forced to endure such conditions, as were fitter for Dogs than men: Some were cast into prison, and so abused that they died there; others were forced to redeem themselves with unreasonable ransoms; the goods of such as were fled were confiscated; and though the inhabitants were willing to have left their houses, and all their goods, yet were they detained in the City, and their destruction most cruelly plotted. Their rage was so great against the Professors of the Gospel, that
neither Turks nor Heathens did ever exceed them. Princes sacred Per∣son were not exempted from their fury; The old Lantgrave of Hessen, and the old Dutchesse Dowager of Wittenburgh were taken prisoners, reviled, and abused. In Saxoni Tillies Souldiers tortured the Prote∣stants by half strangling them, and pressing their thumbs with wheels.Saxony. In Pomeren they, forced the people to eat their own excrements, and if they refused, they thrust them down their throat,Pomeren. whereby some of them were choaked; If they suspected that any had hidden their gold or silver,Horrible cru∣elties. they used exquisite torments to make them to confesse it; They wound and tied about the heads of some, strong matches or cords, and with short truncheons twisted them till blood came out of their eyes, ears, and noses, yea sometimes till their eyes started out of their heads; to others they tied burning matches between their fingers, yea to their eyes, ears, noses, tongues, cheeks, breasts, leggs, and secret parts; yea, such parts that nature hideth, they either stuf∣fed with gunpowder, or hung bags of powder to them, and so gi∣ving fire to it, in an horrible manner they burst their bellies, and kil∣led them. With bodkins they made holes, or with knives they cut the skin and flesh of many. They drew strings and cords through the fleshie parts of some, and through the muscles of their thighs, leggs, armes, &c. or through their noses, ears, lips, &c. Some they hung up in the smoak, drying them with small fires, and sometimes refresh∣ing them with small drink, or water, taking care lest in their torments they should die too soon. Some they put into hot Ovens, roasting or smothering them there. Some they roasted with fires of straw. Some they stifled, strangled, or hanged, and this was a great favour so soon to rid them out of their pain. Of many they bound their hands and feet so hard, that the blood spirted out their fingers and toes ends. Of some they tied their hands and feet backwards together, stopping their mouths with clouts to hinder them from praying. Some they hung up with ropes fastened to their privy parts, and hear∣ing their cries, strove by their roarings to drown their cries, as in sport. Where they found poor creatures troubled with ruptures, they enlarged them by villanous means, filling them with gunpowder, and blowing them up as a Mine by giving fire thereto. Many they drew up on high, hanging great weights at their feet to pull their bodies out of joynt. Of some they plained their faces with Chisels. Some men they openly gelded in the presence of their wives and children. The mouths of some they set wide open with gags, and then poured down their throats stinking water, urine, and other liquid things till they grew sick, and their bellies swelled like tuns, whereby they died leasurely with greater torment. Down the throats of some they violently thrust knotted clouts, and then with a string pulled them up again, whereby they displaced their bowels, and put them to miserable torment, insomuch as some were made dumb, others deaf, others blind, and others lame.
If the Husband intreated for his Wife, or the Wife for the Husband, they would take the intercessour and torture him in the same manner before the others eyes; and when any of these poor creatures in their torments or agonies of death called and cryed unto God for mercy, they would command, and seek to force them to pray and cry unto the devil.Blasphemy. Yea their divellishnesse proceeded so far, that they studied to find out new and unheard of torments. Some they bound, hung up, and sawed off their leggs: Of others they rubbed off the flesh off their leggs to the very bones: Of others they tied the armes backwards, and so hanged them up by those distorted parts. Many they drew through the streets of the Cities stark naked, then brake and wounded them with axes and hammers, and generally used them with such barbarous cruelty, that many begged to be shot or slain instantly, rather than to live and be partakers of such miseries. In most places they took away all the corn and pro∣vision of victuals, leaving the places so bare, that many of the best Rank for the space of divers dayes after saw not one bit of bread, but were glad to live with roots and water. In other places they spoiled the inhabitants of their garments, exposing them to that nakednesse, that neither Man, Woman, nor Child had clothes to put on. Here∣by fruitful Countries were totally ruinated: Cities, Towns, and Villa∣ges, were spoiled and turned into pillars of fire and smoake; Churches lay desolate, the Woods were cut down, the ground lay wast and un∣tilled. One reverend aged Divine they stripped, bound him backwards upon a Table,A Minister kil∣led with a Cat. and set a big Cat upon his naked belley, beating and pricking the Cat to make her fix her teeth and claws therein. So that both man and Cat, with hunger, pain and anguish breathed their last. The Crabats laboured much to teach their Horses, not only to kill men, but to eat humane flesh; and consulted how to find out more new and exquisite torments than ever were before used. At the taking of Magdenburg, a godly Minister of great esteem was found in one of the Churches,Magdenburg. whom they dragged out to his own house, where they ravished his Wife and Daughters before his face; his tender Infant they snatched from the Mothers breast, and stuck it upon the top of a Lance; and when his eyes and heart were glutted with this so cruel a spectacle, they brought him forth bound into the street, and there burned him with his own Books. Rapes and Ravishings were committed beyond all humane mo∣desty; Maids and Matrons, Wives and Widdows, they forced and violated without distinction, yea, and that in the presence of their Parents,Rapes and Ra∣vishings. Husbands and Neighbours; yea, Women great with child, and others in Child-bed: Their beastliness was such that no pen can write it, no Faith can believe it; Chappels and Churches
were not freed from their filthy pollutions; yea, Hospitals, and Bed∣lam-houses were not spared. In Hessen land they took divers poor women, some mad, some dumb, some lame, and tying up their coats about their ears so used them, as a modest pen cannot expresse. In Pomeren they took the fairest maids, and ravished them before their Parents faces, making them sing Psalms the while. One beautiful maid being hid by her Parents in a dunghil, they found her out, had their pleasure of her, then cut her in pieces, and hung up her quarters in the Church. Yea very girles of ten years old and un∣der, they ravished till some of them died; vertuous and chast wo∣men, they would threaten to kill, to throw their children into the fire, if they would not yield to their lusts. Divers maids and wo∣men to avoid the lusts of these Hell-born furies, have leaped into Rivers and Wells, and some have otherwise killed themselves; and that which was never before heard of, they did not only violate sickly and weak maids and women till they died, but committed the like filthi∣nesse with the dead corpses. The Merchants of Basil returning from Strasburg Mart, were set upon by the Imperialists in their lodging;Bazil Mer∣chans mur∣thered. and though they craved their lives upon their knees, yet they killed ten of them, say∣ing, they must die for that they were Hereticks; the rest leaving their goods and garments, escaped by flight stark-naked in the night. Two Noble Countesses with their faire Daughters were rifled in their Coaches of all that they had, nor sparing the very garments that covered them. Neer Friburg these bloody miscreants cut in piecs a Reverend Minister, a man of rare learning and piety;A Minister murthered. after whose death the Dogs would not lick his blood nor touch his flesh. For the com∣mon people, they made not so much account of them as of Dogs, murthering them upon every trifling occasion, neither pitying old nor young, men, women, nor innocent babes, whom sometimes most barbarously they used to eat, even when other meat might be had: yea such inhumane cruelty they used,The Crabbats eat infants. that in some places they scarce left any remaining alive to relate the sufferings of the dead. Ma∣ny times they cut off the Noses and Ears of the living, carry∣ing them about in bravery. Collected out of a Booke composed by Doctor Vincent a Divine, who was an eye-witnesse of many of these things. Before this great persecution befell the Church of God in Ger∣many, God gave his people warning of it by many and strange prodigies. For October the 26. Anno Christi 1618. there appeared a terrible Comet with a great blazing tayle, at first of a red,A Comet. afterwards of a pale-red colour, which continued for the space of twenty seven dayes, and in some places it was seen longer. This fearfull and ominous Link or Torch the Lord sent to those who had long despised and
sleighted his voice in his sacred Word preached by his vigilant and faithful Ministers, to awaken them from their dead sleep of sin, and by repentance to bring them to the reformation of their lives, or otherwise to assure them that he would come suddenly upon them, and plague them with all those evils and miseries which he had denounced a∣gainst them by his messengers, and whereof he gave them warning by this dreadfull sign. Anno 1619. At Groningen in the Dukedome of Brunswick was seen a great blazing star,A blazing star. And two Ar∣mies. and two Armies, one in the East, and another in the North, fighting together till one of them was defeated and slain. Water turned to blood. Three Suns.At Wien in Austria, the water in a Dith was seen to be like blood for the space of eight dayes; and shortly after three Suns appeared in the Heavens. In the beginning of April, Anno 1619. and Anno 1621. in March in the same Country of Austria, were two Armies seen in the Heavens by clear day-light,Two Armies. fighting furiously together with great thundering of Ordnance and Canons. In the same Country, Anno 1623. in the moneth of January, just over the City of Lintz, two swords were seen one over against the other, and two great Armies fighting a pitched battel together,Two swords, and two Ar∣mies. which caused great terrour to the beholders. At Heidleberg in February, Anno 1622. were seen three Suns, and three Rainbows.Three Suns and thee Rainbows. Shortly after which, that City was besieg∣ed by the Inperialists, and at last taken, where a grear slaughter was made of the Imhabitants, and in Neckergemund three miles off, all the inhabitants, Men, Women, and Children were put to the sword. In April, Anno 1622. In the Country of Darmstad, were trees whose leaves drop't blood; and the year after in the same Coun∣try in divers Towns and Villages,Trees dropt blood. Blood on hou∣ses and stone-walls, And sickles. were seen bloody signes on Houses and stone-walls. About Meyenfield and Malants, as men were reaping their Corne, their Hands and Sickles were all bloody. In July, Anno 1622. In the Dukedome of Wittemburgh, it rained so much blood, that it fell upon the hands and cloaths of peo∣ple in the fields,It rained blood. and was seen upon Trees, Stones, and other places. May the twelfth, Anno 1624. in the Dukedome of Anhalt there appeared a strange prodigie in the Heavens, which continued from six till eight a clock at night: First there came out of the clouds an Ancient-bearer; After him came forth a grave man in the same habit; then came forth a Chariot drawn with two particouloured Horses:Two Armies. Then another Chariot with four armed Horses: Then suddenly there brake out of the Clouds an infinite number of people like a swarm of Bees: After them followed a man sitting on horseback with a long Robe, putting the people before him; A quarter of an houre after came forth another Army consisting
of many horse and foot, &c. The two Armies fought till one of them was routed, and presently after all vanished away. Anno 1624. In May a strange tempest happened at Ratisbone;A strange tempest. The weather being very calme, with little raine, two dark clouds met toge∣ther, which suddenly belched out a great wind mingled with fire, which raised such a tempest, that near to the City it tore up trees by the roots, and in a moment drave them into divers places, and thence extending it self to the City, it overturned above two hundred houses in the Towne and Suburbs, not leaving a Chimney standing, nor a roof to cover an house. The Church of Emerans, besides the shattered windows, had one of the steeples laid flat to the ground, and the other broke off in the middle; two other of the chiefest steeples in the City were also broken down. This tempest lasted not above a quarter of an hour, nor extend∣ed beyond the City, neither were there above four men slain by it. Anno 1625.A fight of Jackdaws. Near Troppash a great multitude of Jack-dawes met in the aire, where they fought a great battel, and that with so great eager∣nesse, that many of them fell down dead, so that the Countrey-men ga∣thered up whole sackfuls of them. Anno 1628. In Pomerland the heavens seemed to open, and an Army came forth of the Northern part,Two armies. the Avauntguard consisting of Pioneres & Musqueteres; then followed great peeces of Ordnance, and in the Reare came the Cavalry. Another Army came forth on the other side, and betwixt them there became a cruel battel: The victory inclining to the Northern Army; And at last a fiery beame followed upon the Northern Conquerour, which continued for the space of some hours. Anno 1631. At Hall in Saxony the water was turned into blood to the great astonishment of the inhabitants. During the siege of Magdenburg, a Captains wife being in travel,Water turned into blood. when she could not be delivered, and was near death, she desired that when she was dead, her body might be opened; which being done, there was found in her womb,A monstrous cld. a boy almost as big as one of three years old with an head-piece and breastplate upon him, great boots after the French fashi∣on, and a bag by his side with twoo things in it like musket bullets. June the nineteenth, Anno 1631. In the lower Saxony two great Ar∣mies appeared in the aire, one in the North, the other in the South,Two armies. which fought a great battel together; After long fighting the Northern Ar∣my obtained the victory. After the battel was ended, there appeared a man in a long coat, bearing a bow, with which he shot at, and overthrew the Commander of the Southern Army. In the same Countrey a woman having bought a loafe of bread, when she came home was dividing it,Bloody bread. and in the cutting of it there came forth blood. Anno. 1633. In the Countrey of Altenburgh, a fish-pond was turned into blood, which stank so extreamly,A fish-pond turn'd to blood that if any Passengers did but touch it, they could not wash off the stink thereof in three days space. Anno 1634. At Berlin in Brandenburg,It rain'd blood & brimstone. it rained blood and brim∣stone.
Anno 1635. In Hessen there met two armies of strange birds, which fought a set battel; And not far off, about that same time a multitude of dogs had their Randevouz,A battel of Birds & Dogs which fought so eagerly, that they would not be reconciled; and when the Governour of a neighbour Garrison sent out four companies of Musqueteers against them; they seeing a common enemy, joyned together, and in despight of their guns, beat them away, and devoured nine of them. Here place the eighth Figure.
CHAP. XXXIII. The Persecution of the Church in France, which began, Anno Christi, 1524. ANno Christi, 1209. There were certain learned men in France, dis∣ciples of one Almericus at Paris, whose names were, Master William a sub-deacon of Poictiers, well studied in the Arts, and Divinity: Bernard another sub-deacon: William Goldsmith, Steven, a Priest: Steven of the Seller, and one John, a Priest, who upon examination held, That God was no otherwise present in the Sacramental bread, than in any other bread: That it was Idolatry to build Altars to Saints, or to cense their Images. They mocked those that kissed the Reliques: They said that the Pope was Antichrist, and Rome Babylon: That God was not seene in himself, but by his creatures: For which (when they could not be drawn to recant) they were condemned to be burnt at Paris, which accordingly was executed: Bzorius out of Caesarius. And Almenneus who had been their Master, had his body digged up in the Church-yard, and was buri∣ed in the field. And all French books of Divinity were for ever condemn∣ed, and burned. Anno Christi, 1524. At Melden in France there was one John Clark, who set up a Bill upon the Church-door against the Popes pardons,John Clark. late∣ly come thither, wherein he called the Pope Antichrist; for which, be∣ing apprehended, he was adjudged three several days to be whipt, then to have a mark burned in his forehead as a note of infamy;A mother en∣courageth her sonne. his mother a good woman, when she saw her son so pitiously scourged & branded, encouraged him, crying with a loud voice, Blessed be Christ, and welcome be these marks for his sake. Afterwards he removed from thence, and went to Metz in Lorrain, where for a time he followed his calling of a Woolcarder. But the people of the City used once a year all of them to go forth into the Suburbs to worship some Idols there; whereupon John Clark, inflamed with an holy zeal, went the night before and brake down all those images; The next morning when all the Clergy and people came to the place to worship them, they found all their Idols broken upon the ground;Zeale. This set all in a tumult; and great searching there was after the Author of this deed; and quickly was John Clark suspected and apprehended▪ he presently confessed the fact, and told them the reasons why he did it. The people hereupon cried out against him in a great rage: Before the Judges he professed the pure doctrine of the Sonne of God; and thereupon was condemned to a cruel death, which he sustained with admirable patience and constancy. First his right hand was cut off; then was his nose with sharp pincers pulled violently from his face: then were his armes and breasts pulled off with the same instrument: yet he, through Gods grace, endured all with great quietnesse,His torments. pro∣nouncing
the while that of Psalm 115. Their Idols are silver and gold the works of mens hands;His martyr∣dome. Lastly, he was cast into the fire, and there con∣sumed. Not long after Master John Castellane, Doctor in Divinity, borne at Tourney,Mr. Castellane. being through Gods mercy called to the knowledge of the truth, became a zealous, fervent, and faithful Preacher of it in divers pla∣ces, and at last he was taken Prisoner by the Cardinal of Lorrains ser∣vants, by whom he was carried to the Castle of Nommenie, where he en∣dured much cruel usage, yet still he persevered in confessing the true do∣ctrine of the Sonne of God; then was he carried to the Castle of Vik, and after a time was condemned, degraded, and delivered over to the se∣cular power, with this hypocritical speech; My Lord Judge, we pray you as heartily as we can for the love of God,Popish hypo∣crisie. and the contemplation of tender pity and mercy, and for respect to our Prayers, that you will not in any point do any thing that shall be hurtful to this miserable man, or tending to his death, or the maiming of his body;His Martyr∣dome. Then was he burnt alive, which death he un∣derwent with much patience and comfort. At Paris one James Panane a Schoolmaster was burnt for the truth.James Panane. Dennis de ReuxAlso at Melda, Dennis de Reux was burned, for saying that the Masse was a plain denial of the death and passion of Christ: He used often to meditate of, and to repeat those words of Christ; He that denies me be∣fore men, him will I deny also before my Father; he was burnt in a slow fire, and so abode much torment. John de Cadurco, preaching to his Countrymen of Limosine, was appre∣hended and degraded:John de Cadurco The Friar that was to preace at his degradation, took that text, 1 Tim. 4. The spirit speaks expresly, that in the latter dayes men shall depart from the faith, giving heed to lying spirits and doctrines of errors; Then did John call to him to read on, but the Friar stood dumb, and could not speak a word more;A special pro∣vidence. Then did John read on, Teaching false doctrine in hypocrisie, having their consciences seared with an hot iron, for∣bidding to marry and to eat meats created by God to be received with thanks∣giving, &c. Presently after he was burned. Five burnt at Paris.About the same time, five men for scattering about certain papers a∣gainst the Masse, and other popish superstitions, were apprehended and burnt at Paris. One of them for speaking freely, had his tongue burned through, and with a wire tied fast to one of his cheeks. Alexander Canus, a godly Minister, for preaching and confessing the truth of Christ,Alexand. Canus was burned at Paris with a small fire, whereby he endu∣red great paine. Also John Pointer a Chirurgeon, had his tongue first cut out, and then was burnt about the same time.John Pointer. Peter Gaudet living at Geneva, was by a popish Uncle trained into France, apprehended,Peter Gaudet. Popish trea∣chery. condemned, and after many and long torments sustained in prison, was burned. Divers others were apprehended, condemned, and burned at Arras.
A godly Virgin was burned at Fountains, Anno 1534.John Cornor. As also one John Cornon, an husbandman, but one endowed with such wisdome by God, that all his Judges were amazed at it; yet was he condemned and burned. Martin Gonin was cast into the river and drowned.Martin Gonin. Anno 1540. One Claudius endeavouring to convert his friends and kinsfolk in Paris, was by them betrayed,Claudius. Popish trea∣chery. adjudged to have his tongue cut out, and then burned. Stephen Brune at Rutiers,Stephen Brune. being for the constant Profession of his faith condemned to be burned; when the fire was kindled a great winde so drave away the flame from him, that he stood for ean hours space,A special pro∣vidence. ex∣horting and instructing the people; Then did they bring oile vessels, and more fagots, yet still was the flame driven from him: Whereupon the hangman took a staffe, and struck him on the head, to whom he said, I am condemned to be burned, and do you strike me with staves like a dog?Note. with that the hangman with a pike thrust him through the belly, and threw him down into the fire, and afterwards scattered his ashes in the wind. At Roan four Christians were condemned to be burned,An excellent speech. and being carried to the stake in a dung-cart, they said, Blessed be God, we are here reputed as the excrements of this world, but yet our death is a sweet sa∣vour unto God. John de Beck a godly Minister,John de Beck. being condemned for the doctrine of the Gospel, constantly endured the torment of the fire at Troyes. Aymond de Lavoy, a godly Minister,Aymund de Lavoy. preaching the truths of God faithfully, was complained of by the Popish Clergy to the Magistrates of Bourdeaux, who sent to apprehend him; hereupon some of his friends perswaded him to flie; but he refused, saying, that thereby he might cause the People to think that he had fed them with dreames and fables, and not with the pure Word of God;Flight refused. whereas he feared not to yield up both soul and body in the quarrel of the truth which he had taught, saying, That with Paul,Courage. he was ready not onely to be bound for the testimony of Christ in the City of Bourdeaux, but to die also. After the Sumner came, he stayed three dayes and preached three Sermons; and whereas the people would have rescued him out of the Sumners hand, he desired them not to stop his Martyrdome; for said he, Since it is the Will of God that I shall suffer for him, I will not resist his will. At Bourdeaux many witnesses came in against him, a∣gainst whom he made many exceptions, but they would not be admitted. Nine moneths he remained in prison, suffering great misery, much bewailing his former course of life, though yet it had been such as none could charge him with any crime; Then the Judges proceeded to his condemnation, and he had greater fetters put upon him;His torments. he was also examined with torments, which he endured two or three hours, though but of a weakly body, comforting himself thus: This
body must once die, but the spirit shall live, the Kingdome of God abideth for ever; During his torments he swowned, and when he came to him∣self again, he said, O Lord, Lord, why hast thou forsaken me? Nay said the President, wicked Lutheran, Thou hast forsaken God: Ay∣mund replied, Alas good Masters, why do you thus miserably tor∣ment me?Prayes for his enemies. O Lord, I beseech thee forgive them, for they know not what they do; See said the President, this Caitiffe how he prayeth for us? Shortly after he was condemned; and when the Friars came to confesse him, he bade them depart from him, for he would confesse his sins to the Lord. He went to the place of execution with much joy, exhorting the peo∣ple all the way; at the place of execution they tumbled him out of the Cart, and when he was upon the stage he said, O Lord, make haste to help me, tarry not, despise not the work of thy hands: and seeing some Scholars, he said to them, My brethren, I exhort you to study and learn the Gos∣pel, for the Word of God abideth for ever: Labour to know the Will of God, and fear not them that kill the body, but have no power over your souls. Afterwards he said, My flesh doth wonderfully resist the spi∣rit, but presently I shall cast it away. At the stake he often repeated, Oh Lord my God, into thy hands I commend my soul; and so he was first strangled by the hangman,His Martyr∣dome. and then burned. Francis Bribard, Secretary to the Cardinal of Bellay, being convicted for adhering to the truth,Francis Bribard had first his tongue cut out, and then was burnt. Anno 1544. About the same time, William Husson, an Apothecary, came from Bloys to Roan;William Husson. and in the Palace where the Counsel sate, he scattered sundry books concerning Christian doctrine, and against mens tra∣ditions; and presently taking horse rode away: The books being found, the Counsel made diligent search for the Author, and at last heard that probably this Husson had scattered them there; whereupon Posts were sent out every way to apprehend him, and by some of them he was taken, riding towards Deep, and brought back to Roan; who being examined, professed his faith boldly, and that he had scattered those books, and that he was going to Deep to do the like there. For this he was condemned to be burnt alive; and as he was carried to execution, because he refused to worship an Image, his tongue was cut out; afterwards his hands and feet beeing bound behind him, he was pulled up with a Pully, and so let down into the fire, in which he with a chearful countenance held up his head,His Martyr∣dome. and fixed his eyes upon heaven, till he yielded up his spirit un∣to God. Anno 1545. James Cobard, a Schoolmaster in the City of Saint Mi∣chael,James Cobard. declared and proved that the Masse neither profited the quick nor dead, &c. for which he was burned, Also at Melda fourteen godly persons were cast into prison, where they were cruelly racked to make them confesse their fellows,Fourteene martyred. which they stoutly refused to do, and at last were condemned to the fire; seven of them had their tongues cut out, and so all of them were burned together, their wives being compelled to stand by to see their torments; many others were scourged and banished.
Anno 1546. There was one Peter Chapot,Peter Chapot. Zeale. who having been a while at Geneva, out of a zeal to do good to the Church of Christ, carried divers Bibles into France, and dispersed them amongst the faithful; at last he was apprehended and carried to Paris; there he readily rendred an ac∣count of his faith, exhorting the Judges to do their office uprightly. Three Doctors of Sorbone were appointed to dispute with him, but he made them all to go away ashamed: then was he condemned to be burnt.Vincit veritas. At the stake, one of the Doctors pressed him sorely to pray to our Lady, which he refused, crying only, O Jesus Sonne of David have mercy on me; The Doctor bade him say only Jesus Maria, and he should not be burnt alive, but he for a while refused, yet at last through his importunity, he said Jesus Maria, but presently checking himself; he said,Humane in∣fimity. Oh God what have I done? pardon me O Lord; for against thee only have I sinned; and so he was presently strangled and then burned; but upon the complaint of the Doctor, the Court made a Decree, that all which were to be burned, unlesse they recanted at the stake, should have their tongues cut out,A cruel law. which was diligently afterwards observed. There was living at Meaux a lame Creeple, to whom God was plea∣sed to reveal his truth, and after a time he was apprehended,A Creeple martyred. and exami∣ned, at which time he confessed more than they desired to hear; Then did they ask him whether he would stand to that which he had said? To whom he answered; and I ask you again,Zeale. Dare you be so bold as to de∣ny that which is so plain and evident in the holy Scriptures? being ad∣vised to take care of his life, he said to the Judges, for Gods sake take care of your own lives and souls, and consider how much innocent blood you spill daily in fighting against Jesus Christ and his Gospel;His Martyr∣dome. At last he was carried to Paris, where he endured many sorts of torments, and lastly was burned. At Fera, one Stephen Polliot was apprehended, carried to Paris,Stephen Polliot. and there cast into a foul and dark dungeon, where he lay long in bonds and fetters; At last he was brought forth and condemned to have his tongue cut out, and to be burned with his sachel of books hanging about his neck, which was accordingly executed. Anno 1547. There was one John English condemned by the Court of Paris for confessing the truths of God; and so sent to Sens in Burgundy,John English. where he was burned. Also Michael Michelote, being apprehended for professing the Gospel,Michael Mi∣chelote. was put to his choise either to recant and be beheaded, or to persevere and be burned; he answered, that he trusted that he which had given him grace not to deny the truth,Faith, and Courage. would also give him patience to abide the fire, and so he was burned. Another being betrayed by false brethren,Treachery. was burned at Bar in Bur∣gundy. Five men and two women were condemned to the fire at Langres, for adhering to the truth: one of the women being the youngest,Seven Martyrs. was reserved to be burned at last; and in the mean time she much encouraged them all, saying, This day we shall be married to the Lord Jesus to live with
him for ever,Four Martyrs. and so they all quietly slept in the Lord. Four others about the same time were condemned, and cruelly burnt at Paris for the same cause. Anno 1548. There was one Blondel, a Merchant of precious stones, that frequented many great Fairs in France,Blondel. and was well-known both in Court and Countrey; he was a man of singular integrity, and a Fa∣vourer of Gods Word; being at an Inne in Lions, he freely reproved the filthy talk and superstitious behaviour which he there heard and saw; hereupon the Host complained of him to an officer; withal, informing him of his rich Coller of Jewels; These two suborned one to borrow money of him,Popish malice. which because Blondel refused to lend, the fellow caused him to be apprehended for heresie, thinking thereby to attach his goods, but Blondels friends prevented it, privily conveying them away. Courage.Blondel being examined of his faith, gave a plain and full Confession of it; whereupon he was sent to prison, in which he did much good a∣mongst the Prisoners,Charity. paying the debts of some and so loosing them, feeding others, cloathing others, &c. At length through the importu∣nity of his Parents and friends,Humane infir∣mity. he changed his Confession; yet was he sent to the High Court at Paris, where being examined again concern∣ing his faith,Recovery. he adhered to his first Confession, much bewailing his former fall; Then was he condemned to be burnt, and great haste was made for his execution, left his friends at Court should save his life. Hubert.Anno 1549. One Hubert, a young man of nineteen years old, was so constant in the faith, that neither the perswasions of his Parents, nor the threats of his adversaries could remove him from his stedfastnesse, for which he was burned at Dyion. Florent Venote.The same year there was a godly Minister, called Florent Venote, cast into prison at Paris, where he lay above four years, in which time there was no kind of torment,Cruelty. which he did not endure and overcome: amongst others he was put in to so narrow a place, that he could neither stand nor lie, in which he remained seven weeks, whereas there was never any Malefactor that could endure it fifteen dayes, but he ei∣ther grew mad or died.A miracle of mercy. Henry the second. At last when a great shew was made at the Kings coming into the City, and divers other Martyrs in sundry pla∣ces of it were put to death, Florent also having his tongue cut out, was brought forth to see their execution,His Martyr∣dome. and lastly was himselfe burnt. About the same time one Anne Audebert, as she was going to Gene∣va,Anne Audebert was apprehended and brought to Paris, where she was adjudged to be sent to Orleance and burned there: when she was had forth to execu∣tion, a rope being put about her, she called it her wedding girdle, where∣with she should be married to Christ;Courage and comfort at death. and being to be burried upon a Saturday, she said, On a Saturday I was first married, and on a Saturday I shall be married again: She much rejoyced when she was put into the dung-cart, and shewed such patience and constancy in the fire, as made all the Spectators to wonder at it.
Not long after the Coronation of Henry the second, King of France, at whose coming into the City of Paris divers godly Martyrs were bur∣ned, there was a poor Tailor,A Tailor. that dwelt not farre from the Kings Palace, apprehended for working upon an holy day: Being by the Of∣ficer asked why he wrought upon that day? He answered that he was a poor man living only upon his labour, and that he knew no day but the Sabbath whereupon he might not work, his necessity requiring it; Then was he clapt up in prison; this being noised in the Court, some would needs have the Tailor sent for, that the King might have the hearing of him. Then was the Tailor brought thither, and the King sitting in his chair of State, commanded the Bishop of Mascon to question with him: The Tailor being nothing amated at the Kings pre∣sence, after he had done reverence to his Prince,Admirable courage. gave thanks to God for honouring him so greatly, being such a wretch, as to bring him where he might bear witnesse to his truth before so great a Prince: The Bi∣shop questioned with him about the greatest matters of Religion, and he with an undaunted spirit so answered for the sincere truth, and with such pregnant proofs of Scripture, as was wonderfull; and though the Nobles that were present jeered and taunted at him, yet could they not dash him out of countenance,Popish pride. but that still with much liberty and freedome of speech he defended the truth of Christ, neither flattering their persons, nor fearing their threats. The King seeming to muse much within himself, that so mean and simple a person should shew such audacity in such a presence, the Bishop and Popish Lords taking notice of, cryed out that he was an obstinate and impudent Heretick, and therefore remanded him back to prison:Popish subtilty and within a few dayes after he was condemned to be burnt alive; and left the King should be affected with what he heard from the Tailor, the Bishops often suggested that the Lutherans were such as carried a vaine smoake in their mouthes, which being put to the fire would soon vanish; They also would needs have the King present at his execution: but it pleased God to give such strength and courage to the Tailor at his execution, as much more astonished the King than all his former carriage;Gods judge∣ments on per∣secutors. for having espied the King in the window where he sate, he beheld him with so stedfast a countenance, that his eyes were never off him; yea, when the fire was kindled about him, he still kept his eyes so fixed upon the King, that the King was constrained to leave the window, and to withdraw himself, and was so wrought upon thereby, that he confessed that he thought the shadow of the Tailor followed him whi∣thersoever he went, and for many nights after he was so terrified with the apparition thereof, that he protested with an oath, that he would never see nor hear any more of those Lutherans, though afterwards he brake his oath, as it follows in the story of Anne Du Bourg. About the same time one Claudius a godly man, was apprehended as he came from Geneva, and burned at Orleance.Claudius. Anno 1551. One Thomas, a young man of about eighteen years old,Thomas. coming from Geneva to Paris, rebuked one for swearing,Zeale. whereupon
he was apprehended for a Lutherane, and carried before the high Court; by them he was committed to prison,Cruelty. and cruelly racked to confesse his companions, which he still refused to do, whereupon they continued to rack him, till one of the bloody Inquisitors turned his back and wept, and till the Hangman was a weary; then was he carried to be burned, and was let down with a pully into the fire; and after a while being pulled up again, they asked him if he would yet turn, To whom he said, That he was in his way to God,An excellent spirit. and therefore he desired them to let him go, and so he quietly slept in the Lord. Anno 1553. There was apprehended at Lions one Peter Bergerius who for his bold and constant confession was cast into prison,Peter Bergerius and put into a dungeon, where was a thief that had lain there seven or eight moneths, who being in great pain and torment, cryed out of God, and cursed his Parents that begat him,An admirable example. being almost eaten up with lice, and fed with such bread as dogs and horses had refused to eat; but it pleased Almigh∣ty God of his goodness, through the instructions and prayers of Bergeri∣us, that he was converted and brought to the knowledge of the truth, after which, the very next day, his lice which before extreamly abound∣ed, so went away, that he had not one remaining; and God so stirred up the hearts of good men, that he was fed plentifully, and that with white bread, so that with much patience and joyfulness he bore his imprison∣ment, and had great comfort afterwards in his soule. Three godly men.About the same time three godly men were apprehended at Lions, and being condemned for the truth, when they were to be led forth to execution, two of them had ropes put about their necks; the third, ha∣ving served the King in his wars, was favoured to have none; where∣upon he said to the Lieutenant,Note. that he also desired to have one of those precious chains about his neck in honour of his Lord the which being grant∣ed, they all went singing to the fire, where with much patience they yielded up their spirits unto God. Not long after in the same place was apprehended one Matthew Dimo∣net,Matthew Di∣monet a perse∣cutor convert∣ed. who formerly had lived a most wicked life, full of all filthiness and a∣bominations; he had been also a searcher out of the Professors of the Gos∣pel, and a great Persecutor of them; yet at last it pleased God to shew him mercy, and he was converted to the knowledge of the truth: after which, being apprehended and examined, he made a stout profession of his faith; and during his imprisonment he had great conflicts with the infirmity of his own flesh, but especially with the temptations of his Pa∣rents, kindred, and friends; yet the Lord did so strengthen him that he endured constant to the end;Tentation resi∣sted. At his burning he spake much to the peo∣ple, and was hearkned to with great attention. Simon Laloe coming upon some occasions from Geneva into France, was apprehended by the Bayliffe of Dyon,Simon Laloe. by whom he was imprisoned and racked to force him to confesse what fellows he had; but that not prevailing, he was condemned to be burned. At his death the Executio∣ner,An hangman converted. seeing his great faith, patience, and constancy, was so wrought upon therereby, that he fell into great terrors of conscience, so that he
was neer to utter despair, and all the promises of the Gospel could scarce comfort him; yet at last, through Gods mercy, receiving com∣fort, he with all his family removed to the Church of Geneva, where he afterwards lived till his death. Nicholas Naile, carrying some good books to Paris, was there appre∣hended, and made a bold confession of the faith,Nicholas Naile. for which he was cru∣elly tormented sundry wise, and racked all his joynts asunder, and lastly being condemned, when he was carried to the stake,Popish cruelty. they put a gag into his mouth, vvhich they tied in so hard vvith a rope about his head, that blood gushed out of his mouth: they also besmeared all his body vvith oyle and brimstone, so that at the first taking of fire, all his skin vvas shrivelled together, vvhilst his invvard parts vvere untouched; the cord being burnt in sunder, and the gag falling out of his mouth, he praised God in the midst of the fire, till he yielded up his spirit unto God. Peter Serre vvas at first a Priest,Peter Serre. but God of his mercy revealing his truth to him, he vvent to Geneva, and there learned the Shoomakers craft, vvhereby he maintained himself; and having a brother at Tholouse, out of a singular love to his soule, he vvent thither to instruct him;Charity. his brothers vvife being not vvell pleased herevvith,Treachery. revealed it to one of her Gossips, vvho informed the Officiall against him; hereupon he vvas apprehended and carried before the Inquisitor, to vvhom he made an ex∣cellent declaration of his faith, and so vvas delivered to the Judge, vvho asked him of vvhat occupation he vvas? He said, that of late he was a Shoomaker; then did the Judge ask him of vvhat Occupation he had formerly been? he said, he had been of another formerly, but he was ashamed to utter it or to remember it,Note. being the worst and vilest Science of all others in the world; the Judge and people supposing that he had been some Cutpurse or thief, were more importunate to knovv vvhat it vvas but shame and sorrovv so stopped his mouth that he could not declare it; at last through their importunate clamour, he told them he had been a Popish Priest: this so incensed the Judge, that he presently condemned him to be degraded, to have his tongue cut out, and to be burned; vvhich vvas accordingly executed: In the fire he stood so quiet, looking up stedfastly to heaven at the time of his burning, as if he felt no pain at all,Admirable pa∣tience. Note. which caused wondeful admiration in the people; and one of the Parliament said, that it was not the best way to bring the Lutherans to the fire, for it would do more hurt then good. Anno 1554. There were two godly men, with one of their sons and daughter going towards Geneva, whom a Lieutenant overtaking by the way, like a Judas, he insinuated himself into their company,A Judas. pretended great favour to them and to that Religion, which he said, he supposed them to be of; and so with fair words he circumvented them, and drew out of them that they were Protestants, and their wives at Geneva, whither they were now travelling; Then did he apprehend them and carry them to the Castle of Niverne; During their imprisonment they were examined of many Articles,Courage. to which they made a full and clear an∣swer according to their faith;Cruelty. after this they were racked extreamly for
three houres together to force them to recant, which they bore with admirable patience; being therefore condemned, as they went to execu∣tion,Zeale. the Officer bound a woodden crosse between their hands, but they pulled it out with their teeth, and threw it away, whereupon their tongues were cut out, notwithstanding which God gave them utterance,A miracle. so that they spake plain, saying, We bid sin, the flesh, the world, and the devil farewel for ever, with whom we shall never have more to do hereafter, and much more to the like purpose. When the Officer came to besmear them with brimstone and gunpowder, they said, Go to, salt on, salt on the stinking and rotten flesh; and so persisting constant in the flames they finished their Martyrdome. Philber Ham∣lin.Anno 1557. Philbert Hamlin, a Priest, was through Gods grace brought to the knowledge of the truth, whereupon he went to Geneva, where he exercised Printing, and sent books abroad. Afterwards he was made a Minister, and preached at the Town of Alenart, in which and in some other places he did much good; At last he with his Host, a Priest, whom he had instructed in the knowledge of the Gospel, were apprehended and cast into prison at Bourdeaux; and whilst they lay there, in came a Priest with his furniture to say Masse;Zeale. but Philbert inflamed with a holy zeal, went and plucked the garments from his back, and overthrew the Chalice and Candlesticks, saying, Is it not enough for you to blaspheme God in the Churches, but you must also pollute the prison with your idolatry? the Jailor seeing this, fell upon him, and beat him with his staffe, and also removed him into a dungeon, loading him with irons which made his legs to swell: there he lay eight dayes. The Priest his Host,Apostacy. terrified with the prison and fear of death, renounced Christ and his Word, and was set at liberty; whereupon Philbert said to him, O unhappy and more then miserable man! Is it possible that you should be so foolish,A Prophesie. as for to save your life a few dayes, you should so start away from and deny the truth? Know you therefore that although hereby you have avoided the corporal fire, yet your life shall be never the longer; for you shall dye be∣fore me, and yet shall not have the honour to die for the cause of God: and you shall be an example to all Apostates.Gods judge∣men on an Apostate. Having ended his speech, and the Priest going out of Prison, he was presently slain by two Gentlemen, who formerly had a quarrel to him. Philbert hearing of it, professed that he knew of no such thing before, but spake as it pleased God to guide his tongue. Philbert being condemned, and had to execution, they laboured to drown his voice by sounding of trumpets, and so in the midst of the flames, praying and exhorting the people, he rendred up his soul unto God. Nicholas of Jenvile.Anno 1558. Nicholas of Jenvile, a young man that had lived at Ge∣neva, coming into France to get up some mony that was owing to him, was betrayed by a Lady, apprehended and condemned, and be∣ing carried in a Cart to execution,Popish trea∣chery. his Father met him and would have beaten him with a staffe, but the Officers not suffering it, were about to have stricken the old man;Blind zeal. the son seeing it cryed to them to let his father alone, saying, that he had power over him to do to him what he would.
At the place of execution he had an iron ball put into his mouth, and so he patiently took his Martyrdom at Jenvile. About the same time a company of the faithful of about three or four hundred were met together at an house in Paris, in the beginning of the night, to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; some Priests getting intelligence of it,Popish malice. gathered many of that faction toge∣ther, and came, and beset the house, making an outcry that the watch might come and apprehend them, so that in a short time most of the Ci∣ty of Paris was up in armes, supposing that there had been some conspi∣racy: The people following the noise, and perceiving that they were Lutherans, they grew into a great rage, seeking to murther them, and thereupon stopped the streets and lanes with Carts, and made fires that none might escape them; but, through Gods mercy, before this tu∣mult began, the faithful had finished their administration and prayers, with as much quiet as ever they had done; and now seeing this sudden danger, they were somewhat amazed; whereupon the Pastors of the Con∣gregation exhorted them and fell to prayer; after which, considering the cowardliness of the multitude, it was resolved that such as had weapons should adventure through the press; which being put in pra∣ctice, the admirable power of God appeared, in that notwithstanding the fires, and stopping of the passages, yet they all escaped safe, only one was beaten down with stones and slain: The rest,A special Pro∣vidence. which wanted weapons, being about one hundred and twenty, stayed in the house with the women and children, some of which leaped into Gardens, where they remained till the Magistrates came; The women, which were all persons of good quality, save six or seven, perceiving their dan∣ger by reason of the fury of the people, went up into the windows, shewed their innocency, and desired that they might be tryed in an ordi∣nary way of Justice; yet there they were inclosed by the rabble for six or seven houres; At last came the Kings Atturney with many Serjeants and Officers, who with much ado appeasing the people, entred into the house, and their seeing the quality of the persons, and their innocency, the Atturney much pitied them, yet carried them to prison in the little Castle; but as they went, the furious multitude plucked and haled the Gentlewomen, tore their garments, pulled their hoods from their heads,Popish rage and cruelty. and all besmeared their faces with dust and dirt. In the prison they were used no better; for the Villains and Thieves being let out of their holes, and stinking Caves, these Lambs of Christ were put into their rooms.Popish lyes and slanders. Then followed the cruel and slanderous reports of the Friars, who in their Sermons railed upon them, told the people that they were assembled to make a banquet in the night, after which, putting out the candles, they went together Jack with Jill, after a filthy and beastly manner;Satans subtilty. they charged them also with sediti∣on, as if they conspired against the King, &c. And these cursed defa∣mations were no sooner vented, but they were spread abroad farre and wide, yea in the Court itself, and the Cardinal of Lorraine procured a certain Judge to come to the King, who testified that he found in the
House divers Couches, upon which they intended to commit their whore∣domes and adulteries, which much enflamed the King against them. These things made the enemies to triumph exceedingly, and on the contrary, the brethren which escaped, were full of perplexity, and la∣mentations, sorrowing not so much for themselves, as for the imprison∣ment of their friends; yet they much comforted themselves in the con∣sideration of ther own wonderful deliverance. They upon debate also re∣solved, First, that all of them should humble themselves before God in their own families.Christian wis∣dom. Secondly, That they might stop the false rumours, to write two Apologies, one to the King, and another to the People. Thirdly to write consolatory letters to their friends in prison. The Apology to the King was written and conveyed privily in∣to his Chamber, where it was met with and read openly before the King and his Nobles; yet this prevailed little; for their adversaries suggested to him that all was false, and a pretence to hide their wicked∣ness: But that to the people did very much good, and so did their con∣solatory letter to their friends in prison. The adversaries all this while did bestir themselves to bring them that were in prison to execution, and procured a Commission from the King to certain Judges to hasten their trial. But it fell out by Gods Providence, that at this time the Protestant Princes of Germany were met at a Collo∣quy at Wormes,Gods merci∣ful providence. to whom divers learned men resorted from Geneva, re∣questing them to send their Ambassadors to the French King, in the be∣half of these poor Christians thus imprisoned; by whose mediation, and the Kings other business, who was now in war with the King of Spain, many of them were delivered, yet some of them were executed before the coming of the Ambassodors. Amongst them were Nicholas Clivet, and one Granvelle, both of them elders of the Congregation,Nicholas Clivet and one Gran∣velle. who stoutly defended the truth against the Sorbone Doctors, and afterwards patiently resigned up their soules to God in the cruel flames. Also a young Gentlewoman of about twenty three years old, which came from Gascoigne to joyn her self to the Church at Paris, was brought forth with the former, and endured many conflicts with the Judges and Sorbonists; who when she was urged to recant, said, That she had learned her faith from the Word of God, and therefore there∣in she would live and die: Her neighbours testified against her that there was much singing of Psalms in her house,Popish malice. and that sometimes they had seen abundance of people come out of it, and that at the death of her husband no Priest was called for,Gods judge∣ment on per∣secutors. &c. But presently after, two of these witnesses fell out, and one slew the other with a knife. The Cardinal of Sens much hastened this Gentlewomans death, that he might have her estate. When she was condemned, she had her tongue cut, as the two former also were served. Going to execution, she dressed her self like a Bride,Courage. being that day to be married to her Spouse Jesus Christ; she went to the fire without ever changing countenance, and so quietly yielded up her spirit to God. Divers others of this Congregation suffered in the like sort: the
rest at the mediation of the Prince Elector Palatine, and the Protestant Switzers were released. In other parts of France also sundry faithful Christians were impri∣soned, cruelly racked, had their tongues cut out, and finally were bur∣ned, concerning whom because I find nothing extraordinary, I have for∣born to mention them. Anno 1559. The King of France, Henry the second, coming into the the Parliament in Paris, there was one Anne Du Bourg, a noble Counsel∣lour, a man of singular understanding and knowledge, bred and nursed up in the bosome of the Church of Christ, who made a bold speech before him, wherein he rendred thanks to Almighty God,A Christian speech. for moving the Kings heart to be present at the decision of so weighty a cause as that of Religion was, humbly intreating him to consider well thereof, being the cause of Christ himself, which of good right ought to be maintained by Princes, &c. But the King instead of hearkening to his good advice, was so far incensed against him, that he caused him to be apprehended by the County of Montgomery, Constable of France, and to be carried to prison, protesting to him in these words, These eyes of mine shall see thee burnt;Popish malice. and presently after he sent a Commission to the Judges to make his processe. During his imprisonment there was a godly woman, who was Prisoner also in a Chamber just over against his, who at her window, sometimes by words, other sometimes by signes,Gods mercy. did much encourage him to persevere constantly in the truth, whereby he was so comforted, that when some of his friends perswaded him to recant, he said, God forbid, for a woman hath taught me my lesson, how I ought to carry my self in this busi∣ness; He was often examined about sundry points of Religion,Tentation re¦sisted. and be∣ing once asked whether he had conferred with any one about them, he an∣swered that he had conferred with his books, especially with the holy Scriptures. Having drawn up a confession of his Faith, he intended to present it to the Parliament; but some Advocates that belonged to that Court, who pretended great love to him,Tentation. laboured to draw him to make an∣other confession, not contrary to the truth, but in such ambiguous terms as might satisfie his Judges, who would not stand strictly to examine it; Du Bourg long resisted,Humne infir∣mity. but at last was prevailed with to draw up such a confession, supposing it sufficient that himself knew his own meaning; So soon as this his confession came into the hands of his Judges, great hopes were conceived of his enlargement; but when the Christian Congregation had gotten a copy of it, they were much grieved; whereupon they ordered Master Augustine Marlorate, a learn∣ed and godly Minister, to write a large discourse concerning the duty of such as were called to bear witnesse to the truth of God before Magi∣strates, wherein he set down Gods threatnings and judgements against such, as either directy or indirecty deny the truth, exhorting him more highly to prize the glory of God then his own liberty;Good counsel. the truth of his Gospel then a short and transitory life; shewing that he ought not now to give over, having made so happy a beginning and progresse in
his Christian course: That the same of his constancy was spread, not only through France, but all Christendom over: that he had been a means to confirm many weak ones, and caused others to enquire after the means of salvation: that all mens eyes were fixed on him to enquire by what means he gat out of prison, so that, if through fear and faint-heartedness, he should enterprize ought that should contradict his first Profession, he would give much scandal and offence, and therefore he exhorted him to give glory to God, to edifie his Church; telling him that then he might assure himself that God would neither leave nor forsake him. These Letters brought Du Bourg to a sight of his sin, for which ask∣ing pardon of God,Recovery af∣ter a fall. without any further delay he wrote to the Judges, retracting his last, and protesting to stand to his first confession; so that shortly after he was condemned. In the mean time great feasts were preparing in the Court, for joy of the marriages that should be of the Kings daughter and sister; The day whereof being come, the King imployed all the morning in examining the President, and other Counsellors of the Parliament against Du Bourg, and other his companions that were charged with the same doctrine, in∣tending to glut his eys in seeing their execution, and then went to dinner. After dinner the King being one of the Defendants at the Tilting, which was near the prison where Du Bourg and his fellows lay,A special pro∣vidence. entred the lists, and behaved himself valiantly, breaking many spears against Count Montgomery and others, whereupon he was highly commended of the Spectators, and all thinking that he had done enough, desired him to give over with praise; But he being puffed up with their commendations, would needs run another course with Montgomery, who kneeling on his knees craved pardon, refusing to run against him; the King being ea∣gerly set on, commanded him upon his Allegiance to run, and put the spear into his hands; Montgomery thus enforced, addressed himself to the course, and the King and he meeting together, brake their spears, and the Kings Hemet falling down at the same instant,Gods judge∣ment on Per∣secutors. one of the splin∣ters of Montgomeries spear entred just into his right eye, and so pierced his head that the brains were perished; which wound, despising all means of cure, killed him within a eleven dayes, whereby his hope of seeing Du Bourg burned was frustrated, and thereupon Du Bourg his execution was deferred for six moneths longer; at the end whereof, he having constant∣ly persevered in the confession of his faith, was first degraded, and the next day carried out to execution; The Judges appointed six or seven hundred Horse and Foot well armed,Du Bourg exe∣cuted. to guard him; he was first hanged, and then his body was burnt to ashes. Popish crueltyPresently after, divers others were burnt in Paris, and in many other places for their Religion: many also were massacred as they passed along the streets for not doing reverence to the images, which were then newly set up in the corner of every street; such also as refused to contribute money to buy wax candles to burn before them,The Church prospers under persecution. it cost them their lives. Notwithstanding which cruelties, those of the Religion increased daily, both in zeal and number in all parts of the Realm.
This much incensed the Duke de Guise in his Government of Dauphine, whereupon he sent Mangiron, a cruel man,A great perse∣cution in Dau∣phine. and great enemy to the Pro∣testants, with charge wholly to root them out; This Mangiron first played his part very subtilly; but at last he fell upon Valence, lacking the houses of the Protestants, as if he had taken the Town by assault; and the more to strengthen him in his mischief, he had many Troops of Horse, and some Lanciers sent him: Truchon also, President of Grenoble, cast sixty of the chiefest of the Protestants into prison at Valence, whilst Mangiron pillaged those of Montelimart,Popish cruelty to whom he had promised and sworn to do no wrong. Truchon caused two Ministers at Valence to be hehaded,Two Ministers beheaded. and three of the principal Citizens to be hanged; the rest he punished with great fines, whippings, and banishments. At Roan he hanged two men, whipt one, and afterwards sent him to the Gallies. Anno 1559. In Provence, a godly Gentleman was traiterously massa∣cred for his profession of Religion. Those of the Religion,Ar Ecclesiae. seeing themselves destitute of all humane aid, resolved in all their dangers instead of seeking to man for help, to pray to God, to hear his Word, to continue in true obedience un∣to it, living in great love and concord one with another, whereby a∣bundance of Papists were so edified,A great con∣version. that by whole Troopes they left the Masse, and made open profession of the Protestant Reli∣gion. Anno 1561. There happened a great mutiny in the City of Paris, raised by some Priests, which rang a Bell while those of the Religion were hearing a Sermon: from which proceeded wounds, murthers,Popish malice. and imprisonments; foure of the Protestants were hanged to please the peo∣ple, and the rest paid a fine. CHAP. XXXIV. The Persecution in the time of the Civil Wars. ANNO 1562. The Duke de Guise passing towards Paris, and coming near to Vassy, understanding that the Bell rang to a Sermon, which was to be preached in a Barn, in which place there were assembled about twelve hundred men, women, and children, he presently went vvith all his Troops to the barn, and entring into it, they cryed out Death of God, kill, kill these Huguenots;Christians murthered at a Sermon. then did some of them shoot at those vvhich vvere in the Galleries, others cut in pieces such as they met with. Some had their heads cleft in twain, others had their Armes and hands cut off, so that the Walls and Galleries of the Barne were died with the blood of the slain; The Duke with his sword drawn stood amongst them, charging
his men to kill without sparing, especially the young men: Some of these godly persons getting upon the roof, hid themselves there: but at length some of this bloody crew spying them, shot at them with long pieces, whereby many of them were slain, falling down from the roof like Pigeons. Then they fell to murthering of them all without di∣stinction; the poor Saints of God made no resistance, only praying un∣to God: and every one running to save himself, as it pleased God to direct him, many men and women were slain; others being sore woun∣ded, escaped, which died shortly after; the poor mans box was taken and emptied. The Minister in the beginning of the Massacre ceased not to preach still, till one discharged his Peece against the Pulpit; Then falling upon his knees, he intreated the Lord to have mercy upon him, and upon his poor persecuted flock; and so coming down from the Pul∣pit, attempted to escape, but by the way he received divers wounds, where∣upon finding himself as he thought, mortally hurt, he cryed, Lord in∣to thy hand I commend my spirit, for thou hast redeemed me O Lord God of truth; yet before he was slain, some took him and carried him before the Duke, Who said to him, who made thee so bold thus to seduce the People?Slanders. Sir, said the Minister, I am no seducer, but have faithfully preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ to them. Then did the Duke curse and swear, saying, Death of God, doth the Gospel teach sedition? and cal∣ling the Provost, he said, Take this Varlet and hang him upon a Gib∣bet; Then was the Minister delivered to two Pages, who basely abu∣sed him; The popish women also threw dirt at him, and could scarce be restrained from tearing him to pieces. He was kept close Prisoner, none being suffered to bring him necessaries; and he was oft threatned to be sown up in a sack and drowned;A special pro∣vidence. yet at last, through Gods mercy, he was released, at the earnest request of the Prince of Portion. The pulpit was broken down,Barbarous cru∣elty. the slain stript stark naked, and so the Duke de∣parted with his bloody Troops, sounding his trumpets as if he had obtain∣ed a great victory. When he came to Paris, he with the Constable and Marshal of Saint Andrews, seized upon the King, defaced and overthrew the places where they of the Religion used to assemble, which so encouraged the Popish party, that in every place they so abused those of the Religion, as the most cruel Barbarians would have been ashamed to do the like. This caused a Civil War, wherein the Duke of Guise, having taken Roan, sacked it for three dayes space, and executed many of the Citizens. Not long after he went to Orleance, boasting that within twenty four houres he would win the Town; and neither spare man, woman, nor child in it, and that he would so destroy the Town that the memo∣ry of it should be extinct for ever; But mans purposes; and God disposes; for the same night there was a young Gentleman named John Poltrot, who watching his opportunity,Gods judge∣ment on Per∣secutors. shot him with his pistol laden with three bullets, whereof he shortly after died; and Poltrot declared at his death, that he did it to deliver France, and especially the City of Or∣leance from the violence of the Duke of Guise; After whose death peace
was shortly after concluded between the Queen-mother and the Prote∣stants. But before this peace took place, those of the Religion suffered much in sundry parts of the Realm. In Paris they were persecuted cruelly, the Popish people being whol∣ly set upon blood,Persecution in Paris. and the Parliament there sparing neither great nor small that fell into their hands, either of that City, or such as were brought thither upon appeal, or summons. At Senlis many godly Christians suffered much, some were beheaded,At Senlis. some murthered in a popular tumult, some were whipt, some impri∣soned, some fined, and others sent to the Gallies, not sparing the simple women. Yet through Gods mercy, some escaped, amongst whom was one Iohn Gardens and his Wife, who living with his Wife and child in the fileds, at length determined to go back into the City, cast∣ing themselves upon Gods providence; but when they came into the suburbs, they met some who bade the souldiers to put them to the sword. The woman kneeling down, begged of the souldiers, that if they must needs dye, they would kill her child first, saying that so she should die with the more comfort;A special pro∣vidence. which speech of hers so wrought upon the souldiers, that they spared all their lives. In Chaalons there was a godly Minister, called Fournier,At Chaalons. Mr. Fournier. apprehended and spoiled of all that he had: They stripped him also of his apparel, instead whereof they put on him a thredbare cloak, and so carried him a∣way in a Cart, by reason of an hurt that he had gotten in one of his feet; by the way they did nothing but jeere and scoffe at him, and every mo∣ment he was in danger of his life; the rude people also had almost pul∣led him in pieces; but it pleased God that he was preserved by those which had designed him to death. When he came to Munchon he was cast into prison, and after a while there came a Captain to him with many soul∣diers, who mixing mocks and threatnings together, sware that within three houres he should be hewen in pieces. After them came in some of the Judges, commanding the Jailor to load him with irons, saying to him, You are no better I am sure then Saint Peter, whom they laid in irons: but if you have as much faith as he, God will then deliver you as he did him, by sending an Angel to you. I will not, said Fournier, compare my self with Saint Peter; yet it is not twelve years ago, since for preaching the same doctrine that Peter did, I was imprisoned at Tho∣louse, and there was admirably delivered. And though Peter was de∣livered out of prison, yet in the end he glorified God by his death:Faith. and if I should be counted worthy with him to suffer for the truth, may it not be said that I have the like precious Faith with Saint Peter? When they were gone, the Jailor forbore putting bolts upon him, because of his sore legg, yet did he put him into a straiter prison. Afterwars the Duke of Guise being made Governour in that place, he was put to the torture, where first they strained his thumbs so hard with a small cord that blood came forth: Then turning his armes be∣hind
his back, they hoisted him up with a rope put between his thumbs, twitching him up and letting him down five or six times; they tied also great stones to both his great toes, and let him hang till his spirits fai∣led:Popish cruelty then they let him fall with such violence upon his face, that he was grievously hurt thereby. Then was he thrown into prison, and they would not suffer him to have a Chirurgion to cure him of the gashes which the cords had made in his flesh even to the bare bones: so that his torment and anguish was very great, neither could he lift his hands to his mouth, which he was likely to lose the use of. But it so fell out by Gods Providence, that after he was condemned, news coming of the Duke of Guise his death,A special Pro∣vidence. his enemies began to tremble, and some of his Judges coming to him in prison, asked him if he did not bear them ill will? He answered, that men of his Profession and Religion ought not to bear malice to any, being enjoyned by God to love and pray for those that persecuted them; Shewing also that whatsoever troubles had be∣fallen him, were none other but such as God had fore-ordained for the setting forth of his own glory, for which he esteemed himself most hap∣py; yet he warned them to lay to heart the wrong that they had done him, lest the vengeance of God did sooner or later overtake them for it. The next day Bussi, one of his persecutors, having received letters from the Constable of France to release him, swore that he should be delivered indeed, but into the hands of the multitude. But it pleased God that just at that time there came by the Prince of Portion with his Germane Souldiers,A special Pro∣vidence. which were for the Protestants, who sent word that they would not leave so much as a house standing except they would deliver Fournier; This so affrighted his enemies that they released him out of prison, protected him from the violence of the multitude,His delivery. and conveyed him in safety to the Prince; There he was kindly welcomed and entertained, all grieving for the miseries which he had endured, and two dayes after he preached before the Prince and his followers, and the day after, at the instant request of the Protestants of Vitri, he went to them to preach and baptize their children, and shortly after was called to Ver, where he gathered a Congregation, and spent some time amongst them with wonderful fruit; but by reason he was so ex∣treamly weakned by his strait imprisonment and tortures, being above fifty years old,His death. he soon after finished his course, and quietly resigned up his soul unto God. At Amiens Bibles burnt.At Amiens, all Bibles, New Testaments, and Psalm-books were sought for and openly burnt, as also the Ministers Pulpit: Then did the Guisians proceed to killing of the Christians, and cast∣ing them into the River, some they shot to death, and others they hanged. At Abbevilli they slew the Lord of Haucourt, with divers others; one Beliart they dragged along the streets with his face downwards,At Abbevilly. and then drowned him in the river. At Meaux.At Meaux the Protestants were the stronger Party, and therefore conti∣nued the free exercise of their Religion for a while; but the Parliament of
Paris gave judgment against them, and exposed them to the spoil of such as would undertake it; Then a company of Souldiers entring the Town, disarmed the Citizens, and slew about foure hundred of the Religion; Then Mounsieur de Boisy entring with more Souldiers committed a thousand villanies:Abominable villanies. women and maids were ravished in the open mar∣ket-place and streets; some were beaten and hailed to Masse; children were re-baptized: others married again; houses were pillaged and plundred: Some that fled into the field died with hunger and cold. Ma∣ny men, women and children, were massacred and drowned; infants were dashed against the walls; and some others were hanged. The Executio∣ners running into divers places, committed a world of mischief; and di∣vers Priests amongst them slew some of the Protestants with their own hands. At Troys,At Troys Bibles burnt. Bibles and Divinity-books were rent and torn in pie∣ces; They of the Religion were murthered, and their houses sacked; Eighteen men were hanged; women were dragged through the streets, and cast into the river; and Infants were pulled from their Mothers breasts, and re-baptized. At Bar the Popish enemies entring the Town, committed such cru∣elties as never were seen, especially against women and little children;At Bar. Some of their breasts they cut open,Popish cruelty pulled out their hearts and gnawed them with their teeth, rejoycing that they had tasted of an Huguenots heart; A young Counsellor they hanged at the request of his own fa∣ther; with most horrible blasphemies they ravished women and girls. Mounsieur de St. Esteen with his two brothers were cruelly stabbed by their own Cousin germane, their wives were spoiled of all they had, and led away prisoners. The Pesants in some places committed infinine murthers and mischiefs against those of the Religion; Monsieur de Vigney with his wife and ser∣vants they massacred in his own house, which afterward they pillaged and spoiled. In Crant, the Pesants entring the Town, murthered many; one young child together with his father they burnt.At Crant. In Sens one hundred Protestants were cruelly murthered,At Sens. and their na∣ked bodies thrown into the River; one hundred houses were plundered, the Church where they preached was defaced. At Auxerre one Cosson was barbarously massacred; a faire young Gentlewoman was stabbed and cast into the River;At Auxerre. many other outrages and robberies were committed. At Nevers the Ministers were cast into prison,At Nevers. whereof one perished miserably there; Another miraculously escaped; Children were re-bap∣tized, marriages reiterated, and many houses plundred. The Popish party entring Chastillon, left no kind of cruelty un-exer∣cised, neither upon Women nor Children, old nor young;At Chastillon. yea not sparing the women with childe that were ready to be deli∣vered.
At Guyen.At Guyen they used all the cruelty that possibly could be invented: and some Italians, in hatred of the Religion, cut an infant in two pieces, and eat his liver. At Montargis, there lived the Lady Rene, Dutchesse Dowager of Ferrara,At Montargis. and daughter to King Lewis the twelfth; The Duke of Guise sent thither one Malicorn a Knight of the Order, who entring the Town, murthered some of the Religion, and committed other outrages; Then he proceeded so far as to threaten the Lady to batter her Castle with Canon-shot, if she would not deliver up those of the Religion which were with her; To whom the Princesse bravely answered, I charge you, look what you enterprize;A brave an∣swer of the Lady Rene. for no man in the Realm can command me but the King only: and if you proceed to your battery, I will stand in the breach, to try whether you dare kill the daughter of a King; neither do I want means or pow∣er to be revenged on your boldnesse, even to the infants of your rebellious race: This stout answer made Malicorne to pull in his hornes and de∣part. At Monlius, Monsieur de Montare used all extremity against the Prote∣stants;At Monlius. and without any form of Law he hanged up two Artificers, drave others out, and plundred their houses, and murthered many. At Mans two hundred persons were put to death, men, women, and children,At Mans. the houses of the Protestants were pillaged; such as were fled, were executed by their pictures, their goods confiscated, and their children made uncapable of their offices and estates, yea of inheriting their Lands. Some they beheaded; Others they hung up; Others they massacred, and being half dead, threw them into the River: Above one hundred and twenty men, women, and children were murthered in the neighbouring Villages. One Captain threw above fifty persons into his fishpond to feed his Pikes, and above as many more were thrown into Ditches. One godly man, a Weaver, had his throat cut, and his moutastuf∣fed with leaves of a New Testament which they found bouth him. At Angers.At Angers they murthered a godly Minister, cast many into prison, robbed the houses of others, and slew such as they found therein: In a Merchants house,Bibles burnt. finding many books of the holy Scriptures, they openly burnt them in the middle of the Town; One fair guilt Bible they hung upon an Halberd, and carried it in Procession, saying, Behold truth hanged, the truth of the Huguenots, the truth of all the Divels; Behold the mighty God,Horrible blas∣phemies. behold the everlasting God will speak; and when they came to the Bridge, they threw it into the River, crying louder, Behold the truth of all the Divels drowned. Above eighty other persons were executed. An aged Gentlewoman of the age of seventy years was beaten to death with their pistols, then drawn through the dirty streets, and thrown into the River, terming her the mother of the Divel that preached to the Huguonets. A Counsel∣lors wife that lay bed-rid was murthered; women and maids were ra∣vished: Two young maids were ravished before their Fathers face, who
was forced to look on the while: All that were but suspected to be of the Religion, were massacred, and their houses pillaged.Popish perfidi∣ousnesse. A valiant Captain, contrary to their faith given to him, they broke upon a Crosse, and so they left him hanging in great misery till he died. Anno 1562. a Decree was made by the Parliament of Paris,A bloody E∣dict. com∣manding all Catholicks presently to rise in Armes, to sound the Bells in every place, to destroy all those of the Religion without respect of quality, sex, or age, to spoyle their Houses, and utterly to root them out. This encouraged all sorts of rascals to rise up in Armes, forsaking their Vocations, and to march against the Protestants. In Ligueul they hanged up some, put out the Ministers eyes,In Ligueul. and then burnt him in a small fire: In other places they committed infinite villanies; One young man they flayed alive; The Village of Aze they burnt down, and massacred thirty persons therein. A godly Minister was drowned called John de Tour, at seventy five years old.John de Tour. At Tours, one hundred and forty were murdered and cast into the Ri∣ver; divers others were drowned, sparing neither man, woman,At Tours. nor child. The President being suspected to favour them of the Religion, was beaten with staves, stript to his shirt, hanged up by one foot,Barbarous cru∣elties. his head in the water up to the breast, and whilst he was yet living, they ript up his belly, pluck't out his guts, and threw them into the River; and sticking his heart upon the point of a Lance, they carried it about, saying, It was the heart of the President of the Huguenots. Shortly after came thither the Duke de Monpensier, who caused gib∣bets, wheels and stakes to be set up, whereupon many more, especially of the richer sort, were murthered to the number of some hundreds: when they put any man or woman to death, they entred their houses, murthe∣red their children, and took all their goods. A poor woman, whose husband was a little before drowned, having a young infant sucking at her breasts, and a beautiful daughter of about sixteen years old in her hand; These bloody villains drew them to the River: there the woman on her knees prayed ardently unto God: then took her infant, and shifting it in the Sun, laid it upon the grasse: In the mean while this hellish Rabble endeavoured, partly by threats, partly by fair promises to seduce the young maid; and one of them finer then the rest, promised to marry her if she would do it,Popish subtilty so that the poor wench stood in a disway, which her mother perceiving, who was now ready to be thrown into the River, she earnestly exhorted her daughter to persist in the truth; the daughter hereupon cryed out, I will live and die with my Mother, whom I know to be a vertuous woman: as for your threats and promises I regard them not, do with me what you please. The mother was not yet dead when they threw in the daughter after her, where making towards her mother, they mutually embraced each other,The Mother and her daugh∣ter drowned. and so yielded up their souls into the hands of God. Also in the same City there was a godly Matron called Glee, who was carried before the Captain, where she gave a reason of her Faith,Glee. and confirmed it by evident testimonies of Scripture: She dispuited also
with some Friars, whom she so silenced that they had nothing to say, but that she was in a damnable condition.Vincit verit. It seems so indeed, saith she, being in your hands; But I have a God that will not faile nor forsake me, &c. Then was she committed to prison, where she was much sollicited to recant, but all in vain; for she spake her mind freely, and comforted the prisoners which were in the same Prison for Religion. News be∣ing brought her that she was condemned to be hanged, when the rope was put about her neck,Joy in tribu¦lation. she kneeled down, praising and magni∣fying the name of God, in that he shewed her such mercy as by this death to deliver her out of the troubles of this wretched world, as also for that it pleased the Lord to honor her so far as to die for his truth, and to wear his livery, meaning the halter; Then she brake her fast with the rest of the company, and giving thanks to God, she exhorted them to be of good courage, and to trust to the end in his free mercy, &c. As she went to execution,Tentation re¦sisted. a Kinswoman met her with her little chil∣dren, perswading her to recant, telling her that thereby she might preserve her life, and see those her Babes provided for; This meeting wrought so upon her motherly affection, as made her shed plenty of tears; but pre∣sently taking new courage, she said, I love my children dearly, yet neither for love to them,Faith. nor for any thing else in the world, will I renounce my God or his truth. God will be a Father to these my children, and will provide better for them then I could have done, and therefore to his providence and protection I commend and leave them, At the place of execution having prayed to, and praised God with a chearful heart and voice,Her Martyr∣dome. she quietly resigned up her spirit unto God. Ponteou de MerThe Duke de Aumale in Normandy, took Pontea de Mer by subtilty, where he used all kinds of cruelty, especially against the Minister, Ma∣ster Brione; Shortly after, Roan was besieged, and two Forts taken, where∣in they put all to the sword,Impudence. the Queen-mother in an impudent manner leading the King, who was but twelve years old, to shew him the na∣ked bodies of the women weltring in their own blood; After divers as∣saults the City of Roan was taken, wherein the Kings souldiers used all kinds of monstrous cruelty, massacring all they met: many English and Scots souldiers were hanged; the sick and wounded were cast into the ri∣ver: Divers Ministers were retreated into a strong Tower, which they yielded upon promise of safety, but contrary therereto they were cast into prison;Marliorat hanged. Augustine Marlorat with three Counsellors were condemned to be hanged, which was presently executed, with many opprobrious speech∣es against Marlorat; The sackage of this Town lasted foure moneths to∣gether, in which space divers were executed. In Valougnes divers persons of good quality were massacred, and the houses of the Protestants were filled with souldiers that did what they listed therein.At Valougnes. Amongst other outrages they slew a godly Minister, called Monsieur de Valougnes, whose body▪ they stripped naked, dragd it up and down his house with many scorns and jears;Monsieur Va∣lougnes. Popish pro∣faneness and blasphemy. at last bringing it into the chamber where he used to preach to his people, they spurned his corpse, saying, Now pray to God▪ and preach if thou canst; The Priests that were
present stuffed his mouth and wounds with the leaves of his Bible, say∣ing to him, Preach the truth of thy God, and call upon him now to help thee. In Vire as they came from a Sermon, some were slain, some stoned,At Vire. and a while after many were put to the sword. In, and about Agen, Monluc killed and massacred many,At Agen. two young children were roasted. In the Castle of Reime, Monluc used great cruelty against those of the Religion, sparing none,At Reime. but murthering young children in their mothers armes, and then killing the mothers: some other women they reserved for their lust, which they so abused, that (saith mine Author) I abhorre to write it. Above five hundred men were hanged upon gibbets, amongst whom was a grave Counsellor in his long gown and square cap. One poor man they cut and mangled in several parts of his body, filling all his wounds with salt. In the City of Blois there was a godly woman called Nichola, at whose house some holy people used to meet to pray,At Blis. and confer together for their mutual edification and comfort. The murtherers hearing of it, came rushing in, thinking to have found a Minister preaching, but be∣ing disappointed in their expectations, they dragged these good women out by the haire of the head, loaded them with many stripes, and then threw them into the river; but behold a singular Providence! God so endowed them with strength and skill, that they swam safely to an Island: yet after a while some watermen finding them there, they stript them stark naked, and threw them again into the river, yet they still sought to save themselves by swimming, and coming at last to the Suburbs of Vienne, they were there most cruelly knocked on the head by the bloody Papists. Monluc having defeated a party of the Protestants under Monsieur Du∣ras, he took divers Prisoners, most of which he hanged, especially the Ministers. Amongst the Prisoners was a Captain called La-mothe, whom Monluc meeting with, gave him divers stabs with a dagger, and thrust him through with a rapier, saying, Villain,Blasphemy. thou shalt die in despite of God; but he proved a lyar; for the man being carried away, though he had many mortal wounds, yet he was wonderfully cured and lived after.A miracle. In Guillac,In Guillac. the murthers committed upon the Protestants were many and horrible; and amongst other this was one of their practices; There was by the City, the Abbey of St. Michael, built upon a very high rock, under which ran a swift and deep river called Tar. Many of the Prote∣stants they forced to go up to the top of this rock, whom they threw headlong down into the river; by the way there was another rock,Horrid cruel∣ties. up∣on which most of the bodies falling, were dashed and broken all to pieces, and if any escaped with life into the river, they had their cut-throats waiting upon the river in boats to knock them on the head; A∣mongst others there was one Peter Domo, an Apothecaries servant,Peter Domo. who see∣ing them bent to murther him, requested that he might have leave to cast himself down from the top of the Abbey, provided that if God should
preserve him in the fall, they would suffer him to escape with life; this they promised; whereupon having made his Prayers to God, he fetched his leap from the top of the Abby,Popish perfidi∣ousnesse. and flew so far, that missing the rocks under him, he fell safely into the river, and endeavoured to swim out with life; but these perfidious Villains, contrary to their promise made, knocked him on the head and slew him. In Souraize.In Souraize, there was one Captain Durre, who with his souldiers go∣ing into the house of a godly widow, called Castille Roques, he caused her to be bound with cords, and a rope to be put about her neck, by which he haled her up and down, almost strangling her; then he asked her how oft she had played the whore with those of her Religion? She answered, That in their Christian meetings they had no such villanies com∣mitted. Durre fretting and fuming at this answer, took her by both the cheeks, and oft dashed her head with such violence against the wall, that he had almost beaten out her brains; Then he required her to give him the seven hundred pieces of gold which she had hidden;Prodigious villanies. she told him that she was a poor woman, and had onely one French penny; This more enraged him; whereupon he drew her again about by the neck, and applyed burning hot egges to her arm-pits, till they were all blistred,Blasphemy. bidding her in derision to cry to her Father which was in hea∣ven.Faith and pa∣tience. She answered, I will not cry aloud for thee, and yet my God can hear me well enough, and when his pleasure is, he will deliver me out of thy hand. This made him so to blaspheme, that the poor woman was more afflicted to hear his blasphemies than with all her pains. Then did he call her Huguenote whore, telling her that these were but the beginnings of her sorrows, except she fetched him out her gold, which if she refused, he would draw her cheeks and breasts with Lard, and so roast her quick, and afterwards throw her headlong from the highest steeple in the town. Well,Faith. said she, If you throw my body never so low, that shall not hinder my soul from ascending into heaven: This her courage and constancy did still further enrage him; Then did he open her mouth with his dagger, and crammed lime down her throat; after which he made her drink a glasse of Urine which himself had made before her, withal throwing the glasse with the remainer into her face. After this he carried her to his quarters, where with strange cruelties he intended to have slain her: but some of the neighbours pitying her sad condition, redeemed her from him with ten Crowns,A special Pro∣vidence. and so conveyed her to her house, where shortly after she finish∣ed her dayes. Some other of these hell-hounds meeting with one Peter Roch, con∣strained him to dig his own grave,Peter Roch bu∣ried quick. and then to try how it fitted him; which whilst he was doing, they buried him alive. In Saint Martins in Castillon, they took the wife of one Andrew Renaud, stripped her stark naked,Two crowned with thorns. and would have violated her chastity, which she resisting, they whipt her most cruelly, wounded her with their swords, crowned her with thorns, and lastly shot her to death. Janetta Calvin.They took also one Ianetta Calvin, whom they carried into the City of Brignole, stripped her, whipt her cruelly, crowned her with thorns,
and first stoned, and afterwards burned her. In Mont de Marsan,At Mont de Mar∣son. six of the principal men had their heads stricken off, otheres were executed divers wayes; One was buried quick; and a young woman being pursued to be ravished, threw her self out of a win∣dow and died. In Tholouse the Papists fell upon the Protestants, hurt many,In Tholouse. killed some outright, divers they threw into a Well; Then did some Counsel∣lors proclaim, that they should not spare to kill and spoil all them of the religion, for that they were licensed by the King and Pope. This soon ran through all the Villages, and the Papists rang their bells; In Tholouse were about thirty thousand Protestants, so that there began one of the most horrible Massacres that was in those parts.Horrible cru∣elties. The prisons were presently filled, and many were knocked on the head at the prison-doors, because they could hold no more; the river in a short space was covered with dead bodies; many were thrown into the streets out at the windows: if any sought to escape out of the water, they were pre∣sently slain with swords or stones. Some of the Protestants gat into the town-house, where they stood upon their guard, and at last it was agreed, that leaving their Arms, they should depart in safety; and so after they had received the Sacrament, commended themselves to God with prayers and tears, they came forth; but contrary to the faith and promise made to them, the Popish party seised upon as many as they could, whom they cast into prison;Popish perfi∣diousness. of such as gat out of the City, some escaped to Montaubon, others in the way were spoiled and killed by the Souldiers and Pesants. At Carcasson those of the Religion being gone out of the Town to hear a sermon, when they returned, the gates were shut,Carcasson. and the Papists shot at them, who afterwards issuing out against them, slew some, and hurt others: One they beat down, cutting off his nose and ears, and pul∣ling out his eyes: some they took prisoners, whom they hanged; one they beheaded, and put others to great ransomes. One they took, black∣ed his face, hands and feet, and gave it out that he had a Divel within him, then hanged him, and threw his body to the dogs; Others they banished, or condemned to the Gallies.Popish lies. In Limoux the Papists used all manner of cruelty,At Limox. deflouring women and very girls in a most detestable manner; The Minister was slain, two Gentlemen, and sixty others were hanged. A widdow of great ac∣count redeemed the virginity of her only daughter with a great summe of mony; but the villain that promised to defend her,Abominable villany. ravished her in her Mothers presence, and then killed them both. Yea after peace was proclaimed, fourteen of the Religion coming thither were all slain. In Nonnay, Monsieur Chaumont having surprised the Town,At Nonnay. murthered many Protestants, spitting out infinite and horrible blasphemies against God himself:Blasphemy. A Locksmith being commanded to despite and blas∣pheme God, because he refused to do it, was presently hewen in pieces; for the same cause another was brained with the butt end of a musket;Barbarous cru∣elties.
A Naylor, because he would not give himself to the Divel, was drawn about his shop by the ears; then being laid on his Anvile, they beat his head in pieces with hammers; yea all manner of cruelty was used that could be devised; Three of the principal in the Town were thrown down from an high Tower; many other were thrown down to make sport: Some were burnt in their houses, others thrown out at windows: others stabbed in the streets: women and maids were most shamefully handled; a young woman that was found hid in an house with her hus∣band, was first ravished before her husbands face, then forced to hold a Rapier; wherewith one thrusting her arme, made her kill her own husband. In Foix, many Protestants were cast into prison, of whom some had their armes and legs cut off,At Foix. and then were beheaded; Some burnt, some hanged, and others sent to the Gallies. In Aurange they killed the Protestants without distinction of age, sex, or quality:At Aurange. Some they stabbed, others they threw upon the points of Halberds; Some they hanged, others they burnt in the Churches; Of some they cut off their privy members, sparing neither old nor bedrid, nor the diseased in the Hospitals. Women and maids were killed, o∣thers hanged out at windows were harquebushed, sucking children mas∣sacred at their mothers breasts;Horrible cru∣elties. girls of five or six years old ravished and spoiled; the wounds of the dead were filled with leaves torne out of Bibles. Those in the Castle yielding upon oath and promise of safety, were all stabbed, or thrown over the wals, being one hundred and ninety of them.Perfidiousness. In Grenoble, they slew many of the Religion, and others they cast from the Bridge into the River.At Grenoble. At Cisterno.In Cisterno, the men that were of the Religion being fled, the popish party fell upon the women and children, whereof they slew three or foure hundred: Some women with child were rip't up, many were bu∣ried quick; Some had their throats cut like sheep, others were drawn through the streets, and beaten to death with clubs. At Beaune.In Beaune, they were bereaved of the exercise of Religion, their three Ministers imprisoned; many were driven out of the Town to the number of eight hundred persons with women and children: their houses were filled with souldiers who made spoile of all; such as were found in their houses, were vilely abused, and some were slain. In Mascon the bloody Persecutors having apprehended a godly and learned Minister called Bonnet Bor who was of a very unblameable life,At Mascon. Bonnet Bor a godly Minister having served twenty years in the Ministry, and in that time had been put to his ransome three times; they carried him along the streets with a thousand scoffs and scorns, smiting him with their fists, thrusting him up and down, and then made a Proclamation, That whosoever would hear this holy man preach, should come to the slaughter-house; at which place they again buffeted and mocked him two hours together: Hereupon he requested them that before his death they would permit him to pray to God:Barbarous cru∣elty. Then one stepping to him cut off half his nose, and one of his
ears, saying, Now pray as long as thou wilt, and then we will send thee to all the Divels; and so this holy man kneeling down, prayed with such fer∣vency of spirit that drew sighs from some of the Murtherers: and after∣vvards directing his speech to him that had cut off his nose, he said, Friend, I am now ready to suffer what thou hast further to inflict upon me; But I intreat thee and thy companions to bethink you well of the outrages commit∣ted by you against this poor City; for there is a God in heaven,Courage and constancy. before whose Tribunal you must shortly give an account of these your cruelties. A Captain passing by, cryed, send that wretched man to the Divel; which one of them hearing, took him by the hand, pretending to have him to the ri∣ver to wash off his blood, but when he came thither he threw him into it,His martyr∣dome. battering him with stones till he was drowned. CHAP. XXXV. The History of the Massacre at Paris ANNO 1571. After the end of the third Civil War in France, great means was used to draw the chief of the Protestants to Paris,See this more fully in the life of the Ad∣miral at the end of this book. under pretence of a marriage between the Prince of Navar and the Lady Margaret, sister to the King of France; but in the mean time the Papists in Roan murthered divers Protestants as they came from a Ser∣mon, and grievously beat others; this seemed much to displease the King, and three or four were executed for the mutiny; then were the Articles of marriage agreed upon; The place for it, Paris: and the Admiral sent to by the King to be present at the wedding, and to pre∣vent all Jealousies, those of the house of Guise were sent away, where∣at they seemed much discontented. The Admiral was allowed to bring with him fifty Gentlemen armed for his greater security. When he came to Paris, he was honourably received and conducted to the King, who calls him his Father,Divellish dissi∣mulation. protesting that in all his life he had not seen any day more agreeable to his mind than that, wherein he assured him∣self to see the end of all troubles, and the beginning of firm peace and quietness in his Realm: the Queen-mother and the rest of the great Courtiers received him with greater favour than he expected: Then did the King send him one hundred thousand Franks out of his treasury for the losses which he had received in the wars, &c. The Admiral had divers advertisements of the intended treachery; yet God so blinded him at that time, though a very prudent man, that he gave little heed to them. Yea such a general stupidity seized upon the Protestants, that their minds were very wavering,Sin the fore∣runner of per∣secution. and few there were that shewed themselves zealously bent to Religion; but all both great and small, thinking deeply upon worldly matters, built them goodly Castles in the aire. Then was the Queen of Navar sent for by the King of France to Paris,
to prepare all things against the wedding: but presently after her co∣ming she fell sick of a Feavor, made her will in a most Christian manner, had much inward joy and comfort, and at five dayes end died, not with∣out suspition of poison from certain perfumes given to her: and after her death the Chirurgions were not suffered to open her head,The Queen of Navar dieth. where the mischief lay, whereby it was the better concealed. The Admiral was again advertised of his danger; but he resting up∣on the testimony of a good conscience, and the providence of God, mis∣interpreted those advices, as if they proceeded from men desirous of new troubles. Many Lords and Gentlemen of the Religion, accompa∣nied the King of Navar, and the Prince of Conde to Paris. The King of France, the better to delude the Protestants, spake open∣ly, that he gave not his sister to the King of Navar only, but as it were to the whole Church of the Protestants to joyn with them in an indisso∣luble union,Dissimulation. and as a tie to their peace and safety. August 17. Anno 1572. The King of Navar and the Lady Margaret were married by the Cardinal of Bourborn,The K. of Na∣var married. upon a scaffold in the sight of all the people, and that day was spent in banquets, dances, and masks, with a strange mixture of Protestants and Papists together; but in the mean time the Queen mother with her Privadoes, as also the Duke of Anjou with the Guises, consulted about killing the Admiral, and dividing the Protestants. Five dayes after, as the Admiral came from the Court, accompanied with about fifteen Gentlemen, reading a petition as he went, one shot at him with a Caliver;The Admiral shot. the bullet taking away his right fore-finger, hurt him in the left arm: he that shot had a Spanish Jennet at the back-door of his lodging, upon which he immediately mounted and esca∣ped: The door being burst open, it was found that the Caliver left be∣hind, was brought to the house the day before by one Chally, steward of the Kings house, and a great dealer for the Duke of Guise; the Ad∣miral being conveyed to his lodging, shewed most admirable piety, pa∣tience, and constancy. The King complained of the mischief, swearing and promising to execute such justice upon the offendor, that the Admiral and all his friends should thinke themselves well satisfied. He caused also all the gates of Paris to be shut,Dissimulation. swearing and blaspheming, that he would not that they which had done the fact should escape; he also appointed many Lords and Gentlemen of the Protestants to lodge in the Ad∣mirals quarter, the better, as he pretended, to secure themselves a∣gainst any danger. After noon the King went to visit the Admiral, and there, with many Oaths and protestations, assured him of his love to him, care over him and them of the Religion, and that he would severely punish the Authors of his present hurt. Presently after the Vidame of Chartres [John de Ferri∣ers] advised the King of Navar, the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and o∣ther chief Lords of the religion,Good counsel neglected. presently to depart out of Paris, as∣suring them that that blow was but the beginning of the Tragedy
which was soon to ensue, but they trusting to the Kings word, rested se∣cure. That day also the King wrote to the Ambassadors of forrein Princes, and to the Governours of all his Provinces how much he was offended at the Admirals hurt, how severely he would punish it,Deep dissimu∣lation. yea he desired that all the world might know how much he was offended at it; and the Queen-mother wrote the like. In the mean time the Dukes of Anjou and Guise employed some to go from house to house to take the names of all the Protestants,The Massacre suspected. and to re∣turn the Catalogue to them, so that presently after they of the Religion began to discover that some bloody intentions were hatching against the Admiral and his friend. For the King set a guard of fifty Harquebushires at the Admirals gate. Great store of Armes were carried into the Loure, and about evening all the people were in Armes. The chief of the Protestants hereupon assembled again in the Admirals lodging, where the Vidame of Chartres advised as before, that they should essay presently to carry the Admiral out of Paris, and that the rest should presently dislodge; yet all the rest refused this counsel, resolving to relie upon the Kings word, who had promised them Justice. In the evening some Protestant Gentlemen proffered to watch with the Admiral, but he would not suffer them: At night the Duke of Guise sent for the Captain of the Switzers▪ shewing him his Commission to kill the Admiral and all his partakers,The Kings Commission shewed for it. exhorting him and his men to be cou∣ragious in shedding of blood. At midnight the Provost, Sheriffs, and Captains of every Ward had the same shewed them, with assurance that through the whole Realm the like should be done to all the Protestants, and that the watchword for the general Massacre should be the tolling of the Bell in the Palace to be rung at the break of day, and the Badge of the Executioners should be a white Handkerchif tied on their armes, and a white Crosse in their hats:The Massacre begins. The Duke of Guise and his Associates were to begin at the Admirals lodging: Some of the Protestants being awakened with the noise in the streets of men running up and down in armes, and with torches, gat up to enquire what was the matter; but presently the Bell rung, and the Duke of Guise with his cutthroats hast∣ed to, and knocked at the Admirals gates: he that opened them was pre∣sently stabbed; The Admiral hearing the noise, gat out of bed, and joyned with his Minister [Master Merlin] in fervent prayer, commend∣ing his soul into the hands of God; Then said he,Of Merlins miraculous escape, see in my book of Examples. It is long since I dispo∣sed my self to die; save you your selves if it be possible, for you cannot save my life; I commit my soul into the hands and mercy of God; Then did Merlin his Minister, and the rest get up to the top of the house, and crept out of windows into the gutters to hide themselves; yet most of them were slain in the next house: Then seven or eight men brake into the Admirals chamber, and one of them went to him with his naked sword offering him the point, to whom he said; Young man, thou oughtest to respect any age and infirmity, yet shalt thou not shorten my life; with that he thrust him into the body, and all the rest laid at him, so that he fell to the ground,The Admiral slain. where he
lay gasping: The Duke of Guise below called to them to throw his body out at window, which they did: his face being all bloody, the Duke of Guise wiped it, and looking on it, said, Now I know him, it is he, and so kicked him on the face with his foot, whom all the murtherers in France feared so much when he was alive. Then went he out into the streets, crying, Courage my fellows, we have here made a good beginning, let us now fall upon the rest, the King commands it▪His head im∣balmed, and sent to the Pope. it is his expresse pleasure, he commands it. The Admirals head was sent to the King and queen-mother, and by them sent to the Pope and Cardi∣nal of Lorrain as a grateful present. The Pope when he heard the newes, set apart a day of publick thanksgiving to God, in the Church of St. Lew∣is, and published a Bull of extraordinary Indulgences to such as should pray for the heavenly assistance to the King and Kingdome of France. Strada. The common people cut off the Admirals hands and privy mem∣bers, drawing his body about the streets three days, and then hung it by the feet upon the Gallows.Popish cruelty All the Attendants of the King of Navar and Prince of Conde which lay in the Kings Palace were massacred; the like was done to the Lords and Gentlemen that lay about the Admirals lodging, and then through all the City were the Protestants murthered,Ten thousand slain in Paris. so that that night and the two next days there were slain in Paris about ten thousand persons of all ranks, ages, and sexes, yea they spared not children in the Cradle, nor in∣fants in their mothers wombs. But to colour this their villany, they gave it out, that the Huguenots had conspired to kill the King; They boasted also that they had in one day done that, which Processes, sentences of Ju∣stice,Popish lies. and open Warre could not do in twelve years. The Lords and Gentlemen were most inhumanely muthered, some in their beds, others on the roofs of their houses, and in all other places wheresoever they were found. There were at this time in Paris about sixty thousand men with pi∣stols, pikes, curtelaces, poinards, knives, and such other bloody instruments, that ran up and down swearing and blaspheming the sacred Majesty of God, cruelly massacring all that they met with: The streets were cover∣ed with mangled bodies, gates and doors defiled with blood; Shoutings & howlings of the murtherers, mixed with the cries and groans of the dy∣ing;The river died red with blood the breaking open of doors and windows, with the noise of guns and pistols, all which made an hellish noise; multitudes of dead bodies were thrown into the Seine, which was died red with their blood. The King certified the King of Navar and the Prince of Conde of all that was done, saying, that he saved their lives upon condition that they should renounce their Religion, and turn Papists. The King of Navar desired him not to force his conscience, but to remember the Alliance so lately contracted betwixt them: The Prince of Conde with more zeal told him,Prince of Con∣de's zeal, and courage. that his body and estate were in his power to do with them what he pleased; but for his Religion he was fully purposed not to forsake it, but to remain constant therein to the losse of his life; he put the King in minde also that he had given his faith to him, and to those
of the Religion, and therefore he hoped he would not falsifie his oath, &c. This so enraged the King that he called him rebel, and the sonne of a rebellious person, with horrible threatnings that he should lose his head if within three days he altered not his mind. The King and his Confidents perceiving that this Massacre would not quench the fire, but rather stirre up the Protestants in other parts of the Kingdome to defend themselves; they presently dispatched away letters to the Governours of Towns, with expresse commands to mas∣scacre all the Protestants: yet at the same time the King wrote other letters, wherein he laid the fault of the murther of the Admiral up∣on the Duke of Guise:Divellish dissi∣mulation. pretending that he had quieted all things in Pa∣ris, and intended that his Edicts of pacification▪ should hold invio∣lably. Upon the receipt of the first letters, the Papists fell upon the Prote∣stants at Meaux, Trois, Orleance, and other places, and murthered them without all pity, besides such as were massacred in Villages and Fields, where they thought to save themselves, so that in a few weeks there were above thirty thousand persons massacred in France. But besides this ge∣neral account, some particulars deserve remembrance,Above thirty thousand mas∣sacred in three moneths which are these that follow. Monsieur de la Place, President of the Court of Requests, had a Cap∣tain armed that came into his house, telling him that the Duke of Guise, had slain the Admiral at the Kings appointment, with many other Hu∣guenots, and that he was come to protect him in that common destru∣ction, only he desired a sight of the Gold and Silver that was in his house: The L. de la Place amazed at his audaciousnesse, asked him whe∣ther he thought that there was a King or no? The Captain blasphe∣ming, willed him to go with him to know the Kings pleasure; Hereup∣on the Lord went from him to secure himself; Then did the Captain rifle his house, taking above one thousand Crowns: The Lord would have secured himself in three several houses, all which refused to entertain him, which caused him to go back to his own house again, where he found his wife very heavy, whom he rebuked, discoursed to her of the promises, told her that we must through many afflictions en∣ter into the Kingdome of God, &c. which much comforted her: Then calling his family together, he made an exhortation to them, went to prayer,The Lord de la Place hs holy zeal. and began to read a chapter in Job with Calvins Exposition up∣on it. Then went he to Prayer again, resolving to suffer all torments or death, rather than to do any thing that might be dishonorable to God: Then came the Provost-Marshal with many Archers to his house, pre∣tending to secure him, and safely to convey him to the King, who would speak with him; De la Place told him that he was most willing to do it, but saw it impossible (in regard of the horrible massacres committed eve∣ry where) without apparent danger of his life; In brief, presently after came the Provost of Merchants, who would needs also have him to the King, yet he would have excused it as before, but the Provost would have no nay, wherefore resolving upon death, which he saw he could
not avoid, he embraced his wife, wishing her above all things, to con∣tinue in the fear of God, and so went on his way boldly; but in the street some murtherers that attended there for his coming, with their daggers stabbed him, and then pillaged him, carrying his body into a stable, and covering his face over with dung,The Lord de la Place mur∣thered. and the next day they threw him into the river. Peter Ramus also, the Kings Professor in Logick was not forgotten; the murtherers breaking into the Colledge of Priests where he was,Peter Ramus murthered. mas∣sacred him, then cast him out of the chamber-window, so that his bowels issued out on the stones: then was his body trailed through the streets and whipt by certain young Scholars, who were set on by their Popish Tutors to do it. A godly young man going early abroad on the Sabbath morning, and hearing of the death of the Admiral, and seeing the insurrection, out of a singular child-like affection to his mother, he hasted home, informed her of the danger, secured her in a place of great secresie; after which he shut himself up in his study,A dutiful and loving son. by Prayer to fit himself for death, into which the murtherers breaking with battleaxes and staves, so loaded him with blows on the head, that he received his blood into his own hands; and when they had killed him, they threw him into the river. Two Ministers murthered.Two Ministers belonging to the King of Navar were also murthered, and thrown into the river: God miraculously preserving all the other Ministers in the City. A Jeweller being in bed with his wife, who at that time had the mid∣wife with her, being near the time of her delivery, these bloody Villains came knocking at the door, and in the Kings name demanded entrance; the woman as ill was she was, opened the door, whereupon rushing in, they stabbed her husband in his bed; the Midwife seeing that they were bent to murther the woman also, earnestly entreated them to tarry at least so long till the infant (which would be the twentieth child that God had given her) was born;Hellish cru∣elty. but notwithstanding her request, they took the woman, and thrust a dagger into her fundament up to the hilts; the wo∣man finding her self mortally wounded, yet desirous to bring forth her fruit, fled into a corn-loft, whither these tygers persuing her, gave her another stob into the belly, and so cast her out of the window into the street, and upon the fall, the childe came forth of her body, the head formost, gaping and yauning in a pitiful manner. One of these murtherers snatching up a little childe in his armes, the poor babe began to play with his beard,An Infant murthered. and to smile upon him; but in∣stead of being moved to compassion, this villain, whose heart was hard∣er than the rocks, wounded it with his dagger, and cast it all gore blood into the river. The Kings letters being come to Meaux upon the same Sabbath, to Cosset the Kings Atturny there,At Meaux. upon the sight of them, he presently went about to his cutthroats, warning them to come to him armed at seven a clock at night, withal causing the gates of the City to be shut up; The hour being come, he with his Partizans went up and down, cruelly
murthering the innocent servants of Jesus Christ, in which bloody em∣ployment they spent all that night; The next day they pillaged their houses, and took above two hundred Protestants more, and shut them up in prison: the next day towards evening,Two hundred Protestants murthered. Cosset with his companions went to the prison, where having a Catalogue of the prisoners names, Cosset called them out one by one, and then they murthered them till they were aweary: Then they went to supper, that so they might breath and refresh themselves; and then filling themselves with wine, they went back to glut themselves with blood also; They took with them butchers axes that they might dispatch them the more easily, with which as they called them forth, they knocked them down and murthered them; A∣mongst those that were thus butchered, was an Elder of the Reformed Church, who praying for his enemies, they laughed him to scorn, and be∣cause he had a Buffe-coat on, which they were loth to spoil, they opened it before, and stabbed him into the breast. Another was an ancient man, that had been sheriffe of the City; him they were not content to kill out-right, but first cut off his nose, ears, and privy members, then they gave him several small thrusts into the body, tossing him up and down, till through losse of blood he fell down, calling upon the name of the Lord, and so with many wounds he was slain. The Kings letters being come to Troys, the Protestants were all shut up in prison;At Troys. Then did the Bailiffe send for the common Hangman to murther them; but he refused, saying, That his office was only to execute such as were legally condemned, and so went his way: Then was the Keeper of the prison sent for, who being sick, he sent one Martin to know what the businesse was, to whom the Bailiffe imparted the mat∣ter, wishing him to murther all the Prisoners; and that their blood might not run out into the street, he bade him to make a great trench in the midst of the prison, and to cause certain vessels to be set into it to re∣ceive the blood; This Martin going back with abhorrency of the fact, concealed it from the Jailor: The next day the Bailiffe came to the pri∣son, and smiling, asked the Jailor if it was done? but he, being ignorant of his meaning, asked him what should be done? Hereupon the Bailiffe was so enraged, that he was ready to strike him with his dagger, till he promised to perform his Will; Then did the Jailor go to the Prisoners who were in the Court recreating themselves, and shut them up one by one in their several Cels, which made them suspect that they were destinated to slaughter, and therefore they betook themselves to pray∣er; The Jailor called his companions about him, acquainted them what was given him in charge, and caused them to swear to execute it; but when they approached to the prisoners, they were so surprized with feare, that they stood gazing one upon another,Gods Provi∣dence. having not hearts to act so horrid a deed; whereupon they returned to the Jailors Lodge, and sent for eight quarts of the strongest wine, with other things, to intoxi∣cate their brains; then they took a Catalogue of all their prisoners, and gave it to one Martin to call them forth in order:Prodigious wickednesse and cruelty. The first prisoner being called for, presented himself with a cheerful countenance, cal∣ling
upon the name of the Lord, then opened his breast to them, recei∣ving the mortal stroke, whereof he died. Another being called forth, one of them thrust at him several times with the point of his Halbard,Courage and constancy of Gods people. wounding, but not killing him, whereup∣on the prisoner took the point of the Halbard, and set it against his heart, saying with a stedfast voice, Here souldier, here, right at the heart, right at the heart, and so finished his life. The rest were all murthered in the like manner, after which the mur∣therers made a great pit in the back-side of the prison, into which they cast the bodies one upon another, some of them yet breathing: yea one of them raised up himself above his fellows, whereupon they threw in earth and so smothered him: But the Bailiffs order of making a trench be∣ing not observed, the blood of the slain ran so abundantly out of the pri∣son door, that thence, through the channel, it ran into the river, and turned it into the colour of blood, which bred an horror in the very Pa∣pists themselves which saw it. The Massacre at Orleance.At Orleance the Kings Edict for observing the Treaty of Peace was so∣lemnly published, which made those of the Religion very secure, where∣upon above three hundred of them, men, women and children met toge∣ther at a Sermon; but the same night came the Kings letters for the mas∣sacring of them all; Then did the Major and Sheriffs raise the companies in Armes to put it in execution.A Noble Counsellor. One of these murtherers with some of his companions went to a Noble Counsellors house, bidding themselves to supper; The Counsellor ignorant of their intents, made them good cheere;Monstrous in∣gratitude. but when supper was ended, with horrible blasphemies they mur∣thered him, and then plundred his house. About the Ramparts of the wall inhabited many of the Religion, a∣mongst whom all night was heard nothing but shooting of guns and pistols, breaking open of doors, fearful out-cries of the men, women and children that were massacred, trampling of horses, rumbling of Carts that carried the dead bodies away, and the cryings out of the mur∣therers that went up and down, howling out, Kill, kill them all, and then take the spoile. This Massacre continued all the week long, the bloody beasts crying out to those whom they murthered,Blasphemy. Where is now your God? What is be∣come of all your Prayers and Psalms now? Let your God whom you call'd upon, save you if he can. Others sang in scorn to them the 43. Psalm, Judge and revenge my cause O Lord. Others, Have mercy on me, O God, &c. Yet notwithstanding all these taunts, the faithful died couragiously. In this Massacre the Papists boasted that they had slain above twelve thousand men, besides women and children; some of them said eighteen thousand. A Doctor of the Law.On Tuesday night some of these murtherers came and knocked at the door of a Doctor of the Civil Law, and when he opened it to them, they told him that he must die, whereupon he fell to Prayer with such ardency and affection, that they being amazed and over-ruled by a di∣vine power, only robbed him and went away; The next day came some Scholars to his house desiring to see his Library, which he shewed
them; then they asked, some one book, some another, which he gave them; yet they told him they were not satisfied, but they must kill him; whereupon betaking himself to prayer, when he had done, he de∣sired them to kill him there, which they refused, forcing him out into the streets, leading him by the schools, and there he again desired them to kill him in that place, where he had taught so long; but they still re∣fused; and when they had led him a little farther, they knockt him on the head. Others meeting with an Apothecary who had brought Physick to a Patient, cut off one of his armes,An Apothe∣cary. and then had him forth into the market-place, where they murthered him. A Cook that had hid himself three dayes,A Cook. was at last through hunger forced to come forth, and so was slain. And to fulfil the measure of their cruelty, such Protestants as through fear revolted to them,The reward of Apostates. they placed them in the fore-front of their compa∣nies, putting weapons in their hands, compelling them to give the first on∣set, crying, Smite them, smite them, are they not your holy brethren and si∣sters? and if any refused, they presently slew him. In Lyons, Mandolet Governour thereof, hearing of the Massacre at Paris, presently caused the City gates to be shut, raised forces, command∣ing them, that if any of the Protestants came out of their houses, though but with swords, they should presently kill them; but the Protestants see∣ing a storme coming,The patience of the Saints. which they knew could not arise without the spe∣cial providence of God, set themselves to bear it with invincible pati∣ence.Gods provi∣dence. The day following if any of them did but go abroad about their necessary occasions, they were presently clapt up in prison, and when night came, the murtherers entred their houses, which they rifled and plundred, and pretending to carry the Protestants to prison, some they stabbed in the streets, others they threw into the river, whereof some were carried down the stream half a mile below the City, by which means they escaped; The day after, Proclamation was made by sound of Trumpet, that all of the Religion should appear at such a place to know the Kings pleasure concerning them; many went,Popish malice and cruelty. but so soon as they came, they were sent to several prisons, and the night following every corner and part of the City was full of lamentable cries and shreekings, partly of such as were massacred in their houses, partly of such as were but half murthered, and so haled to be thrown into the river; and from that time there were such horrible murthers committed in the City, as if the Divels in the likenesse of men ran roaring about to do mischief; The Sabbath morning following those that had hitherto escaped massa∣cring, were then dispatched. In the Arch-bishops house there were three hunded and fifty Priso∣ners shut up,Three hundred and fifty mur∣thered. and a bloody crue of cutthroats were appointed to murther them, to whom the keyes were delivered, and they rushing into the great Court, gave notice to the prisoners with a loud voice that they must die; then having first taken all the Prisoners purses, they fell up∣on them with barbarous cruelty, hacking and hewing them in a
furious manner, so that within an hour and an half, they were every one cut in pieces; The prisoners were all slain, with their eyes and hands lift up to heaven, whilst their hands and fingers were cut off. There was a Merchant called Francis de Bossu that had two sonnes; the father seeing the horrible Massacres,Francis de Bossu and his two sons. The father en∣courageth his sons to die. said to his sons, Children, we are not now to learn that it hath alwayes been the portion of believers to be hated, per∣secuted, and devoured by unbelievers, as Christs sheep of ravening wolves; if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him: let not therefore these drawn swords terrifie us, they will be but as a bridge whereby we shall passe to eternal life: we have lived long enough amonst the wicked, let us now go and live with our God, let us joyfully go after this great company that is gone before us, &c. When he saw the murtherers come, he clasped his armes about his two sons, and they theirs about him, as if they strove mutually to ward off the blows each from other, who were afterwards found dead in these mutual imbraces. The murtherers went up and down the City boasting that they had died their white doublets red in the blood of the Huguenots;Prodigious cruelty. one bragging that he had killed an hundred, and some more, and some lesse: when the people went into the Arch-bishops house, and saw the slaugh∣ter that had been made there, though they were Papists, yet they said that surely they were not men, but Devils in the habit of men that had done this. The dead corpses were carried out, and lay spread like dung upon the face of the earth, and when they were about to throw them into the river, an Apothecary told them that much money might be made of their grease, whereupon all the fat bodies were sought out, ripped up,Their grease is sold. and their grease sold for three shillings a pound; which be∣ing done, after many jears bestowed upon the dead carcasses, some were tumbled into a great pit, others thrown into the river. The Coun∣tries which lay below upon the river were amazed to see such multitudes of dead bodies to come down the streame, some with their eyes pul∣led out, others their noses, eares, and hands cut off; stabbed into eve∣ry part of their bodies, so that some had no part of humane shape remaining. Shortly after the Popes Legat came thither, and as he came out of the great Church from Masse, all the chief Massacrers kneeled down for to have his absolution,The murthe∣rers absolved. and when he was told who they were, and why they kneeled there, he absolved them all by making the signe of the Crosse. A Gentleman of Paris, as soone as the Massacre was ended there, went to Angiers,At Angiers. and coming to the house of a reverend, godly, and learned Minister called Master John Mason, meeting his wife at the door, he saluted her,Hypocrisie. A Minister murthered. asking where her husband was? she said that he was walking in his garden, directing him the way to him; when he came to him, he lovingly embraced him, and then said, Do you know wherefore I am come to you? the King hath commanded me presently to kill you, and therewithal he presented a Pistol to his breast; the Minister replyed that he knew not wherein he had offended the King; But seeing, said he,
you will have my life, pray you give me leave to pray to God, and to begge mer∣cy at his hands; which being granted, he made a short prayer,A godly Mini∣ster pistolled. and then wil∣lingly presented his body to the murtherer, who pistolled him, and so de∣parted. Presently after the King sent one Pugilliard,And his wife murthered. who drowned nine or ten more in that place, and amongst the rest, the wife of this Mr. Mason, who shewed an admirable constancy of faith, even to her last breath. In Roan in a few dayes they murthered above six thousand men besides women, upon whom they exercised no lesse cruelty than upon the men;At Roan six thousand mur∣thered. their dead bodies they carried out in tumbrels, and threw them by heaps into great pits digged for that purpose. The news of the Massacre of Paris coming to Tholouse,At Tholouse. the great gates of the City were presently shut up; but it pleased God, that that morning most of the Protestants were gone out of the City to hear a Sermon; The report of the shutting up of the gates coming to them, some thought it not fit to return, others would needs go back to take order abour their affairs: these were suffered to enter peaceably, leaving their swords at the gates,Popish subtilty the rather to draw in the rest, amongst whom were divers Counsellors; and great meanes were used to entrap them, and indeed some of them were enticed to come back; but when they saw they could get in no more, the wednesday morning following souldiers were sent to break into all the houses of those of the Religion, and to carry them to sundry prisons; and the gates were watched that none should escape:And cruelty. command also was given that none should conceale any of the Protestants: Amongst the prisoners were five or six Counsellors, who much comforted and en∣couraged the rest. Then were all the prisoners brought together into one place, and letters procured from the King to massacre them all: and accordingly some leud persons, armed with axes and butchers knives, were sent to effect it, who calling them out one by one, murthered them all, not permitting them so much as to speak, much lesse to pray. The number of the slain was above three hundred, who were all stript stark naked,Three hundred murthered. and their bodies left to the common view of all for two dayes together: then were they, thus naked, thrown into pits one up∣on another, only the Counsellors were hung up in their long gowns up∣on an Elme in the Palace-yard; all their houses vvere also sacked and plundred. At Bourdeaux when the news of the Massacre of Paris came thither, the Protestants were taking boats to go into a meadow to hear a Sermon,At Bourdeaux. but the Governour sent and stayed them, yet under preience of securing them against the multitude; then were the gates guarded that none might escape, yet it pleased God that the Ministers were conveyed away,A special Pro∣vidence. who aftervvards took ship and came into England. There vvas a Jesuite that dayly preached in that City,A bloody Je∣suite. to stir up the Governour and people to massacre the Protestants, proposing the exam∣ple of the Persians to them. The Governour could not vvell tell vvhat to
do, but the Lord of Monpessat assured him that it was the Kings minde that they should all be murthered, and that he could not do a more ac∣ceptable service to him; whereupon he, gathering the scum of the Ci∣tizens together, commanded them to kill all the Protestants without sparing one, and to give them an example, himself went to the Lord of Obiers house, and murthered him in his own Court; Then did they mur∣ther a Countrey Minister also that was come thither for shelter,The Lord of Obiers mur∣thered, and a Minister. toge∣ther with the rest of the Protestants, and afterwards pillaged their houses: An old man that was a Deacon of the Reformed Church, being at this time sick in bed, they dragged him forth into the streets, asking him whether he would go to Masse, to whom he answered; I hope I shall not so far forget the eternal salvation of my soul,An holy speech as for fear of death to prolong my life for a few dayes; for thereby I should buy a short time of life at too dear a rate; whereupon they instantly murthered him. It was lamen∣table to see the poor Protestants wandring up and down, not knowing where to hide themselves; some were rejected of their own Parents and Kinsfolk, who would not open their doors to them; others were betray∣ed by their friends, and delivered into the hands of their murtherers; yet some were hidden by their very enemies, whose hearts abhorred such de∣testable outrages.Gods provi∣dence. CHAP. XXXVI. The Siege of Sancerre, Anno Christi, 1573. Gods care of his people.YEt in the midst of these Massacres and dangers God provided some Pella's [places of refuge] for his people, as Rochel, Montalbon, Nismes, Sancerre, Privas, &c. Anno 1573. Sancerre was besieged by the Lord of Chastre, with an Army, who planting his Cannons, played incessantly upon the Town, so that the stones of the wall,A special Pro∣vidence. the pavement in the streets, and the shivers of timber flew about continually, yet the mighty power and providence of God herein appeared, that none within the City were slain, but one∣ly one maid that was slain with the breath of a Cannon-bullet: yet were the stocks of Musquets sometimes broken in the hands and on the shoul∣ders of the townsmen, and themselves not hurt; yea some had their coats, breeches and hats shot through, and their bodies not hurt; yea some stones that were beaten off the wall, flew violently between a Mi∣nisters legs, and hurt him not. Many were the assaults given to this Town, yet still the Assailants were beaten back with great losse. The siege continuing long, the Townsmen began to be in want,A terrible Fa∣mine. so that they were forced to eat their Horses, Asses, and
Mules, which food lasted but a moneth, then they did eate all the dogs, cats, rats, mice, and moles that they could get: and those also being spent, they lived upon hides of beasts, Calves and Sheep-skins: then did they eate parchment, horse and beasts hoofs, hornes, Lanthorns, halters, and furniture for horses, girdles o leather, herbs and wild-roots; and these being all spent, and no bread left in the City, such as could get Linseed, or any other seed, ground it, or beat it in a morter, and made bread thereof, as also of herbs mix∣ed with bran if they could get it: This being spent they eate bread made of straw-meal, powder of nutshels, yea of slates; su∣et, old ointments, and other old grease served to make pottage, and with it also they fried the excrements of horses and men, which they did eate, yea the filth in the streetes was not spared. In this extremity a poor labourer and his wife were taken and executed for eating the head, intrals and brains of their daughter of three years old, that died of famine; they had dressed also the rest of her body to eat at other times; and that which aggravated their fault was, that it was proved that that day there was given to them a little pottage made with herbs and wine,Two executed for eating part of their own daughter. which might have satisfied them in that necessity: Such as went forth of the walls to seek relief, were either slaine by the enemy, or lived upon sprigs of vines, black-berries, red snailes, and herbs; A∣mongst other sad and lamentable spectacles, one was of a labou∣rer and his wife found dead amongst the Vines, and two of their children crying by them, the lesser being but sixe weekes old, which a charitable Widow took home to her house and sustained: Many dyed in this famine, some in their houses, others fell down in the streets, and gave up the ghost; most of the children under twelve yeares old died: Lamentable it was to heare the poor fathers and mothers mourning and weeping to see their misery and yet they could not relieve them; Never∣thelesse most of them did wonderfully encourage themselves with the assurance of the grace of God, whereof there is this notable example. A boy of five years old, languishing divers weeks, ran along the streets, till nature failing him, he fell down in the presence of his father and mother, who wept and lamented over him; and feeling upon his armes and legs, they were as dry as a stick; whereupon the child said; Why do you thus weep to see me die of hunger? I ask you no bread, mother,A remarkable story. for I know you have none; but seeing it is the Will of God that I should die in this sort, I must take it thankfully: Had not the holy man Lazarus hun∣ger? Have not I read it in my Bible? and saying so, he yielded up his spirit unto God. That which preserved all from being famished, was this; There were yet sixe Kine kept to give milke for some infants, and certaine horses of service which were reserved for an ex∣tremity;
These were killed, and their flesh sold to comfort those that lived. Also some little corne was brought into the Towne by stealth, which was sold for two shillings sixe pence a pound. The war killed but eighty four persons, but the famine killed above five hundred, besides those which were brought so low that they hard∣ly recovered. During these miseries, divers souldiers, and some townsmen gat out, chusing rather to die by the sword of the Enemy, than by famine, of whom some were slain, others imprisoned, and exe∣cuted. So all hope of being saved in mans judgement failed to those of Sancerre:A wicked oath for the King had sworne that he would make them devoure each other. But mans misery is Gods opportunity; The King of Kings found out a strange meanes to deliver his people that put their trust in him; Just at this time, by the sollicitati∣ons of the Bishop of Valence, the Polonians had chosen the Duke of Anjou, brother to the French King, King of Poland, and Am∣bassadors were come to fetch him into that Countrey, who hear∣ing of this siege, sollicited the Bishop of Valence to perform the Promise, which he had sworn to them in the name of his Master, viz. to fet at liberty all the Towns of France that were molested for Religion: by this means the poor Sancerreans, halfe dead for hunger, were delivered at the request of these good men who came from a farre Countrey to be their deliverers,An admirable Providence. though their enemies had oft-times threatned them with a general Massacre; They were suffered to depart with their armes and goods, and such as would stay, not to be questioned for any thing past; they had a promise also that the honour of women and maids should be preser∣ved; and such Ministers and others, as had fled thither for safe∣ty, had Pasports given them, and they were suffered peaceably to depart. The Siege of Rochel, Anno 1573. ABout the beginning of the same year Rochel was also besieged; The Townsmen often sallied out, and there were very hot skirmishes betwixt them and the besiegers; in one of which there came a young Gentleman, who with horrible blasphemy boasted that he was one of the Admirals murtherers, shewing his Courtelace,Gods judge∣ment on a bloody Per∣secutor. which he said, he brought from that conflict, with it threatning to slash the Rochellers; yet, when it came to trial, his heart failed, and he ran away; but one of the City souldiers pur∣suing
him, slew him, stript him, and left his naked body in the field, the dogs tearing his face before next morning. In one moneths space the enemy discharged above thirteene thousand Cannon shot against the Rochellers, and made many as∣saults, wherein they still went away with the worst. Then came the Duke of Anjou to the Army to be the General▪A famine. The siege having continued some moneths, the Rochellers began to want vi∣ctuals, which famine, after awhile, much encreased upon them, but behold the admirable Providence of God! when all other Provision failed them,An extraordi∣nary Provi∣dence. there came an infinite number of small fishes never before seene in that Haven, as it were yielding them∣selves to the mercy of the poor People, which gathered them every day so long as the siege lasted, but presently after the pub∣lishing of the Edict for peace, they went away,Rochel delive∣red. and were never seen afterwards. During this siege came the Ambassadors from Poland to fetch their new King; by whose means a truce was granted to the Ro∣chellers, and lastly Articles of peace were agreed upon, whereby the Army was withdrawn, and Rochel enjoyed her Priviledges; Yet this is further very remarkable, that all the chief persons that were imployed in the Massacre of Paris and other places,Gods judge∣ments on Per∣secutors. were drawn forth to this siege, by God, there to receive the reward of all their impieties, some of them being slain, and others re∣ceiving there those wounds whereof they shortly after died; A∣mongst whom were the Duke de Aumale, and Cosseins, Marshal of the Field, that first entred the Admirals lodging;Gods judge∣ment on the Duke of Ajou see in my book of Examples. three Masters of the Camp; divers great Lords and Gentlemen; above sixty Captains; as many Lieutenants and Ensignes, and above twenty thousand common souldies. Anno 1574. King Charles himself, that was at least the counte∣nancer of all these horrible Massacres, being in the prime of his youth, about twenty four years old, fell sick of a languishing disease; his Physicians let him blood and purged him, but to no purpose; for by degrees he so faded away, as caused great astonishment to many. He long strugled against his disease, but at last was faine to betake himself to his bed, and the two last weeks of his sicknesse, much blood issued from divers parts of his body, and once he rolled himself in his own blood, and a little before he died,The Kings sicknesse and death. he desired his mother to pursue his enemies to the uttermost, with great ve∣hemency reiterating his speeches; saying, Madam, I pray you hearti∣ly to do it, and so he breathed forth his soul, May the thirtieth,Anger impla∣cable. Anno Christi, 1574. I shall here adde a few words also of the great miseries which the people of God endured in Rochel, Anno Christi, 1628. expe∣cting help from England, which proved but a staffe of reed,Rochel besieg∣ed. Anno 1628 which whilst they leaned upon, it ran into their hands; The City being besieged by the King of France his Army, the inhabitants were
brought to such extremity, that for want of other meat, the Citizens and Souldiers,A terible fa∣mine. having eaten up all the horses, dogs, cats, rats and mice, lived two moneths with nothing but Cow-hides and Goats-skins boil∣ed; then did they eat up all the old gloves, and whatsoever was made of leather: yea, the poor people cut off the buttocks of the dead, and did eat them. Young maids of fourteen or sixteen years old, did look like old women of one hundred years old. All the English that came out, after the surrender of the City, looked like Anatomies; The prizes of things were as followeth; a Bushel of Wheat twenty pounds; A pound of bread twenty shillings; a quarter of mutton above sixe pounds; A pound of butter thirty shillings; An egge eight shillings; An ounce of Sugar two shillings and six pence; A dried fish twenty shillings; A pint of French wine twenty shillings; A pint of milk thir∣ty shillings; A pound of grapes three shillings, &c. Margaret Pi∣errone.Anno 1593. There was one Margaret Pierron of the Town of San∣say in France, who by her maid-servant was accused to the Jesuites, for not going to Masse, and for keeping a Bible in her house, in reading whereof was her whole delight; The Jesuites, complaining hereof to the Magistrate, caused her to be apprehended, yet had she some notice of it before-hand from her friends that advised her to flie from the danger; but God had a purpose that she should bear witness to his truth, so that she was taken and cast into prison; After a while the Judges sent for her, saying, Margaret, Are you not wil∣ling to returne home to your house, and there to enjoy your husband and children? Yes, said she, if it may stand with the good Will of God; Then, said they, if thou wilt do but a small matter thou shalt be set at liberty;Tentation. If, said she, it be not contrary to Gods glory and mine own salvation, you shall hear what I will say to you. No such thing, said they, for all that we require is but this, that a Scaffold being set up in the chief part of the City, you shall there crave pardon for offending the Law, and a fire being by, you shall burne your Bible in it without speaking a word. I pray you my Masters, said she, Tell me, is my Bible a good Book or no? Yea, said they, we confesse it is: Why then, said she, would you have me cast it into the fire? On∣ly said they, to give the Jesuites content: imagine it to be but paper, and then you may burne it, and you may buy you another Bible at any time, and hereby you may save your life. Thus they spent above two hours in perswading her, that thereby she might do a lesse evil, and a greater good would come of it: But she confidently answered, that by the help of God she would never do it: What will the people say (said she) will they not say,She chooses to be burnt ra∣ther than to burne her Bible. Yonder is a wrethed woman indeed, that burns the Bible wherein all the Articles of Christian Re∣ligion are contained? I will certainly burne my body rather than my Bible. Then did they commit her close prisoner, fed her only with bread and water, and her friends were debarred from coming to her: but when nothing could remove her from her constancy, she was con∣demned
to be set upon a scaffold; to have her Bible burnt before her face; her self to be strangled, and her body to be dragged through the streets to a dunghil, which sentence she underwent cheerfully, and so slept in the Lord. Collected out of the History of the Tragical Massacres of France under Henry the second, Francis the second, Charles the ninth, Henry the third, and Henry the fourth. Translated out of French.
Here place the ninth Figure.
CHAP. XXXVII. The Persecution of the Church of Christ in the Val∣toline, Anno Christi, 1620. THe Grison Lords, who were the Soveraign Magistrates of this Countrey, had by sundry Decrees granted liberty to the Pro∣testants to exercise their Religion freely: But when as the Minister of Tell, with his Congregation,Popish trea∣chery. were met together about the service of God, the bloody Papists rising in arms, set upon them, slew one, and beate others so cruelly with staves, that they were forced to desist from their purpose: Shortly after they murthered some others,Cruelty. and conspiring with some other bloody villaines, they set guards upon all the passages of the valley, that so none of the Protestants should e∣scape them; then ringing their bells, they raised all the Countrey, and if any Protestants stirred out of their houses, they murthered them in the streets: they also brake into the houses of others, drew them out of their beds, and murthered them. Some of the Protestants retired to the houses of Papists that were neer of kin, or otherwise engaged to them, to secure themselves, but there they were betrayed and mur∣thered: Some they strangled; some they shot; Of some they beate out their brains, and others they drowned in the river Alba. A noble Gentleman that had hid himself in the river,A Noble Gentleman murthered. was found by them, who requested them to spare his life, for his dear childrens sake: But they told him that this was no time for pity, except he would ab∣jure his faith, and swear by the Popes Bull: Nay said he, God forbid, that to save this temporal life, I should deny my Lord Jesus Christ, who with his precious blood upon the Crosse redeemed me at so dear a rate;Christ prefer∣red before all. and having through his grace so long freely and publikely professed him, that I should now hazard the losse of eternal life, to which I was elected before the foun∣dation of the world; I say God forbid. Hereupon in a barbarous and sa∣vage manner they murthered him. They brake also into the Palace of the Governour, and murthered him; women and maidens they de∣floured; and of all the Protestants in that part of the Countrey, there were onely three that escaped over the horrid and vast mountains of the Alps into Rhetia. These wicked villaines having thus dispatched the Protestants in this place, they marched to another, coming just at the time when the Protestants were at Church hearing a Sermon: They were guid∣ed to the place by two Friers; the Protestants seeing them coming, shut the Church doors, barricadoing them up with benches: these villaines laboured to break open the door, but when they could not readily do it, they clambred up into the windows, through which they shot with their musquets at the people, whereby they
wounded and killed many: The Minister beig▪ a man rarely endued with learning and piety,Protestants murthered at Church. according to the shortnesse of time, exhorted them with lively reasons to persevere in the truth notwithstanding all the danger; but in the mean time these barbarous Papists had forced o∣pen the door, where they fell to murthering of all without respect of quality, sex, or age: Some Lords and Gentlemen were here slaine, the Minister was shot to death; divers Ladies and children gate into the Belfree to save themselves; but these hell-hounds set fire to the place, and miserably burnt them all. At Sondres.These savage wretches having thus glutted themselves with inno∣cent blood in this place, they marched to Sondresse: The Papists in that place hearing of their coming, went to the Justice, protesting that they would guard him from danger, and that they would not suffer such villanies to be committed amongst them: Then did they beat their Drums, ring their Bells, and arme themselves under pre∣tence of securing the Protestants, who trusting to their promises, mix∣ed themselves amongst them to stand for their own defence; These Popelings concealing their mischievous intent, killed now one, then another,Popish trea∣chery. as if it had been by accident, so that though divers of them were slain, yet they found not out the mystery of the practice: yet some, both men and Gentlewomen sought to escape, but all passages being shut up, they were met with and cruelly murthered. Then did they more openly discover their malice, killing the Protestants where ever they met them: hereupon some eighteen of the Protestants, to∣gether with some Ladies and young children gat together; and the men being well armed, they marched close together, repulsing their enemies, and at last came to a Church in the mountain of Sondresse, un∣to which place a Minister, and some others, in all, about seventy three men were gathered together, and after their prayers made unto God, they passed the Valley of Malaneo, which was beset by the enemy on two sides; but such as kept the passages, were by Gods special pro∣vidence,A special Pro∣vidence. so astonished that they fled away; and the Protestants, though they were pursued to the tops of the mountains, yet did miracu∣lously escape with safety. Then did the Pesants joyne with these villaines to rob and plunder the houses of the Protestants, and amongst them, divers Noblemens houses richly furnished with great abundance; They ran up and down also through fields, woods and mountains, searching every bush for the Protestants; and as they found any of them, they presently murthered them. A noble Lady.There was an honorable Lady that not long before came out of Italy to enjoy her liberty of conscience, whom they exhorted to change her Religion, which she refusing, they advised her that yet at least she would▪ do it out of a care of her young infant which she held in her armes, which otherwise, together with her self should present∣ly be slain: But she with an undaunted courage answered: I have not departed out of Italy,Courage, and constancy. my native countrey, nor forsaken all the estate that
I had there, to renounce now the faith which I had wrought in me by the Lord Jesus Christ; yea I will rather suffer, if it were possible, a thousand deaths; And how shall I have regard in this case to my infant, since God my heavenly Father spared not his own Sonne my Lord Jesus Christ, but delivered him up to death for his love to me, and such sinners as I am? and so giving her childe to one, she said, Behold my child, the Lord God, who hath care of the birds of the aire, is much more able to save this poore crea∣ture, although by you it should be left to these wild mountains:Faith. Then un∣lacing her gown, she opened her breast, saying, Here is the body which you have power to kill; but my soul, on which you have no power to lay your hands, that I commend to my God; and so she was presently slain, and hewed in pieces; The infant being a lovely and sweet Child, they spared, and delivered it to a Popish Nurse to be brought up.A special Pro∣vidence. These miscreants finding such sweetnesse by the plunder of the Protestants; they spared none, plundering their houses twice or thrice over: Some noble Matrons had their rings pul'd off their fingers; and if they refused presently to draw them off,Horrible cru∣elties. they would cut off ei∣ther their hands or fingers from them. Some women with their chil∣dren were dragged to the tops of high Mountains, and threatned to be thrown down headlong with their children if they would not promise to go to Masse; and though one amongst them was found, that through terrour, promised them to do it, yet did they throw her down with the rest without all pity. One Dominico Berto of sixteen years old,Dominico Berto▪ Barbarous cru∣elty. they set upon an Asse with his face to the tayle, and the tayle in his hands for the bridle, and thus with many jears they led him to the Market-place; then they cut off his nose, ears, and cheeks, then burned many holes in several parts of his body with hot irons, continuing these torments till in that barbarous manner they had killed him. Yet through the won∣derful goodnesse of God, some Ministers with their wives and chil∣dren, by great travel, dangers,A special pro∣vidence. and difficulties amongst the craggy and high mountains, were delivered out of the hands of these bloody persecutors. Theophilus Messino was shot with a Musket, but being not slain, they set open his mouth with a gag, filled it with gunpowder,Theophilus Mes∣sino. and giving fire to it, tore his head miserably; his son was slain with ma∣ny wounds. Another being wounded and stripped naked, was carried out and thrown into the woods; yet afterwards he gat up and went home to his own house, where he had mountains of gold profered him if he would turn Papist, yet, through Gods mercy, he continued faithful to the death.Constancy. A young Gentleman, too much addicted to the vanities of the world▪ being earnestly sollicited to forsake the Protestant Religion, stoutly refused, whereupon they shot him with a Musket,Tentation re∣sisted. and having layn a while, and then raising himself up, he besought them to dispatch him, that he might render his soul to his Creator.
Divers men and women were thrown down from Bridges into the ri∣ver Adda, and drowned for their constancy in the truth. Prodigious cruelties.Some had their mouthes si up to their ears, others had the flesh cut from their faces; others were slashed in other parts of their body till they dyed; and others were often put to the strappado, and then hewen in pieces. A noble Virgin that was come to Sondres for Religion sake, these vil∣lains took and carried her through the streets with the greatest shame and disgrace that could be:A noble Vir∣gin. they put a mitre of paper on her head, besmeared her face with dirt, buffeted her on the cheeks, then exhorted her to call up∣on the Saints; but she smiling thereat, said, My trust and my salvation is only in my Saviour Jesus Christ, and upon him only will I rest; as for the Virgin Mary,An excellent speech. though she be blessed above all women, yet is she not omniscient, and there∣fore knows not our requests: yea she her self had need of the merits of her own son, without which she could not have been saved, &c. They still continuing to scorn and deride her, she manfully said, I willingly endure all this as it be∣comes me to do, desiring no better usage, seeing the same was done to my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and to his Apostles, and to thousands of the holy Martyrs. Then was she carried away and murthered in the fields. Some Ministers and many other godly Christians, men and women, noble and ignoble were murthered sundry wayes. Many hid themselves in holes, and caves, and woods, out of which they durst not come, but by night only to get them food; yet were they so watched that many times they were murthered: Others in those places were famished for want of food; Others living upon roots, herbs, grasse, &c. contract∣ed diseases whereof they dyed, so that the mountains and woods lay scattered with dead carcasses everywhere. Then came there a letter to these blood-suckers from a Governour, that they should with all their power,A wicked E∣dict. murther, strangle, and massacre without all pity and mercy all the Lutherans wheresoever they were; whereupon these murtherers having slain all in Tyrane, Bruse, Tell, Sondres, and Malen, they went to Berbenno, where they presently mur∣thered sundry persons of good rank and quality, and that with great cruelty, contrary to their faith and promise given them; the like they did in Caspano and Trahen, and divers other places, shewing neither pity nor favour to any:Popish perfi∣diousnesse. In one house they slew a man and his wife; and seeing an infant of three years old lying in a Cradle, the child being a girle of a sweet and amiable countenance, and seeming to smile upon them, they took her by the heeles, and dashed out her braines. Then did these villains march to Brae, where also they murthered many; shooting some, drowning others, stoning others, burning others, and grinding their very bones to powder: Amongst others, finding an a∣ged Matron of eighty years old, they much sollicited her to hear Masse, wishing her to have respect to her age; to whom she answered with a noble resolution; God forbid that I, who now of a long time have had one foot in the grave,Courage and constancy. should forsake my Lord Jesus Christ, who hath so long time preserved me in the knowledge & profession of his truth, & to put my trust in
creatures, and instead of his holy Word to receive the traditions of men, where∣upon they instantly slew her. CHAP. XXXVIII. The Persecution of the Church in Scotland, which began Anno Christi, 1527. MAster Patrick Hamilton of an ancient and honourable family,Patrick Hamil∣ton. cal∣led Abbot of Fern, as one hating the world, and the vanity there∣of, left Scotland, and went into Germany, and the fame of the Univer∣sity of Wittenberg being greatly divulged, thither he went, and became familiar with those great lights and notable servants of Jesus Christ, Martin Luther, and Phil. Melancthon, whereby he greatly encreased in god∣ly knowledge and learning; from thence he went to the University of Marpurg, which was then newly erected by Philip Lantgrave of Hessen, where he was intimate with other learned men, especially with Francis Lambert, by whose instigation he was the first that there pub∣lickly set up conclusions to be disputed of concerning faith and good works; By reason of his learning and integrity of life he was had in admiration by many; But the zeal of Gods glory did so eat him up, that he could not rest till he returned into his own Countrey,Zeale. where the bright beams of the true light, which by Gods grace was planted in his heart, began most abundantly to break forth, as well in publike as in secret. In processe of time the fame of his doctrine troubled the Clergy, and came to the ears of James Beton, Arch-bishop of Saint Andrews, who grew impatient that by this means the kingdom of darkness was disturbed; and therefore he so laboured with Patrick Hamilton, that he gat him to Saint Andrews, where after divers dayes conference he had his freedom and liberty, the Bishop seeming to approve his doctrine, ac∣knowledging that in many things there needed a reformation in the Church; But withall, fearing that their Kingdom should be endamaged, they laboured with the King, who was then young and much led by them, to go on Pilgrimage to Saint Dothesse in Rosse, that so by reason of his ab∣sence no intercession might be made to him,Popish subtilty. for the saving the life of this innocent servant of Jesus Christ, who not suspecting the malice that lodged in their hearts, remained as a Lambe amongst Wolves. The King being gone, upon a night Master Hamilton was seised upon by the Bishops officers and carried to the Castle, and the mor∣row after he was brought forth unto judgement, and was condemned to be burnt for the testimony of Gods truth; The Articles for which he suffered, were about Pilgrimages, purgatory, prayer to Saints, and for the dead, &c.His condem∣nation. And that his condemnation might have the greater Autho∣rity,
they caused it to be subscribed by all those of esteem that were thee present, and to make their number great, they took the subscription of very children if they were of the Nobility. Immediately after dinner the fire was prepared, and he was led to ex∣ecution; yet most men thought that it was only to terrifie him, and to cause him to recant. But God, for his own glory, the good of his servants, and for the manifestation of their beastly tyranny, had other∣wise decreed: for he so strengthned him, that neither the love of life, nor fear of that cruel death could once move him to swerve from the truth which he had professed. At the place of execution he gave to his servant that had long attended him,Constancy. his Gown, Coat, Cap, and his other garments, saying, These will not profit in the fire, they will profit thee; After this of me thou canst receive no commodity except the example of my death, which I pray thee to beat in minde; for though it be bitter to the flesh, and fearful before men, yet it is the entrance into eternal life, which none shall possesse which denies Christ Jesus before this wicked generation; and so being tyed to the stake in the midst of coals and timber, they gave fire to some powder, which with the blast scorched his left hand and the side of his face, but neither killed him nor kindled the wood and coals; till they ran to the Castle for more powder, and more combustible mat∣ter, which being at last kindled, with a loud voice he cryed: Lord Je∣sus receive my spirit; how long shall darknesse overwhelme this Realme? and how long wilt thou suffer the tyranny of these men?His Martyr∣dome. The fire was slow, and therefore put him to the greater torment; but that which most grieved him was the clamour of some wicked men set on by the Friars, who continually cryed, Turn thou Heretick; call upon our Lady; say Salve Regina, &c. To whom he answered, Depart from me and trouble me not thou messenger of Satan; And speaking to one Campbel, a Friar that was the Ringleader, who still roared on him with great vehemency, he said to him; Wicked man, thou knowest the contrary, and hast confessed the contrary to me; I appeale thee before the Tribunal seat of Jesus Christ; after which words he resigned up his spirit unto God, Anno Christi,Gods judge∣ment on a per∣secutor. 1527. And within few dayes after the said Friar died in a phrensie, and as one that despaired. Anno 1534. The said Arch-bishop of Saint Andrews, convented before him David Straton a Gentleman, and Master Norman Gourlay; The first of these having a Fisher-boat that went to sea, the Bishop of Murray demanded tithe fish of him,David Straton, Norman Gour∣lay. to whom he answered, that if they would have tithe of that which his servants caught in the sea, they should take it in the place where it was caught, and so caused his ser∣vants to throw the tenth fish into the sea again; All this while he had nothing in him for Religion. But when hereupon he was summoned to answer for Hersie, it troubled him exceedingly, and then he began to frequent the company of such as were godly, and there appeared a wonderful change in him,Stratons con∣version. so that whereas before he despised the word of God, now all his delight was in hearing of it read to him, and he was a vehement exhorter of all men to peace and concord, and
contempt of the world. He much frequented the company of the Laird of Dun Areskin, whom God in those dayes had marvellously illu∣minated: hearing the text read, (for he could not read himself) He that denieth me before men, or is ashamed of me in the midst of this wicked generation, I will deny him before my Father and his holy Angels; At those words being suddenly as one revived, he fell upon his knees, and stedfastly lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, at length he burst forth into these words; O Lord, I have been wicked, and justly mayst thou withdraw thy grace from me; but, Lord, for thy mercy sake,His prayer. let me never deny thee nor thy truth for fear of death or any corporal paine. Being after∣wards together with Master Norman brought to judgement in holy Rood∣house, the King himself being present,Tentation re∣sisted. much means was used to draw this David Straton to make a recantation; but he persevered in his con∣stancy, still denying that he had offended, and so they were both con∣demned to the fire, and after dinner Anno 1534. they were both first hanged, and afterwards burnt. Not long after the burning of these two holy men; There was one Deane Thomas Forret, who used to preach every Lords day to his Pa∣rishoners, out of the Epistles and Gospels as they fell in order:Thomas Forret. This was counted a great novelty, for none used to preach but the Friars, and therefore they envying him, accused him to the Bishop of Dunkel∣den for an Heretick, and one that shewed the mysteries of Scripture to the vulgar people. The Bishop instigated by the complaint of the Friars, called the said Deane Thomas before him, to whom he said, My joy Deane Tho∣mas, I love you well, and therefore I must give you counsel how to govern your self; The Deane thanked him; and then he proceeded, My joy Deane Thomas, I am informed that you preach the Epistle and Gospel every Sunday to your people, and that you take not your dues from them, which is very preju∣dicial to the Churchmen; and therefore my joy Deane Thomas, I would have you take your dues, or else its too much to preach every sunday; for by so do∣ing, you make the people think that we should do so also; Its enough for you when you find a good Epistle or Gospel, to set forth and preach the liberty of holy Church, and let the rest alone. Thomas answered, My Lord, I presume none of my Parishoners complaine for my not taking my dues; and whereas you say its too much to preach every Sunday, I think it is too little, and wish that your Lordship would do the like. Nay, nay, Deane Thomas, said the Bishop; let that be, for we  not ordained to preach; Then said Thomas, whereas you bid me preach when I meet with a good Epistle and Gospel; I have read them all over, and I know  ad ones amongst them, but when your Lordship shews me such, I will passe by them. Then said the Bishop, I thank God I never knew what the Old and New Testament was;Grosse igno∣rance. and Deane Thomas, I will know nothing but my Portuise and Pontifical. Go your wayes and let all these fancies be; for if you persevere herein, you will repent you when tis too late. I trust, said Thomas, my cause is good and just in the presence of God, and therefore I care not what follows thereupon; and so he went his way; But
shortly after he was summoned to appear before the Cardinal,His martyr∣dom. by whom he was condemned and burned for a chief Heretick and teacher of Heresies. But notwithstanding all their bloody tyranny, the knowledge of God did wonderfully encrease in that Kingdom, partly by reading, partly by brotherly conference, which in those dangerous days was much u∣sed to the comfort of many, which so enraged the Popish party, that Anno 1538. there were burned in one fire foure persons of good quality. Jerome Russel, Alexander Kennedy.The year after there were apprehended Jerome Russel, a man of a meek and quiet natur▪ and Alexander Kennedy of about eighteen years old; these two poor servants of Jesus Christ being brought before the Arch-bishop and his Associates to judgement, Kennedy at first was faint,Humane in∣firmity. and would faine have recanted, but when all place of repent∣ance was denied him, the Spirit of God (which seasonably comes in with comfort,) began to refresh him, yea the inward comfort began to burst forth, as well in his visage, as in tongue and words; for with a chearful countenance and joyful voice, falling on his knees, he said, O eternal God, how wonderful is that love and mercy that thou bearest un∣to mankind,Joy in tribula∣tion. and to me a vile Caitiffe and miserable wretch above all others! for even now when I would have denied thee, and thy Sonne our Lord Jesus Christ, my only Saviour, and so have cast my self into everlasting damnation, thou by thine own hand hast pulled me from the very bottome of Hell, and made me to feele that heavenly comfort which takes from me that ungodly feare wherewith before I was oppressed. Now I defie death, do with me what you please, I praise God I am ready; Then did they raile upon him and Jerome, who also said unto them, This is your hour and power of darkness; Now sit ye as Judges, and we stand wrongfully accused, and more wrongfully to be condemned; But the day will come when our innocency will appear, and ye shall see your own blindnesse,Their condem∣nation and martyrdome. to your everlasting confusion. Go forward and fulfil the measure of your iniquity. Shortly after they were condemned to die, and as they went to execution, Jerome comforted Kennedy, say∣ing to him; Brother, fear not; greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the world; the pain that we are to suffer is short, and shall be light, but our joy and consolation shall never have an end. Let us therefore strive to enter into our Master and Saviours joy, by the same straight way which he hath taken before us. Death cannot hurt us, for it is already destroyed by him for whose sake we now suffer. And thus passing chearfully on, they constantly triumphed over death and Satan, in the midst of the flaming fire where they gave up their spirits to God. Anno 1543. Cardinal Beton coming to Edenburgh, caused many god∣ly persons to be called before him, and when he could prove nothing else against them, he caused four men to be hanged upon suspition that they had eaten a Goose upon a Friday:Popish cruelty. and a woman with her child sucking on her breast, to be drowned for refusing to pray to the Virgin Mary.
Many others he caused to be banished, others to be imprisoned at Saint Johnstons,John Rogers. amongst whom was one John Rogers a godly and learned man, that had fruitfully preached Christ Jesus to the comfort of many in Angus and Meannes, whom he caused to be murthered in prison, and then thrown over the walls, giving it out that by attempting to escape, he had broken his neck. CHAP. XXXIX. The Life of Master George Wiseheart, or Wischard, who died, Anno Christi, 1546. GEorge Wiseheart was born in Scotland, and brought up first at School, from whence he went to the University; after which he travelled into several Countries, and at last came to Cambridge, where he was admitted into Bennet Colledge; He was tall of stature,His Character. and of a melancholy constitution; He had black haire, a long beard, comely of personage, and well-spoken, courteous, lowly, lovely, willing to teach, desirous to learn; for his habit, he wore a Frize gowne, a black fuftian doublet, plaine hose, course Canvas for his shirts, falling bands, &c. all which apparel he gave to the poor, some weekly, some monethly, some quarterly; saving a French Cap that he wore, which he kept a twelvemoneth. He was modest, temperate, fearing God, hating covetousnesse. His charity was extraordinary,His charity. he for∣bore his food one meale in three, one day in foure, that he might the better relieve the poor. His lodging was upon stravv, and he had course nevv Canvas sheets, vvhich vvhen once foule, he gave avvay; He had by his bed-side a tub of vvater, in vvhich in the dark night he bathed himself; He taught vvith great modesty and gravity, so that some about him thought him severe, and vvould have slain him, but the Lord vvas his deliverer; and he;A special pro∣vidence. after due correction for their ma∣lice, by good exhortation amended them; His learning vvas no lesse sufficient than his desire of it; he vvas alvvayes ready to do good to his ability; both in his private Chamber and publick Schools, he read di∣vers Authors, yea he alvvayes studied hovv to do good to all. Anno 1544. Some of the Nobility of Scotland, coming to treat with King Henry the eighth, about the marriage between his sonne Prince Edward, and their young Queen Mary, at their return, Master Wischard went with them into Scotland, being a man of admirable gra∣ces, and singularly learned both in Divine and humane sciences; He first preached in Rosse, and then in Dundee, where with great admiration of all that heard him, he went over the Epistlle to the Romans, till at the in∣stigation of the Cardinal, one Robert Misle, a principal man there,Popis malice. and
formerly a Professor of Religion, inhibited him from preaching, re∣quiring him that he should trouble their Town no more, for he would not suffer it; and this was spoken to him in the publick place; where∣upon he mused a space, with his eyes bent unto heaven, and after∣wards looking sorrowfully upon the speaker and people, he said, God is witnesse that I never minded your trouble, but your comfort; yea your trouble is more dolorous to me then it is to your selves:A Prophesie. But I am assured that to refuse Gods Word, and to chase from you his Messenger, shall not preserve you from trouble, but shall bring you into it: for God shall send you Ministers that shall neither feare burning nor banishment. I have offe∣red you the word of salvation; with the hazard of my life I have remained amongst you: Now ye your selves refuse me, and I must leave my inno∣cency to be declared by my God; If it be long prosperous with you, I am not led by the spirit of truth: But if unlookt for trouble come upon you, acknowledge the cause, and turn to God who is gracious and mercifull; but if you turn not at the first warning, he will visit you with fire and sword; and so he came down from the Pulpit. Some Noble men being present, would have perswaded him to stay, or to have gone with them into the Countrey, but by no means would he stay till he had past the Ri∣ver Tay. Then went he into the West-countrey, where he made offers of Gods Word,He goeth into the West. which was gladly received by many, till the Bishop of Glasgow, by the instigation of the Cardinal, came with his Traine to the town of Ayre to resist Wischard; The Earl of Glencarne and some other Gentlemen hearing of it, came thither also with their retinue, and when they were all come together, the Bishop would needs have the Church himself to preach in. Some opposed, but Wischard said, Let him alone, his Sermon will not do much hurt, let us go to the Market-Crosse, and so they did,He is opposed by the Bishop. where he made so notable a Sermon, that his very enemies them∣selves were confounded. Wischard remained with the Gentlemen in Kyle, preaching some∣time in one place, sometimes in another, but coming to Machlene, he was perforce kept out of the Church; Some would have broken in, but he said to one of them, Brother, Jesus Christ is as mighty in the fields as in the Church, and himself often preached in the Desert, at the Sea-side and, other places. Its the Word of Peace God sends by me: the blood of none shall be shed this day for the preaching of it; and so going into the fields, he stood upon a bank, were he continued in preaching to the people above three houres; and God wought so wonderfully by that Sermon,The power of the Word. that one of the wickedst men in all the Country, the Laird of Sheld was converted by it, and his eyes ran down with such abun∣dance of tears, that all men wondred at it. Presently news was brought to Wischard that the plague was broke out in Dundee, which began within four dayes after he was prohibited preaching there, and raged so extreamly,His Prohesie accomplished. that its almost beyond credit how many died in twenty foure houres space; This being related to him, notwith∣standing the importunity of his friends, he would needs go thither, say∣ing,
They are now in trouble, and need comfort; Perhaps this hand of God will make them now to magnifie and reverence that Word of God, which before they lightly esteemed. Coming to Dundee, the joy of the faithful was exceeding great, and without delay he signified that the next day he would preach;His second▪ coming to Dundee. and because most of the inhabitants were either sick, or imployed about the sick, he chose the East-gate for the place of his preaching, so that the whole were within, and the sick without the gate; His text was Psal. 107. He sent his Word and healed them, &c. wherein he comfortably intreated of the profit and comfort of Gods Word, the punishment that comes by the contempt of it, the readinesse of Gods mercy to such as truly turn to him, and the happinesse of those whom God takes from this mi∣sery, &c. By which Sermon he so raised up the hearts of those that heard him, that they regarded no death, but judged them more happy that should then depart, rather than such as should remain behind; consi∣dering that they knew not whether they should have such a Comforter with them. He spared not to visit them that lay in the greatest extre∣mity, and to comfort them.Charity. He provided all things necessary for such as could take food, the Town being very bountiful to them, through his instigation. But whilst he was thus busying himself for the com∣fort of the afflicted, the Devil stirred up the Cardinal, who corrupted a desperate Popish Priest, called John Weighton, to slay him. And on a day the Sermon being ended, and the people departed, suspecting no danger,He is in dan∣ger of being murthered. the Priest stood waiting at the bottome of the stairs with a na∣ked dagger in his hand, under his gown, but Master VVischard being of a sharp piercing eye, seeing the Priest as he came down, said to him, My friend what would you have?Gods Provi∣dence. and withal clapping his hand upon the dag∣ger, took it from him; The Priest herewith being terrified, fell down upon his knees, confessed his intention, and craved pardon; A noise being hereupon raised, and it coming to the ears of those which were sick, they cryed, Deliver the Traytor to us, or we will take him by force, and so they burst in at the gate, but VVischard taking him in his armes, said, VVhosoever hurts him shall hurt me, for he hath done me no mischief,He preserves the murtherer. but much good, by teaching me more heedfulnesse for the time to come; and so he appeased them, and saved the Priests life. When the plague was almost quite ceased, he took his leave of them, saying, that God had almost put an end to the battel, and that he was now called to another place; for the Gentlemen of the West had written to him to meet them in Edinburgh, where he should dispute with the Bishops, and should be publickly heard, which he willingly assented to: but first he went to Montrosse, to salute the Church there, where he sometimes preached,He goes to Montrosse. but spent most of his time in private meditation, in which he was so earnest, that night and day he continu∣ed in it; during which time, the Cardinal again conspired his death, causing a letter to be sent to him, as if it been from his familiar friend,Meditation. the Laird of Kinnur,Popish malice▪ desiring him with all possible speed to come to him, for that he was taken with a sudden sicknesse; In the mean time
he had provided sixty men armed to lie in wait within a mile and na hall of Montrosse to murther him as he passed by that way, The letter com∣ing to his hands by a boy, who also brought him an horse to ride on; accompanied with some honest men his friends, he set forwards; but suddenly stopping and musing a space, he returned back again, which they wondring at,A Prophesie. asked him the cause; to whom he said; I will not go, I am forbidden of God, I am assured there is treason: Let some of you go to yonder place and tell me what you finde; which they doing, found out the treason, and hastily returning back, they told master Wischard of it, whereupon he said; I know that I shall end my life by that blood-thirsty mans hands▪ but it will not be on this manner. The time approaching wherein he should meet the Gentlemen at Edinburgh, he took his leave and departed; by the way he lodged with a faithful brother called James Watson of Inner Gowry; in the night time he gat up and went into a yard; which two men hearing, privily followed him; There he walked in an Alley for some space, breath∣ing forth many sobs and deep grones, then he fell upon his knees, and his grones increased; Then he fell upon his face; Those that watched him, hearing him weeping and praying, in which posture he continued near an hour;His fervent Prayer in the night. then getting up he came to his bed again; Those which attended him, making as though they were ignorant of all, came and asked him where he had been? but he would not answer them; the next day they importuned him again, saying, Be plain with us, for we heard your mourning, and saw your gestures; then he with a dejected countenance, said, I had rather you had been in your beds; but they still pressing upon him to know something; he said, I will tell you; I am as∣sured that my warfare is near at an end, and therefore pray to God with me that now I shrink not when the battel waxeth most hot; When they heard this, they fell a weeping, saying, This is small comfort to us; Then said he, God shall send you comfort after me. This Realme shall be illu∣minated with the light of Christs Gospel as clearly as any Realme since the dayes of the Apostles;A Prophesie. The house of God shall be built in it, yea it shall not lack, in despite of all enemies, the top-stone; Neither will it be long be∣fore this be accomplished; Many shall not suffer after me, till the glory of God shall appear and triumph in despight of Satan: But alasse! If the peo∣ple shall afterwards prove unthankful, then fearful and terrible shall the plagues be that shall follow. He comes to Leith.Then went he forward on his journey, and came to Leith, but hear∣ing nothing of those Gentlemen that were to meet him, he kept him∣self private a day or two: then did he grow very pensive, and being asked the reason of it; he said, What do I differ from a dead man, but that I eat and drink? Hitherto God hath used my labours for the instruction of others, and to the disclosing of darknesse, and now I lurk as a man ashamed that dare not shew his face: hereby they perceived that his desire was to preach, whereupon they said to him,Faith, and Courage. It's most comfortable to us to hear ou, but be∣cause we know the danger wherein you stand, we dare not desire it; But said he, if you dare hear, let God provide for me as best pleaseth him; and so it
was concluded that the next day he should preach in Leith; his text was of the Parable of the Sower, Mat. 13. The Sermon ended, the Gentlemen of Louth, who were earnest Professors of Jesus Christ, would not suf∣fer him to stay at Leith,Hi departvre from Leith. because the Governour and Cardinal were short∣ly to come to Edinburgh, but took him along with them, and so he preached at Brunstone, Languedine, and Ormstone; then was he request∣ed to preach at Eneresk neer Muscelbrugh, where he had a great conflu∣ence of people, and amongst them Sir George Dowglas, who after Ser∣mon, said publickly, I know that the Governour and Cardinal will hear that I have been at this Sermon: but let them know that I will avow it, and will maintain both the doctrine, and the Preacher to the uttermost of my power; This much rejoyced those that were present. Amongst others that came to hear him preach, there were two Gray-friars, who, standing at the Church door,Popish malice. whispered to such as came in: which Wischard observing, said to the people, I pray you make roome for these two men, it may be they come to learn; and turning to them, he said, Come neer, for I assure you, you shall hear the Word of truth, which this day shall seale up to you either your salvation or damna∣tion; and so he proceeded in his Sermon, supposing that they would be quiet; but when he perceived that they still continued to disturb all the people that stood near them, he said to them the second time with an angry countenance; O Ministers of Satan, and deceivers of the souls of men; will ye neither hear Gods truth your selves, nor suffer others to hear it? Depart and take this for your portion;A Prophesie. God shall shortly confound and disclose your hypocrisie within this Kingdom; ye shall be abominable to men, and your places and habitations shall be desolate. This he spake with much vehemency, and turning to the people, he said, These men have provoked the Spirit of God to anger; and then he proceeded to the end of his Sermon. Afterwards he preached in divers other places, the people much flock∣ing after him; In all his Sermons foretelling the shortnesse of time that he had to travel, and the near approaching of his death. Coming to Haddington, his auditory began much to decrease;He goes to Haddington. the cause, as it was conceived, was this, The Earle Bothwell, who had great observance in those parts, by the instigation of the Cardinal, had in∣hibited both those of the Town and Countrey from hearing him. Presently after, as he was going to Church, he received a letter from the West-countrey Gentlemen, and having read it, he called John Knox,John Knox: See his lie in my first part. who had diligently waited upon him since he came into Lothaine, to whom he said that he was a weary of the world, because he saw that men began to be weary of God; for saith he, the Gentlemen of the West have sent me word, that they cannot keep their meeting at E∣dinburgh; John Knox wondring that he should enter into conference about these things so immediately before his Sermon, contrary to his custome, said to him; Sir, Sermon-time approaches, I will leave you for the present to your meditations. Then did Master Wischard walk up  down about half an hour, his sad countenance declaring the grief of
his mind: at last he went into the Pulpit, and his Auditory being ve∣ry small, he began on this manner: O Lord, how long shall it be that thy holie Word shall be despised, and men shall not regard their own salvati∣on? I have heard of thee, O Haddington, that in thee there used to be two or three thousand persons at a vain and wicked play:A Prophesie. and now to hear the Messen∣ger of the eternal God, of all the Parish can scarce be numbred one hun∣dred present. Sore and fearful shall be the plagues that shall ensue upon this thy contempt; with fire and sword shalt thou be plagued; yea thou Haddington in special, strangers shall possesse thee; and you the present inhabitants shall either in bondage serve your enemies, or else you shall be chased from your own habitations, and that because ye have not known, nor will know the time of your visitation. This Prophesie was accomplished not long after, when the English took Haddington, made it a garrison, enforced many of the inhabitants to flie: oppressed others; and after awhile, a great plague breaking forth in the Town, whereof multitudes died, the English were at last forced to quit it, who at their departure burnt and spoiled great part of it, leav∣ing it to be possessed by such as could first seize upon it, which were the French that came as Auxiliaries to Scotland, with a few of the ancient inhabitants, so that Haddington to this day never recovered her for∣mer beauty, nor yet men of such wisdome and ability as did formerly inhabit it. That night was Master Wiseheart apprehended in the house of Orme∣ston,His apprehen∣sion by Both∣well. by the Earle Bothwel, suborned thereunto by the Cardinal. The manner was thus; After Sermon he took his last farewel of all his friends in Haddington; John Knox would faine have gone with him; but he said, Return to your children, and God blesse you; One is sufficient for one sacrifice; Then went he the Laird of Ormestons with some others that accompa∣nied him. After Supper he held a comfortable discourse of Gods love to his children, then he appointed the 51. Psalm to be sung, and so re∣tired to his chamber. Before midnight the house was beset: and the Earle Bothwell called for the Laird of the house, and told him that it was in vain to resist, for the Governour and Cardinal were within a mile with a great pow∣er; but if he would deliver Master Wischard to him, he would promise upon his honour that he should be safe, and that the Cardinal should not hurt him; Master Wischard said, Open the gates, the Will of God be done; and Bothwell coming in, Wischard said to him, I praise my God that so honourable a man as you, my Lord, receive me this night; for I am perswaded that for your honours sake you will suffer nothing to be done to me but by order of Law? I lesse feare to die openly, than secretly to be murthered: Then said Bothwel, I will not only preserve your body from all violence that shall be intended against you without order of Law,Bothwels pro∣mise. but I also promise in the presence of these Gentlemen, that nei∣ther the Governour, nor Cardinal shall have their will of you, but I will keep you in mine own house, till I either set you free, or restore you to the same place where I receive you; Then said the Lairds, My Lord, if you
make good your promise, which we presume you will, we our selves will not only serve you, but we will procure all the Professors in Lothain to do the same, &c. These promises being made in the presence of God, and hands being stricken by both parties, the Earle took Master Wischard and so departed. Master Wischard was carried to Edenburgh; But gold and women ea∣sily corrupt fleshly men; for the Cardinal gave Bothwel gold;He is carried to Edenburgh. and the Queen, that was too familiar with him, promised him her favour, if he would deliver Master Wischard into Edenburgh Castle, which he did;Bothwel falsi∣fies his promise and shortly after he was delivered to the blood-thirsty Cardinal: who, seeing that it was forbidden by their Cannon Law for a Priest to sit as a Judge upon life and death; he sent to the Governour, requesting him to appoint some Lay-Judge to passe sentence of death upon Master Wischard. The Governour would easily have yielded to his request, but that David Hamilton, a godly man told him, that he could expect no better an end than Saul, if he persecuted the truth which formerly he had pro∣fessed, &c. Hereupon the Governour sent the Cardinal word, that he would have no hand in shedding the blood of that good man; The Car∣dinal being angry, returned this answer, that he had sent to him of meer Civility, and that he would proceed without him, and so to the great grief of the godly, the Cardinal carried Master Wiseheart to Saint An∣drews, and put him into the Tower there;He is carried to St. Andrews. and without any long delay he caused all the Bishops, and other great Clergy-men to be called to∣gether to Saint Andrews. Feb. ult. 1546. Master Wischard was sent for to appear before them, to give an account of his seditious and Heretical doctrine, as they called it; The Cardinal caused all his retinue to come armed to the place of their sitting, which was the Abby-church, whither when Master Wischard was brought, there was a poor man lying at the door, that asked his almes, to whom he flung his purse; when he came before the Cardinal, there was a Dean appointed to preach; whose Sermon being ended, Wischard was put up into the Pulpit to hear his charge: and one Lawder, a Priest, stood over against him, and read a scrowle full of bitter accusations and curses, so that the ignorant people thought that the earth would have opened and swallowed up Wischard quick:His accusation▪ but he stood with great patience without moving, or once changing his coun∣tenance; The Priest having ended his curses, spat at Master Wischards face, saying, VVhat answerest thou? thou Runnagate, Traytor, Thief, &c.His patience. Then did Master VVischard fall upon his knees, making his prayer un∣to God; after which he said, Many and horrible sayings unto me a Chri∣stian man, many words abominable for to hear, have ye spoken here this day, which not onely to teach, but even to think, I ever thought it a great a∣bomination, &c. Then did he give them an account of his doctrine. Answering every Article as farre as they would give him leave to speak. But they without having any regard to his sober and godly answers,
presently condemned him to be burnt. After which sentence he falling upon his knees, said, O immortal God, how long wilt thou suffer the rage, and great cruelty of the ungodly to exercise their fury upon thy servants, which do further thy Word in this world,His Prayer. whereas they on the contrary seek to destroy the truth, whereby thou hast revealed thy self to the world, &c. O Lord, we know certainly that thy true servants must needs suf∣fer for thy names sake persecutions, afflictions, and troubles in this present world; yet we desire that thou wouldest preserve and defend thy Church which thou hast chosen before the foundations of the world, and give thy people grace to hear thy Word, and to be thy true servants in this present life. Popish subtiltyThen were the common people put out, the Bishops not desiring that they should hear the innocent man speak, and so they sent him a∣gain to the Castle, till the fire should be made ready; In the Castle came two Friars to him, requiring him to make his Confession to them, to whom he said, I will make no confession to you, but fetch me that man who preached even now, and I will speak with him; Then was the Sub-Prior with whom he conferred a pretty while, till the Sub-prior wept, who going to the Cardinal, told him that he came not to intercede for Ma∣ster Wischards life, but to make known his innocency to all men; at which words the Cardinal was very angry, saying: We knew long ago what you were. The Captain of the Castle with some friends coming to Master Wischard, asked him if he would break his fast with them: yea, said he, very willingly, for I know you be honest men; In the mean time he desired them to hear him a little; and so he discoursed to them a∣bout the Lords Supper,He admini∣streth the Sa∣crament. his sufferings and death for us, exhorting them to love one another, laying aside all rancor and malice as becomes the members of Jesus Christ, who continually intercedes for us to his Fa∣ther. Afterwards he gave thanks, and blessing the bread and wine, he took the bread and brake it, giving it to every one, saying, eate this, remember that Christ died for us, and feed on it spiritually; so taking the Cup, he bade them remember that Christs blood was shed for them, &c. Then he gave thanks and prayed for them, and so retired into his chamber. Presently came two Executioners to him from the Cardinal, one put on him a black linnen coat, the other brought him bags of powder, which they tied about several parts of his body, and so they brought him forth to the place of execution; over against which place, the Castle windows were hung with rich hangings, and Velvet Cushi∣ons laid for the Cardinal and Prelates, who from thence fed their eyes with the torments of this innocent man; The Cardinal fearing lest Wise∣heart should be rescued by his friends, caused all the Ordnance in the Castle to be bent against the place of his execution,The Cardinals feare. and commanded his gunners to stand ready all the time of his burning; Then were his hands bound behind his back, & so he was carried forth; In the way some
beggars met him, asking his alms for Gods sake: To whom he said, My hands are bound wherewith I was wont to give you almes: but the mer∣ciful Lord, who of his bounty and abundant grace feeds all men, vouchsafe to give you necessaries both for your bodies and souls. Then two Friars met him, perswading him to pray to our Lady to me∣diate for him; to whom he meekly said, Cease, tempt me not, I entreat you: and so with a rope about his neck, and a chaine about his middle, he was led to the fire: then falling upon his knees, he thrice repeated; O thou Saviour of the world have mercy upon me; Father of heaven,His Prayer at death. I com∣mend my spirit into thy holy hands: Then turning to the people, he said: Christian brethren and sisters, I beseech you be not offended at the Word of God for the torments which you see prepared for me; but I exhort you that ye love the Word of God for your salvation,His exhorta∣tion to the People. and suffer patiently, and with a comfortable heart for the Words sake, which is your undoubted salvation and everlasting comfort; I pray you also shew my brethren and sisters which have often heard me, that they cease not to learne the Word of God which I taught them, according to the measure of grace given to me, for no persecution or trouble in this world whatsoever; and shew them that the do∣ctrine was no old wives fables, but the truth of God; for if I had taught mens doctrine, I had had greater thanks from men: but for the Word of Gods sake I now suffer, not sorrowfully, but with a glad heart and minde: For this cause I was sent that I should suffer this fire for Christs sake; behold my face, you shall not see me change my countenance: I feare not the fire; and if persecution come to you for the Words sake, I pray you fear not them that can kill the body, and have no power to hurt the soul, &c. Then he prayed for them which accused him, saying, I beseech thee father of heaven, forgive them that have of ignorance, or of an evil mind, forged lies of me:He prayes for his Persecutors I forgive them with all my heart; I beseech Christ to forgive them that have condemned me this day ignorantly: Then turning to the people again, he said, I beseech you brethren, exhort your Prelates to learn the Word of God, that they may be ashamed to do evil, and learn to do good, or else there shall shortly come upon them the wrath of God which they shall not eschew; Then the Executioner upon his knees, said, Sir, I pray you forgive me, for I am not the cause of your death; and he cal∣ling him to him, kissed his cheeks, saying, Lo here is a token that I forgive thee; My heart, do thine office; and so he was tied to the stake, and the fire kindled. The Captain of the Castle coming near him, bade him be of good courage, and to beg for him the pardon of his sin; to whom Master Wischard said, This fire torments my body, but no whit abates my spirits; then looking towards the Cardinal, he said, He who in such state from that high place, feeds his eyes with my torments, within few dayes shall be hanged out at the same window to be seen with as much ignominie as he now leans there with pride; and so his breath being stopped,A Prophesie. he was con∣sumed by the fire.
This Prophesie was fulfilled, when after the Cardinal was slain, the Provost raising the Town, came to the Castle gates, crying, What have you done with my Lord Cardinal? Where is my Lord Cardinal? To whom they within answered, Return to your houses, for he hath received his reward, and will trouble the world no more: But they still cryed, We will never depart till we see him; Then did the Leslies hang him out at that window to shew that he was dead, and so the people de∣parted. But God left not the death of this holy man long unrevenged: for the people did generally cry out of the cruelty used against him, especi∣ally John Lesley, brother to the Earle of Rothes, and Norman Lesley his Cousin, fell foul upon the Cardinal for it: but he thought himself strong enough for all Scotland,The Cardinals pride, and car∣nal confidence. saying, Tush, a fig for the fools, and a button for the bragging of Hereticks. Is not the Lord Governour mine, witnesse his eldest sonne for a pledge at my table? Have I not the Queen at my de∣votion? Is not France my friend? why should I fear any danger? yet he had laid a designe to cut off such as he feared and hated, which was dis∣covered after his death by letters and memorials found about him. He kept himself for his greater security in his Castle; and on a Friday night there came to the Town of Saint Andrews, Norman Lesley, Wil∣liam Kircaldy, John Leslley, and some others; and on the Saturday morn∣ing they met together not far from the Castle, waiting till the gate was opened,The Castle surprized. and the draw-bridge let down, for the receiving in some lime and sand, to repair some decays about the Castle, which being done, Kir∣caldy, with six more, went to the Porter, falling into discourse with him, till the Leslies came also with some other company: the Porter seeing them, would have drawn up the Bridge, but he was prevented, and whilst he endeavoured to keep them out at the gate, his head was brok∣en, and the Keys taken from him; The Cardinal was asleep in bed, for all night he had for his bedfellow, Mistris Mary Ogleby, who was a little before gone from him out at the Postern gate,Popish un∣cleannesse. and therefore the Cardi∣nal was gone to his rest. There were about one hundred workmen in the Castle, which see∣ing what was done, cried out, but, without hurt, they were turned out at the wicket gate; Then VVilliam Kircaldy went to secure the Postern lest the Cardinal should make an escape that way: The rest going to the Gentlemens chambers, who were above fifty, without hurting them, they turned them all out at the gate; They which undertook this enterprise were but eighteen men. The Cardinal being awaked with the noise, asked out at the window what was the matter? Answer was made, that Norman Lesley had taken his Castle: Then did he attempt to have escaped by the Posterne, but finding that to be kept, he returned to his chamber: and with the help of his Chamberlain fell to barrica-doing up the door with chests, and such things: Then came up John Lesley and bids open the door: The Cardinal asked, who was there? He answered John Lesley: The Cardinal said, I will have Norman, for he is my friend: Content your self, said the other, with those that are
here: and so they fell to breaking open the door; in the mean time the Cardinal hid a box of gold under some coales in a secret cor∣ner. Then he said to them, Will ye save my life? John Lesley an∣swered, It may be that we will. Nay, said the Cardinal, sweare unto me by Gods wounds that you will, and then I will open the door; then said John, that which was said, is unsaid, and so he called for fire to burn down the door, whereupon the door was opened, and the Cardinal sate him down in his chair, crying, I am a Priest, I am a Priest, ye will not slay me? Then John Lesley and another struck him once or twice; But Master James Melvin, a man that had been very familiar with Wischard, and of a modest and gentle nature, percei∣ving them both to be in choler, plucked them back, saying, This work and judgement of God although it be secret, ought to be done with great gravity: And so presenting him the point of his sword, he said, Repent thee of thy former wicked life, but especially of sheding the blood of that notable Instrument of God, Master George Wisheart, who though he was consumed by the fire before men,The Cardinal slain. yet cries it for vengeance upon thee, and we from God are sent to revenge it; for here, before my God I protest, that neither the hatred of thy person, the love of thy riches, nor the feare of any hurt thou couldst have done me, moveth me to strike thee; but onely because thou hast been, and still remainest an obstinate enemie against Jesus Christ and his holy Gospel; and so he thrust him through the body, who falling down, spake never a word, but I am a Priest, I am a Priest: Fie, Fie, all is gone. The death of this Tyrant was grievous to the Queen Mother, with whom he had two much familiarity, as with many other women; as also to the Romanists, though the people of God were freed from their fears in a great measure thereby. Anno 1550. There was one Adam Wallace,Adam Wallace. a man that had no great learning, but was zealous in Godlinesse, and of an upright life; him the Bishop of Saint Andrews caused to be apprehended, and carried to Edenburgh, where after a while he was brought to judge∣ment before Duke Hamilton, Huntly, and divers others; The Bishops and their instruments accused him: First,His accusation. that he took upon him to preach; to which he answered, that he never judged himself wor∣thy of so excellent a Vocation, and therefore never took on him to preach; yet he denyed not, that in private places he used to read the Word, and out of it to exhort such as were willing to hear him. Knave, quoth one, What have you to do to meddle with the Scri∣ptures? I think, said he, its every ones duty to labour to know the will of God, and to get assurance of his salvation, which is to be found in the Old and New Testament. What then, said ano∣ther, shall we leave to the Church-men to do? To whom he answered, their work is publickly to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ,The Ministers work. and to feed the flock which he hath redeemed with his own blood, as all true Pastors are commanded to do, &c. The Bishops being angry
hereat, caused his charge further to be read; as that he denyed Purga∣tory, praying to Saints, and for the dead, &c. To which he answered, that he had oft read over the Bible, and yet found no mention of Pur∣gatory, nor command to pray to the Saints, or for the dead; There∣fore I believe, said he, they are but meer inventions of men, devised for covetousnesse sake. Then did they ask him what he thought of the Masse? He answered, I say as my Lord Jesus Christ said, That which is greatly esteemed before men, is abomination before God; Then cryed they all out,His Martyr∣dome. Heresie, Heresie, and so and so adjudged him to the fire, which he patiently underwent the same day upon the Castle-hill. Henry Forrest.Anno 1553. Henry Forrest was accused of Heresie, but when they brought him to trial, nothing could be proved against him, where∣upon they sent him to Friar Langius to be confessed. The Friar a∣mongst other questions, asked him what he thought of Patrick Ha∣milton, who had been formerly burned for Religion? He answered, that he was a good man, and that his Articles were to be maintained. This wicked Friar discovered his Confession, which was taken as a sufficient proof against the poor man, who thereupon was condemned to be burnt.Popish perfi∣diousnesse. As he went to the place of execution, he complained of the Friar who had betrayed him, saying, Let no man trust the false Friars after me; They are despisers of God, and de∣ceivers of men; and so in the flames he resigned up his spirit unto God.His Martyr∣dome. Anno 1558. Andrew Oliphant accused one Walter Mill, former∣ly a Priest;Walter Mill. who being at Prayer, Oliphant said to him, Rise up Sir VValter; But when he had ended his prayers, he said, My name is VValter: I have been too long one of the Popes Knights. Then said Oliphant, Thou keepest my Lords too long here, therefore make an end. He answered, I must obey God rather than men: When he was brought forth to judgement, they asked him concerning Priests mar∣riage: he answered, It is Gods Ordinance, that they which cannot ab∣stain,Popish un∣cleanness. should marry. But you abhor it, vowing chastity, which you can∣not keep, but take other mens wives and daughters; Then they asked him if there were not seven Sacraments? he answered, Give me two, and take you the rest; after other questions they asked him if he would re∣cant? He answered, I am corn and not chaffe, I will not recant the truth: Then they commanded him to go to the stake; but he said, By the law of God I am forbidden to lay hands on my own self, therefore do you put me into the fire, and you shall see my resolution. Having made his Prayer to God, he said to the people; Although I have been a great sinner, yet it is not for that, but for Gods truth contained in his VVord of the Old and New Testament that I now suffer;His speech at death. and God out of his abundant mercy doth honour me so farre, as to make me amongst other of his servants, seale his truth with my blood; Dear friends, as you would escape eternal death,His Martyr∣dome. be no more seduced with lyes of Arch∣bishop, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, &c. but only trust in God, and
so he quietly slept in the Lord; and was the last man that died for Reli∣gion in Scotland. Collected out of the History of the Reformation in Scotland. CHAP. XL. The Persecution of the Church in Ireland, Anno Christi, 1642. THough the barbarous cruelty used by the Irish against the Eng∣lish, go usually under the name of Rebellion, yet I rather look up∣on it as, and chuse to call it a persecution, because their cruelties were exercised upon Protestants only, so farre as ever I could hear; neither were the English Papists murthered, yea they joyned with the Irish in murthering of their brethren. Besides, the Jesuites, Priests, and Friars were the chief instigators to these murthers, stirring up continually all sorts, both of the Gentry and Communalty, to shew the utmost of their zeal therein; and when their designe was so surely laid, that they thought it impossible to be prevented, they did in their publick devo∣tions recommend by their Prayers the good successe of a great de∣signe, tending much to the advancement of the Catholick cause; and that they might stir up the people with the greater animosity and cruelty to put it in execution, they everywhere declaimed loudly against the Protestants, saying, That they were Hereticks, not to be suf∣fered any longer to live amongst them; that it was no more sin to kill one of them, than to kill a dog;Popish malice. and that it was a mortal and unpardonable sin to relieve or protect any of them. They also with much acrimony represented the severe courses taken by the Parliament of England to suppresse the Romish Reli∣gion, and utterly to extirpate the Professors of it:Popish lyes. They told them that in England they had caused the Queens Priests to be hanged be∣fore her face, and that they held herself under a most severe disci∣pline; and that the like cruel Laws should be made against Popery in Ireland, &c. When their plots were ripe for execution, we finde their first pro∣ceedings against the English very various; some of the Irish only stripping and expelling them; others murthering man, woman, and childe without mercy; yet all resolving universally to root out all the Protestants out of Ireland; yea, so deeply malicious were they a∣gainst the English Protestants,The malice a∣gainst the Eng∣lish. that they would not endure the very sound of that language, but would have all such punished as spake English; and the names of all English places they would have changed in∣to old Irish. In many places they killed the English Cowes and Sheep, meerly
because they were English: sometimes they cut off their legs, or cut out a piece of their buttock, and so left them to live in pain: yea in some places, what they could not devoure, they killed, and left in great multi∣tudes stinking in the fields. The Priests gave the Sacrament unto divers of the Irish, upon con∣dition that they should neither spare man,Popish malice and cruelty. woman nor childe of the Protestants, saying, that it did them a great deale of good to wash their hands in their blood. One Halligan a Priest, read an excommunication against all those, that from thenceforth should relieve or harbour any English, Scotch, or VVelch man, or give them almes at their doores, whereby many were famished to death. The Friars with tears ex∣horted them not to spare any of the English; they boasted, that when they had destroyed them in Ireland, they would go over into Eng∣land, and not leave the memorial of an English man under hea∣ven. They openly professed, that they held it as lawful to kill a Protestant, as to kill a sheep or a dog. One of their Priests said, that it was no more pity or conscience to take their lives or estates from them, than to take a bone out of a dogs mouth. The day before this Massacre was to begin, the Priests gave the people a dismisse at Masse, with free liberty to go out and take posses∣sion of all their lands, which they pretended to be unjustly detained from them by the English. As also to strip, rob, and despoil them of all their goods and cattel; the Protestants being as they told them, worse than Dogs, for they were Divels, and served the Divel, and there∣fore the killing of such was a meritorious act, and a rare preservative against the pains of Purgatory; for that the bodies of such of them as died in this quarrel should not be cold, before their soules should ascend up into heaven, so that they should not need to feare the paines of Purgatory; and this caused some of these Murtherous Cains to boast, after they had slain many of the English, that they knew that if they should dye presently they should go strait to Hea∣ven. The chief Gentlemen of the Irish, when this persecution first be∣gan, perswaded many of their Protestant neighbours, that if they would bring their goods and cattel to them,Popish perfi∣diousnesse. they would secure them from the rage of the common people; and hereby they got abun∣dance peaceably into their hands, whereof they cheated the Prote∣stants, refusing to restore them again; yet so confident were the Pro∣testants at first of their good dealing in regard of former familiarity, that they gave them Inventories of all they had; nay digged up such of their best things as they had hidden in the ground, and deposited them in their custody. They also gat much into their hands by fair pro∣mises, and deep oaths and engagements, that if they would deliver them their goods, they would suffer them with their wives and children quietly to depart the Country; yet having got what they could, they afterwards murthered them.
Having thus seised upon all their goods and cattel, ransack't their houses, and gotten their persons under their power, the next work was to strip man, woman, and childe stark-naked, and so to turn them out of doors,Prodigious▪ cruelties not suffering them so much as to shelter themselves under bushes, or in the woods, strictly prohibiting all the Irish, un∣der great penalties, not to give them any relief as they passed in the high wayes; and their great designe herein was, that they on whom they would not lay their hands and cruelly murther in cold blood, might miserably perish through cold, nakednesse, and want; and therefore if any of them gat any old rags to cover their nakednesse with, they stripped them again and again, sometimes twice or thrice over, the Irish women being very active herein, yea they taught their very children to do the like; yea they would not leave to the women so much as a smock or an hairlace: So that many of them being starved, fell down dead in the high wayes: Others that gat to any English town, by reason of famine, and cold suffered by the way,Many starved and strip. died so soon as they came thither. In the town of Colerain, of these miserable people, that fled thither for succour, many thousands died in two dayes, so that the living being not able to bury them, laid the Carkasses of those dead persons in great ranks in waste and wide holes, piling them so close and thick as if they had packed up herings together. One Magdalen Redman deposed that she, and divers others Prote∣stants, amongst whom were twenty two widows, were first robbed, and then stripped stark-naked, and when they had in an house covered them∣selves with straw, the bloody Papists threw burning straw in amongst them on purpose to burn them; Then did they drive them so naked in to the wilde woods in frost and snow, so that the snow covered their skins, where a long time it lay unmelted, and some of their Children died in their armes with the extremity of the cold; and whereas some of these poor soules went towards the Burre for shelter, the cruel Irish turned them back again, saying, they should go to Dublin; and when they went towards Dublin, they beat them back, saying, they should go to the Burre, and so tossed them to and fro, that some of them died; those which through many difficulties gat to the Burre, many of them died there; and those that survived, lived miserably by reason of their many wants. Yet though these bloody Villaines exercised such inhumane cruelties towards the poor Protestants, they would commonly boast, that these were but the beginnings of their sorrows; and indeed they made it good; for having disarmed the English, robbed them of their goods, and cattel, stript them of their cloathes, and having their persons in their power, they furiously broke out into all manner of abominable cruelties, horrid massacres, and execrable murthers, so that it would make any Christians eare to tingle, and his heart to ake to hear the men∣tion of them. For there were multitudes murthered in cold blood, some whilst
they were at plough, others as they sate peaceably in their houses, others travelling upon the high wayes;Horrible mur∣thers. all without any manner of provocation given by them, were suddenly destroyed. In the Castle of Lisgool were about one hundred and fifty men, wo∣men, and children consumed with fire. At the Castle of Moneah were one hundred slain altogether. At the Castle of Tullah, which was delivered to Mac Guire upon composition, and faithful promises of faire quarter, as soon as he and his entred the Court, they began to strip the people, and most cruelly put them to the sword, murthering them all without mercy. At Lissenskeah they hanged and killed above one hundred of the Scot∣tish Protestants,Popish perfidi∣ousness. shewing them no more favour than they did to the Eng∣lish. Yea the County thereabouts being well planted and peopled, was in a most horrible manner quite destroyed. In the Counties of Armagh and Tyrone, where the Protestants were more numerous, their murthers were more multiplied, and with greater cruelty, if it were possible, than in other places. An Irish Mon∣ster.Mac Guire coming to the Castle of Lissenskeah, desired in a friendly manner to speak with Master Middleton, who admitting him in, as soon as he was entred, he first burned the Records of the County which were kept there; then he demanded one thousand pounds which was in his custody of Sir William Balores, which as soon as he had, he cau∣sed Master Middleton to hear Masse, and to swear that he would never alter from it, and then immediately caused him, his wife and children to be hanged up: hanging and murthering above one hundred persons be∣sides in that place. At Portendown Bridge there were one thousand men, women, and chil∣dren carried in several Companies, and all unmercifully drowned in the River, the Bridge being broken down in the midst, and the people driven and forced on till they tumbled down into the water. Yea in that Country there were four thousand persons drowned in several places,Multitudes drowned. the barbarous Papists driving on the poore soules, when they had miserably stripped them, unto the places of their sufferings like swine; and if any were slack in their pace, they pricked them forward with their swords and pikes; yea to terrifie the rest, they killed and wounded some; and when they were cast into the river, if any assayed to swimme to the Shore, the Rebels stood and shot at them. In one place one hundred and fourty English were taken and driven like cattel for many miles together. Other companies they carried out under pretence of safe conduct, thereby causing them to march chearfully till they had got them to some place fit for execu∣tion, and then murthered them there. One hundred and fifteen men, women, and children they sent with Sir Philem Onenles Passe, till they had brought them to the bridge of Portendowne,Popish trea∣chery. and then forced them all into the water, and such as by swimming, or other means sought to escape, they either knocked them on the head, and after drwowned them,
or else shot them to death in the water. One Mistris Campbel being forced by them to the River,A just reward. and finding no meanes to escape their furie, suddenly clasped one of the chief of them in her armes, and so both tumbling into the River, they were drowned together. At another time one hundred and fourty Protestants being thrown in at the same place, as any of them swam to the shore, the bloody vil∣laines with the butt-ends of their muskets knockt out their brains. At Armagh, O Cane gat together all the Protestants thereabouts, pretending to conduct them to Coleraine; but before they were gone a dayes journey, they were all murthered, and so were many others, though they had protections from Sir Phileme O Neale. The aged people in Armagh were carried to Charlemount, and there mur∣thered. Presently after, the Town of Armagh was burnt, and five hundred per∣sons of all sorts were there murthered and drowned. In Killoman were fourty eight families murthered. In one house twenty two Protestants were burned; In Kilmore all the inhabitants were stript and massacred, being two hundred families: Some they set in the stocks till they con∣fessed where their monie was, and then massacred them; The whole County was a common butchery,Prodigious cruelties. where many thousands perished in a shor time, by sword, famine, fire, water, and all other cruel manner of deaths that rage and malice could invent. To many, these bloody Villains shewed so much favour as to dis∣patch them presently, by no means allowing them so much time as to pray. Others they imprisoned in filthy Dungeons full of dirt and mire, and there clapping bolts on their legs, suffered them to perish at leasure. One told John Cowder that they would kill him,They deny them liberty to pray. but first bid him say his prayers, and when he kneeled down to pray, they pre∣sently cut off his head. When some others upon their knees begged but leave to pray before they were slain, they would bid them be∣queath their soules to the Divel; others would ask them, why do you desire to pray? your soules are already with the Divel; and so would immediately slaughter them. At Casel they put all the Protestants into a loathsome Dungeon, where they kept them twelve weekes in great misery. Some they barbarously mangled and left them langush∣ing upon the high wayes, crying out but for so much mercy as to be dispatched out of their paine; some they hanged up twice or thrice: O∣thers they buried alive. Some when they were half-hanged, they cast into pits, covering them with a little earth,Some buried alive. where they sent out most lamentable groanes for a good while after. In Queenes County, an English man, his wife, five children, and a maid, were all hanged together, then put into a hole; the youngest child being not dead, put up the hand and cried Mammie, Mammie, and yet without mercy they buried it alive. Thomas Mason in Laugal was extreamly beaten and wounded, yet his wife and some others carried him away, whereupon these Villaines cruelly hacked, slashed and wounded them, and then dragged the said
Mason into an hole, and there threw stones on him with the weight whereof they kept him under: there he lay languishing and groaning till his own wife, to put him out of paine, stopped his breath with her handkerchief. At Clownes seventeen men were buried alive, yet so as their pitiful cryes were heard afar off. Some were deadly wounded, and so hanged upon tenter-hooks. Some with ropes about their necks were drawn through the water.Some were hung upon tenter-hooks. Some with ropes about their middles were drawn through woods and bogs. In Castle Cumber one of these cut-throats took two boyes, wounded them, and hung them upon a butchers tenters. Some were hanged up, and taken down several times to make them confess their monie, which when they had done, they presently murthered them. Some were hung up by the armes, and then with their swords they made experiment how many blowes an English Protestant would endure ere he died. Some had their bellies ript up, and so were left with their guts running about their heels. An ancient woman coming towards Dublin, was stript seven times in one day,Blasphemy. and they bade her go and look for her God, and bid him give her cloaths again. In Kilkenny they cruelly beat an English woman, till they forced her into a ditch,Many had their bellies ript. where she died; then they took her child, a girle of about six years old, ript her belly, and let out her guts. One they forced to go to Masse with them, yet afterwards wounded him, ript his belly, took out his guts, and so left him alive. A Scottish man they stripped and knocked on the head, who after∣wards coming to himself, went into the Town naked; Then did they again take him and hewed him all to pieces; They also ript up his Wives belly, so that a Child dropped out of her womb. Many other women great with childe they hung up, then ript their bellies, and let the Infants fall out. Sometimes they gave their children to be devou∣red of Swine and Dogs. One John Stone with his son, two sons in law, and their wives, they took and hung them all up; and one of the young women being great with child, they ript her belly, took forth her child, and used such beastly barbarous actions to her as are not fit to be mentioned. At the Newry they ript up a womans belly that was great with two children, throwing them to be devoured of swine. Also another woman being delivered of a childe in the fields, they which had formerly killed her Father and Husband, killed her al∣so with two of her children, and gave the new-born infant to be devou∣red of Dogs. In the County of Armagh they Robbed, stripped, and mur∣thered abundance of Protestants, whereof some they burned, some they slew with the sword, some they hanged, and some they starved to death; and meeting Mistris Howard, and Mistris Frankland with six of their
children, and themselves both great with child, with their pikes they killed and murthered them all, ript open the Gentlewomens bellies, took out their children, and threw them into a ditch. A young Scottish womans child they took by the heeles,Children had their brains dashed out. and dash∣ed the braines out against a tree; the like they did to many other chil∣dren. Anne Hill going with a young child on her back, and four more by her side, these cruel persecutors pulled the child off her back, trod▪ on it till it died, stripped her self and the other four children starke naked, whereby they died of cold. Some others they met with, hanged them up upon a Windmill, and before they were half dead, cut them in pieces with their Skeins. Ma∣ny other Protestants, especially women and children they pricked and stabbed with their Skeins, Forks and Swords, slashing, cutting and mangling them in their heads, faces, breasts, armes and other parts, yet killed them not, but left them wallowing in their blood, to languish, starve and pine to death, and when they desired them to kill them out of their paine, they refused; yet sometimes after a day or two, they would dash out their braines with stones or clubs, which they accounted as a great favour. One goodwife Harvey at Kilkenny was forced to go to Masse, yet af∣terwards, together with her children was stripped, and one of her daugh∣ters had her belly ripped that her intrails fell out; and her self was so beaten and wounded, that she hardly escaped with life. The Castle of Lisgoole being set on fire by these mercilesse Pa∣pists, a woman leaped out at a window to save her self from burn∣ing, but they presently murthered her;Many burned. the next morning her child was found sucking at her breast, which they murthered also. And whereas many Protestants with their wives and children fled into vauls and cellars to hide themselves, they were all murthered there. One Jane Addis they stabbed, and then putting her child of a quar∣ter old to her breast, bid it suck English bastard, and so left it to perish there. One Mary Barlow had her husband hanged before her face, and her self with six children were all stript stark naked in frost and snow, after which, sheltring themselves in a Cave,Some perish by famine. they had nothing to eat for three weeks, but two old Calves skins, which they beat with stones, and so eat them hair and all, her children crying to her rather to go out and be killed than to famish there. In the cold weather many thousands of Protestants of all ranks, ages, and sexes, being turned out stark naked, perished of cold and hunger, thousands of others were drowned, cast into ditches, bogs, and turf-pits. Multitudes were inclosed in houses, which being set on fire they were burnt miserably. Some that lay sick of feavors they drew out of their beds and hanged them. Some men, women, and children they drove into boggie pits; and if any of them endeavoured to get out, they knockt them on the heads.
Some aged men and women, these Barbarians enforced their own children to carry them to the river where they were drowned: yea some children were compelled unnaturally to be the Executioners of their own Parents:Unnatural cruelties. wives were forced to help to hang their own husbands, and mothers to cast their own children into the water, after all which them∣selves were murthered. In Sligo they forced a young man to kill his own father, and then hanged him up: In another place they forced a wo∣man to kill her husband, then caused her son to kill her, and then im∣mediatly hanged the son; and this they did that they might destroy both soul and body. Yea such was their detestable malice against the English Protestants, that they taught their children to kill English children; One of these Villains wives was very angry with their souldiers, because they did not bring the grease of a fat Gentlewoman,Children kill English chil∣dren. whom they had slaine, with them for her to make candles of. The Irish women that followed the Camp, egged on the men to cru∣elty, always crying out, kill them all, spare neither, man, woman, nor child. They took the child of one Tkomas Straton, being about twelve years old,Some boiled in Cauldrons. and boiled him to death in a Cauldron. One Goodwife Lin and her daughter were carried into a Wood, where they first hanged the mother, and then the daughter in the hair of the mothers head. Some women and children of the Irish, meeting an English woman great with child, stript her to her smock, then pulled off her smock, and so rent and abused her, that the poor woman falling into labour, both she and her child died under their hands. In some places they plucked out the eyes, and cut off the hands of the Protestants,Some had their eyes pulled out and so turned them out into the fields to wander up and down till they perished. The very women in some places stoned the English women to death, together with their children. One man they shot through both his thighs; then digging a hole in the ground, they set him in it upright upon his feet, and then filled up the hole, leaving out only his head, where they left him till he pined and languished to death. Of another man they held his feet in the fire till he was burned to death. In Munster they hanged up many Ministers in a most barbarous man∣ner. One Minister they stripped stark naked, and drove him through the town, pricking him forwards with darts and rapiers, and so pursued him till he fell down dead. Neither did all the malice that they bore to these poor Christians, end with their lives when they had slain them, but extended after death to the denying burial to their carcasses, casting some into ditches, lea∣ving others to be devoured of ravenous beasts and fouls; yea some that had been formerly buried they digged up, and left them as dung upon the face of the earth. These barbarous Villains vowed that if any Parents digged graves to bury their children in, they should be buried therein themselves. They stripped one William Loverden naked, then killed him before his wife and children, cut off his head, and held it up for them to gaze at;
and when his wife had buried hin in his garden, they digged him up, and threw him into a ditch. Divers Ministers bones that had been bu∣ried some years before, they digged up, because they were, as they said, Patrons of Heresie. Poor children that went out into the fields to eate weeds and grasse, they killed without all pity. And a poor woman, whose husband was taken by them, went to them with two children at her feet, and one at her breast, hoping to beg her husband, but they slew her and her sucking infant; brake the neck of another, and the third hardly escaped: And which was a great aggravation of their wickednesse, they exercised all this cruelty upon the English Protestants who never provoked them thereto, yea that had alwayes lived peaceably with them, administring help and comfort to them in distresse, putting no difference betwixt them and those of their own Nation, and cherished them as friends and loving neighbours. Notwithstanding all which courtesies, they now shewed them no favour or pity. Alas, who can comprehend the fears, terrours, anguish, bitternesse, and perplexity that seized upon the hearts of the poor Protestants, finding themselves so suddenly surprized with∣out remedy, and inextricably wrapt up in all kind of outward miseries, which could possibly by man be inflicted upon humane creatures! What sighs and groans, trembling and astonishment, what shrikes, cries, and bitter lamentations of wives, children, servants and friends, howling and weeping, finding themselves without all hope of delive∣rance from their present miseries! How inexorable were their barba∣rous tormentors that compassed them in on every side, without all bow∣els of compassion, or the least commiseration and pity! One Ellen Mil∣lington they put into an hole, fastning her in with stones, and left her there to languish to death, bragging how many of them went to see her kick and tosse in the hole. Yea they boasted upon their successe, that the day was their own, and that ere long they would not leave one Protestant Rogue living, but would uttery destroy every one that had but a drop of English blood in them; their women crying out, Slay them all, the English are fit meat for dogs, and their children are ba∣stards. Yea so implacable was their malice, that they vowed that they would not have an English beast alive, nor any of the breed of them. How grievous was it to any Christian heart to hear a base Villain boast, that his hands were so weary with killing and knocking down Protestants into a bog, that he could not lift up his armes to his head! Another boasted that he had been abroad and had killed sixteen of the rogues. Others boasted that they had killed so many, that the grease and fat which stuck upon their swords, might well make an Irish candle. Yea two boyes boasted, thar at several times they had murthered and drowned thirty six women and chil∣dren. These mercilesse Papists having set a Castle on fire, wherein were many Protestants, they rejoycingly said amongst themselves, O how sweetly do they fry!
At Kilkenny when they had committed many cruel murthers, they brought seven Protestants heads, amongst which one was the head of a Reverend Minister, all which they set upon the Market-crosse, on a Market day, triumphing, slashing, and mangling them; and putting a gag into the Ministers mouth, they slit up his cheeks to his ears, and laying a leaf of a Bible before it, they bid him preach, for his mouth was wide enough; it cannot be imagined with what scorn and derision they acted these things, and with what joy and exultation their eyes be∣held the sad spectacle of the Protestants miseries; what greedy delight they took in their bloody executions. An English woman, whom they had stripped stark naked, gat a little straw, which she tied about her middle to cover her nakednesse; but these impudent villaines set fire to it, boasting what brave sport they had, to see how the fire made the English Jade dance. At Kilmore they put many Protestants, men, women, and chil∣dren together into a thatched house, and then set fire on it, boast∣ing of the lamentations and out-cries that they made whilest they were in burning, and how the children gaped when the fire began to burne them; taking pride, and glorying in imitating those cries. They took one Mistris Maxwel being in labour, and threw her into a river,Prodigious cruelties. boasting that the childs arme appeared, and that it was half-born when the mother was drowned. These bloody Persecutors took great pleasure and delight in their cruelty, and to encrease their misery, when they butchered them, they used to say, Thy soul to the Devil. One of them coming into an house with his hands and cloaths all bloody, made his boasts, that it was En∣glish blood, and that his skeine had pcked the cleane white skins of many of them, even to the hilt thereof. When any of them had killed a Protestant, many of them would come one after another, each of them stabbing, wounding, and cutting his body in a most despiteful manner, and then leave it naked to be devoured of dogs, beasts, and fouls; and when they had slain any number of them, they would boast that they had made the Devil beholding to them, in sending so many souls to hell. But its no wonder that they carried themselves so towards these in∣nocent Christians, when they spared not to belch out their execrable blasphemies against God and his holy Word. In one place they burnt two Protestant Bibles, and then said it was hell-fire they burnt.Bibles burnt. Other Bibles they took, cut in pieces, and then burnt them, saying, that they would do the like to all Puritane Bibles. In the Church at Powerscourt they burnt the Pulpit, Pues, Chests and Bibles belonging to it. Others of them took the Protestants Bibles, and wetting them in dirty water, did several times dash them on the faces of the Protestants,Blasphemies. saying, I know you love a good lesson, here is an excellent one for you, come to morrow and you shall have as good a
Sermon as this. Others they dragged by the hair of the head into the Church, there stripped and whipped them in a most cruel manner, say∣ing, If you come to morrow you shall heare the like Sermon. They took the Bible of a Minister called Master Eward Slack, and opening it, they laid it in a puddle of water, and then stamped upon it, saying, A plague on it, this Bible hath bred all the quarrel, and that they hoped within a few weeks all the Bibles in Ireland should be used as that was, or worse. They did most despitefully upbraid the Profession of the truth to those blessed souls, whom neither by threats nor terrours, pains nor torments they could draw to forsake their Religion. And though some by extreme torments were drawn to professe the change of their Reli∣gion, yet did they finde no more favour with these hell-hounds, who with great scorn used to say,Aposttaes murthered. That it was fit to send them out of the world whilst they were in a good mood. At Claslow, a Priest with some others, drew about forty or fifty En∣glish and Scottish Protestants to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then he told them that they were in a good faith, and for fear they should fall from it and turn Hereticks, he with his companions presently cut all their throats. John Nicholson and Anne his wife, being received into the Protection of one Fitz Patrick, he laboured to perswade them to go to Masse, and to joyn in the present massacre; but they professed, that rather than they would forsake their Religion they would die upon the swords point;Constancy, and Courage. Then he would have had the woman burn her Bible; but she told him, rather than she would burn her Bible, she would die the death; where∣upon the Sabbath morning after they were both of them cruelly mur∣thered; but he that acted the villany was so tormented in conscience,Gods judge∣ments on Per∣secutors. and dogged with apparitions of them, as he conceived, that with inward horror he pined away. In the County of Tipperary near the Silver works, some of these barbarous Papists met with eleven English men, Protestants, ten wo∣men, and some children, whom they first stripped off their cloaths, and then with stones, poleaxes, skeins, swords, &c. they most bar∣barously massacred them all; this was done on a Sabbath evening, the day having been very fair and clear; but just at that time God sent a fearful storme of thunder, lightning, wind, haile and rain, so that the murtherers themselves confessed, that it was a signe of Gods anger against them for this cruelty, yet they persisted in their bloody act, hacking, hewing, flashing and stabbing them, so that most of them were cut in pieces then tying withs about their necks, they threw them into an hole which they made for the purpose; yet it pleased God, that one Scottish and an English man, though they had many grie∣vouous wounds, and were left for dead, after a while revived, and with much difficulty escaped with their lives; but as God shewed his great mercy in preserving them, so he shewed his just judgment upon Hugh Kennedy, the chief of those murtherers, who presently fell into a most
desperate madnesse and distraction, neither resting day nor night, till a∣bout eight days after he drowned himself. In the County of Mayo, about sixty Protestants, whereof fifteen were Ministers, were upon Covenant to be safely conveyed to Galway by one Edmund Burk and his souldiers; but by the way this Burk drew his sword,Popish perfid∣ousnesse. teaching thereby the rest of his company to do the like; and so they began to massacre these poor Protestants, some they shot to death; some they stabbed with their skeins, some they thrust through with their pikes; some they cast into the water and drowned, the wo∣men they stript stark naked, who lying upon their husbands to save them, were run through with pikes, so that very few of them escaped with life. In the town of Sligo fourty Protestants wete stript and locked up in a Cellar; and about midnight a Butcher, provided for the purpose, was sent in amongst them,Many knock∣ed on the head who with his axe knocked them all on the heads. In Tirawly, thirty or fourty English, who had formerly yielded to go to Masse, were put to their choyce whether they would die by the sword, or be drowned? they chose the latter, and so being driven to the Sea∣side, these barbarous villaines with their naked swords forced them into the Sea; the mothers with their children in their armes wading to the chin, were afterwards overcome by the waves, where they all perished. But present death was counted too great a favour, and therefore of some they twisted withs about their foreheads till the blood sprang out at the crown of their heads: Others they hanged, and let down several times, &c. The sonne of Master Montgomery, a Minister, aged about fifteen years, met with one of these blood-suckers, who formerly had been his school∣master, who drew his skein at him, whereupon the boy said, Good Ma∣ster,A boy mur∣thered by his Master. whip me as much as you will, but do not kill me; yet this mercilesse Ty∣ger, barbarously murthered him without all pitie. A Scottish man was first wounded, and then buried alive in a ditch. In the Towne of Sligo, all the Protestants were first stript, and robbed of all their estates; afterwards they were summoned to go into the Goale, and such as refused, were carried in; and then a∣bout midnight they all were stripped stark naked, and there most cruelly and barbarously murthered with swords, axes, skeins, &c. some of them being women great with child, their infants thrust out their armes and legs at their wounds; after which execra∣ble murthers, they laid the dead naked bodies of the men upon the naked bodies of the women in a most immodest posture,Berbarous cru∣elty, and im∣pudence. where they left them till the next day to be looked upon by the Irish, who beheld it with great delight; Also Isabel Beard, great with childe, hearing the lamentable cries of those that were murthered, ran forth into the streets, where she was barbarously murthered, and was found the next day with the childs feet coming out of the wounds in her sides: many o∣thers
were murthered in the houses and streets: But by Gods just judg∣ment the river of Sligo, which was before very full of fish, whereby ma∣ny were nourished, for a long time after it afforded no fish at all. A Prior also that had a hand in the murther of Isabel Beard, and of casting her into the river, presently after fell mad. About Dungannon were three hundred and sixteen Protestants in the like barbarous manner murthered: About Charlemount above four hundred; about Tyrone two hundred and six. One Mac Crew murthered thirty one in one morning: Two young Villains murthered one hundred and fourty poor women and children that could make no resistance: An Irish woman with her own hands murthered forty five. At Portendowne Bridge were drowned above three hundred.Many drown∣ed. At Lawgh were drowned above two hundred: In another place three hundred were drowned in one day. In the parish of Killamen there were murthered one thousand and two hundred Protestants. Many young children they cut into quarters and gobbets: eighteen Scottish infants they hanged upon a clothiers tenterhooks. One fat man they murthered, and made Candles of his grease;They made candles of their grease. of another Scot∣tish man they ript up his belly, took one end of his small guts, tied it to a tree, and forced him round about it till he had drawn them all out of his body, saying, that they would try whether a dogs or a Scotchmans guts were the longer. By the command of Sir Philem O Neale, Master James Maxwell was drawn out of his bed, being fick of a Feavor▪ and murthered; and his wife being in child-birth, the child half borne,Prodigious cruelties. they stript her stark naked, drove her about a flights shoot, and drowned her in the Black∣water; the like, or worse they did to another English woman in the same town. They took one Master Watson, and cutting two collops out of his buttocks they roasted him alive. Of a Scottish woman great with child, they ript up her belly, cut the child out of her womb, and so left it crawling on her body. Master Starkey, Schoolmaster at Armagh, being above one hundred years old, they stripped stark naked; then took two of his daughters being Virgins, whom they stripped stark naked also, and then forced them to lead their aged father under the armes a quarter of a mile to a turspit, where they drowned them all three,Popish un∣cleannesse. feeding the lusts of their eyes, and cruelty of their hearts with the same object at the same time. In some places they shewed the like cruelty to the English beasts, which they would not kill out-right, but used to cut collops out of them, delighting to hear their roaring,Their cruelty to the cattel. and so the poor cattel would sometimes live two or three dayes in that torment. To one Henry Cowel, a gallant Gentleman, they profered his life,Henry Cowel. if he would marry one of their base Truls, or go to masse, but he chose death rather than to consent to either. Also to one Robet Ecklin,Constancy. a child about eleven years old,Robert Ecklin. A childs con∣stancy. they profered his life if he would go
to Masse, but he refused, saying, That he saw nothing in their Religion for which he would change his own. Many of the Protestants they buried alive, solacing themselves in hearing them speak to them, whilst they were digging down old ditches upon them. They used also to send their children abroad in troops armed with long wattles and whips,Childrens beastly cruelty wherewith they used to beat dead mens bodies about their privy members, till they beat them off, and then would re∣turn very joyful to their Parents, who received them, as it were in tri∣umph for their good actions. If any women were found dead, lying with their faces downwards, these bruitish persons used to turn them on their acks,Popish un∣cleannesse. viewing and cen∣suring every part of them, especially those parts that are not fit to be named, which also they abused so many ways, and so filthily, as chast ears would not endure the naming rhereof. They brake the back-bone of a young youth, and so left him in the fields,Monstrous cuety to a boy. and some dayes after he was found, having, like a beast, eaten all the grasse round about him; yet neither then would they kill him out-right, but removed him to a place of better pasture, wherein was fulfilled that saying, The tender mercies of the wicked are cru∣elty. In the County of Antrim they murthered nine hundred fifty four Protestants in one morning, and afterwards about twelve hundred more in that County. Near Lisnegarvy they forced above twen∣ty four Protestants into an house,Many burnt. and then setting fire on it, they burned them all, counterfeiting their out-cries in derision to o∣thers. Sir Philem O Neal boasted that he had slain above six hundred at Gar∣vagh: and that he had left neither man, woman, nor child alive in the Baronry of Munterlong. In other places he murthered above two thou∣sand persons in their houses, so that many houses were filled with dead bodies. Above twelve thousand were slain in the high ways as they fled to∣wards Down. Many died of famine, many were starved to death for want of clothes, being stript of all in a cold season; Some thousands were drowned. So that in the very Province of Ulster there were about one hundred and fifty thousand murthered by sundry kinds of torments and deaths.One hundred and fifty thou∣sand murthered in Ulster. These bloody Persecutors themselves confessed that the Ghosts of divers of the Protestants which they had drowned at Portendown Bridge, were daily and nightly seen to walk upon the river, some∣times singing of Psalms, sometimes brandishing naked swords, some∣times screeching in a most hideous and fearful manner;Gods judge∣ments on per∣secutors. so that many of the Popish Irish which dwelt near thereabouts; being affrighted herewith, were forced to remove their habitations further off into the Countrey. The Popish English were no whit inferiour, yea rather exceeded
the natural Irish in their cruelty against the Protestants that lived a∣mongst them, within the pale, being never satisfied with their blood till they had seen the last drop thereof. Anne Kinnard testified that fifteen Protestants being imprisoned, and their feet in the Stocks, a Popish boy being not above fourteen years old, slew them all in one night with his skeine. Another not above twelve years old, killed two women in another place. An En∣glish Papist woman killed seven men and women of her neighbours in one morning.Boys and wo∣men murde∣rers. And it was usual for the Papists children to mur∣der the Protestants children, and sometimes with their woodden Swords, sharp and heavy, they would venture upon people of riper years. An English woman, who was newly delivered of two children, some of these villains violently compelled her in her great pain and sicknesse to rise from her bed, and took one of the infants that was living, and dashed his brains against the stones, and then threw him into the River of the Barrow; the like they did by many other infants. Many others they hanged without all pity. The Lord Mont Garret caused divers English Souldiers that he had taken about Kilkenny to be hanged,Souldiers han∣ged. hardly suffering them to pray be∣fore their death; they dyed very patiently, and resolutely in the de∣fence of the Protestant faith; and one of them, being an Irish man, had his life offered if he would turn Papist, but he rather chose to dye,Constancy. and so was executed with the rest. Some of these Persecutors meeting a poor young Girle that was go∣ing to see her friends, they first half-hanged her, and then buried her quick. One Fitz Patrick enticed a rich Merchant that was a Protestant, to bring all his goods into his house, promising safely to keep them, and to redeliver them to him. But when he had thus gotten them into his possession, he took the Merchant and his Wife, and hanged them both:Popish perfi∣diousnesse. the like he did by divers others. Some English mens heads that they had cut off, they carried to Kil∣kenny, and on the market day set them on the Crosse, where many, espe∣cially the women, stab'd, cut, and slashed them, every one accounting themselves happy that could but get a blow at them. One of the heads being a Ministers, a woman struck so hard with her fist, that the same night her hand grew black and blew, and so rankled, that she was lame of it a quarter of a year after:Gods judge∣ments on Per∣secutors. Another woman that looked on those heads with much rejoycing, presently after fell so distracted, that neither night not day she could rest, but cryed out continually that she saw those heads before her eyes. One English▪ Protestant, saying, that he would believe the Divel as soon as the Pope, they presently hanged him up in an Apple Tree till he dyed. A poor Protestant woman with her two children going to Kilkenny
upon businesse, these bloody miscreants baited them with Dogs, stabbed them with skeins,Some worried with dogs. and pulled out the guts of one of the children, where∣by they dyed; and not far off, they took divers men, women, and chil∣dren, and hanged them up; and one of the women being great with child, they ripped up her belly as she hanged, so that the child fell out in the cawle alive. Some after they were hanged, they drew up and down till their bowels were torn out. How many thousands of Protestants were thus inhumanely mur∣thered by sundry kinds of deaths in that one Province of Ulster we have heard before; What the number of the slain was in the three other Provinces, I find not upon Record; but certainly it was very great; for I finde these passages in a general Remonstrance of the di∣stressed Protestants in the Province of Munster. We may (say they) compare our woe to the saddest Parallel of any story;The Mun∣ster Remon∣strance. Our Churches are demolished, or which is worse, profaned by Sacrifices to Idols: our ha∣bitations are become ruinous heaps: No quality, age, or sex priviledged from Massacres, and lingring deaths, by being robbed, stript naked, and so exposed to cold and famine. The famished Infants of murdered Pa∣rents swarme in our streets, and for want of food perish before our faces, &c. And all this cruelty that is exercised upon us, we know not for what cause, offence, or seeming provocation its inflicted on us, (sin excepted saving that we were Protestants, &c. We can make it manifest that the de∣populations in this Province of Munster, do well near equal those of the whole Kingdome, &c. And thus in part we have heard of the mercilesse cruelties which the bloody Papists exercised towards the Protestants; Let us now consider at least some of Gods judgements upon the Irish, where∣by he hath not left the innocent blood of his servants to be al∣together unrevenged.Gods judge∣ments on Per∣secutors. Some particular instances have been mentio∣ned before: as also the apparitions at Portendown Bridge which af∣frighted them from their habitations, concerning which it is further te∣stified,Apparitions at Portendown Bidge. that by their own confession, the blood of those that were knocked on the head, and then thrown into the River at that Bridge, re∣mained for a long time upon the stones, and could not be washed away; as also that ofttimes they saw apparitions sometimes of men, some∣times of women rising breast-high above the water, which did most extreamly screech and cry out for vengeance against the Irish that had murdered them there. Catherine Coke testified upon oath, that when the Irish had barba∣rously drowned one hundred and eighty Protestants, men, women, and children at Portendown Bridge, about nine days after she saw the ap∣parition of a man bolt upright in the River, standing breast-high, with his hands lift up to heaven, and continued in that posture from Decem∣ber to the end of Lent, at which time some of the English Army passing that way saw it also, after which it vanished away. Elizabeth Price testified upon oath that she and other women whose husbands and children were drowned in that place, hearing of these
apparitions, went thither one Evening, at which time they saw one like a Woman rise out of the River breast-high, her haire hanging down, which, with her skin, was as white as snow, often crying out, Revenge, Revenge, Revenge, which so affrighted them that they went their way. Divers Protestants were thrown into the river of Belterbert, and when any of them offered to swim to the Land, they were knocked on the head with Poles, after which their bodies were not seen of six weeks: but after the end thereof, the murtherers coming again that way, the bodies came floating up to the very Bridge where they were. Sir Con mac Gennis with his company slew Master Turge, Minister of the Newry, with divers other Protestants, after which the said Mac Gennis was so affrighted with the apprehension of the said Master Turge his being continually in his presence, that he commanded his souldiers not to slay any more of them, but such as should be slain in battel. A young woman being stript almost naked, there came a Rogue to her, bidding her give him her money, or he would run her through with his Sword. Her answer was, You cannot kill me except God give you leave,A Miracle. whereupon he ran three times at her naked body with his drawn Sword, and yet never pierced her skin, whereat he being confounded, went his way and left her; This was attested by divers women that were present and saw it. But besides these forementioned judgements of God which befel them for their inhumane cruelties; we may observe how the hand of God hath been out against them ever since, and that in a special manner, by emasculating and debasing of their spirits; whereby it hath come to passe that ordinarily a few English Souldiers have chased multi∣tudes of them, and generally in all the battels and fights that have been betwixt them, they have always been beaten, though the ods was great of their side; And as they made themselves formerly drunk with the inno∣cent blood of the unresisting Protestants; so now God hath given them their fill of blood in jealousie and fury. Many thousands of them have perished by the Sword of War; And how heavy hath the hand of God lain further upon them this present year, 1650. in that terrible and universal plague that hath been scattered all over the Nation, where∣by many thousands more of them have perished, and God is still fight∣ing against, and probably will continue their destruction, till they either shall truly be humbled for their horrid sins, or be utterly consumed from the face of the earth! Amen; Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. These particulars were attested upon Oath by sundry persons before Commissioners appointed to take their Examinations.
Here place the tenth Figure.
CHAP. XLI. A continuation of the History of the Walden∣ses from the year 1560. ending with the late persecution in the Valleys in PIEMONT. ANNO Christi 1561. the Duke of Savoy published an Edict in favour of the Evangelical Churches in the Vallies of Piemont,An Edict in favour of the Protestants. wherein he granted an indemnitie to the people of the Vallies of An∣grognia, Bobio, Villaro, Valguicchiardo, Rora, Tagliaretto, and La Rica di Boneti at the end of La Torre, Saint Martino, Perosa, Roccapiatta, and Saint Barthelemo, from all former actings, and restoring them into his favor, as if they had never acted any thing against his Highness; receiving them into his safegard and protection: He granted them also to have preaching Assemblies, and other Ministerial Offices according to their Religion in their wonted places, &c. But in the year 1565. Another Edict was published at the instigation of the Popish party, whereby all men who lived in the Duke of Savoy's Dominions, and would not conform to the Romish Religion,A cruel Edict. were en∣joyned to come and declare the same to their respective Magistrates within ten dayes after the publication thereof, and two moneths after to leave the Country, having one years time given them to dispose of their goods movable, and unmovable, during which time they should enjoy the revenue thereof, &c. The tidings of this cruelty so wrought upon the hearts of the Pro∣testant Princes of Germany, that they sent an Embassie to the Duke of Savoy to intercede in their behalf: Amongst whom the Prince Elector Palatine was exceeding zealous,The Elector Palatine inter∣cedes for them. sending one of his Counsellours of State, a person of singular worth, to the Duke of Savoy, to mediate in their behalf; at whose return the Prince being informed by him of the unworthy dealing of that Court, and finding that notwithstanding all their faire promises, they did not at all cease from persecuting these poor people, he wrote a very smart and pathetical letter to the said Duke, challenging him for breach of promise to himself and the other Germane Princes, in that he suffered his Ministers still to perse∣cute and banish those poore innocent people, meerely upon the account of Religion, concluding that such severity was neither pleasing to God nor man; neither (saith he) is it the way to bring men to the true know∣ledge of God, which should be done by perswasions, and Scripture-proofs, not by persecutions, &c. Wherefore I pray your Highnesse that you will give us an evidence of that which you have for us, by delivering those poor peo∣ple
who are now in the Gallies, and by recalling those who have been lately banished, as you promised by your Letters. Have compassion upon so many poore wandring Exiles, deprived of all their goods and estates: Call them home, and restore them to their habitations; and grant them, and the other inhabitants of your Highness Countries the publick exercise of their Religion, which they prefer before their necessary food: Free them from their false ac∣cusations, that they may live in peace under your Highnesse Government, &c. If your Highness will grant me this request, I doubt not but you shall ex∣perimentally finde the favour and blessing of God, and you shall oblige us to you in all things: If otherwise, you will both provoke God to lift up his hand against you, and estrange from you the affections of those who desire to do you pleasure and service, &c. Dated 1566. Now that you may see upon what occasion the Prince wrote this let∣ter, you are to understand that Castrocaro (one of their Popish Gover∣nours) being extreamly troubled that the Prince Electors Ambassa∣dor had obtained several promises at the Court for the poor peoples ad∣vantage, did immediately after the said Ambassadors departure, pub∣lish through the Valley of Lucerna,They are cru∣ely dealt with two Ordinances: By the one he commanded all the inhabitants throughout his Government, that were not Natives, to depart within a day after the publication thereof, upon paine of death, and confiscation of their goods: By the other, he prohi∣bited upon the same penalty those of the reformed Religion, inhabiting Lucerna, Bubbiana, Campiglione, and Fenile, to hear Sermons at Saint Giovanni; and for their not submitting, he imprisoned and tormented a great number of them in the Castle of La Torre, which dealing made the poor people to make their addresse to the Dutchess of Savoy, who pittying their condition, wrote to the said Castrocaro in their behalf, commanding him in the Dukes name to set at liberty the imprisoned, and to cease to molest them in the enjoyment of their ancient habitati∣ons and priviledges. This Letter stopped the fury of Castrocaro for the present: but it was far from working any change of affections in him, as was evident by his af∣ter-actings: For in the year 1571. he did so incense the Governour of Bobio against the poor inhabitants of the Valley, that he did not only grie∣vously molest them upon all occasions as they came under his clutches, but also wrote bitter Letters to the Duke against them, improving the uttermost of his parts and power for their ruine and extirpation: and certainly Castrocaro had then effected his designe, had not the Dutches upon the joynt supplications of the Evangelical Churches, very effectu∣ally interposed for them,Gods Provi∣dence for them and procured the continuation of their just and undoubted priviledges. Anno 1571. Many of the poor Protestants of the Valleyes were grievously molested under pretext that in the former War of France against those of the Religion, they had joyned themselves to the Pro∣testant Troops. But King Charles the 9th being moved with com∣passion towards them,King of France intercede; for them. wrote a Letter to the Duke of Savoy in their be∣half, requesting him to receive them with gentleness into his grace and
favour, and to re-establish them in their estates, &c. The subject of which Letter was not only satisfactory to those for whom it interceded, but also to all other faithfull ones of the Valleyes, out of the great hopes they had of future tranquillity. But it endured no longer than till their Ene∣mies had an opportunity of molesting them, which they greedily em∣braced upon the news of the horrible massacres in France. For Castrocaro did thereupon so threaten the poor Protestants, that they retired themselves, with their families, and movables,Popish malice. to the tops of the neighbouring Mountains, and into all other places where they hoped for safety:Gods mercy. But the Duke of Savoy not approving the cruelties exercised against the Protestants in France, sent to those his Subjects, who were thus withdrawn, commanding them to return to their hou∣ses, and habitations, promising that they should suffer no prejudice, nor incur the least danger thereby. Neither indeed were their suffer∣ings great afterwards, so long as Madam the Dutchess was living, who was a refuge to them upon all occasions. After the death of this Princess which happened Octob. 19. 1574. the Popish party came forth like Lions, improving the uttermost of their endeavours to devoure and destroy this poor people upon all occasions; but the goodness of God was so great towards them, that they always found some considerable friends about the Duke, who inclined his heart to gentleness and moderation: But after the death of this  Emanuel, who died Aug. 30. 1580. Charles Emanuel his son, having invaded the Marquisate of Saluces, Monsieur L' Esdiguiers by way of retaliation, seized upon the Valleys of Piemont: But the French Army was no sooner gone home, than there was a rumour spread throughout the Valleys, that the Duke was resolved to take this occasion to extir∣pate all the Protestant Churches, because they had taken an Oath of fi∣delity to the French King, neither was it groundless: for the thing was really propounded in the Dukes Councel, but it pleased God so to or∣der affairs, that the leading men amongst them did not at all approve of the business, yea the Duke himself did extreamly mislike it: and after he had retaken Mirebuc, he did not a little revive the spirits of the Represen∣tatives of the Protestants of Lucerna, who met with him at Villaro on pur∣pose to assure his Highness of their fidelity,The Duke fa∣vours them. and to beg the continu∣ance of his grace and favour, to whom (in the presence of a great num∣ber of his Lords) he returned this Answer: Be but faithfull unto me, and I will be sure to be a good Princ, nay a Father unto ▪ and as to the liberty of your Conscience, and the exercises of your Religion, I shall be so far from innovating any thing against those liberties in which you have lived unto this present, that if any offer to molest you, have recourse to me, and I shall effectually relieve and protect you. These words being spoken in such a presence, and in so obliging a manner, were very advantagious to the poor peoples interest, for some time after,Satans malic they served to counterballance the threats of their fiercest Enemies: Yet were there some amongst the Popish party that thought it an unpardonable sinne to suffer them to live one
year in peace, and on the contrary an acceptable service to molest them, either by secret stratagems, or by open force and violence. Such was the condition of this poor people from the year 1595. to the year 1602. at which time all the Masters of Families in the Valley of Lucerna, professing the Protestant Religion, were cited to appear be∣fore Count Charles of Lucerna, the Governour Ponte, the Arch Bishop Broglia, and others, and were by them commanded in the Dukes name, either to go to Masse, or to quit Lucerna, and all their pretensions thereto, without the least hopes of ever obtaining favour to return, or in case of disobedience, to prepare themselves for inevitable mischiefs and cala∣mities: which threats were pressed with so much violence, that it cau∣sed many of the poor creatures to submit, at least seemingly, to the change of their Religion, though many others of them were the deep∣lier rooted by these shakings. From Lucerna the aforenamed Lords removed their seat to Bubiana where they found the Reformed so stiff in their Principles,Popish subtilty prevented. that they could not remove them an hairs bredth from the same, wherefore they caused the chief of them to be summoned to appear at Turin, thinking that the Dukes presence might prevaile more with them than all their threatning speeches: The persons thus summoned were Master Valentine, and Mr. Boules, his brother, with one Peter Morese, and Samuel Falc, who were brought one after another before hi Hisghnesse: Mr. Valentine was the first, whom the Duke perswaded to embrace the Roman Catholick Religion, and to draw others to do the like, promising him great rewards and preferments if he obeyed, &c. To this Mr. Valentine answered, that next to the service of God,Courage and Constancy. he had no greater desire then to obey, and please his Highness, in whose service he would willingly adventure his person and estate, when ever there should be occasion: But as for his Religion which he knew to be true, and confirmed by the Word of God, he could not abandon it without disobeying God, and wound∣ing his own Conscience, so as never to enjoy any comfort in his soul afterwards: and therefore he humbly intreated his Highness to be sa∣tisfied with what he could do with a good conscience: and to leave him to the liberty of his Religion which he valued above his life: the Duke replyed, that he also doubted not of the truth of that Religion which he professed, and that such as embraced it, should find how much they had gratified him in so doing, yet would he not force the Conscience of any man, and so he gave them leave to depart.
CHAP. XLII. The Marquisate of Saluces described, with its several troubles and Persecutions. THe Marquisate of Saluces is on the South side of the Valleys of Predmont, containing in it several Cities, and considerable Valleys, very fruitfull in all sorts of fruits. Its most Northerly Valley is that of Po, where the famous River Po hath its rise, and source; one onely Moun∣tain separates this from the Valley of Lucerna on the North side: In this Valley were those ancient Churches, viz. Pravillem, Biolets, and Bietone, who retained the purity of Christian Religion for several hun∣dreds of years, and lived in great union with their neighbouring Churches. Anno Christi 1561. The Church of Dronier, which was one of the most flourishing, understanding that the publick exercise of the Reformed re∣ligion was permitted in France, obtained Letters from the Kings Council to Sieur Lovis of Birague, Governour of that Country in the Duke of Nevers absence, whereby he was ordered to provide for the Petitioners a convenient place for the publick exercise of their Religion: But not long after their Adversaries, by their importunity, prevailed so far that the said letters were revoked:They are fa∣voured, but again molested. This occasioned the said Church to send Mon∣sieur Francis Galatee, their Minister, into France, with some others, to re∣cover (if it were possible) their former priviledges. But this falling out in the time of their troubles in France, all that they could obtaine, was only bare promises. In the mean time they received many hortatory and consolatory letters from the chief Ministers in the Churches of France, and amongst others from those of Grenoble, Lions, &c. to per∣swade them to patience, and perseverance in that truth which they had embraced: which accordingly they did, notwithstanding all the malice and subtilty of their adversaries: So that their Churches were continu∣ed and upheld,They are en∣couraged. convenient order being had for the preaching of the Word, administration of the Sacraments, exercise of their discipline, &c. only there wanted in some places liberty of having General Assemblies, and publick Sermons. For the better safety of their Ministers in the places that were most dangerous,Their pru∣dence. one Pastor had the charge of the faithful in several Cities and Communalties, which rendred their residence and exercises less vi∣sible to their Adversaries: Hereby the Gospel (through Gods mercy) made a very considerable progress at Dronier, Verzo, and some other pla∣ces of moe noe. The Church of Aceil in the Valley de Mairi was extraordinarily peopled, and enjoyed more liberty than the others, by reason of the scituation of the place: but Satan the Enemy of Christs Church and Kingdom, perceiving such a growth of the reformed Re∣ligion
in those places,Satans policy. ceased not to imploy all his power and policy to hinder the same; and therein he made use of instruments for the effect∣ing of it: viz. first the Anticodemites, whose ringleader was Baronius, who lived at Valgrane and thereabouts, accommodating himself to the times:Dissembling Hypocrites. For when the Church had rest and ease, he wrote strange things, and cryed out of the abuses in Popery: But in times of persecution he u∣sually played the Hypocrite, and laboured to draw others to do the same, by which means he had a multitude of followers, and amongst them the Lord of Valgrane, and Maximilian de Saluces, who set his name to Baronius to add luster to his writings against the Ministers, reproach∣ing them for that they would not give way to any dissimulation in their Disciples, whereby they exposed them to great extremities. This Lord had some learning and knowledge of the truth; but to avoid the bearing of the Cross, he thought it convenient to dissemble, and condemned those who any way gain said the Papists.They are con∣futed. Yet Monsieur Gelido, Minister of Aceil, opposed them both, very learnedly in several letters that he wrote unto them: So did Monsieur Truchi, Minister of Dronier, together with other Pastors of the Neighbouring places, demonstrating both by Scrip∣ture Testimonies, and by the Example of the Primitive Church, that they had done nothing but what they ought to do, and what every faith∣ful Christian was bound to, and consequently that the opinion of Baro∣nius and his followers was pernicious to the Church in times of perse∣cution. The other instruments that Satan made use of to the prejudice of the Church, were the Roman Clergy, with their passionate Proselites, who would faine have done to these godly Christians, as their brethren in iniquity had done to their neighbours in the Dukedom of Savoy: viz. Banish, imprison, kill, and confiscate the goods of the Protestants: But (through Gods mercy) they were hindred by the Kings Edicts, confirm∣ing to those his Subjects of Saluces a peaceable habitation, without being molested for their Conscience and religion, or questioned for any thing they did in their private houses (provided they abstained from the pub∣lick exercise of it) by which means their Ministers had opportunitie of as∣sembling in small Companies, baptizing, marrying, comforting the sick, and instructing every one in particular; which provoked their ad∣versaries to bend themselves chiefly against the Ministers, thinking that if they could find out any meanes to extirpate them,Popish policy. they should easily prevaile upon the common people, having none to animate and in∣struct them. Accordingly they published an Edict of Octob. 19. 1567. in the name of the Duke of Nevers, Governour for the King on this side the moun∣tains, injoyning all of the religion there inhabiting or abiding, that were not the Kings natural Subjects, to depart, together with their families within the space of three dayes, and never to return thither to inhabit, pass,Persecution re∣newed. or otherwise to abide without a special safe conduct, upon pain of life, and confiscation of their goods. Now the greatest part of the Ministers not being natural subjects to
the King, by this Edict were to quit the Marquisate, o to obtain a safe conduct, or lastly to incur the penalty: A safe conduct they could not obtain, and yet they thought themselves bound in Conscience not to abandon their people; wherefore continuing with their Congregations, two of them were apprehended and imprisoned: viz. Monsieur Francis Truchi, and Monsieur Francis Soulf, where they were detained four years, four moneths, and odd dayes, the poor people being not able by any means to obtain their deliverance, though they continually sol∣licited de Berague their Governour,Gods Provi∣dence. and others that had undertaken the management of these affairs: yet the Lord was so pleased to restrain the power of their Enemies that they could not take away their lives: yea by degrees they obtained for them a more spacious and convenient pri∣son than that whereunto they were at first confined. To procure their full deliverance the Churches of the Marquisate sent their supplications to the King by the aforesaid Minister Galate, and another; who set out July 27. 1571. and went as far as Rochel to im∣plore the intercession of the Queen of Navar, as also to intreat the assi∣stance of divers others in several places:Gods mercy. and the great Patrons of the reformed religion disputed their case before the King, and in the end obtained Letters under the Kings own hand for their enlargement, Octob. 14. 1571. which was accordingly effected; but it was four moneths after before it could be done. When Sieur Galatee returned, he was overjoyed, as well for the pro∣sperous successe of his negotiations, as for the great hopes of a profound peace, founded upon the smooth promises of his Majsty, and upon the alliance which he had made by the marriage of his sister to the King of Navar, who professed the reformed religion. But this joy lasted but from the moneth of May 1572. to the beginning of Septemb. at which time there arived the lamentable news of the massacre of many noble persons, and multitudes of others who were most inhumanely murthered in divers places of France,The massacre of Paris. to the great astonishment of all the faithful in those parts. About the same time there arived letters from the King to the Gover∣nour Birague, by which he was required to have an eye, that, at the arival of the news of what happened at Paris, they of the Religion should make no combustion; remitting the rest of his pleasure to those instru∣ctions which he had sent him by the bearer, the contents whereof were, that he should put to death all the chief of the Protestants within his ju∣risdiction, whose names he should find in the Roll that should be present∣ed to him. Birague having received this command, together with the Roll afore∣mentioned, was much troubled, and immediately called his Council to∣gether, whom he acquainted with the Kings Orders: whereupon some were of opinion that they should be immediately executed: But others, seeing the King in his late Patents, not many moneths before, had enlarged the Ministers that were imprisoned, and had ordered that those of the reformed Religion should not be any wayes molested for
their Conscience sake: as also upon consideration that nothing had oc∣curred since that time worthy such a change, they therefore thought it sufficient to secure the persons of such as were enrolled,A special pro∣vidence. and to defer execution for a while, and in the mean time to inform the King that they were persons of Honour, faithful to his Majesty, living peaceably with their neighbours, and inoffensive in their lives: adding that in case his Majesty was resolved that they should be put to death, there was yet time enough to execute his pleasure therein. This advice Birague approved of, and accordingly apprehended some, but others escaped, and concealed themselves: and in the mean time he dispatched a Messenger to the King, to inform him as abovesaid, and to know his further pleasure. This Messenger met another at Lions, where the King had sent to Birague to advertise him, that in case his former Order was not already executed, he should desist from it, and only have a special care that those of the Religion should make no insurrection, nor have any publick exercises. But they of the reformed Religion in the Marquisate were not a little troubled when they heard of the cruel massacre of their brethren in France without distinction of age, sex, or quality, insomuch as divers of them fled; many Papists also secretly caused the families of their kinded and friends of the Religion to retire their families and themselves till such time as Birague had published the Kings pleasure, after which they returned by little and little: and though their publick exercises were prohibited, yet they were well satisfied with the assurance of their lives, and estates, besides that they had the liberty of private exercises in their families. This was the condition of the Protestant Churches in Saluces during the time that it was under the Dominion of the King of France, which continued to the year 1588. at which time the Duke of Savoy took the possession, who, for a while suffered them to enjoy their priviledges in general: But in particular, some of the chief Members of the Church of Dromier, being cited to Turin, were so befooled with subtile Artifices, that one part of them promised to go to Masse, which gave a conside¦rable blow to the said Church, yet it lost not its courage in general, although the great failings of the former encouraged their adversaries to attempt the like upon others by both words and letters. Anno Christi 1597. the Duke of Savoy wrote his Letter to them, wherein he told them how desirous he was that all his Subjects in the Marquisat of Saluces should embrace the Romish Religion,The Dukes let∣ter to draw them to Po∣pery. and finding that his exhortations had prevailed with some, he hoped that they would have the same effect upon the rest, desiring that laying aside their Heretical obstinacie, they would embrace the true Religion out of respect to Gods glory, and their own good, making large promises to such as should submit, and telling them that it should return to their great advantage. The Churches of the Marquisat having received this letter, they an∣swered,Their answer. first, that they returned his Highness many thanks for that
he had suffered them to enjoy their Religion hitherto as he had found them in the year 1588. when he took possession of the Marquisat. Se∣condly they humbly intreated him to continue to them the said benefit, as also to grant them his protection, seeing that they knew that their Religion was founded upon the holy Scriptures, according to which they ordered their lives and conversations, so as none had any just occa∣sion of offence: and considering that even the Jews and other enemies of Christ were suffered to live in peace, and to enjoy their Religion, they hoped that those which were found Christians, faithful to God, and loyal to their Prince, should not be denyed the same privi∣ledge. After this aswer they lived a while in peace, and the Duke took a voyage into , after which followed a War, so that they continu∣ed as aforetime But after the exchange of the Marquisat was establish∣ed upon him, his soft Letters were turned into sharp Edicts, wherein he commanded all those of the Religion within the Marquisat, that every one should go, and declare to his ordinary Magistrate within the space of fifteen dayes whether he would renounce his religion,A cruel Edict or go to Mass or no; which if they would do, they should not only enjoy their habitations, and Estates, but many other favours also: But if they re∣solved to persist in their Religion, they were enjoyned to depart out of his Highness Dominions within the space of two moneths, and ne∣ver to return without expresse permission, and that upon pain of death, and confiscation of all their goods: yet they were permitted within the said term of two months to transport their goods as they should think meet. This unexpected Edict being published through the Marquisate, July 1601. much troubled those of the reformed Religion, who immediately sent Deputies to his Highness to obtain a revocation, or at least a mo∣deration of it: and indeed they had some hopes given them by divers persons of quality, so that many of the poor people resting upon this broken reed, let slip much of the said prefixed time without preparing for their departure, whereby they were the more amazed when they understood, not many dayes before the time was expired; that all hope of favour was now wholly taken away: yet most of them prepared for their departure; some recommending their goods to their kindred and friends who remained in the Country, others leaving all they had at random, except what they could carry with them to serve for their present necessities. In these two moneths space they who were resolved to depart, were continually set upon by their friends and kindred,Popish subt∣ty. with all manner of perswasions to divert them from their purposes, especially when they presented themselves to the Magistrate to give in their answer in writing: For then they were caused to stand in a certain Pew in pub∣lick view, where the Magistrates had either Monks, or other Ecclesi∣asticks, who ceased not to urge them by all possible arguments and mo∣tives thereby to shake their faith and constancy: Amongst others, a cer∣tain
Capuchin Friar called Philip Ribo▪ who a little before had been im∣ployed in the same manner in the Valley of Perosa, being now imployed in this place, ran up and down, using all subtilties imaginable, especial∣ly among those who through feebleness of age, weakness of sex, or want of estates, might probably make them more easie to be seduced: they caused them also to be brought before the Magistrate one by one, that so the constancy of some might not encourage others: Yea hardly were Husbands permitted to declare for their Wives and Children; and they▪ so sifted the tender ones that it was hard for them to escape with∣out making shipwrack of their Faith and Religion; and to promote their design they prohibited all upon pain of death, not to disswade others from revolting. Yet through Gods mercy, they were so fortified in their spirits▪ that most of them withstood the tentations, and went forth as Providence guided them▪ not knowing whither they went. Some steered their course beyond the Alps to France,Courage, and constancy. Geneva, and other places: Others retired themselves into the Valleys of Piedmont, and re∣mained there without trouble,They are ba∣nished. though the Edict required that they should depart out of his Highnesses Dominions. In the beginning of this Persecution, the adversaries fearing some resolute union amongst these poor persecuted souls, to prevent any com∣bustion, they gave it out in the Churches of the Mountains, that though the Edict was general, yet the intention thereof was only to unlodg those in the lower Plains,Popish subtilty in the great Villages, and other publick places: and that such as inhabited amongst the Mountains might be sure to live in peace and quiet: This indeed was a cause that at the first there was not such an universal union amongst those of the Reformed Religion that were destinated for slaughter, as they could have desired: But this fraud at length appearing occasioned a more close union amongst them: Neither was it without cause: for at last they spared those in the Mountains no more then those of the Plains: only that they made no enquiry after the Church of Pravillelm, and the quarters thereabouts, who thereupon trusting to the ancientness of their possession, troubled not themselves to make any declaration to the Magistrate, or to prepare themselves for their departure, as if the Edict had not at all concerned them: Nei∣ther indeed were they disturbed till all the rest were departed out of the Province, and scattered in several places: But at length they were gi∣ven to understand, that seeing they had not yeilded obedience to the Edict, they were liable to the punishment therein appointed: and there∣fore some warned them to have a care of themselves both in general, and each particular: Hereupon they repaired to the Syndicks of the Communalty, requesting them to intercede for them, shewing the reasons why they conceived not themselves concerned by the Edict, and therefore they had not offended out of any malicious inten∣tion. The Syndicks accordingly made many journeys about this business, but brought back nothing but sad and uncomfortable messages; so that at last they were forced to flie.They are for∣ced to flie. One part of them (the men having
ordered their Families which they left in their houses) retired into the Western Mountains:They are forced to flie. Those who were fit to bear Arms (being about two hundred) with their Arms retired into the Castellnie of Casteau Dauphine which was near at hand: but those of Dauphine, and who were lesse disposed, retired themselves into their highest For∣rests. Yet before their departure they declared to their Popish neighbours, that being forced to retire themselves by reason of the threats which were given against them for their Religion; and being unable to take their families along with them, they intreated them to take care of them; withall telling them, that they would make a sudden return, either of the good or evil that should be done to their Relations, either by themselves, or by their permission. This so prevailed with the Pa∣pists, that either out of fear, or for some other reasons, they so far sol∣licited, and prevailed with their Superiours, that the others had liberty of returning to their ancient habitations withour being molested, and that for many years together. CHAP. XLIII. The Artifices and wicked practices used to consume and destroy the Faithful in the Valleys of Piedmont. THe Popish Clergy have several persons under pay, whose business it is to kindle strifes and quarrels amongst the Protestants, and to en∣gage them in suits of Law one against another:Popish subtil∣ty. and when they see them reduced to poverty and despair, they secretly offer them all the favour imaginable, provided that they will either openly revolt, or remain as Spies amongst their brethren to betray them: and the better to dispose them hereto, they assure them that they shall get a full victory over their Enemies, in case they will imploy some Churchmen to recommend their affairs to the Judges, who in all publick imployments are prefer∣red before the Protestants, and made their superiours, that so they may over-rule them as they list. The Popish Clergy also knowing that young men are apt to be in love, which captivates reason, they propound to them by their Emis∣saries, a match with some Papist, whose portion and other advantages they amplifie by officious lyes, and so they inveigle some poor souls, sometimes without, and sometimes against the consent of their Parents, and friends: and if any amongst the Protestants be so wicked as not to regard the admonitions of their Ministers and Elders, so that they are
forced to excommunicate them, these Monks and Priests perswade them to embrace the Romish Religion, where they shall be protected against such as pursue them for their crimes: yea they promise that they shall be set over them in all publick Offices, by which means they may have power in their hands to be revenged of them. This was the practice of the Monks in the year 1640, 1641, &c. even towards some who were manifestly convicted of Witchcraft, who, revolting to Popery, had their lives spared, and were set at liberty: yea they have often rewarded them with money, merchandizes and other things; withall exempting them from all manner of Taxes: and when the Protestants complained hereof, the Duke of Savoy indeed gave them a favourable answer by his Edict, dated in June 1649. but they could never obtain the putting of it in execution. But of all the means used for these last sixty years to root out, and ruine the Protestant Churches in the Valleys of Piedmont, there hath been none like that of the Missionaries established by Pope Clement the 8th, Anno Christi 1596. For the Monasteries of these firebrands have ever been as so many Citadels in the Valleys, wherein very many wick∣ed instruments have been harbored, who never ceased to contrive mis∣chief by their lyes, calumnies and slanders wherewith they have filled the ears of the Magistrates and Princes, who have alwayes given more credit to them, than to the true complaints of these poor people in their own just defence, whereupon they have published many bloody Edicts against them: and though the Protestants reiterated their humble supplications to his Highness, and therein declared their own innocen∣cy, and the boldness of those Missionaries, which was grown to such a heighth as was altogether intolerable, yet have they prevailed nothing: and that which makes these Monks the more confident, is, that they know they are not to be punished by any Magistrate for whatsoever they say or do against the Protestants; no not when they steale away their Children from them: whereas the Protestants are put to death if they speak but the least word against these Missionary Priests, or but go about to disswade any, though of their own families from turning Papist. Yea by the Dukes Edict any one witness is sufficient against a Prote∣stant, and a reward of an hundred Crowns is promised to any that will come and witness against them, whereby all those are encouraged, who either out of revenge, envy, or covetousness, shall report such false things against them as by the Romish Friars they shall be dire∣cted to. By vertue of this Edict the Monks have made bold upon all occa∣sions both in the streets, yea in the very Curches, and that in the Sermon time to set upon the Protestant Ministers, with all the most base, vile, and unsufferable speeches they could possibly devise, knowing that no man durst either censure their zeale, or witness against them for what they said or did against the Protestants, for fear of the severe penalties ordained against the favourers of Hereticks. Nay, if their abusive carriage could but draw any word out of the Ministers, or out
of any other mans mouth that did not please them, they had their hired witnesse in a readinesse to bring the Minister, or other Protestant to the stake, and that without redemption. These men got an Edict from Madam Royal, of Jan. 16. 1642. having made her believe that the Papists were compelled to contribute towards the maintenance of the Protestant Ministers, with some other such like fictions; upon which they obtained an Order for the Officers called Castellani, to give the Missionaries all the Writings they should demand of them; by means whereof they usurped power over the said Castellani, and so over the poor Protestants, compelling the Castellani to make most unjust Ordinances against these poor people: As for ex∣ample; when the question is concerning their habitation, the Missio∣ners do perswade them that come to witnesse the truth, that so to do is to favour the Hereticks, whereby they will fall irrevocably under the censure of Excommunication; whereas its a meritorious work to wit∣nesse against them by such officious lies as are suggested to them by the Popish Clergy: Nay, the Judges themselves durst not passe a righteous sentence, when it reflected in the least upon the Catholick party. And that they may have the opportunity of negotiating with the Prote∣stants, they procure of his Highnesse every year,Popish subtil∣ty. the Assignations of Grain, and other Impositions, that so they of the Reformed Religion, being obliged to make their payments to these Publicans, they may have the advantage to shew favour, and give ample rewards to such as will comply with their superstitious Idolatry, and to lay heavy burdens upon the backs of those that are true to their Prin∣ciples. Mention might here be made of their frequent falling into the said Valleys with Troops of Armed men, under pretence of quartering them there; whereby they have miserably surprized, and made a prey of them: As likewise the cunning stratagems which they have used in all their Treaties, which have been as full of Jesuitical Equivocations, as of lines and sentences, following therein their old Maxime, that Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks. To this may be added their diligent search, and strict enquiry after all Protestant Books and Writings, which they commit to the fire with much devotion, lest they should discover their rotten principles, and the wickednesse of their actions to the world. Another stratagem they have to allure men to revolt, wherein are proffers of great rewards made, and published in the Princes name; as may be seen in the Dukes own letter, wherein are these words. To en∣courage the Hereticks to turn Catholicks, it is our pleasure, and we do hereby expresly command, that all such as shall embrace the Holy Ro∣mane Faith, shall enjoy an exemption from all, and every tax for the space of five years commencing from the day of their conversion, &c. Which term of five years he hath sometimes lengthned out to ten or fifteen years; whereas indeed the burden that they took off from these Revolters, they laid upon the backs of those that persevered in their
Religion, the better to break and destroy them. But as if all this were too little to compass their ends, the Duke e∣rected a Congregation for extirpating the Hereticks, who were to judge concerning the rights of the Protestants. Their meeting place was in the Arch-bishops house, the Bishop himself being President, together with the Dukes Confessor, and divers others, every one of them hired by the Court of Rome, to undermine the liberties of the Protestant Chur∣ches, by robbing them of their Ancient Priviledges under sundry pre∣tences, and upon false Informations. And the better to disguise their proceedings, they usually incense the Duke by grievous accusations, and so procure grievous Edicts from him against the poor Protestants. These were they who procured from Charles Emanuel, Anno Christi 1602. An Edict, wherein he enjoyns the Protestants upon pain of death to banish from amongst them all manner of Schools both publick and private, (as Julian the Apostate had formerly done to extirpate the Christian Religion) And by another Edict of Decemb. 18. 1622. he forbade them to receive any strangers amongst them that should be either Ministers or Schoolmasters, as also from sending their youth into Forreign Schools suspected of Heresie. He also debarred all manner of Protestants from publick Offices, either great or small. In another E∣dict, all Protestants were commanded either to go to Masse, or to de∣part within two moneths after the publication thereof: And by a∣nother Edict the same was commanded, and but fifteen dayes given them. Another order was given out, Novemb. 18. 1634. enjoyning the Protestants of Campiglione, to leave that place within twenty foure houres, and that upon pain of death, which was executed without mer∣cy. The same was done Anno Christi 1655. by Gastaldo, who gave no longer than twenty foure houres to those of the Valleys of Saint Martino and Perosa, to depart upon pain of death; and to those that lived beyond Pelice, but three days. Many times when these Missionary Fathers could not possibly per∣swade his Royal Highnesse to an open Persecution against the generality of the Protestants, then they usually tormented them one by one upon sundry false pretences, whom they delivered up to the Inquisi∣tors, who contrary to all Forms of Justice, forthwith condem∣ned them, without so much as hearing them, or letting them know their accusers. Anno Christi 1622. They took one Mr. Sebastian Basan, and after the Inquisitors had cruelly tempted and tormented him for the space of fif∣teen months, they burned him alive at Turin, Novemb. 23. 1623. where he dyed, singing the praises of God in the midst of the flames. Anno 1655. These Missionary Fathers stole away very many of the Protestants children in the time of the Massacre; whom they would not afterwards restore, though his Highness had promised it by his Pa∣tent; which practice is the most execrable of all the Turkish tyrannies:
Yet there is this difference, that the Turks do so only to their own Subjects, whereas the Popes Ministers do it to those over whom they have no right at all. Two instances may be given (amongst many others) of the subtile insinuations of the Jesuites to withdraw men from the truth; There were two Ministers, the one Mr. Peter Gros, the other Mr. Francis Aguit, with whom they had thus prevailed: But the Lord in mercy shewing them the greatnesse of their sin,Humane frail∣ty. they made a publick Recantation in a full Congregation, August. 28. & 29. 1655. at Pinache in the Valley of Perouse, wherein they testified their ex∣tream sorrow for their defection through infirmity, from the true Reli∣gion, during the time of their Imprisonment at Turin, together with their abjuration of Popery, which they conclude thus. Do not think us unworthy your holy communion, although we have been an occasion of offence:Repentance. Suffer us to poure into your bosomes a torrent of tears to deplore our condition, and to assure you in the anguish of our souls, that our grief is greater than we can expresse: Help us by your ho∣ly prayers to the Lord, and publish our repentance in all places where you conceive our sin hath been, or shall bee known, that so it may be evident to all the world, that from the very bottome of our souls we grieve, and sorrow for it, and that in the presence of God, and of his ho∣ly Angels, and in the sight of those who have been witnesses of our con∣version, we do abjure, and detest the Masse, the authority of the Pope, and in general, all sorts of beliefs, and worships dependent upon them; we recant whatsoever we may have pronounced to the prejudice of the Evangelical Truth, and promise for the future, through the Grace of God, to persevere in the profession of the Reformed Religion to the last moment of our life, and rather to suffer Death, and Torments than to renounce that holy Doctrine that is taught in our Church according unto the word of God: even as we swear, and promise, with our bended knees upon the earth, and our hands lifted up to the Eternal, our Al∣mighty God and Father, Sonne, and Holy Spirit. As we desire his assistance to do this, even so help us God. Amen. The Motives of the late Persecution in the Valleys of Pie∣mont, Anno Christi 1655. with the publication of that bloody Order of Gastaldo, and the flight of the Pro∣testants in the middest of Winter. THe chief Officers, and Gentry of Savoy are moved to endeavour the extirpation of the Reformed party,Reason▪ why they persecut∣ed the Prote∣stants. chiefly for these Causes: 1. That by evil entreating the Reformed Churches, they may conserve the Papal authority, of which they have oft-times so much need, to cover and cloke their Incestuous marriages contract∣ed by Dispensations from the Pope: and thus they become engaged to maintaine Popery, for fear of being declared guilty of Incest. 2. Be∣cause
the Courtiers for persecuting the Reformed party are rewarded with Prebendaries, Bishopricks, Abbies, and Priories, especially such as are members of the Council for extirpating of Hereticks. 3. Un∣der this pretext, the poor people of the Valleys become a prey to the said Courtiers, who daily rob, and spoil them, extorting the best part of their livelishood by sundry subtile devices. 4. The Gentry of Lucerna (who are very poor) promote this work all they can by perpe∣tual calumnies against them, rendring themselves by such good Offices capable of meriting, and receiving those pensions which are assigned them by the Court of Rome for the same purpose. 5. For this end of late they have made the Gentlemen of the respective Valleys subordi∣nate to the Monks, and Masse-Priests, who teach and appoint them what to do, as to the bearing of false-witnesse against their Neigh∣bours, sowing discord amongst them, murthering of some, procuring the Assasination of others, stealing, and carrying away their children, &c. without the performance whereof they refuse to pay them their yearly Pensions. 6. But the chief ground of all why the Court of Savoy strives so much to extirpate this poor people, is, the Designe that they have to wrest Pignorolio out of the hands of the King of France, to which the habitation, and liberty of those people are a great hindrance: For they, inhabiting the neighbouring parts of Pigno∣rolio, both in the Plaine and Mountains, cannot, upon the account of conscience, be brought to make any agreement with the Spanish party for assaulting, and surprizing that place: Hence the Court of Savoy seeks all manner of occasions to root them out, especially those of Lu∣cerne, Fenile, Bobio, Campiglione, Bricheras, and Saint Secondo, which are near Pignorolio, and to deprive it thereby of all sorts of commodi∣ties which it receives from the Valleys, which alone doth furnish it with more than all the neighbouring Valleys which belong to the Duke. Now if these people were extirpated, and others put in their places, men forward to execute their Designes, they might easily seize on Malange, a narrow passage above Pignorolio, on that side which looks towards France, where a very few persons would be able to hinder the French Armies from relieving Pignorolio. Upon these, and the like grounds the Court of Savoy hath sought their destruction, though its true, that in all the persecutions which they have raised against them, especially in this last, 1655. those ravening wolves approached in sheeps cloathing, the better to deceive, and destroy the innocent Lambs of Christ. For these Evangelical Churches had, long before that fatal year, cleared themselves of all those calumnies which the Council for the extirpation of Hereticks, to the end that they might enjoy their promised Pensions, had cast upon them. Yea, his Royal Highnesse had now given an ample testimony of his being fully satis∣fied in this point, and by an authentick Decree published Anno Christi 1649. had confirmed all former Confessions; which confirmation was again renewed Anno 1653. confirming the Grants made to them in the years 1603. and 1620. without any addition, or diminution, amplifica∣tion, or restriction whatsoever.
Now as these poor people sought for an Interination of these Grants, His Royal Highness, knowing that the delay thereof proceeded not from any negligence of their part, but was occasioned by the multitude of Troops that were then quartered upon them, whereby they could not possibly have the convenience of assembling, &c. out of his goodness towards them, he declared by an Edict, of May 19. 1654. that his in∣tention was that they should enjoy the Concessions as effectually as if they had been again interinated, upon condition that they did procure the Interination thereof within three moneths following. So that till this time of May 19. 1654. none can say that those of the Reformed Religion had committed any thing whereby to be deprived of the be∣nefit of their Concessions; yet contrary to all their expectations, short∣ly after, viz. January 25. 1655. this infamous Order was published by Andrew Gastaldo, Doctor of the Civil Law,A bloody Or∣der. Mr. Auditor Ordina∣ry, &c. That every Head of a Family, with its members of the Re∣formed Religion, of what rank, degree or condition soever, none ex∣cepted, inhabiting and possessing estates in the places of Lucerna, Lu∣cernetta, St. Giovanni, La Torre, Bubbiana, and Fenile, Campiglione, Briche∣rassio, and S. Secondo, within three days after the publication therof should withdraw and depart, and to be with their families withdrawn out of the said places, and translated into the places and limits tolerated by his Highness, during his pleasure, as namely Bobbio, Villaro, Angrogna, Rorata, and the Country of Bonetti, under pain of death, and confisca∣tion of houses and goods, situated or being out of the said limits; Provided, if they make it not appear to us within twenty days follow∣ing that they are turned Catholicks, or that they have sold their goods to the Catholicks. And that it was not the mind of his Royal Highness by any Act whatsoever to enlarge the said limits: But on the contrary, he declares by these presents, that the said Acts are meer usurpations, contrary to the intention as well of his Orders, as of his Magistrates, published to that end; and that therefore the transgres∣sors have incurred the punishment therein contained: Besides, in the aforesaid places favorably tolerated, he wills that in every one of them shall be celebrated the holy Mass, forbidding those of the pre∣tended Reformed Religion any ways to molest, either by deed or word, the Missionary Fathers, or their Attendants, much less to disswade any that would turn Catholicks, under the same pain of death, giving it in charge particularly to the Ministers of the said pretended Religion, inviolably to observe the same, upon pain of answering it in their pro∣per names, &c. It's easie to conjecture the miserable inconveniencies of a flight in the midst of winter, especially to such a people amongst whom were many aged and decrepit, many sick and diseased, besides a multitude of women big with childe, or newly brought to bed, together with a number of tender Infants, yet all forced to flye, and none being in capacity to succor another. Yet did these bloody beasts in the most violent and rigorous winter-season chase and drive out of their houses
all on a sudden those poor people, who scarce had clothes to cover their nakedness, much less were they provided to resist the extremi∣ties of cold, and hunger; thinking hereby either to force them to change their Religion,Popish cruelty or to cause them to dye in the craggy Rocks and snowy Mountains; yea, they were so subtilly malicious as to chuse those very days, when by reason of the multitude of violent wa∣ters in the Plain, and of snow upon the Mountains, they judged it im∣possible for those silly sheep ever to escape. But these poor people considering that the Apostacy propound∣ed was the way to eternal damnation, chose rather to follow Christ in bearing his cross, and to hazard their temporary lives, rather than to lose their souls for ever; yet that they might leave no lawful means unat∣tempted, they presently dispatched their Deputies to the Governor, to represent to him the strangeness of this command, to force them with their Families to abandon their antient habitations; as also that it was impossible for so many souls as there were in number to subsist in the said place, to which by the Edict they were confined, they be∣ing scarce sufficient to supply in any sort those that inhabited them: As likewise, that this command was contrary to all their former Con∣cessions, upon which account they protested and appealed to his Royal Highness. But the Governor knowing well the intention of the Council for the extirpating of Hereticks, would neither admit of the one or of the other. Hereupon the poor people, seeing they could obtain nothing of him, entreated him to grant them at least some time to have recourse to the Duke by humble supplications; but this also was deni∣ed, unless they would draw up their Petition by a model which he should prescribe, which indeed was prejudicial both to their just Rights and Consciences. These poor people (I say) seeing this, to the end that they might remove all pretext for accusing them of Rebellion, under that colour to ruine and destroy them; hoping also that at last they might finde some means to lay their griefs at the feet of his Royal Highness, and that his Clemency and Justice would in the end re-establish them in their ancient habitations,They go into banishment. they chose rather to suffer this violence; and therefore recalling their Protestation, thereby to testifie their pro∣found respect to their Prince, they quitted their houses, and goods, and retired with their Familes, their Wives and Children, great and small, young and old, whole and sick; yea, halt, lame and blind; drag∣ing after them such as were infirm by sickness or age through Rain, Snow, Ice, Waters, and a thousand difficulties. Oh think with your selves, what bitter tears, what wringing of hands, what smitting upon the breasts, what mournings, sighings, and lamentations there were in the families of these miserable and distressed Creatures, who were now reduced to the utmost of extre∣mities; before them were a multitude of violent and roaring waters, on each hand most barbarous and snowy mountains; behinde them, men sevenfold worse than the Egyptians, ready to butcher and de∣stroy them; yet recommending themselves, Souls and Bodies
to Gods protection, they are resolved to undergo the worst of tem∣porary miseries, rather than by denying their Religion,Constancy. to damn their Souls. This their Constancy and Resolution was no small comfort to o∣ther Churches, and a matter of great astonishment to their Perse∣cutors; the rather considering the great advantages they might have purchased by quitting their Religion; as Pardon for all crimes, Liberty if in Prisons, exemption from all manner of Taxes, &c. They were no sooner departed from their houses, but a number of Thieves and Robbers entred them, spoiling and pillaging whatever the people had left behinde them, pulling down their houses, cut∣ing down all their trees, and turning their habitation into a desolate wilderness; of which violence the poor people complained to the Duke, and received from him such an answer, that they apprehended his intentions were not that they should wholly quit their houses till their cause might be heard and judged; in confidence hereof, they sometimes returned to their houses to guard them from these Robbers, and to husband their ground, that so they might have wherewithal to pay their Taxes; yet for this they were bran∣ded with Rebellion, though they had neither taken up arms, nor act∣ed any other hostility, every one living peaceably without giving any cause of offence. Gastaldo having thus driven these poor people from their antient inheritance, without legal citing them, hearing their plea,Popish cruelty or giving them the least time to provide for so sad a flight; their last refuge was to have recourse to the Lord by fervent prayers, and to their Prince by humble supplications; which was done not only by those that were driven from their houses, but by the other Churches of the Reforned Religion, the cause being common to them all. But alas! they found both his and all other his Ministers ears stopped to their wosull crys; neither could they obtain so much as admittance into the presence of his Royal Highness. Amongst other cunning Artifices used by their malicious Adver∣saries to imbitter the spirits of his Highness, and the Dutchess his Mother against these poor Protestants, this was one; John Ressan, President of the Province of Pignorolio, having for many years born a deadly spleen against the popish Priest of Fenile, hired one to assassinate him; and then by his Secretary, he spread it abroad all over the Country that the Protestants were the Authors of the murther, who yet five days before were driven out of Fenile, which report flew far and near, being entertained as an undoubted truth by those Papists who lived far off, encreasing also with carriage, though upon the place the author of this murther was well known, so that by all their re∣ports they were not able to fasten any blemish in the minds of the dead Priests friends and Kindred, nor to hinder them from apprehend∣ing both the Master and his Secretary; by which means the innocency
of the Reformed party was so cleared to the world, that the Marquess of Pionessa, in his Letters, wherein he sought all the devices he could to lay something to their charge, never mentions this for fear of blemish∣ing the credit of all the rest. Shortly after one Berru basely murdered Peter Rovier Consul of Mean; and then fled to Pignorolio, where he was met by the afore∣said Rissan, who was lately returned from Turin, where he had been im∣prisoned for the former murther, and now had his liberty no otherwise than upon good security, because the said Berru and some others had taken their oathes against his Secretary [D. Agot] and himself, for being guilty of the aforementioned assassination; but after some private con∣ferences had between them Rissan, so wrought upon that wretched Berru, by gifts and promises, that he was perswaded to return back with him to Turin, and there not only to retract his former oath, but to swear that he had been sollicited thereto by the two Pastors Leger and Mechelin, as also by Antonio, and Francis Danna, chief Elders of the Church of S. Giovanni; by means of this devilish retractation and ca∣lumnie, Rissan and his Secretary were discharged in the very heat of the War between the Papists and Protestants, so that they had the op∣portunity of forging what lies they pleased against the Protestants, both at Lucerna and Turin, without the least contradiction, which accordingly they did to the purpose; for at Lucerna there were pub∣lished at the same time two personal Citations against the said Leger, Mechelin, and Danna; and as for Berru, he was also at the same time, as a recompence for his perjury, discharged, and set at liberty, though he had been convicted of two murders, the one the afore-mentioned, and the other at S. Giovanni, upon one Giovanni Bertot, a Protestant. After this base action, he came to the said Leger, and many other Pa∣stors of the Valleys,Popish dissi∣mulation. and chief men, and leaning upon his staff, and bemoaning his condition, he protested to them that he could scarce stand upright, by reason of the many blows which he had received from the Papists to force him to forswear himself against the said Leger and the rest; but as he could not in conscience do so wicked an act, so he had withstood them to the utmost; telling them plainly, who so urged him, that he would rather be torn with wilde horses than do it; and that they thereupon seeing his constancy, had beaten him most unmerci∣fully, and then cast him out into the open streets, where he had mi∣serably perished, had not a certain Jew pitied him, and took him up, as he was grovelling on the ground, and ready to give up the ghost. In the mean time the Treaty of Peace being concluded at Pigne∣rolio, Aug. 1655. Mr. Leger and the rest against whom the Process had been made, as against Criminals, staying a while at Pignorolio, chanced to hear of it, and thereupon went presently to the Prefect Rissan, en∣treating him to tell them if it were true that Berru had thus accused them; Rissan made them such a doubtful answer, that they judged it high time to have immediate recourse to the Senator Prerrastino, be∣seeching
him to declare to them the truth of the whole matter, and to ap∣point them a set time and place to make their justification: Hereupon he told them plainly that Berru had accused them for suborning him to swear falsly against De Agot; and his Master; and withal he shew∣ed them a copy of the Citation against the said Leger, and the rest of his Complices, which was to banish them out of the Dukes Domi∣nions, if they did not appear personally at Turin to answer to such in∣terrogatories as should be proposed to them about that business. Upon this Sieur Leger, by the assistance of David Leger, a Minister, handled the matter so, that the said Berru was shortly after apprehended, as he was lurking in the Highways, with a purpose to mur∣ther the said Leger upon the first opportunity. This wretch being thus apprehended, used all the devices imaginable to have got out of their hands; though they assured him, that all that they intended was only to make him verifie what he had already confessed before a full Assembly of their Ministers and others. Leger being assured that Berru was in safe custody, went and declared the whole matter to the Sena∣tor Perichvini, and to Referendano Tarquin, yea and to Rissan himself, who was on a sudden not a little surprised at it; afterwards he told it to the French Ambassador, and to the Ambassadors of the Evan∣gelical Cantons, and with much ado he got leave to bring the said per∣jured person to Pignorolio; where he hoped to obtain leave of coming face to face against him in open Justice, importuning all the Dukes Mi∣nisters of Justice, and the French and Switzers Ambassadors for their intercession, the last whereof openly protested, that in case of refusal, they would complain that Justice was denied them; yet could they prevail no further,Popish inju∣stice. but that there should be a letter written to Turin about it: from whence after a while they had an answer, that nothing could be done in it; and so Leger was fain to content himself, that he and the rest that had been accused were declared as persons altogether innocent, and clearly acquitted from the accusation that Berru had made against them. Upon this and the like feigned accusations, the Deputies of these poor people and their Supplications were miserably rejected at the Court of Savoy: For when they instantly beseeched the chief Mini∣sters of State at Turin, that they might be admitted into the Dukes presence, there to cast themselves at his feet, the Council for extirpa∣ting of Hereticks would not suffer them to have audience of his Highness, and contrary to all equity they usurped the cognisance of this business, which belonged not to them, they being of the adverse party; nay, they were not suffered to come in personally before them to plead their own cause, but were forced to send in their Procurator Gibellino, a Pa∣pist, who, knowing that Excommunication is the certain punishment of all those that any way favored the Hereticks, durst not speak a word till he had fallen down on his knees and begged leave of the Archbishop, who was President of that Council; and the conclusion was, that those of the Valleys were commanded to make no more re∣quests
to his Royal Highness, unless they would send Deputies with procuration, and power to accept and promise all that should be or∣dered them; yet they (like the importunate widow) sent again their Deputies to Turin, with their requests, and with order to en∣deavor to get audience of his Royal Highness; they also, beside other intercessions, instantly requested Madam Royal to have pity on them, and to procure the same for them; they wrote also other Letters to di∣vers Princes of the blood to mediate for them about the same; but all in vain, for they could get no answer from any of them; and the Marquess of Pionessa slighted their supplications, thirsting violent∣ly after the blood of these poor creatures; yet that he might not open∣ly discover the black design of the Council for extirpating of Hereticks,Popish sub∣tilty. before the hour of its execution, he disguised his answers to them in such doubtful terms, that though he gave them but cold comfort, yet he left them not without some glimmering hopes at least of a day of audience for the hearing of their complaints, that so during this in∣terval of time all things might be in a better readiness for the day of slaughter, as you shall hear in the next Chapter. CHAP. XLIV. A Narrative of the bloody cruelties which were ex∣ercised against the Protestants of the Valleys of Piemont during the heat of the late Massacre in April, Anno 1655. UPon Saturday April 17, 1655. whilst the deputies of the Pro∣testants were by the subtilties of Pionessa, detained at Turin, as you heard before, there arrived a great Army at St. Giovanni, which was now, with La Torre, and all the lower parts unpeopled, and in a sad and lamentable condition; this Army continued there for some hours, and in the dusk of the evening fell into La Torre, where they met with none of the Protestants, only about eight or ten persons, not thinking of an enemy, were seeking up and down for something to satisfie their hunger; but so soon as they came near to the Convent they were saluted with a volley of shot, which killed Giovanni Combe, and hurt Peter Rostain, whereupon the rest, seeing the danger fled for their lives. The next day being the Sabbath, the enemy ranged about through the Communalties of La Torre,Popish cruelty and St. Giovanni, plundering and pilla∣ging all before them; and the day after, heir number being encreased, to about Fifteen thousand, they set upon the Protestants in several quarters
amongst the little hills of St. Giovanni, and La Torre. But the poor people, being prompted thereto by the Law of Nature,The Prote∣stants defend themselves. stood up∣on their own defence, and the enemy was vigorously opposed on every side; in one place by Captain Jahier, and in other places by the Officers of St. Giovanni, Angrognia, Roccapiatta; and their Troops. Tuesday April 20. The Popish Army made three several attempts to take away the Bell of St. Giovanni, and to burn the Church; but those of the poor people in arms did so couragiously resist them, that they were driven to a shameful retreat, with the loss of about Fifty of their men; and had not their Cavalry defended the Plain, they had been utterly routed: But of the Protestants party there were onely Two slain, upon whose dead bodies they basely revenged themselves. Wednesday the 21. which was the fatal day to the Protestants, the Marquess of Pianessa held the Deputies of the Valley of Lu∣cerna in parley till noon, and then entertained them with a large Dinner, and sent them away with many fair promises, that there should be no hurt done to any except those of St. Giovanni and La Torre, as being the places specified in the Order of Gastaldo;Popish sub∣tilty. but for the rest, if they would but quarter a few Troops as a token of their obedience, and that but for a short time, they might be fearless of the least inconvenience. Hereupon the Agents of Angrogna bestir∣ed themselves to perswade their own party from making the least re∣sistance; the same did the Agents of Villaro and Bobio: But no sooner were those Troops entred, but they put all to fire and sword, slaying all they met with that had but the likeness of mankind, and that in the most barbarous manner they could possibly devise: As you may see by this extract of a Letter written by some of those poor Prote∣stants, wherein they thus write; The Army having gotten footing, became very numerous by the addition of a multitude of the neighboring inhabi∣tants, who hearing that we were given for a prey to the Plunderers, fell upon us with an impetuous fury: To these were added a great number of Out-laws, Prisoners, and other Offenders, who thought hereby to have saved their souls, and filled their purses: We were forced also to receive five or six Regiments of the French Army, besides some Irish (to whom as it was said, our Country was promised) and several other Troops of High∣way-men, and Vagabonds, under a pretence of coming into the Valleys only for fresh Quarters. The multitude being licensed by Pianessa, encouraged by the Monks, and led by our wicked Neighbors,Barbarous cru∣elty. fell upon us with such violence on every side, and in so treacherous a manner, especially in Angrognia, Villaro and Bobio (to whom Pianessa had plighted his troth, that if they would but quarter one Regiment, they should be secure from all harm) that in a mo∣ment of time all was turned into a confused heap, and the inhabitants constrained after skirmishes that they made in the way, to fiye for their lives, together with their Wives and little children; and that not onely the inhabitants of the Plains, but of the Mountains also, who had other∣wise
been certainly betrayed and surprised. Yet was not all their diligence sufficient to preserve very many of them from destruction; for in many places they were hemmed in on every side, that there was no way left for their flight, but they were most inhumanl massacred. In one place they cruelly tormented One hundred and fity Women and Children, and after∣wards chopped off the heads of some, and dashed out the brains of others against the rocks: Multitudes of Prisoners they took; and such of them from fifteen years of age and upward who refused to go to Mass, they hanged up some, and nailed the feet of others to trees, with their heads hanging downwards, all which they constantly endured. Mr. Gross, one of the Pastors, with some of his Family they sent to Turin: They made such havock of all, that there were neither any Cattel or other Provision left in the Valley of Lucerna; Yea, in the Communalties of St. Gio∣vanni, La Torre, &c. a Franciscan Friar and another Priest set fire on houses and Churches that they left not one of them unburnt. In these desolations the Mother was bereaved of her sweet Childe, the Husband of his dear Wife. Those which were richest amongst us are forced to beg their bread; yea, they are weltring in their own blood, and deprived of all outward comforts; and whereas there were some Churches in St. Mar∣tino, that were always formerly as a Sanctuary to the persecuted, they are now commanded to quit their dwellings, and every soul of them presently to depart without any respite, and that under pain of death. The pretence of these strange Massacres and cruelties are, that we are Rebels to the Duke's commands in not pforming a pure impossibility by immediate departing from our Habitations in Bubiana, Lucerna, Fe∣nile, Bricheras, La Torre, St. Giovanni, and St. Secondo. As also for our frequent petitioning his Royal Highness to take pity upon us. To conclude, Our beautiful and flourishing Churches are left desolate, and that without remedy, unless the Lord work miraculously for us, &c. The truth is, the cruelties which were there excuted would ex∣ceed the belief of any man, were they not so fully proved, by the formal attestations of eye witnesses, by the wofull crys of so many desolate and poor wretches who have been miserably robb'd of their Relations, Houses, Lands, and all other comforts; yea, by the formall oath of one of the chief Commanders of the Army that act∣ed these cruelties, signed with his own hand in the presence of two authentick witnesses, and the voluntary confession of one of the Sol∣diers, who told some of his Comrades that many times, during the heat of the Massacre, he had surfetted with eating the boiled Brains of the Protestants.
The Declaration of Monsieur du Petit Bourg, first Captain of the Regiment of Gransey, subscribed with his own hand at Pignerol, Nov. 27. 1655. in the presence of two other Commanders. I Sieur du Petit Bourg being commanded by Prince Thomas to go, and joyne my self with the Marquesse of Pianessa, who was then at La Torre; upon my departure I was requested by the Ambassador to speak to the Marquesse, and to use my endeavour to accommodate the trou∣bles which were amongst those of the Religion in the Valleys of Pie∣mont, which accordingly I did, entreating him with much earnest∣nesse that he would give way thereunto, and I doubted not but I should be able to effect it: but he refused this my request, and that divers times, notwithstanding all the endeavours I could possibly use to perswade him thereto; and instead of the least mitigation, I was witnesse to ma∣ny great violences, and extreme cruelties exercised by the Bandets, and souldiers of Piemont upon all sorts, of every age, sex, and condition, whom I saw massacred, dismembred, hanged up, burnt, and ravished, together with many horrid confusions, which I beheld with horror and regret: and without any distinction of those that resisted, and such as resisted not, they were used with all sorts of inhumanity, their houses burnt, their goods plundered; and when prisoners were brought before the said Marquesse, I saw him give order to give them no quarter at all, saying, his Highnesse was resolved to have none of the Religion within his Dominions. And whereas in his Declaration he protests that there was no hurt done to any but during the fight, nor the least out∣rage committed upon any persons that were not fit to beare Armes: I will maintaine that it is not so, having seene with my eyes many persons killed in cold blood: as also women, aged persons, and young children, miserably murdered, &c. The attestation of divers persons of honour, and integrity, who were for the most part eye, and eare witnesses of the ensuing barbarous cruelties which were exercised upon diverse members of the Evangeli∣cal Churches in the Valleys of Piemont in the late Massacre 1655. Sarah Rastignole des Vignes, about sixty years of age,Women tipt up. being over∣taken by divers souldiers, was commanded to say her prayers, and when she had done they bade her say Jesus Maria, which the poor wo∣man refusing, one of the souldiers thrust a sickle into the lower part of her belly, and ript her up to the navel, and then dragged the poor crea∣ture upon the ground, being half dead, till another came and cut off her head; the daughter in Law of this poor woman who hid her self in the snow for two dayes after without any succour, was an eye-witnesse hereof. Martha Constantine of Giovanni, after that she had seene several o∣thers most cruelly put to death, was her self, first ravished,Base cruelty. and after∣wards had her Breasts cut off, and part of her Privities by some of the souldiers, who fried them, and set them before some of their Comrades,
making them believe they were Tripes, but when they had eaten a good part, they told them what they were, which caused a quarrel amongst them; and they that had eaten them were so sick, that some of them died soon after. This was certified by a Papist to one Andrea Javel of Ei∣nachia. A man of Thrassaniere being taken prisoner, received divers stabs in the soles of his feet,Horrid cruelty. and in his eares by two of the souldiers, who af∣terwards cut off his privie members, and then applied a burning candle to the wound, frying it with the flame thereof, that so the blood might be stopped, and the torments of that miserable creature prolonged. Then tore they his nailes off with burning pincers to force him to renounce his Religion: But when nothing would do, they tyed one of his legs to a Mule, and dragged him thorow the streets till he was almost dead, and then binding a ord about his head, they twisted it with a staffe till his eyes and braines dropped out, and then cast his carcasse into the River. Peter Simond of Angrogna about eighty years of age, was tyed neck and heeles together, and so violently thrown down a fearful Precipice, but by the way, falling upon a cragged branch of a Tree, he there hung in a most languishing condition for divers days together (a most lamentable spectacle to behold) being neither able to help himself, nor capable of receiving help from others, the Precipice being inaccessible. Esay Garcino of Angrogna, of ninety years old, had first his body cut, and hacked in small pieces, and then his head chopped off. The wife of Daniel Armand of La Torre, had her body torne and cut in pieces, and the parts of it strawed along the high-way, and hung upon the hedges. Captain Pola of Plancalier took two poor women of La Torre, and with his Fauchin ript up their bellies, and left them grovling upon the Snow in this sad and lamentable condition till they died. The souldiers of Bagnols cut off, first the nose, then the fingers, and lastly the hands of a very old, and decrepid woman, and so left her lan∣guishing in this woful condition, not having so much as an hand to feed her self with, till she died. They took also many little children, and tender infants, and flung them down the steep Rocks, whereby they were dashed to pieces. Magdalen Bertino of La Torre they stripped stark-naked, tied her head between her legs, and threw her down one of the Precipices. Mary Reymonde of La Torre, a lame woman, was found in a Cave with all her flesh sliced off from the bones, and chopt as small as herbs to the pot. Magdalen Pilot of Villaro being exceeding decrepit, and blinde with old age, was cut in pieces in a Cave near Castelus. Anna daughter to Giovanni Charboniere of La Torre had a long stake thrust into her privities by some of the souldiers, who each man in his turne carried her upon their shoulders till they were weary, and then stuck the end of the stake into the ground, and so left her hanging in
the aire: A terrible spectacle to every one that passed by. Giovanni Andrea Michialin of La Torre being taken Prisoner, es∣caped miraculously, having first seen three of his children torn in pie∣ces limb from limb before his eyes, and the fourth, being about six weeks old, snatched out of the mothers Arms, stripped of its swad∣ling cloaths, and its brains dashed out against the Rocks. Jacob Perrin, an Elder of the Church of Villaro, and David his brother being taken Prisoners in their Beds, were carried to Lucerna, and cast into the Marquesses Prison, where they were most barbarously and cruelly handled, the bloody Souldiers stripping off the skin on their Arms and Legs, in long slices like leathern points, till the flesh was left quite bare: after which they were miserably starved to death in the same Prison, and their Carcasses left to rot there. Giovanni Pelanchion, a young man about twenty five years old, ha∣ving been taken Prisoner, made an escape; but being taken again by the Souldiers, they tyed one of his Legs to the taile of a Mule, and so dragged him through all the streets of Lucerna; and because the poor wretch sometimes lifted up his hands and head, through pain and an∣guish that he suffered by the grating of his body against the ragged flints, the bloody and mercilesse villains batterd and bruised his bo∣dy with stones and brick-bats, crying, that he was possessed with the Divel which kept him from dying. After which they cut off his pri∣vy members, and crammed them violently down the poor Creatures mouth, and down his throat to stop his breath, and at last chop't off his head, and so drawing him to the Rivers bank, they left him there unburied. Magdalen the daughter of Peter Fontana, a beautiful Girle about ten years old, being taken by some of these lecherous Brutes, because her body was uncapable of being forced in an ordinary way, they tore her in so inhumane a manner, that afterwards she was found half dead, wallowing in her own blood. A poor woman apprehending her danger, having a sucking child in the Cradle, took the child and Cradle upon her head, and fled: some of the Souldiers seeing her, pursued; and she perceiving that she was like to be overtaken, left her Cradle in the way, supposing that those Butchers could not have such hearts of Adamant as to hurt her inno∣cent babe, and so hid her self in the cleft of a Rock not far off: But these hell-hounds finding the Infant in the Cradle, took it out, and tore it in pieces, and afterwards finding the Mother, they first ravished her, and then cut off her head, and left her dead body upon the Snow. At Villa Nova the daughter of Moses Long, about ten years old, as she was slying upon the Snow, some Souldiers of Piemont took her, broached her upon a Pike, and roasted her alive with a fire made upon a broad stone: and after a while they cut off a slice of her flesh, intending to have eated it; but finding it
not well roasted, their stomacks would not serve them to eat it. Jacopo Michelino, one of the chief Elders of the Church of Bobio, being taken Prisoner, had his two hands tyed to his privy members, and so hung upon a Gate in a shameful posture; but the shame was no∣thing to the torments, the whole weight of his body hanging upon so tender a part, which caused most exquisite and almost incredible pain: and this they did to force him to renounce his Religion; but when this prevailed not, they took him down, and carried him away amongst o∣ther Prisoners: And afterwards having with incredible constancy en∣dured a world of other cruelties, he at last exchanged this life for a better. Peter Gros, during the time of his imprisonment, saw two of these poor Protestants of La Sarcena, hanging in a most hideous manner, meerly by their privy members, and their hands tyed behind them, till their very bowels were almost torn out, and so at last they dyed with horrible pain and anguish. Giovanni Rostagnal of Bobio, being eighty years old, had his Nose, Ears, and other parts of his body cut off, and so he was left languishing upon the Snow for a long time, till at last he gave up the Ghost. Daniel Salvagio and his Wife; Giovanni Durant, Daniel Revel, Lodwick and Bartholomew Durant, all brothers, and Paolo Reynaud, being taken by the Souldiers, had their mouths and throats stuffed with Gunpowder, and then setting fire to it, their heads were torn all to pieces. Jacob Di Rone, a Schoolmaster of Roras, being stript stark naked, after they had torn off his Nails with Pincers, and made a thousand holes in his hands with a Daggers Point, they dragged him by a cord fastened about his middle through the Bourge of Lucerna, and at every step he took, one Souldier on one side cut off a piece of his flesh with a Fauchin, and another on the other side gave him a great blow with a staffe, crying, What sayst thou now Barbet? wilt thou go to Masse? To which the poor creature with admirable constancy, as long as he was able to speak, answered, Much rather death than the Masse; dispatch me quickly for the love of God. A while after came a notorious cut-throat, who as soon as he saw him, cryed out, Lo, here is the Mini∣ster of Roras, withal giving him a deadly blow athwart the head with a Back-Sword: From thence they dragged him to the Bridge, and cutting off his head, they threw him into the River of Pelis. Paolo Garnier of Roras being taken by these murderers, they first violently pulled out his eyes, then cut off his privy members, thrusting his yard into his mouth, and in this posture they exposed him to publick scorn for several days together; afterwards in a most inhumane manner they flead him alive, and then cutting his skin in four parts, they hung it in the windows of foure of the principal houses of Lucerna.
Daniel Cardon of Roccappiata being taken by some of the Souldiers, they cut off his head, took out his brains, and frying them in a Pan, eat them up; they cut open his breast also, and were taking out his heart to fry and eat that, but that they were frighted by some of the poor peo∣ples Troops that were coming that way. Margaret Revel of La Cartere, aged eighty five years; Mary Di Pravillerm, aged ninety years, and blind, both of S. Giovanni, were taken, and in a most barbarous manner were both burned alive. Madona Lena, aged eighty years, and blind, and Jeanna Batzan, aged ninety years, both of La Torre, were used in the like cruel manner, and burned A widow of La Torre, who had lain very sick for three years toge∣ther, was taken by some of these bloody villains, together with one of her daughters, and were drawn upon a Carr through the streets of La Torre, and as they passed along, some of these blood-hounds stab∣bed their bodies with Pitchforks, others bruised them with flints and stones, and then they threw them into the River of Angrogna, where they threw stones and bats at them till they dyed. Paolo Giles of La Torre, as he fled for his life, was shot in∣to the neck by one of them, after which they slit his face through the chin and nose, and when they had slain him, they left his carcasse to be eaten by the dogs. Some of these Murderers having taken eleven men at Garcigliana, heated a great Furnace red hot, forced these poor creatures to throw one another into it, and when it came to the last man, they themselves threw him in also. These sons of blood pursued, and hunted out multitudes of these poor Protestants amongst the Rocks and Mountains, by the traces of their bleeding legs and feet, which were cut and mangled with the ice, and flints which they met with in the way, and having found them, basely murdered them. Michel Gonet of Lucernetta, aged ninety years at least, was burnt alive by the Mountains of Bobio, whither he had fled to hide himself. Bartholomew Frasche of Fenile, was taken by the Souldiers, and af∣ter they had slashed and mangled his legs, they thrust a poysoned knife through his heels, and in this woful plight they dragged, and threw him into the common Prison at Turin, where he lay in continual tor∣ment till he dyed. Giovanni Baptista Oudri, an Old man, was cruelly murthe∣red at La Sarcena, after he had been barbarously abused by them. Magdalena La Peire, a woman of about thirty five years of age, being pursued by these Villains, and knowing what measure she should meet with if she fell into their hands, chose rather to throw herself down a dreadfuly Precipice, whereby she dyed. Margeret Revella, aged about eighty five years, together with Marie Di Pravillerm, about ninety years old, and blind, were both burnt alive.
Mary Davi was basely murdered by them. Michel Bellino, with Anna Di Pol Bochiardino, and a servant of theirs, were beheaded. The daughter of Peter Mallonat, a Councellor of Saint Gi∣ovanni, together with her brother, an infant of eight months old in her Arms, were rolled down a steep hill, and two days after they were found dead upon the Snow. One Giovanni, with his wife and child, were hurled down a migh∣ty Rock, the mother holding the child in her Arms, and three days after they were found dead; only the child was alive, and clasped so fast in the dead Mothers Arms, that they had much ado to get it out. Joseph Chiairet, having received a wound in the flight, was flayed alive, and his grease taken out of his body: The like was done to Pao∣lo Carniero. Mattheo Turin was massacred at Lucernetta, and his body devou∣red by dogs. Margeret Saretta was stoned to death, and her dead body cast into the River. Cypriano Bastia was cruelly starved to death, and his body cast to the dogs. Antonio Bertino, had first his nose, paps, and privities cut off, and then his head cleft in twain. Two Children were first murdered, and then burnt to ashes. Joseph Pont was first wounded in his back, and then had his body cut off in the middle. Daniel De Maria being found in a place where he had hid himself, and lay sick, had first two of his children murdered before his eyes, and then himself barbarously slain. Judith, a widow of eighty years old, was dragged up and down up∣on the ground, and at last had her head cut off. Three Infants of Peter Fine were stifled in the Snow. A maid that was an innocent, was first stripped stark na∣ked, and then had a long stake driven through her belly, whereof she dyed. Luce the wife of Peter Besson, being near the time of her lying down, as she fled for her life, was so affrighted with the shreeks of some that were massacred, that she fell in travel upon the Mountains where she was, and afterwards was found dead with the new born infant, and two other sucking children lying by her. Francis, the son of Mr. Gros a Minister, being taken, had his body cut into small Gobbets, whilst he was alive, and that in the presence of his wife; and then they took two of his small children, and most inhu∣manely murdered them. The Sieur Thomas Margher being forced to flye from his house, be∣ing an Elder of La Torre, was miserably starved to death with hunger and cold. Judith Ravelin, with her seven children, were all barbarously mur∣dered in their beds.
Anna, a widow of about seventy five years old, was cut in pieces by the souldiers. The wife of Gaspar Fayol, being taken, was forced to labour hard for them by cutting down the corne, and at last as she was so at work, they came behind her, and cut off her head. Jacob Rosseno refusing to say Jesus Maria, was first cruelly beaten with cudgels, and clubs; and having received several shots in his body, they at last clave his head. Two children, both of them dumb, were most unmercifully mur∣thered. Susanna, the daughter of Polo Giacquin, resisting a souldier that would have ravished her, and by chance pushing him down a rock, was hewed in pieces by others of them. Giovanni Pullius, a poor Pesant of La Torre, being taken by the Souldiers, after all manner of reproaches, and scorns cast upon him by the Friers, and others, in words, and actions, was by the command of the Marquesse of Pionessa dragged by the hangman to a place near the Convent, where the Marquesse commanded the hangman to place the ladder against a tree, and to prepare for his Execution, at which time the Monks, and Priests ceased not to use all the arguments which the De∣vil and their own wicked wits could possibly furnish them with, to shake the Faith, and Constancie of this poor creature; yet could they not prevaile; yea by all his gestures, and expressions he shewed the in∣ward joy of his soul that he was counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ: and though they oft pressed him to remember the sad estate that he should leave his children and family in, yet he alwayes answer∣ed that it was his hearty Prayer to Almighty God that his children might follow their fathers steps, and die like himself: whereupon the Priests seeing all their labour lost, assisted the Hangman to end this poor mans life, and hasted to turn him off the ladder. Sieur Paolo Clement, an Elder of the Church of Rossana, was short∣ly after brought by the Monks and Priests to this same place, and shew∣ed the dead body of the other, thinking thereby to scare him from his Principles, and profession: but he answered them with undaunted cou∣rage, that they might kill the body, but could never be able to prejudice the soul of a true Believer. He told them also that God would assu∣redly avenge the innocent blood that they had spilt: and so having by some ejaculations prepared to resigne up his soul unto God, he desired the Hangman to do his work: three or four dayes after the Marquesse of Pianessa coming that way, one of the souldiers discharged a Mus∣quet at his dead body, whereupon there gushed out a streame of fresh blood, which the Marquesse observing, said to some about him, This blood cries for vengeance: Afterwards they took both these dead bo∣dies, and hung them up naked by one foot neer to La Torre, and when any prisoner of the Protestants passed that way, they forced him or her to go and kisse their Privities, that they might put alike scorne both upon the living and dead: But by reason of the multitude of bullets
that were shot thorow them by the souldiers, they at last fell to pieces. Daniel Rambaut of Villaro, having a numerous family, was taken, nd carried to Paysana with divers others of his Neighbours, where he was cast into prison, and after awhile was importunatly set upon by the Monks, and Masse Priests, both with promises, and threats, to pro∣nounce Jesus Maria; and when they could not prevail, the Tormentors first cut off his fingers one by one, and then his hands, and lastly gave him a deadly wound in the stomack, and then they dragged his carcasse to the Rivers side, and left it to be devoured by Dogs, and wilde Beasts. Peter Chabriolo being taken by the Souldiers, they hung a great quantity of Gunpowder about his body, and then giving fire to it, tore him all to pieces. Antony the sonne of Samuel Calieris, a dumb, and innocent creature, was inhumanly butchered as he was sitting by the fire side. Peter Moninat, and his wife, lying both of them extreme sick, were murthered by the Souldiers, who finding in the same house one of their children a poor infant, lame and impotent, they cut off its legs, and so left it in that miserable plight: they had also another poor girle, who had been dumb from her cradle, which not long after was found starved to death for want of sustenance. Daniel Benech of Villaro was taken by the Souldiers, who cut off his nose, eares, and other parts of his body, till they had slain him, and then they left the mangled pieces upon the hedges, and bushes in the same place. Two of his children were also stifled in the Snow. Mary the Widow of Daniel Pelanchion of Villaro, being taken by the Souldiers, after they had basely abused her, they almost shot her to death, and then threw her into the River: But this poor woman being not quite dead, with much pains, and hard shifts, got out of the River again, hoping to be somewhat revived by the warme Sunne which she laid her down in: but some of these bloody Villains spying her, they fastened a rope to her feet, and dragged her to the Bridge, where they hung her up by the legs, and so shot her to death, afterwards leaving her stark naked upon the Rock. Mary the wife of Daniel Monino was taken by the souldiers, who having broken her jawes in pieces, they gave her a deep cut in the neck, so that her head was halfe off, and so they left her in that languishing condi∣tion, till after extreme torments endured for divers dayes together, she at last yielded up the Ghost. Mary the Widow of David Nigrino (a poor beggar of Villaro) toge∣ther with her daughter who was an Innocent, were both inhumanly massacred in the Village of Bozza, and their dead bodies were thrown into the Woods. Susanna the Widow of Samuel Bals of Villaro, was by the Souldiers basely abused at their pleasure, and afterwards they shut her up between two stone walls, where she was miserably pined to death. Susanna the wife of Jacob Calvio being sorely wounded by the
Souldiers, after which flying into a Barne to hide her self, the Souldi∣ers perceiving it, set fire on the Barne, and burnt her to ashes. A child of Daniel Bertino, who had been dumb, and an Innocent from the womb, was burnt in a Barne at Balmedaut. Paolo Armand, being extreme sick and weak, was by these Barbari∣ans hacked in pieces. Andrea Bertino, a very old, and lame man, had his breasts first cut off, and then was cruelly murthered by these bloody villains, who to testi∣fie their malice against him for his constancie in Religion, after he was dead they cut out his bowels, and with their Halberds hacked his body in pieces. Daniel the sonne of David Michialino, being taken by the Souldiers, after much other cruel usage, had his tongue pulled out with great vio∣lence and torments. Constantia Bellione had her body hacked, and mangled in most parts thereof, and then was shot to death with several bullets in her bowels: and after she was dead they cleft her head with a Hanger. Judith Mondon was beaten to death in a savage manner with clubs and staves. David Paglias, and Paolo Genre endeavouring to fly, each of them having a little infant in his armes, being at last tired, and out of breath, were overtaken by the Souldiers, and both men and infants inhumanly murthered. Micheli Genre, a young man of Bobio, was thrown off the Bridge of La Torre, where, as he was praying with his hands lifted up to heaven, he was partly stoned, and partly drowned. David Armand was knocked, and beaten about the head with an ham∣er till he died. Jacob Baridono, being taken prisoner at Villaro, and from thence car∣ried to La Torre, after the Tormentors had sufficiently, and cruelly af∣flicted him with burning Matches between his fingers, his lips, and o∣ther parts of his body, till with intolerable paine he died, they caused his dead corps to be carried out by two of his fellow-Prisoners, and by them to be thrown into the river Pelice: but thinking that too honora∣ble a burying-place for an Heretick, they forced them to fetch it out a∣gain, and to lay it on the rivers brink, where, after they had exposed the same to all manner of ignominies, it was at last eaten up by Dogs. Margeret the wife of Joseph Garniero,Courage and Constancy. having received a shot in one of her brest, as she was giving suck to her little child with the other, was yet so couragious that with many pathetical expressions she exhorted her husband to endure the Crosse with patience, and to hold out to the end; neither did she desire any favour of the murtherers, but onely that they would spare the life of her innocent Babe: which accordingly they did: but withal gave the mother another shot in her body whereof she died, and afterwards the infant being found alive in the dead mothers armes, was miraculously preserved. Isaiah Mondon having a long time hid himself in the cleft of a rock,
where for many dayes together he had nothing but a few leaves of un∣wholsome Herbs to eat, was at last found out by the Souldiers, and most unmercifully handled by them: and from thence they drave him towards the Town of Lucerna, being almost half dead: at last when the poor creature could march no further, he fell down upon his knees, and beseeched them to dispatch him speedily, which accordingly they did; for partly with their Swords, and partly with their Pistols, they put an end to his miserable life, crying out in a scoffing manner, Kill the Bar∣bet, kill the Barbet, who refuseth to become a Christian. Giovanni Barrolino and his wife were cast alive into a poole, and often plunged, and thrust under the water with staves, and pitchforks, and at last were dispatched with stones and brickbats. Mary Revel receiving a shot in her body, fell down in a manner dead, yet afterwards she recovered so much strength as to get upon her knees, and as she was praying to God, the bloody enemy dispatched her. Giovanni Salvagiot as he was returning from Bagnol, after the peace was concluded, as he passed by a Chappel, because he put not off his hat, and made obeysance thereto, was murthered, and his body left un∣buried. Giovanni Gayo, and divers other men, women, and children hid themselves in a Cave, where for a time they continued in safety: but at last were discovered by some of these Bloodhounds; whereupon they fell upon their knees, and begged their lives of them, most of the mur∣therers having been their neighbours, and familiar acquaintance, and such as had pretended great friendship to them: But the mercy of these men proved extreme cruelty: For the kindest salute they could afford their old acquaintance was with Swords, Musquets, and Pistols: which the poor people perceiving, and not desiring to behold the lamentable misery each of other, they kneeled down in a Ring, and thrust their heads into Ferne, and such like stuffe as they had prepared to lie upon, in which posture they were all miserably shot to death, and their dead bodies afterwards horribly mangled, and cut in pieces. Jacob Barral and his wife having been taken prisoners by the Earle of Saint Secondo, were three or four dayes after carried forth: and ha∣ving first cut off the womans breasts, they shot them to death. Antony Guiguo went to Periero with a purpose to change his Reli∣gion; but it pleased God so to touch his heart, that he repented of the resolution, and sought to make an escape: But as he was flying, some Troops of the Marquesse of Galeas caught him, and used him most cruelly because he would not yield to go to Masse: and as they carried him prisoner towards Praly, passing by a Precipice, the poor man to avoid his tormentors, leaped down from the Rock, and so was dash∣ed in pieces. Very many others there were which might here have been inserted, whereof some were drowned, some burnt, some slaine with the sword, some shot to death, some starved, some smothered in the Snow, some
pined, some killed with staves, some cut in pieces: but I am weary with reckoning up their names, and I suppose the Reader also is tired with these cruelties: yet are their names written in red letters in the Kalen∣der of Heaven, though their Popish adversaries would have them writ∣ten in the dust: and whosoever desires to see more, may finde a larger Catalogue in Master Moorlands History of the Peresecutions in the Val∣leys of Piemont. CHAP. XLV. A true Narrative of the War in the Valleys of Pie∣mont between the Popish, and Protestant party upon the occasion of the Massacre. IN the former Chapter you have a faithful Narration of what cruel∣ties were exercised against the Reformed party in the Valleys of Pie∣mont from the first arrival of, the Marquesse of Pianessa's forces at St. Giovanni, which was April 17. 1655. to the 21. of the same: by which time they had made such havock of the poor people, that there was now onely the little Communalty of Roras which was left entire, and untouched: But that they also might in all things be made like unto their suffering brethren of the other Churches, and that it might ap∣pear that the destruction was designed to be universal, the Earle of Christophle upon that very day, being April 21. sent three hundred Souldiers secretly by the way of Villaro, to surprize them of Roras, and to put them all to the sword: This party being got upon a little hill called Rumer, belonging to Roras, it pleased God that they were met with by some Souldiers belonging to Captaine Joshua Gianavel (whom God raised up at that time as a choice Instrument for the preservation of the poor scattered remnant of his people). These Souldiers being but seven or eight of them, yet having been beforehand placed in am∣buscado at a convenient Post to prevent the inrode of the enemy, they fired upon them, and plyed them so hard, that many of them were kil∣led upon the place, and the rest, supposing by the great number of bul∣lets that flew about their eares, that the men in Ambuscado were sixe times more in number than indeed they were, they fled back in great disorder, and confusion: which the others perceiving, they fell upon their Rear, and chased them at least three quarters of a League amongst the Rocks, and Woods, doing notable execution upon them in their flight. The Members of this little Church of Roras, to take away all occa∣sions of exceptions, presented their complaints to the Marquesse of Pi∣anessa, who, that he might have the better opportunity to deceive, and
surprize them, answered, that those of his Souldiers that went to Ro∣ras,Popish subtil∣ty and perfidi∣ousnesse. were but Thieves, Robbers, and Out-lawes, that herein had whol∣ly disobeyed his Orders; adding that they had done him a singular fa∣vour in driving them out of their Countrey; and that he would take a course to prevent their being disturbed for the future: and hereupon he published an Order whereby he straightly charged his Souldiers, not to give them any further causes of complaints, nor to molest them in any kind hereafter. Yet perfidiously, the very next day he sent a party of five hundred chosen men to put his first bloody designe in execution. As these men were passing over a little hill of Roras, they were so sa∣luted by eleven Musqueteers of the Protestants,A special Pro∣vidence. and six men with slings under the conduct of Captaine Gianavel, who had divided them into three Squadrons, that the enemy was soone put to flight: and this poor handful of despicable men pursued them for an whole League, slaying a very great number of them, without the losse or hurt of any one of themseves, which shews the admirable Providence of God in preserving, and prospering those that fight his battels. The Marquesse of Pianessa, though he had failed this second, yet was resolved to make a third attempt; and still to deceive them, he made new promises, and protestations that no injury in the world should be offered them, and that in regard of the Intercession of the Earle of Christophle, their Lord and Patron, he would protect, and defend them; yet the very morrow after he sent a party of seven hundred men, who first seized upon, and secured all the passes, that none might escape their bloody hands, and then most barbarously burnt, and destroyed whatsoever they met with thorow all the Communalty of Roras. Hereupon seventeen housekeepers, whose hearts God had marve∣lously strengthened, and encouraged for their poor Brethrens preser∣vation, seeing what they must expect, and that nothing but death, and destruction waited for them, unlesse some admirable providence pre∣vented it: as also calling to mind those signal deliverances which God had vouchsafed to his ancient people of the Jewes in their greatest straits: they unanimously resolved to cast themselves with their lives, and estates into the hands of the same God, resting upon his gracious promises, and freely submitting to his good will and pleasure for the issue of their undertaking. The Captaine of this valiant party was the aforesaid Gianavel, who marching up with this little Band, suddenly surprized, and dexterously carried away their Court of Guard with their Centinel from off a little hill where they were placed: At which bold attempt, the enemy being not a little amazed, withdrew from the place where they were, resolving to march thorow a little meadow, and so to get to Villaro or La Torre: But being not nimble enough, the o∣thers met with them at Piampra, and there slew many of them, with∣out the losse of any one of their own, and took from them all the Cat∣tel, and other things which they had plundered from the neighbouring places. Pianessa seeing all his designes thus frustrated, and that his specious
promises were but as so many watchwords to bid these poor people to stand upon their guard; he speedily sent to all those of Lucerna, Bubbia∣na, Barges, Bagnol, Famolas, Cavors, and the adjacent places, who wete able to bear arms, to come and joyn with a good part of his own Army, to environ these poor people on every side. But God, who infatuates mens Counsels as he pleaseth, though the time of their Rendezvouse was punctually assigned them, yet they came two hours too late; all except the Troop of Bagnol, which was conducted by one Mario, a notorious persecutor, and an inveterate Enemy to the Reformed Churches: This Mario with his ragged Regiment of Theives, Outlaws, and a great number of Irish Rebels, assaulted this poor people on the upper and lower part of the Canton of Ru∣mer, who were not about Seventeen in number; yet the Lord was pleased so to encourage them, that they presently gat upon the top of the mountain, and there after a long skirmish forced their ene∣mies, though full of fury and malice, yet to give back, and to flie as far as the Cliff called Pairo Capello; in which fight and pur∣suit they killed above Sixty of them, and wounded many more, and many of them being laden with plunder, as they fled a∣mongst the Precipices of the Rocks, fell down, and were dashed in pieces. Those of them that were lighter, and nimbler, gat safe to Pairo Capello; but when they came there they found greater difficul∣ties to contest with than before; for being closly pursued and com∣passed in on every side, they were forced to take the Ropes where∣with they had bund up their plunder, and tying them to shrubs, to slide down the Rocks by them, and to fall into the River that ran below; but by reason of the violence of the torrent, and the great confusion that was amonst them, one falling on the neck of another, and such as could not swim, catching hold of them that could, the greatest part of them were there drowned. Captain Mario also a∣mongst the rest threw himself into the River, and had not several of the Souldiers that could swim excellent well, ventured their lives to fetch him out, he had gone with the rest to receive present pay from the Devil. This Captain Mario, having thus escaped,Gods Judge∣ments on per∣secutors. was carried to Lucer∣na in his shirt, without either Hat or Shoos, as a man at his wits end; and shortly after he fell into a desperate disease, whereof he died: But before his death he oft cried out in a most despairing man∣ner, that he felt a grievous burning in his bowels, as a just Judge∣ment upon him for having burnt so many innocent persons, and their habitations. The Protestants after this gallant action, being somewhat weary with their hard service, as they were marching back to refresh them∣selves, they spied another company of Murtherers coming from Vil∣laro, whereupon forgetting their weariness, they placed themselves in Ambuscado: when the Enemy drew near the place, they perceived some of them; but not being able by their colours to discern of
what party they were, they called to them for THE WORD; the Protestants answered not, but beckned to them to come nearer, which they did in a careless posture, supposing them to be friends, and when they came near, the others suddenly discharged upon them, and slew many of them upon the place, and the rest they pursued near to La Torre, and Villaro. After which signal Victory, Captain Gianavel rallied his men upon an high ground not far off, and in the very sight of his enemies, he caused them to kneel down, and with a loud voyce to give thanks unto the Lord for this very great mercy in their deliverance. Three days after, the Marquess of Pianessa, being highly incensed by this success of the Protestants, sent to the people of Roras, ex∣presly charging them to change their Religion, within the space of Twenty four hours, and that upon pain of death, and of having their houses burnt to the ground: To which they answered, That they would much rather chuse death, than to obey any such Order. The Marquess vexed at their resolute answer, presently dispatched away Eight thousand men, besides the Militia Forces of the neighboring Commonalties; who according to his order were divided into three Squadrons, the one to set upon the poor people on the side of Villa∣ro, the other upon the Mountains of Bagnol, and the third on that part which looks toward Lucerna; which accordingly they did, not only murthering man, woman and childe, but exercising all manner of cruelties upon them, taking much pleasure (like bloody villains) in torturing those poor creatures, and in tossing their little Infants from off their Pikes and Halberts, and dashing their brains against the Rocks, whose cryes would have melted an heart of Adamant, but theirs were harder; the number thus taken and slain was about One hundred twenty six, the rest almost miraculously escaped their bloody hands. Having thus shewn their valour upon naked men, women and in∣fants, and being glutted with the prey that they found in the Country, they turned their houses into ashes; and such as survived they sent priso∣ners to Turin, amongst whom was the Wife and Children of Captain Gianavel, and so they marched back to Lucerna with great joy and acclamations. Shortly after Pianessa wrote to Captain Gianavel promising him great preferment if he would change his Religion; Otherwise, threatning that his Wife and Children should be burnt: He also pro∣mised a great sum of money to any that should bring him the said Gianavel either alive or dead. To this Captain Gianavel presently answered, That there was no torment so violent, nor death so cruel, that he did not much prefer before the abjuration of his Religion; and that all these promises and threats did but the more fortifie him and streng∣then his Faith: And for his Wife and Children, he told the Marquess that though he had gotten them into his power, yet he could but kill their Bodies; And as for their Souls, he recommended them, together with his
own into the hands of God, in case it so happened that he should fall in∣to his power. This Captain Gianavel having gotten together a small party of men upon part of the Alps called La Pellas des Jamies, May 22. went out in the evening to a place about three leagues off, not far from Bubiana, where he first sought God by prayer, and afterwards being informed of the number and strength of the enemy, finding them too many to be attachqued by such a handful of men, he turned towards Lucernetta, where he was furiously assaulted by the Garison of Lucerna, but he couragiously encountred them without the loss of any one man, only himself was shot into the leg, by a Soul∣dier that had hid himself behinde a tree, with a purpose to have slain him; but the Captain perceiving whence the shot came, lame as he was, he made to the place, where he quickly dispatched him for his pains. Whilst these things were acting, the Irish Rebels in the Mar∣quesses Army, thinking to make themselves Masters of Babbiana, under a pretence of protecting them against the Barbets, the Pea∣sants of the place perceiving their drift, took occasion to quar∣rel with them, and after drove them out, killing a great number of them. May the 26. 1655. Captain Gianavel wrote to Captain Jahier and the rest that were retired into Val Lucerna, to meet at a Rendez∣vouz at Angrognia, which accordingly they did, and the day after they marched together to a place in the Plain called Garcigliana, thinking to have entred the Town; but they met with a great party of Horse and Foot, yet they disputed it with them a long time, but being o∣verpowred, they were forced to retreat; though they got six yoke of Oxen, and many other small Cattel, and some prisoners, and that with the loss of one only man in the retreat. May 28. They marched to St. Secondo, where, having first kneel∣ed down, and prayed for a blessing upon their undertaking, encou∣raging one another, they attaqued the place with incredible valor; and the better to secure themselves against their enemies, who had lodged and fortified themselves in houses, they got Planks, Barrels, and such other things as they met with to keep off the bullets, which were poured out upon them out of those houses, and so quick∣ly made themselves Masters of the doors of those houses, to which immediately they set fire, and so forced their entrance, putting all the Souldiers they found to the sword; and no marvel; for they had been extreamly provoked to this rigour by the others cruel usage of their Wives and Children: Besides every room of those Houses was filled with the plundered goods of the Protestants; yet did they not meddle either with Women or Children. Then did they set fire on the Town, and plundred the Churches, which they found full of their own goods and cattel, and carried away seven of their Mass-Bells.
Many Irish slaine.At this time they slew about four hundred and fifty of their enemies, and amongst others a whole company of Irish Rebels, who chose ra∣ther to be burnt than to crave Quarter. Of the Protestants there were only seven slaine, and six or seven more slightly wounded, whereof they soon recovered. Munday June the fourth, the Captaines Jahier, Laurentio, Giana∣vel, Genolat, Benet, and other officers of the Protestants went to Angrog∣nia, and having called a Councel of warre, they concluded the next day to alarum the enemy at Briqueras, and Saint Giovanni: and accordingly the Captaines Laurentio and Jahier went by the way of Reccapiatta, that by the help of the thick woods wherein they shrouded themselves, they might the better approach Briqueras, and having gotten upon a little hill near the Town, Captaine Laurentio made there a stand to hin∣der any relief that might be sent them from Saint Secondo, and Captaine Jahier marching down, set fire on several Houses and Barnes. At the sight of this fire, they of Briqueras gave notice to those of Cavors, Fenile, Bubiana, Campiglione, and other neighbouring places, whereupon the enemy quickly advanced towards them, and were as soone beaten back again: in the mean time there came a party of about twenty Horse and stood at Saint Secondo, lest the Reformed party should Salley out that way, really believing that they had a designe upon Bri∣queras: But Captaine Jahier marched with his company by the way of Saint Giovanni, and Captaine Laurentio went an higher way, yet both met at the place appointed, where Captaine Gianavel was enga∣ged with the Enemies from Lucerna, and La Torre, against whom he had defended himself very stoutly: Then did Captaine Jahier charge them on the Flanck, and Captaine Laurentio on the Front, seasonably in∣terposing his company in that place where the enemy had thought to have surrounded Captaine Gianavel, so that the Popish party was soone routed, leanving one hundred men behinde them, besides many that were wounded, the Reformed party having but one slaine upon the place. June the second, three hundred of the Enemies went from La Torre to fetch a Convoy into the Fort of Mirebuc, situate between the Fron∣tires of Dauphine, and Piemont: But Captaine Gianavel being at Mal∣bec, though he had but nine souldiers with him, fell upon them, and fought a great while with them to the great astonishment of his Ene∣mies: but at last was forced to retreat without the losse of a man, only four were slightly wounded. Afterwards Captaine Gianavel with a small party marched to La Palle des Guienets, from whence he sent to some that were retired into Villora, requiring that all those of the Reformed Religion should with∣in twenty four hours come out of the said place where Masse was cele∣brated, and that upon the paine of being dealt with as enemies, and that such as through weaknesse had abjured, and would persist in their abjuration, should depart thence upon the same penalty. Hereupon all the Papists fled presently out of Villaro, and the Protestants came in to
Captaine Gianavel, and such of them as were able to bear Armes fol∣lowed him chearfully: the rest contributed according to their abilities towards the maintenance of him, and his Troops. Those which through frailty had abjured their Religion went over the Mountain in∣to the Valley of Queires; yet not long after they returned like so ma∣ny wandring Sheep to the true Shepherd of their souls, and testi∣fying their repentance, were again received into the bosome of the Church. After those of Lucerna were retreated, the Captaines Jahier, and Gianavel, with some other Officers called a Councel of Warre, where∣in they resolved to sally out, and if it were possible, to surprise those of La Torre, most of which were Irish. But the enemie having time∣ly notice, was so prepared, that they killed some who had passed the Bridge at Angrognia, which so encouraged them that they thought to have enclosed all the small body of Protestants, and to have cut them all off: but after many assaults to no purpose, they were forced to re∣treat to La Torre with the losse of very many of their Souldiers, besides many others that were dangerously wounded. The next day the Captains, Jahier, and Gianavel went before La Torre, against whom many of the Souldiers came out; but not sallying forth in a full body, they were all slain upon the place, which their Cap∣tains seeing, they thought fit to send out no more: whereupon the Pro∣testants retreated towards Angrognia, to a place called La Verne, where a few houses were yet left unburnt. The next day was spent in the review of their Army, and holding a Councel of warre, where they resolved to send a party against the Communalty of Crusol, the inhabitants whereof had made Incursions upon them, and committed many Outrages in the beginning of the Massacre: and accordingly they marched all night, being four hundred ninety and five men, and passing by La Torre undiscovered, a little af∣ter midnight they arrived at Crusol, where they took four hundred head of Cattel, six hundred sheep and Goats, with much other booty, and that without the least resistance: For the Inhabitants of Crusol, being terribly affrighted, had cast themselves into the mouth of a most fearful Rock, whence they could not be gotten out: and so the Protestants re∣turned over one of the Alps of Villaro, where arriving the next day to∣wards evening, they divided the spoil amongst the Souldiers. Presently after their departure the enemy from Lucerna, Cavors, Briqueras, and other places to the number of eight hundred, having heard of their designe against Crusol, marched to their relief: but find∣ing that they were gone too farre to be overtaken, they resolved not to lose their labours, and so fell a plundering the poor people (though their friends) much worse than the Protestants had done, and afterwards falling out amongst themselves about dividing the spoil, they destroy∣ed one another instead of doing hurt to the Reformed party. The very same day that this enterprize was against Crusol, the ene∣my at Saint Secondo advanced to burn the rest of the houses at Roccapi∣atta,
and being advanced as farre as to the little hill of Angrognia, they thought to have surprized the rest of the forces left under the com∣mand of Captaine Laurentio, and Captaine Jahiers brother: But they having timely intelligence of it, marched presently to the top of the Mountain with one half of the Souldery, leaving the other halfe un∣der the command of Captaine Bennet of Saint Germano, who also with all possible expedition, took his Post upon the said little hill with se∣venteen of his men, and placed the rest in Ambuscado. But the ene∣mies hearts misgiving them, they shamefully retreated, at which time they took one Giovanni Pietro Ragio as he was coming from Pinachia, and binding his head with a cord, they strained it with such violence, that they made it sink into his brains, and so they sent him to Turin, where he ended his dayes shortly after by a languishing, and miserable death. Eight dayes after, Captaine Gianavel, having waited three whole dayes at Angrognia for the coming of Captaine Jahier, that with joint forces they might assault the Town of Lucerna, when he came not, he resolved to assault it himself, and so marching all night, he arrived at Lucerna by break of day. His first work was to cut off the Pipes that conveyed water into the Town, and brak down the Bridge that no relief might come to them from Bubiana, Barges, and Bagnol: then did he assault the Town, and quickly defeated two of the out-guards: but the Regiment of Monsieur de Merolles, and divers others being got in∣to the Town the night before, he was constrained to give over the en∣terprize, and to retreat, whereas if Captaine Jahier had come in time, and joyned with him, probably they had carried the place, June the eighth, Captaine Gianavel being left alone at Angrognia only with his own Company, and some few others, was assaulted early in the morning by the Souldiers of La Torre and others, one part of them getting upon the top of the Mountain, and the other part go∣ing the lower passage to possess themselves of the Gate of Angrognia by the way of Saint Bartholomew, intending suddenly to fall upon Cap∣taine Gianavel and his small company, having already devoured them in their hopes: But it pleased God that at the sound of the Trumpet, when all should have fallen on, Captaine Gianavel soone awaked, and having first sought unto God by prayer,A special Pro∣vidence. he fell upon the enemy, and gat the advantage of the place from them, and after a short Dispute, forced them to turne their backs, though there were at least two thousand five hundred of them, and all the Captaines company was not above three hundred, yet did that handful of men pursue them as farre as to the descent of Angrognia, into the Woods, and steep places of the Rocks, where they slew a very great number of them. Captaine Gianavel seeing it impossible to think of any further at∣tempt for the present, entreated Captaine Jahier to give over for that day, and to refresh himself and his Souldiers: but he being at that time more passionate than prudent, refused his good counsel, and picking out one hundred and fifty choice men, sweetly took his leave of Cap∣tain
Gianavel (little thinking that it should be his last) and so marched down into the plaine, where he burnt several of their Houses who had formerly burnt, and destroyed so many of the Protestants, bringing away with him a good Booty of Cattel, and other Goods. This valiant Captaine who hitherto had been so successeful in all his attempts,His Charactea thinking in the close of the day to Crowne all his former un∣dertakings, as he was now near the execution of his Designe, Lo a Squadron of Horse surrounded him and his fourty five men (for at this time he had no more with him) at a Countrey house, not farre from Ossac: and though he and his men did all that could possibly be expect∣ed from them, killing three Captains, with the Commander in chief of that Squadron, besides many others, yet he at last and thirty five of his followers, all lost their lives; and the enemies in great Triumph, cut off Captaine Jahiers head, and the heads of his sons, and carried them to Turin, presenting them to the Duke and his Mother, who rewarded them with six hundred Ducatoons for their good service therein. Captaine Jahier deserves to be renowned, especially for his great piety, and zeale for the service and honour of God, and the preserva∣tion of his poor afflicted Church and Members. He was of so un∣daunted a spirit, that the terrors of death, and the most cruel torments could never affright him. He was bold as a Lion in his enterprizes, but meek, and humble as a Lamb in the middest of his Victories, al∣wayes lifting up his hands towards Heaven, from whence he acknow∣ledged all his help to come, and alwayes recited fit and comfortable passages out of the Scriptures (wherein he was admirably versed) for the encouragement of all his followers, and the strenthening of their faith upon all occasions. As to his outward parts, and accomplish∣ments, he was a man of a sound understanding, and good judgement, and above all, of a wonderful active spirit, which had he but used with mo∣deration, he had been hardly to have been paralleld. The death of so brave a Commander, and the wound of Captaine Gianavel, in that juncture of time did not a little startle the Protestants:A special Providence. But necessity often puts inconsiderable men upon bold enterprizes: for these poor men did not despond, nor lose their courage, but assembling shortly after in a Mountaine of Angrognia, they descended into the plaine, where twice they were assaulted with violence, the last of which was by a dangeros Ambuscado, where the enemies were at least six thou∣sand, and they not above one hundred: But God of his infinite good∣nesse so encouraged their hearts, and guided their hands, that they slew very many of their enemies, and amongst them many principal Offi∣cers, whereas the Reformed party lost onely one Michael Bertino, a Ser∣jeant of Angrognia, and had but one common souldier wounded. The sonne of the said Bertino seeing his father fall dead at his feet, was so farre from being discouraged, that he immediately stepped into his fa∣thers place with these words, Though my father be dead, yet be of good courage my fellow souldiers, for God is a father to us all.
Munday following they had a very sharp dispute at La Torre, and about Tagliaretto, where they killed and wounded a great number of their e∣nemies, without the losse of any of their own men. Indeed in this time the enemies reaped their Corne in the plaines of Saint Giovanni, but they could not carry it away but with the losse of many of their lives. About the same time there came to them one Monsieur Andrion, a Major of a Regiment of Horse, with two other Gentlemen that were strangers, who were followed with some Volunteers, whose friendly vi∣sit of their poor afflicted Brethren, and their good advice in such a juncture of time, was taken (as it deserved) very kindly: and God made it a singular means to uphold the fainting spirits of some weak Bre∣thren, who seeing others come in to the help of the Lord against the Mighty, went on with a great deale more chearfulnesse, and ala∣crity: and these staid with them till the peace was concluded at Pignerl. July the eleventh 1655. Sieur John Leger, Pastor of the Church at Saint Giovanni, who deserves to be remembred for the great paines, and many services performed by him in the behalf of the Churches of the Valleys, having notice that the enemies were of opinion that he was come back from his journey with Armes and Money, and Ammu∣nition, and thereupon presuming that they would suddenly make some notable attempt to prevent what they so much feared, he went to Co∣lonel Andrion, and pressed him to put his designe in execution. The poor people had as yet no standing Army: but the Bands of each Commonalty were quartered at a great distance the one from the other; and certainly they had been cut off every man of them with∣in a few dayes, had not their Centinels been very watchful; and a∣bove all, if Captaine Charforan had not on the one side timely disco∣vered the enemy, an the poor people on the other side been exceed∣ingly heartned to the Battel by the great valour, and singular conduct of the Sieurs Andrion, Michelin, and Leger. The Enemy was very numerous, having been lately reinforced with many Troops. They encamped themselves within half a League of the Reformed party, and early in the morning they divided themselves into four Brigades, three whereof fell upon the Protestants with a mar∣velous Resolution in three several places at once: the fourth stood still, ready to succour their friends if there were need. The fight continu∣ed at least four hours without intermission, and was the sharpest that ever was fought in the open field: and that which made the enemies more fierce, was, their hopes to have beaten back the Protestants from their Post called the Castelas, which if they could have effected, they had been certainly Masters of the Valleys Perosa, Saint Martino, and Lucerna: But the poor people having lifted up their hearts by earnest supplications to the Lord of Hosts (as they used to do upon all such oc∣casions) Major Andrion, and the two other Captaines which he had brought with him, gave forth such orders as were necessary, encoura∣ging
their men exceedingly, so that without budging a foot, they kept their ground, all save a few who were either quite tired, or faint for want of food, or that wanted powder, or flints in their fire-locks: But these, the Sieurs Mechelin and Leger imployed in rolling down great stones upon their enemies heads as they came to attacque them, which proved ve∣ry successeful, doing much execution upon the enemy, and causing them to abate much of their fury; and whereas in the beginning of the fight they cryed alwayes, Advance, Advance, ye relicts of Jahier: the Protestants now began to cry as fast, Advance, Advance, ye relicts of Saint Secondo, and withal they ran upon those murtherers as so ma∣ny Lions, and caused them to turn back, and flie towards La Torre and Lucerna as fast as they were able, leaving behinde them fifty five upon the place, and about fourty that were killed in the flight, besides ma∣ny others who were carried either dead, or dangerously wounded, to Lucerna. Themselves confessed that in this encounter they lost at least three hundred men, amongst which were many Officers of a Bavarian Regiment. When such multitudes of dead, wounded, and dying men were brought into Lucerna, the Syndick, who was indeed a Papist, but not so superstitious as many others, said to some, Hitherto the Wolves de∣voured the Barbets: But now the Barbets devour the Wolves; which words being reported to Monsieur Marolles, the Commander in chief in Lucerna, he threatened to imprison him, and to give him the Strap∣pado for them, which so terrified the poor man, that he presently sick∣ened, and within a few dayes died. Two dayes after this great fight, the enemy being much enraged for their great losse, spread themselves all over Angrognia, and began to set the Corne on fire, which being seene by the Company of La Torre, who at that time were upon the Mountaine of Tagliaretto, they speedi∣ly gave notice to those of Saint Giovanni, and Angrognia, who hasted thither, and charged them so fiercely, that they forced them to flie, and to leave most of their Ammunition behinde them: and in the meane time Captaine Belin assaulted the Towne of La Torre, killed the Cen∣tinel, and souldiers upon the works, and gave the Towne such an hot Alarum, that most of them fled towards the River of Pellice; and pro∣bably if he had had a few more men with him, he had at that time made himself Master of La Torre. July the eighteenth, the General of the Protestants gave Order to fall upon the Towne of La Torre, which accordingly was put in exe∣cution. Captaine Belin gave the first onset, who being followed with many other Officers, and Souldiers, they quickly made a considerable breach in the Garden-wall next to the Convent, which so encouraged the rest, that they fell on with an invincible resolution, and in a short space burnt both the Convent, and most of the Towne down to the ground. Those in the Fort finding themselves hardly beset, began to Parley about surrendring of it upon honorable termes: But some horse coming seasonably to their relief from Lucerna, which the Protestants
might have prevented if they had been so careful as they should have been, they were frustrated of attaining their desires. Besides these, there were divers other battels fought in divers places where the Reformed party had considerable advantages against their e∣nemies, but for brevity sake they are here omitted. CHAP. XLVI. A brief account of the Intercessors to the Duke of Savoy in the behalf of these poor people, and the successe therof. UPon the first supplication of that terrible Order of Gastaldo, which was a forerunner of the Massacre, the Protestant Cantons of Switzer∣land, being their near neighbours, and therefore could soonest take notice of it, wrote their Letters to the Duke of Savoy in the poor peo∣ples behalf. To which the Duke of Savoy shortly after gave a com∣plemental, but cold answer, which was little better than a plaine deni∣al of their request, and mediation. April the 29. being the Lords day, newes of the horrible Massa∣cre was brought to the Council of Zurick, who immediately gave Or∣der for a Publick day of Humiliation through all their Territories, as also for making a Collection for their relief: resolving to give notice of this doleful newes to their Protestant friends; and amongst others, they wrote to the States General of the united Provinces, acquainting them with the sad condition of this poor people, intreating them to consider of some expedient for the accommodating their affairs. May the fifth they sent Monsieur Gabriel Weis, Captaine Gene∣ral of Berne as their Deputy to the Duke of Savoy, who in very re∣spectful termes requested him to re-establish those who had survived the Massacre in their ancient priviledges, the free exercise of their Reli∣gion, and for the enlargement of their Prisoners, delivering him a let∣ter to the same purpose. The answer which the Duke (or rather his Mother) gave, was, that though they were not obliged to give an ac∣count of their actions to any Prince in the world, yet out of respect to the amity which they had compacted with his Masters the Cantons, they had given order to the Marquesse of Pianessa to acquaint them with the truth of those affairs: and shortly after when Major Weis spake with the Marquesse, he laboured to justifie all his proceedings, and to lay the load upon the backs of the poor people, protesting that he never intended to force their Consciences, and that all the reports about such strange cruelties exercised towards them were meer forgeries, &c. Major Weis replyed that the Massacre was so notorious, that it could not be denied, and that their right of habitation in those places was founded upon Justice, being granted to them by the Dukes Predeces∣sors,
and purchased by them of the present Duke for six thousand Du∣catoons. The Marquesse answered that all those Grants were upon con∣dition that the Romish Religion should be freely exercised amongst them, which yet they would never suffer. Master Weis still pres∣sing their sad condition, and the necessity of finding an expedient for accommodation, &c. the Marquesse desired him to apply himself to the poor people, and to cause them to desist from Hostility, which would be the way to obtaine favour from the Duke: and no marvel though he moved this: For about this time (through Gods mighty as∣sistance) these poor people began so to prevaile, that their enemies began to fear what the successe might be, and therefore the Marquess laboured to get the sword out of their hands by such a stratagem as this. Major Weis went to Perosa, propounding these things to the poor people: who returned humble thanks to the Cantons for what they had already done in their behalf; and said, that if the six Evangelical Cantons would engage that the Treaty should be carried on upon honest and ho∣norable termes, they were ready to hearken to it; Otherwise they were resolved never to trust those who had so oft deceived them, and whose principle was, that Faith is not to be kept with Hereticks. With this answer Master Weis returned, and sued for the enlarge∣ment of the Prisoners, or that at least he might be suffered to speak with them: but neither the one nor other would be granted; whereup∣on he returned to his Masters, and upon his report to them, being dis∣couraged from any farther proceedings, they resolved to expect what would be done by other Princes, and States. May 1655. Letters were brought to Oliver Lord Protector of En∣land of this doleful newes, whereupon he invited all the people of En∣gland to seek the Lord by Humiliation, and Prayer, and withal, mo∣ved them to a liberal Contribution for the succour of these poor souls. He sent also Master Samuel Morland as his Envoy to the King of France, and Duke of Savoy to meditate on their behalf. He wrote also to the King of Denmark, to the States of the United Provinces, and to the Evangelical Cantons of the Switzers, requesting all their Mediations in the behalf of these poor people. May the twenty sixth 1655, Master Morland set out on his journy, and June the first he came to the King of France at La Fere, to whom he delivered the Lord Protectors Letters, wherein he solicited his Maje∣sty to improve his power, and interest with the Duke, that the cruel Order of Gastaldo might be recalled, and the poor people restored to their ancient liberties, and habitations. The King of France three dayes after returned an answer to the Lord Protectors Letter, and Ma∣ster Morland proceeded in his journey to the Court of Savoy, and arri∣ved at Rivole, where the Court was, June the 21. and demanded au∣dience as the Lord Protectors Envoy, which accordingly was granted: and at his appearing he made a speech in the behalf of the poor people, and delivered the Lord Protectors Letter.
Madam Royal, the Dukes Mother answered, That she could not but extremely applaud the singular charity of his Highnesse the Lord Protector towards their Subjects, whose condition had been presented to him so exceeding sad, and lmentable, as she perceived by Master Morlnds discourse it was; yet withal she could not but extremely ad∣mire that malice should proceed so far as to clothe their fatherlike chastisements of their rebellious Subjects with so black a character, thereby to render them odious to all their neighbouring Princes, and States with whom they desired to keep a good understanding, especi∣ally with so great and powerful a Prince as the Lord Protector. Ad∣ding that she doubted not but when the truth of all passages should be made known to him, he would rest satisfied with the Dukes proceed∣ings. Yet for his Highnesse sake they would pardon their rebelli∣ous Subjects, and grant them such priviledges, and graces, as should shew to the Lord Protector how great a respect they bore both to his person, and Mediation: And withall Master Morland was requested to go to Turin, where by the Dukes Order he was entertained with all outward demonstrations of Civility, and respect imaginable during his abode there. Master Morland after a while pressed for his dispatch, and had it, and so according to the Lord Protectors Order he went to Geneva. There was Collected in England, and Wales towards the relief of these poor souls the full summe of thirty eight thousand, ninety seven pounds, seven shillings, and three pence, the greatest part whereof was at several times transmitted to them; and what remained, being about nine thousands pounds, was put out to Interest, that so both the Prin∣cipal, and the Improvement might be disposed of for their best ad∣vantage: and further to shew what effects the Lord Protectors inter∣cession had, I finde that presently after, the King of Sweden, the King of Denmark, the States of the United Provinces, the Prince Elector Palatine, the Elector of Brandenberg, the Duke of Wittenberg, and ma∣ny other Protestant Princes and States did either by their Letters to the Duke of Savoy, or otherwise, declare their deep resentment of the bloo∣dy Massacre, especially the Lantgrave of Hessen wrote most zealously in their behalf. They had also many Consolatory Letters written to them from sundry particular Churches, viz. From Franckfort, Zurick, Hanaw, Flushing, Middleburgh, &c. and large Contributions according to their respective abilities. Divers Commissioners also were sent from England, and Holland to joyne with those of the Evangelical Can∣tons for the procuring a well-grounded peace for those poor people: but before they came, the Switzer Ambassador had concluded a Trea∣ty with the French Ambassador; and betwixt them, they had hudled up a Peace, the woful effects whereof these poor people were quick∣ly sensible of; and to this day they labour under heavy burdens laid upon their shoulders by their Popish Taskmasters: they forbid them all manner of traffique for their sustenance: they rob them of their goods, and estates; they drive them from their ancient habitations, and force
them to sell their Birth-right for a messe of Pottage: They banish their Ministers, that the Shepherds being gone, they may the more easily devour them: they ravish their young women, and maidens, they murther the innocent as they passe along the high-wayes upon their occasions: they continually mock and revile them, and threaten an∣other Massacre, sevenfold more bloody than the former: Through the malice and subtilty of their Popish adversaries their Valleys are no o∣ther than a Dungeon, to which the Fort of La Torre serves as a door, whereby at their pleasure they may let in a Troop of murtherers ut∣terly to destroy and extirpate those innocent people: and notwith∣standing all those large supplies that have been sent them from England, and other States, yet so great are the necessities of those poor hungry creatures, and so grievous are the oppressions of their Popish adversa∣ries, who lie in wait to bereave them of whatsoever is given them, that some of them are yet ready ever and anon to eate their own flesh for want of bread: their miseries are more sad, and grievous than can be expressed; they are dying, even whilst they live: When that which was collected for them is once spent, they must inevitably perish, un∣lesse the Lord in whose hand are the hearts of Princes, shall incline the heart of their Prince to pity these his poor, harmlesse, and faithful Subjects, who are so farre from thoughts of Rebellion, that could they but enjoy the freedom of their Consciences in peace, they would be the first that would be ready to sacrifice their lives for the good, and safety of his Royal Highnesse. How long Lord, Holy, just, and true, &c. Rev. 6.10. If any desire to see a fuller account of these things, together with the Letters and Transactions about them, they may finde them fully and faithfully set down by Master Samuel Morland in his History of the Evangelical Churches in the Valleys of Piemont.
Here place the Eleventh Figure.
CHAP. XLVII. A brief Description of Piemont, and the Valleys thereof. PIemont is so called, because it is situated à pede montium, or at the feet of the Alps which separate Italy from France: It's but a little spot of earth, yet very pleasant, and of incredible fruitful∣nesse. It's bounded on the East with Millan, Montferrat, and the Com∣mon-wealth of Genoa: on the South is the Mediterranean Sea: On the West, and North part it hath the Alps for a Bulwark, by which it is se∣parated on the VVest side from Provence, and Dauphine, and on the North from Savoy, and the Countrey of Valley. It's almost all cover∣ed with high mountains, and watred with four great Rivers, viz. Po, Tanaro, Stura, and Dora, besides which there are about twenty eight Rivers more, great and small, which render it exceeding fruit∣ful in Cattel, Wine, Corne, Hay, Nuts, and many other fruits in great abundance. The principal Valleys are, on the North part those two, Aosta, and Susa; on the South side Stura and some others: and in the midland, Lucerna, Angrogni Roccapiatta, Pramol, Perosa, and Saint Martino. The Valley of ▪ been, and still is a part of Dauphine as farre as La Capella, which is situated at the lower end thereof, and divides it from Perosa: which was the ordinary passage of the French Armies in∣to Italy. These Valleys, especially that of Angrognia, Pramol, and Saint Mar∣tino are strongly fortified by nature, by reason of their many difficult passages through Rocks and mountains: as if from the beginning it had been designed by the all-wise God to be as a Cabinet, wherein he would keep some rare Jewel. Those Valleys of Piemont which have been for some hundreds of years inhabited by the Waldenses, are Lucerna, Perosa, and Saint Martino▪ Lucerna contains fifteen miles in length: the highest Communalties thereof, viz. Bobio, Villaro, and La Torre are for the greatest part mountains: but Lucerna, Saint Giovanni, Fenile, Campiglione, and Gar∣cigliana, though they have both on the North and South side a little of the mountains, yet they extend themselves into a very fair Plaine. Angrognia is but a little Valley on the North side of Lucerna, as also Rorata, and Vallon, which are on the South side of Lucerna wholly with∣in the mountains: So is also Roccapiatta, and Pramol, which are enclosed between the Valleys of Lucerna and Perosa. The Communalty of La Torre took its name from an high Tower
which stood upon a little hill near Bourg: But Francis the first, King of France, considering how prejudicial it might be to the affairs and in∣terest of France, and the safety of Pignorole, he caused it to be demolished. But the Duke of Savoy rebuilt it, Anno 1652. which afterward served as a slaughter-house of many poor innocent souls. Bricheras, which is joyned to the Valley of Lucerna, is on the East of Angrognia, and Saint Giovanni, and on the South of Roccapiatta, al∣most all in the Plain. Perosa, and Saint Martino are on the North of Lucerna, Angrognia, and Roccapiatta, situated in such sort that the Valley of Perosa is at the lower end, and on the East are the Valleys of Saint Martino, and Pra∣gela. The Valley of Perosa is about six miles long: and its distributed, part in the mountains, and part in the Plains, and very fruitful hills. At the lower end of it are the Communalties of Porte, Saint Germano, and Villaro: In the middle, Pinachia, and in the higher part that of Perosa, where is the City and Citadel of Perosa, whence the Valley takes its name. The Valley of Saint Martino is eighth miles in length, on the West of the Valley of Perosa, included between the Valleys of Lucerna, and Clusone, in the highest part of the Alps, which border upon the Valley of Queyras, containing eleven Communalties: viz. Rioclaret, Faet, Ro∣doreto, Salsa, Macel, Maneglia, Chabrans, Traverses, Bovile, and Saint Martino, which gives the name to this Valley. This indeed is the poor∣est, yet the strongest of all by reason of its situtation. In these Valleys before the late horrid Massac 1655. there were fourteen Churches of the Protestants which Coed two Classes, or Colloques, and those two Classes, one Synod for their Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment. The one was the Colloque of Lucerna consisting of the Churches of Saint Giovanni, La Torre, Villaro, Bobi, Rorata, and Angrog∣nia, to which was annexed that of Roccapiatta, which is between the Valley of Lucerna, and Perosa, situated upon those little hills which se∣parate the two valleys. The other was the Colloque of the valley of Perosa, and Saint Marti∣no, containg four Churches in the valley of Perosa, viz. Villaro, Saint Germano, which made but one Church, Pinachia, La Cappella, and Pra∣moh▪ in the valley of Saint Martino, were three Churches, viz. Villa Sec∣ca, Maneglius, Prasi. The Church of Saint Giovanni contains within it a very fair Plain, and little hills, very fruitful, and abounding with Corn, Vines, Chest∣nuts, Figgs, Olives, and other fruits, but it wants Pastures, and Woods, so that they have not many Cattel, but only some Oxen to till the ground, and to carry their wine to Turin, and other places to sell. This Church hath annexed unto it Lucerna, Lucernetta, the Vineyards of Lucerna, Fenile, Bubiana, and Bricheras. In the City of Lucerna the third part of the Inhabitants were Protestants. In Lucernetta, and the Vineyard of Lucerna, almost all the Inhabitants professed the Reformed Religion time out of mind.
Fenile is lower on the other side of the River Pelice towards the South, being a more fatt and fertile soil than any place in St. Giovanni, in all sorts of Fruit and Grain. Bubiana, as to the Plain, is like to Fenile, and neerly adjoyning to it: but the Protestants have often been driven out of it, so that what they possessed was mostly in the hills, where they have little Corn, & Wine; but abundance of Chestnuts: So that the inhabitants, which were about fifty Families, were generally poor, living by their hard labour, and by their profit which they made of wood, which they carried to sell to the towns of Babiana, and Lucerna. The hills of Bricheras, where there have been alwayes Protestant Fa∣milies, are like those of Saint Giovanni. The Church of La Torre is the same for situation and quality with that of Saint Giovanni, containing one Plain, where is the Town of La Torre, and hills adorned with the same kind of fruits as those of Saint Giovanni. The Church of Villaro adjoyns to that of La Torre, but is a little higher towards Dauphine, containing a little Plain where is the Town, and the hills adorned with Vines, and Chestnuts. The Church of Bobio is near to that of Villaro, being a little higher towards the Mountain on the West, but as fertile as that of Villaro: and being environed with many Mountains, and having fat Pastures, the Inhabitants had many oxen, Kine, and smaller Cattel, together with milk, and wool in abundance, as also they had many Chestnuts, which being cleansed, and dried, they sold, or exchanged for other Commo∣dities. The Church of Rorata is a little Valley, situated on the other side of the River Pelice, on the West of Lucerna, being bounded by the Moun∣tains of Villaro. It abounds in Pastures, and is very fruitful▪ especially in Chestnuts. The Church of Angrogna is North-West to that of St. Giovanni, to∣wards Perosa, in a Mountainous County, but fruitfull in Chestnuts, Corn, and Pastures, environed with fruitfull Mountains, which yielded good Pastures in the Summer season. The Church of Roccapiatta contains four parcels, viz. that of Rocca∣piatta, St. Bartholomeo, Perustine, and La Inverso delle Porte. In these three latter there grow abundance of rich Wines, Chestnuts, and other good fruits. In Roccapiatta they have Corn, Pasture, and Fruits, but no Wine. The Church of Villaro, and St. Germano is situated in the lowest part of Perosa, about a mile from Pignorolio: the West and North part of Villa∣ro on this side the River Clusone, belong to the King of France, and St. Germano to the Duke of Savoy on the other side of the said River, which running through the whole length of the said Valley, separates the Kings Territories from those of the Dukes. These two places of Villaro, and St. Germano contain a little Pain on both sides the River, the rest is in hills, yielding Corn, Wine, and Fruits.
The Church of Pinachia is within the French Dominions, adjoyning on the VVest part to that of Villaro, and contains a fair, and beautifull Plain, on the North-side fenced with pleasant hills: On the VVest is the Town, and fort of Perosa; on the South, the River Clusone, and some hills, but scarce any Plain at all. It abounds with Corn, Wine, Nuts, Grass, and other Fruits. The Church of La Capella is on the VVest of that of Pinachia in the upper end of the Valley of Perosa; on the West it joyns to the Valley of Pragela (which belongs to the King of France) On the East to the Citadel of Perosa: It hath several very fruitfull hills in it: It hath an∣nexed to it Pomare, and Inverso del Perosa, and some other small Villages, called Le Mean, making a little Communalty at the foot of the Valley of Pragela. The Church of Pramol is situated on a Mountain between the Val∣leys of Lucerna, and Perosa, at the feet whereof grow a few , and good Fruits: In the highest part is Corn, and much wood, and Pasture ground. The Church of Villa Secca is at the lowest part of the Valley of St. Martino, where there is almost no Plaine but where the river Germanasco takes its course; the Hills which lie South from the said River are very cold, so that there grow no Vines: but those on the North which lie open to the South-sun are hot, and so have many Vines. In general, its tolerably fruitful in Corne, Fruits, and Pasture. The Church of Maneglia which is on the West part of Villa Secca, comprehends three little Communalties, viz. Maneglia, Machel, and Salsa: All are in a mountainous place, but exceeding fruitful in Corne, Pasture, &c. except only in the highest parts thereof. The Church of Prali is situated in the uppermost part of the Valley of Saint Martino, and contains two Communalties, viz. Prali, and Ro∣doret, bounded on the South with the Alps, and the Valley of Lucerna; On the West by the Valley Queyras in Dauphine; and on the North by the Valley of Pragela: Here is nothing but Hay and Grasse. Generally in all these Churches (except on the tops of the moun∣tains) there are plenty of Fruits, especially of Chestnuts, and in some places there are vast spaces of Ground yielding almost nothing else: as in the little Hills of Bubiana, and all along the Valley of Lucerna, and in the South parts of the Valley of Perosa: So that the Inhabitants in those places dry, and clense great quantities of them, part whereof they keep for their own use, and the rest they sell, or exchange for Corne, and that, quantity for quantity, with the Inhabitants of the Plaine, it being a great part of their food in Piemont. They also dry these Nuts in an Oven, or on a Kilne, and make thereof an excellent sort of Bisquet, which they first string as they do their Beades, and so hang them up in a moist place the better to preserve them. These they frequently make use of instead of Maqueroons, and such sweetmeats.
Of the late Persecution of the Church of Christ in Po∣land, Anno Christi 1656. THe All-wise, and holy God, whose wayes of Providence are al∣wayes righteous, though often secret, and unsearchable, hath made it the constant lot, and portion of his people in this world to fol∣low his Sonne in bearing his Crosse, and suffering persecutions. For they that are borne after the flesh, do alwayes persecute them that are borne after the spirit. But scarcely have any sort of the Churches enemies more clearly followed the pernicious way of Caine herein, than hath that Antichristian faction of Rome, that Mother of Harlots and Abominati∣ons, whose garments are died red with the blood of Saints, which they have alwayes cruelly shed, and made themselves drunk with. And a∣mongst those chosen and faithful witnesses, the Lord seemeth very sig∣nally to have raised up those Christians, who (though dispersed in divers Countreys) have been commonly known by the name of Waldenses, who for some Centuries of years have lived amongst their enemies as Lambs amongst Wolves, to bear their testimonies to the Truths of Christ, against the Apostasies, and Blasphemies of Rome; for which they have been killed all the day long, and accounted as sheep for the slaughter. One part of this little flock, and remnant which the Lord hath left, & reserved, are scattered partly in the Valleys of Piemont, of whose Tra∣gical sufferings you have had a faithful account in the precedent Chap∣ter: the other part of this poor, but precious remnant, have been di∣spersed in the Kingdomes of Bohemia, and Poland, whose sufferings, to∣gether with the Lords signal Providences about them, are now to be spoken of, as they have been related to the Lord Protector O.C. and the State here by two godly persons delegated by those persecuted Chur∣ches, which are now the sad Monuments of their enemies rage, and of the Lords sparing mercy. These sometime flourishing Churches were by degrees worne out by the constant underminings, and open outrages of the Antichristian party; being first driven out of Bohemia into Poland: and then after their taking root, and spreading in Poland into a numerous company, they were forced out of their chiefest Cities there, and at last by the Jesuited, and enraged Popish Army, were persecuted in their few hiding places with fire and sword. Their Ministers were tortured to death by most exquisite, and un∣heard of Barbarisme, by cutting out of the tongues of some, pulling out the eyes, and cruelly mangling the bodies of others. Yet did not their rage, and brutish cruelty reach only to the Ministers, but to pri∣vate persons also; yea, even to women, and to young children, whose heads they cut off, and laid them at their dead mothers breasts. Nay their rage brake out, not only against the living (not one of
whom they spared that fell into their hands) but also against the dead, plucking the bodies of Honorable persons, and others out of their graves, tearing them to pieces, and exposing them to publick scorne. But the chiefest eye-sore, and object of their fury was the City of Lesna, which after plundering and murthering of all whom they found therein, they burned to ashes, and laid it in the rubbish. Only the Lord in mercy having alarm'd the City by the report of their enemies ap∣proach, the greatest part of the Inhabitants (being three famous Chur∣ches) saved themselves by flight, and are now wandring up and down in Silesia, the Marquisate of Brandenburg, Lusatia, and Hungary, poor, de∣stitute, afflicted, and naked, the relation whereof you have in this en∣suing Narrative written in Latin by some of themselves, and called Les∣nae Excidium. The History of the destruction of Lesna faithfully related. LEsna a City of great Poland, almost thirty years ago began to be famous both far and near; but now being suddenly and utterly ra∣zed hath nothing left beside the name and fame thereof. For the ful∣ler discovery of this businesse from the beginning, we must briefly re∣late the Original and progresse of this town. When above seven hundred years ago, Mieczislaus, then Duke of Poland, took to wife the daughter of Boleslaus Duke of Bohemia, and together with her received the Christian Faith, it happened that among those of the Bohemian Nobility that accompanied him, there was one Peter de Bernstein, whom, because he was a person endowed with ma∣ny vertues, Mieczislaus was willing to detain him in Poland, and to that end bestowed upon him rich possessions, the chief whereof was a Vil∣lage called Lezsyna, (i. e. a grove of hasle-trees) upon the very confines of the lower Silesia, being situate twelve miles from Wratislavia, five from Glogaw, and ten from Posnania. From this place therefore of his resi∣dence, Peter de Bernstein taking the rise of his denomination, according to the custome of the Nation, he and all his posterity were called Lez∣scynii, and were afterwards admitted to all sorts of Dignities in the Realm; so that of this family there were never wanting some or other that were Captains, Governours of Castles, Palatines, Marshals, Chan∣cellours, Bishops, or Archbishops, even to this day: and besides this, for their noble management of affairs in several Embassyes to the Roman Emperour, they were adorned with the title of Earles of the Empire, which they still enjoy. But Leszcyna it self begun by little and little to change its name, and by contraction was called Lessna, and their neigh∣bour Germans called it Lissa▪ This Village, something above one hundred
of years ago had the dignity and title of a market town granted to it by the famous King Sigismund, and tradesmen were invited hither out of the neighbouring Silesia, and so the use of the German tongue was brought in together with them. As for Religion, it was reformed in Lesna about the same time, by the most illustrious Count Andrew, Pa∣latine of Bernstien, according to the rites of the Bohemian Confession, which it hath retained to this day, and became as it were the Metropolis of the Churches of that Confession, throughout all the greater Poland. And when, after the year 1620. a very sharp persecution was raised a∣gainst the Professors of the Gospel in Bohemia; and not long after the Mi∣nisters and Nobility were banished, they were fain to seek refuge in Po∣land, whom that most pious Noble man, the Lord Raphael de Lesna, Pa∣latine of Belse, received under his protection, appointing Lesna, Wlodava, & Baranovia for their places of refuge. But for as much as the greater part did seat themselves at Lesna because of the neernesse thereof, and not long after, a far greater company flocked thither out of Silesia (for there also the butchery of souls grew wonderful fierce, in the years 1628. and 1629.) it came to passe that Lesna, by the addition of many streets, grew into a large City, having three market places, four Churches, a large School, above twenty streets, one thousand six hundred houses, two thousand freemen of the City, and abundance of other company. There was built also a very fair Church for the service of God accord∣ing to the rites of the Augustane Confession, which had over it three Pa∣stors, learned men; and a School for the mother tongue with some Schoolmasters, beside the Free-schoole, which had a learned man of the forementioned Confession appointed over it, by the title of Pro∣rector. The Citizens also having ordered themselves according to the best policy they could, there were found out handsome wayes for a publick revenue that made no noise, and were little felt, and without any mans dammage or burden, so that they were able for some years to maintaine workmen for the compassing of the City about with a Bul∣wark and Trench, and for the building of gates with walls and faire turrets: And lastly, there was built a very fair Court-house in the mid∣dle of the market-place of the old City; there was scarce the like in all great Poland, except at Posnania. In a word, Civility, trading, mer∣chandize (for all things were here bought and sold) and Religion did so flourish here, that this City did not come behinde any City in Poland for its admirable pleasantnesse. All this was matter of joy, not only to those pious Christians that were scattered out of several places for the Gospels sake, and here gathered together under the protection of God, but to others also that came hither from all parts, as strangers: but it galled the enemies of the Gospel extremely, so that it made them leave no designe unassayed for the overthrow of this City of re∣fuge for the godly. At the first (Annis 1628, & 1629.) they made use of several accusations and slanders to King Sigismund the third, suggesting to him that it was a confluence of all sorts of men that were enemies and traytors to his Majesty; that it was good to nip them
in the bud, &c. But through the prudence of that great Senator, the Lord of the place, whose wisdome went beyond their envy, and who knew well enough how to counter-work all malicious projects of that kinde, all those their battering-rams were at that time used in vain. But, Anno 1653. after that the Swedes were broken by the Empe∣rours army in Germany, and were driven out of Silesia, new plots were hatched at Glogaw to send out one or two of the Emperours regiments, who should suddenly invade Lesna, sack the town, and put the inhabi∣tants to the sword, or at least scatter them. But it pleased God so to order it, that this plot was discovered by some of themselves two days before the appointed time, and so vanished into smoak, though the smoak of their devices did not yet cease to rise. For after the death of the most illustrious Prince Palatine of Belse, when his estate was divided amongst his sons and heirs, and the County of Lesna fell to the illustrious Lord Boguslaus, his third son, then newly returned from tra∣velling, the Plotters were not wanting so to lie in wait to insnare this candidate of great wisdome and vertue, that after they had wearied him for some years with the promises of honours (unto which there was no door of entrance but by entertaining the Roman-Catholick Reli∣gion) at last they enticed him to professe Popery. But however they heaped many honours upon him, procuring him some Captainships, afterwards the Generalship of great Poland, and lastly the Arch-treasurership of the Realme, yet could they not procure his hatred of the Professors of the Gospel, and the dissipation of his sub¦jects, which was the thing they hoped for, but he still pre∣served intire to his Lesna those priviledges both Civil and Religious, which his father, of blessed memory, had promised, offered, or con∣firmed to them. They attempted therefore this other device: The Bishop of Posnania ventured to redemand the old Parish-Church, because it was of ancient foundation, and pretended that it might not any lon∣ger be left to the use of Hereticks. The Lord Treasurer answered, that his Grandfather (Andrew Palatine of Brenstien) had built another Church for the Catholicks (whose number was very small in the town, scarce ever above three or four Citizens) to exercise their Religion in, and endowed it with revenues to that purpose, that the greater number of Citizens might enjoy the greater Church. But all was in vain, though he doubled the maintenance of the Roman Parish-priest: for Anno 1652. they brought the Lord Count before the tribunal of the Realme, where the cause must needs go against him, the very same persons being accusers, witnesses and Judges; yet he obtained that this Church should not suddenly be taken away from his Subjects the inha∣bitants of old Lesna until they had built themselves a new one. This building they presently set about with the help of forrein Churches: (according as they were in a capacity to help, things being every where in confusion) But when the adversaries saw that it went on apace, and that this was like to be bigger than the other (for so great now was the multitude of Citizens of this Confession, that the old Church was not
able to contain them) they began again to mutter and threaten, that this might not be endured, that the Hereticks should have a bigger Church than the Catholicks; that they did but build this also for the Catholicks, &c. At length the irruption of the Swedes into Poland (Anno 1655. gave them the long wished for occasion of oppressing and rooting out not only the Lesnians, but also all the Professors of the Gospel (or as they were wont to be called, the Dissenters from the Roman Religion) throughout Poland. For although the Papists themselves had trans∣acted with the Swedes at their coming out of Pomerania (in the agree∣ment of Uscia) and had delivered to them expressely and by name the chief Cities, Posnania, Kalisch, Fraustat, Meseritz, and Lesna, and the rest, after some weak resistance, had yielded themselves up to the Swedes, yet while the King of Sweden was slowly, and as it proved, dangerous∣ly busied in Prusia, they took counsel together for the resuming of their armes, to fight for the liberty of their Countrey, and the Catholick Religion (as they call it) to drive the Swedes out of the Countrey, and to root out all the dissenters in grosse. That this their purpose might make the quicker progresse, and be set on the more strongly, there were Jesuites and Monks sent out every way, to intimate these things to the multitude, and to encourage them to so glorious an undertaking, compelling those that were slow with the thunderbolt of Excommuni∣cation, and promising the relaxation of the pains of Purgatory, and eternal rewards to them that were forward. To this end King Casa∣mire being recalled out of Silesia, they commanded the Nobility to flock to him, and to give the King of Sweden a meeting in his return out of Borussia. The Commonalty also they stirred up against the Professors of the Gospel, making themselves their furious leaders; and such was their successe, that in lower Poland a great number of families (it is not yet known how many, because the furious tumult still continues) al∣most within the compasse of a moneth (in February and March) were miserably butchered, men and women, young and old being murthered without distinction, all, save such as could escape into the neighbour∣ing parts of Hungary, and so save their lives by flight. But the Nobi∣lity of the greater Poland, most of them having retired themselves into Silesia, began there to gather themselves into small companies, in the beginning of April, and to break forth; by whose coming the rest be∣ing encouraged, made a great slaughter of the Swedes that were garri∣son'd in the small towns, so that General Muller was fain to go forth with an army of Swedes to restrain them. As for Lesna, the hereditary Lord thereof, the Treasurer of the Kingdome, was gone into Borussia to salute the King of Sweden some way to take care for the safety of his Countrey: But about the begin∣ning of April he returned to Lesna without seeing him, the King then being full of action, and ranging up and down. This businesse pro∣cured much more envy both to himself and the City, as if he had plot∣ted with the Swedes against his Countrey, having never been true and faithful either to the Church or his Countrey: therefore they breathed out
flames, and belched out threats so much the more fiercely both against him and his City. However there were not wanting such as by private messages gave him hope of pardon, if he would but withdraw himself from them, as afterwards he did. But the enemies prepared them∣selves to destroy that so populous a City by force (if they could) or else by flames, furnishing themselves with many sorts of weapons for that purpose. Of this doing although the inhabitants of Lesna had notice by several messengers, yet a fatal security prevailed with them to think that there was no fear of such an enemy as was not furnished either with Infantry or Artilery for such a designe. Upon Easter day a  of Poles broke into some territories (belonging to an eminent Professor of the Gospel) neer Lesna: for whom they made diligent search, but finding that he was from home (for he had retired himself to Lesna for Religion sake) they plundered all his movable goods, and took his er∣vant (Martin Multz, a Bohemian) and hanging a great stone about his neck, threw him into the river that ran by, and so drowned him. On the third Holy-day in Easter the report was very hot that the Swedes had lost all, and that the King was slain: upon which account when the Lord Treasurer did betake himself to Wratislavia in Silsia, the Citizens of Lesna were something afraid, although the Comman∣ders of the Swedes that were there in Garrison (being three coours of horse) did encourage them; as did also the Administrator of the City and County of Lesna, who requiring anew the oath of fidelity from the Citizens, did promise them to stay with them, and bid them be of good courage. Being lifted up with this hope, and drawn on with the pro∣mises of new Auxiliary forces to come very suddenly to them, they promised themselves all manner of security, so that no man took any care to get out of the way, or to carry any thing of his goods to a sa∣fer place: yet they kept strong guards night and day, sometimes the third part of the Citizens, and sometimes half being upon duty. The Swedish horse also ever and anon made excursions to see what the ene∣my was a doing, and whether they were neer. But they never brought back any other news, but that there were no footsteps or signes of any enemy appearing: Yea, even that very day in which the Poles came in the afternoon, the Swedes returned with good booty, but not a word of the enemy. But about three dayes after upon Thursday, April the 27. an army of the Polonian Nobility, mixed with a rout of peasants, shewed themselves unexpectedly out of the Woods, and anon they drew forth into the open field, and so set themselves within sight of the City, a∣bout five or six furlongs from the Suburbs. When this was percei∣ved, the alarm was given, and the Citizens hasten to their armes, and place themselves on the walls; yet not knowing who they were, and with what intent they came, and wondring much, why, according to the custome they did not send forth a Trumpeter. (For that which they did bruit abroad afterwards, and many perhaps beleeved, that the Lesnians gave the occasion of hostility by killing their Trumpeter, is just nothing: Heaven and earth will bear witnesse that this was devised
meerly to colour over the hainousness of the fact:) At length they begin their work with firing a Brick-kiln, that stood not far from the Suburbs. Then the Swedish Troopers (about one hundred and fifty in number) which were already mounted & gone out of the City, going a little far∣ther, encountered with the Enemy in light skirmishes, for the space of two hours; in which many of the Poles, and some of the Swedes were slain. But while the Swedes were earnest with the Citizens for some help, as it were to defend the Suburbs from further burning, some were drawn forth (about seventy of the younger Citizens) who mixed themselves rashly and confusedly among the Horse-men; which when the Poles saw, they feighned a flight, returning towards the Wood: But as soon as they perceived that they had drawn them far enough from the Walls, they wheeled about, some fetching a compass to come behind the Lesnians, and so to get between them and home, and the rest re∣turning straight upon them, fell on in a full body. The Swedish Horse when they saw this, turned their backs, leaving the Foot to the mercy of the Enemy; but the Poles followed them so close at heels, that two Colours (about four hundred men) passed through the Suburbs to the very gate, and wanted but little of entering the City it self with them, had not some good confident fellow, ventured to step in be∣tween, and bar the Gate against them, while others of the Citizens sent a showr of Bullets among them, and so beat them back: So the Poles being glad to stop, yea, and retire (just at Sun-set) set fire on the outward parts of the Suburbs, and burnt some Granaries and Wind-mills, thereby making the whole night light to us; while themselves returned through the Wood to Oseczno, which the Ger∣mans call Storoknest. The City being thus filled with fear, spent the whole night without sleep; the men in watching upon the Walls, and the women in gathering themselves together in the Market-pla∣ces and Church-yards, and other open places, and there wearying Hea∣ven with Psalms and Prayers to God. When the morning came, and no enemy appeared, the Citizens went forth and fetched in the slain to bury them; among whom were found about forty Citizens, but above a hundred of the Poles, and among them their chief Commander himself, Cresky, who formerly had taken Pay under the Swedish General Banier, and was accounted more expert then the rest: In the mean time it was hotly reported that the Administrator of the County and many of his Retinue were wanting and gone; whereupon the courage of the Citizens began to fail, and they went to the Senate, to desire leave to send away their wives & children, that if the enemy should come again they might be the more couragious in defending themselves, not being daunted with the out-cryes and tears of the women. Some disswaded them with good reasons, saying, That those that should be sent forth under pretence of convoying the rest in safety, would not return again, and so the rest of the Citizens should be left in greater fears; That the Spartans of old were wont to take their wives & children to the war, with them, that having them in their
eyes, they might fight the more stoutly for their safety. But all was in vain, though the Swedish Commanders also endeavoured to hinder the flight of the richer sort, which they could not do, being overcome with the cryes of the multitude. There were some Ecclesiasticks also who desired leave to depart for a few dayes, because that the Antichri∣stian fury was bent chiefly against them: But the Senate left it to their consciences, whether in such a case they could leave the people then when they would most need instruction and comfort; especially if wounded and dying. But the others persisted in their importunity, and there went out before Noon about three hundred Waggons, which were all that could be got in the City. After this there followed some quietness, with hopes that the Enemy would return no more, having found by experience how well able the Lesnians were to defend themselves and theirs; and perhaps they had never returned indeed (as it was know afterwards) had they not been encouraged by that Hight of the Citizens: For two dayes after the twen∣ty eight of April, there was a Letter delivered to the Consul from the Commanders of the Polish Forces, in which they demanded the sur∣render of the City, and gave them hope of good usage; but if they would not embrace that offer, they then threatned to destroy them with fire and Sword, having now such an addition of Foot souldiers, that they were able to take the City by storm. They added moreo∣ver that they had received a Letter from the Lord Treasurer, where∣in he intreated them to spare his Lesna upon their submission, saying, that he had already given them a command to set open their Gates. If ever there were indeed any such command, it must needs have been suppressed by some one; so that the Citizens never knew of it; other∣wise they would have provided a little better for the safety of them∣selves and their goods. But so it must needs be, that our sins (through others treachery) should be brought to punishment. This message of the Poles to the Senate did wonderfully daunt the Citizens; For these things were not kept secret, but before the Consul could call together the Senate and the Commanders of the souldiery, the report thereof had run through the whole City, as also that there was very little Gun-Powder left, and they had not wherewithal to defend them∣selves; so that the Citizens being taken with a pannick fear, cast away their weapons and courage together, and betook themselves to flight; especially when presently after, they who were on the Guard, discove∣red the Body of the Enemies coming the same way they came before; For they forsaking every man his station, hasted home, advising their wives, children, and neighbours to flye, themselves leaving their weapons upon the Walls, or at the Gates; or afterwards casting them away in the fields, that they might not be a burden to them. When the Swedish souldiers saw the Citizens thus in amaze and running away, they also soon mounted, not to meet the Enemy (as before) but to run away too from the face of the Enemy. Then followed the Senate in such a trembling fit of fear, that every one run out at the Gate that
was next him, or over the very Forts and Ditches; so that in one hours space, a most populous City was left destitute of inhabitants: Save a company of sick and aged people, and a few others that could not so suddenly get away, or for some other cause were necessitated to await the issue. But all hastened to those Moorish woods, by which Poland is par∣ted from Silesia, in such confusion, that when the nearest passes (to¦wards Thorlang and Krosken) were not wide enough, they tumbled by Troops to other passes (Strizwik, Prybisch, and Hundsloch) that were more remote. The Swedish Troops went to Fraustad, and from thence, taking the Garrison along with them, towards Meseritz: But the passage through the Moors was very difficult, in regard that the company crouding one upon another, as if the Enemy were just at their heels, did not onely many of them stick in the deep Mud (in vain cry∣ing out for help to those that passed by, every one being solicitous on∣ly for his own preservation) but were also mired and lost! Here chil∣dren lost their parents, and parents their children, wives their hus∣bands, and one friend another; so that they could scarce find one ano¦ther again; in two, three, and four days time. The Enemy by a Trumpeter, who was sent to Posnania gate enqui∣red what the Citizens meant to do; to whom John Kolechen, a learn∣ed Citizen, and well acquainted with many of the Nobility (in con∣fidence whereof, having sent away his wife he adventured to stay) came forth and answered, That the Gates stood open, the Swedish E∣nemies were gone, and the rest of the Citizens stood to their courtesie, and desired their favour. A little after that, came the illustrious Grzymaltowsky with many of the Nobility to the same Gate, and when the aforesaid Kolechen, with another in his company, had gone out to them and scarcely per∣swaded them that the City was forsaken, and that there was no trea∣chery; they went in, and when they were disposed into the next fair houses, they were entertained with a noble supper (which was prepa∣red to sweeten them a little, if it might be) and had plenty of Wine out of Dlugosses Cellar, who was a rich Senator. At last when they were half Drunk, they set upon Kolechen with threats, and would have made him their Prisoner, but that he escaped wonderfully out of their hands, and saved himself by flight. But they durst not stay all night in the City, for fear the Swedes and Citizens should set upon them unawares out of some Ambuscado; and so they returned to their own company, and in the morning with many hun∣dred Waggons they came back, killing all they met, and setting themselves to plunder the City. Here then you might have seen strange examples of barbarous cruelty on the one side, and blockish fol∣ly on the other. For though no man made resistance, yet like Mad Dogs they flew upon all that either came out or were drawn out of the holes wherein they had hid themselves. Of some they pulled out their eyes; Of some they cut off their Noses and Tongues; Of others they cut off their Hands and Feet; others they stabbed and slashed, and
so butchered them with innumerable wounds, that it could not be known who they were: And (which was more) they spared not his High∣ness, Prince Frederick, Landgrave of Hassia, though dead, whom they had slain half a year before at Costena, and who was decently Embal∣med by the Lessians, and kept laid up in the Chappel of the New-Church upon a Scaffold, till he might be transported to his own Coun∣try: They first rifled his Coffin, which was handsomely adorned, taking away his silver and guilt keyes, and all the silk that was about it; then they set upon the Princes corps, and took away his silk robe, lined with Ermines, and so left him once again naked, and lying on the ground. But (after the burning of the City, his body being found in the same place, untouched by the fire) he was cloathed again by the ancient Lesnians, and put up in his Coffin, and buried in a certain place, where he is still honourably kept. But that mad rabble shew∣ed abundance of folly in this, that whereas they might have made Lesna their nest (the Swedes having Garrisoned themselves in the strongest places of the Province) or at least might have gathered toge∣ther the richest of the plunder; (for there was such abundance of victuals, wares, housholdstuff of all sorts, and treasure that was brought hither from other places, as to a place of safety, that a thousand Wag∣gons could scarce have carried it away in many dayes) yet such was their over-eager desire of their destroying this hated City, that the very same day; yea before noon, they set fire to the City and Suburbs in every street, (for the Waggons which they brought with them were not empty, but loaded with Torches, Pitch, Straw, and such other com∣bustible matter) and so cruelly destroyed that most pleasant City, to∣gether with all that abundance of all sorts of things that was in it. This fire lasted three whole dayes, and there were those that took care that nothing should scape it; for when the New-buildings of the New-churches, did not easily take fire, they brought Straw, Pitch, and dry wood; and put under the roofs and the in-side of the steeples, and so forced them to take fire: And they came again upon the third day (1. May) and whatsoever was left they set fire to again. They burnt also the very Wind-mills, whereof there were seventy about the City; and a very pleasant Park of the Countesses, which lay close by the Castle; that every place might be filled with spectacles of cruel∣ty, and at length it might come to be said, En cineres ubi Lesna fuit! Where fairest Lesna stood of old, Now nought but Ashes we behold! The Citizens sadly beholding these flames some miles off, ran thither next day by Troops; whether out of a desire of quenching the fire (if it were possible) or else to save something out of the flames;
(for most through fear had gone away empty handed) but the Enemy came upon them; and although they stoutly defended themselves, and slew many of their Enemies, yet many of themselves were slain; and many others also on the dayes following, when some Villages that belonged to the County of Lesna, and were inhabited by professors of the Gospel, were in like manner burnt down. There perished in these flames many aged and sick people, that could not get away; besides such abundance of houses, houshold-stuff of all sorts, precious wares, corn (many thousand bushels whereof were brought hither) libraries and other things, that the loss would amount to many Tuns of gold; and many thousands were thereby reduced to meer beggery. But that which was saddest of all, was, that the Church of the faithful, that was here gathered together out of divers places and Countryes, to en∣joy the pure worship of God, was so utterly overthrown, that it can∣not but cry out with Sion of old, when it was rased by the Babylonians, Lament. 1. and 3. O all ye that pass by, behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, wherewith the Lord hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger! For he hath sent a fire into my bones, and it prevaileth a∣gainst me; he hath made me a desolation, so that I am not able to rise up; my children are desolate, because the Enemy prevailed. Sion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her. I called for my lovers, but they deceived me. Mine Enemies chased me sore, like a Bird, without cause. They have cut off my life in the Dungeon. Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: Thou saidst, Fear not; It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. It must not be concealed what wonder hapned the first day of the burning of the City about evening, at Czirna (which is the first Town of Silesia, next to Lesna, about two miles distant) Some of the Les∣nians went out to look upon the sad smoke of their Country; and as they were looking, there fell from the clouds which carried the smoke over Silesia, together with the soot, a leaf of burnt paper, which when they took up, they found to be a leaf of the Bohemian Bible, contain∣ing the 6th. and part of the 7th. chapters of Matthew; where those words of Christ came first to sight, With what measure ye meet, it shall be measured to you again; with many other of Christs exhortations to trust in the fatherly Providence of God. This leaf was presented to the Lord of the place; and a Lesnian Physitian, who was there by chance, that read and interpreted it, and divers others, can bear witness to the truth hereof; and the Lord of the place laid it up among his rarities! What now should Sion do, but cry out under the cruel oppression of the Enemy, Render unto them a recompence, O Lord, according to the works of their hands, Lament. 3.64. And indeed God began to re∣venge his peoples wrongs the fourth day after, when they furiously as∣saulted Costena, a Town four miles from Lesna, where they were of∣ten repulsed stoutly by the Swedish Garrison; and having suffered a great slaughter (about five hundred of them being wanting) they were
forced to retire in great confusion. The like also they met withall at Kalissia, and other places, being slain and put to flight by the Swedes. Herein it hapned unto them much after the same manner, as it did to Tilly formerly when he had ruined Magdeburg, the God of vengeance manifesting himself the avenger of his people: And now they begin to acknowledge and upbraid one another with their folly; the Nobles, in that they have spoiled their mart and treasury; and the Clergy, in that it is hapned otherwise than they intended. For their purpose was, utterly to ruine the Hereticks (as they term them) with their nest; but now that they see the nest spoiled, and the birds sa∣ved, it is much more matter of grief and vexation than of joy to them. For here God performed what he promised of old to Baruch, I will give thee (in the midst of thy Countryes ruines) thy life for a prey, Jer. 45.5. So God gave to thousands of his worshippers, who were snatched out of the midst of those ruines, their life for a prey, having set bounds to the fury of the Devil, which he could not pass; as he did of old, when he gave Job into his hands, as to all that he had, but so, that he should spare his life. Blessed be the name of the Lord. Tru∣ly we have cause to say with David (Psalm 124.) If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us, then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul; then the proud waters had gone over our soul: Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us a prey to their teeth: Our soul is escaped, as a Bird out of the snare of the Fowlers; the snare is broken, and we are escaped; our help is in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. Oh the wonder∣full providence of our God! which then saves when he seems to have forsaken, and then makes alive where he seems to have killed. We had been undone, if we had not been undone: We had been undone in our lives, those furies gathering together soon after, in far greater troops, if we had not been undone in our estates, which were left to them for a prey by our flight (which the fatherly providence of God, fore-seeing greater evils, procured, by sending that fright among us.) Blessed be the Name of the Lord again and again: We notwithstand∣ing, with other afflicted ones, in what Nation soever, whom that proudest Babylonian flood of waters seeks to swallow up, will not cease to cry, How long, O Lord, wilt thou be angry with thy people? How long shall thy jealousie burn like fire? O remember not against us former ini∣quities; let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, &c. Psalm 79. And with the souls of those that were slain for the word of God, that lie under the Altar of Christs merits, for whose faith we are killed, How long (O Lord) holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth! Rev. 6.9, 10.
The Delegates of these poor persecuted Prote∣stant Churches coming over into England to move for a Contribution towards the relief of their distressed Brethren, Published this en∣suing Narrative. The utmost Fury of Antichrist against the Protestants or Re∣formed Church of the Bohemian Confession in Poland, set down in a brief (but faithful) Narrative, and according to the truth of the matter. THe Spouse of Jesus Christ, she who in the Cradle was besprink∣led with the blood of a Protomartyr, hath alwayes brought forth into the world men like Abel or Stephen, that so there might ne∣ver be wanting to cry from the earth unto God, and that the wounds of that Rose which lies among the Thorns of Persecution might not be concealed. Every age, and every year in each age, and every moneth and day in each year, hath produced new inundations of blood unto this day; and yet the little flock of the Lord hath alwayes encreased under persecutions, one while here, another there, shifting their seats and habitations. While it pleased God by the means of Wicklef to kindle the light of the Gospel in Great Britain, John Huss asserted the truth of Jesus Christ in the midst of thick darknesse of Po∣pery in Bohemia, many thousands being stirred up by God to receive it, who despising all the cruelty of Tyrants, received it with joy, untill by Gods assistance they took rooting in the Kingdom, and grew up into flourishing Churches. In a short time after, Antichrist breathing out his fury, the Truth was banished out of Bohemia, and the Confessors be∣ing driven out, transplanted the Gospel into Poland; where being fa∣vourably entertained by King Sigismond, they in a short time encreas∣ed to so great a number, that being little inferiour to the Papists, they were able to boast of an equal authority and priviledges with them. Hence it came to passe that the Kings at their Coronations were wont, not only to promise, but solemnly to swear protection to such as dis∣agreed from the Roman Religion, and therefore they proceeded not to open persecutions, save only in those Cities where the Jesuits had seat∣ed themselves in power (to wit) Cracovia, Posen, Lublin, Vilna, &c.
where, by their disciples, and by stirring up the common people to fu∣ry, the Churches of the Reformed Professors were a good while ago demolished, and divers Ministers cruelly massacred. Neverthelesse the malice of the Enemies being no whit allayed, they were many ways afflicted, first indirectly, afterwards by pretences under colour of Law, until those Churches being worn out by degrees, and overthrown, were not many years ago reduced to a very inconsiderable number, especially when as in the Reign of the late King, the Enemies being confident they might do any thing, brought things to this passe at length, that there were no more than twenty one Congregations re∣maining in the Greater Poland, and those also ready to perish. But a∣mong these twenty one remaining Churches, the chief, and as it were the Mother of them all, was that of Lesna, which was divided into three Congregations, the Bohemian, the Polonian and the German; each of which had their own Pastors, but the Communicants joyntly were about two thousand: Therefore it was that this Church was in the first place exposed to the Enemies malice, and of late designed to the slaughter, as well by reason of its being very much frequented and grown famous, as also because of the Synod there usually celebrated, as likewise a famous University and Printing-house, and books fre∣quently published to the world. When therefore in the year 1655. the Swedish Army out of Pomerania drew near to the borders of Poland, and the Nobility were summoned to Arms, according to the custome of the Countrey, it came to passe that the Papists brake forth into ma∣ny furious expressions, crying out, That the Hereticks had invited the Enemy, and therefore they were first of all to be put to the sword and extirpated; which reports, though most falsly scattered abroad (for the searcher of the heart and the reins knoweth, that we never so much as dreamt of it) yet they easily found credit among the sworn Enemies of the Gospel, who sought nothing more than our ruine. Hereupon they who first consulted to agree with the Swedish Army, being terri∣fied by its power, concluded about the surrender of all Great Poland into the Kings protection, and namely, the Royal Cities of Posen, Ca∣lissen, Meserick, &c. to which also Lesna was expressely added: In a little time after they endeavoured to cast off the Swedish Yoke, and turned their Arms not against the Swedes, but first against our Evange∣lical Professors, as conspiring with the Swedes upon the account of Re∣ligion, and none of them scrupled to take revenge upon them. They first of all set upon those of Lesna, with resolution of putting all to the sword, and destroying that Heretical City by fire, and they had effected both, unlesse God had by sending some persons before, who by signifying the coming of the Enemy, and with what intent they came, had possest the Citizens with a Panick fear, so that leaving all their Estates, they every man fled; and thus within the space of one hour, a most populous City abounding with all manner of wealth, was left without Inhabitants, who in a miserable condition wandered then into the neighbouring Woods and Marishes into Silesia. But the
Polish Nobility with their Army entring the City, did what they plea∣sed, slaying a number of decrepit old people, and sick persons that were not able to save themselves by flight; then the City it self was first plundred, and afterwards so destroyed by fire for three dayes to∣gether, that no part of it remained beside rubbish and ashes. In what manner they would have handled the Citizens, especially their Pa∣stors, they shewed by their heroick actions performed in other places, by the most savage slaughtering of divers Ministers of the Church, and other faithful Members of Christ, of both Sexes; for of all that they laid hold on, they gave not one man quarter, but very cruelly put them to death with most exquisite tortures. They endeavoured to force Master Samuel Cardus, Pastor of the Church of Czuertzinen, to renounce his Religion, after they had taken him, and miserably hand∣led him with all manner of cruelty; but he stoutly resisting, they first put out his Eyes, and led him about for a spectacle, then they pulled off his Fingers-ends with pincers; but he not yet condescending to their mad Fury, they found out a new kinde of torment, poured molten Lead into his mouth, and at length while he was yet half alive, they clapt his Neck between folding Doors, and violently pulling them together, severed his Head from his Body. They took John Jacobides, Pastor of the Church of Dembnick, and Alexander Wartens his Colleague, and another that was in company with them, as they passed through the Toun of LUBIN, and hurrying them up and down for divers hours, and grievously handling them after the manner of Tyrants, then last of all cutting their Throats with a Razor, threw them headlong, while they were yet breathing, into a great pit, which had been before-hand prepared for their Martyrs, and stifled them by cast∣ing down Dung and Dirt upon them. They a great while pursued Andrew Oxlitius a young man designed for the Ministery, whom after long seeking, they at last found in the open field, and in the end ha∣ving taken him, they cut off his Head with a Sithe, chopping it into smal pieces, and the dead carcase also they slasht in a barbarous manner. The same fate befell Adam Milta, a Citizen of Lesna; but they more grievously handled an old man of above seventy, whose name was Simon Priten, and many others, whose names it were too tedious to relate. Of that barbarous execution which they did upon the weaker Sex, there were besides other examples, horrid Trophies of Cruelty erected in the said City of Lesna: a pious Matron there, who was the mother of three chil∣dren, not being able quick enough to leave the City, and being slain in the open street, they cut off her hands, & feet, & cutting off her childrens heads, they laid two of them at her breasts, and the third by her side. In like manner, another woman having her hands and feet cut off, and her tongue cut out, being inclosed and bound in a Sack, lived the space of two dayes, making most miserable lamentation. Grief forbids us to adde more; for they behaved themselves so furiously towards us, that there remains not an example of any one man saved of all those that happened to fall into their hands. It is notoriously known how
that fury of theirs tyrannized also over the dead; some they dragg'd out of their graves, and cut in pieces, as at Zichlin; others they ex∣posed naked for a publick Spectacle, as at Lesna; of which outragi∣ous action we had an example, even in the dead body of the most Se∣rene Landgrave of Hassia, which was drawn out of the grave, who was heretofore slain in a most barbarous and tyrannical manner at Kos∣cian, but buried by our Friends at Lesna. The like was acted also upon the Body of the most Noble Arciszevius, heretofore the valiant Admiral of the Hollanders in Brazile, which was likewise dragg'd out of the grave, and being stript of the grave-clothes, was found after the firing of Lesna. There are divers other examples, which the Christian Reader may finde in the Book, Entituled, Lesnae Excidium, faithfully written, and lately set forth in print; but they are such examples onely as are commonly known; for who is able to relate all things in particular? as burning men alive, drowning others with stones tied about their necks, &c. Now Lesna being destroyed, the fury of the Enemy proceeded to the persecutions of others; they in a short time utterly demo∣lished all our Congegations, not onely driving away the Pastors, but also either burning or leaving most of the Temples desolate, as at Karmin, Dembnick, Skochy, Czriuczin, &c, yea and the Auditories themselves were either slain (as in the Town of Sko∣chy, where there was a very flourishing Church of the Bohemian Exiles; Sixty persons, both men and women were cruelly put to death) or else they were scattered abroad, so that there remain∣ed not one place wherein the Worship of God may be celebrated. Lo, this is the most miserable state and condition of our Church∣es; moreover our Countrey-men, to the number of five thousand, besides youths and children, being dispersed in banishment (which hath now befallen most of us the second time) especially through∣out Silesia, as also through the Marck, Lusatia, Hungary, &c. find no comfort, but much misery, and are there exposed to the ha∣tred and envy of men. We that are Pastors dare not openly mi∣nister to our Auditories with the Word and Sacraments, but one∣ly in private Meetings, or in Woods among Fenny places, God onely seeing us, who is witnesse of these calamities, and our com∣fort in extremities. Indeed being thus destitute of all things, we lead a wretched life in banishment, being afflicted with hunger and nakednesse, and are become next to the most miserable Waldenses, the greatest spectacle of calamity to the Christian world; for so it hath seemed good to that Soveraign Wisdome that governs all things, that we should be inheritors of the Crosse and persecution of those men from whom we have derived the original of our Do∣ctrine and external Succession: For truly we are the remaining Pro∣geny even of the Waldenses, with whom being raised from the ashes of blessed Huss, and with whom combining into the same holy Fellowship of the Faith and afflictions of Christ, we have for
two whole ages and more, been perpetually subject to the like storms of Calamities, until at length we fell into this calamity, greater than ever was known in the memory of our Fathers, and which threatens us with utter destruction, unlesse God prevent it. The truth is, this businesse constrains us to amazement and tears, greater than can be exprest in words, to set forth our af∣fliction and sorrow: If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, we desire that this affliction of Joseph may be recom∣mended, especially to all that are of the houshold of Faith. Let them not suffer those to perish whom the same Faith, and the same Spirit of Christ hath joyned with them in so near a relation; we beseech them in the name of Christ, that they would rather make haste to relieve those who are ready to perish, we being as∣sured that we suffer this persecution upon no other account, than for the confession of the Truth, from those Enemies who have acted such things as these are against us in times past, and are now at length by Gods permission, pouring out their fury upon us. Signed in the name of the said distressed Churches, by their Delegates and now Exiles for the Cause of Christ; Adam Samuel Hartman, Pastor of the Church of Lesna in Poland, and Rector of the famous University there. Paul Cyril a late Member of the University of Lesna.
A BRIEF REPRESENTATION OF THE Protestant Cause in GERMANY. In what Case it hath been, since the Peace of MUNSTER; and how it stood in the year 1657. and how it is now this present year 1659. THe Justice of the late civil warres in Germany, which were composed at the Peace concluded in Munster and Osna∣burgge in the year 1648. was grounded upon this; That the Protestants were necessitated to enter into a League or mutual union together, for the maintaining of their rights and priviledges in the Empire, against the infections thereof, and manifold disturbances of their profession, which contrary to for∣mer agreements at Imperial Dyets, did befal unto them in many places by the Popish and Jesuites practices, whereof they could obtain no re∣dresse by any peaceable Treaties: Therefore finding that there was a design formed in the Conclave, and by the house of Austria, to be put in execution, tending by little and little to wear out and deprive them of their liberties; they formed an union among themselves, to stand upon the defence of their rights, and to oppose the power of the house of Austria, by whose means, both in Germany and in Bohemia, the Je∣suites did drive the design of rooting out Protestants. The head of this union (who by his place was bound to appear in it) was the Ele∣ctor Palatine: but he being a soft man, of no experience in war, and beset in his Counsels and enterprises with such as did betray him, the cause was soon overthrown; and by his overthrow, the intended perse∣cution against Protestants to root them out, what by power, and what by policie, was openly carried on by the house of Austria; which mo∣ved the King of Denmark Christian the IV. and after him the King of Sweden, to come upon the Stage: the Dane was soon overthrown, but God gave such successe unto the Swedes, to the Landgrave of Hessen their associate, and to the French; (who joyned with them to ballance the power of Austria, after the Elector of Saxony had made his peace at Prague with the Emperour, and deserted the Protestant in∣terest): that from the death of King Gustavus, they continued the war with various successes till the year 1648. at which time the Swedish being masters in Bohemia, and the Emperour brought so low, that he
saw little hopes to recover his strength without a Peace, he yielded to the conditions which the Protestants and the French stood upon. The Swedish stood upon their satisfaction, and to keep a foot in the Empire, to be able upon all occasions to secure or help the Protestant party; And the Protestant Princes they stood upon the setling of all things and of themselves in their former rights and possessions, as before the war; and chiefly upon this point the re∣formed party and the Landgrave of Hessen, who headed them, stood, that thence forward the reformed Protestants (alias called Calvinists) should have equal freedom and liberty of conscience, for the exercise of their profession in the Empire, with the Papists and Lutherans. This condition being obtained, and a way determined to give the agrieved parties in point of dammage further satisfaction, Armies were dismis∣sed, a new convention of States was held at Nurenberg, to settle the remaining matters within the Empire, which at Munster and Osnabrugge could not well be handled, by reason of the Treatie with forreigne States, and afterward a Dyet was called at Ratisbon, to confirme all what formerly had been treated on and concluded, and to put the re∣mainder of grievances in a way to be rectified: To which effect at the dissolution or rather adjournment of the Imperial Dyet at Ratisbon, a Committee of Deputies from all the States of the Empire, of equal number of both parties, (that is, so many of the Protestants as of the Popish partie) were named to meet at Franckford, and prepare (by way of disquiry of rights) the matters then remaining undecided, that at the next Session of the Dyet, there might be a full decision and deter∣mination of them; but before these Delegates did meet, the Elector of Mentz did broach a new quarrel with the Elector Palatine, tend∣ing to abridge him of much of his right, and to make him inconsi∣derable to the Protestant party; but the King of Sweden his cousin (for he is a younger brothers son of the house Palatine) and the Landgrave of Hessen his Brother in Law, did appear for him so farre, that the Emperor and the Elector of Mentz fearing a new breach on his behalf, did leave him unmolested. Soon after the composure of this quarrel, the Committee of Imperial Deputies, met according to the appointment of the last Dyet at Ratisbon, and they have continued at Franckford, debating and disputing one with another concerning their respective rights, in the several cases which remained undetermined. This meeting of Deputies hath agitated matters in the years 1655 — 56 — 57. till these new affairs were come into consideration, which the King of Sweden his war with Poland hath occasioned: for from that time that he went into Poland and prospered there, the Deputies al∣though they did not dissolve their meeting, yet did in a manner alter the course of their treating one with another, as looking much upon the event of that war, till the death of the late Emperour hath al∣tered the Scene, and a Dyet for the election of a new Emperour hath been called. The King of Swedens war with Poland, did alarm the Popish party
in Germany, and the house of Austria extremely: and did terrifie the States of the Low-countreys, lest if he should be master of the Baltick Sea, their Trade should be thenceforward under his power, with whom they had no friendly correspondence, by reason of some reci∣procally conceived injuries, for which they could not trust him. This moved those of Holland who are the chief traders in those Seas, to stir up enemies against him, and openly to appear for, and correspond with Dantzick to oppose him: and it is known to the Swedish, that they have dealt underhand with the Muscovite, with the Po∣lish King, with the Austrians, and above-board with the King of Denmark, to combine against him; by which means after that he had conquered Poland, his forces were distracted, first to oppose the Muscovite in Livonia, who besieged Riga; and afterward to put himself in a defensive posture against the Austrians, who came to the assistance of the King of Poland; and lastly, to retire from Po∣land into Germany, to oppose the Danish forces, who had invaded his Territories of Bremen. Being come into Germany upon this de∣sign, he did conquer from the King of Denmark the last Summer all Hostein and Jutland, and although by these conquests he was able to live in his quarters in the Winter: yet his enemies being round about him on all hands, and he having neither money, nor convenient places to recruit his Army, it was expected, that in the spring the Combination of his enemies who compassed him about, would have swallowed him up: but God was pleased to appear for him, and direct him in a way to escape and overcome these diffi∣culties: For in January last, he formed his design to assault the other Territories of the Danish King; namely the Islands which lie between Germany and the Continent of Sweden, and to that effect had prepared his men to march over into Fuenen, either by a bridge of Ships if the Sea were not frozen so as to bear: or over the Ice, if it should be strong enough: having then notice gotten, that to∣wards the latter end of January the Ice did bear, he took of horse and foot not above six or seven thousand, and therewith did march over the Sea into Funen, where the Danish King had placed his chief for∣ces to defend the place. And although some dangetous and dread∣full accidents did befal him in that his march over the Sea, yet he went on and fought the Danish forces more in number than he had with him, which on firm land stood in a readinesse to receive him, and beat them, took the chief Commanders prisoners, and the spoil of the Island, which is one of the richest that belongs to that Kingdom. Having made himself Master of that Island, he went forward to the next Island, over the Sea, called Langland, where he found a body of five hundred men to resist him, but being charged, they were instantly defeated; so he went from thence to the next called Laland, and from thence to Falster, and from Fal∣ster to Zeland, the frost still continuing to make a bridge for him in all these marches. And from the time he came into Funen,
till he entred Zeland, he spent onely five or six dayes. In Zeland (where the King of Denmark was at Coppenhagen) M. Medows, the pub∣lick Minister of the State, sent from thence to reside with the King of Denmark, came to him and desired him to admit the King of Denmark to a Treaty; this he condescended unto, and by the interposition of M. Medows and of the French Ambassadour (for he would not admit the Hollands Ambassadour to be a Mediator) the place was concluded about the twentieth of February, after twelve dayes treaty. The conditions are, That he restore to the King of Denmark all what he had taken from him in Germany, namely Holstein, and Jutland, and the Islands of Fuenen, Langland, La∣land, Falster, and Zealand; and in lieu thereof the King of Den∣mark quits unto him all his rights in the Provinces of Haland and Schonen, and of Blieken, which are the Continent of Sweden, on the North side of the Sound; and doth moreover surrender unto him the Island of Bornholm, and the Lordships of Bahusen, and of Drunthen in Norway, which lie most convenient to cause the Trade of Sweden to flourish. Some other conditions there are, but lesse considerable. The Peace being concluded and ratified by both Kings, the King of Denmark feasted the King of Sweden for cer∣taine dayes, and at several times both Kings were together alone, for the space of two or three hours at a time, whereby it is con∣ceived that they have contracted a nearer and stricter alliance to∣gether, than the Publick Treatise can mention. This being done, the King of Sweden went into his own Countrey; and hath con∣vocated the States of his Kingdom at Gottenburg, to dispose of his affairs with their advice, and to take up further resolutions in time to come. This unexpected and miraculous successe of the Swedish Kings enterprise, hath disappointed all the Counsels and plots of his ad∣versaries against him, for which he is obliged to none but unto God alone: and from hence his friends have just cause to gather, that God hath raised him out of his straits, and redoubled his strength to make further use of him towards the advancement of the common cause of Protestants, in whose behalf he concluded the Peace at Munster, and which he thinks himself in conscience and honour obliged to see maintained for the Protestant interest; tanquam altera pars paciscens, as in a letter of his to the Empe∣rour he did expresse himself. So that it seems the Protestant cause in Germany will finde in him a Protector of so much cou∣rage and resolution, and conduct, as any that could be expected or desired: And it is known to all that know him, that he is earnestly bent to take away the differences, and advance the re∣concilement of Protestants within themselves: and that he makes no difference between Lutherans (as they are called) and Calvi∣nists, but makes use of both alike, according to their abilities, as he findes them fitted for employment to forreign affairs: for
within the Kingdom of Sweden, no forreigners, and none but Lu∣therans, are to be admitted to the civil charges of trust; others are employed in military charges, both there and elsewhere, ac∣cording to their deserts. But presently after the Elector of Brandenburg was by subtile artifices withdrawn from the King of Sweden, and joyned with the Emperour, and the King of Poland against him: the King of Denmark was prevailed with to break his late-made League, and the States of the United Provinces have joyned with the Dane against him; and God having taken away his great friend Oliver Lord Protector, he hath conflicted with many and great difficulties, and yet hitherto God hath upholden him from sinking under them. What the issue will be, time must discover. FINIS.
A Table of all the principal Things contained in this General MARTYROLOGIE. A ANabaptists wickedness Pag. 281 Anger implacable 355 Apostacy dangerous 43, 50, 53, 82, 171, 183, 202 205, 210, 264, 324, 349 Apostates wickedness 6, 15, 177 B BIbles, & sacred Scriptures burnt 7, 62 204, 210, 283, 332, 333, 334, 388 Bibles in French first printed 118 Blasphemy 16, 44, 72, 84, 86, 172, 186 189, 190, 209, 290, 295, 310, 334, 336 337, 338, 339, 348, 384, 388▪ C CHarity of Christians 70, 92, 96, 103, 285, 286, 293, 303, 320, 323, 367, 369 Chastity eminent 52 Children martyred 44, 48, 51, 72, 73, 91, 99, 110, 346, 391 Children encouraged by their parents to sufferings 23, 24, 75, 88, 95, 98, 315 Christ preferred above all 132, 269, 283 350, 359 Christians slandred as the Authors and causes of mischief 31, 34, 37, 41, 46, 56, 63, 80, 87, 98, 105, 112, 115, 136, 174, 177, 179, 325 Christians murthered in Churches 65, 93, 329, 360 Christians reproached 82, 241 Comfort at death 177, 193, 196, 266, 270, 279, 282, 289, 320 Conscience evil 92 Constancy of Gods children 18, 39, 42, 44, 53, 63, 73, 76, 78, 81, 92, 94, 95, 117, 132, 147, 171, 188, 204, 209, 254, 264, 266, 269, 270, 272, 277, 288, 301, 304, 305, 341, 361, 364, 415 Conversions strange 47, 48, 58, 179, 268 279, 286, 287, 289.299.303 329, 364 Courage and Constancy of Gods children 7, 9, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 51, 52, 57, 63, 66, 67, 71, 73, 77, 83, 85, 86, 98, 99 103, 118, 142, 189, 191, 192, 256 259, 269, 288, 290, 291, 292, 293 295, 299, 302, 317, 319, 321, 323, 326, 360, 362, 370, 389, 400, 406, 429 Cruelty of heathens to Gods people 7, 9, 31, 52, 65, 69, 71, 76, 77, 83, 84. Cruelty of Heriticks to them 87, 89, 91, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97. Cruelty of Papists to them 103, 105, 108, 110, 111, 113, 115, 125, 126, 134, 135, 137, 143, 146, 153, 171, 173, 183, 184, 188, 201, 203, 206, 207, 208, 209, 240, 241, 242, 272 279, 282, 286, 288, 292, 297, 298 305, 308, 309, &c. 323, 325, 328 330, 332, &c. 344, 361, 380, &c. 414, &c. 421, &c. 451. D Devils subtilty 59 Dissimulation 199, 252, 341, 342, 343, 345, 402, 416. E Edicts good 145 Edicts, and Lawes cruel 49▪ 62 70, 97, 106, 137, 155, 160, 164, 173, 175, 179, 198, 199, 319, 335, 362, 397, 405, 413. Envie 94 Examples prevalent 98 F Faith of Gods children 77.78, 190, 193, 266, 304, 331, 336, 338, 361 False witnesses 282 Famines terrible 69, 157, 159, 298 352, 355, 356. Fasting, and Prayer 122 Fidelity 193 Flattery 73, 249 Flight in time of persecution 51 Flight refused 287, 300, 317 H Hereticks profane 90, 100 Hereticks proud 97 Heretickes subtile 96, 97 Hereticks impudent 98
Heroical acts 274, 292 Humane frailty 41, 51, 63, 66, 120, 134, 249, 267, 273, 296, 319, 327, 366 Humility 275 Husbands malice against his wife 40 Hypocrisie 68, 70, 248, 316, 350 I Idolatry gross 276 Idolatry reformed 282 Jewes murthered refusing to fight on the sabbath 8 Ignorance 256, 285, 365 Jmage of Apollo broken with lightning 85 Ingratitude 36, 184, 281, 348 Inquisition, begun 118, 236. Joy unspeakable 44, 193, 67 Joy in tribulation 128, 190, 209, 270, 294, 296, 302, 336, 366. Judgments of God 16.116, 154, 157. L Life refused 266 Love of Christians 54.115 M Meekness of Christians 287 Ministers Mrtyred 53.56, 80 88, 172, 187, 280, 284, 285, 286, 290 293, 298, 310, 311, 329, 336, 340, 346, 350, 351, 352 Ministers sheltred in times of Persecu∣tion 198 Miracles. Miracles of mercy 13 23, 32, 41, 49, 51, 63, 83, 87, 121, 279 282, 285, 288, 320, 322, 324, 337 343.395. N Nobility true 72 O Ordination of Ministers 174 P Patience of Gods children in sufferings 19, 40, 50, 66, 191, 203, 271, 274 292, 296, 323, 338, 349, 373 Perfidiousness 15.243. See Popish per∣fidiousness. Persecution spreads the Gospel 104, 156, 164, 174, 178, 328. Persecutors plagued by God 13, 26, 28 48, 53, 54, 59, 67, 69, 70, 84, 89, 100 112, 116, 125, 138, 139, 168, 175, 176 177, 210, 211, 257, 277, 283, 284, 297 305, 321, 326, 328, 330, 354, 355 364, 389, 392, 393, 394, 433 Persecutors converted 27.64.322 Plagues terrible 54.69.158 Popish malice 103.104.106.115.119 120.173.175.178.179.208.235.251 279.284.289.300.320.326.329 367.399 Popish Prrfidiousnesse 122.124.125 131.145.149.150.151.159.183 201.233.264.290.298.299.316 335.338.339.340.362.378.380 390.393 Popish subtilty 113.114.122.124 128.140.147.151.170.172.174 180. &c. 199.203.206.207.233 237.239.290.296.306.331.351 364.405. &c. 432 Popish uncleanness 113.138.139.144 207.336.376.378.391.392 Prayer in times of danger 5.10.11 126.129.130.287 Prayer powerfull and prevalent 44.9.123.191.294.370 Predictions and Prophesies 195.265.324.368.370.371.372.375 Pride 62.92.148 Profanness 93.118.121.123.135.139.17.207 Providences special 14.40.52.54.58.61.78.85.88.91.92.93.96.114.116.118.120.123.124.125.126.128.129 130.134.145.167.178.179.184.202.251.255.259.261.264.265.266.269.277.286.289.292.299.303 307.316.317.325.326.328.330.331 332, 338.347.351.352.354.360.361.367.369.404.432.433. Prudence of Chrisians 119.326.401 R REcovery after falls 43.53.79.202.249.251, 256.264.267.273 296.320.328 Riches are snares 50 S Scismaticks plagued by God 90 Scismaticks bloody 86 Scismaticks profane 90 Scismaticks subtile 86 Scisme comes from pride 54, 172 Scriptures, see Bible Sectaries dangerous 48 Sin the forerunner of persecution 56.61.100.180.341 Son dutifull and loving 346 Southsayers wickedness 49, 55, 79, 80
Speeches excellent 293.295, 300.304.317.322 327.334.352.362 Stories excellent 33.78.88.95.125.322 353 Subtilty of the Churches enemies 16.18.20.23.82.84.87 Success no sign of a good cause 189.278 Sympathy 95 Synods 173 T TEntations resisted 77.79.94.95.99.132; 176, 187, 190, .203.265.268.270.271.272.284.291.293.300.322.327.336.361.365 Thanksgiving for mercies 129.154 Thanksgiving for sufferings 266▪ 300 Trechery rewarded 45.323.359 360 V Visions 53.56 W WAldenses their opinions 103 Wife loving to her husband 171 Wisdom of Christians 84 see prudence Witnesses false, plagued by God 47 Womens courage 356.360 Z ZEal 8.19.41.45.46.50.51.53.58 63, 76.79.86.107.116.117.131 133.135.51.258.268.275.289.290.291.295.299.300.304.315.319.321.324.345.363 FINIS. This Book being printed most of it by the printed Copy, I looked not over the Proofes, and so through the carelesness of the Correctors and Compositors many faults have escaped, which I pray thee to amend with thy pen before thou readest the Book ERRATA in the general MARTYROLOGIE. PAge 29 line 14 read him for them. l 40 r India for Indian. p 36 l 25 r whom for who. p 37 l. 17. put in, cease to. l 21 put in, to. p 45 l 6 r were for was. l 14 r Decree for degree. p 62 l 22 r ador∣ning for adoreing. p 67 l 4 r this for his. l 5 r com for cow. l 8 r they for the. p 79 l 16 r that for the p 81 l 29 r stake for stalk. p 84 l 41 r also for all. p 94 l 28 r Torturers for tortures. l 36 r Courtiers for Countries. p 106 l ult. put in, whosoever. p 114 l 37 r they for the. p 115 l 10 r was for were. l 15 r Prince for Princes. p 117 l 17 r which for with. l 23 r belief for relief. p 118 l 3 r edified for edifying. p 120 l 1 r they for the p. p 121 l 25 put in, whereupon. p 122 l 26 r enjoyned for enjoyed. p 128 l 41 r slaying for staying. p 132 l 31 r children for child. p 133 l 17 r receiving for receive. p 135 l 32 r sixty for sixtly. p 137 l 39 r opened for opening. p 147 l 34 put out, was. p 149 l 7 r retaining for restraining. p. 151 l 16 r their for they. p 152 l 11 r represented for presented. p 153 l 37 r approach for reproach. p 154 l 1 r die for are. l 31 r Bertrand for Btrand. p 156 l 1 r Bosnia for Bosina. l 7 r when for where p. 158 l 41 r root for rout. p 159 l ult. r delivered for discovered. p 160 l 15 r Maundy for munday. p 161 l 29 r upon for of, Cities for City. p 163 l 5 r buried for burnt. l 14 r they for the. l 29 r two for second. p 164 l 1 r Catholick for Cathe. p 186 l 42 r they for the. p 189 l 2 r breast for breasts. l 8 r was for were. p 193 l 8 r hoary for heavy. p 198 l 7 put out should. p 202 l 9 r were for was. p 139 l 15 r this for his. l 17 r for never no man, r no man ever. p 271 l 41 put in, free. p 279 l 8 put in, one. l 28 r sent for set. p 297 l 16 r zeal for seal. p 303 l 24 put in, her. p 304 l 13 put in, took. p 308 l 7 r girls for gilts. l 11 r burnt for burn. l 16 r goodly for godly. l 30 r macerating for macecrating. p 309 l 28 put in, of. p 334 l 3 r mouth for mouta. p 351 l ult. r Parisians for Persians. p 375 l 18 put in, brought p 378 l 9 put out, and so. p 383 l 21 r short for shot. p 387 l 35 r leave for have. p 404 l 12 r whom for where. p 468 l 6 for Infections r Infractions. Other literal faults are easily amended.
