C4816 16992781 105646
A CONTINUATION Of the Account of The Nature, Causes, Symptoms and Cure OF THE DISTEMPERS That are incident to Seafaring People. Illustrated with some remarkable Instances of the Sicknesses of the Fleet during the last Summer, histo∣rically related. To which is prefix'd, An Essay concerning the quantity of Blood that is to be evacuated in Fevers. Being the Third Part of the Work. By William Cockburn, of the College of Physicians, London; Physician to the Blue Squadron of his Majesty's Fleet, and Fellow of the Royal Society. LONDON, Printed for Hugh Newman, at the Grashop∣per in the Poultry, 1697.
TO THE Right Honourable John Lord Berkeley, Baron Straton, Admiral and Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Fleet, &c. My Lord, OCasions of Addres∣sing those of your Lordship's Worth and Qua∣lity, have as often been a∣bus'd by the undiscreet Pa∣negyrics, and fulsom flat∣teries of cringing Parasites, as they have been eagerly catch'd at. My obligations to your Lordship make me
glad of an opportunity but I confess, I think a De∣dication an improper light for that sacred thing Nobi∣lity, and the great actions of Noble Persons: Grave History, and a good Hand do that picture a great deal more to the life; for then there's no design, it never sullies, and the colours hold through all ages; yet if I had as strong inclinations to Flatter, as my subject is tempting, and hands me fairly into an opportunity, your Lordship's known and declar'd aversion to all such practices and flaunting cu∣stoms, a true stamp of en∣grain'd
Nobility, that ne∣ver wanted these false, (and may I say) satyrical lights of silly flatrerers, who never yet made a better Hero, than Aesop's bird with bor∣row'd plumes: I say, that if my desire was as great, as my subject's inviting, yet this true Greatness of your Lordship's would justly check all such unreasona∣ble and impudent de∣signs, that would so tickle these poor Creatures that are infinitely pleased with borrowed Feathers, when their Gnatho's after a long study, can find nothing so good to equip them with,
as a piece of old Marble, or a Monument only valu∣able for the want of a Nose or Lg broke off by time. But tho your Lordship hates as inveterately, as you do not want any such ridi∣culous praises, and I, of all things, hate a Sycophant the most; yet I may ac∣knowledge, that my Ob∣ligations to your Lordship are very great, and that 'tis only Gratitude that pushes me forward to give you the trouble of This; but especially, since your Favour and extraordinary Encouragements, have mightily contributed to∣wards
the productions in these sheets, that now ven∣ture into the world under your Lordship's protection; and I will hope that you'll not only protect this stran∣ger, but accept of my slen∣der Thanks; till I have a better opportunity to ac∣quit my self, as ought, My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble and Faithful Servant, W. Cockburn.
THE PREFACE. I Am oblig'd, with the modern Poets, to be speak my Reader's favour to the following Sheets. They contain nothing but what is fact; yet, That appears too simple in their primitive dress, to bear the Censure of some peevish Cri∣tics: The first draught was done at Sea, and it was my business for an hour after dinner, only to keep me from sleeping; else these Observations had lain to this day, wrapt up in that rubbish of an or∣der, in which they wee made; for soon after my Summer's expedition was at an end, I was commanded to attend the Fleet, under Sir Cloudesly Shovel, into Spain, which is the sole reason, why these
Papers are not fild from some of their roughness, that might justly have forbidden their seeing the light, if my design of publishing my yearly observations shou'd not have been broke off: and I know that Ingenious and Candid Rea∣ders will more easily dispence with this Ore, than to have had no Metal at all. But that they might not prove entirely ungrateful, as the reading a continu'd series of Observations always is, I have en∣deavour'd to intersperse some∣thing that's more of Theor and Reasoning, as often as the thread, nature and design of the subject would allow me: I never sought a Digression, yet when I judg'd it a propos, and for m Reader's diversion, I neither shunn it, nor run it out to too great length. Histories of Diseases a not for wearing off a melanchol minute, however useful they may b and therefore I inclind to seaso them with an exercise of reason
which gives the greatest satisfacti∣on to great and thinking Souls: I have related the Histories them∣selves in all their circumstances of propriety and time; and have not scruplde to propose new medicins and even methods of Cure, when they have been the most rea∣sonable, faithfully relating the suc∣cess that attended the practice. The relating of Observations is the pe∣culiar province of Physicians that have liv'd long and have had a great practice; or of any One that has been much among sick people, and with all thi, they ought to be very capable to know how to ask their Patients proper questions, to hear what they relate, and distin∣guish betwixt these Symptoms that must of necessity attend such a Dis∣ease, or at least this Distemper in a Patient of such a Constitution, and those that now appear by some accident or a peculiar practice. O∣therways; men may live a great , as long as the World
is to last, and yet have no more experience, than they had the first hour they began their Trade; whereas, when they are thus qualifi∣ed, the not only improve themselves to an unconceivable pitch for the the good of their Country; but they are capable too, to hand down to succeeding ages, these natural Hi∣stories of Diseases, which become as certainly and well known by their symptoms, and as easy to be distin∣guished as Silver and Gold, by the properties we relate to belong to each of them; and the Novices in Me∣dicin being fitly moulded in the Schools of the Philosophers and Mathematicians, approaching the simple but noble discoveries of the modern Anatomists, not veil'd with the ridiculous jargon of an Usus partium, and learning to know medicins these instruments of health he is to be an absolute master of in a way he would naturally dis∣cover a Stone not to be a Fsh, a Man, or a Horse, and enquiring
what relation they may have to us, how they may affect us, without be∣ing prejudicd by the principles of any sect of Philosophers, he may have read: then reading and com∣paring by these helps of Philosophy, Mathematicks, Anatomy, Pharma∣cy, Experimental Knowledge, &c. such Observations we suppose him to have now made to his hand, he must needs enter into the world upon such foundations, better qualified and of more and greater experience, than one who has al∣ready practic'd as long as Methu∣selah lived, but of an other educa∣tion and make. We talk a great deal here of the Barbarity of the Chinese, and their ignorance of a great many Arts that are very well known among us; yet we deserv∣edly admire the stupendous and a∣stonishing relations we have, of the progress they have made, and the certainty they have attained to in Aesculapius's Art, and that with the native plants of their Country, and
the only reason we can assign for their singular and great improve∣ment in this most noble and useful Art, (which by restoring us to our health, makes us enjoy our Estates, our Liberty and our Relations, gives us all the satisfaction Mankind is allowed to enjoy in this troublesom life, and ev'n makes us conquer our misfortunes) is that they initiate their Children from their tender years in its mysteries, by a constant attendance upon their Parents, who are often Kings, Princes, and Brachmans, as well as Physicians, and that they enjoin them a strict observation of their Parents practice without being diverted and amus'd with any thing besides, when they are upon the study of so human and heavenly a Knowledge, which can bring relief to their languishing friends, and solace and suppot their decaying nature: So there is no wonder if one that is instructed in the experience of many former ages, having his head turn'd, and his na∣ture
perfectly moulded that way, does arrive to a greater perfection and certainty in that art, even in a more barbarous and ignorant Country (if we may suppose them so) than they are capable to do in Nations that are more famous for Learning, where me∣dicin is begun with nothing so great an advantage, nothing so much studied not only as there, but even as they themselves study other things of less concern, and all comprehended in the short life of one man. I do not write this with any reflexion up∣on our own age, tho I must own that we have as great a share in this, as our Ancestors, when the telling a pleasant story, a piece of wit, a gloomy and sullen melancholy alone can entitle us to the fame of great Physicians; and which is worse, pretence and impudence are the only stock and furniture of some. There can be no remedy for this till Pa∣tients shou'd become fit judges of their Physicians, which is never to be expected. But since we see that
Observations are so necessary and useful a piece of Medicin, let us but see what helps the Authors of this kind of Learning give us. We ought to look back into all the ages of Medicin, if we were to be exact in this matter, but the talk has been so difficult, that it has been either industriously shunn'd or very ill performed hitherto by the Learn∣ed that have lived before us, till at this time the learned Monsieur Le Clerc has undertaken this work, and has already favour'd the world with his first Tome, where he gives us hope of his carrying it on to our time. 'Twere needless to manage the matter in his way, tho a Pre∣face would admit of it; since the daily complaints of practitioners are about the short coming of such ob∣servations to their daily business, and how often they lose their way in such dark paths. But let us compare the Observations of Physi∣cians with a rule which we ought to make to our selves, about an exact
and genuin ennmeration of symptoms, numbers and force of pulses, colours and quantity of Ʋrin, its consistency, time of breaking and the like, the time of the year, the Patient's age, the time of the disease when we see him, what medicins are given, how kept, and what is the event, and how the medicins took their effect, with other more particular questions that may more particularly settle the difference of the Disease. I say, if we compare the Books of observations with this Rule, Im a∣fraid we will find them of very little use, not only Forestus, Hollerius, Horstius, Platerus. &c. but great∣er Masters of greater antiquity sinking under the apprehensions of being tried by this general rule; 'tis not many Names, many Countries, and many Streets of any one City, that make an observation compleat, but a little more: and really looking into all the modern and ancient wri∣ters of Observations, I must own that 'tis my opinion that our own Dr Sy∣denham
has writ in the most exact and particular way, tho he has not come quite up to the former Rule. 'Tis surely in Medicin as in all other other Physical knowledge, the more circumstances we know, the better judgment we are able to make. This is the scheme I have laid to my self in writing my Observations last year, and this, which I have endeavour'd to pursue as far as the conveniency of the place I was in did allow, and tho I saw people in all the Ships of my division yet I only thought fit to relate my Observations in 3 or 4, where I was most capable to satisfy the particulars of my own rule, as I have expresly said, in the beginning of the 2d part of my Sea-sicknesses, tho one or two who pretend more to the way of Writing than the way of Medicin, laid this as a heavy charge to my door, but the little, one of them writ, especially in his own profession, may evidently convince the world, that he's almost as wretched a Writer as he's a weak Physician: 'Tis true, his
Trade's to be a Physician, but his pre∣tences are to Wit. I have spent too much time upon a thing that's the diversion of the Apothecarie's Boy, in every Bill he sends him, which he's forc'd to model in another way; since I neither stand nor fall by his censure, I neither value the Book more or less for his character, which I knew he would give it, without a reading. I first began a book of this subject, because it was wanting, and 'twas my particular province; and I must acknowledge my obligations to the world for the entertainment they gave it; tho it came abroad in the Summer, an when the interrup∣tion in the Currency of money did so much discourage all sorts of Trade: but above all, if I was to value the Book, I would upon the encourage∣ment it had in the most famous and learned Ʋniversity of Oxford, the Glory of all Europe for its noble fabrick, but a great deal more for these famous and shining lights she sends abroad at all times, and
in so great and so singular a number, that she's but deservedly the admira∣tion of the whole earth. But 'twas neither fame nor a desire of praise that put me upon this task, but an inclination of doing good in the way providence has put me into; and all my wishes are only, that this and the former book may be able to men some of the many mistakes I found, in that business, and if I am so hap∣py as in these Observations, to lay one firm Step, by which others may advance to a greater certainty in their practice, I have at∣tain'd to a perfect enjoyment of my propos'd design and inclination.
THE CONTENTS. THE Introduction pag. 1 The requisites for an Evacuation in Fevers 3 The imperfect account Authors have given of Blood-letting 6 Their Rules ib. What is to be thought of the first Rule 7 The second is false 10 What of the third 11 The fourth which is Hippocrates Rule is very uncertain 12 The last is most false 14 An Observation 16 Proposals for a better understanding the quantity of Blood-lettiag 18 What a Depress'd pulse is 19 The second thing proposed 23 The first Observation of a fever 26 The 2d Observation 30 A remark 31 Another ib. Observation 3d 32 A remark 34 Observation 4th 35 Observation 5th 37 The solution of a considerable Symptom ib. Observation 6th 43
Observation 7th 44 Observation 8th 48 Observation 9th 50 Observation 10th 52 Observation 11th 52 A remark 56 Observation 12th 57 A remark 58 A remark 60 A Letter 61 A remark 63 Observation 13th of a new medicin for the cure of fevers 64 Observation 14th 66 Observation 15th 67 Observation 16th of an Ague 68 Observation 17th 70 Observation 18th 72 Observation 19th of an Ague personated by the Gout 74 A remark 75 Observation 20th of a looseness 78 Observation 21st 80 Observation 22d ib. Observation 23d 81 Observation 24th 83 Observation 25th 84 Observation 26th 85 Observation 27th of an Apoplexy 86 A remark about the nature, and reasonable cure of this Disease 87 Observation 28th of an Asthma 99 Observation 29th of a Clap 101 A remark 102
Observation 30th of a Pox 104 Observation 31st of the Spleen 106 Observation 32d 109 Observation 33d of a beginning decay 111 Observation 34th of a Melanch. Hyp. 112 A remark 114 Observation 35 115 A remark 117 Observation 36th of a Cough and a spitting of Blood 115 Observation 37th of a Pleurisy 122 Observation 38th of an Anasarca 124 A remark 129 Observation 39th of an Iiac Passion 130 Observation 40th of a Cholera Morbus 135 Observation 41st of a Dropsie 139 A remark 140 Observation 42d of a Quinsey 141 Observation 43d of the yellow jaundice 143 Observation 44 of the same A remark against the Doctrine of secretions by fermentation
A CONTINUATION OF THE History of the Diseases IN HIS Majesty's Navy, &c. I Endeavour'd last year, to give a genuin and true account of the rise and nature of the Sicknesses at Sea, from considerations about the way of their living; and the Indica∣tions of Cure, which were the results of that Reasoning: and to these I ad∣ded the historical observations of that year, which made a more particular and practical part of that Book:The Con∣tinuation. And now being to illustrate that first part, and perform my promise in the se∣cond,
I will confine my self to the Method I proposed for relating these Observations, and pursue it with all the Candidness and Integrity that can be expected, without repeating any thing that has been mention'd alrea∣dy: and therefore I must desire every one that will judge of this, to recol∣lect the general Theory in the first, and the most reasonable Indications in the second Part, as the best way to prevent mistakes and obscurity. On∣ly I must confess, that tho I have put it beyond exception, by arguments from reason and experience, that Evacuation in the case of Fevers is absolutely necessary towards their Cure, and tho I have also declar'd that this Evacuation is to be propor∣tionable to the interrupted perspirati∣on, that causes our Fevers, that is, ei∣ther in the same quantity, with the detained steams, or at least in such a quantity as may procure more liberal secretions; so that if the quantity that is evacuated be not equal to the quantity of detain'd steams, yet mak∣ing the secretions more freely, there may be a quantity evacuated equal to these steams, by the secretions that
are now begun: Yet, I say, I must confess that I may seem to be wanting in setting a standard, or certain mark, which may direct our Surgeons in the difficult stages of these Evacuations, with as much certainty as a fix'd mark in the Heavens directs our Sailers in their Voyages. 'Tis true I might al∣ledge that the profound intricacy of so particular a part of knowledge, and the many blunders I have ob∣serv'd in the most learned Authors that have but touch'd upon these dif∣ficulties, tho never so slightly, have deterr'd me from venturing upon so nice a Task; and after so reasonable an excuse I cou'd not be blam'd for any considerable neglect or omission. But since this knowledge, tho never so hard, is extremely necessary for the fixing of a certain Method of practice, I'le set out for once, and if I do mis∣carry, 'twill be in good company, a∣mong the masterly Heroes in Me∣dicin. Since the quantity to be evacuated is proportionable to the detain'd steams,The requi∣sites for this Eva∣cuation. and the quantity of staems may be very easily valued, (as I hope I shall prove in its proper place), as I
have already intimated in the gene∣ral, that it exceeds not two or three pounds; 'tis plain that either two or three pounds are actually to be eva∣cuated, or such a quantity that may procure new secretions which will evacuate the requir'd quantity. And 'tis no less certain that this is to be perform'd according to the different strength and constitutions of our Pati∣ents, and with such Instruments as may not require a larger Evacuation by rarefying and giving a new motion to the Blood. 'Tis here the difficul∣ty lyes, to know what quantity our Patients strength will allow to be evacuated, and to make an estimate of the instruments we use on this oc∣casion, and of the effects they pro∣duce, besides our primary intention. Now 'tis the uncertainty of the Sweat∣ing Medicins we use for compassing our design of evacuation that occasions this great difficulty in our first inten∣tion, because sometimes they are gi∣ven without any success, but heigh∣ten the Pulse, and encrease the other severe symptoms we see in Fevers; and at other times taking effect, and cau∣sing an excessive evacuation through
the pores of our Body, they send our patients out of the world another way, instead of curing them by a due quantity, which no man can pretend to expel by these Medicins, which we are so little Masters of, that we are not able to foretel, with any tolera∣ble exactness, the quantity of steams discharg'd that way, nor the additional heat produc'd by their small parts. Next to them are purging medicins, of which tho we are a great deal more certain, yet they are not exempted from some of the difficulties that at∣tend the others. So that the surest instrument for performing our design is Phlebotomy or Bleeding, tho' even this may create a stronger pulse, a greater heat, and the like, than was before, after losing ten or twelve ounces of blood in a certain circum∣stance, which I shall have occasion to speak of here. And therefore bleeding being the most certain way, I will for once suppose all the rest as certain, or at least signify by this more certain way what we intend by the rest when we apply them them to evacuate the quantity we desire, according to the strength and constitution of our patient.
And now when I am to apply Venesecti∣on to this design, I must confess I can hardly forbear running out into a long digression concerning some noble Theores about the great and diffe∣rent effects of bleeding, that depend entirely upon the infinitely useful de∣monstration of the circulation of the Blood, that crowd into my thoughts; but I must at present restrain my self now, because the general ac∣counts we find in Authors about bleeding, are only as it evacuates such a quantity;The im∣perfect ac∣count Au∣thors have given of Blood-let∣ting. I will shew in the first place how imperfect and useless the advices of our great Masters are in this affair, and then inform the Rea∣der, what other ways are to be taken for attaining a greater certainty, tho the more particular account can ne∣ver be properly apply'd in this place; and this will exactly answer what I proposed. The Rules and Advices which Wri∣ters in Medicine have given us in this matter, are to let blood according to the strength of the Patient; till he faint away, till we have taken away enough, and till it change its colour from worse to better, from black to red; and
lastly, some others who think they have given the last touch to this que∣stion, take their marks from the big∣ness and fulness of the Vessels, and so take away as much as a man may be supposed to lose in a day without dying, and this way they pretend to confirm by some nstances from pra∣ctice, in which, th I hope they suc∣ceeded in their own practice, yet I doubt not but I shall convince the Rea∣der, of the unhappy state of those sick people that are drain'd of their Blood, by such unsteady and uncertain rules.What is to be thought of the first Rule. But to enquire into the first of these, which advises us to let our Pa∣tients blood according to their strength, 'tis certain that must never be exceed∣ed; yet there are a great many de∣signs in bleeding, in which that is not so often to be respected. Not but that if the quantity to be let, should exceed the Patient's strength, that consideration would become the first and greatest; yet, I say, there are a great many designs in bleeding, that the quantity to be taken away is so small, that the strength of the Patient can never be brought into question: For instance, in making a
revulsion, and old and confirmed ope∣ration and practice, tho never to be accounted for, but by supposing Harvey's noble Theorem of the cir∣culation of the Blood, however con∣trary to that Doctrine, the most of our modern Physitians have been pleased to think it. I say in making a revulsion, or by determining the motion of the Blood, more towards one part than another, which is to be practiced upon a thousand occasions; the quantity to be let, if other cir∣cumstances are observed, very often exceeds not six or eight Ounces in the strongest constitutions; now such a quantity can never be supposed to bring our Patients strength into doubt, 'tis evident that in such cases this great rule is, (I had almost said) of no use at all to us. But next, if our Patient be troubl'd with a Distemper that proceeds from too much blood, and we desire to be so nice, as to re∣lieve him of all the offending quantity, and not to impair his strength, or ha∣ving others sicknesses that require Phle∣botomy for their cure, and the strength of the patient comes in competition, so that is never to be injur'd; yet th
Rule is so precariously injoin'd, that no Physician can be instructed, how to put it in practice; which the learn∣ed Galen willingly confesses. Nullam rem, says he, aeque artem medicam con∣jecturalem facere, quam Medicamentorum quantitatem. That nothing makes the Physicians Art more conjectural than the dosing of Medicins. De curat. rat. per sang. miss. c. 12. But this appears more evidently by Physicians Consul∣tations in acute Diseases, concerning a healthy young Man affected, for ex∣ample with a Fever, Pleurisie, or Quinsie, they all agree, and are of one judgment, that nothing can so secure∣ly rescue him from this imminent danger, than the taking away of as much blood as his strength can bear: yet assoon as the Vein is opened, and the Patient has lost some nine or ten ounces of blood, one of 'em begins immediately to try by his Pulse how far his strength is impaired; and after a round Trial has been made by them all, they can come to no positive a∣greement about their Rule; while one thinks there is too much, another too little, and a third just enough taken away; so that however they seem'd
agreed about letting him blood in the general, and in as great a quantity as his strength could bear; yet they can∣not condescend about the time of of stopping it, and the rise of all this difference is only from their ignorance of their Patient's strength, which they thought so easy, as to settle it for a Rule in this operaration. Now perhaps they are to measure the strength of the Patient by bleed∣ing him till he faint away; other false. and if this be set up, as more evident than the first, 'tis so far from being so, that 'tis a great deal more obscure: for very many who are to be let blood till they put on this emblem of pale Death, faint away, not only after losing a very moderate quantity, but even af∣ter the loss of two or three ounces, or immediately after the vein is cut; or even by seeing any other persons blood, or the Lancet it self. What's then to be done? nothing; but the wound must be tied up, and the bleed∣ing delay'd till a sitter opportunity. 'Tis true, the bleeding may be put off, but the cause of the Disease will not adjourn, but double its force and dis∣pute the command of the subject. Up∣on
the other hand, there are many who could suffer all the blood in their Body to run out, before they faint a∣way, which often happens to those whose dressings fall off in their sleep, and make their Bed swim with blood, tho sometimes they themselves reco∣ver. The third rule is just as satisfacto∣ry as the other two;What of the third. for when they advise us to let so much as we may think enough, it is evident that there will be as many opinions about this enough as there are Physicians, and perhaps more; for while some are for bleeding and others not, they that agree in their judgments for letting Blood, differ about the quan∣tity, and very often the business is car∣ried by him, whom age alone gives the killing authority, or an habituated impudence has taught to overtalk the rest; so that we may very well say with the learned Galen,  Fortu∣natum esse aegrotantem qui in manus boni Medici inciderit, aut cui fortuna seu De∣us potius ita faveat, ut eam caeteris prae∣valere sententiam faciat, quae sit utilior: That sick person is very lucky who falls into the hands of a good Physi∣cian,
or whom fortune or rather God Almighty favours so much, that he makes that opinion prevail, which is the most useful. Now this third Rule is certainly true, but at the same time 'tis very obscure and hard to be un∣derstood; this is an aim or design in every bodies eye, but it is not so ea∣sily performed by most Physicians, for the reasons we gave before, and what more learning does a Doctor show, when he orders a Surgeon to let so much as is sufficient, than a Wo∣man, who seeing the blood run out, desires them to take no more than may be enough. Yet this enough is only presum'd to be known, by the other signs we have just now con∣demn'd, and therefore 'tis plain, how well 'tis like to be done; and how certain a Rule this will prove. And when they persuade us, with Hippoc.Hippocrat, Rule very uncertain. to make the colour of the blood the rule and standard of the quantity that is to be taken away, they confine this useful and noble operation within too narrow bounds; and to say no more, if the blood was only to be taken away when it is black, tough, and seizie, and till it become red:
the redness of the blood being the mark beyond which we are not to go, 'tis evident that when the blood is so, there will be no want of bleeding. Yet, in a great many Apoplexies, Fe∣vers, &c. the blood is not often dis∣coloured, at least not very considera∣bly, and yet this operation is extreme∣ly useful and necessary. Besides, when one of the best habit of body has just fallen from a high place, a wise Phy∣sician easily foresees that the vessels of those parts that come first to the ground, will be considerably com∣prest, and that by this compression the blood cannot move so easily through those parts, and by its stopping there, will produce terrible symptoms, ac∣cording to the greatness of the com∣pression, and the office of the part whose vessels are thus compres'sd: And therefore, he thinks it necessary, both for lessening the quantity, and perhaps quickening the motion, to cause this person to be let blood, and that in a considerable quantity, with very great success. Yet the blood in those people, immediately after the fall, is not much, if at all, altered from what it was before the fall, and
being then suppos'd to be of a good colour, or red, 'tis evident that by this Rule he could not lose an ounce, and the consequece would be, most troublesome and dangerous contusions, Apoplexies, Rheumatical and Pleuritical pains, difficulties of breathing, a Fever, and the like, which we see happen upon suth occasions. But upon the other hand, let us suppose that blood was never to be taken away, but in this ill colour of the blood (which we see is not so) and till it has acquir'd a better one, yet they cannot so qua∣lify this Rule, that we may know the degrees of this ill colour, and how much blood we may take away before it acquires a better one, and whether the blood that seems necessary to be evacuated, can be spared by the Pati∣ent, which would have been highly useful, and even necessary for making their Rule complete; whereas by our historical account of the last year, 'tis evident that the blood may be mighti∣ly chang'd by an interruption of perspi∣ration, and now in case of a fall, in less than 24 hours, and that bleeding may actually dispose the blood for beco∣ming better, by promoting the secre∣tions,
and recovering its colour and strength in almost as short a time as they wee lost. Now one that speaks very high on this subject, and whom the rational bleeders at this time follow, says we can never fail, if we have respect to the fulness of the vessels, and the quan∣tity of blood a man may be reckoned to spare.This the most false. But this Rule is too general to be put in practice: 'tis true, as he says, that fat people, whose veins are generally small, and consequently can∣not contain much blood, if they be drain'd of an indifferent quantity, will feel the inconveniences of the want of blood, or of a dispirited blood, very soon and fatally, by cachectical dis∣eases and a Dropsie▪ Yet it is no less certain, that melancholy splenetick men, or women that are troubled with va∣pours, whose vessels are generally wide, and actually contain a great deal of blood, and by this Rule can spare the most; yet they, for the most part, can never bear so large a bleeding, even as those fat people we just now spoke of, and very seldom can endure the loss of ten or twelve ounces of blood without a sinking in their heart (as they
call it) dimness of sight, or as it is ex∣pressively called by the French, une De∣faillance des esprits; so that their over∣much comes sooner than that of the fat people themselves, which plainly con∣tradicts this Rule. Now, I would gladly ask any of those Authors, whe∣ther or not the other part of the Rule, What a man can spare, be not the same with that of the strength of the Patient, which we find to be very true, but not plain enough to be of any use: Or if they think they may take as much blood away, as we find people have lost by wounds, bleeding at the Nose, Piles, &c. without losing their Life; they may if they please, but I shall never think it reasonable to have re∣course to a Remedy, which no less than the distemper must always require the help of a Physician.An Obser∣ation. 'Twas upon this precarious and general way of practice, I saw a learned man, and a Physician too, who had been sick of a Looseness for some weeks, if I may not say months, by which he was brought to a very low condition; yet I know not what odd fancy possest him who was call'd to his assistance, to take from him 12 or 14 ounces of
blood at that time, and I think re∣peated it next day, contrary to the rules of common sense, as well as of Physick, with as great boldness as in∣discretion, and of which the Sufferer was so sensible, that when I was pro∣pos'd to be sent for by some of his friends, he said he was convinc'd of their mistake, but that it would dis∣oblige men of their Character and Dotard Seniority to send for a younger Physician; and so he ended his days with a vast deal of Ceremony. I am sorry I must relate so ungrateful a story, but 'tis but one of too many I have seen, tho I must confess there are as great mistakes, and greater, occasion'd by the neglect of bleeding; and therefore since on both sides, they are fatal and pernicious, 'twou'd be needless to observe, that there ought to be a great deal of care taken about it, not only in performing the opera∣tion, which is the easiest that can be, by an Instrument; but in determining the just quantities in different Patients, which you see Authors have endea∣voured by desiring us to let them blood according to their strength, as much as is sufficient, as much as they can
spare, which are all the same thing; only I think better express'd in the first. But the question at first ask'd was, what will the Patients strength hear, what is sufficient, and what may he spare, which is left in as great obscurity as when they begun it. Now to clear this a little better than it has been by others, 'twould be ne∣cessary not only to write a Book of Phlebotomy, but for greater distinctness to apply the consequences of its noble Theorems to particular diseases, constitu∣tions of our Patients, seasons of the year, &c. which 'tis plain are foreign to my subject. Yet to direct my Brethren in the Navy in their thoughts and practice, as well and shortly as this con∣finement will allow me, that they may make evacuations fit to discharge the excessive quantities of detained steams, without impairing or destroy∣ing the strength of the Patient, I shall propose these two ways,Proposals for better under∣standing the quan∣tity of Blood-let∣ting. which if rightly enquir'd into and thought upon, cannot miss of success. And first, since the strength and velocity of the blood, is to be understood by the Pulse, 'tis to That we must have regard, that we may know how far
they either exceed or are lower than their ordinary measure; and propor∣tionably to the number of pulses, more than in a natural state, so to let blood, that the blood after venesection may come to a greater cohesion, may not be so much attrited and broken down, and so there may not be separated so great a quantity of animal spirits. Or the pulse being depress'd, very full, and not so frequent, we ought to let blood, not only in a quantity able to raise the pulse, and make it more frequent, but even afterwards to abate this fre∣quency by a larger bleeding as before: For there is nothing more ordinary than in the most natural fullness (if I may so say) where there is a Ple∣thora ad vasa (as Physicians term it) a great abundance of the best blood, the fittest, of its own nature, to make animal spirits, and to produce all the consequences that follow upon good blood and a great abundance of spi∣rits; I say there is nothing more ordi∣nary than to have a depress'd pulse as I describ'd but now, in a natural or artificial fullness; for the blood is so confin'd within its own vessels, and its parts so crowded one upon another,
that there is not a sufficient secretion of its fine and subtle parts, but ev'n by this great quantity the distractile blood-pipes being very much distend∣ed, compress the nerves over all the body, and hinder the conveyance of the animal spirits into, and thro these vessels, according to their force of going outwards, and the resistence of these in the different parts; so that tho there is a greater quantity of blood contain'd in the vessels, yet that be∣ing propell'd or driven forwards with less force, will occasion a full, tho slow, pulse: and therefore since this less secretion of animal spirits, their slower motion, &c. proceeds entirely from the quantity of blood contain'd in the veins, but especially the arteries, and produces the effects of a real want, yet its motion is only to be heightned, its sense of greatness to be advanced, by taking off such a quantity that may remove this huddling up of the blood, and make the secretions more free▪ that so there may be a greater quan∣tity of spirits deriv'd into, and deter∣min'd thro, the whole series of the nerves, upon which there will follow a quicker and greater pulse; tho if it
exceeds its natural state in these pro∣perties, another bleeding must be ap∣pointed in pursuance of the above∣mentioned design, which will pre∣vent the use of bleeding in Fevers, as we use a charm to blood, and that all. Now in both these cases you see the natural pulse is the standard, and before you can know whether it is depress'd, slower or quicker, you must know that which is natural to which the rest are referr'd; and not only so, but before you can determine any quantity of blood to be taken away in either of these cases, you ought to know what cohesion, what loosoness is fit to make the pulse so much quicker, or depress'd, or to make an estimate of the number of pulses by the blood in the best state, and of their strength: the last of which I intend to attempt in a Review of my O Economia Anima∣lis, that it may want nothing of the perfection I can give it, and may be∣come more worthy of the learned Mr. Bridgeman, under whose protecti∣on it ventur'd into the world with so great advantage.
Yet the first is very considerable, and ev'n necessary for its use; for un∣less we know the natural pulse of every single Man, we are call'd to, we can never know, when it is sickly and defective; for example, suppo∣sing that more especially the number of pulses pecuiar to men were of three sorts, as I have endeavoured to prove them to be in my Animal Oe∣conomy, viz. from 55 to 65 in some, from 60 to 70 in others, from 70 to 80 in a third sort, and all in the same part of time, viz. a minute; 'tis evi∣dent, that if he who has sixty for his natural pulse, comes ever to beat eighty, the motion of his blood must certainly be more than naturally aug∣mented, that is, he has a Fever; since that is only an immoderate velocity or quickness of the motion of the blood, accompany'd with heat. 'Tis no less cer∣tain, when a pulse that beats naturally 80 in a minute, comes down to 60, that the person labours under some cachectical Distemper, and a want of spirits, except his pulse be depress'd: yet both these are the natural pulses of several people, beyond which 'tis not convenient to go, and to which
their other pulses are to be compar'd. And therefore it would be necessary to settle this affair, and to enquire into the peculiar pulses of every con∣stitution, that by them and other concurring signs, we may be infallibly guided, not only in Evacuations, but other administrations in Medicin. However, I shall forbear to proceed in this Enquiry, since I have treated designedly, and at large upon that subject, in my O Economia Corporis Ani∣malis, to which I refer those that love to be informed, and do hope to see that matter more fully done, in some practical Treatise of pulses, with which some generous Promoter of useful Knowledge may one day ob∣lige the public. The second thing I would propose as useful in this matter, is the appli∣cation of the Thermometer; for since the warmth of our blood, another pathognomical sign of a Fever▪ depends upon its motion, as I have often proved; if we can settle the warmth that is proper to every constitution, or proportion the warmth to the certain numbers of pulses in the particular constitutions; we may,
by applying the Thermometer, not only know how far the blood has ex∣ceeded its natural motion and warmth, but even, in other cases, how much it has fallen from them too; and be∣cause the only difficulty in discover¦ing this excess and diminution, may consist in the comparison with that warmth, which is peculiar to every constitution and number of pulses, which has never been particularly consider'd, I will endeavour to lay down my observations on this subject. And first, the heat of a man's body, whose pulse is of the first sort raises the Oil in the Thermometer to about 16 or 16¾ degrees, the pulse of the second to 17⅝ degrees, and that of the third to about 20 or 21¼ degrees. And therefore the differences of the degrees will not only make up the true warmth and different pulses, but comparing the warmths upon occasi∣ons in Fevers we can find how much more it is than that which is natural, and even the exceeding numbers of pulses, which will not only be of infinite use for evacuating in Fevers which we propose, but if we compare the different and vast excesses of heat
that may be in our body, will soon be convinc'd, that the most violent symptoms may proceed from them, tho they seem never so opposite to each other in the judgmen of the un∣skilful: and this still the more easily, if we observe how different the effects seem to be, which proceed from the various degrees of the Sun's heat; for example, the Summer's heat in the air raises the Oyl in the Thermometer to 7 gr. ½, The heat of a man's skin whose natural Pulse is sixty in a Mi∣nute, to 16 ¾ gr., The heat of boiling water, to 52 gr. The heat of red hot Iron, to 156; wherefore according to this calculation, our natural heat is double the Summer's heat, and scalding water is only somewhat above three times hotter than our skin; and last∣ly, the heat of red hot Iron is al∣most ten times greater than the heat of our Skin; yet there are no symp∣toms in a Fever so different, as these which are produced by the heat of our Skin, and that of red-hot Iron, tho they only differ in degree. But not to insist further upon this use, I may conclude that the true mark of letting Blood, or evacuating in Fevers,
is more truely regulated by these ways, I have now hinted, which are truly the Strength of the Patient, we are all puzzled so much about, yet never otherwise to be known; and I hope I have explained them too as fully, as my time and subject, and my resolution to avoid incroaching too far upon the true doctrine of Pulses and Phlebotomy will allow: and therefore I shall proceed to the Cure of our sicknesses this year, which is the main design of this work. Observation I. The first, then, I was called to this year, was a Dutch Captain, Com∣mander of the Amsterdam, upon the fourth of March, who had lain ill three or four days of a continu'd Fever; the pains in the head, back, and other parts that begin these Fe∣vers were vanish'd, his Pulse beat very high and frequent, his thirst was very great, he watch'd most part of the night, and was now and then delitious. He had taken all that time nothing but a sort of a disa∣greeable,
immiscible mixture of oe. canc. sang. Drac. camphor. sperm. cet. ant. Diaph. all jumbled together with some White Wine; some sunk, some swam a top, and the Wine was left clear in the middle. His ordinary drink was Rhenish Wine, he was not let blood, neither vomited, nor so much as had a Clyster, tho he had not gone to stool during all that time. Seeing him, then, in these circumstances, I order'd him imme∣diately to be let blood, to the quan∣tity of ten ounces, and next day to take this vomit, then to begin the Testaceous powde s. ℞ Vin. emetic. ℥j. oxym. scyllit. ʒvi. aq. theriacal. ℥ss M. ac capiat cras mane cum regimine. ℞ oc. 69. ppt. ʒij. pulver. rad. serpent. Virginian. sal. absynth. an ʒss. M. ac divid. in ix part. aeq. Quarum unam ca∣piat ter in die. ℞ Tamarind. optim. ℥ss. hord. muudat. M. ss. boq. in s. q. aq. font ad hord. cre∣pituram, Colatur. ℥vi. calid. affund. fol. senn. virent. ℥ss. cin. acerr. Crem. Tartar. an gr. xii. Stent per noct. in infus. ac mane colatur. add. syr. de spin. cerv. ʒij. M. f. potio quam capiat die quarto con∣sumptis
pulveribus. Potus sit decoctum hordei cum aceto probe acidulatum. These are the Medicins I pre∣scrib'd him, but his Surgeon knowing all the Medicins and their quantities, but not one word of Latin, I was forced to leave him directions in Dutch by the help of one of the Lieu∣tenants, who spoke very good Latin, and so I left him, with a design to see him by that time he had taken all those Medicins; but the weather was so very stormy for 5 days, that no Boats could go off from a Ship. On the tenth, the Sea not being so great, they sent their Boat for me, and when I came aboard, I found he had not taken one half of his powders; he had taken no vomit, and but one half of his purging potion, which wrought twice, and his drink was still Wine. His Pulse was great, and very frequent, he was very de∣liious, and had a violent thirst. I desir'd he might continue the pow∣ders prescrib'd before, and the drink, of which he should not only drink as often as he call'd for it, but should be remembred to drink of it: and if he did not go to stool once or twice a
day, to have a Clyster. Besides, I order'd strong blistering Plaisters to be apply'd; one to the nape of his Neck, and one behind each Ear, to be removed next morning, applying to the sore part the simple Melilot Plaister: before I left the Ship, I saw the Surgeon mix the Plaister, but when he spread it upon the Leather, 'twas not bigger than a Filberd nut, so I shap'd the Leather and spread him large Plaisters, leaving him to apply them, and intended next day to see the sick person, but it blew so very hard, that I had not opportu∣nity to see him, till at our return to the Downs, it proving easie weather, I went on board that Ship, and tho it was least three days since I was there before, the Plaisters were not remov'd: the two behind his ears had risen very well, but the largest that was to be apply'd to the nape of his Neck, being laid among the hair, the skin lookt scalded, but had never risen. He had not even then taken his Medicins as directed, yet his pulse was slower and great enough, aud he was not quite so delirious. I desir'd the Sur∣geon
to be more careful about the use of the former Medicins, to shave his Neck, and to apply there a great and strong blistering Plaister, and so took leave; but after we came into the Downs, we had again very blow∣ing weather, and the first news I had of my Patient was, that he was dead; which was not so surprizing to me, as that he had lived so long, with such management. Observation II. .....Robie, being about fifteen years of age was taken ill, on board the Edgar, on the 27th of April last, with a pain in his head, back, and loins, a coldness, sudden weakness, a slow pulse, and want of appetite; all which kept him three days, then he was hotter, had a quick pulse, a great drought, and could nor sleep. He was let ten ounces of blood next day, and the morning after he took three grains of Tartarum emeti∣cum, which made him vomit about a quarter of an hour ofter he took it; and being well ply'd with thin water-gruel between the times of his vo∣miting,
he vomited four times and had one stool, and was much easier that day. He had no paregorick, which too commonly is made the constant attendant of a vomit, or purge, because of the recommenda∣tion of some of the best Physicians; but I not only give none my self in the Fevers, of which I write, but must ev'n desire every body to abstain from that practice, who would not surrender the management of his Pa∣tient to the hurry of an impetuous blood, and a deprav'd delirium. On the thirtieth he began to take the following powders. ℞ oc. 69. ppt. ʒjss. sal. prunel. ʒij. sal. tartar. ʒss. M. ac divid. in ix. part. aeq. Capiat unam ter in die, donec consumantur integrae doses novem. His ordinary drink for the time was Barley Decoction sharpen'd with Vinegar, which I think better than either spirit of Vitriol or oyl of Sul∣phur per. camp. By these his blood was kept very moderate, he had a stool every day, and on the first of May at night he slept a little: on the third in the morning, he took the following lax∣ative.
℞ Decoct. senn. Gereon. ℥iv. syr. rosar. solutiv. ℥ss. aq. Cinam. hordeat. ʒi. M. ac capiat mane cum regimine. It purg'd him six times, and abat∣ed his thirst, and other feverish symp∣toms; he slept easily that night, and next day awakening very hungry, I allowed him some water gruel. On the fifth and sixth in the morning, he had six ounces of the bittet draught without the purgatives, and recover∣ed every day, till eating a hearty dinner of salt beef, he fell into an Ague, for which he took another vomit on the tenth of May, and then the following electuary. ℞. Cons. ros. rub. ʒvi. pulver. Quin∣quin. subtiliss. pulverat. ℥ss. Theriac. An∣dromach. ℈ij. Syr. cujusvis grati q. s. selectuar. quod consumat in intervallo pa∣roxysmi. The Fit not returning three days after, as it would, otherwise, have done, he only liv'd more cautiously and recover'd his health. Observation III. Laurence Douthey, a Marine Soul∣dier, about twenty three years of age,
complain'd of a violent pain in his head, and back, a pain in his bones, and want of appetite: he was costive and very weak; in a day or two his Pulse became frequent, he had a great drought, his tongue was very white and chinkie; he could not sleep, and was delirious. On the 11th of April he was let blood to the quantity of twelve ounces, and that evening had a sup∣pository, which gave him two stools: on the 12th he took 5 grains of Eme∣tick Tartar, and drinking Water-gruel, as in that case, he vomited six times, and had three stools: he took the preceding testaceous Powders for theee days, and drank Barley decocti∣on acidulated as before, the whole time; and on the 16th took this Purge. ℞ pulv. rad. jalapp. ℈ij. Crem. Tartar. ℈i. M. ac capiat multo mane cum regimine. He had eight stools with this, and was very easy; in a day or two he began to crawl about upon Deck, an hour or two in the warmest time of the day; but, coming up a little too soon, he catch'd cold and relapsed on the 24th, and was obliged to go over
the former course, as near as his weaker body would allow; but on the 27th he turn'd very delirious, and had a very quick Pulse; he could not sleep and had an unsatiable drought. I allowed him as much of the Barley-decoction as he would drink, and ordered his Mess mate who attended him, to give it him unaskt, if it was a great while before he askt it. On the 28th in the evening, I caused a large and strong Blister to be laid up∣on the nape of his Neck and down∣wards, which rose very well, and was removed, applying a Plaister of Me∣lilot to the part next day; he was mightily relieved by it, his Delirium abated, and his Pulse was not so fre∣quent, but still he could not sleep, which puzzled me extremely, finding the ill consequences of Opium, or Opiars, the Medicins which Physici∣ans depend on for the removal of this symptom; and therefore reflecting upon the Theory of this symptom, as I demonstrated it in the first part of my Book of Sea Sicknesses for 1695, I could not think of any thing that would be so reasonable an indication from that Theory, as the applying of
a double Linnen Cloth dipt in Oxy∣crat round his head, which I ordered to be done with so great success, that he slept almost all that night, and was mightily refresht. I ordered his blister'd Neck to be kept as long run∣ning, as possible; and to drink the Decoctum amarum alterans for four days, and on the fifth to add the Purgatives that he might have four or five stools, which being done, he recovered without any further trouble. Observation IV. Francis Marpole, aged twenty six years, whose natural pulse beats about sixty in one minute, was taken ill, on board the Edgar, April the 29th, of a pain in his head, and bones; he was weak, had no appetite to his victuals; his pulse beat but 45 in a minute, and he was very cold; The next day after, he was let blood, his pulse was more frequent, and even exceeded its natural number; he was very hot, and restless, had a great drought, and could not sleep. On the 30th he was let blood in his right arm to the quantity of ten
ounces, and next day took 5 grains of the vomiting Tartar; and being treated as people ordinarily are, after they have taken a vomit, it wrought six times, and gave him seven stools. Next day he began the following powder. ℞ oc. 69 ppt. ʒi. pulv. fl. chamom. ℈ij. sal. prunel. ʒij. M. ac f. dos. ix. ut capiat unam ter in die. His ordinary drink, all the time he was taking these powders, was Barly decoction sharpened with Vine∣gar, of which he drank as much and as often as he pleased. On the 4th of May he took this purge. ℞ pulv. Cornachin. ʒss. tartar. vitriolo gr. vii. M. ac capiat mane cum regi∣mine. This purg'd him seven times, and he was very easy thereafter. Only I must tell you, that all the time he was taking the powders he was restless, and did not sleep in the night, till by applying the Oxycrate, he was very and recovered without any o∣ther help than drinking half a pint of the altering bitter decoction every morning, for four mornings.
Observation V. John Kock, a Man of three or four and twenty years of Age, complained on May 8th, of a giddiness in his head, a coldness, sudden weakness, and want of appetite; his pulse was low and depress'd yet, in a day or two after, it grew very frequent and strong; he was very hot, had a great drought, and could not sleep. 'Tis plain from this description, that this Man was taken ill of a Fe∣ver, the symptoms of which I have already resolv'd and demonstrated; yet in this case there being an unusual symptom, not yet accounted for, I cannot omit explaining it, how∣ever hard it may be, and maintain my design of plainess, which I have hi∣therto endeavoured. 'Tis known that those who are giddy or vertiginous, have such a sensation, as if every thing they see were turning round, howe∣ver fixt and immoveable it be; and truly this Phaenomenon, tho it may often happen in Fevers, yet either as a symptom of them, or as it is an essen∣tial Disease, has not too often had
the good fortune to be sufficiently explain'd; and if I except two or three, I may venture to say, that a∣mong so many thousand Authors who have written Medicinal Treatises there is not one that has spoken common sense upon this subject; we may hear what a late learned Author, who is thought to speak the fullest and most satisfactorily, says; that the immediate subject of this disease are the animal spi∣rits, the more mediate those parts of the Brain, where imagination and common sense reside, and from whence the nearest way is into the Nervous kind, which are the callous and strious Bodies; for in these parts they love to range and divert themselves as in a spacious field, and pass thro all the pores and thickest passages of the Marrow, with full force like a ray of light: hence it is that, while they glide along in the same Line, from the utmost borders of the Callous Body towards its middle part, they represent pleasant ap∣pearances and imaginations; and whilst they slow, in another line, (perhaps thro other passages, from the middle of the Cal∣lous Body into the gyri of the Brain) they transfer thither the marks of Notions to be laid up for our future remembrance; and, a∣gain,
whilst they pass into the Strious Bodies, and the beginning of the Nerves, they actuate all the moving parts, and carry to them, upon occasions, the instincts of the motions they are to perform▪ But in the Vertigo these equal emanations of the Spirits seem to be intercepted, and variously perverted in different places, because some quantities of the Spirits are obscured, others are determined into other ways, and turned to and frō in so many Vortices one over another. Wherefore confused phantasms, wandring, and &c. Here is a most poetical flash of a description, but how true, every one must see, that will give himself the trouble to remember the Anatomy of the Brain, and since its make will not at all allow of such a roving and sporting expansion, or so melancholy a circumgyration or turning round, we must seek its cause some where else, and yet this sense is not afford∣ed us from the object it self, which we suppose to be, and often is im∣moveable, and therefore, since this sense is not caused by a turning round of the Animal Spirits, nor by the object that is thought to turn round, it can be no where else than in the
Optick nerve, the Eye it self, or some∣thing that goes to its construction. And first, it is evident that any object will seem to turn round, if the images that come from it fall successively upon different parts of the retina, go∣ing, viz. from the left, while the object is not really moved, and the images that come from it represent always the same distance; I say that object will seem to be turned round from the left to the right; for the images have a contrary posture in the retina, yet this may be done while the motion is only in the Eye, the ob∣ject remaining unmov'd; for whe∣ther the object be moved while the Eye is quiet, or the object be quiet while the Eye is moved, the rays that come from the object, will not fall upon the same part of the bottom of the Eye; and therefore since we judge of the change of place where the object exists, by the change of place upon which the object is de∣scrib'd, 'tis plain that the object which has no motion will seem to move, and may be thought to turn round to the Eyes that are moved▪ Moreover, the object and Eye may be both un∣mov'd;
for if the optick nerve be only moved, the rays will not al∣ways fall upon it in the same situati∣on; and therefore since a direct and oblique falling do not affect the Nerves alike, but excite different sorts of motions; then, the object that is quiet will seem to have chang'd its place, when only the optick nerve is mov'd, the representation of the place where it was being changed. And therefore 'tis evident that any thing that can move the Eye, Optick nerve, or Retina may cause this Gid∣diness, tho the object be not moved. Now there are a thousand things that may produce this effect, but nothing can more readily press upon the Brain than the distended arteries that are next the optick nerve; and since we have seen how the fulness of all the vessels is occasioned by an interruption of perspiration, the cause of our Fe∣vers; there can be no further doubt, but that this fulness may occasion the Retina's being remov'd from its place, together with the optick nerve, so that it cannot receive the rays from the objects at the same part of the bottom of the Eye; and consequently
while the Images change their place in the Retina, the objects are repre∣sented to our mind, as if they were constantly moved. This being pre∣mis'd. He was let ten ounces of Blood on the 9th, and on the tenth, he had five grains of Tartarum Emeticum, which made him vomit half an hour after he took it. He drunk large draughts of thin water-gruel after every time he vomited till it had done working; which it did very well and made him go twice to stool; next day he began the testaceous powders, and on the fourteenth he had the following purge. ℞. pulv. rad. jalapp. ℈j. resin. jalapp. gr. vii. Crem. Tart. gr. xv. M. ac ca∣piat cum regimine. It purged him eight times, and he found himself very easie; but since he had no inclination to sleep, I caus'd a doubled linnen wet in vinegar and water to be laid round his head, by which he slept, and awak'd very much refresh'd on the sixteenth. All this time he drunk water-gruel sharpned with vinegar; and, after his Fever was gone off, the decoctum a∣marum
every morning for four days, and recover'd a pace, 'till, I cannot ell by what accident, he died apo∣lectical, and very suddenly. Observation VI. Edward Powis, a man about twenty years of age, and never at Sea before this Summer, was taken ill on board the Edgar, the twelfth of May, of a Coldness, want of Strength, and appetite for his victuals, this pulse was low and depress'd, he complain'd of violent pains in his head, back, and bones: In a day or two his pains went off, his pulse was high, he was very hot and had a great drought. On the 13th he was let twelve ounces of blood, and next day took four grains of emetick Tartar, and vomited 6 times, and went thrice to stool. I always use to give them vo∣mits in the beginning, for they miti∣gate all the Symptoms through the whole progress of the sickness, and the Patients are more easily mana∣ged: on the fifteenth he began to take these powders.
℞. oc. 69 ppt. ʒj. sal. absynth. pulv. s. chamom. an. ℈ij. rad. serpentar. virginian pulverat. ʒss. M. f. pulv. divid. in tres p a. Capiat omnes die crastino tribus vicibus. The day after, he drunk this pur∣gative. ℞. tamarind. ℥ss. hord. mund. M. s. Coq. ad hord. crepitur. in s. q. aq. font. Colatur. ℥iv. affund. sol. senn. ℥ss. semin aris. contus ʒss. crem. tartar. ℈j. mane∣ant per noctem in infusione, maneque li∣quori colato add. syr de rham. ʒi. M. ac capiat cum regimine, This purg'd him eight times, and having applied the Linnen dipt in Oxycrat, he slept all night, and re∣cover'd daily. His Drink at the time of his sickness was as much of the Barley Decoction sharpened with Vinegar as he would; and half a pint of the decoctum amarum for four days after his Fever was gone off; after which he began to recover. Observation VII. Thomas Poste, being about 26 years of age, was taken ill, on board the Edgar, where he was the Captain's Cook, of a pain in his head, and o∣ver
all his body as if he had been beaten, his pulse was depressed, he was costive, and had no stomach for his Victuals; in a day or two his pains left him, he grew very hot, he had an insatiable drought, and could not sleep. On the 6th of May he was let 12 ounces of blood, and in the evening had a Clyster which gave him two stools; next day he took the tartarum emeticum which vomited him very well, and made him go to stool; so that on the eighth he began the use of these powders. ℞ oc. cancr. ppt. ʒij. pulv. fl. chamom. ʒj. sal. prunel. ℥ss. M. ac divid. in ix partes aequales, ac capiat dosin unam ter in die. He took all these Powders, and then this Purge. ℞. pulv. rad. jalap. ʒss. tartar. vitrio∣lat. gr. viii. M. ac capiat cum regi∣mine. It purged him six or seven times, and he was pretty easie that evening, and the most of the next day, till on the 12th in the evening he began to be delirious, and his pulse beat very quick; so I order'd a large Blister to
be laid to the nape of his neck, and one behind each ear, and to remove them next morning, dressing the bli∣stered parts with the Melilot Plaister. The morning comes, but the Blisters had not risen; I was told of this in the afternoon, and when I went to see him his sight was dim, he could hardly speak, and lookt almost like one who is apoplectical: I caus'd 6 ounces of blood to be taken out o his jugular vein, for the reasons I will give in the case of an Apoplexy that happen'd to a Sailer this Summer, and order'd him immediately to be∣gin the following powder. ℞. Rad. serpentar. Virginian. pulverat. fl. chamom. sal. absynth. an ℥ss. antimon diaphoret. ℈. M. ac divid. in tres part. aeq. quas consumat partitis vicibus, cap∣enda dosin quarta quaque hora; in coch∣leari julap. seq. superbibendo alterum. ℞ aq. lact. alexiter. ℥ij. decoct. hord. ℥i. aq. epid. ʒi. syr. poeon. ʒii. M. . julap. I saw him at eight a clock that evening, and he spoke easily enough, tho weakly; and therefore I only order'd a piece of Linnen we in Oxycrate to be laid round his
head. He slept all that night, and till ten a clock net day, when he awak'd, and desiring something to eat, I order'd him some Water-gruel with the juice of a Limon squeez'd into it, whereof he took half a dozen spoonfuls, and fell asleep; he slept again till six in the evening, and had more Water-gruel prepar'd as before, when he awak'd; and thus he slept for almost two days, and recover'd very fast; his ordinary drink, during his whole sickness, was Barley de∣coction sharpned with Vinegar; and sometimes Water, Sugar, and the juice of Limons. Since that time I ordered the Sur∣geon's Mate always to observe when their pulse began to grow low, whe∣ther their face was reder than ordi∣nary, whether their eyes began to stare, or whether they complain'd of an illness or heaviness about their head; which I conclude to be the symptoms of the blood's going slower thro the carotid arteries of the face, and brain; and, in this case, I de∣sir'd him always to open the jugular vein, and to let out 6, 8, or 10 ounces of blood, according to the urgency of the symptoms.
Observation VIII. William Mayes, being about twenty years of age, May 29th, complain'd of a violent pain in his head and bones; he was very cold, his pulse weak and depress'd; then he was hot, very restless, his pulse quick, had a violent drought, and his tongue was very white. On the 30th he was let ℥xij of blood, and next day took five gr. of tartar. emetic. which made him vomit six times, and go twice to stool; he drank Water-gruel plentifully during the time of its working, and brought up with the nasty stuff several large Worms, some of which had flat heads, and some sharp. On the first of June he began the following pow∣ders. ℞ oc. 69 ppt. aut testar. ovor. pulverat. ʒii. sal. prunel. ℥ss. M. ac divid. in ix part. aeq. ut capiat unam ter in die in cochl. decoct. hord. After he had taken these powders for three days, he took this purge.
℞. Pulver. Cornachin. ʒss. resin. jalapp. gr. iii. Tartar. Vitriolat. gr. v. M. ac capiat cras mane cum regimine. This purg'd him six times and he was pretty easy that night, yet his Fever did not take leave of him; so we continu'd the testaceous powder prescrib'd before, and finding his pulse grow quicker towards the even∣ing, and his face very red, I began to suspect that he was inclining to be delirious, and therefore I caused six ounces of blood to be taken out of his Jugular Vein; he was quieter all that night, and next day, and on the 7th I purg'd him again, whereby he void∣ed a great abundance of the small Worms they call Tertes, and was very well. All the time of his Sick∣ness he drunk as much as he pleased of the Barley-decoction sharpen'd with Vinegar; and half a pint of the decoctum amarum alterans when he be∣gan to recover, which prevented his falling into the Melancholia Hypochon∣driaca, as some are apt to do upon their Recovery, if we do not help them in their digestion.
Observation IX. Thomas Tyes, a lusty Man, and ne∣ver at Sea before, nor ever afflicted with sickness, was taken ill on the 5th of Jun with a pain in his bones, a heaviness and pain in his head, a sud∣den weakness, his pulse was deprest, and he had no appetite for victuals; but in a day or two he became extra∣ordinary hot, his pulse was frequent and great, he had a great drought, he was delirious and could not sleep. On the 6th he was let 12 ounces of blood, and on the 7th took the Tartarum Emeticum, which wrought very well, drinking great draughts of thin Water-gruel in the intervals of his vomiting; it purg'd him but once, and he was a great deal easier in all his pains. On the 8th he began to take this pow∣der. ℞. Oc. 69 pptorum, aut testar. ostre∣crum sine igne praeparatarm ʒij. sal. pru∣nel. ʒiss. Crem. Tartar. ℈ij. M. ac di∣vid. in ix doses, quarum unam capiat ter in die in cochl. cujusvis liquoris conveni∣entis.
On the 9th he had a gentle Clyster, because he had not gone to stool since his vomiting; and on the 10th in the morning, having been furiously de∣lirious the night before, he was let 7 ounces of blood out of the Saphaena of the Right Leg, which bled freely without being put into warm water, and that evening had the Oxycrat applied to his Temples and round his Head, and next day was to be purg'd if his Delirium should go off; he was easier that night, but being still light-headed, I caused 6 ounces of blood to be taken out of the Jugular Vein on the 11th, and the Oxycrat to be continu'd that night, which he past in quiet sleep, and awakening easy next morning took the following Purge. ℞. Decoct. senn. Gereon. ℥iv. syr. de spin. Cervin. ʒi. M. ac capiat cum regi∣mine. It purg'd him five times, and he had a good nights rest thereafter; next day he awak'd very hungry, and had some Water-gruel.
He drunk all the time of his Sick∣ness a great deal of Barley Decoction sharpned with Vinegar, and some∣times some Sal Prunellae, dissolv'd in a Spoon, given him in a draught of the Decoction. Observation X. Thomas Hoskins, on the 11th of June, was taken ill of a violent pain in his head, and such a pain in his bones as when one is beaten, he was cold and weak of a sudden, he was costive, and had no appetite for victu∣als; in a day or two more the pains went off, except a little in his head; he became very warm, his pulse was quick, he had a great drought, his tongue was very white and chinkie, he could not sleep. On the 12th he was let 12 ounces of blood, and vomited a great deal while he was bleeding, tho he had not taken any thing, and did not vo∣mit before, next day he had six grains of vomitive Tartr, which wrought seven times, and gave him three stools; he drunk a great deal of wa∣ter-gruel in the intervals of the vo∣miting,
and went sick to his Ham∣mock, but a little after was very quiet, and slept about half an hour. On the 14th he began the Powder, which is made thus. ℞. testar. ostreor. in subtiliss. pulver. super porphyrit. redct. ʒij. sal. prunel. ʒi. crem. Tartar. ʒss. M. ac f. doses ix Su∣mat unam ter in die. On the 16th, being a little light-headed, and his pulse very high, he was let 8 ounces of blood out of his Jugular Vein, and had the Linnen wet in Oxycrat laid round his Head, by which he slept most part of the night, and next morning drank this potion. ℞. Tamarind. . hord. integ. M. ss. Coq. l. a. in s. q. aq. fontan. ad hord. crepi∣tur. Colatur. ℥vi. calide affund. fol. sen. ℥ss. semin. soenic. duic. contus. ʒss. Crem. Tartar. ℈i. Maneant per noctem in in∣fu. ac Colatur ae mane per express. factae add. syr. de spin. Cerv. ʒss. M. ac bibat cum regimine.
This purg'd him six times, and at night the Linnen wet as before was laid round his Head, and he had so good a night, that the outcry next morning was hunger, which was soon quench'd with a little thin Water-gruel. His drink all this time was Water-gruel sharpned with Vi∣negar; he slept a great deal for a day or two, and recovered every day. 'Tis not without extraordinary difficulty that we are able to restrain them from eating Salt Beef even in the beginning, which they are so far from being able to digest, that no soon∣er do some, that will not be manag'd, eat a hearty belly full, but they imme∣diately relapse, and are forc'd to go through the greatest part of this pro∣cess a second time, with far greater danger than before.
Observation XI. William Gray, a man about 33 years of age, whose natural pulse beats a∣bout sixty in a minute, complain'd of a most violent Head-ach, a pain in his Bones, his Pulse beat six and forty in a minute, he was costive, and became weak very suddenly; as his pains went off, the warmth and heat encreas'd, his pulse was higher, that once when I felt it I reckon'd eighty strokes in one mi∣nute; he was very dry, and could not sleep. On the 27th of July he was let xiv ounces of Blood, and vomited very much while he was bleeding, which made him a great deal easier; as I have observ'd in many others: next day he had five grains of Tartar. E∣metic. which, being well assisted with large draughts of thin Water gruel, gave him six vomits and one stool. On the 29th he began the testaceous powders, as I ordinarily prescribe them, and took them three days, the last two having a Clyster in the even∣ing. On the 1st of July in the even∣ing
he began to be delirious; the Surgeons-mate bled him in the Fore∣head, but with no great success; for he was furiously delirious all that night, and his Mess-mates were forc'd to lash him in his Hammock; next morning he took six ounces out of the Saphaena, with no greater be∣nefit, but at five in the evening he let him 8 ounces out of the Jugular, and in an hour after he fell asleep, and had a pretty good night. Next day he was purg'd with an easie Me∣dicine; all the time before the Purge he took he testaceons Powders, and drank Water-gruel frequently: in the evening after the Purge he drank some of the following Emul∣sion. ℞. semin. iv. frigid. major. ℥i. semin papav. alb. ʒij. amiyd. dulc. N. xvi. Contund. s. a. affundend. decoct. hord. lbij. f. emuls. cum sach. edulcorunda; de qua bibat haustum ad libitum. He recovered very well, without that lingring weakness, that generally attends our men for want of conveni∣ent Victuals; whereas if but their
Burgoo were made more pleasant, by a small addition of Butter, it would prove very good and nourishing Victuals for them in the beginning, and would fit them in a short time for eating the Ships provisions with∣out any injury. It is a great deal bet∣ter than Rice, which I find makes them very Costive; and therefore I could heartily wish some considerati∣on was taken about this matter. Observation XII. Thomas James, Captain Munden's Cook, in the London, was taken ill on the 23d of June of a pain in his Head and Bones, was weak of a sud∣den, he lost his appetite, his pulse was depress'd, and he was very co∣stive; in a day or two, tho he was very hot, he had a strong and quick pulse, was very restless, had a great drought, and was very delirious. On the 24th he lost 12 ounces of Blood out of his right Arm, tho he be at least fifty years of age; and next day took four grains of Tarta∣rum Emetic. which wrought very well, and gave him two stools; he
was pretty easie all the rest of that day, and had the testaceous pow∣ders, as I generally prescribe them in the beginning of Fevers, strictly ob∣serving that he had a stool every day. His ordinary drink was Water, Lime-juice, and Sugar; of which he had as much as he would drink: yet on the 28th in the evening he prov'd very delirious, and I caused him to be let vi. ounces of Blood out of the gular Vein, and then order'd a piece of Linnen doubled, and wet in Vi∣negar and Water to be apply'd round his Head; after which he slept pretty well that night; and next day took this purge. ℞. decoct. Sen. Gereon. ℥iv. syrup ro∣sar. solutiv. simpl. ℥ss. M. ac Capiat cras mane cum regimine. This purg'd him four times with a great deal of ease, and he had a pretty good night after; but in the morn∣ing, being a very peevish sort of a man, and complaining of a very great weakness, I was alarm'd with his dying; which was a very great sur∣prize to me, who thought of nothing
less the evening before; so down I went, and feeling his pulse run be∣tween the Radius and the Ulna, it was not to be felt without some art; however, turning his wrist a little round, the Artery lying more upon one of the Bones, was easier felt, as I have observ'd in my Oecon. of the Humane Body, speaking of pulses. It was very strong, and not at all frequent and therefore declaring all things to be in a good way, I order'd him the following powder. ℞. oc. canc. ppt. ℈ij. pulver. flchamom. pulver. rad. serpentar Virginian. an gr. xv. M ac f. dosestres. Capiat omnes eodem dis, sed vicibus partitis, in cochl. decoct. aord. He had the wet Linnen apply'd afresh once more, by which he slept very well; and only eating Water-gruel for five days, he recover'd with∣out further help. I'm sure by repeating some things so very often, I must needs weary the more delicate Reader, as I con∣fess I am my self; but this is not en∣tirely design'd for him; and those that are to be bettered by repeated
instances, I hope will reap some ad∣vantage, and so I have sufficient re∣ward for all my labour: and there∣fore I shall only trouble you, and let you know, I advertis'd all the Surgeons I came to talk with, about this observation in opening the Jugu∣lar; which they have acknowledg'd to have practic'd often with the like success; but there being one thing that happen'd to Mr Chapman, who is a careful and an expert Surgeon, easie to follow an advice when reasonably given: I say one thing very singular happen'd to him and me, in the case of a man who had been treated after the same way while I was on board the London; yet in warmer weather he was very delirious; Mr Chapman went to let him blood in the Jugular in the morning, but the Vein would not rise: he try'd to bleed him in the Arm, but with the like success; he immediately sends for me, I felt his pulse, which was very depress'd, and beat not above 30 times in a mi∣nute, and while I look'd upon his failing senses, and dim eyes, and feeling it again, it beat but 27. Things being at such a pass, I order'd
two▪ Cupping glasses to be apply'd, with Scarification, which was done; but he scarify'd very deep before the blood appear'd; yet getting about six ounces out of the lower part of his Neck, the pulse immediately grew quicker; and in two hours af∣ter, he let him eight ounces of blood out of his Arm with a very easie Li∣gature; by which, and other things, as given before, he recovered. This is a very unusual accident, and not to be accounted for, but by a thorough understanding of the Doctrine of Apoplexies; and because I shall have an opportunity, as I said be∣fore, to speak a little to that subject, I shall content my self with referring you to that place; and conclude this Observation with a Letter I had sent me, about what I have written. SIR, I Most willingly account my ha∣ving your company one whole Summer, and a great part of this, amongst the happy parts of my Life; when I see the most exact practice
I ever saw or read in my days; and all this mightily heightned by your condescension in giving me most solid rules and reasons for giving and doing of things, upon certain occasions. Any one that knows what I have improv'd by this, must needs envy me, and acknowledge with my self, the misfortune I had to be depriv'd of you, when we made our Bilboa Voyage; yet returning now into England, I hope you ex∣cuse my taking the first opportuni∣ty to let you know, that tho we had an abundance of sick, we have not buried one; for which, next to God Almighty, you are to be thank'd: Yet I must tell you, that tho you advis'd me to let blood in the Jugular, in more stu∣pid deliria, and in the Saphaena when they were more furious, which has done very well; yet I have open'd the Saphaena and the Frontal in the case you advis'd me, but with nothing of that success
as opening the Jugular, which has most surprizing effects. This I presume to tell you not only for your own thoughts, but as I hope and desire wou'd make us in the Fleet, and even others that look higher, happy in a Continuation of what you have begun: So I must beg you you'll do me Justice to the World in this; whom I would have know too, that I have all the ob∣ligations worth and esteem can en∣joyn, to be Your Most Humble Servant. S. S. Notwithstanding of all this, and what I have often proved, I cannot be wanting in any thing may be of advantage to the Service, but ac∣knowledge that tho what I demon∣strate about the Nature of Fevers, and that they are entirely owing to the fulness occasion'd by an inter∣ruption of perspiration, and that therefore he that would cure a Fever
must either evacuate a quantity equal to the quantity of detain'd steams, or such a quantity that the secretions being better perform'd, there may, at length, a due quantity be evacu∣ated; yet the instruments we use in voiding this quantity by sweat, being so uncertain, that either not having the expected effect, they make the most healthy patient die the most fu∣rious and mad death, or ev'n when they prove effectual, yet by their warmth add a greater heat and velo∣city to the blood, than they help by their evacuation, which makes a ve∣ry unsuccessful practice, and deterr'd me from having recourse to that way. Bat having, of late, fallen upon a medicin, that, in half a quarter of an hour, puts the patient into a large sweat, without any warmth, and judges his Fever, especially if he has the good fortune of a Cabin; I must relate two or three instances of about forty, in which I have us'd this medicin, and with the same success.
Observation XIII. Joshua Manning was taken ill the latter end of July on board the Dutchess, of a pain in his head, & bones, and was very weak of a sudden; his pulse was depress'd, he was costive and had no appetite. On Friday 24th, Mr Birkly, who is a very expert and knowing Surgeon, let him twelve ounces of blood; next morning he took 5 gr. of Tartarum Emeticum, which vomited him four times, and made him go twice to stool▪ That evening he took ℥ss of Syrup of white Poppies; and on Sunday the 26th the medicin, which made him sweat from eight in the morning till six in the evening, with so good success, that next day about noon he sat up in his Cabin, and in a day or two when I came on board, I found him walking upon the Deck.
Observation XIV. Mr Noble, first Lieutenant of the same Ship, was taken ill after the same manner, and Mr Birkly, after he had let him blood, & given him a vomit, and the Syrup de mecan in the above-mentioned order, he gave him next morning the Medicin, which had so great success, that in the af∣ternoon he found himself so well that he thought he might put on his Cloaths, and go upon Deck; which he did, but catching cold, he re∣laps'd; I happen'd to be there the day after his relapse, and finding him incline to be delirious, I caus'd a Blister to be apply'd to the nape of his Neck that evening, and next day ordered him to take the medicin a second time, which he did much to his advantage, and being more care∣ful for a day or two, he recovered very well.
Observation XV. Thomas Munden, a Kinsman of Cap∣tain Munden's, who commands the London, was taken ill, on Tuesday, July 28th at night, of a sickness in his Stomach, an exquisit pain in his Head, his Bones, and all his Joints; his pulse was a great deal lower than naturally, and he had no desire to eat. On Wednesday he was let blood; next day, had a Vomit, and the third, the Medicine; which produc'd a ve∣ry good effect, to the satisfaction of us all. On Saturday he was very hun∣gry, but I would allow him nothing but Water-gruel; and on Sunday he took Physick, and recover'd very fast every day. At the same time one of Mr Chap∣man's Mates was ill, was treated after the same way, and recover'd as soon, tho not quite so well, being a little warmer by the heat of the Cock-pit where he lay; so mischievous is the least extraordinary warmth in Fevers, tho it has not hitherto been so well lookt into, but rather encouragd.
And now, since I have given you these 4 instances of this easy way o Cure, I shall only add, that all the Experiments I have had occasion to make of this method, have prov'd equally successful, so well may a practice be mended; and therefore I will not tire your patience with more histories of continu'd Fevers, but keeping to the order of my last Book I proceed to these that are intermitting▪ In the mean time I must desire you to peruse with attention, the Theory in the first part, and the Indications in the second, of that last book, which are but the consequences of the former; for otherwise you can∣not understand the design of the pra∣ctice. Observation XVI. John Orran, was taken ill after dinner, on May 2d, of a coldness and trembling which lasted two hours, all which time his pulse was depress'd and weak; but afterwards he became a great deal hotter, his pulse was quick, he had a great drought, and the fit ended in a sweat that lasted 3 hours.
'Twas evident to me that it was a formed Ague, and because most Spring agues are Tertians, I suspected to be so too; yet that we might seem to torment him without ein sick, we delay'd giving him any hing till he should have another fit; accordingly on Monday by nine in the morning his fit came violently upon him, and held him as before; and on Wednesday by five in the morning, e took 5 grains of Tartarum Emeticum, which vomited him ten times. I did not allow him to drink so large draughts of Water gruel, as I pre∣scribe in continual Fevers; for the reasons I assign, when I speak of Agues in the 2d part of my Sea-sick∣esses: However, with this severe fit e miss'd of his Ague; and next morning he took the following me∣dicin. ℞ Decoct. amar. alterant. cum dupla uantitate radic. gentiaan. ℥viij. Bibat ras mane; ac repetatur ad vij. alias ices.
After he had drank this four or five mornings, he began to recover hi colour and flesh, which is always a certain sign of their recovering health. Observation XVII. Michael Sunderland, was taken th latter end of April, with a coldne and trembling after dinner, his Puls was depress'd, he had a great desi to vomit, his Lips and ace wer very pale, and he had no appetit for his victuals; in an hour or tw after he became very warm, and wa hot for more than an hour, his Puls was very quick, and he sweat a hour more, which ended fit. On the first of May, in the morn∣ing, he took five grains of Tartar Emeticum, which vomited him fo times, and gave him two stools about eleven in the forenoon his returne▪ but it was nothing so seve as his ; after he had swea and all was over in pretty good o∣der, he began to take the Jesui powder in this form.
℞ Pulver. cortic. chin. chin. ℥j. cons. rosar. rub. ʒvj. syr. fl. caryophill. q. s. ut f. electuar. Cujus capiat magnitudinem nucis moschatae majoris tertia quaque hora, superbibendo vin. hispanic. aut Canarin. poculum, after which his fit did not return; yet to prevent a relapse, I prescrib'd him the following Tin∣cture. ℞ rad. gentian. ℥j. helen. aristol. ro∣tund. an ℥ss. Zedoar. ʒij. summitat cent. min. flor. chamom. an M. j. cortic. au∣rant. ℥ss. baccar. Juinper. ℥ij. Pptis. s. a. affunde vin hispanic. lbij. ac postquam fuerint per biduum in infusione, bibat cochl. iv▪ bis in die. Having drank this or some time, he began to recover his colour, which is always a certain sign that the Patient is out of danger of a relapse; yet he infus'd the medicins a second time, and did very well.
Observation XVIII. Richard Osburn, was taken ill of a coldness after dinner, which was succeeded with a trembling, an in∣clination to vomit, his Pulse was very depress'd, and his Lips were of a perfect clay-colour; yet instead of death came a great warmth▪ his Pulse was quick, he had a great drought, and his heat was so sharp, that he was very restless, till a plentiful sweat succeeding, made him more temperate; this Fever re∣turn'd once in 24 hours. When I saw him first, the fit, which lasted six hours was just gone off, and expecting the return next day about ten in the morning, I ordered him five grains of Tarta∣rum Emeticum, to be taken by eight that morning. which wrought very well, and had done its operation but a little before his sit came upon him; the cold fit was a great deal easier, and did not continue so long as be∣fore, and just as it was ending, he took ℈j. of pulv. gasconic. He fell asleep and awaking in a fine
sweat, he judg'd that fit to be very well; and immediately after the fit, began to take the powder made into an Electuary, as follows. ℞ Pulver. quinquin. ʒvj. cons. rosar. rub. ℥ss. theriac. Andromach. ʒij. syr. de mecon q. s. ut f. electuar. molle; quod consumat partitis dosibus ante paroxysmi sequentis adventum. By the use of this he miss'd his fit; yet to confirm his strength, he took 6 spoonfuls of the following Tin∣cture, till it was ended. ℞ rad. gentian. helen. an ℥j. summitat. absynth. cent. min. fl▪ chamom. ac M. j. semin. coriand. ʒij. cortic. aurant. ℥ss. baccar. juniper. ℥ij. limatur. mrt. ℥ss. Tartdr. alb▪ crud. in pet. ligat. ʒij. . fund. per biduum in vin. hispanic. lbiij. dein biat cochl.  bis in die. After he had drank this for some days, his colour and flesh return'd, he got an appetite for his victuals, and recovered daily without a re∣lapse.
Observation XIX. M—Captain of his Majesty's Fireship—was taken ill for a great while of a pain in his Heel, in the evening, so that sometimes he was so lame in the morning, that he could hardly walk till nine or ten of the clock. In my first visit, I found he had a great may symptoms that happen to people in Agues, and for that reason, I was the aper to think it one, since I have seen twice before such strange personating of Agues, particularly in a Lady of Quality, Sir Thomas Mil∣lingtoun and I was concern'd in, who had an Ague personated by the most violent hysterical fits, that ever were describ'd by any Author, but I forbear relating it, because it hap∣pened not at Sea. Yet whoever un∣derstands perfectly the Theory of Agues, and especially about their Return, will easily be perswaded, that there may be such obstructions in the smaller and less comprest vessels that may produce such effects, and these supplied and discussed, that very
way end one paroxysm and begin ano∣ther: tho I must confess, that the diligent Doctor Sydenham was the first, who took any particular no∣tice, and gave us a plain account of any such fact; tho he thought the reason was never to be assigned. This he does in his letter to the learn∣ed Doctor Brady, at present Kings professor in Cambridge. Hic autem, says he, commemorare libet, quod sub primus▪ hujus constitutionis annos sympto∣ma qaoddam insigne Febribus intermit∣tent ibus quandoque supervenerit. Nempe ear um paroxysmi non cum igore & horrore, quas postea Febris exci pit in∣vadebant sed aeger ijsdem plane symptomatis tentabatur ac si Applexia vera laborasset quae tamen nihil alid esset, utcunque hunc affectum, aemularetur, qua ipsa Febris caput impetens; ut ex alijs signis, it a ex colore urinae satis liquebat: quae intermittentibus ut plurium rubore saturato extat, qualis crntur in uri∣na eorum qui Ictero laborant, etsi non adeo intense rubet, & pariter se∣dimentum deponit pulverem laterum fere referens. Hoc autem in casu, &c.
But I must now take notice that a very considerable symptom at∣tended these intermitting Fevers, about the beginning of this consti∣tution. Their paroxysms made not their approach with a shaking and shivering, and then had the Fever following; but the sick person was affected in that very way, as if he had been ill of a true Apoplexy; which, nevertheless was nothing else but the Fever it self attacking his head. However, it imitated that disease, as was most evident by a great many signs, but more particu∣larly by the colour of the Urine, which, in Agues, is commonly of a deep red, such as that is in those that are ill of the Jaundice, tho it be not quite so red, and likewise breaks into a sediment almost like Brickdust. But in this case, &c. The great Doctor Sydenham is imi∣tated in this by Doctor Morton, who endeavours to follow so exact a guide in writing observations of some dis∣eases; but whatever people may think of that way of writing, I think it is the hardest thing to perform well in the world, which makes the
observations of Platerns, Horstius, and a great many more Authors, who have been mightily commended of so little real use. I say that Doctor, Morton does here pursue the hint from Doctor Sydenham at greater length about the 82 and 83 page of his Pyraetolog, and give us the patho∣gnomical sign, the Ʋtinam bone tinctam, sedimento lateritio saturatam, an Urine of a deep colour, stuffed with a sediment like Brickdust. And therefore, by the conduct of Doctor Sydenham, for I had not read the other Author when such a symp∣tome first appeared to me, and the reason I have already assigned. I believ'd in my former patients and in this, that he had an Ague perso∣nated by a fit of the Gout. Du∣ring the paroxysin I endeavoured to allay the pain, but design'd to prevent a relapse by the Jesuits powder, which succeeded very well given this way. On the 8th of May he had a fit in the evening; next day, he dined by eleven in the forenoon, and at five took this vomit.
℞ Vin. emetic. ℥i. Oxym. seyllit. ℥ss. aq. theriacal. ʒij. M. ac exhibeatur cum regimine. This made him vomit six times, and gave him one stool, and having his Fit in the evening, he began the Powder in the night; it was made up into an Electuary this way. ℞ cons. ros. rub. ℥j. pulv. chin. chin. ʒvi. syr. de succ. limon. q. s. f. electuar. molle, quod consumat ante reditum sequen∣tis. paroxysmi. He took it accordingly, and pre∣vented the Fit; he had the Tincture too, for the design I use to give it, and suffer'd no relapse. Observation XX. The order I proposed in the begin∣ning, leads me next to the other part of our stationary sicknesses the Loose∣nesses and Scurveys; and I shall give you a few instances of a great many that happen'd, as clearly and shortly as is possible.
Peter Pierce having returned from the Streights, was troubled with a violent Flux: he was put ashore at Del, and Gosprt, but returning with∣out any Cure, I saw him on the 9th of June, on board the Queen, where Mr. French, a very careful Man, is Surgeon; he went to stool some 14 times a day, and was very uneasy in the night, he had no appetite for his Victuals, and was in a very weak condition: next day he took the following Purge. ℞ Pulv. rad. Rhubarb. ℈i. cinam. pulverat. ℈ss. M. ac capiat cum regi∣mine. He did not void much more than usually, with thsi, and in the even∣ing he took the powder I prescribe for this disease, made into a Bolus, with conserve of red Roses, by which he recovered without taking any more remedies.
Observation XXI. John Hall at the same time came from the Streights with the sickness upon him, and had the fate of the former; he had tryed every thing that is prescribed by Physitians in this case, but to no purpose; at last taking the purgative as before, and then the Bolus, he did not go to stool for two days, and once every day thereafter; and recovered his health. Observation XXII. At the same time I saw Edward Mc Kaffrey, who had return'd from the Streights in that Ship, and was put ashore for his illness, but to no purpose; he took this purge on the 10th of June. ℞ Pulver. radic. jalap. cortic. cinam. subtil. pulverat. an ℈j. M. ac capiat cum regimine.
He had ten stools that day, and in the evening took the powder made up with a little of the Conserve of pale Roses, and Syrup of White Poppies into a Bolus, it kept him from going to stool that night, but he having three or four stools next day, and being a little grip'd he had a Clyster that day, and in the evening the Powder made up with Conserve of Red Roses, and recover'd per∣fectly. Observation XXIII. Alexander Ferguson, one about six∣teen or eighteen years of Age, re∣turned from the Streights with the rest, but went to stool sometimes twenty times a day, he voided little but blood, and a skinny sort of sub∣stance, which he would be apt to take for the coats of the guts.
He was let 5 ounces of blood in the arm, that evening, for revul∣sion. Now the reasonableness of this practice will appear from what I shall write about the cure of an Apo∣plexy; and the success of such a re∣vulsion may be seen in Authors: in particular, Amatus Lusitanus says, Ad virum illum, qui Dysenteriam diuturnam, & forte triginta dierum, ingenti cum febr patiebatur, ac post multa & varia ad∣hibita remedia, imbecillis & gracilis est factus, perseverante etiam fluxu ventris multo cum sanguine; Medicus cordatus ingressus est, qui sanguinem ex basilica dextri brachij extraxit, sed quanto ju∣vamine, audite. Ilico, mirum dictu! sanguis cohibitus fuit, perseverante adhuc fluxu ventris. Caetetrum saccharo ad aliquot dies, & nonnullis ingestis Cly∣steribus, ac topicis astringentibus remediis adhibitis; Alvus, in totum, restricta est.
℞ Rad. Rhab. elect. subtiliss. pulverat. ℈j. cinam. gr. xv. balsaem. Capyi. gut. j. M. ac capiat cum regimine. This purg'd him easily, and that evening he took the Medicin in this form. ℞ Pulver. contra Diarrhaeas ℈j. Opo∣bals. gut. viij. cons. ros. rub. q. s. ut f. bolus quem capiat hora somni. He slept easily, and was not di∣sturb'd that night, he had no stool next day; and but one the day after, and was restored to his health. Observation XXIV. Hearing that there were some per∣sons troubl'd with a looseness, on board the Sandwich, Commanded by Captain Mees; I went on board for that purpose on the 23d of July, and saw Robert Alvin, Edward Huggin, Charles Child, Thomas Starre, and Robert Craig, who were very much weaken'd by most troublesom loose∣nesses that had kept them for three
months, in spight of all that the Phy∣sitians, or any body else could give them. On the 24th they were all purg'd with the powder of Rhubarb and Cinnamon, which had all the success imaginable, and in the evening go∣ing to bed they took the bolus, which put an end to their troublesom disease, without any inconvenience whatsoe∣ver. Observation XXV. Henry Lloyd, having been troubled with this distemper so long, that for a fortnight he came not out of his Hammock, but as he was carried in mens arms, and was so weak that he could not turn himself, had this Cly∣ster in the afternoon. ℞ Decoct. commun. pro Clster. (in quo coct. sint sl. chamomil. Melilot. an. M. ss. semin. nis. contus. ℈ii. baccar. juniper. ℥jj) ℥viij. terebinth. in vitel. ovi solut. ʒj. M. f. enema injiciendum hora quinta pomeridiana.
He could not keep it above half an hour, and when he voided it, it brought along with it a great deal of slimy stuff; and in the evening he took the medicin, as I used to pre∣scribe it; he drunk for three or four days after the Decoctum album, and recovered without any relapse. After he had been ten days free from his flux, and began to crawl about again, he was sent ashoar to recover strength, which he did in a very short time, blessed be God. Observation XXVI. —Servant to Lieutenant Collonel Lutherel, was taken ill on board the Dutchess, in the beginning of August. When I saw him he had had six stools in one hour that morn∣ing; he immediately had the purge, and in the evening the Bolus, and recovered. I will not trouble you with more instances, since these are sufficient to demonstrate how powerful that me∣dicin
is, and of how great use it may be in those Countries where this disease is epidemical; and destroys so many thousands, as it has done in all the Armies and Navies in Europe, since the beginning of the present war. In the next place I proceed to the Cure of Scurveys, which, I bless God for it, are not so frequent as people imagin, and these that are truly Scorbutical, recover better in three days ashore, than in three thousand on board, tho very many recovering imperfectly of their Fe∣vers and continuing weak, are always said to have the Scurvey, and this might even be pretended with a little more care, and therefore I will say no more on this subject; and the mistaken Scurvy, or Melancholia Hypochondriaca shall have its place among our interfering Diseases, which I now begin to account for. Observation XXVII. John Davis, was taken suddenly with a loss of his Speech, he fell down as if he had been thunder-struck,
and fast asleep, without feel∣ing or any motion, except Respira∣tion, the motion of the Heart, and consequently that of the Pulse: yet, the Respiration and Pulse were so very small, that the sick person seem'd to be dead for a great many hours, his breathing was high, as when a man snores, and he foam'd a little at the mouth. 'Tis certain, that this is a Fit of an Apoplexy, a Disease not necessa∣rily occasion'd by our way of living at Sea, and therefore not to be mi∣nutely and particularly accounted for, in this place; yet to make the me∣thod of cure to be better understood, 'twill be necessary to say something, in the general, of its production: and therefore, let us only consider what we observe upon this and the like occasions; we have here a sud∣den and universal deprivation of sense and motion, except those already mentioned in the foregoing History; so that whatsoever is capable of pro∣ducing this universal and sudden De∣privation, is the immediate cause of this Disease. Again, let us remem∣ber that when I prov'd in my O Econ.
Anim. that there was a liquor pro∣pell'd through the Nerves which we might call Animal Spirits, I did it upon an experiment of a part's losing its sense and motion by making a ligature upon the nerve with which that part is provided; and now since we see that a member, or a particular muscle may lose their sense and mo∣tion by making ligatures upon their Nerves; if so many ligatures or something that produces the same effect, be suppos'd to affect every Nerve and ail its parts, or all the Nerves in their Original, which may be more easily done, 'twill not be difficult to apprehend this universal and sudden deprivation of sense and motion, which is requir'd. Now any thing that may depress the small and tender Nerves in their rise, in the Brain, and Medulla oblon∣gata, will hinder this derivation of animal spirits thro the Nerves and cause an Apoplexy; whether the sides of the Arteries be stuff'd with too much blood (thro its visidity, too great quantity, or its being too much rarefied) bending outward
with greater force than these Nerves have resistance; or whether these Nerves are thus deprest, by any of the vessels of the Brain being broken, and their liquors driven thro all the brain by the force that propell'd those liquors; extraneous bodies bred in the brain, a depression of the skull, which compresses these vessels, and the whole substance of the brain; all which may produce the required effect. Now if the compression be of such a kind that either few animal spirits are derived, or none at all; if the last, the consequence is death, because of the absolute and perfect want of those spirits that distribute sense over all the body, and motion to all its vessels and liquors: but when these spirits are conveyed in a very small quantity, they go with no unequal force into all the muscles, and consequently they effect equally, as to our observa∣tion, the whole muscles; and because the muscles of the whole body are counterpoised by their Antagonistical Muscles, except the Heart which has no Antagonistical
Muscle, and they being equally affected with this small quanity of animal spirits, their powers will be equal, and all detain'd in equi∣librio, except the Heart whose faint motion, from so few spirits, does continue; and the pulse too, which depends upon the motion of the Heart. Now from this Theory 'twere easy to establish the Cure, according to the different ways of the production of this Disease; as that an Apoplexy from extravasated liquors or extraneous bodies bred in the brain is incu∣rable, because we know of no way to bring back these liquors into their vessels, or to destroy these growing and compressing bodies in the brain: and that that from a depression of the skull requires the raising of the skull, and a practice according to the hurt the brain has receiv'd by this depression. But the Cure of that which is occasioned by the stag∣nating of the blood in the Arte∣ries of the Brain, and Medulla Oblongata, can only be perform'd by such means as may put this
blood into motion, and empty those vessels from the extraordi∣nary quantities; upon which views, straight come into our mind all sorts of Evacuations, as Bleeding, Vomiting, Purges, Clysters, Sweating Medicins, &c. then such Medicins as cause pain, which occasions the vessels and muscles to be more violently contracted, that so the stuffing liquors may be the more easily cast off. Now, tho Authors do mightily depend upon such evacuating Medicins for curing the paroxysm of an Apoplexy, yet it were easy to demonstrate the un∣successfulness of that practise, by proving how such Medicins can∣not affect the body in this cir∣cumstance, and therefore can afford but a very weak help; but this not being my design, I will only put 'em in mind of an instance of daily experience, and defer other Arguments to a more proper oc∣casion; and that is, if we give a very strong Vomit to any one in a Quartan Ague when the cold fit is begun, we find it never has
its effect till the cold fit, which may last three or four hours, is over; the vomitive parts of any medicin not being capable to affect the Blood or animal Spirits, in this viscid state of the Blood, or when it has a slower motion in the cold fit of an Ague, so as to produce their natural and constant effect; yet so soon as that is over, we find that, in a reasonable time, this small quantity of a medi∣cin that has been in reserve, for some hours, in a place, that uses to digest our most solid food, and trans∣mit its healthful juices into the blood for our sustenance in less time, at length, and then only begins to move us; and since this is the constant fate of vomits taken in such circumstances, 'twill be very plain to those that can see into the reason of this obvious observation, what we are to expect from this medicin in the fit of an A∣poplexy, where all feeling and sense seem to be at a final period, the equable and exact motion of our Li∣quors interrupted, the Pitcher broken at the Fountain, and the spring and origin of motion taken off:
And if all this happens to vomits, the medicins, that of all others have the most violent effects up∣on us, what must the weaker helps of the other medicins be thought to perform? just nothing; and if we can cram them into him, 'tis only to plague him after he has recovered without our help. Now, if this is all that internal medicins can do, even when we are to use violence upon our Patients to make 'em receive them; we must certainly depend upon external o∣perations, for any service we can expect to do, as anointings, which can do least, smelling at things that may affect our Senses and create pain, which may do more; but if we can hinder a greater afflux of Blood to that which already stagnates, and even take off some of the stagnating power, we may reasonably hope that the Heart may recover such force, as may propel the stag∣nating Liquors in the Brain, and Medulla Oblongata, or that we may relieve our Patients with a
great deal of certainty and in a short time, and to put him in a condition to reap advantage from internal Medicins that could do him no service be∣fore: And this may be done by such ways of bleeding, where∣by the blood being determined more to one part than another, more to the place where there is no cause for obstruction, than to one where it already is, there may be some of the obstru∣cting force taken off, or it may be done by Revulsion and Deriva∣tion, a practice so confirmed by daily experience, as well as by that of the Ancients of all Ages; tho its reason was never to be assigned, but by supposing Harvey's most no∣ble Theorem, the Circulation of the blood, Whatever; contrary use some of our Modern Physi∣tians have pleas'd to make of it, without any reason. For, if the Blood's motion is quicker by bleed∣ing, and in that Vessel where the wound is made, than it is in any other Vessel of
the opposite side, and that has no communion with this, or even in the same Vessel; before the bleeding; 'Tis cer∣tain that there will a great∣er quantity of blood flow thro that Vessel than there does in its opposite Vessel in the same space of time, or did throw it self before the Veesection; and that if this emissary is made upon a Vein that is continued with an obstructed Artery, this new out∣let of the Blood will take off some hundreds of degrees of resistance that it had from the blood contained in its Channel; or by the different ways of bleeding there will be Re∣vulsion and Derivation as was to be proved. Now the blood's motion must be quicker, because the powers that propel the blood, or rather the blood it self, does not communicate, or does not lose, by a great deal, so much of its force, when it moves thorough a Vessel, or its processes even to the Heart, as where there is an emissary made, where there is none. This is most evident upon
this account, because the parts of blood that are next to the Heart pro∣pelling the parts that are more re∣mote, lose a thousand times more of their motion when they propel the blood thorough a whole Chan∣nel, than when the Vessel has a large emissary made upon it, the propor∣tion betwixt the column of blood as it runs in a continued course (the parts of blood being contiguous one to another in their motion from the left Ventricle of the Heart, till they return into the right) and as it runs thorough an emissary into the air being as 1 to 1000, or by some calculations as 1 to 1200 or there∣abouts. But not to insist upon this, and that some who are accustomed to more nice calculations, may be capable to conceive the truth of this proposition we advance; let them but call into their thoughts what happens constantly in bleeding; where we may see run out of one Vein some ten or twelve ounces of blood in little more than a minute, and shewing such quantities over all the body, then considering the Mass
and bigness of the Vessels, and so he'll find this excessive velocity is either to be allowed, or else his quantity of Blood must grow in∣finitely upon him, and extraordina∣rily beyond a reasonable allowance. And now it being clear, that not on∣ly the Doctrin of Revulsion and Deri∣vation is to be accounted for by sup∣posing the Circulation of the Blood, but even that they who believe that this Doctrin is contrary to this Pro∣position, are perfectly ignorant of this noble Theory, the Circulation of the Blood, and its great Effects; I will proceed to the Cure of the Pa∣tient in the Fit of the Apoplexy; and because things could not be got ready soon enough for a more consi∣derable Revulsion by Bleeding him in the Foot, I caus'd eight Ounces to be taken out of his Arm, through a large Orifice, and thereafter, because he had abundance of Blood, ℥xvj. were taken out of his right jugular, because they convey the Blood im∣mediatly from the Sinns of the Brain, into which these Arteis dis∣charge themselves; which Operation, with smelling at some strong Spirit
of Hart's horn, brought him out of the Fit while the Surgeon was Bleed∣ing him; after the Fit was over, he had a Clyster, not at all stronger than usually, and took now and then three spoonfuls of this Ju∣lep. ℞ aq. lact. alxiter. ℥v. spirit. vin. ℥ij. aq. theriacal. ℥j. Tinctur. Castor. ʒj. M. ac cum. syr. fl. caryophyl ℥j. f. julap. Cujus bibat . iij. tertia quaque hora. He had a Seton in his Neck for one Month, and his ordinary drink was the following decoction. ℞ lign. Guaiac. ℥vj. Cortic. ejus∣dem ℥ij. santal. rub. citrin. an. ʒvj. Coq. & digerant. l. a. in s. q. aq. sont. ad lbvj. Circa finem addend. passul. major. integr. ℥v. Colatura servetur usui. All this time he had suffer'd no re∣lapse, nor since as I can learn.
Observation XXVIII. T. —who had been ill of a long time, of a difficulty of Breath∣ing, of that sort that's call'd an Asthma, according to an Ancient verse, Disnia se celat, canit Asma malumque revelat, Ortonia quoque morbo vexatur utro∣que. His Pulse was slower than usually, he had no Appetite, and was of a Ca∣chectical disposition. Now, since an Influx of the Ani∣mal Spirits into the Muscles of the Thorax, in its proper disposition, as that of the Lungs, Air and Blood are absolutely necessary in a natural res∣piration; so any one or more of these, or all together being viciated will occasion a difficulty of Breath∣ing, which are more particularly to be accounted for by those that write, on purpose, upon that Subject; in this case, his thicker Blood not being able to pass quickly enough through
his Lungs did produce this Asthma; and therefore being first call'd to him while he was in a very severe Fit, I order'd him immediately to be let twelve Ounces of Blood; next Morn∣ing which was the 25 of June, he took gr. vj. of Tartar. Emetic. which produced the desired effect; and the day after he took this purge. ℞ resin. jalapp. gr. x. mercur. d. gr. viij. trochisc. Alhand. gr. ij. gum. am∣moniac. solut. ac parum inspissat. q. s. ut f. pil. No. v. Quas capiat multo mane cum regimine. After he had taken these Pills, he began this Tincture, which I had order'd to be prepar'd in the mean time. ℞ rad. gentian. ℥ij. summitat. hyssop. puleg. centaur. min. M. j. baccar. ju∣niper. ℥ij. croc. Anglic. in pet. ligat. ʒj. illeped. viv. ac mundat. No. xl. prepa∣ratis s. . aund, vin Xeresens. lbij. ac post quam fuerint per biduum in in∣fusione, bibat cochl. v. bis in die.
He found himself in less than a Month, a great deal easier than he had been for a year before, and I hope he has e're now recover'd his perfect Health. Observation XXIX. T—B—was taken with an Ef∣flux of yellow Matter out of his Yard, in one days time, after some impure Embraces, he had a scalding of his Urin, a painful erection, and une chorde. He complain'd to me as soon al∣most as it appear'd, and he was per∣fectly cur'd of this misfortune, the Gleet and all its attendants in twelve days, by the method I hinted in my last Book. The Gonorrhaea in this way of Cure, has this constant ap∣pearance thro' the whole course, as I have hitherto observed; for the first three or four days, it runs but moderately of a thicker kind of stuff, from the Fourth or Fifth, to the Ninth thinner and in a greater abun∣dance, very yellow and sometimes green; about the Ninth it general∣ly changes its colour to an equal sub∣stance,
and the desired whiteness, de∣creasing considerably in its quantity, till on the Twelfth, Thirteenth or Fourteenth, it quite vanishes, daily lessening by degrees, its substance becoming thicker and whiter, the it grows; after the same very way which we observe in other Ul∣cers. I could relate more Instances of this kind, if it were not too tedious to read Cures, without knowing the Method, and Instruments that con∣tributed towards them; and there∣fore I will add no more Observations of this Nature, but rather divert our selves a little with some Reason∣ings about its Antiquity, which, in my Opinion, is pretty plainly to be read in a great many places in Anci∣ent History, but more especially a∣mong the Comodians. Tho' this has seem'd to be very obscure, and we are contented to refer its Original to the Siege of Naples; yet to lay aside prophane History, at this time, I will only alledge that an Account of may easily be found in the Holy Scriptures themselves, and by the way of expressing it there; this
seems to be as Ancient as the time of Women having Monthly and Child-bed purgations, which succeed the description of our Diseases here, from the very beginning of Mankind. The place where I think this is so plainly intimated, is when Moses Institutes the Ceremonies of the Jews purifying themselves, he says in the 2d verse of the 15th Chapter of Le∣viticus, When any Man has a Running Issue out of his Flesh, &c. It is de∣scrib'd very plainly and beyond a guess: And the Word Flesh here spoken of, is frequently taken in ho∣ly writ for the Privy Member of a Man, as in the Institution of the Cir∣cumcision with Abraham, in the 17th Chapter of Cenesis at the 11th verse, and when God Almighty denounces his Wrath against the Whoredom of Jerusalem, in the 26th verse of the 17th Chapter of Ezel's Prophesies, he says, Thou st also  or∣nication with the Aegyptians thy ∣bours, great of Flesh, as he had , cum, Mutoneatis Aegyptis; and in the 20th verse of the 23d Chapter of that Prophet's Book, For she doted upon their paramours, whose Flesh is as the
Flesh of Asses, &c. Now seeing the word Flesh here spoke of is Penis, we can be at no dispute about the Acci∣dent related of it in the sequel of this Chapter, in Leviticus: And it being the Running of the Reins or Clap, that Moses Institutes this Ce∣remony of Purification for, 'tis evi∣dent also, that this Sickness thus to Purified for, was known to Mo∣ses, and frequent among those that receid those Laws, or that it was among the Children of Israel; and so, among the most Ancient things that we know, and more An∣cient than the most of, or any other Diseases: But this is still more clear that we read it in the French Translation, or in that of the vulgar Latin. And therefore 'tis plain, from this single Instance, that this Disease is more Ancient than the first of the times we use to assign, as I intneded to prove. Observation XXX. D—J—a Boatswain's Mate in his Majesties Ship the—was seis'd with the above-mentioned Disease in
an East India Voyage, and had a Cure, that stopt his Running; about three Months after, he was troubled with great, thick, crusty Scabs on his Arms; for which he had a great many Liniments and other Med'cins, by which the Scabs fell off, but still sprung up again; 'till meeting him this Summer he was perfectly Cured by the following method: He took a Bolus of Turbith Mineral twice a Week, and his constant drink was a decoction of Guaiac. for one Month, the Remedies were these, ℞ Turpeth. mineral gr. vij. cons. rosar. rub. q. s. ut f. Bolus, quem Capiat cum regimine Repetatur ad alteram vicem hac septimana, ac bis hebdomadib. seq. ad mensem integrum. ℞ Rasur. lign. guaiac. ℥ij. corti. ejusd. ℥ss. Coq. s. a. in aq. fontan. s. q. ad lbij. Circa finem addendo passul. major. integr. ℥iv. aut liqurit. raspat. ℥ss. f. Colatura in lagena vitrea re∣condenda ad usum.
In the short time he us'd these things, his Scabs fell off, and he be∣came very fat; neither had any re∣turn of his fulsome Disease. Observation XXXI. Mr. Ankers, Captain Greenway's Clark in the Edgar, was troubled with a want of Appetite for his Vi∣ctuals, a prodigious spitting, an ap∣prehension of dying suddenly, belch∣ing, a weak and rare Pulse, and a sinking at his Heart, with a difficulty in fetching his Breath. 'Tis evident that this Sickness which held him of a long time, and for which he had advis'd with a great many, to no purpose, is no other than the Melancholia Hypochon∣dra, or that which People com∣monly call the Spleen, tho' it often times has tho least part in that Dis∣ease; and almost none of these Symp∣toms I have just now nam'd, can be the consequences of that Part's being any way affected, as I might easily demonstrate by a more particular re∣solution of the Symptoms of this Distemper: But since it is no other∣ways
under my consideration, at present, than as 'tis an Interloping Sickness, I may suppose its Causes, in laying down the Indications for its Cure. And therefore, because these Belchings, Indigestion, and Win∣diness in the first Passages, the Slow∣ness of the Pulse, Ʋnactiveness, and Whiteness of the Urine, argue a de∣fect in the attrition of the Chyle, and an unfirness for its being mix'd with the Blood, I order'd him a Vomit both to cleanse the first Pas∣sages, that the Chyle and Medcins might be transmitted into the Blood in their full force, and that without any loss of Spirits, as also that the thick and languishing Blood might receive a new tour and determina∣tion, by the violent Contraction of almost all the Muscles, in the time of vomiting. The Vomit was five grains of Tartarum , dis∣solv'd in two or three  of White-wine; he drnk now and then large draughts of thin Water-gruel in the intervals of the vomit∣ing. It wrought very easily for 3/4 of an Hour, in which time he had four vomits and two stools; about an
hour after it had done working, he drank a glass of warm Sherry, and laid himself to sleep; and next Morn∣ing took the following Potion. ℞ sol. senn. sine slip. ʒiij. rad. rhab. elect. incis. ℈j. infund. epid. per noct. in decoct. fortior. passul. major. ℥viij. mane colaturae per express. factae adde syr. de rhamn. ʒss aq. epidemic. ʒij. fl. til. ℥ss M. ac. hibat cum regimine. This purg'd him five times with∣out any griping, and to the satisfacti∣on of us all: The day after he began an infusion that was preparing for him, from the beginning of this course, whereof this is the form. ℞ rad. gentian. ℥ij. Aristol. rotund. ℥j. summit. cent. min. absynth. Card. Benedict. an M. j. fol. cochlear. hortens. M. ij. Cortic. aurant. ℥j. baccar. juni∣per. ℥iij. praeparatis s. a. aund. vin. Xere∣sens. lbiv. ac macerent. per dies quatuor vel quinque; dein bibat cochl. iv. bis ter∣ve quotidie. Infusio, vero, tantum cole∣tur tempore usus; ac persistat in hujus infusioni usu ad mensem integrum.
He drank this Tincture the whole time appointed, which dissipated all his fears of a sudden Death, and brought him a good Stomach, and easie Nights. Observation XXXII. A—M—Captain of his Maje∣stie's Ship—was taken ill of a want of Appetite, Thoughtfulness, Disturbance in his sleep, Melancho∣ly dreams, and a Defect of Spirits; his Pulse was weak, and there were small Swellings in different parts of his Body, in the Morning especially, tho' they went off about Noon. 'Tis evident that the Sickness is of the same sort with the former, and therefore I order'd him to be let nine Ounces of Blood, and next day to take this Vomit. ℞ Tartar. emetic. gr. iv. Solv. in vin. alb. Gallic. cochl. uno vel altero, ac Ca∣piat mane cum regimine. It wrought five times, and made him go once to stool, all the time of its Operation he drank large draughts
of Posset-drink; next day Morning he took these Pills early in the Morn∣ing. ℞ pil. Rud. gr. xxv. Merc. d. gr. vij. Tartar. vitriolat gr. v. elixir. propri∣etat. q. s. utf. pil. No. v. Quas capias multo mane, cum regimine, ac superdor∣miendo. They purg'd him four times with a great deal of ease; and next Morn∣ing he began the following Electua∣ry. ℞ cortic. aurant. condit. rad. helen. condit. ℥ij. z. in z. in Ind condit. ʒvj. pulver. Ari composit. ʒij. theriac. An∣dr. ʒj. lyr. chalybeat, q. s. ut f. electuar▪ de quo Capiat quantitat. nuc. moschat. major. bis in die, superbibendo ujustbet generos. poculum. Every Evening about bed time, he took a Dose of these Pills. ℞ gum. ammo. . sagapen. ʒj. en. vener. ℈ij. croc. Anglic. subtil. pulverat. ʒss sal. volatil. succin, C. C. gr. xv. elix. proprictat. q. s. ut f. pil. N. xl.
ac Capiat tres alternis noctibus, eundo Cubitum. With the use of these Med'cins, and such a bitter Infusion as was pre∣scrib'd before, he recover'd perfect∣ly in the space of one Month. Observation XXXIII. B—D—Surgeon of his Maje∣sties Ship the—after a Summer's custom of drinking drams of Bran∣dy and other Spirituous Liquors, was perfectly dried up, and decay'd; he had no Appetite for Meat, he had a great drought, he Sweat very much in the night, and could not sleep: He had taken a Vomit and was drink∣ing decoct. amar. ashoar when I saw him first; so I forbid him to use the decoction any longer, and desir'd his whole diet might be Water-gruel, Whey, Milk and the like, and to take frequently some of the following Electuary. ℞ pulp. passul major. cons. cynobat. cochlear an ℥j. cortic. citr. condit ℥ss ocul. caner. ppt. ʒij. sal. prunel. ʒjss.
syr. alth. Fernel. q. s. ut f. electuar. Cujus capiat magnitud. nuc. myristic. bis vel ter in die, superbibendo seri lact. recent. ac non salsi poculum. He continu'd faithfully in the use of these Med'cins for a Month, and recover'd sensibly every day. Observation XXXIV. F—L—Captain of his Maje∣stie's Ship—was troubled with a pain in his Stomach, a want of Ap∣petite, and what he eat, lay heavy and did not digest, his Pulse was a crawling rare Pulse, he was subject to sudden Faintings, and had always most Melancholy dreams. This being another Fit of the Me∣lancholia Hypochondriaca, I order'd him to take a Vomit, next Morn∣ing, of five Grains of Tartar. emetic. drinking large draughts of thin wa∣ter gruel between every Fit of Vo∣miting: The day following he drank this Potion.
℞ fol. senn. virent & a stipit. mundat. ℥ss rad. rhab. elect. ac inis. ℈j. fl. chammoil. pu. ij. crem. Tartar gr. xv. inf. per nct. in dcoct. passul. major. ℥vi. Clatur. mane per expr. fact. add. aq cin. ordeat. ʒj. M. ac bibat cum re∣gimine. This purg'd him six or seven times but grip'd him a little, and inter∣mitting one day, on the third the Potion was repeated with the same success as before; then, he began to take this Infusion. ℞ rad. Imperator ℥ij. raphan. ar∣morac. ℥jss. fol. menth. puleg. beton. summitat. cent. min. fl chamom. an M. j. rad. galang. ℥ss. z. z. alb ʒij. cor∣tic. aurant. i℥ij. mac. ℈ij. limatur. chalyb. lbviij. In. in vin hispa. lb viij. post macerat. quatour dierum, bibat jejuno ventriculo, cochl. iv. mae, & totidem hora quinta post meridiem. He drank also two drops of ol. sul∣phur. per camp. in a glass of wine half an hour before Dinner for a whole Month, and recover'd very fast.
To these Histories I could add a hundred more, of People that have been in the same condition after Fe∣vers; for how can it be expected, that after one, who is very weak and just recover'd of a Fever, and falls, without due strength, to the eating of the Ship's salt Provisions, which I proved to require a vast deal of Exercise, Work and Fatigue, at any time; I say, how can it be ex∣pected that he can recover strengh upon such a diet, which he is not so much as able to digest? But this may be almost intirely prevented, by making their Burgoo-diet more grateful, by a greater allowance of Butter, or fresh Provisions, which will not do quite so well. I am con∣fident that this one thing would save a great many Mens lives, how small and inconsiderable soever it may seem to be, and make the Service to be better performed; and I dare positiv, affirm, that there can be no inconvenience reasonably alledg∣ed, so much as by a thousand Conse∣quences, to the contrary, except a little more Expence and Charge to the King, and that but very little,
and ev'n that sav'd by the discreet management of the Commissioners of the Admiralty and Navy, which has been singular in this long War. But as things stand now, I have prevent∣ed very much this inconvenience, by confining them, as much as possible, to a diet of Water-gruel, Burgoo, Bread and Butter, for the first week of their recovery; drinking half a pint of the bitter draught without the Purgatives, every morning, or longer as 'tis needful. But we have more considerable Errors in my way, or the administring of Physick to the Fleet, which would be less charge∣able, and of greater advantage, if amended; and I must believe, that all these things will be sufficiently look'd into, in their proper time. Observation XXXV. Mr. Smith, second Lieutenant of the Victory, was troubled with a Cough, and difficulty of breathing, he had a pain in his Breast, he was Costive and had no Appetite.
I order'd him immediately to be let fourteen Ounces of Blood, and next day to take this purge. ℞ pil. Rud. ʒss calomelan. gr. viij. Tartar. vitriclat. gr. v. elix. proprietat. q. s. ut f. pl. No. v. quas Capiat. multo manc cum regimine & superdormiendo. Repetatur ad alteram vicem interjecto die uico. When this was done, he was a a little better, yet the pain in his Breast continuing, I order'd him a∣gain to be let Blood, and taking once more a dose of the Physick, to be∣gin the use of this Electuary, and to live very astemiously, drinking no strong drink, and eating only Water-gruel. ℞ pulp. passul. major. conserv. rosar. rub. ℥ij. theriac. Andromach. ʒiij. syr. alth. fernel. parum, ut f. electuar. de quo Capiat magnitud. nuc. moschat. bis vel ter in die. Before he had consum'd this Ele∣ctuary, he was perfectly well. I know that I shall be blam'd among
great Persons that neglect all small things, for observing this trivial thing of a Cough, and for Curing it this way: But I am not asham'd to own my inclinations to observe the meanest things that may happen; tho', at the same time, I think a Cough one of the greatest Distem∣pers that may be, either as 'tis the beginner of the greatest Diseases, or as it has been the least accounted for, and the Indications of Cure most in∣judiciously establish'd. For a Cough naturally introduces Fevers, Apoplex∣ies, Consumptions, Convulsive Diseases, &c. and the sooner by the ordinary way of Cure, which is generally en∣deavour'd by thickning Lozenges, or diaphoretical Med'cins; or, which is ridiculous, by such things that absorb Acids, those pernicious Causes of this Disease, as they are pleas'd to think. The first method in any Cough, that does not go off of it self, makes the Patient Asthmatical, Lethargical, or throws him into some Convulsive Disease; the second, which is done to open the Pores, which most pro∣bly were never shut, nor can be agin'd to be so, by any reason yet
alledged, is the plain beginner of Fevers and Sicknesses of that sort; and as the third is prescrib'd with∣out a design, so it never produces any good effect, but prolongs the Disease, so that if it does not go off in spite of the Med'cins, it ends in a decay. But whoever will give himself the trouble to remember the time wherein we are most apt to catch cold, may easily discern that it is the too great lightness of the Air that occasions the slower motion of the Blood, which is the immediate cause of this Distemper; for the Blood being more slowly mov'd, does especially produce that larger discharge of Lympha in the Salival Vessels, after the manner hinted in my Oecon. Animal. which Lympha be∣ing separated in a great abundance about the Mouth, Throat, or in the Aspera Arteria it self, and falling in∣to the Lungs, does very often by its own weight provoke the Lungs into that action we know by the Name of Cough; tho' this be not the proper place either to explain what it is, how it is produc'd, or what are its causes: Only it is evi∣dent
that this large discharge of Lym∣phae, and the other accidents in a Cough proceeding from the Blood's slower motion, and greater quanti∣ty; that this greater quantity is to be lessen'd, and the Blood's motion heighten'd by ways that are not re∣pugnant to one another, which may be done by the foregoing method, tho' the reason is to be deduc'd in a great measure, from what I have said about the Cure of continu'd Fevers, in the Second Part of my Book of Sea Sicknesses. Observation XXXVI. Mr. Listock, a Lieutenant in his Majestie's Ship the Royal William, was ill of a violent Cough and a spit∣ing of Blood, which made him very pale and lean; he had a weak Pulse, he did not sleep well in the Night, and was sometimes Feverish. The Cough and spiting of Blood, being the great Diseases in this case, and the other Symptoms but the consequences of them; 'tis certain that a spitting of Blood being only produc'd by the greater force made
upon the tenderer and smaller Ves∣sels, about the Nose, Mouth, Throat, Aspera Arteria, and the Lungs them∣selves; that the natural way of Cur∣ing this Disease, is by lessening this violent force of the Blood, that may come from its extraordinary Rare∣faction, Quantity or Motion, and re∣pairing the defects and inconvenien∣cies the Vessels have sustained by this eruption: But before I speak of the Cure, some will expect that I should determine the part for which this Blood was voided, which is of no great consequence to the Cure, tho' it may be in a clear Prognostick, yet ev'n this I have neglected, because 'twould spend too much time in set∣ling more evident and certain signs, than we find among Authors; for who that has read any thing of Phy∣sick, does not see that we all follow Hippocrat. 5. Aph. 13. Quicunque spumantem sanguinem extussiunt, iis ex pulmone educitur, in settling this Effux from the Lungs, rather in the Throat or any where else, where it is de∣monstrable that Blood may be fro∣thy, tho' it never came from the Lungs; and that there may be Ves∣sels
broken in the Lungs, out of which a great deal of Blood may be voided, and yet this may not be frothy. I say not to spend too much time, and from the purpose upon this Subject, I am content to give an account of the way how I cur'd my Patient, tho' he eat salt Victuals al∣most all the while. He was first let Blood, both to lessen the quantity and to make a Revulsion, and then because the spit∣ing was not so frequent, and his Blood seem'd to be in an ill conditi∣on, he was purg'd with half a dram of Rhubarb, and next took this Elect∣uary. ℞ cons. cynosbat. pulp. passul. major an ℥ij. lapid. haematit. ppti. pulv. sang. dracon. an ʒij. sal. prunell. ʒiss. the∣riac. Andromach. ℈ij. syr. de ros. sicc. q. s. ut f. electuar. Cujus capiat quanti∣tatem nuc. muschat. major. bis vel ter in die. His drink was Water, and a little red Wine, and in every draught, he had ℈ss. sal. prunellae; and at Bed
time he took twice a Week the fol∣lowing Bolus. ℞ spermat. cet. non rancid. gr. xv. pil. de styrac. gr. vj. cons. rosar. rub. q. s. ut f. bolus, quem Capiat hora som∣ni. After he had taken these things eight or ten Days, he found himself a great deal better, and continu'd using them for a Month or two more; only the Electuary was a lit∣tle alter'd, and made not so bind∣ing. Observation XXXVII. G—D—Purser of his Majesty's Ship the—was taken ill of a sharp pricking pain in his left side, he was somewhat Feverish, he breath'd thick, and with a great deal of difficulty, his Pulse was hard and frequent, and withal he had a Cough. 'Tis evident by this description, That he was ill of a Pleurisie, and because this affection is only an in∣ammation of the Pura, and, per∣haps,
of the Muscles themselves, which is produc'd by the Blood's stagnating in the Arteries of these parts, where this affection is: And therefore, I order'd twelve Ounces of Blood to be taken out of his right Arm, and the very same minute I saw him; and injoyn'd it to be re∣peated, if the pain did not sensibly abate in four hours time, and in 24 hours time, he lost 48 Ounces of Blood at convenient intervals: his drink was barley decoction, in every draught of which, was mixt a dose of purifi'd Nitre; and at night, go∣ing to Bed, he drank off this Emul∣sion. ℞ semin. iv. frigid. major. ℥j. se∣min. papav. alb. ʒij. amygd. d. No. x. Contundant. l. a. in mortar. marmor. ac f. emuls. sensim. affundendo decoct. hord. ℥ x. Colatur. lar. add. syr. de mecon. ℥j. He abstain'd from eating any thing but Water-gruel for ten days, yet a day or two after the violence of the pain was abated, I order'd him this Purge, for the same rea∣sons
he was let Blood, tho' 'tis ge∣nerally forbidden by Authors. ℞ fol. senn. sine stipit. ℥ss. fl. melilot. pug. ij. crem. tartar ℈j. inf. per noctem in decoct. tamarind. ℥vj. Colatur. per express. fact. add syr. de rhamn. ʒj. M. ac. Capiat cum regi∣mine. This purg'd him very easily, and with a great deal of success and sa∣tisfaction; and besides these things, he took nothing else, only the part was anointed with a liniment of the Oyntment of Marsh-mallows and Lin∣seed oyl, and so he recovered. Observation XXXVIII. John Turner, had been ill for a∣bove a Year of want of Appetite, a Swelling, for the most part of the day, in the Muscles of all his Bo∣dy, but especially of his Legs, his lour was greasie, and like Clay, is Pulse was weak, and he made but little water.
The History of these Symptoms, plainly declares what this Disease is, that it is a Dropsie, and of that sort they call an Anasarca or Leu∣cophlegmatia: The ancient Physici∣ans thinking that it was entirely Phlegm subsisting some way between the Muscles that gave this white or pale colour, and made the Flesh capable to retain the print of any thing, that was press'd upon it, for some time. 'Tis certainly a very great weakness of the whole mass of Blood, ev'n so great, that it seems the Heart is not supplied with a sufficient quantity of Spirits to propel the mass of Blood, and to accommodate the thing to their way of speaking, seems to be full of Phlegm; but we must believe, that when the Sickness goes no far∣ther than an Anasarca, there is no breach of the Vessels, none of this stuff lodg'd between the interstices of the Muscles; because it would produce quite other effects than we see. This weakness may be procur'd many ways, either because the Spirits are mightily exhausted too great evacuations, made by
our selves or such as may be custo∣mary or critical, or because there are not sufficient quantities of Spirits made, through an ill way of living, or the Blood may ev'n be made so thick by some usual evacuations, be∣ing suppress'd, that this defect of Spirits may be very sensible. In all these Circumstances, this weakned Blood not having that quantity of motion, I have prov'd necessary for making the Perspiration; the steems that are daily voided that way in a great abundance being de∣tain'd in a great measure, and heightning the bulk of this sordid mass of Blood that was not easily pro∣pell'd, must needs lose of its mo∣tion, by this daily addition, and subsist in the smaller and more ca∣pillary Vessels, especially in extream parts of the Body, and proportio∣nably to this addition, the grow∣ing swelling will be. Now, for the Cure of this Dis∣ease, the want of Spirits we must endeavour to supply, and to cor∣rect the viscidity and toughness of of the Blood: Upon these designs, Authors have advis'd sweating
Med'cins, which seldom have their effect in this Disease; and I must believe very hurtful, if they had, by carrying off some of the more spirituous parts of the Blood; and 'tis certain that when this Disease succeeds any immoderate evacuations that the fam'd purgatives are as un∣reasonable as letting of Blood: tho' when it comes from a suppression of some usual evacuations, purgatives conveniently used may be of great advantage: Yet Vomits for the rea∣sons assign'd in the second part, a∣bout curing of Agues may be of infi∣nite advantage, as Authors have found in their practise. The method I pursu'd for his Cure was this; he first took gr. vij. of Tartar. emetic. which wrought very well, Vomiting eight times and giving him four stools; next day he took the following purgative. ℞ Pil. Rud. ʒss. Calomelan. gr. xij. elater. gr. j. Elixir. proprietat. q ut f. pil. No. v. quas capiat multo m∣ne cum regimine ac superdormiendo. Repe∣tantur semel vel bis qualibet septimana.
℞ radic. gentianraphan sylvestr. an. ℥ij. Zedoar. Galangae an. ℥j. summitat. absih. card. Benedict. centaur. min. an. M. jss salvi. agrimon. rut. murar. cochlear. a. M. j. cortic. aurant. ℥j. eran. ℥ss. baccar juniper. ℥iv. semi. sinap. ℥jss. pptis s. a. affundant. cerevis. plus quam mediocr. lb xvj. Stent dem unum aut alterum in infusione; dein bibat pro potu ordinario: Affunde. tamen poterit cerevisia eisdem materialib. adalteram vicem. With the first opportunity he was desired to purchase this Electuary and to take it as I have here pre∣scrib'd it, upon Riverius recommen∣dation in the 97th Observation, Cent 2. ℞ cons. fl tamarisc. capil. vener an. ℥jss. conserv. rad. enul. ℥ss. conf. al∣rm. ʒiij. sal. absynth tamarisc. an. ʒj. rasur. ebor. pulverisat. spec. diarrhod. Abbat. an. ℈j. syr. capil. vener. q. s. ut f. opiat. Cujus capiat quantitat. castan. sin∣gul. diebus duabus horis ante pastum su∣perbibendo
vini enjuslibet generosissimi poculum. By the exact use of these things he recover'd wonderfully, and at∣tain'd to his perfect Health in the space of three Months. But besides Anasarca's, 'tis almost a wonder that that other sort of Dropsie and Ascites is so rare a∣mongst People of gross enough ha∣bits of Body, that drink so much of spirituous Liquors; and they really observe themselves, that such as drink dry Drams (as they call them) seldom escape this misfortune; whereas when their Brandy is temper'd with Ship's Beer or rather in Flip or Punch, it becomes a most wholesome and useful Drink, considering their Diet and way of living. For this is it that these dry Drams drank at Sea or a Shoar do, they shrivel all the Mem∣branes and Membranous parts of our Body, by which our Stomachs is made less sensible of hunger, and uncapable of performing its office in digesting our Victuals, our Veins, Arteries and Nerves are dried up, so that they are not so easily contracted
℞ radic. gentian. raphan sylvestr. an. ℥ij. Zedoar. Galangae an. ℥j. summitat. absh. card. Benedict. centaur. min. an. M. j. ss salvi. agrimon. rut. murar. ochlear. a. M. j. cortic. aurant. ℥j. Wineran. ℥ss. baccar juniper. ℥iv. smi. sinap. ℥jss. pptis s. a. affundant. cerevis. plus quam mediocr. lb xvj. Stent per dem unum aut alterum in infusione; dein bibat pro potu ordinario: Affunde. tamen poterit cerevisia eisdem materialib. adaeram vicem. With the first opportunity he was desired to purchase this Electuary and to take it as I have here pre∣scrib'd it, upon Riverius recommen∣dation in the 97th Observation, Cent 2. ℞ cons. fl tamarisc. capil. vener an. ℥jss. conserv. rad. enul. ℥ss. conf. al∣erm. ʒiij. sal. absynth tamarisc. an. ʒj. rasur. ebor. pulverisat. spec. diarrhod. Abbat. an. ℈j. syr. capil. vener. q. s. ut. f. opiat. Cujus capiat quantitat. castan. sin∣gul. diebus duabus horis ante pastum su∣perbibendo
vini enjuslibet generosissimi poculum. By the exact use of these things he recover'd wonderfully, and at∣tain'd to his perfect Health in the space of three Months. But besides Anasarca's, 'tis almost a wonder that that other sort of Dropsie and Ascites is so rare a∣mongst People of gross enough ha∣bits of Body, that drink so much of spirituous Liquors; and they really observe themselves, that such as drink dry Drams (as they call them) seldom escape this misfortune; whereas when their Brandy is temper'd with Ship's Beer or rather in Flip or Punch, it becomes a most wholesome and useful Drink, considering their Diet and way of living. For this is it that these dry Drams drank at Sea or a Shoar do, they shrivel all the Mem∣branes and Membranous parts of our Body, by which our Stomachs is made less sensible of hunger, and uncapable of performing its office in digesting our Victuals, our Veins, Arteries and Nerves are dried up, so that they are not so easily contracted
and bent outwards, which of it self creates old Age, and a thousand other inconveniences: These dry Drams with their loose Spirit, that's so free∣ly put in motion where ever it is, disperses and destroys the native and benign Spirits of our Blood, and so disposes it to a lesser motion. But not to insist upon the infinite misfor∣tunes that attend these dried and wi∣thered Vessels, especially the Arteries; how by their not being Contracted and Distended, the Blood may want some considerable determinations in its Motion, the secretions over all the Body may be diminished, and the Liquors separated even not pro∣pell'd through their proper ducts in∣to their proper Receptacles or some∣times into the Air; but I say, not to insist upon these inconveniences, which are so considerable, that upon them only depends the well being, nay indeed the being at all of the Crea∣ture; yet if the Vessels be thus hard∣ned and shrivel'd with such spiritu∣ous Liquors, Brandy, Plague-Water, &c. they are not at all fitted either to the Motions we are to perform, or the greater or lesser quantity of
the Blood; for the Blood must either never be rarefied or possess greater space, or we never change our po∣stures, else these Vessels must break; because, when the Vessels are so hard∣ned, and proceeding, as we may conceive them, in different shapes from the Heart through the whole Body, they cannot remain whole and entire, except they keep the same Posture; but that cannot be, if the parts thorough which they run change their Posture, and this is chang'd in every one of their Moti∣ons; the same may be alledg'd of the Blood's taking up more space in its augmentation. But in this hardning of these Vessels we cannot apprehend them to be rigid Bodies, perfectly stiff, and so not to break as matter in that circumstance; yet being har∣der, and not so pliable as musculous Membranes or parts made up of Fi∣bres and Muscles or Blood Vessels va∣riously interwoven as they originally are; they must be torn in considera∣ble motions or growth of Blood, which emissaries and holes transmit Liquors that can pass the diameters of these small Wounds, and in a
quantity proportionable to the re∣sistance the sides of these Holes make to the circulating Blood: So 'tis no wonder if considerable quantities of Serum are thus discharged into the cavity of the Abdomen, Thorax, or on the Brain it self, as it may ouze thorough these small emissaries upon these places; and make an Ascites, Empyema and Hydrocepha∣lus, which are of a very considera∣ble consequence to deter all exces∣sive drinkers of these loose Spirits, whatever specious names some of them may have. Observation XXXIX. Adam Wilkins, was troubled for two or three years with a Costive¦ness, that he almost never went to Stool, but once in four or five days; at last having not been at Stool for a fortnight, he began to have violent Cholick pains, a vomiting and a sup∣pression of Urin, with a prodigious heat upon the Reins of his Intestins or over all his Belly.
The Surgeon had given him emol∣lient Clysters of Oyls, and decocti∣ons of Plants, gentle Purgatives, and such other things before I saw him, but without the desired success. When I first visited him, he had a most vio∣lent pain, and had not slept for a great many Nights. And besides, Hip∣pocrat. his prognostick in his praeno∣tiones, verse 48. Cum Ileosis inter∣ceptio est Ʋrinae cito Mors venit, gave me but little hopes of any advantage that might accrue to him by my help; since our reason as well as the authority of that great Physician makes always this appearance most ominous; for, that the Urin may be intercepted by the Ileum, this Gut must be so swoln as to com∣press the neck of the Bladder and adjacent parts, which will be a great and irreparable tumor: And if the tumor is not so great as to compress the neck of the Bladder, but does compress the Ʋreters, both which in their whole length lye immediately under the Ileum, so that the falling of the Urin into the Bladder is inter∣cepted, it must of necessity cause Death, both because of this swelling
of the Ileum, and this interruption in the Urin which cannot be separa∣ted from the Blood. But because we cannot be positively sure of the power and efficacy of our Med'cins, the strength of our Patients, and other circumstances; we are oblig'd to use our best endeavours while there is life; and therefore I order'd him doubl'd pieces of Flannel, wet in hot anodyn Fomentations to be applyed over his Belly frequently every Day. His Drink was a de∣coction of Chamomile Flowers with a little white Wine added to it: And to stay his vomiting he had the fol∣lowing mixture. ℞ sal. absynth. ℈ij. succ. limon. cochl. ij. M. ut fermentescant, ac bi∣bat priusquam penitus desierit ebulli∣tio. This stopp'd his vomiting for some time, and stronger things as Opium us morbi asylum, as a learned Doctor als it, seem'd unreasonable because of the vast inflammation that seem'd to be upon his intestins, and the continu'd Costiveness. I caus'd eight
or ten ounces of an emollient decocti∣on to be injected, to which was added two ounces of vin. emetic. turbid the Clyster came off by it self, but no∣thing like Excrements. In the even∣ing he took this Bolus both for his Urin and Costiveness. ℞ milleped. pptorum, sal. polychrest. an. ʒss. terebinth. venet. q. s. ut f. bolus, quem capiat eco chleari syrup. de alth. Fernel. He found himself easier after it, and pass'd a little Urin; but all I could contrive was not of a force capable to vanquish his Distemper, for in three days after I saw him, he had an end put to his troublesome days, by, I'm perswaded, a more desi∣rable Death. Observation XL. Adam Littleton, was taken ill of a vomiting and going to stool for three days; he vomited a gre deal of yellow and green stuff, slept little or none, all that time, and was very weak.
This being a Cholera morbus, which does not at all proceed from any heterogeneous, unconceivable mix∣ture of unnatural and improper ferments with the Blood; but ra∣ther from some nasty, sharp stuff lodg'd in the stomach, by a thou∣sand things that may be antecedent causes to it, which being affixt to its coats, does determine the ani∣mal Spirits in its nerves to Con∣vulsions, and by the greater sharp∣ness of this matter affecting the upper part of the stomach, and the pylorus makes this violent vo∣miting and purging. This matter brought upwards, is thought of some to be sincere bile, contrary to all reason or any thought of how it ought to be supplied: Indeed, the small quantity of bile, that is prest out of the Gall bladder, and brought into the stomach by this reverse motion, is very capable to colour a great deal of Lympha that's squeez'd out of the glands of the stomach, or brought from the Pan∣creas, and to affect it with its bit∣terness, without bringing us into a needless necessity of supposing
this impossible supply of Bile. Up∣on the other side, there are some who seeing how closely the Pylorus is shut, in the case of vomiting, will not allow that any Bile can at all be convey'd into the stomach, from the Gall-bladder; and would rather have all this quantity to be given from some small glands we may sometimes discover in the sto∣mach, and which contain a yellow∣ish liquor, not very bitter, and of no quantity. But not only the greater quantity we see voided here, and sometimes three or four Mouth fuls of pure gall, brought up in the end of an artificial Vomit, convince us clearly that these are not the fountains, and source of so great a provision, wheresoever it is to be brought from: But it were easie to make it very plain, how the Gall is convey'd into the stomach, if this were the proper place; and I will only remember them of something of greater bulk that uses to be con∣vey'd, without dispute, from the Guts, in an Iliack passion. Now, since the whole cause of this Disease, is entirely lodg'd and
confin'd to the Stomach, and he had strength enough left to proceed in the surest method; I resolv'd to promote the evacuation with some∣thing that was no Vomit of it self, but that washing away the sharp stuff lodg'd in the Stomach, it might be carried off by the com∣mon course of vomiting; and when this store was exhausted, the Cure might reasonably be expected to succeed; and therefore I advis'd him to drink large draughts of Ship's-beer made blood warm, which he did to so great an advantage, that he had not drank and vomit∣ed above twice, when his vomiting left off: That evening, tho' he had the following mixture, ℞ decoct. hord. ℥ij. aq. cinam. hor∣deat. spirit. vin. an ℥j. diascord. fra∣castor. ʒss. M. ac bibat hora som∣ni. He slept very well, and keeping up three or four days, he was purg'd with ℥vj. of the purging bitter Draught, and so recover∣ed.
Observation XLI. George Jones, of a thick habit of Body, and about twenty eight years of Age, was troubled with a Drop∣sie, for a whole year, his Legs and Belly swell'd prodigiously; but there were no signs of any Water contain'd in the cavity of the Ab∣domen; he had a difficulty of breath∣ing, and his Pulse was weak. His Pulse and shortness of breath, gave me but small hopes of his re∣covery; because, this more especi∣ally proceeds from the Mediastinum and Lungs, being too much crouded by an overgrown Liver, which is very often Schirrous or full of pu∣rulent matter, and so past our reco∣vering; yet having declar'd the danger he was in, to those that were about him; I prescrib'd him the following Med'cins to be taken in that order as I mention them here∣after.
℞ elixir. proprietat. ʒss. spirit. C. C. gut. xx. M. ac Capiat. gut. xv. bis in die in pocul. vini cujuslibet me∣rosioris. ℞ urin. homin. san. lbj. terebinth. venet. vitell.  solut ℥jss. sal. prunell. ʒij. f. enem. quoidie nijiciend∣um. This Clyster, after an hour, came off, with a deal of nasty slimy stuff, and made him void great quantities of Urin; by which he was mightily reviv'd; yet, on the fifth day after the begining of these Med'cins he died. The day before his Death, he had such a violent pain in his Side and shortness of breath, that he could not be easie any way he lay; 'till about ten hours before he died, his pain va∣nish'd, tho' his difficulty in breath∣ing encreas'd, and he always said that he found something break with∣in him; which was not improba∣ble, and it might be his Imposthu∣mated Liver; tho' I can do no more
more but suspect so, since I was not there when he died, and the Sur∣geon did not give himself half an hours trouble for my satisfacti∣on. Observation XLII. John Lambert, was taken ill, on 28th of August, of a pain in his Neck; he could not spit, he had a difficulty in fetching his Breath, his Eyes were red, he star'd and complain'd of a great heat in those parts. 'Tis plain that this sickness, I have now describ'd is a Quinsey, and tho' its seat is on the Neck, yet it may be easily apprehended how it affects the Face and Eyes, and might produce many terrible Symptoms by communication with the Brain: For, since the Carotid Arteries and the Jugular Veins creep along the Neck into the Head, they may be asserted and comprest by this inflammation, so that the Blood can neither flow freely into the Brain, nor returning, be carried in∣to the Lungs; but stopping about
the Face, must needs make this red∣ness of it and the Eyes, and their fulness of Blood makes that staring, that almost Tonical motion and fixt look; and wheresoever there is a stoppage of Blood there must be Heat and Warmth. But to proceed to the Cure, I cau∣s'd him be let eight ounces of Blood out of his left Arm; and, in six hours after, ten out of the right Ju∣gular; for the reasons I assign in a like case p. 169. of my former Book of Sea sicknesses; by which he was a great deal more easy, that flammeous colour of his Face and redness of Eyes disappear'd upon that last bleed∣ing, he was easier in his Breathing, and his Spittle was thinner; next day he took the following Purge. ℞ decoct. amar. purgant. ℥iv. syrup. de spin. Cervin. ℥j. M. ac Capiat cras mane cum regimine. It purg'd him twelve times, and had the desired effect to all our sa∣tisfaction; and then he began to take of this Lohoch.
℞ oc. cancr. ppt. ʒj. pulv. fl. papav. rhaead. spermat. cet. non rancid. an ℈ij. syr. alth. vel mel. puriss. q. s. ut f. eclegma, de quo Capiat sapius indies. His Drink was a decoction of Bar∣ley sweetned with Honey, which he drank as often, and as much as he pleas'd. His Purge was renewed, and he recovered his Health, with∣out any more trouble. I gave him no Gargarisms, which are always us'd in such cases; be∣cause if I were of opinion that they cou'd be of any use, yet I'm con∣vinc'd they are of no use, since seldom or never they can reach the part. Observation XLIII. I—D—Lieutenant of his Majestie's Ship the—was taken ill the latter end of March, with a Costiveness, Sleepiness, want of Ap∣petite, and his Skin, especially under his Nails and the Coats of his Eyes were all of a yellow colour.
There being in this case such a thick∣ness of the Blood, and Gall, that it was not separated in the Liver, nor con∣vey'd into the Gall-Bladder, but be∣ing of an oily substance and swiming on the top of the Blood in the Circu∣lation, and some perhaps, sticking to the Vessels does certainly give this Colour; and it not being dis∣charg'd from the Gall-Bladder into the Intestins, neither tinges the Ex∣crements nor contributes towards their excretion; and therefore, that the Blood and Bile might be freed of its viscidity, and its obstructing parts promoted in their motion, I first ordered him a Vomit, and then other Med'cins, the forms where∣of I add. ℞ Tartar. emetic. gr. v. solv. in vin. alb. cochl. ij. ac bibat cum regimine, hau∣riendo affatim de aqua tepida quolibet in∣tervallo vomitorij nisus. This Vomited him six times, and gave him one Stool; next Day he drank this Potion.
℞ radic. rub. tinctor. chelidon. ma∣jor. an. ʒj. summitat. cent. minor. Card. Benedict fl. chamomil. aa. M. j. baccar. junip. ℥iij. Stent per. biduum in infus. cum. vin. hispanic. lb. vj. bibat cochl. vj. bis in die. When he had taken of this, for some Days, his Yellowness went off, he began to Eat with an Appetite, and perfectly recover'd. Observation XLIV. L— P— Commander of his Majesties Ship the — was taken ill with a want of Appetite, a difficulty in digesting his Victuals, his Excrements were White, ne∣ver tinctur'd with Bile, his Urin was very high colour'd, and his Eyes yel∣low. 'Tis almost plain that in this weaker secretion of the Bile from the Blood, its want of conveyance into the Intestines, and by its fre∣quent and repeated Circulations with the Blood, that this extraordinary thickness of the Blood, and Bile is
to be mended, without having any respect or consideration to the par∣ticular ferment, which some Authors fancy, contributes towards the se∣paration of the Bile, in a healthy state, and to be now defective upon this occasion; and because I have prov'd that Vomiting does contri∣bute powerfully, towards making the Blood more Fluxil, and resolv∣ing obstructives especially in the Li∣ver; I order'd him this Vomit next Morning. ℞ Tartar. emetic. gr. v. solv. in vin. alb. cochl. unic. ac bibat cum Regi∣mine. It wrought seven times with him, and made him go twice to Stool; and the Day after he took the follow∣ing Purge. ℞ decoct. amar. purgant. cum dupli∣ci snna ℥vj. syr. de rhamn. ʒij. M. ac bibat cum Regimine; ac inter jecto die vel altero, repetatur ad aliam vi∣m.
The success answering our expe∣ctation, he began to Drink of an Infusion I order'd to be ready for him, against he had taken his Vo∣mit and Purge; and 'twas made thus. ℞ rad. gentian. rub. tinctor. an ℥ij. summitat. centaur. minor. absynth. an M. ij. fl. Chamomil. sambuc. genist. an M. j. cortic. aurant. sicc. ℥ss. bac∣car. junip. ℥ij. croc. ℈ij. Inun. bid. in vin. alb. lb. iv. bibat. cochl. v. bis in die. By all which, and drinking fifteen drops of Elix. proprietat. in a Glass of White Wine, before Dinner, he recover'd perfectly in a fortnight. But as I was saying before, it is most pleasant and diverting, to see what absurdities, these patrons of an unreasonable ferment suppos'd to be lodg'd in a certain and pecu∣liar part, are brought into; for be∣sides the Chimerical Existence of this Notion evidently made out in the mention'd Book, they are not on∣ly oblig'd to maintain a ferment to se∣parate
every one of these ferments in Infinitum in every one of these Solutions; or else to fix upon some single one that was implanted in eve∣ry one of these Parts, in the begin∣ing, and at the first minute of Gene∣ration; which nevertheless must be diminish'd in part, by its action up∣on these Liquors it dissolves, melts down and precipitates; and yet it must never be intirely wasted; and if it is intirely exhausted, there can no way be assign'd how it is to be recruited and rapair'd; but even, if we be sick by any of these Ferments falling from their natural state, they are never to be repair'd by the force of any remedy, except it be separated from the Blood, without the help of any ferment, for if no solution can be in the Blood, without the help of a Fer∣ment, neither will any specifick Med'cin give its force to the lan∣guishing Ferment; because it is re∣quisite that the specifick Med'cin of every one of these Ferments be de∣riv'd into their Cells, and that this may be done, it must be mixt with the Blood, and separated from
the Blood into these different Cells, and so be mixt with the languish∣ing Ferment; but, by the suppo∣sition, there can be no secretion, without a Ferment, and, because the Ferment is decay'd, wasted or spent; therefore this specifick remedy for recovering this Fer∣ment, cannot be separated from the Blood and mixt with it; where∣fore the languishing Ferment can never be repair'd by  specifick Med'cin that is transmitted to the Blood. And if it be true, that our Pati∣ents by the taking of such Med'∣cins do recover their Health, we may conclude from hence, that such peculiar and specifick Ferments are meer Chimera's, and have no real being, and that the cause of the Disease was not thro' the de∣fect of any decay'd Ferment; since the sick Person does recover his Health, without the Med'cins that they suppos'd to be the recruiter of the languishing Ferment, arriv∣ing at the Ferment it self; and therefore the conclusion is evident, that there are Secretions without a
Ferment, and that peculiar Fer∣ments are no less confidently than weakly establish'd by their Pa∣trons. I might have easily pass'd by this, in perfect silence, but that this supposition of a Ferment is such among the Chymists, and of that consequence, that they make the whole Art of Physick turn up∣on it; and yet 'tis plain to any one how great difficulties they put themselves upon, who main∣tain and suppose these specifick or peculiar Ferments; and with how weak and uncertain a Foundation he's contented with, who sets up with a dependance upon this Do∣ctrin of Ferments. The more I reflect upon the way of making Secretions from the diffe∣rent Velocities of the Blood, as it is found asserted in my Oecon. Animal. I do not only think it infinitely to be prefer'd before this precarious way by specifick ferments, but ev'n before any other hitherto alledged, as I have prov'd at great length: But it seems the most natural in re∣solving Phaenomena of the Secreti∣ons; and the more so, if we consi∣der
that it is sufficient and only neces∣sary that the make of a Glandul is such, that the parts of any Liquor that lows mixt, but loose, into its Cavity may be deriv'd into the dis∣charging duct; not entirely and in the confus'd mass, but such and such parts only as come nearer to their separation, by consequence of the different velocities the Liquor has in its departure from the Heart: And we must still more readily assent to this, that we bring into our Memo∣ry the common accidents that hap∣pen to Blood every Day, by Phlebo∣tomy. The red part of the Blood that seem'd to fill up all the Porren∣ger in time of the Operation, does as 'twere contract it self by degrees towards the centre, and removes peace-meal tho' sensibly from the sur∣face, and the growing space which it leaves a'top, is fill'd with a clear Li∣quor, that congeals upon the Fire, and we commonly call the Serum of the Blood. All this while, the redder part of the Blood which thus con∣tracts it self in the centre of the Ves∣sel, becomes Hard or grows toge∣ther; and if we hold our Nose and
opened Mouth over these Liquors, they send up such steams that affect our smelling very ungratefully, and create in us a very unpleasant and nauseous Taste. We see here what secretions are perform'd, without a Ferment? And that That which affects our Tongue, and Nostrils, rises out of the same very Vessel, and offends both these senses with its ungrateful touch; yet this Li∣quor (which by the bye cannot be thought Homogeneous) is separated from the other Liquors, and with∣out a Ferment to; but this Liquor was contain'd in the Blood, and if it had been brought into a Glan∣dul, fit to receive this invisible steam, it might have been as easily seperated in this Glandul without a Ferment, as we see it is separated in the Vessel. And so we might reason about the other parts. But if we conceive  we ought to do, that this effect of the different ve∣locity can  the same things that the  degrees of Heat do in a  Vessel, (for it must not be  I think that it can make any Chmical preparation,
but that these different velocities can dispose the Blood for several Secretions, as the different degrees of Heat can produce several Bodies in the same Vessel:) I say that all this will be most evident and plain to such as can run this Paralell to its proper length. From my Lodgings in Great-Suf∣folk-street near Charin-Cross, Sep. 28. 1696. FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Hugh Newman, at the Grashoper in the Poultry. AN Account of the Nature, Causes, Symptoms and Cure of the Distempers that are incident to Seaaring People. With Observations on the Diet of the Sea-men in His Majesty's Navy. By W. C. of the Colledge of Physicians, London: And Phy∣sician to the Blue Squadron of his Majesty's Fleet. price 1 s. 6 d. Oeconomia Corporis Anima∣lis. Autore Gulielmo Cockburn, Collegii Medic. Lond. Perm. Ac Classis Sereniss. Regis Magnoe Britanniae Medicorum Altero. Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d.
Chirurgorum Comes; Or, the whole practice of Chirurgery. Begun by the Learned Dr. Read; continu'd and compleated by a Member of the Colledge of Phy∣sicians in London. To which is added, by way of Appen∣dix, two Treatises, one of the Veneral Disease, the other con∣cerning Embalming, Octavo, price 6 s. Dr. Sydenham's Compleat Me∣thod of Curing almost all Disea∣ses, and description of their Symp∣toms. To which are now ad∣ded, five discourses of the same Author, concerning the Pleurisy, Gout, Hysterical Passion, Drop∣sy and Rheumatism. Abridg'd and faithfully Translated out of the Original Latin. With short and useful notes on the former part, written by a late Learned Physician, and never printed be∣fore, Twelves, 1 s. 6 d.
Advice to a Physician: Con∣taining particular directions re∣lating the Cure of most Dis∣ss: With reflections on the Na∣ture and Uses of the most Cele∣bra Remedies. By way of Aphorisms. Done from the La∣tin. Musaeum Regalis Societatis. Or a Catalogue and Description of the Natural and Artificial Rari∣ties belonging to the Royal Soci∣ety, and preserved at Gresham Colledge. Made by Nehemiah Grew, M. D. Fellow of the Roy∣al Society, and of the Colledge of Physitians. Whereunto is sub∣joyned the Comparative Anato∣my of Stomachs and Guts, by the same Author. Illustrated with a great number of Cuts curiously Engraven on Copper Plates. Fo∣lio, price 12 s.
