C4876B R219456 99830924 35386
The high and Mighty Monarch CHARLES the second by the Grace of GOD King of Great Brittaine France and Ireland Defender of the fayth G portrait of King Charles
HIS Majesties Propriety, AND DOMINION ON THE Brittish Seas ASSERTED: Together with a true account of the Neatherlanders Insupportable Insolencies, and Injuries, they have committed; and the inestimable Benefits they have gained in their Fishing on the English Seas. As also their Prodigious and Horrid Cruelties in the East and West-Indies, and other places. To which is added an Exact Mapp, containing the Isles of Great Brittain, and Ireland, with the seve∣ral Coastings, and the adjacent Parts of our Neigh∣bours: By an Experienced Hand. LONDON; Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Brittain, 1672.
THE PREFACE TO THE Reader. THe Combinations and Endea∣vours of the States General of the United Provinces against His Majesty, and this Nation have been so insupportably Insolent, that the Parliament not long since, upon the Cry of the Whole Nation, did sol∣licite him to take some extraordinary way to give Redress unto his Subjects for the many and daily Injuries they sustained from them by their Depredations at Sea, for the Horrid and Barbarous Cruelties inflicted on them in the East and West-Indies, which being as
odious in their Nature, as they are remar∣kable in their Number, have been the onely Cause that these pains are taken to give a ge∣neral satisfaction to the World, by exhibiting this Brief, but most true Account of His Ma∣jesties Undoubted Right, and sole Propriety in the English, Scottish, and the Irish Seas: A truth as Antient, as it is Eminent, and not only held forth and attested by the Laws of our Land, and the Records of the Tower, and the High Courts of Parliament, but heretofore confessed also by divers of their own Naion, as in this Book you shall find it faithfully represented to you; But it hath been the late practise of the Hollan∣ders (without examining the Lawfulness of the Act) to put their Oares into every Boat, where Gain and Profit doth appear. It was this, that tempted them to invade the Islands of Moluccos, Lantore, and Polleroon, which in the Name of the Crown of England the English for some years had possessed, neither did they entertain the least jealousie of opposition from the Hollanders, who they knew heretofore had been oblidged to them for many antient good Offices in a time, when their greatest safety did depend upon them, and who lately were conjoyned with them in
a strict Alliance and Confederacy for Part∣nership in the East-Indie-Trade, in the year 1619. Neither did they fear the Natives, whom they found to express a greater Incli∣nation of good will unto them then to the Hollanders, for the English aimed at no∣thing more, then a lawful and competent pro∣fit by Commerce and Traffick with the Na∣tives, and the Dutch; And though in some places the English had erected some Forts, and setled some Strength, yet it was not by any Force or Violence, nor against the good will of the People of the Country, but with their own good liking, and consent, for the better security of their Trade, and upon the voluntary submission of the Natives to the Obedience and Soveraignty of the Crown of England, in which submission the Antient Laws and Liberties of the said Natives, and all their own Immunities were comprehend∣ed, and reserved: In this Establishment the English did conceive themselves to be se∣cure enough; when behold the Dutch (who would be no better Neighbours to us in the Indies then in Europe) began to quarrel with us, and to hinder us in our Trade to free Places, the which the better to obtain, they oftentimes seized upon our Ships, and
Goods, and finding this violence not to An∣swer their Expectation, they at the last con∣trived to make themselves the absolute Masters of the vast profits of those Places; In the pursuit whereof, they have razed and demolished the English Forts, and laying violent hands on the English themselves, who made not the least Resistance; they have tyed them to stakes with Ropes about their Necks; they have seized upon their Goods, they have Imprisoned their Persons, they have Whipped them at the Post in the open Market Place, and having washed their torn and wounded Bodies with Vinegar and Salt, they have again doubled their scourges to multiply their Torments; they have drag∣ged them from thence to places almost inac∣cessible, by reason of their steepness and roughness, and having thrown them down the Rocks, if any Sence of life remained, they have added new oppression to their weary and bruised limbs, by the heavy weights of Iron; To these deliberate Torments the cru∣elties of other Nations are but Courtesies, and Death it self a Mercy; And as if they were the absolute Lords in the Indies they have assumed a Power to themselves in the deciding of the controversies between the
English and the Indians for matters passed quite out of their jurisdiction, and when Law and Right have pleaded against them, they have Executed their Decrees by violence. These be they who have laid a claim to His Majesties Interests on his own Brittish Seas, and rather then allow them proper unto Him, they have declared them common unto All: At the first they begged leave for their Fish∣ing on the English Seas, which being grant∣ed them by the accustomed Indulgence of our Princes, they have so presumed upon their lenity, that at the last they have made a Law in their own Country, That the English shal Sell no white Herrings, nor other Fish there upon penalty of Confiscation; They are Fish∣ing on the English Seas from June unto November, and seem there to dwel amongst the Fish for 26 weeks together, in which time the havock which they make in destroy∣ing the Spawn and Fry of Fish that comes in∣to their Netts, and otherwise is as remarka∣ble as what they carry away with them. The Reverend and Learned Mathematitian, Do∣ctor Dee, almost one hundred years since,Vide, Doctor Dee, his Brittish Mo∣narchy, pa. 44. speaking of the incredible spoyle of Fry and Spawn, which is yearly made on the River of Thames, and other Rivers belonging to this
Island, doth conclude, that there are yearly spoyled on those Rivers, 2000 Cart-loads of fresh fish, which would have so proved to be Market-able, if they had not been destroy∣ed in their Nonage; I shall give you his As∣sertion in his own words; It is probable, saith he, that in all England by the mani∣fold disorder used about the destroying of Fry and Spawn, there is yearly spoy∣led or hindred the Brood of 2000 Cart-loads of fresh Fish of middle Market∣able-skantlin. The value of which 2000 Cart-loads, do amount to 90000 Bushels of fresh Fish, six Quarters going to a Cart-load, which one with another being rated at five shillings a Bushel, doth amount in currant English Money, to the sum of 20500l. Which quantity of Fish also would maintain for one day, One thousand thousand, and eight hundred thousand Men; or nine hundred thousand Men two dayes; or three hundred thousand Men six dayes, or a hundred thousand, eighteen dayes, or fifty thousand Men thirty six dayes, or five and twenty thousand Men six and twenty dayes.
If by our own Neglect, so great a destructi∣on of Fish is made in our own Rivers, what may we conceive the disorders to be which are made on the English Seas, by those whose business it is, to think all is Fish that comes to Net, and whose Trade to Plunder; The time of our patience hath been long, their promises of Redress numerous, and the daily Injuries we have received insupportable: To give you in this place a more large Ac∣count of them, were to Anticipate your Un∣derstanding; I shall therefore for your fur∣ther Satisfaction, refer you to the particulars in the Book it self: Farewell.
map of Scotland, Ireland, England, the North Sea, northern Europe, and western Scandinavia
An. Exact Map, Containing the Isles of Great Brittaine and Ireland, with the Severall Coastings that Surround the Same: As also the adjacent parts of all the other neighburing Nations: Drawne according to the best and latest Discoveries, Sold by A. Kembe, E: Thoms, and R: Clavell by an experienced Hand map of England, Ireland, the British Sea, and the coast of westerna and nothern Europe
THE Propriety and Dominion of the KING of Great Brittain on His SEAS; Asserted against all Opposers, and Confirmed from all Ages, to this Present Time. FOR the better Under∣standing of the follow∣ing Discourse, we shall in the first place lay down these Two Propo∣sitions: First, That the Sea by the Law of Na∣ture and Nations is not common to all Men, but is capable of Private Dominion, as well as the Land. The Second, Is, That the KING of GREAT BRITTAIN Is LORD of the SEA Flowing about, as an Insepa∣rable and Perpetual Appendant of the Brit∣tish Empire.
Before we shall insist on these Pro∣positions, We shall in the first place, remove some Objections that may be made against them: Some are drawn from the Freedome of Commerce or Traffique, which by many are affirmed to be so Naturall, that they can no where be abolished by any Law or Custome, and that by the Law of Na∣tions it is unjust to Deny Merchants the Benefit of Commerce and Navi∣gation. Other Objections are drawn from the Nature of the Sea it self, for it is com∣monly alleaged that the Sea is altered, and shifted every Moment, and the State thereof, through a continued suc∣cession of new waters, alwayes uncer∣tain, and remains so little the same in all things, (the Channel onely exce∣pted) that it is impossible it should ever be retained in the Possession of any One Particular. As to the first, It is easie to be pro∣ved by the Ancient Interpreters of the Mosaical Law,Lyren. ad Numer. 34. That the Sea is altoge∣ther as capable of Private Dominion, as the Land; The Words of GOD in
the Book of Numbers are express; And let your Borders be the Great Sea; that is, say the Rabbins, the main Ocean, and its Isles; And it is plainly to be proved, that a Private Dominion of the Sea no otherwise then of Land arose from humane Distribution: We read,Dion. lib. 36. that Pompey the Great, being Master of a Huge Navy, had a Commission given him from the Senate, as absolute Lord of the Sea; The like had Mark Anthony some few years after him; And many of the Roman Historians have called the Sea, their Sea; because it was wholly subdued to the Roman Power. We might here alleage many Ex∣amples how long the Lidians, the Phygi∣ans, the Rhodians, the Phaenicians, and many other Eastern Nations, one after another have been Lords of the Sea: Thy Borders are in the midst or heart of the Sea saith the Prophet Ezekiel of the Tyrians: Quintus Curtius affirmeth, that the City of Tyre builded by Agenor,Chron. Ca∣non. p. 128. made not onely the neighbouring Sea, but what Seas soever her ships sayled into, to be of her Dominion: There was an ancient custome used in the
East, that when Great Kings had a de∣sign to bring any Nation under their Power, they commanded Water, and Earth, the pledges of Empire and Do∣minion to be delivered unto them, conceiving that the Command of the Sea, as well as the Land was signified by such a token. Florus, lib. 2. cap. 6.The like may be affirmed of the West, for both Polybeius, and Appian af∣firme that the Carthaginians Enjoy∣ed the Command of the Sea without all Controversy, as received from their Ancestors; And if we take a view of these late Times, as to the Rights and Customes of other Nations, which at this present are in high Reputation, we shall finde that the Common-Wealth of Venice have enjoyed the Dominion of the Adriatick Sea for many Ages: The Tuscans to this day have an Absolute Dominion in the Tyrhene Sea, and those of Genoa in the Lygustick; the like we may alledge of the Danes, the Swedes, and the People of Norway; And to conclude, that the Dominion of the Sea is admitted a∣mongst those things that are lawfull,
and received into the Customes of Na∣tions, is so far from contradiction, that nothing at all can be found to con∣troule it in the Customes of our latter Times, unlesse it be by some, who be∣ing Borderers upon the Sea-Domini∣ons of others, do strive to violate the Rights of their Neighbours, under the pretense of Civil Community. Now as to the Objection concern∣ing the Freedome of Commerce and Passage pretended to be common to All; It is most evident from the Cu∣stomes of all Times, that Commerce, and Free Passage hath ever been so li∣mited by Princes in their Territories, that it is either permitted, or prohibi∣ted according to the various Concern∣ments of the Publick Good. Princes are concerned to be wary and carefull, that they admit no such Strangers or Commerce where the Common-Wealth may receive any Damage thereby: And Aristotle plainly and ex∣presly saith,Aristo. Po∣lit. lib. 7. cap. 6. That provision ought to be made by Lawes, with whom Sub∣jects may, or may not converse: More∣over it is commonly provided in
Leagues, that it shall not be lawfull for either Party to sayle into each o∣thers Ports, Coasts, or Harbours with such a number of Ships, as may give a just occasion of Fear or Jealousie that Force is intended; except leave be first had of that Party under whose Juris∣diction those Places are, or unless they be driven thither by Tempest, or other Necessity, to avoid a greater Force, or the Danger of Shipwrack: And to con∣clude, Bodine affirmeth, That it is law∣full to prohibite any Forreigner from entring the Borders, and also to force him out, if he hath entred the Borders, not only if a War be on foot, but also in Time of Peace, that the Priviledges, Safety, and Welfare of the Inhabitants may not be corrupted by conversation with Strangers. As to that Objection concerning the uncertainty of the Sea, which (it is al∣ledged) doth render it unfit for private Dominion, because it is ever in mo∣tion, and in no wise remains the same: Suppose we grant that it be so flowing, as is usualy said of the most Northernly Seas;Strabo. Geograp. lib. 1. yet certainly the Channels, and
Places through which the waters flow remain ever the same, although the waters themselves do shift, and change continually. In the Germane Empire, (according to the Civil Law) Rivers are all of them of Publick Use, yet for all that, they are reckoned in the Em∣perours private Patrimony,Seneca Ep. 39. and a∣mongst the Royalties belonging to his Exchequer; So that the Emperour, or others by his Grant, have a yearly Revenue out of the Fisheries in them; Neither is there any thing more com∣mon then an Asserting of the Private Dominion of Rivers, in the Lawes of France, Spain, Poland, and Venice, and, in a word, of all Nations whose Customes are known; seeing therefore that a Do∣minion and Propriety of Rivers hath been every where acknowledged, why should it not in the like manner be ac∣knowledged, that there may be Ow∣ners of any Sea whatsoever? Since the always running and flowing Nature of water can no more hinder a Dominion in the one, then in the other, for the Rivers themselves are but little Seas; as the Sea it self, to its fluide Consti∣tution,
is but a River, the one differing only in bignes from the other; and so it hath been taken by the Antients; In the very History of the Creation, all the Gatherings together of the waters are called Seas: Many Lakes have been called Seas; Tiberias by St. LukeLuke 5.1. is cal∣led a Lake, but by the other Evange∣lists a Sea. Asphaltites is by Pliny, Soli∣nus, and others, termed a Lake, but by Moses in the Fourteenth of Genesis, the Salt Sea, and by most of the late Wri∣ters, the Dead Sea. They indeed, who make use of such frivolous subtilties, as these to oppose the Dominion of the Sea deserve to be turned over to the Phylosophers, He∣raclitus and Epicharmus, who taught that every thing is so altered, changed, and renewed, that nothing in this World continues the same, as it was in the instant immediately going be∣fore. Our Bodies (saith Seneca) are hurried like Rivers; whatsoever thou seest, runneth with Time; Not one of all those things that are visible contin∣ueth; I even whilest I speak of these changes am changed my self: But let
such men as dream that the fluide In∣constant Nature of the Sea disproves the private Dominion of it, entertain the same opinion if they please with these Men, and then they must of ne∣cessity grant also, that themselves are not Owners or Possessors, of Houses, Lands, or Money, or any other thing whatsoever. As to that Argument, that the water is open to All, and therefore by Law, it must lye open at all times to all men, it is a very trifling Argument. Before the first Distribution of things, there was no Land which did not lye open unto All before it came under particu∣lar Possession: In many places payment is made for the use of water; as amongst the Hollanders, they have in Delph-Land a Custome, called, Jus Grutae, which hath ever been under the care of those Officers, called in Dutch, Pluymgraven, whereby the Beer-Brewers are obliged to pay them the hundreth part for the use of the water. Some men may here object that say∣ing of Antonius,Forcus in cap. Juris. cap. 9. I am Sovereign of the World, but the Law is Sovereign of the Sea.
The True and Genuine sense of those words is this, I am Lord of the World, because I Govern the World by my own Law; but the Rhodian Law, is the Law of the Sea, because by this Law Ju∣stice is administred on the Sea; there∣fore let this case of Eudaemon concern∣ing Navigation be determined by the Rhodian Law, so far as none of our Lawes doth oppose the same. There is no man unlesse he will renounce his own Reason, who will affirme, that any Denial is made of the Dominion of the Sea in that Answer, or that the least Tittle can be found in it against the Dominion thereof. Having thus in general given you an account, that almost amongst all Nati∣ons, there hath been allowed a Private Dominion of the Sea; we shall now come more particularly to our selves, and acquaint you, that the Antient Brit∣tains did Enjoy and Possesse the Sea as Lords thereof, before they were subje∣cted to the Roman Power: It is upon good ground concluded, that the most An∣tient History, whereunto any credit ought to be given about the Affaires of
Brittain, is not elder then the Time of Cajus Julius Caesar,Seld. Marc Clausum 158. the Ages before him being too obscured with Fables; but at his coming we finde many clear passages of the Brittains Dominion of the Sea flowing about them, especially the South and East part thereof, as a perpetual Appendant of the Sovereign∣ty of the Island; For at that time, they not onely used the Sea as their own, for Navigation, and Fishing, but also permitted none, besides Merchants to sayle into the Island without their leave; nor any Man at all to view, or sound their Sea-Coasts, or their Har∣bours: And though at Caesars first Arri∣val, they were Terrified with the sight of his long ships beaked with Brass or Iron; and they fled to the shore, and from it to the In-lands, being not suffi∣ciently provided for such a Sea-fight as was then at hand, and which they ne∣ver had been acquainted with, yet most certain it is, that they had Vessels of their own in which they used to Coast about the Neighbouring Seas: And though mention is made by Wri∣ters, that commonly they were framed
with Twiggs (as the fashion then was in the more Antient Nations) and co∣vered with Oxe-Hides; yet with good ground we may conceive, that they were wont to Build, and set forth ships of War, of a far more commodious, and solid substance, for the Guarding of the Seas, and the Isles: We read in Caesar's Commentaries,De Bello Gallico. lib. 9. that they were strong at Sea, and it is not to be doubted, but that besides their Twiggs and Leathern Vessels, they had a con∣siderable Navy which was able at plea∣sure to Encounter the ships of their Neighbours that were best Armed: But the Southernly Parts of Great Brit∣tain being Invaded by the Emperour Claudius, and the Isle of Wight surren∣dred to them; the Brittish Sea, follow∣ing the Fate of the Island, was annex∣ed with it to the Roman Empire. From the Dominion of the Brittish Sea, as being continually United to the Island, or an Inseparable Concomitant thereof, many remarquable passages have proceeded amongst those who have left unto Posterity the Atchieve∣ments of the Romans, when they were
Masters of this Island: But when the Roman Empire was declining, and they had scarce Forces enough to Guard the City it self, The Brittains about the Year of our Lord,Zosimus Hist. lib. 6. Four Hundred and Fourscore, did cast off the Roman Go∣vernment, and setled a Common-Wealth after their own liking: In the mean time the Saxons Inhabiting the Shoar over against them, had a great and greedy mind unto it, who being a People extreamly given to Pi∣racy, the Romans were accustomed to appoint an Officer to drive them away, called, The Count of the Saxon Shore throughout Brittain. These Saxons being sent for by the Brittains to Assist them against the Scots and Picts, did get at length the whole Power into their own hand.Bede, De Natura Re∣rum. cap. 28 These Saxons being Arch Pi∣rats, did not only know, but were fa∣miliarly acquainted with the Dangers of the Sea. The same may be said of the Danes and Normans, for these names being promiscuously used, do often signifie the same Nation, as is suffici∣ently attested, by Regino, Dudo, the Monk of Malmesbury, and others: And
these People had so great and so admi∣rable a Knowledge of the Sea, and Sea Affairs, that by an exquisite obser∣vation of the Tides, and Ebbings of the Sea, they were accustomed to rec∣kon their Months and Years, yea, and to frame Computations of years there∣by. In Antient Records, diverse par∣ticulars are to be seen, which most plainly show, that both the Saxons and Danes had a Dominion over the Sea, whilest they Reigned in Brittain. Mt. In Bi∣bleothecâ Cottoni∣anâ.In the Reign of the English Saxons, we read in Asserius Bishop of Sherburn, that Hengist being invited into England by the Perswasions of Vortigern, there came presently afterwards to recruit him Octa and Ebissa, who putting Pi∣rates aboard his ships, he charged them to Guard the passages of the Sea. You are to understand that the word Pirate was not then taken (as now commonly it is) for Robbers or Rovers, but for such who being the most skilfull in Sea-Affairs, were judged to be the fittest Men to Encounter with their Ene∣mies; The word, sayes my Authour, doth seem to be deriv'd from the Greek,
for , or Pira, in the Greek Tongue signifieth Craft, or Art, and from this Art in Maritine Discipline they are now called Pirates which infest the Seas. But amongst these Kings none was more Potent then King Edgar, who possessing an Absolute Dominion of the Seas, sayled round about it every Year, and secured it with a constant Guard. It is Recorded that these ships being very stout ones,Hunting. lib. 5. were in number One Thousand Two Hundred; Other Writers affirm that they were Foure Thousand; the Abbot of Jorvaux, John Bramton by name, doth number them to be Four Thousand, and Eight Hun∣dred sayle: And what Dominion King Edgar had, as Absolute Lord of the Sea, appears in these words; I Edgar King of England,Guil. Mal∣mesb. lib. 2. cap. 8. and of all the Kings of the Islands, and of the Ocean lying round about Brittain, and of all the Nations that are Included within the Circuit thereof Su∣pream Lord and Governour, do render my thanks to Almighty GOD My KING, who hath Enlarged my Empire, and Exalt∣ed it above the Royal Estate of my Progni∣tors, who although they Arrived to the Mo∣narchy
of all England ever since Athel∣stan; yet the Divine Goodness hath favour∣ed me to Subdue all the Kingdomes of the Island in the Ocean with their most Stout and Mighty Kings, even as far as Nor∣way, and the greatest part of Ireland, to∣gether with their most Famous City of Du∣blin. After him King Canutus left a Testi∣mony whereby he most expresly As∣serteth the Sea to be a part of his Do∣minion: For placing himself by the Sea side in the time of a High Tide up∣on Southampton shoare, he is reported to have made tryal of the Obedience of the Sea in this manner; Thou, O Sea art under my Dominion, as the Land also which I sit upon is mine; And there was ne∣ver any that disobeyed my Command with∣out Punishment; Therefore I command thee not to ascend upon my Land, nor do thou presume to wet the Feet or Garments of Thy Sovereign: But although the Event did not answer his Expectation, yet most plain it is, that here he openly professed himself to be Sovereign of the Seas, as well as of the Land.
From the Testimonies of the Saxons and Danes, we shall Descend to the Government of the Normans; where by many Notable and Cleer Proofs we shall finde; That 1. The Custody, Government, or Admiralty of the English Sea did belong unto the King, together with the Do∣minion of the Adjacent Islands. 2. That the Leave of Passage through this Sea, was granted unto For∣reigners upon Request. 3. That the Liberty of Fishing, was upon Courtesie Allowed to For∣reigners and Neighbours, and Pro∣tection given to the Fisher-men. 4. That Laws, and Limits were Prescribed to Forreigners; who being in Hostility the one with the other, but both in Amity with the English, made Prize of each other on the Sea. 5. The Records whereby this Do∣minion is expressely Asserted as a most Undoubted Right, and that not onely by the Kings, but by the Parliaments of England. As for the First, There is nothing more Cleer, than that the Kings of
England, have been Accustomed to Constitute Governours, or Comman∣ders, who had a Charge to Guard the English Seas, and these were called Custodes Navium, or Custodes Maritimi. These were the Officers that were cal∣led Butsecarli, as may be gathered out of that Breviary of England, called Doomes Day:Rot. Pat. 48. Hen. 3. In this Number was Tho∣mas de Moleton, who is Stiled Captain and Guardian of the Sea; and Hugh de Cerquen; Afterwards the Title of Guar∣dians, was changed into that of Ad∣miral, as is alleaged by Thomas Walsing∣ham,22. Edw. 1. in the days of Edward the First. We finde that in the days of Edward the third; The Principal End of Cal∣ling that Parliament, was concerning the Preservation of Peace, both by Land and Sea; giving us to under∣stand, that the Land and Sea together made one entire Body of the King∣dome of England. In the time of Richard the Second,2. Rich. 2. Hugh Calverley was made Admiral of the Sea, saith the same Author, and the Universal Cu∣stody of the Sea was committed by our Kings, to the High Admirals of Eng∣land.
And that the Dominion of the Seas, is properly in the Power and Jurisdi∣ction of the King, may appear by those Tributes and Customes that were Im∣posed and Payed for the Guard and Protection of them; The Tribute cal∣led the Danegeld, was paid in the Time of the English Saxons, which amounted to four shillings upon every Hide of Land, for the defending of the Do∣minion by Sea. Roger Houerden affirm∣eth,Annal. 1. part, page 276. that this was paid until the Time of King Stephen. Afterwards Subsidies have been demanded of the People in Parliament, upon the same Account; and in the Parliament-Records of King Richard the Second, it is Observable; That a Custome was imposed upon e∣very Ship that passed through the Nor∣thern Admiralty, that is, from the Thames along the Eastern Shoare of Eng∣land towards the North-East, for the Maintenance of a Guard for the Seas. Neither was this Imposed onely upon the English, but also upon the Ships of Forreigners, payment was made at the Rate of six pence a Tun upon every Vessell that passed by, such Ships only
excepted, that brought Merchandize out of Flanders into London. If a Ves∣sel were imployed to Fish for Herrings, it payed the Rate of Six pence a week upon every Tun; f for other kind of Fish, so much was to be payed every three weeks, as they who brought Coles to London from New-Castle, paid it every three Moneths; But if a Ves∣sel were bound North-wards, to Prussia, Scone, or Norway, or any of the Neigh∣bouring Countries, it payed a particu∣lar Custome according to the Weight and Proportion of the Freight; And if any were unwilling, it was Lawful to Compel them to pay. In this Place we shall give you the Copy of the usual form of a Commissi∣on,Rot. Parl. 2 Rich. 2. part 2. Act 38. whereby the High Admiral of Eng∣land is Invested with Authority for the Guard of the Sea; it runneth in these Words, VVE Give and Grant to N. the Office of our Great Admiral of England, Ireland, Wales, and of the Do∣minions and Islands belonging to the same, also of our Town of Calais and our Marches thereof, Normandy, Acquitayn,
and Gascoign; and we have Made, Ap∣pointed, and Ordained: And by these Presents we Make Appoint, and Or∣din, im the said N. our Admiral of England, Ireland, and Wales, and our Dominions and Isles of the same, our Town of Calais, and our Marches there∣of, Normandy, Gascoign, and Aquitayn, as aso Geneal Governour over all our Feets and SEAS of our said King∣domes of England, and Ireland, and our Dominions and Islands belonging to the same; And know ye further, that we of our especial Grace, and upon certain Knowledge, do Give and Grant to the said N our Great Admiral of England, and Governour General over our Fleets and Seas aforesaid; all manner of Iuris∣dictions, Authorities, Liberties, Offices, Fees, Profits▪ Duties, Emoluments, Wracks of the Sea, cast Goods, Regards, Advantages, Commodities, Prehemi∣nences, Priviledges whatsoever, to the sid Officer our Great Admiral of Eng∣land and Ireland, and of the oher Pla∣ces and Dominions aforesaid, in ny manner Whatsoever Belonging or Ap∣pertaining. Thus we see we have a continual Pos∣session or Dominion of the Kings of England by Sea, pointed out in very
Expresse Words for very many years; We may add to this, that it can be proved by words plain enough in the form of the Commissions, for the Command of High Admiral of Eng∣land; that the Sea for whose Defence he was appointed by the King of Eng∣land, who is Lord and Sovereign of it, was ever bounded towards the South by the Shores of Aquitain, Normandy, and Picardy; for although those Countries sometimes in the Possession of the Eng∣lish are now lost, and for many years under the Jurisdiction of the French, yet the whole Sea Flowing betwixt our Brittish Isles, and the Provinces o∣ver against them, are by a Peculiar Dominion and Right of the King of England on those Seas, subject unto them whom he puts in Command o∣ver the English Fleet and Coasts, that there remaineth neither Place nor Use for any other Commanders of that kinde: And as for the Islands of Ger∣nesey, Jersey, and the rest; Mr. Sel∣den affirmeth, that before a Court of Delegats in France, in expresse terms it hath been acknowledged, that the King
of England hath ever been Lord,Seld. Mare Clausum page 334. not onely of this Sea, but also of the Islands placed therein, Par raison du Royalme d' Angleterre, upon the Account of the Realm of England, or as they were Kings of England; And in the Treaty held at Charters, when Edward the Third Renounced his Claim to Nor∣mandy, and some other Counties of France that bordered upon the Sea; it was added, that no Controversie should remain touching the Islands, but that he should hold all Islands whatsoever which he Possessed at that time, whi∣ther they lay before those Countries yt he held there, or others; For Reason required this, that he should maintain his Dominion by Sea; And both Gerne∣sey and Jersey, as well as the Isles of Wight and Man, in several Treaties held betwixt the Kings of England and other Princes, are acknowledged not onely to lye neer unto the Kingdome of England, but to belong unto it. But to give a greater Light to this Truth, we may from several Records produce many Testimonies; that the Kings of England have given leave un∣to
Forreigners upon Request to passe through their Seas, he gave per∣mission to Ferrando Vrtis de Sarachione a Spaniard, to Sail freely from the Port of London through his Kingdomes, Domi∣nions, and Jurisdiction, to the Town of Rochel. There are Innumerable Letters of safe Conducts in the Records,Rot. Fran. 5 Hen. 4. especial∣ly of Henry the Fifth, and Sixth, where∣by safe Port and Passage was usually granted; And it is worthy of observa∣tion, that these kinde of Letters was u∣sually superscribed, and directed by those Kings to their Governours of the Sea-Admirals, Vice-Admirals, and Sea-Captains,. And to clear all at once, the Kings of England have such an ab∣solute Dominion in the English Seas, that they have called the Sea it self their Admiralty. And this we finde in a Commission of King Edward the Third; The Title whereof is, De Na∣vibus Arrestandis & Capiendis, For the Arresting and Seizing of Ships: The Form of it runs in these Words; The King to his beloved Thomas de Wen∣lock his Serjeant at Armes, and Lievte∣nant,
To our Beloved and Trusty Reginald de Cobham, Admiral of our Fleet of Ships from the mouth of the River of Thames, towards the Western parts Greeting: Be it known unto you, that we have appointed you with all the speed that may be used by you, and such as shall be Deputed by you; to Arrest and Seize all Ships, Flie-Boats, Barks, and Burges of ten Tun burthen and upwards, which may happen to be found in my foresaid ADMIRALTY (that is, in the Sea, reaching from the Thames Mouth, towards the South and West) and to bring them speedily, well, and sufficiently Armed to Sandwich, &c. All Officers also in the said Admiralty, are Comman∣ded to yeild Obedience and Assistance upon the same Condition; Thus, That the Sea it self was contained under the Name of the Admiralty, is most clearly manifest, by what already we have shown you. And as a Freedome of Passage, so also we do finde, that a Liberty of Fishing hath been obtained by Petition from the Kings of England, we have al∣ready made mention, that King Richard the Second, imposed a Tribute up∣on all persons whatsoever that used
Fishing on his Seas. We read also, that Henry the Sixth,Rot. Fran. 38 Hen. 6. gave leave to the French, and other Forreigners, some∣times for a Year, sometimes but for six Moneths, to go and Fish through∣out his Seas, provided that the Fishing-Boats and Busses, were not above thir∣ty Tuns; And if any Forreigners, whi∣ther French, Dutch or others, should Disturb or Molest any of the Kings Subjects as they were Fishing, they were to loose the benefit of their Li∣cence. But in the Eastern Sea which wash∣eth the Coasts of York-shire, and the Neighbouring Counties; It hath been an Antient Custome for the Hollanders and Zelanders to obtain leave, by Pe∣titioning to the Governour of Scarbo∣rough Castle. It is worth the while, saith the Reverend Mr. Cambden, to observe what an extraordinary gain the Hollanders and the Zelanders do make by fishing on the English Seas, having first obtained leave from the Castle of Scarborough; For the English have ever granted them leave to Fish, reserving always the Honour, and the
Priviledge to themselves, but through a negligence resigning the Profit unto Strangers; for it is almost incredible (saith he) to believe what a vast sum of Money the Hollanders do make by this Fishing upon our Coast; Mr. Hit∣chock also, in the time of Queen Eliza∣beth, presented a Book to the Parlia∣ment written in the English Tongue concerning the Commodity of Fish∣ing; in which he specifies, that the Hollanders and Zealanders every year towards the latter end of summer, do send forth four or five hundred Vessels called Busses, to Fish for Herrings in our Eastern Seas; but before they Fish, they ask leave of Scarborough, they are his very Words. Care was also taken by K. James, that no Foreigner should Fish on the English or Irish Seas without leave first obtained, and every year at the least, this leave was renewed from the Commissioners for that purpose ap∣pointed at London. But the Reason why we do not so often meet with these Forms of Licences is, because by the Leagues made with the Neigh∣boring Princes, a Licence, or Freedom
of that kinde was so often allowed by both parties, that as long as the League was in Force, the Sea served as it were a Common Feild, as well for the For∣reigner yt was in Amity, as for the King of England himself, who was the Lord and owner of it. But a remarkable Example of Fishing in this Nature we finde in the days of King Henry the Fourth. An Agreement was made be∣twixt the Kings of England and France, that the Subjects of both Kingdomes might freely Fish throughout that part of the Sea, wh is bounded on this side by the Ports of Scarborough and Southampton, and on the other side by the Coast of Flanders, and the Mouth of the River of Sein; The time was al∣so limited betwixt Autumn, and the beginning of January. And that the French might securely enjoy the Bene∣fit of this Agreement, the King of Eng∣land sent Letters unto all his Sea Cap∣tains and Commanders. By this we may plainly see, that these Limits wholy excluded the French from that part of the Sea which lies towards the West, and South-West, as also that
which lieth North-East of them as be∣ing so limited by our Henry at his own pleasure, as Lord and Soveraign of the whole. There is amongst the Records of Ed∣ward the First an Inscription, Pro Ho∣minibus Hollandiae, &c. For the Men of Holland, Zealand, and Friesland, to have leave to Fish neer Jernemuth, now cal∣led Yarmouth; The Kings Letter for their Protection, runneth in these Words. The King to his Beloved and Trusty,Rot. Patent 23. Edvar. John de Buteturte Warden of his Port of Jernemuth Greeting; For as much as we have been certified, that many men out of the Parts of Holland, Zealand, and Freis∣land who are in Amity with us, intend now to come, and Fish in our Seas neer unto Jernemuth, we command you that publick Proclamation be made once or twice every week, that no Person whatsoever imployed abroad in our Service, presume to cause a∣ny Injury, Trouble, Dammage, Hinderance, or Grievance to be done unto them, but ra∣ther when they stand in need, that you give them Advice, and Assistance in such man∣ner, that they may Fish and pursue their
own Advantage, without any Let or Impe¦diment. In Testimony whereof, we hav caused these our Letters to be made Pa∣tents, and to continue in Force until after the Feast of St. Martins next ensuing. Here you see, that the King granteth a Protection to Fish, and he Limits i within the space of two Moneths. He alone also Protected the Fishermen upon the German Coast, nor might the Fishermen use any other kind of Ves∣sels then what were Prescribed by our Kings. Upon which Accounts all kind of Fishing was sometimes prohibited, and sometimes admitted; this Restri∣ction being added, hat they should Fish onely in such Vessels as were under the Burden of Thirty Tun And this appears by the Letters of King Edward the Third concerning the Laws of Fishing, which were direct∣ed unto the Governours of several Ports, and Towns on the Eastern Shoar, the Words are these; For as much as We have given Licence to the Fishermen of the Neighbouring Ports, and to others who shall be willing to come un∣to them for the Benefit of Fishing; that they
may Fish and make their own Advantage with Ships and Boats under the burden of thirty Tuns, any Prohibition or Commands of ours whatsoever to the contrary notwith∣standing, we command you to permitt the Fishermen of the said Towns, and others who shall be willing to come to the said places for the Benefit of Fishing, to Fish, and make their own Advantage with Ships and Boats under thirty Tun, without any Let or Im∣pediment, any Prohibitions or Commands of ours made to the contrary in any wise not∣withstanding. This is evident also in the Records of King Edward the Fourth, for he in∣vested three Persons with Naval Pow∣er, whose Office it was to Protect and Guard the Fishermen upon the Coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk; and the charges of the Guard were to be Defrayed by the Fishermen of the said Seas at the pleasure of the King of England, al∣though they have Letters of Publick Security and Protection from Foreign Princes; Neither were any Persons admitted to a Partnership in this kind of Guard, except those who were ap∣pointed by the King of England; least
by this means, perhaps it might De∣rogate from the English Right, which is a manifest Sign and Evidence of their Dominion, and Possession of the place; And this may yet more clearly appear by the Laws and Limits usually set by our Kings to such Foreigners as were at Enmity with each other, but in Amity with the English: and to this effect, is the Proclamation of King James; who having made Peace with all Nations, did give equal Protection to the Spaniards, and the United Nea∣therlands, at that time exercising Acts of great Hostility one against another; Our Pleasure (saith he) and Com∣mandment is to all our Officers and Subjects by Sea and Land that they shall Prohibite as much as in them lieth, all hovering of Men of War of either Spaniard or Hollander neer to the Entry of any of our Coasts or Ha∣vens; and that they shall Rescue and Succour all Merchants, and others that shall fall within the Danger of any such as shall Await our Coasts: And it is further to be observed, that as our Kings have very often Commanded
that all manner of persons should cease from Hostility throughout all the spaces extended into their Territories by Sea; so they indulged the like Pri∣vilege for ever throughout the more Neighbouring Coasts of the French shore, that all manner of Persons, though Enemies to one another, should securely sayle to, and fro, as it were, under the wings of an Arbitrator, or Moderatour of the Sea, and also freely should use the Sea, according to such spaces, and limits, as they were pleased at first to appoint, which without doubt is a clear Evidence of Dominion. In this next place, I shall cite some of the Publick Records which are kept in the Tower of London, in which the Dominion of the Sea is expresly As∣serted, as belonging to the Kings of England; We Read, that Edward the Third in his Commissions given to Geoffery de Say,Rot. Scotia 10. dvar Governour or Com∣mander of the Western and Southern Seas, and to John de Norwich of the Nor∣thern, expresseth himself in these fol∣lowing words: We calling to mind, that our Progenitors, the Kings of England,
having before these times been Lords of the English Sea on every side, yea and Defen∣dors thereof against the Invasions of Ene∣mies, do strictly Require and Charge you by the Duty and Allegiance wherein you stand bound, that you set forth to Sea with the Ships of the Ports, and the other Ships that are ready, and that you Arrest the other ships under our Command, and that with all Di∣ligence you make search after the Gallies and Ships of War that are abroad against Us, and that stoutly and manfully you set upon them if they shall presume to bend their Course to∣wards any part of our Dominions, or the Coasts of Scotland, &c. Then followeth a Power to Press Seamen, and other matters of that kind. We read also in the Reign of the said King, in the preferring of a cer∣tain Bill in Parliament (which is the voice of the Estates of the Realm) that he was usually accounted King or So∣vereign of the Seas by all Nations; The words in French are to this sence in En∣glish;Rot. Parli. 46. Edv. 3. The Nation of the English were e∣ver in the Ages past Renowned for Sea-Af∣fairs in all Countries near the Seas, and they had also so numerous a Navy, that the Peo∣ple
of all Countries Esteemed, and called the K. of Engl. the K. or Sovereign of the Sea. Another Testimony to the same Ef∣fect we read in the Parliamentary Re∣cords of Henry the Fifth, where the Te∣nour of the Bill runs after this manner: The Commons do pray, that seeing our Sove∣reign Lord the King, and his Illustrious Pro∣genitors have ever been Lords of the Sea,Rot. Parli. 8. Hen. 5. and now seeing through Gods Grace it is so come to pass, that our Lord the King is Lord of the Shores on both sides of the Sea, such a Tribute may be imposed upon all Strangers passing through the said Sea, for the Benefit and Advantage of our said Lord the King, as may seem agreeable to reason, for the safegard of the said Sea. The An∣swer subscribed to the said Bill, was, Soit a vise par le Roy, which is, Let the King Himself be advised of it. For the King at that time Resided in France, being Lord of that Country, as well by Conquest, as Inheritance; And Hum∣phrey Duke of Glocester was then Presi∣dent of the Parliament, and Leivtenant of England, by whom as the Kings De∣puty, that Answer was given to the said Bill; but when the King was pre∣sent
in person, Le Roy S' advisera, the King will Advise, was the Answer from the Antient, down to our present times, in such Bills as were to be pas∣sed into Acts; Many other Testimo∣nies in this Nature may be produced, which for brevities sake are purposely omitted. Neither hath the High Court of Par∣liament onely given this Attestation to our Kings, as Supream and Sovereign of the Seas: But to confirme it, we shall produce the Testimonies of Robert Bel∣knap,Rich. 2. Fitz Her∣bert Tit. protection, 46. an Eminent Judge in the Time of Richard the Second, who affirmeth, that the Sea is Subject to the King, as a part of his Kingdom, or of the Patri∣mony of the Crown; And it appeareth by Publick Records, containing di∣verse main points, touching which the Judges of the Land were to be consul∣ted for the good of the Common-Wealth, that the Kings Sea-Domini∣on,Edw. Cook part 5. fol. 108. & in Com. ad Littleton, Sect 439. fol. 260. which they called, The Antient Su∣periority of the Sea, was a matter out of Question amongst all Lawyers of that Age, and Asserted by the Determina∣tions and Customes of the Law of the
Land, and by the express words of the Writs and Forms of the Actions them∣selves. Neither is this Truth confirmed on∣ly by our Laws, but by our Medals. There hath been a piece of Gold very often Coyned by our Kings, called a Rose-Noble, which was stamped on the one side of it with a Ship, floting in the Sea, and a King Armed with a Sword and Shield, sitting in the Ship it self, as in a Throne, to set forth a Represen∣tation of the English K. by Sea: The first Authour hereof was Edward the Third, when he Guarded his own Seas with a Numerous Navy, consisting of Eleven Hundred ships, at which time, as at o∣thers he marched victoriously through France: But what need we labour to produce so many Testimonies at home from our Records in the Tower and other places, from our High Courts of Parliament, from our Laws, from our Coyns, & from our Histories, to prove this Truth; since it is acknowledged even by Forreigners themselves whom it most concerneth, by their usual stri∣king of sayles, according to the antient
Custom by every ship of any Forreign Nation whatsoever, if they sayle near the Kings Navy, or any ship belonging to it at Sea, which is done not onely in Honour to the English King, but also in acknowledgement of His Sovereignty, and Dominion at Seas. The Antiquity of this Custome, and that it hath been in use for above these Four Hundred years may appear by this following te∣stimony: At Hastings, a Town scituate up∣on the Shore of Sussex, it was Decreed by K. John, in the Second Year of His Reign, with the Assent of His Peers, That if the Governour, or Commander of the Kings Navy in His Naval Expeditions shall meet with any Ships whatsoever by Sea, either Laden or Empty,Mr. Com∣mentar de Rebus Ad∣miral, fol. 28. that shall refuse to strike their sayles at the Command of the Kings Governour or Admiral, or his Lievtenant, but make resistance against any who belong un∣to his Fleet, that then they are to be reputed Enemies, and if they be taken, their Ships and Goods to be Confiscated, as the Goods of Enemies; And that, although the Masters or Owners of the Ships shall Alledge after∣wards, that the same Ships and Goods do be∣long to the Friends and Allies of our Lord
the King, yet the persons who shall be found in these Ships, are to be punished with Im∣prisonment at discretion for their Rebel∣lion. It was accounted Treason (saith Master Selden) If any ship whatsoever had not acknowledged the Dominion of the King of England in His own Sea by striking sayle, and they were not to be protected upon the Account of Amity, who should in any wise presume to do the contrary; Penalties were also appointed by the Kings of Eng∣land in the same manner, as if mention were made concerning a Crime committed in some Territory of his Land. But above all, that as yet hath been said, there can hardly be alledged a more convincing Argument, to prove the Truth of all that hath hitherto been spoken, then the Acknowledgement of the Sea-Dominion of the King of England by very many of our Neigh∣bouring Nations. At what time the Agreement was made by Edward the First of England, and Philip the Fair of France, Reyner Grimbald, Governour of the French Navy, Intercepted and Spoyled, on the English Seas, the Goods of many Merchants that were going to
Flanders,Rot. Parl. 31 Edw. 1. Membran. 16. as well English, as Others, and not contented with the Depredation of their Goods, He Imprisoned also their Persons, and delivered them up to the Officers of the King of France, and in a very insolent manner justified his Actions in Writing, as done by Autho∣rity of the King his Masters Commis∣sion. This being alledged to be done to the great Damage and Prejudice of the King of England, the Prelats, Peers, and the rest of the Nation, a Bill against Reyner Grimbald, was exhibited, and managed by Procurators on the behalf of the Prelates, Peers, and of the Cities and Towns throughout England, and lastly, of the whole English Nation, by an Authority (as I believe) of the Estates Assembled in Parliament; with these were joyned the Procurators of most Nations bordering upon the Sea throughout Europe, (Viz.) The Genoeses, The Catalonians, The Spaniards, The Almayns, The Zealanders, The Hollanders, The Freislanders, The Danes, The Noruegians, The Hamburghers, &c.
All these instituted a Complaint a∣gainst Reyner Grimbald who was Go∣vernour of the French Navy,Ibidem ut Supra. in the time of the War of Philip King of France, and Guy Earle of Flanders; And all these Complainants in their Bill do joyntly affirm, that the King of England and his Predecessors have time out of minde and without Controversie, En∣joyed the Soveraignty and Dominion of the English Seas, and the Isles belonging to the same by Right of their Realm of England, that is to say, by Prescribing Laws, Statutes and Prohibitions of Armes, and of Ships otherwise furnished, then with such necessa∣ries, and Commodities as belong to Mer∣chants, and by demanding Security, and af∣fording protection in all places where need should require, and ordering all other things necessary for the conservation of Peace, Right, and Equity between all sorts of Peo∣ple passing through that Sea, as well Stran∣gers as others in Subjection to the Crown of England; Also that they have had, and have the Soveraign Guard thereof with all manner of Cognisance, and Jurisdiction in doing Right and Justice, according to the said Laws, Ordinances and Prohibitions,
and in all other matters which may concern the Exercise of Soveraign Dominion in the said places. This is the Declaration of the Na∣tions above named, manifestly ac∣knowledging the Sovereignty and Do∣minion of our Kings over the Seas, and thereupon demanding protection for themselves;Tilius in Recueil. destraictes, fol. 4. But more particularly we do finde an acknowledgment of the Sea-Dominions of the Kings of Eng∣land, made by the Flemmings them∣selves in the Parliament of England, in the Reign of Edward the Second; the Records of the Parliament speak it thus. In the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of Edward the Second,Rot. Parl. 14. Edvar. 2. Membran 26. there appeared cer∣tain Ambassadours of the Earl of Flanders, to Treat about the Reformation of some In∣juries they received; and as soon as the said Ambassadours had been admitted by our Lord the King to Treat of the said Injuries, amongst other particulars they required, that the said Lord the King would at his own Suit, by Vertue of his Royal Authority, cause Enquiry to be made, and do Justice about a Depredation by the Subjects of Eng∣land
upon the English Seas, taking Wines and other sort of Merchandizes belonging to certain Merchants of Flanders, towards the parts of Crauden within the Territory and Jurisdiction of the King of England; Alledging that the said Wines and other Merchandizes taken from the Flemmings were brought within the Realm, and Juris∣diction of the King, and that it belonged to the King to see Justice done, in Regard that HE IS LORD OF THE SEA, and the aforesaid Depredation was made upon the said Sea within his Territory, and Jurisdi∣ction, &c. This we have Cited out of the Parliament Records which may Declare an Acknowledgement of the Sea-Dominion of our Kings, made by those Foreign and Neighbour-Nations who were most concerned in the Bu∣siness. Having given you thus (besides the Attestation of our own Writers) the acknowledgment of Foreign Nations, that the King of England hath the Do∣minion of the Seas; we shall now come to give you an Account of those Nor∣thern Seas, which came unto the Sub∣jection of the Kings of England, at
what time King James of Blessed Me∣mory by reducing the two Nations in∣to one Great Brittanie United the Crown of Scotland to the Crown of England. Odericus in his Ecclesiastical History informs us, that the Orcades was subject heretofore to the King o Norway, and that the people of the Or∣cades do speak the Gothish Language to this day; these Isles are Numerous and onely Twenty Eight of them are at this day Inhabited. Above One Hundred Miles beyond the Orcades to∣wards Norway, are the Shetland Isles in Number Eighteen, which are at this day Inhabited, and in subjection to the King of Scotland;Cambd. in Insul. Bri∣tan. p. 849. concerning which, there hath been a great Quarrel in for∣mer Ages between the Scots and Danes, but the Dane kept the Possession. All these Islands, did Christiern King of Den∣mark peaceably Surrender, together with his Daughter in Marriage, to James King of Scots, until that either he himself or his Posterity paid to the Scottish King or his Successors the sum of Fifty Thousand Rhenish Florens, which were never discharged to this
day; But afterwards when the Queen had been delivered of Her Eldest Son, the Danish King being willing to Con∣gratulate his Daughters good Delive∣ry, did for ever Surrender his Right in the Islands of the Orcades, Shetland, & the rest unto the Scottish King. This was in the days of James the Third of Scotland in the Year, 1468. A Claim was afterwards laid to Iseland, by Q. Elizabeth, And her Successor K. James the Sixth of Scotland,Cambden Annal. Elizab. and first of Eng∣land, hath a Dominion in the Sea which lieth farr more Northerly then Iseland which is that of Greenland; For that Sea having never been entred by Occupation, nor used in the Art and Exercise of Fishery, was first of all rendered very gainful through a pecu∣liar Fishing for Whales by those English Merchants of the Muscovie Company, who first Sailed that way. The use of a Sea never entred by Occupation, and such a kinde of profit being first disco∣vered, doth according to the manner of the Claim give a Dominion to the Discoverer, who claims it in the Right of another, as here in the Name of the
Sovereign of England; Upon which ground it was, that King James in his Letters of Credence given to his Am∣bassadour in Holland, Sir Henry Wotton did very justly say that the Fishing in the North Seas was His onely, and His by Right. In the Seventh year of the Reign of King James, this Right was more stre∣nuously asserted by Proclamation, and all persons excluded from the use o the Seas upon our Coasts, without par∣ticular License; the Grounds whereof you have here set down in the Procla∣mation it self. A Proclamation, Touching Fishing. JAMES by the Grace of God King of Great Brittain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all an singular persons to whom it may apper∣tein, Greeting. Although we do suffici∣ently know by Our Experience in the Of∣fice of Regal Dignity (in which, by th Favor of Almighty God, We have béen
placed and exercised these many years) as also by the observation which We have made of other Christian Princes exem∣plarie actions, how farr the absolutenesse of Sovereign Power extendeth it self, and that in regard thereof, We need not yield account to any person under God, for any action of Ours, which is lawfully grounded upon that Iust Prerogative: Yet such hath ever béen, and shall be Our care and desire to give satisfaction to Our Neighbour-Princes, and Friends in any action which may have the least relation to their Subjects and Estates, as We have thought good (by way of friendly premo∣nition) to declare unto them, and to whom∣soever it may appertain as followeth. Whereas we have been contented since Our coming to the Crown, to tolerate an indifferent and promiscuous kinde of li∣berty to all Our Friends whatsoever, to Fish within Our Streams, and upon any of Our Coasts of Great Brittain, Ireland, and other adjacent Islands, so farr forth as the permission or use thereof might not redound to the impeachment of Our (Pre∣rogative Royal, nor to the Hurtan Da∣mage of our loving Subjects, whose pre∣servation and stourishing Estate We old Our self principally bound to advance be∣fore all worldly respects: So finding that Our continuance therein, hat not onely
given occasion of over-great encroach∣ments upon Our Regalities, or rather questioning of Our Right, but hath béen a means of daily wrongs to Our own People that exercise the Trade of Fish∣ing, as (either by the multitude of stran∣gers which do pre-occupie those places, or by the injuries which they receive most commonly at their hands). Our Subjects are constrained to abandon their Fishing, or at least are become so discouraged in the same, as they hold it better for them, to betake themselves to some other course of living; whereby not onely divers of Our Coast-Towns are much decayed, but the number of Mariners daily diminished, which is a matter of great consequence to Our Estate, considering how much the strength thereof consisteth in the Power of Shipping and use of Navigation; We have thought it now both just and necessa∣ry (in respect that Wée are now by God's favor lineally and lawfully possessed, as well of the Islands of Great Brittain, as of Ireland, and the rest of the Isles adja∣cent) to bethink Our selves of good law∣ful means to prevent those inconveniences and many others depending upon the same. In consideration whereof, as We are desirous that the world may take no∣tice, that we have no intention to denie Our Neighbours and Allies, those fruits
and benefits of Peace and Friendship, which may be justly expected at Our hands in Honour and Reason, or are afforded by other Princes mutually in the point of Commerce, and Exchange of those things which may not prove prejudicial to them: so because some such convenient order may be taken in this matter, as may suf∣ficiently provide for these important consi∣derations which do depend thereupon; We have resolved first to give notice to all the world that Our Express Pleasure is, That from the beginning of the Moneth of Au∣gust next coming, no Person of what Na∣tion or Quality soever, being not Our na∣tal born Subject, be permitted to Fish upon any of Our Coasts & Seas of Great Brittain, Ireland, and the rest of the Isles adjacent, where most usually heretofore any Fishing hath béen, until they have orderly demanded and obtained Licenses from Vs, or such Our Commissioners, as we have Authorised in that behalf, viz. at London for Our Realms of England and Ireland, and at Edenborough for Our Realm of Scotland; which Licenses Our intention is, shall be yearly demanded, for so many Vessels and Ships, and the Tonnage thereof, as shall intend to Fish for that whole year, or any part thereof, upon any of Our Coasts, and Seas as a∣foresaid, upn pain of such chastisement,
as shall be fit to be inflicted upon such wil∣ful Offendors. Given at our Palace of Westminster the 6. day of May in the 7th. year of Our Reign of Great Brittain, Anno Dom. 1609. Notwithstanding this Proclamation, the Netherlanders proceeded still in their way of encroachment upon our Seas and Coasts, through the whole Reign of King James, and were at length so bold as to contest with him, and endeavour to quarrel His Mae∣sty out of his Rights, pretending, be∣cause of the long connivence of Him∣self and Queen Elizabeth, that they had a Right of their own by Immemorial Possession; which some Commissioners of theirs that were sent over hither, had the confidence to plead in Terminis, to the King and his Council. And though the King, out of his tenderness to them insisted still upon his own Right, by his Council to those Com∣missioners, and by his Ambassadour to their Superiors, yet they made no o∣ther use of his indulgence, than to tire
out his whole Reign,The Hollan∣ders Inso∣lence. and abuse his pa∣tience by their artificial Delays, Pre∣tences, Shifts, Dilatorie Addresses, and Evasive Answers. And all that the King gained by the tedious di∣sputes, overtures, and dispatches to and again, was in conclusion onely a Ver∣bal acknowledgment of those Rights; which at the same time that they ac∣knowledged, they usually designed to invade with much more insolence than before. But you have the main of what passed in those days in this par∣ticular, with their insolent demeanour, lively described in these following Collections, taken out of several Dis∣patches that passed betwixt Secretarie Naunton, and Sir Dudly Carlton Lord Ambassadour from the King, to the States of the United Provinces.
In a Letter of Secretarie Naunton's to the said Ambassadour, dated at White∣hall the 21. of December 1618. I finde these passages. I Must now let your Lordship know, that the States Commissioners and Deputies both, having attended His Majesty at New-Market, and there pre∣sented their Letters of Credence, re∣turned to London on Saturday was a se∣ven-night, and upon Tuesday had Au∣dience in the Council-Chamber, where being required to communicate the points of their Commission, they delivered their meditated Answer at length, The Lords upon perusal of it, appointed my Lord Bining and me to attend His Majesty for directions, what Reply to return to this Answer of theirs; which I represented to their Lordships yesterday to this effect: That his Majesty found it strange, that they having been so often required by your Lordship His Majesties Ambassa∣dour, as from himself, in their pub∣lique Assembly, to sd over Com∣missioners
fully Authorized to Treat and Conclude, not onely of all differ∣ences grown between the Subjects of both States, touching the Trade to the East-Indies, and the Whale-Fishing, and to Regulate and settle a Joynt and an even Traffick in those Quarters, but withal to take order for a more indif∣ferent course of determining other Questions, growing between our Mer∣chants and them about their Draperies and the Tare; And more especially to determine his Majesties Right for the sole Fishing upon all the Coasts of his Three Kingdoms, into which they had of late times inroached farther then of Right they could; And lastly, for the regle∣ment and reducing of their Coyns to such a proportion and correspondence with those of his Majesties and other States, that their Subjects might make no Advantage to transport our Monies by inhansing their valuation there: All which they confessed your Lordship had instanced them, for in his Majesties Name; that after all this attent on his Majesties part, and so long deliberation on theirs, they were come at last with
a Proposition to speak only to the two first points, and instructed thereunto with bare Letters of Credance only, which His Majesty takes for an Impe∣rious fashion of proceeding in them, as if they were come hither to Treat of what themselves pleased,Their Impe∣rious fashion of Treating. and to give Law to His Majesty in his own King∣dom, and to propose and admit of no∣thing but what should tend meerly to their own ends. To the second; Whereas they would decline all debate of the Fishings upon His Majesties Coasts, first by Allegati∣ons of their late great Losses and an Es∣meute of their people, who ae all in∣teressed in that Question, and would be like to break out into some combu∣stion to the hazard of their State which hath lately scaped Naufrage, and is not yet altogether calmed; What is this but to raise an advantage to themselves out of their disadvantage? But after∣wards they professe their lothnesse to call it in doubt or Question, claiming an immemorial possession seconded by the Law of Nations; To which His Majesty will have them told, that the
Kings of Spain have sought leave to Fish there by Treaty from this Crown; and that the King of France (a nearer Neigh∣bour to our Coast then they) to this day requests leave for a few Vessels to Fish for Provision of his own houshold; And that it appears so much the more strange to His Majesty, that they being a State of so late date, should be the first that would presume to question His Majesties Antient Right, so many hundred yeers inviolably possessed by His Progenitors, and acknowledged by all other Antient States and Princes. That themselves in their publick Let∣ters of the last of Iune, sent by your Lordship, seemed then to confirm their immemorial possession (as they term it) with divers Treaties, as are of the year, 1550. and another between His Majesties Predecessors and Charles the Fifth, as Prince of those Provinces, and not by the Law of Nations. To which their last Plea, His Majesty would have them told, that he being an Islander-Prince, is not ignorant of the Laws and Rights of his own King∣doms, nor doth expect to be taught the
Laws of Nations by them, nor their Grotius, whose ill thriving might rather teach others to disavow his Positions; and his honesty called in question by themselves, might render his Learning as much suspected to them, as his Per∣son. This His Majesty takes for an high point of his Soveraignty, and will not have it slighted over in any fashion whatsoever. Thus I have particulated unto you the manner of our proceeding with them; Let them advise to seek leave from His Majesty, and to acknowledge Him, His Right, as other Princes have done, and do; or it may well come to passe, that they that will needs bear all the World before them, by their Mare Li∣berum, may soon come to have neither Terram & Solum, nor Rempublicam li∣beram.
And in a Letter of the said Lord Ambas∣sadour Carlton to Secretary Naun∣ton, of the 30. of December, 1618. from the Hague, we finde this Return, touching the business of Fishery. WHether the final resolution here will be according to His Maje∣sties desire, in that point concerning the Fishing upon the Coasts of His Three Kingdomes, I cannot say; And by somewhat which fell from the Prince of Orange, by way of Discourse when he took leave of me on Monday last, at his Departure; I suspect it will not, in regard the Magistrates of these Towns of Holland, being newly pla∣ced, and yet scarce fast in their Seats, who do Authorize the Deputies which come hither to the Assembly of the States in all things they are to Treat and Resolve, will not Adventure for fear of the people, to determine of a Business, on which the livelihood of Fifty Thousand of the Inhabitants of this one single Province doth depend. I told the Prince, that howsoever His
Majesty, both in Honour of His Crown and Person, and Interest of his King∣doms, neither could nor would any lon∣ger desist, from having His Right ac∣knowledged by this State, as well as by All other Princes and Common∣wealths, especially finding the same openly oppugned both by their States∣men, and men of War, as the Wri∣tings of Grotius, and the taking of John Brown the last year may testifie; yet this acknowledgment of a Right and a Due was no exclusion of Grace and Favour; and that the people of this Country paying that small Tribute up∣on every one of their Busses, (which is not so much as disputed by any other Nation whatsoever) such was His Ma∣jesties well-wishing to this State, that I presumed of his permission to suffer them to continue their course of Fish∣ing; which they might use thereby with more Freedom, and less appre∣hension of molestation and let then be∣fore, and likewise spare the Cost of some of their Men of War, which they yearly send out to maintain that by force, which they may have of Cour∣tesie.
The Prince answered, that for him∣self at His Return from Utrecht, he would do his best endeavour to pro∣cure His Majesty contentment, but he doubted the Hollanders would appre∣hend the same effect in their payment for Fishing, as they found in the pas∣sage of the Sound, where at first an ea∣sie matter was demanded by the King of Denmark, but now more exacted then they can possibly bear: And touching their Men of War, he said, they must still be at the same charge with them, because of the Pirates. Withal, he cast out a question to me, whether this freedom of Fishing might not be redeemed with a summ of mo∣ney? To which I answered, It was a matter of Royalty more then of Utility, though Princes were not to neglect their profit. And in another Letter of the said Lord Ambassadour from the Hague to Secretary Naunton, of the 14. of January, 1618. He gives him to understand, That having been expostulated with, but in friend∣ly manner, by certain of the States a∣bout his late Proposition, as unseasona∣ble
and sharp, they said, they acknow∣ledge their Commissioners went beyond their limits in their terms of Immemo∣rial possession and immuable Droict de Gens; for which they had no order. Then, saith he, I desire them to con∣sider, what a wrong it is to challenge that upon right, which these Provin∣ces have hitherto enjoyed, either by connivence or courtesie, and yet ne∣ver without claim on His Majesties side, &c. In another Letter of Secretary Naun∣ton's to the Lord Ambassadour Carl∣ton, of the 21. of January, 1618. we read thus: AS I had dictated thus far, I re∣ceived direction from His Maje∣sty to signifie to the States-Commissioners here; That albeit their earnest entrea∣ty and His Gracious consideration of the present trouble of their Church and State, had moved His Majesty to consent to delay the Treaty of the great Fishing, till the time craved by the
Commissioners; yet understanding by new and fresh complaints of His Mar∣riners and Fishers upon the Coasts of Scotland, that within these four or five last years, the Low-Country-Fishers have taken so great advantage of His Majesties Tolleration, that they have grown nearer and nearer upon His Ma∣jesties Coasts year by year, then they did in preceeding Times, without leaving any Bounds for the Country-Peopl and Natives to Fish upon their Prince's Coasts, and oppressed some of His Subjects of intent to continue their pretended possession; and driven some of their great Vessels through their Nets to deter others by fear of the like violence from Fishing near them, &c. His Majesty cannot forbear to tell them that he is so well perswaded of the E∣quity of the States, and of the Honou∣rable respect they bear unto him, and to His Subjects for His sake, that they will never allow so unjust and intole∣rable Oppressions; for restraint where∣of, and to prevent the inconveniences which must ensue, upon the continu∣ance of the same, His Majesty hath by
me desired them to write to their Su∣periours to cause Proclamation to be made, prohibiting any of their Sub∣jects to Fish within Fourteen Miles of His Majesties Coasts this year, or in any time hereafter, untill order be ta∣ken by Commissioners to be authorised on both sides, for a final setling of the main business. His Majesty hath like∣wise directed me to command you from Him, to make the like Declara∣tion and Instance to the State there, and to certifie His Majesty of their An∣swer, with what convenient speed you may. Thus farr Secretary Naunton to the Ambassadour. Now what effect the Ambassadour's Nego∣tiation with the States had appears by a Letter of his from the Hague, of the 6. of February, 1618. to Kings James him∣self; where, among other passages he hath this. I finde likewise in the manner of proceeding, that treating by way of
Proposition here, nothing can be ex∣spected but their wonted dilatory and evasive Answers; their manner being to refer such Propositions from the States General to the States of Holland. The States of Holland take advice of a certain Council residing at Delph, which they call the Council of the Fi∣shery. From them such an Answer commonly comes, as may be expected from such an Oracle. The way there∣fore (under correction) to effect Your Majesties intent, is to begin with the Fishers themselves, by publishing, a∣gainst the time of their going out, Your resolution, at what distance You will permit them to Fish, whereby they will be forced to have recourse to their Council of Fishery; that Council to the States of Holland; and those of Hol∣land to the States-General, who then in place of being sought unto, will for contentment of their Subjects, seek un∣to Your Majesty.
A Proclamation by King Charles the First, For restraint of Fishing upon His Seas and Coasts without Lisence. WHereas Our Father of Blessed Memory Kings James, did in the Seventh Year of His Reign of Great Brittain, set forth a Proclama∣tion touching Fishing whereby for the ma∣ny important Reasons therein expressed, all Persons, of what Nation or Quality soever (being not His Natural born Sub∣jects) were restrained from Fishing upon any the Coasts and Seas of Great Brittain, Ireland, and the rest of the Isles adjacent, where most usually heretofore Fishing had béen, until they had orderly demanded, and obtained Licenses from Our said Father, or His Commissioners in that behalf, upon pain of such chastisement as should be fit to be inflicted upon such wilful Offen∣dors: since which time, albeit neither Our said Father, nor Our Self have made any considerable execution of the said Procla∣mation, but have with much Patience ex∣pected a voluntary conformity of Our
Neighbours and Allies, to so iust and rea∣sonable Prohibitions and Directions as are contained in the same. And now finding by experience, that all the inconveniences which occasioned that Proclamation, are rather increased then abated: We being very sensible of the pre∣mises, and well knowing how farr We are obliged in Honour to maintain the rights of Our Crown, especially of so great consequence, have thought it neces∣sary, by the Advice of our Privy Council to renew the aforesaid restraint of Fishing upon Our aforesaid Coasts & Seas, with∣out License first obtained from Vs, and by these presents to make publick Decla∣ration, that Our resolution is (at times convenient) to kéep such a competent strength of Shiping upon Our Seas, as may (by God's blessing) be sufficient, both to hinder such further encroachments upon Our Regalties, and assist and Pro∣tect those Our Good Friends and Allies who shall henceforth, by virtue of Our Licenses (to be first obtained) endeavour to take the benefit of Fishing upon Our Coasts and Seas, in the places accusto∣med. Given at our Palace of Westminster the 10 day of May, in the Twelfth year of our Reign of England, Scotland, France and Ireland.
This Proclamation being set forth in the year, 1636. served to speak the intent of those Naval preparations made before in the year, 1635. which were so numerous and well-provided, that our Netherland Neighbours being touched with the apprehension of some great design in hand for the Interest of England by Sea, and of the guilt that lay upon their own Consciences, for their bold Encroachments, soon be∣trayed their Jealousies and Fears, and in them a sense of their offences, before ever the Proclamation was made pub∣lick: As I might shew at large (if it were requisite) by certain Papers of a publick Character yet in being. But there is one, Instar omnium, which may serve in stead of all; and it is an acute Letter of Secretary Coke's, that was written to Sir William Boswel, the Kings Resident then at the Hague, the Ori∣ginal whereof is still reserved among the publick Papers: In which Letter, he sets forth the Grounds and Reasons of preparing that gallant Navy, with the Kings resolution to maintain the Right derived from his Ancestors, in
the Dominion of the Seas; and there∣fore I here render a true Copy of it, so farr as concerns this business, as most pertinent to our purpose. (SIR,) BY Your Letters and otherwise, I perceive many jealousies and dis∣courses are raised upon the preparati∣ons of His Majesties Fleet, which is now in such forwardness, that we doubt not but within this Month it will appear at Sea. It is therefore expe∣dient both for your satisfaction and di∣rection, to inform you particularly what was the occasion, and what is His Majesties intention in this work. First, we hold it a principle not to be denied, That the King of Great Brit∣tain, is a Monarch at Land and Sea to the full extent of His Dominions, and that it concerneth him as much to maintain His Soveraignty in all the Brittish Seas, as within His three King∣doms: because without that, these cannot be kept safe; nor he preserve
his honour and due respect with other Nations. But commanding the Seas, he may cause his Neighbours and all Countries to stand upon their guard whensoever he thinks fit. And this cannot be doubted that whosoever will encroach upon him by Sea, will do it by Land also when they see their time. To such presumption Mare liberum gave the first warning-piece, which must be answered with a defence of Mare clau∣sum: not so much by Discourses, as by the louder Language of a powerful Navy, to be better understood, when overstrained patience seeth no hope of preserving her Right by other means. The Degrees by which his Majesties Dominion at Sea hath of latter years been first impeached and then questi∣oned, are as considerable as notorious. First, to cherish, and as it were to nourish up our unthankful Neighbors, We gave them leave to gather wealth and strength upon our Coasts, in our Ports, by our Trade, and by our Peo∣ple. Then they were glad to invite our Merchants Residence, with what priviledges they would desire. Then
they offered to us even the Soveraign∣ty of their Estates, and then they sued for License to Fish upon the Coasts, and obtained it under the Great Seal of Scotland, which now they suppresse. And when thus by leave or by conni∣vence, they had possessed themselves of our Fishings, not onely in Scotland, but in Ireland and England, and by our Staple had raised a great stock of rade; by these means they so encreased their Shiping and power at Sea, that now they endure not to be kept at any di∣stance: Nay, they are grown to that confidence to keep guards upon our Seas; and then to project an Office and Company of Assurance for the Ad∣vancement of Trade; and withal pro∣hibit us free commerce even within our Seas, and take our Ships and goods, if we conform not to their Placarts. What insolencies and cruelties they have committed against us heretofore, in Ireland, in Greenland, and in the In∣dies, is too well known to all the world. In all which, though our sufferings and their wrong may seem forgotten, yet the great interest of His Majesties
honour, is still the same, and will re∣fresh their Memories as there shall be¦cause. For, though charity must re∣mit wrongs done to private men, yet the reflection upon the publick may make it a greater charity to do Justice on crying crimes. All this notwith∣standing, you are not to conceive that the work of this Fleet, is either re∣venge or execution of Justice for these great offences past, but chiefly for the future to stop the violent Current of that presumption whereby the Men of War and Free-booters of all Nations (abusing the favour of His Majesties peaceable and gracious Government, whereby he hath permitted all His Friends and Allies, to make use of His Seas and Ports in a reasonable and free manner, and according to his Treaties) have taken upon them the boldness, not only to come confidently at all times into all his Ports and Rivers, but to convey their Merchants ships as high as his chief City, and then to cast An∣chor close upon his Magazins, and to contemn the Commands of his Offi∣cers, when they required a farther di∣stance:
But which is more intolerable, have assaulted and taken one another within his Majesties Chamber, and within his Rivers, to the scorn and con∣tempt of his Dominion and Power; and this being of late years an ordinary practice which we have endeavoured in vain to reform by the ways of Ju∣stice and Treaties, the world I think will now be satisfied, that we have reason to look about us. And no wise man will doubt that it is high time to put our selves in this Equipage upon the Seas, and not to suffer that Stage of Action to be taken from us for want of our appearance. So you see the general ground upon which our Counsels stands. In parti∣cular, you may take notice, and pub∣lish as cause requires, That His Maje∣sty by this Fleet intendeth not a Rup∣ture with any Prince or State, nor to infringe any point of his Treaties; but resolveth to continue and maintain that happy peace wherewith God hath blessed his Kingdom, and to which, all his Actions and Negotiations have hitherto tended, as by your own in∣structions
you may fully understand. But withal considering, that Peace must be maintained by the arme of power, which onely keeps down War by keeping up Dominion; His Ma∣jesty thus provoked, finds it neces∣sary even for his own defence and safety, to re-assume and keep his antient and undoubted Right in the Dominion of these Seas, and to suf∣fer no other Prince or State to en∣croach upon him, thereby assuming to themselves or their Admirals, any Soveraign command: but to force them to perform due homage to his Admirals and Ships, and to pay them acknowledgements, as in former times they did. He will also set open and protect the free Trade both of his Subjects and Alies: And give them such safe Conduct and Con∣voy, as they shall reasonably re∣quire. He will suffer no other Fleets or Men of War to keep any guard upon these Seas, or there to offer violence or take prizes or boo∣ties, or to give interruption to any lawfull intercourse. In a word, his
Majesty is resolved, as to do no wrong, so to do Justice both to his Subjects and Friends, within the li∣mits of his Seas. And this is the real and Royal design of this Fleet, whereof you may give part as you finde occasion to our good Neigh∣bours in those parts, that no Um∣brage may be taken of any hostile act or purpose to their prejudice in any kinde. So wishing you all health and happiness, I rest Your Assured friend and Servant, JOHN COOK. White-hall, 16. April, 1635. our style.
The inestimable Riches and Com∣modities of the Brittish Seas THe Coasts of Great Brittain do yield such a continual Sea-har∣vest of gain, and benefit to all those that with diligence do labour in the same, that no time or season in the year passeth away without some appa∣rent means of profitable imployment, especially, to such as apply themselves to Fishing, which from the beginning of the year unto the latter end, con∣tinueth upon some part of other of our Coasts, and therein such infinite sholes and multitudes of Fishes are offered to the Takers as may justly move admi∣ration, not onely to strangers, but to those that daily be imployed among them. The Summer-Fishing for Herring, beginneth about Midsummer, and last∣eth some part of August. The Winter-Fishing for Herring, lasteth from September to the middle of
November, both which extend in place from Boughones in Scotland, to the Thames mouth. The Fishing for Cod at Alamby, Whir∣lington, and White Haven, near the Coast of Lancashire, from Easter untill Whit∣sontide. The Fishing for Hake at Aberdenie, Abveswhich, and other places between Wales and Ireland, from Whitsontide to Saint James-tide. The Fishing of Cod and Ling, about Padstow, within the Land, and of Se∣vern from Christmas to Mid-lent. The Fishing for Cod and the West-part of Ireland frequented by those of Biscay, Galicia, and Portugal, from the beginnig of April untill the end of June. The Fishing for Cod and Ling on the North, and North-East of Ireland, from Christmas until Michaelmas. The Fishing for Pilchers on the West coast of England from Saint James-tide until Michaelmas. The Fishing for Cod, and Ling upon the North-East of England, from Easter untill Midsummer.
The Fishing of great Staple-Ling, and many other sorts of Fish lying about the Island of Scotland, and in the seve∣ral parts of the Brittish Seas all the year long. In September, not many years since, upon the Coast of Devonshire, near Mi∣nigal, Five Hundred Tun of Fish were taken in one day. And about the same time three thousand pounds worth of Fish in one day were taken at Saint Ives in Cornwall by small Boats, and other poor provisions. Our five-men-Boats, and cobles ad∣venturing in a calm to launch out a∣mongst the Holland Busses, not far from Robinhood's Bay returned to Whitbie full fraught with Herrings, and report∣ed that they saw some of those Busses take Ten, Twenty, Twenty four lasts, at a draught, of Herrings, and return∣ed into their own Country with Forty, Fifty, and an Hundred Lasts of Her∣rings in one Buss. Our Fleet of Colliers not many years since, returning from Newcastle, laden with Coals, about the Well, near Flan∣borough-Head, and Scarborough, met
with such multitudes of Cod, Ling and Herring, that one amongst the rest, with certain ship-hooks, and other like instruments, drew up as much Cod, and Ling in a little space of time, as were sold well near for as much as her whole Lading of Cole. And many Hundred of ships might have been there laden in two dayes and two nights. Out of which wonderfull affluence, and abundance of Fish swarming in our Seas, that we may the better per∣ceive the infinite gain which Forreign Nations make, I will especially insist upon the Fishing of the Hollanders in our Coasts, and thereby shew how by this means principally they have in∣creased. 1. In Shipping. 2. In Mariners. 3. In Trade. 4. In Towns and Fortifications.
5. In Power extern or abroad. 6. In publick Revenue. 7. In private Wealth. 8. In all manner of Provisions, and store of things Necessarie. 1. Encrease of Shipping. BEsides Seven Hundred Strand-Boats, Four Hundred Evars, and Four Hundred Sullits, Drivers and Tod-boats, wherewith the Hollanders Fish upon their own Coasts, every one of those imploying another Ship to fetch Salt, and carry their Fish into other Countries, being in all, Three Thousand Sayle, maintaining and set∣ting on work at least Four Thousand persons, Fishers, Tradesmen, Women and Children; They have One Hun∣dred
Doyer Boats, of One Hundred and Fifty Tuns apiece, or there abouts; Seven Hundred Pinks, and Well-Boats from Sixty to One Hundred Tuns a∣piece, which altogether Fish upon the Coasts of England and Scotland for Cod, and Ling onely. And each of these employ another Vessel for providing of Salt, and transporting of their Fish, making in all One Thousand Six Hun∣dred ships, which maintain and em∣ploy persons of all sorts, Four Thou∣sand at least. For the Herring-season, they have One Thousand Six Hundred Busses at the least, all of them Fishing onely up∣on our Coasts from Boughonness in Scot∣land to the mouth of Thames. And every one of these maketh work for three other ships that attend her; the one to bring in Salt from Forreign parts, another to carry the said Salt, and Cask to the Busses, and to bring back their Herrings, and the third, to Transport the said Fish into Forreign Countries. So that the Total Num∣ber of Ships and Busses plying the Her∣ring-Fare, is, Six Thousand Four Hun∣dred;
whereby every Busse, one with another, imployeth Forty Men, Ma∣riners and Fishers within her own Hold, and the rest Ten Men a piece, which amounteth to One Hundred Twelve Thousand Fishers and Mari∣ners. All which maintain double, if not treble so many Tradesmen, Wo∣men, and Children a land. Moreover, they have Four Hundred other Vessels at least, that take Her∣ring at Yarmouth, and there sell them for ready money: so that the Hollan∣ders (besides Three Hundred ships be∣fore-mentioned fishing upon their own shores) have at least Four Thousand Eight Hundred ships only maintained by the Seas of Great Brittain, by which means principally Holland being not so big as one of our shires of England, con∣taining not above Twenty Miles in length, and three in breadth, have en∣creased the number of their shipping, to at least Ten Thousand sayle, being more then are in England, France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, and Russia. And to this number they add every day, although their Country
it self affords them neither materials, or victual, nor merchandise to be ac∣counted of towards their setting forth. Besides these of Holland, Lubeck hath Seven Hundred great ships, Hamborough Six Hundred, Embden Fourteen Hun∣dred, whereunto add the ships of Bre∣mer, Biscay, Portugal, Spain, and France, which for the most part fish in our Seas, and it will appear that Ten Thousand sayle of Forreign Vessels and above, are employed and maintained by fish∣ing upon our Coasts. So that in Hol∣land there are built a thousand sayle at the least to supply ship-wracks, and augment their store, which as the Prince, and common Nursery, is the chiefest means onely to encrease their number. 2. Encrease of Mariners. THe number of ships fishing on our Coasts, as being aforesaid Eight Thousand Four Hundred. If we al∣low
but twenty persons to every Ship one with another, the total of Mari∣ners and Fishers, amounteth to One Hundred sixty eight Thousand, out of which Number they daily furnish their longer Voyages to all parts of the World; for by this means they are not onely enabled to brook the Seas, and to know the use of the Tackles and Compass, but are likewise instructed in the Principles of Navigation, and Pilotage; insomuch as from hence their greatest Navigators have had their Education and breeding. 3. Encrease of Trade. BY reason of those multitude of Ships and Marriners, they have ex∣tended their Trade to all parts of the World, exporting for the most part in all their Voiages our Herring, and o∣ther Fish for the maintenance of the same. In exchange whereof they re∣turn
the several commodities of other Countries. From the Southern parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal, for our Herrings they return Oyles, Wines, Prunes, Honie, Wools, &c. with store of Coin in Specie. From the Straits, Velvets, Sattins, and all sorts of Silks, Alums, Currans, Oyles, and all Grocerie-ware, with much monie. From the East-Countries for our Herrings, and other French and Italian commodities before returned, they bring home Corn; Wax, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar, Sope-Ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clap-board, Wainscot, Tim∣ber, Deal-board, Dollers, and Hunga∣rie-Gilders. From Germanie, for Herrings, and other salt Fish, Iron, Steel, Glass, Mil-stones, Renish-wines, Button-plate for Armour, with other Muniti∣on; Silks, Velvets, Rashes, Fustians, Baratees, and such like Frankford-com∣modities, with store of Rix-dollers. From Brabant they return for the most part ready mony with some Ta∣pestries,
and Hull-shop. Yea, some of our Herring are carried as farr as Braseil. And that which is more strange and greatly to our shame, they have four hundred Ships with Fish, which our men of Yarmouth, within ken almost at land do vent our Herrings amongst us here in England, and make us pray for the Fish taken upon our own Coast ready mony, wherewith they store their own Country. 4. Encrease of Towns and Forts. BY this their large extent of Trade, they are become as it were Citi∣zens of the whole world, whereby they have so enlarged their Towns, that most of them within these four hun∣dred years are full as great again as they were before; Amsterdam, Leyden, and Middleburgh having been lately twice enlarged and their steets and buildings so fair, and orderly set forth,
that for beauty and strength, they may compare with any other in the world, upon which they bestow infinite sums of monies, all originally flowing from the bounty of the Sea, from whence, by their labour and industry, they derive the beginning of all that Wealth and Greatness, and particularly for the Ha∣vens of the aforesaid Towns whereof some of them cost forty, fifty, or an hundred thousand pound. Their For∣tifications also both for Number, and strength, upon which they have be∣stowed infinite summs of Money, may compare with any other whatsoever. 5. Encrease of Power abroad. SUch being then the Number of the Ships and Marriners, and so great their Trade, occasioned principally by their Fishing; they have not onely Strengthened, and Fortified them∣selves at home to repel all Foreign In∣vasions, as lately in the War between
them and Spain; but have likewise stretched their power into the East and West-Indies, in many places whereof, they are Lords of the Sea-Coasts, and have likewise fortified upon the Main, where the Kings and People are at their devotion. And more then this, all Neighbour-Princes, in their differen∣ces, by reason of this their power at Sea, are glad to have them of their party. So that, next to the English, they are now become the most re∣doubted Nation at Sea of any other whatsoever. 6. Encrease of Publick Revenue. MOreover how mighty the pub∣lick Revenue, and Customes of that State are encreased by their Fish∣ing, may appear in that above thirty years since, over and above the Cu∣stomes of other Merchandize, Excises,
Licenses, Waftage, and Lastage, there was paid to the State, for Cu∣stome of Herring, and other salt-Fish, above three hundred thousand pound in one year, besides the tenth Fish, and Cask paid for Waftage, which com∣eth at the least to as much more among the Hollanders onely, whereto the tenth of other Nations being added, it a∣mounteth to a far greater sum. We are likewise to know, that great part of their Fish is sold in other Countries for ready monies, for which they commonly export of the finest gold, and silver, and coming home recoin it of a baser allay, under their own stamp, which is not a small means to augment their publick Trea∣sure.
7. Encrease of private Wealth. AS touching their private Wealth, if we consider the abundant store of Herrings, and other Fish by them taken, and the usual prises that they are sold for, as also the multitude of tradesmen & Artizans, that by reason of this their fishing are daily set on work, we must needs conclude, that the gain thereof made by private men, must of necessity be exceeding great, as by ob∣serving the particulars following will plainly appear. During the Wars between the King of Spain, and the Hollanders before the last Truce, Dunkirk by taking, spoil∣ing, and burning the Busses of Holland, and setting great ransom upon their Fi∣sher-men, enforced them to compound for great sums, that they might Fish quietly for one year; whereupon the next year after the Fisher-men agreed amongst themselves to pay a Doller upon every last of Herrings, towards the maintenance of certain Ships of War to waft and secure them in their
Fishing, by reason whereof there was a Record kept of the several lasts of Herrings taken that year, and it ap∣peared thereby, that in one half year there were taken thirty thousand lasts of Herrings which at twenty pound per last, amounteth to Three Millions six Hundred Thousand, and at sixteen, twenty, thirty pound the last, they are ordinarily sold, then transported into other Countries, it cometh at least to Five Millions, Whereunto if we add the Herrings taken by other Nations, together with the Cod, Ling, Hake, and the Fish taken by the Hollanders, and other our Neighbours upon the Brittish Coasts all the year long, the totall will evidently arise to be above Ten Millions. The great Trade of Fishing imploy∣ing so many Men and Ships at Sea, must likewise necessarily maintain as great a Number of Trades-men, and Artizends on Land, as Spinners, and Hemp-winders to Cables, Cordage, Yarn-twine for Nets and Lines, Wea∣vers to make Saile Cloaths, Cecive Packers, Tollers, Dressers, and
Cowchers to sort and make the Her∣ring lawful Merchandise. Tanners to Tan their Sails and Nets; Coopers to make Cask, Block, and Bowl-makers for Ships, Keel-men, and Labourers for carrying and removing their Fish, Sawyers for Planks, Carpenters, Ship-wrights, Smiths, Carmen, Boat-men, Brewers, Bakers, and a number of o∣thers, whereof many are maimed per∣sons, and unfit to be otherwise im∣ployed. Besides the maintenance of all their several wives, and children, and families. And further every man and maid-servant, or Orphant, having any poor stock, may venture the same in their Fishing-Voiages, which affords them ordinarily great encrease, and is duly paid according to the Proportion of their Gain.
8. Encrease of Provisions. AND to conclude, it is manifest that Holland only affording in it self some few Hops, Madders, Butter and Cheese aboundeth notwithstand∣ing (by reason of this Art of Fishing) in plentiful manner with all kinde of Provisions as well for life, as in Corn, Beef, Muttons, Hides, and Cloaths; as for Luxury, in Wines, Silks and Spi∣ces; and for defence, as in Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Timber. All which they have not onely in competent proporti∣on for their use, but are likewise able from their several Magazines to supply their Neighbour-Countries. The premises considered, it maketh much to the ignominy and shame of our English Nation, that God and Na∣ture offering us so great a Treasure even at our own doors, we do not∣withstanding neglect the benefit there∣of, and, by paying Money to Stran∣gers
for the Fish of our own Seas, im∣poverish our selves to make them Rich. Insomuch that for want of industry and care in this particular, two hundred twenty five Fisher-Towns are decayed and reduced to extream po∣verty; whereas on the contrary by di∣ligent endevouring to make use of so great a blessing, we might in short time repair these decayed Towns of the Kingdom, and add both honour, strength, and riches to our King and Country, which how easily it may be done, will appear by some few obser∣vations following. By erecting Two Hundred and fifty Busses of reasonable strength and big∣ness, there will be employment made for a Thousand Ships, and for at least Ten Thousand Fisher-men and Mari∣ners at Sea, and consequently for as many Tradesmen and Labourers at Land. The Herrings taken by the Busses will afford His Majesty two hundred thou∣sand pound yearly custom outward,
and for commodities returned inward, thirty thousand pound and above. We have Timber sufficient, and at reasonable rates, growing in our own Kingdom for the building of Busses, every Shire affordeth hardy and able men fit for such employment, who now live poorly and idle at home. We have Victuals in great plenty sold at easie rates without payment of Excises, or Impost. Our shores and harbours are near the places where the Fish do haunt. For drink, or nets, salting and pack∣ing our Fish; and for succour in stress of weather, we may bring our Fish to Land, salt and pack it, and from some part of His Majesties Dominions be at our Markets in France, Spain, or Italy, before the Hollanders can arrive in Hol∣land. We have means to transport our Fishing into some Northern Coun∣tries,
where the Hollanders sel∣dome or never come. And though we had as many Busses as the Hollan∣ders, yet is there vent for all, or more, for in the East and Northern Coun∣tries, and in many other places, Her∣rings are every days meat, Winter and Summer, as well to draw on drink, as to satisfie hunger, and in most pla∣ces the greatest part of the year they be scarce to be had; for presently after Michaelmas the Sound and Rivers are frozen up, so as no Herrings can be transported into twenty several King∣doms, and free States until July, which is for thirty weeks space together; so that when Lent comes, there are few to be bought for money. Lastly, since by care and industry we gained from the Flemmings, doubt∣less so by the means we may as easily grow expert in the Art of Fishing, and in time make it a staple-commodity of our own. But this we shall the better and sooner do, if we consider and endea∣vour to reform certain wants and abu∣ses
which hitherto have hindred us from effecting that good and great work, whereof these that follow are none of the least. 1. General liberty of eating Flesh contrary to old custom, and the Sta∣tute-Laws provided for observing Fish-day, from whence our scarcity and dearth of Fish proceedeth; for where Flesh is ordinarily spent, Fish will not be bought, and want of sale de∣cayeth all Trade, gain being the Nurse of Industry. 2. Want of order and discretion in our Fishing, every man being left to himself and permitted to Fish as best liketh him: whereas amongst the Hol∣landers two of the best experienced Fisher-men are appointed to guide the rest of the Fleet, all others being bound to follow them, and to cast their lines according to their directi∣on. 3. The Hollanders and other Nations set forth with their Busses in June, to
finde the shole of Fish, and having found it, dwell amongst it till Novem∣ber, whereas we stay till the Herring come home to our Rode-steads, and somtimes suffer them to pass by ere we look out, our Herring-Fishing conteining onely seven weeks at the most, and theirs twenty. 4. The Hollanders Busses are great and strong, and able to brook foul weather, whereas our Cobles, Cray∣ers, and Boats being small, and thin sided, are easily swallowed by a rough Sea, not daring to adventure far in fair weather, by reason of their weaknesse for fear of Storms. 5. The Hollanders are industrious, and no sooner are discharged of their lading, but presently put forth for more, and seek for Markets abroad as well as at home; whereas our English after they have been once at Sea, do commonly never return again untill all the money taken for their Fish be spent, and they in debt seeking onely to serve the next Market.
6. The Hollanders have certain Mer∣chants, who, during the Herring-sea∣son do onely come to the places where the Busses arrive, and joyning toge∣ther in several companies, do present∣ly agree for the lading of thirty or for∣ty Busses at once, and so being dis∣charged, they may speedily return to their former shipping; whereas our Fisher-men are uncertain of their Chap-men, and forced to spend much time in putting off their Fish by par∣cels. These and other effects would care∣fully be taken into consideration, and certain orders made to make our Fish∣ing prosperous, and succesful, especial∣ly considering the fearful mischiefs, the neglects hereof hath brought to the King and Kingdom in general, and to many good Towns and Corporations in particular, as by Authority even of Parliament it self in the Statute of 33. Hen. the eight, is plainly testified, which I have summarily here set down, to avoid the prolixity of the o∣riginal.
Because the English Fisher-men dwelling on the Sea-Coasts did leave off their Trade of Fishing in our Seas, and went the half-Seas over, and there∣upon they did buy Fish of Pickards, Flemmings, Normans, and Zelanders, by reason whereof many incommodities did grow to the Realm, viz. the decay of the wealth and prosperity as well of the Cinque-Ports, and Members of the same, as of other Coast-Towns by the Sea-side, which were builded, and inhabited by great multitudes of peo∣ple, by reason of using and exercising, the craft and feat of Fishing. Second∣ly, the decay of a great number of Boats and Ships. And thirdly, the de∣cay of many good Marriners, both able in body by their diligence, labour, and continual exercise of Fishing, and ex∣pert by reason thereof in the know∣ledge of the Sea-Coasts, as well with∣in this Realm as in other parts beyond the Seas. It was therefore enacted, that no manner of Persons English, De∣nizens, or strangers at that time, or a∣ny time after dwelling in England, should buy any Fish of any strangers in
the said Ports of Flanders, Zealand, Picar∣die, France, or upon the Sea between shoare and shoare, &c. This Act by many continuances was continued from Parliament to Parlia∣ment, until the first of Queen Marie, and from thence to the end of the next Parliament, and then expired. For Conclusion, seeing, by that which hath formerly been declared, it evidently appeareth, that the Kings of England, by immemorable prescrip∣tion, continual usage, and possession, the acknowledgment of all our Neigh∣bour-States, and the Municipal Laws of the Kingdom, have ever held the Sovereign Lordship of the Seas of Eng∣land, and that unto his Majesty, by reason of his Sovereignty, the supream command and Jurisdiction over the passage, and Fishing in the same right∣fully apperteineth; considering also the natural Scite of those our Seas that interpose themselves between the great Northern Commerce of that of the whole world, and that of the East,
West, and Southern Climates, and withal the infinite commodities that by Fishing in the same is daily made; It cannot be doubted, but his Majesty, by means of his own excellent Wis∣dom and Virtue, and by the Industry of his faithful Subjects and People, may easily, without injustice to any Prince or Person whatsoever, be made the greatest Monarch for Command and Wealth, and his People the most opu∣lent and Flourishing Nation of any o∣ther in the world. And this the ra∣ther, for that his Majesty is now abso∣lute Commander of the Brittish Isle, and hath also enlarged his Dominions over a great part of the Western In∣dies; by means of which extent of Em∣pire, (crossing in a manner the whole Ocean) the Trade and persons of all Nations (removing from one part of the world to the other) must of neces∣sity first, or last, come within compass of his power and jurisdiction. And therefore the Sovereignty of our Seas, being the most precious Jew∣el of his Majestie's Crown, and (next
under God) the principal means of our Wealth and Safety, all true Eng∣lish hearts and hands are bound by all possible means and diligence to pre∣serve and maintain the same, even with the uttermost hazzard of their Lives, their Goods and Fortunes. Thus you see what wonderous ad∣vantages may redound to the Felicity, and Glory of this Nation, if God give hearts and resolutions to vindicate those rights which are now most im∣piously and injuriously invaded. There is also another Dominion of the Sea belonging to the King of Great Brittain, and that of a very large Ex∣tent upon the Shore of America, as on the Virginian Sea, and the Islands of the Barbadoes and Saint Christophers and ma∣ny other places; but how farr our Eng∣lish Colonies Transported into Ame∣rica, have Possessed themselves of the Sea there, is not exactly as yet disco∣vered.
A further Assertion that the Sea is under the Laws of Propriety, Declared in a full Convention betwixt Ferdinando Emper∣our of Germany, and the Re∣publick of Venice in the Year, 1563. AT this Convention the Com∣plaints on both sides were open∣ed; And it being required in the Name of his Emperial Majesty, that it may be Lawful for his Subjects and others, to Traffick freely in the A∣driatick Sea; It was answered by the Advocate of the Common-Wealth of Venice, that Navigation indeed ought to be free, yet those things at which his Imperial Majesty found himself a∣grieved were no ways repugnant to this Freedom,How farr Navigation is to be free. for as much as in Coun∣tries which are most free; Those who have the Dominion thereof receive Custome, and do give Bounds, and prescribe Order, by which way all Merchandize shall pass, and therefore
none should finde themselves agrieved if the Venetians for their own Respects, did use to do so in the Adriatick Seas which is under their Dominion, there being nothing more known then that the Common-Wealth of Venice were Lords of the Adriatick Sea, and do ex∣ercise that Dominion which from time out of minde it had always done, as well in receiving of Customes, as in assigning of places for the Exaction of it; And that according to former Ca∣pitulations, the Subjects of the Vene∣tians were to have no less liberty in the Lands of the Austrians, then the Austrian Subjects in the Sea of Venice; And if his Imperial Majesty within his own State upon the Land, will not permit that the Subjects of the Common-Wealth of Venice shall go which way they list, but doth constrain them to go by such places onely where customs is to be paid, he cannot with Justice demand that his Subjects may passe by or through the Sea of the Republick which way they please, but must con∣tent himself that they passe that way onely, which shall best stand with the
Advantage of those who have the Do∣minion over it; And if his Majesty cause Custome to be paid upon his Land, why may not the Venetians like∣wise do it upon their Sea? He deman∣ded of them if by the Capitulation they would have it that the Emperour should be restrained or hindred from the taking of Custome? And if not, why would they have the Venetians ty∣ed thereunto by a Capitulation, which speaks of both Potentates equally with the same words; He proceeded in a Confirmation of the Truth that the Re∣publick had the Dominion of the Sea, and although the proposition was true, that the Sea is common and free, yet it is no otherwise to be understood there in the same sence when usually we say,The Sea in His Maje∣sties Domi∣nions no more common nor free, then is the High-way by Land. that the high-way are common & free; by which is meant, that they cannot be Usurped by any private Person for his sole proper service, but remain to the use of every one; Not therefore, that they are so free, as that they should not be under the Protection and Govern∣ment of some Prince, and that every one might do therein Licenciously
whatsoever pleaseth Him, either by Right, or by Wrong, for as much as such Licenciousness, or Anarchy both of God, & Nature, as well by Sea, as by Land; That the true liberty of the Sea excludes it not from the protection and superiority of such as maintain it in Liberty, nor from the Subjection to the Laws of such as have Command over it, but rather necessarily it includes it; That the Sea no less then the Land is Subject to be divided amongst men, & appropriated to Cities and Potentates which long since was ordained by God from the beginning of man kind, as a thing most Natural; And this was well understood by Aristotle, when he said,The Domini∣on of the Seas appropriated to such and such places ever since the begining of Mankind. that unto Maritine Cities the Sea is the Territory, because from thence they take their Sustenance, and Defence; A thing which cannot possibly be, unless that part of it be appropriated in the like manner as the Land is, which is divided betwixt Cities and Govern∣ments not by equal parts, nor according to their Greatness, but as they have been, or are able to Rule, Govern, or Defend them. Bern, he said, was
not the greatest City of Switzerland, and yet it hath as large a Teritory, as all the rest of the twelve Cantons toge∣ther; The City of Norimburg is very great, and yet the Dominions and Te∣ritories of it do hardly exceed the wals. The City of Venice it self for many years was known to be without any possession at all upon the firm Land. Upon the Sea likewise, certain other Cities of great Force and Valour have possessed a large quantity of it, and o∣ther Cities of less force have conten∣ted themselves with the next waters; Neither are there wanting Examples of such who notwithstanding they do border upon the Sea, yet having fer∣tile Lands and adjacent to them, have sa∣tisfied themselves with their Land Pos∣sessions without ever attempting to gain any Sea Dominion. Others there are, who being awed by their more mighty Neighbours, have been con∣strained to forbear any such Attempt, for which two causes, a City notwith∣standing it be Maritine, and border∣eth upon the Sea, may happen to re∣main without any possession of the Sea.
He added, that God did institute Principalities for the maintenance of Justice, to the benefit of Mankind, which was necessary to be executed, as well by Sea as by Land; And St. Paul said, that for this cause there were due unto Princes, Customes and Contri∣butions, that it should be a great Ab∣surdity to praise the well Governing, Regulating, and Defence of the Land, and to condemn that of the Sea;The Pro∣priety of the Seas, accor∣ding to the Laws of God. And that if the Sea in some parts thereof, for the ampleness and extream distance of it from the Land is not possibly to be Governed, and Protected, it doth pro∣ceed from a Disability, and Defect in Mankind, as in the same consideration there are Desarts or Wildernesses so great upon the Land, as it is altoge∣ther impossible to protect them, wit∣ness the many sandy parts of Affrica, and the Immense Vastities of the World but lately discovered; And as it is a gift of God that a Land by the Laws, and publisht Power be Ruled, Protected, and Governed, so the same happeneth to the Sea; He said, that those were deceived by a
gross Equivocation, who affirmed that the Land by reason of its Stability and Firmness may be governed, but not the Sea, for being an unconstant Ele∣ment, it passeth, and hath a motion proper to it as well as the Aire; And if by the Sea, and the Aire, all and e∣very part of those fluent Elements be intended, it is a most certain thing that they cannot be governed, because whilst a man secureth himself with any one part of them, the other fliteth out of his power; And this also hapeneth unto Rivers, which cannot be restrai∣ned in their fluent motions; But when mention is made to rule over a Sea or River, it is not understood of the Ele∣ment but of the Scite where they are placed; The water of the Adriatick Sea doth continually run out of it, nei∣ther can it at all be kept in, and yet it is the same Sea, as well as the Thames, the Rhine or the Po are the same Rivers now, as they were one Thousand years agoe,The Sea not to be with∣out Protecti∣on. and this is that which is Subject to the Protection of Princes. He askt the Germans, if their pretence were that the Sea should be left without Pro∣tection,
so that any one might do therein whatsoever he listed, by Rob∣ing, Spoiling and making it Unnaviga∣ble; This he said, would be so absurd in reason, that he durst answer for them that they had no such pretence; he therefore concluded, that therefore his Majesty of Germany by a necessary Consequence must acknowledge, that it ought to be kept Governed,The Sea to be protected by those to whom it doth apper∣tain by Di∣vine Dispo∣sition. and Pro∣tected by those unto whom it did ap∣pertain by Divine Disposition, which if it were so, as indeed it is, he desired to understand if in their Judgment it seemed to them a Just thing, that such should do it with the expence of their own Pains, and Treasure, or rather that should contribute towards it who equally did enjoy the Benefit; And as to this, he said, he durst answer for them, the Doctrine of Saint Paul being clear in this particular, that all such who are under Government and Pro∣tection, are thereby bound to pay Customes and Contribution; Much he said, might be alleaged in matter of Law to confirm this Truth; And thereupon he concluded, that if the
Common-Wealth of Venice were that Prince to whom it did appertain to Govern and Protect the Adriatick Sea, it of necessity must follow, that who∣soever Traffick, and Saileth on their Sea ought to be subject to their Laws, in the same manner as such are who travail through a Country upon Land. From hence he did proceed to show that this Dominion over the Sea from time out of minde did belong to the Common-Wealth of Venice; And to prove this, he caused to be read out of an Abstract which he had taken the o∣pinion of Thirty Famous Lawyers who from the Year One Thousand Three Hundred until the present time, did speak of the Dominion which the Common-Wealth of Venice had over the Sea, as of a thing most known, and of which even in their Times, the mind of man knew not the Contrary, some of them affirming that the Common-Wealth of Venice had no lesse Domi∣nion over the Sea, then over the City of Venice; Others maintaining that the Adriatick Sea is the Territory and the Demeans of the said City; And to
render this more evident, they do make mention of the lawful Power which the Venetians have to establish Laws o∣ver Navigation, and to impose Cu∣stomes upon such as traffique on those Seas; And he added,The Power of the Sove∣raign of the Seas, to im∣pose Customes in his own Jurisdiction. that he never read any Lawyer which held forth to the contrary, moreover he told the Advocate of the Emperour, that if he would not believe those Authors who testified that the Sea belonged to the Venetians▪ whereof they had possession from time out of minde, before the age wherein those Authors lived, yet he could not deny to receive them for the Testimonies of such things, which they saw, and knew in their times, and to hold them as witnesses far above all Exception, being all of them Famous men, though dead so many years agoe, and whose Impartial Pens could no ways be interested in the present Dif∣ferences. And because more then two hundred and fifty years were passed from the time that the Authors whom he alleaged as Witnesses hereof, did Write to the time of those whose Names he last of all did mention in
that behalf; he urged that by their At∣testation it was sufficiently proved, that for a long time more then so many years the Common-Wealth hath com∣manded the Sea, and therefore he could not deny the assured and certain pos∣session of it to the present. Then Addressing himself to the Judges, he desired them to consider, that notwithstanding some of the above mentioned Authors do speak in gene∣ral words, and name at large the Sea of the Venetians, neither taking care to declare the Quality or the Quantity thereof, yet others more expresly do give it the Title of the Adriatick Sea, which evidently doth demonstrate not onely the Scite, but also the Quantity of the Sea possessed, and hereupon he explained himself, that those who speak more precisely ought to cleer the pas∣sages of those who write more general∣ly, according to the common Precept which is, that with cleer places the more obscure are to be illustrated; He mentioned also the divers manner of speaking of the same Lawyers, some deriving the Dominion of the Repub∣lick
over the Seas from Custome, some from Prescriptions, others from an in∣duced Subjection, and others from a Privilege, which did arise all from this Reason; Because, as they were most assuredly informed of the Possession and Jurisdiction of the said Sea, which they both heard and saw to belong to the Common-Wealth time out of mind; So they Writing on the same Subject not at the Instance or the Com∣mand of any One, but of their own proper Motions, and b way of Insti∣tution only, every one of them judged it most convenient to express the Title of that Jurisdiction, some with one Term, and some with another, with∣out coming to use the sole, true pro∣per Term, as they would have done if they had been put to write for the In∣terest of any one, in which Cases the Lawyers are alwayes conformable, re∣ceiving from the Person interested the like Instructions. After the Declination of the Constan∣tinopolitan Empire, the Adriatick Sea was found to be for many years aban∣doned in such manner, as it remained
unregard, and without the Protection and Government of any Prince, and under the Jurisdiction of none, untill it came into the Power of the Venetians, who to receive their lively-hood there∣by, were constrained to maintain it in freedom, and thereupon taking it into their protection, they obtained the Go∣vernment, and the Dominion over it: In like manner,How the Sea comes into the Domini∣on of Princes as by the Law of Na∣ture, and of Nations, the Land, the Sea, and other things which are not under the Dominion of any other, come Justly into the hands of those who first do get the possession of them; by which Reason, the first Empires were founded, as well upon the Sea, as on the Land, and daily there are new ones in the same manner formed, when any of them, either through Age, or Vice becoming weak wanteth Force, and sinketh of it self, The which Custody and Government of the Sea acquired the Common-Wealth of Ve∣nice, hath daily advanced by the keep∣ing of Powerful Fleets, with the ex∣pence of much Treasure, and the effu∣sion of as much Blood, both of their Ci∣tizens,
and Subjects, continuing with∣out Interruption in the sight of all the World their Dominion and Custody of the said Sea, and overcoming and removing all Impediments, as either by Pirates, or by Potentates, have at divers times been raised against them. After the testimony of the Lawyers, he added, that of the Historians, who do relate, that the Common-Wealth of Venice for more then three hundred years past, did receive Custom of such as sail'd that Sea, and kept arm'd Vessels in a readiness to compell all such ships so sayling to go to Venice, testifying moreover, that even unto their pre∣sent time the same custom was obser∣ved: But he dwelled not much upon their Attestations, saying, that although they were good Testimonies of pre∣ceding Occurrences; yet when we un∣dertake to prove either the interests of Princes, or of private Persons, he ought to help himself by Authentick Writings, and to use the Historians with great Discretion, some of them being moved by Love, others with Ha∣tred, and others with hopes of Prefer∣ment,
which constrains them often∣times to use Flatteries, or Hyperboles, upon which cannot be laid any sure Foundation: He therefore did produce an Act of the General Council held at Lions in the year, one thousand two hundred seventy four, where the Abbot of Nervesa being delegated by the Pope did Sentence, that the Venetians should not be molested in the Defence, and Protection of the Adriatick Sea, against the Saracens and Pirats, neither should they be Disturbed by any from exact∣ing their Rights and Customs, which they had of Victuals, Merchandize, or any other portable Commodities. He added also that there remain the Regi∣sters of Licenses granted to pass their said Sea, with armed Vessels, or Ships of War, and to the Persons and Goods belonging to their use, at the request of divers Princes who had their Posses∣sions on the shore of the Adriatick Sea: But for the greater confirmation of all that had been said, he remembred the yearly Ceremony used at Venice, where the Duke in the presence of the Am∣bassadours of other Princes, and more
particularly of the Emperours of Ger∣many doth constantly use to Espouse the Sea by casting a Ring of Gold into it with these words, Desponsamus te Mare in signum veri & perpetui Dominii: We do Marry thee O Sea, in sign of our true and perpetual Dominion over it; Which Ceremony, as many Writers do affirm, had its beginning when Pope Alexander the third was in Venice, not∣withstand they do add withall, that it was Instituted in sign of the Domini∣on which the Republick had formerly gotten by the Right of War. At the Conclusion he produced the Letters of many Princes and Poten∣tates who joyntly acknowledged the Truth of what he spoke, two of them were from the Emperour Frederick to Giovanni Mocernigo Duke of Venice, where having acquainted him of a cer∣tain quantity of Corn, that was to pass through the Adriatick Sea, he desireth that he may be permitted to have a free passage, which will be to him a great pleasure, and he shall acknowledge it with many thanks. Another Letter was from Beatrice Queen of Hungary to
the Duke above mentioned, where ha∣ving informed him that she had divers things to pass through the Adriatick Sea, which could not be without his permis∣sion, she desired that for Courtesies and Friendships-sake it might be granted her, which she should take for a great Favour, and correspond with him on the like occasion. Another Letter was from Matthias King of Hungary to the Duke of Venice, where relating how the Common-Wealth of Venice was ac∣customed every year to give License for the Transportation of a certain quantity of Corn, he prayed that the same Grace might be shewed unto him, and that he would acknowledge it for a Favour, and correspond according∣ly. Thus as in a Glass, you may see the Dominion of His Majesty in His Brit∣tish Seas clearly represented, asserted, and fully proved by that propriety of Title and Soverainty of Power which the Duke of Venice exerciseth on the Adriatick Sea, which by the manner of prescription, the consent of Histories, and even by the confession of their Ad∣versaries
themselves is almost the same with His Majesties of Great Brittain; But His Majesty hath one Title more above all theirs, which is, the Title of Successive Inheritance, confirmed as well by the Law of Nature, as of Nati∣ons, and is so much the more consider∣able, in regard of the infinite Advanta∣ges of the profits of it, as the Brittish Ocean in its Latitude and Circumfe∣rence exceedeth the small Boundaries of the Gulph of Venice. But in this great Disputation (where were present the most Remarkable Wits of Italy and Germany,Vide the Venetians Title unto the sole Do∣minion of the Adriatick Sea. and where the Imperialists themselves and a∣mongst them, one of the most Emi∣nent, Stephen, Baron of Gourz Attested openly, that the Common-Wealth of Venice was Patron of the Adriatick Sea, and might impose what Customs they thought fitting, and that all other the Commissaries thought so in their Con∣sciences:) There is enough, as may be thought in Reason to convince all Op∣ponents, that may pretend to differ in Judgement from us; Yet so it is, that the Indulgence of the Kings of England
to their Neighbouring Nations, espe∣cially to the Hollanders, by giving them too much liberty hath incouraged them to assume a Liberty to themselves, and what at the first was but a License, they improve into a Custom, and make that Custom their Authority; Insomuch, that some of the most busiest of them have openly declared against the Kings Propriety on the Brittish Seas: Amongst these is one Hugo Grotius, a Gentleman of great Ingenuity, but in this particu∣lar so inclined to obey the Importu∣nities, and serve the Interests of his Country-men, that he disobliged him∣self of the Truth, and moreover (to speak the truth) of his Conscience it self,Hugo Gro∣tius, Sylv. lib. 2. for if you look into his Silvae, up∣on the first Inauguration of King Iames of ever Blessed Memory, he is pleased to express himself in these words, Tria Sceptra profundi in magnum Cojere Ducem, which is, that the Rights of the English, Scottish, and Irish Seas, are united under one Scepter, neither is he satisfied with this bare profession, but he goes on, Sume animos a Rege tuo, Quis det Iura Mari, which is in English, Take cou∣rage
from the King, who giveth Law unto the Seas: In the same Book, in the contemplation of so great a Power, he concludeth, Finis hic est, qui fine ca∣ret, &c; that is, This is an end beyond an end, a bound that knoweth no bound, a bound, which even the winds and the waves must submit un∣to. But with what ingratitude have the Dutch Answered the many Royal Fa∣vours, which the Kings of England have almost perpetually conferred on them: If there be no Monster greater then Ingratitude, what Monsters are these Men, who of late are so far from ac∣knowledging their thankfulness, that like Vipers, they would feed upon, and consume those Bowells which did afford them Life and Spirit? We may observe, that in their Lowest Conditi∣on, which is most sutable to the Name of their Abode, called the Low Countries, they Petitioned to the Majesty of the Queen of England, whose Royal Heart and Hand being alwayes open to those that were Distressed, especially those that were her Neighbours, upon the
account of Religion,Vide the Observations concerning the Affairs of Holland. she sent them Threescore Thousand Pound, upon the account of Sir Thomas Gresham in the year, One Thousand Five Hundred Se∣venty and Two; and presently after∣wards, there followed Colonel Morgan, Colonel Gilbert, Colonel Chester to As∣sist them in their Wars, who were the Commanders of so many Regiments of Men; And after them the War increa∣sing, there were sent over Colonel North, Colonel Cotton, Colonel Candish, and Colonel Norris, and some other persons of an Eminent Name, who for the Honour of the English Nation made there Excellent Demonstrations of their Valour, and Redeemed the Dutch from the Power of those who otherwise would have brought them to a better understanding of their Du∣ties: Great supplyes of monies were sent over to maintain so great a charge: At the last, the Prince of Orange being slain presently after the Death of the Duke Alanson (Brother to Henry the third of France,) who (if the successe had Answered the Expectation) was wisely enough made Duke of Brabant;
the Queen of England sent over unto them Robert Duke of Leicester with great provision both of Men and Mo∣ney, accompanied with diverse of the Nobility and Gentlemen of good ac∣count; And although the said Earle, not long afterwards, returned into England and the affairs of the Hollanders were doubtful untill the fatal Battel at Nieuport, yet Queen Elizabeth of ever Blessed Memory, out of her unspeak∣able goodness to the distressed, and to those that suffered for Religion, did as long as she lived constantly Assist the Hollanders both with Men and Monies; she gave them Hope in Despair, she gave them strength being weak, and and with the Charity of her Princely Hand did support them being fallen; And although the Hollanders do un∣gratefully alledge, that it was a Benefit great enough for the English to Assist them in reason of state, because by so doing they kept out a War from their own Country. It is most certain, that at that time the English had need to fear to Warr at all, but onely for their Cause, and for taking their parts; for
it was for their Cause that the English in the year, One Thousand Five Hun∣dred, and seventy one, had seized upon the sum of Six Hundred Thousand Du∣cats,The Hol∣landers Ob∣jections An∣swered. on the West Coast of England, being the money designed from Spain to the Duke of Alva for the Advance∣ment of the Spanish Interests in the Neatherlands: And although the Hol∣landers do further alledge in their own Excuse, that they were so grateful, as that they offered unto the Queen of England the Soveraignty of the Neather∣lands, which she would not accept, and therefore it was not their fault that she obtained it not; It is in reason truly answered, That the Queen of England, well knowing that she was in danger to draw a perpetual Warr upon her Self, and her Successours, by the accept∣ing of such a Gift to which she had no Right, did wisely refuse their Liberali∣ty; And yet for all that, she continued still to aid them without that charge∣able obligation. The Hollanders do fur∣ther alledge, that the Queen of England had the Cautionary Town of Brill, Flushing, and the other places delivered
into her Hands: It is true she had so, and thereby enjoyed only the Benefit of being at more Expence, both of Men and Money; and let the Reader take notice, that most certain it is, that the Hollander had no sooner made a Truce with the King of Spain, and the Arch-Duke Albertus, but he began presently to set the English at nought, and to take the Bridle out of their Hands; where∣upon immediately insued their Forbid∣ing of the bringing of English cloaths died, and dressed into Holland, and the adjoyning Provinces without ever ma∣king the King of England or his Ambas∣sadour Leiger at the Hague Privy there∣unto. And to make amends for this their Saucy and Insolent Affront,The Impu∣dent Affront of the Hol∣landers to the late Kings of England. in a more High and Peremptory way they de∣meaned themselves to King Iames him∣self; for whereas the Duke of Lennox, as Admiral of Scotland, had by order from the Majesty of King Iames in the year, One Thousand Six Hundred and Sixteen, sent one Master Brown to de∣mand of the Hollanders then fishing up∣on the Coasts of Scotland a certain an∣tient
Duty called, Size Herring, they began to contest with him about it, and after a long Disputation they pay∣ed it, as in former times it had been ac∣customed, but not without some af∣fronting terms; that it was the last time it should be payed. And it is most observable, that the same Gentleman coming the year fol∣lowing with the same Authority and Commandment with one only Ship of His Majesties to demand the Duty a∣foresaid; And with Order, if he were denyed, to take witness of the refusal in writing, and so peaceably depart: He came aboard one of their Ships, and no sooner demanded the aforesaid Du∣ty, but by the Master of the Ship, he was denyed it, who as plainly, as pe∣remptorily told him, That he was com∣manded by the States of Holland not to pay it unto the King of England any more; of which he took witness accord∣ing to his Order from His Majesty. This taking of witness did so startle the Dutch, that before Master Brown had got off to his own Ship, the Master of another Ship of Holland came pre∣sently
aboard that Ship in which he was, who demanding of Master Brown, his Name, he replyed that his Name was Brown; Why then, quoth he, if you be the Man, I have Order to Arrest you, and to carry you into Holland; whereof Master Brown gave notice to the Master of the Kings Ship, requi∣ring him to advertise His Majesty of this Insolency; and Master Brown was in this manner Arrested, and carried away Prisoner into Holland, where for a while he was detained. I do read, that much about the same time one Master Archibald Ranthin a Scotch Gen∣tleman, and residing at Stockholme in Sweden, where he sollicited for the pay∣ment of some sums of monies due to the English Merchants, there was at the same time in the same City one Van∣dyke, who lying there as an Agent for the States of Holland,Vide Obser∣vations con∣cerning the Affairs of Holland. said unto some Principal Persons of the Swedes, that they need not be so hasty in paying any Monies to the Subjects of the King of England, or to give them any high Re∣spect, because the said Kings promises were not to be believed, nor his threat∣nings
to be feared; for which Vile and Insolent Speeches being afterwards challenged by Master Archibald Ran∣thin, he had no better Excuse, then to say, he was drunk when he did speak those words (for deny them he could not;) and by this means his Excuse of playing the Beast, did excuse him for playing the Man. Now from these Insolent Affronts by words, let us proceed, and come to what they have done by deeds, where in the first place, we may observe their rude demeanour to our English Nation in the Northern Seas on the Coasts of Greenland, and those parts, about the Fishing for Whales, and the Commo∣dity of Train Oyle, where violently they have offered unpardonable abuses by giving of blows, and chasing the En∣glish-men away, and by procuring much loss and prejudice unto them; their Pride of Heart was so high, that it would not give their Reason leave to apprehend that Fishing at Sea is free for every Man where it is not upon the Coast of any Country, unto which the Dominion of the Sea belongeth by an∣tient Prerogative.
And yet all this is but inconsiderable in regard of their usage of our Nation in the East-Indies, where in open Ho∣stility they have as fiercely set upon them, as if they had been most mortal Enemies, having in several Encoun∣ters slain many of our Men, and sunk sundry of our Ships; And when they had taken our Men Prisoners, they would use them in the sight of the In∣dians, in such a Contemptible and Dis∣dainfull manner, as if at their own Home, and in the Country of the But∣ter-Boxes; the English in respect of them were but a sordid and a slavish Nation, and the Hollanders were either their Superiours, and might use them at their own pleasure, or the English were so spiritless, or so unpowerfull, that they durst not be revenged, but quietly must put up all the Affronts and Injuries which they received at their Hands. And as for the Commodious Trade which the English have had in Muscovy for above these fourscore years, and some other Countries that lye upon the East and North, which the Hollanders
have now gotten quite out of their Hands,Their spoy∣ling of our Trade in Muscovy, and other Countries of the East. to the great Grief and Prejudice of many Merchants in this City: What shall we say, seeing not long since they have been acting the same again with our English Merchants in Turkey: And it is a practise so usual with them to spoyle the Trade of other Nations, that when they cannot find any Occa∣sion to do it, they will show a Nature so wretchedly Barbarous, that they will not stick to spoyle one another; so great is their Covetous and most In∣satiable desire of Gain: And yet all this proceedeth out of an ignoble and a sordid spirit, for let them arrive to what Wealth they will, they can never be the Masters of a Noble, and a Ge∣nerous Disposition. Had it not been for their Neighbou∣ring Nation of the English, they had never arrived to the liberty of a Free State, yet so ungratefull have they been, that they have endeavoured to forget all the Obligations of Humani∣ty, and have digged into the very Bowels of those who did preserve them. Many Examples of this may be
instanced; I shall look a little back a∣gain on the cruelty of their proceed∣ings in the East Indies, before their stu∣died malice at Amboyna, and afterwards of their horrid Massacre at Amboyna it self. As their Avarice was unsatisfied, so their quarrels with the English were many; Covetousness and Ambition not long enduring a Co-partner. Queen Elizabeth being translated in∣to a better World, and the Hollanders (to be the more ready to set the English at nought,) having by the Assistance of Sir Ralph Winwood got the Cautio∣nary Towns into their own Possession, they presently began to appear in their true Colours, by adding Cruelty to Hypocrisie, and Avarice to Insolence; The English that were Trafficking in the East Indies being sensible thereof, and finding no redress, preferred their Just Complaints to the Majesty of King Iames, on which ensued the first Trea∣ty in the year, One thousand six hun∣dred and thirteen, in the City of Lon∣don, and after that, another Treaty in the year, One thousand six hundred and fifteen, at the Hague in Holland,
which taking up much time to little effect; there was a third Treaty which was held in London in the year, One thousand six hundred and nineteen, touching the Differences between the English and Dutch in the East Indies, in which a full and solemn Composition was made, and a fair Order set as to the Management of the Affairs for the Time to come; but so restless were the Spirits of the Hollanders to make them∣selves the entire Masters of the profits of the Indies, that having driven from thence the Spaniards and Portugals, they at the last determined with themselves by subtility as well as strength, to force from thence the English also; In pur∣suance whereof, some four years be∣fore the most Barbarous Proceedings at Amboyna, they endeavoured to dis∣possess the English of the Islands of Ban∣da, Polleroone, and some others, famous for the Rich Spices of Nutmeggs, Cloves and Mace; and understanding by one of their Spies, that Captain Courtupe was gone from his House and Factory in Polleroon to one of the adjacent Clove-Islands, called Lantore,
they did shoot him as he was in his Boat upon his Return, and being de∣manded the cause of so unexpected a Murther, they sent word to the English that they should take no more care for him, for he was dead, and he should be buried; Although this was a great dis∣couragement to the English that were there in their Occupation of Merchan∣dize, yet some were afterwards so ven∣turous, as to endeavour a settlement at Lantore, amongst whom was Master Woofe a Factor there,Vide, Ma∣ster Woofes Discourse on the Tyranny of the Dutch upon the En∣glish. pa. 10. and the Authour from whom we have received this Discourse, and one who being taken not long afterwards by the Dutch, in∣dured almost as much misery, as a Created Nature can be capable of, which the ensuing Narration will make manifest: He writeth of the Dutch, That as often as he thinketh of their unparralleld and barbarous Cruelty, he can∣not but admire, and praise that Great God who so much strengthened and inabled him to undergoe those heavy Tortures and Pres∣sures which were loaden on him by those bloody Patrons of Cruelty. The Dutch had no sooner notice that the English had
raised a Factory in the Island of Lan∣tore, but sayling from Iaccatra, now by them called Batavia, they importuned the Natives to surrender the Island in∣to their Hands and Custody; Some∣times they thought to have prevailed upon them with perswasions, and fair words fayling, they would make use of foul, and threaten them with Sword and Fire; And although they were not ignorant that a Treaty had been held in London, and a full Composition for the ending of all Controversies, yet they informed the Natives, that al∣though they had given the Island to the King of England, they need not to fear to disclaim what they had done by ma∣king them to become Masters of it,Ibid pa. 12, and 13. for they said they could, nay, and they would interpose between all Dangers and them, and assured them that they had Strength enough to defend them against all the Nations in the World; They only desired of them a Seizin of security to enjoy the profit of their Fruits on those Terms which the En∣glish had conditioned with them. The Natives of the Island being hereat in a
great perplexity, and doubting amongst themselves what might be the event, if they refused a proffer, which carried an Obligation of so much safety with it, did Address themselves unto the English, and desired of them to be in∣formed, how they might secure them∣selves from that deceitfull and cruell Generation of men, whose perswasi∣ons were as plausible, as their threat∣nings terrible; And understanding by the English, that they expected a consi∣derable Recruit both of Men and Ships to come suddainly unto them, they were resolved to be Couragious, and not to yield to their treacherous per∣swasions: In this apprehension, the Dutch not long afterwards desired of them after some flattering Asseverati∣ons to give them, A Seizin of Security; At which the Natives pretending Ig∣norance, told them, that they knew not the signification of the Word, and seemed to be extraordinarily curious to understand the Interpretation of it; At which the Dutch with as much Mirth as Confidence, having whispered amongst themselves, did after some delibera∣tion
tell them, That they must bring a great Brass Bason filled with Earth, and plant in the middle of it the Branch of a Nutmeg-Tree laden with Fruit, and cause it to be presented to them by the Chiefest Men of their Islands; And this they told them was the Sence and Interpretation of the word. The Natives having received this Answer, did suddainly acquaint the English with it, to whom they were more inclined then to the Dutch, as all the rest of those Nations are; and ha∣ving advised with one another, they told the Dutch in plain terms, that their Demands were Impossibilities, for should they recede from what already they had done, both God and Man might justly brand them with Infide∣lity, for to their apprehensions, they seemed to un-interest the English of what was their proper Title, which by no means they could be induced to consent unto; At which the Hollanders being much incensed, told them, that since no perswasions would allure them to a knowledge of their own Happi∣ness,
they must expect to find the re∣ward of their obstinacy, for rather then be frustrated of their Intentions, they were resolved to make a Bonefire of the Island, they did advise them, not to trust to the English strength which could stand in no Competition with theirs, for they owned them but as a Handfull in comparison with them∣selves. This Dispute being frustrated, and the Dutch finding the Natives of the Island to be intractable to their De∣mands, they prepared a great Vessel which they had with Battery Guns, with a resolution forthwith to Assault the Town; This great Ship was called the Float, and besides her, they had in a readiness other less Ships that lay a∣gainst that part of the Town, where the English Factory was; Having for two dayes planted their Batteries, and play∣ed against the Town, but more especi∣ally against that place where by the Flaggs and Pendants of the Red Cross, they found the English Factory to be, and finding the Event not to answer the expectation, on the first of March,
(five dayes after their first Assault) they found the means to Land their Men, and Enter the Town; they had placed in their Front a considerable number of the Nation of Japan being all armed with Guns like unto Culli∣vers with barrels of Brass, who making way for the Hollanders, did such Execu∣tion,Ibidem pa. 18. that the Out-cry in the Streets was terrible, Men, Women, and Chil∣dren being cut in pieces, and the Town a Shamble of dead persons. The Eng∣lish being but few in number were ta∣ken Prisoners, and saluted with the Titles of base Rogues and Villains, they were bound unto posts by Hands and Neck, they were bruised, beaten and buffeted, they were afterwards ty'd back to back, and so the stronger was inforced to carry the weaker to one of the Dutch Ships, called the Holland, where they were laden with Irons, and tormented with variety of Tortures; Insomuch,Ibidem pa. 20. that the Author of this Dis∣course, who was a Factor at Lantore, and one of those who did partake in these grievous torments, hath these ex∣press words; For my own part, I seriously
protest, that if it pleased God, the great Determiner of all things, to command me to yield my Body to be Tortured, I had rather by far choose the Turkish then the Dutch Tormentors, for their Cruelties I am confi∣dent are far transcending the Turkish Ex∣tremities, and I know their viperous incli∣nations to the English will not be consuma∣ted untill their compleated Iury shall surfeit it self into an unparalleld Revenge. Many dayes were they thus Tor∣mented, and some of them being most sadly troubled with the Flux, these un∣mercifull people would not let them out of their Bolts, but compelled them to use the same Dish to receive their Excrements, in which all of them con∣stantly did eat their meat; these things were unsavoury indeed, but these In∣humane Creatures would not be sen∣sible of their Calamities; At the last it pleased God, that some English Ships sayling that way, and being informed what the Dutch had acted at Lantore, one of the Captains, Captain Fitz Herbert by Name, sent to the Dutch to Demand the Prisoners, who being conveyed to his Ship, he wondered at their un∣sightly
complexion, and the lameness of their bodies, the one being eaten in with Irons, and the other quite decay∣ed for want of eating; By his means their Release being obtained, they had liberty to depart to the Island of Polle∣roon. And here they continued not long, but the Dutch who would have no Fa∣ctories in the East-Indies but their own, did again seize upon them, and having plundred them to their very shirts, they Imprisoned them in a Castle which was in that Island, where they continued enduring many Extremities until the noise of their sufferings, and durance being again divulged, they were again relieved by some English ships that passed that way; And the reason why they used so much cruelty to the English, being demanded, no o∣ther thing being to be laid unto their Charge, but onely their buying of Cloves upon the Islands; the Dutch at their Discharge told the Prisoners, that in regard they were the first English-Men that ever they took buying of Cloves upon that Island, they were
willing to spare their lives, but if for the time to come, they should ever take an English-Man in the same na∣ture, they would not be so favourable as to hang him, but they would whip him to Death; And speaking in con∣tempt of the English, they have been heard to speak words to this Effect: Alas! what is England if compared to our High and Mighty States of the Nea∣therlands, we know that we have Ships enough to block up all the English, and if any difference should arise, the proof should manifest the truth, for they would show us what the Dutch Men were, if ever they could find opportu∣nity to put their Designs in Agitation; The Authour of this Discourse to show the candour of his spirit,Ibidem pa. 42. in the repre∣sentation of so sad a subject; I protest, saith he, and shall be ready at any time to justifie it with my life, that I have not ex∣pressed any thing but what is really corres∣pondent to the truth, and I am very much as∣tured, that there be those now living, who can testifie with me the many Tragical De∣signs, that have not onely been acted on us, but upon many others.
Neither was this their Arrogancy, and Cruelty expressed to the English a∣lone, but the Inhabitants of China have had the sad Experience of it, it being the common practise of the Dutch to seize upon their Vessels as they came down to Traffique in those Rivers, and and having plundered their ships, to drown the Men. In the year, One thousand six hun∣dred and seventeen, the Inhabitants of the Banda Islands, made a Present to Captain Ball, at that time President of Bantam, and besought him that he would so far be pleased to compas∣sionate their sorrowfull conditions, as to accept of their Present, and receive their Islands into his Jurisdiction, by defending them from the Tyrannies of the intruding and unmerciful Hollan∣ders, whose practise it was, daily to ex∣act upon them, and to murther them at their pleasures, and to abuse their Wives whiles themselves were infor∣ced to look on, and not dare in the least to resist them; Moreover their Drun∣kenness was such, and so habitual to them, that it was almost a wonder to
see them sober; they told him, if he were pleased to accept of what they proffered, he should very much oblige them, and no wayes prejudice himself nor the English Nation. To which Captain Ball replyed, that he much la∣mented their misfortune, but in regard that they had made a surrender of their Island already to the Dutch, it was not consonant to Reason, that he should take away that by force from the Dutch, which they had obtained by favour, he therefore desired them to cease their importunity; to which the Ban∣daneses replyed, that if that were all the obstacle, it might easily be removed, for they generally protested, they ne∣ver gave the least consent to the Hol∣landers to possess their Islands, but that they wilfully and violently entred up∣on them without their consent, and though that oftentimes they had desi∣red, yet the Dutch had never received any assurance of submission from them, the unworthiness of their Acti∣ons having deterred the Bandaneses from condescending to their perswasi∣ons. Hereupon Captain Ball became
willing to receive them into his Pro∣tection to the great comfort of the af∣flicted Indians. Captain Ball continued President not long after, for Captain Iourdan Ar∣rived with Sir Thomas Dailes Fleet, in the year, 1618. at what time Captain Ball was commanded home; howso∣ever the Cruelties against the poor Ban∣deneses in many of their Islands still continued, and grew to such a height, that they hardly could be parallel'd, and for no other cause, but that their Affections were so generally, and so fervently expressed towards the Eng∣lish. Mention hath already been made of the taking of the Chief Town in the Island of Lantore, and how barbarously the Dutch dealt with the English Factory there; It is worthy your observation, that the greatest part of the Inhabitants flying for their safety into the highest Hills of that Island, were courted by the Dutch to submit, and surrender themselves, and that they should be received into favour and protection; Hereupon they came down in great
numbers, and four hundred of the Chiefest of them being picked out a∣mongst the rest, they were transported into an adjacent Island, where having washed themselves, accordingly as they had been advised, they were all invited to a great dinner, and intreated with many welcomes; they told them, they were heartily sorry that they should so much distrust them as to fly to the English, there being none that desired their safety and welfare more then themselves, and that they would befriend them against all Opposers; they desired that all differences what∣soever may be absolutely composed, and all former injuries forgotten; to which purpose, to give them a mani∣festation of their Respects, they had transported them thither, and provi∣ded what for the present could be had for their Refreshment. The Poor In∣habitants being much surprized at this unusual manner of Respect, having fed heartily, and expressed their thankful∣ness, prepared for their departure; but the Dutch leading them to a window, told them, that they must walk to yon∣der
Green, and take their Farewell of them there, for there their Executi∣oners stood in a readiness to dispatch them; whereat the poor Bandeneses be∣ing much amazed, cryed out, O Apetow! which is in English, O what is this! Im∣mediately they were hurried away to the place of Execution, and by the Ia∣pan Slaves, the cruel Instruments of the Hollanders, they were cut asunder in the middle alive, and their divided Quarters were sent some of them to Lantore, some of them to Polleroon, and other Islands belonging unto Banda. In the same year, they put to Death the Chiefest of the Inhabitants of Polle∣roon, amongst whom was the Chief Priest of that Island, in whose side the Dutch having cut a hole, they com∣manded that Gun-powder should be put into it, which at that instant being set on fire, by a new way of torment they deprived him of his life. It is very observable, that although these Inhabitants of Polleroon were un∣der the English Protection, yet their numbers being inconsiderable to the strength of the Dutch, the English durst
not contradict them; So that these poor people were not only murdered before their faces; but the English per∣ceiving how Tyrannical withall the Dutch were, and how incroaching upon them, and what were their cruelties which they practised at Amboyna, of which more in its due place; in the year, One thousand six hundred and twenty two,The English abandoned the Banda Islands, and the reason of it. they abandoned the Banda Islands which the Dutch have ever since possessed, and do still wrongfully and unjustly enjoy, not permitting the En∣lish to have any Commerce with them. And in this place I shall not forget to give you the memorable account of the innumerable Shoales of Mackerell which was the Chiefest thing that sup∣ported those Islands, they came always in their season in great Multitudes, and if at any time they appeared not so numerous, they were sure to have arrived within the limits of two or three dayes, and in far greater abun∣dance then usually before; but after that the English had left those Islands, they did forsake them also, as places polluted with Blood, and Avarice, or
as if they would come to no Coasts, but where Humanity and Probity, or at least where the English had their Re∣sidence. Vide, The Dutch Ty∣ranny, pag. 64.Much about the same time, Cap∣tain Iourdan sayling from Bantham with two Ships, the one called the Sampson, the other the Hound, to the great Islands of Burnew, he discovered three or four Dutch Ships standing in for the same Port, and being confident that they in∣tended no good to him, he gave order to prepare for the Encounter, fully re∣solving to fight it out to the last Man, rather then to yield himself to the un∣merciful hands of his Insulting and Ap∣proaching Enemies; the Dutch sum∣moned the English to deliver the Ships upon fair Quarter, but Captain Iourdan a well complexioned Man, who had a great heart in a little body, absolutely refused to yield upon any Condition whatsoever. The Dutch pretending to be unwilling to shed blood, called out to the English, and told them, that they knew very well that little Cap∣tain Iourdan was there, and desired them to perswade him to Parley with
them; Captain Iourdan being inform∣ed of it, refused to have any conference with them; whereupon they desired that he would but show himself upon the Quarter Deck, that by a fair com∣plyance they might stop the effusion of blood, which otherwise must come to pass; Whereupon Captain Iourdan (thinking that to speak with them could not much prejudice him) did show himself on the Quarter Deck, & after the exchange of some few words, told them, that he knew the Justice of his Cause, and the Injustice of Theirs, and was resolved to fight it out: The Hollander alledging that their strength was far greater then his, and it was ra∣ther Desparateness then true Valour to fight upon such a Disadvantage; it prevailed nothing at all with Captain Iourdan, who told them, he questioned not his own strength, but was resolved to fight it out, and to leave the suc∣cess unto God. The Dutch finding him intractable to their Demands, did hold him still in Discourse, until a Musquet Bullet from one of their ships laid him dead upon the Deck, as he was in Par∣ley
with them: At that very instant of time, whether by Treachery, or by Accident it is uncertain, a part of our other English Ship called the Hound, was blown up, and many of our men mor∣tally hurt; the Amazement was so great, that the English were inforced to yield to the mercy of their Enemies, who having taken them, did cause them to be laden with bolts, and did not allow them so much favour as to the Heathen, for they were permitted to walk up and down with a chain of Iron, which is far more easie then to lye in bolts of Iron. Thus may we observe, what injury and wrong we have all along sustained by the Dutch, who have got many of those Islands where now they have seated themselves by cruelty and blood-shed, and by murthering the English and their Friends; These in∣deed are sad Relations, and though dis∣mall in themselves, they are but the Prologues to the Tragedy at Amboyna. Amboyna is an Island lying near unto Seran, fruitful of Cloves, for the buying and gathering whereof the English
Company had for their parts planted five Factories, the Chiefest whereof was at the Town of Amboyna; but the Hollanders who had already dispossessed them of their residence at Polleroon, and at Lantore, had a labouring desire to heave them out also at Amboyna, and at Banda, several complaints and discon∣tents did every day arise, which were transferred to Iaccatra in the Island of Iava Major to the Council of Defence of both Nations there residing, who also not agreeing in points of differ∣ence did send them over into Europe to be decided by both Companies here, or if they could not agree amongst themselves, they should then be deter∣mined by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords the States General according to the Article of the Treaty in the year One thousand six hundred and nine∣teen, which although it was then Arti∣cled and Agreed upon by both Nations, yet the Ambition and Avarice of the Dutch, would not admit of so delibe∣rate a course, but with rash hands would of themselves cut their way to their own ends, and use neither delay
nor conscience where gain or profit did appear. The English Factories at Am∣boyna began to be rich, and were a great eye-sore unto them who could not in∣dure that any should Trassick there but themselves; On the eleventh therefore of February, in the year, One thousand six hundred and twenty two, a Iaponer who served the Dutch as a Soul∣dier was apprehended upon suspition of Treason, and put to the Torture, the pretense was for asking the Sentinel, what was the strength of the Castle? The Extremity of the Torture was such, that it prompted him to confess whatsoever he perceived they would have him to say, which was, that him∣self, and sundry others of his Country∣men there had contrived the taking of the Castle; Upon this confession (which made a great noyse amongst the Dutch, and administred them a sub∣ject upon which to act, even according to their own desires) divers other La∣poners were examined and tortured; This Examination continued four dayes, during which time, diverse En∣glish-Men that belonged to the Factory,
had every day their ingress into the Ca∣stle, and egress from it, they heard of the torturing of the Japoners, and of the crime laid to their charge, never drea∣ming of the bait that was prepared for themselves: at the same time there was Prisoner in the Castle one Abel Price, an English Man, for threatning in a drunken humour to set a Dutch Mans house on fire: The Dutch being glad they had such an Instrument to work on in their Custody, they showed him some of the Japoners whom most grie∣vously they had Tortured, and told him, they had confessed that the English had combined with them for the taking of the Castle; whereupon having put him also to the Torture, they enforced him to confess whatsoever they desired of him; Immediately upon this, Cap∣tain Towerson and the rest of the English that were in Amboyna, were sent for to the Governour of the Castle: They in obedience to the command, did all of them repair unto him, one man ex∣cepted, that was left to keep the Fa∣ctory; The Governour told Captain Towerson, that he and many other of the
English Nation were Accused of a Con∣spiracy to surprize the Castle, and were to remain under Custody untill a further Tryal; instantly they attach∣ed the person that was left at home in the Factory, and the Merchandize of the English Company was taken into the Dutch Custody by Inventory; All their Chests, Boxes, Books, Writings, and whatsoever was of any Value in the English House were seized on, Cap∣tain Towerson was committed to his Chamber, having a Guard of Dutch Souldiers; Emanuel Thomson, one of the Chiefest of the Factors, was kept Pri∣soner in the Castle, seven others, viz. John Beaumont, Edward Collins, William Webber, Ephraim Ramsey, Timothy John∣son, John Fardo, and William Brown were sent aboard the Ships of the Hollanders then in Harbour, some to one ship, some to another, and all made fast in Irons: The rest of the English that were in the other Factories in the same Island were apprehended; Samuel Col∣son, John Clark, George Sharrock were found in the Factory at Hitto, and Ed∣ward Collins, William Webber, and John
Sadler in the Factory at Larica, who were all brought Prisoners to Amboyna. John Powel, John Weatheral, and Thomas Ladbrook were apprehended at Cambello, and Iohn Beaumont, William Griggs, and Ephraim Ramsey at Loho, and brought in Irons to Amboyna on the 20th. day of February. In the mean time the Governour and the Fiscal intend to lose no oppor∣tunity, in the prosecution of the fine Plot that was contrived; Iohn Beaumont, and Timothy Iohnson are sent for from aboard the Unicorn; Being come into the Castle, Beaumont was left with a Guard in the Hall, and Iohnson was ta∣ken into the place of Torture, where by and by to the great grief and astonish∣ment of his heart and understanding, Beaumont heard him to make a la∣mentable Out-cry, and then to be si∣lent for a little while, and not long af∣terwards to be as loud in his hideous complaints, if not louder then before; After this Torture Abel Price the Chy∣rurgion, who was first of all wracked, was brought in to accuse him; But Iohnsons heart being as stout as it was
innocent, and not confessing any thing, he was remanded to the Torture again, where Beaumont heard him to roar, and cease from roaring, and then to roar out again, enough to soften the hardest stones into compassion; Having been a whole hour in this Purgatory of Fire and Water, they brought him forth wet all over, and burned in severall places of his body, and so laid aside in a by-place in the Hall, with a Souldier to watch him that he should speak to no man. After him Emanuel Tompson was examined in a room adjoyning to that where Iohnson had been Tortured, where being an hour and a half in his Examination, and his Torment, he was carried another way, and passed not through the Hall, where Beaumont attended, and every hour expected the dreadfull summons; At the last, Beau∣mont was called in, and with deep pro∣testations denying what was propound∣ed to him, he was made fast to the Rack, and the cloath being tyed about his Neck, and two men with Jarrs of Water in their hands being ready to pour it on his head, the Governour
commanded that he should be taken down again, saying, that he would for∣bear him a day or two longer, because he was an Old Man. The next day being Sunday, Robert Brown was called in, and being on the Rack, and the Torment of Water gi∣ven him, he confessed all as the Fiscal asked. After him was Edward Collins called in, whose Hand and Feet being fastned to the Rack, he prayed to be re∣spited, saying, he would confess all; But being let down, with great Oaths and Execrations he protested his inno∣cency as before, yet told them, that be∣cause he knew that by Torture, they would make him to confess any thing, though never so contrary to the Truth, they should do him a great favour to tell him what they would have him to confess, and he would acknowledge it to avoid the torture; At which the Fis∣cal being angry, he was hoysted up a∣gain, and the Torment of Water being given him, he was not able to endure it, but prayed to be let down again to his Confession, After which having deliberated a little with himself, he
confessed he had a hand in the Plot for the surprisal of the Castle, and being demanded of the Fiscal, whether Cap∣tain Towerson were not an Associate in the Conspiracy; He Answered, No; Whereupon the Fiscal told him, that he lied, for said he, Did not he call all of you of the English Factories unto him, and tell you, that the daily Af∣fronts and Abuses of the Dutch had put a Plot into his head, and that he want∣ed nothing but your Consent and Se∣crecy? A Dutch Merchant standing by said; And did not you all swear upon the Bible to be secret to him? Collins with great Protestations replyed, that he knew nothing at all of it: Being then delivered again into the hands of the Executioner, the sense of the late Torture so prevailed upon him, that he confessed all to be true which they had spoken. Being thus respited, he was demanded, whether the President of the English at Iaccatra, or Master Welden Agent for the English at Banda were not privy to the business; to which he a∣gain answered, No; Afterwards the Fiscal propounded other Interrogato∣ries
unto him, and perceiving that Col∣lins knew not what answer to make, he helped him to confess those things which he thought most conducing to his purpose. Next to him was Samuel Colson brought in, who for fear of the pain when he saw Edward Collins come forth, chose rather to deny nothing that was propounded to him then undergo the Torments of Fire and Water in the Attestation of his Innocence: But Iohn Clark was of another Resolution, he was no sooner brought in by the Soul∣diers and Officers, but by and by he was heard to make a hideous and a la∣mentable complaint, which continued for the space of two hours, during which time as they abated or increased his Torments, he diminished or dou∣bled his cryes at the Sense and horrour of his Sufferings. The two Elements of Fire and Water, although merciles of themselves, by making their Fury more deliberate, were here instructed to be more unmercifull, whiles accu∣rate cruelty did torment even inven∣tion it self to torment the Innocent;
The Rack ordained for the confession of great and grievous Offences is of∣tentimes but an unfaithfull discoverer of them; for whiles men are put to those torments, which Flesh and Blood are not able to endure, they confess those crimes which their Flesh and Blood were no wayes accessary to. Two hours was this poor Man under the torment of Fire and Water, yet confessed not any thing, at which his Tormentors being amazed, they did cut off his hair, thinking belike, that the strength of his Resolution lay in his hair, when indeed it lay in the Justice of his Cause, and the Innocence of his Conscience. Afterwards they hoysed him up again, and with lighted candles they did burn him in the bottom of his feet, untill the moisture that dropped from them did put out the candles, yet even then they applyed fresh lights unto him; They burnt him also in the elbows, and in the palms of his hands, and so horridly under his arm-pits, that his Inwards might evidently be seen; At the last, when they percei∣ved that he could make no handsome
Confession, they led him along with questions of particular circumstances which they had fra∣med of themselves; And being wearied and overcome with Torments, he at last, according to their own wishes, made Answer to whatso∣ever they demanded of him. Being then re∣leased from his Martyrdom, they sent him out by four Negroes, who carried him between them to a Dungeon, where he lay five dayes without any Chyrurgian to dress his wounds, untill his flesh being putrified great Maggots creeped and dropped from him in a most loathsom, and noy∣some manner. In the like manner, the rest were all Exami∣ned, but none of them were so heavily Tortu∣red, for some of them to avoid the Torment, made suddain Confessions, others at the first or second drenching with the water, Answered to all the Interrogatories of the Fiscal. Captain Towerson himself being reserved amongst the last, untill the Torments of those that were Ex∣amined before him might Rack out something from them that might Evidence against Him, was brought into the Court, where these youn∣kers of Holland, like another Council of Reho∣boam sate in Judgement upon Him, he deeply did protest his Innocence, to Encounter which they produced the Persons and Confessions of
Samuel Colson, William Griggs, and John Fardo, Samuel Colson being told, that unless he would make good his former Confession against Cap∣tain Towerson, he should be commanded again to the Torture of Fire and Water, did coldly and faintly re-affirm what before he said, and so was dismissed; the other two being brought face to face before Captain Towerson, he charged them, as they would Answer it at the dreadful Day of Judgement to speak nothing but the truth, at which both of them trembled down upon their knees, and besought him for GOD'S sake to for∣give them, they openly acknowledged that that whatsoever they formerly had confessed was most false, and spoken only to avoid the Torment; Upon these words the Fiscal, and the rest of this High Court of Justice did com∣mand them again to the Torture, which they would not endure, but affirmed their former Confession to be true. I do find this Torment was so terrible to Flesh and Blood, that it even startled the Courage of Captain Towerson himself, who either to avoid the horrour of the Torment, or the infamy of it, confessed some words which the Factor of Cam∣bello in the Isle of Seran, Master John Weatherall should speak, who being sent for, and Exami∣ned on the day following, the Captain was
brought forth to justifie what before he had con∣fessed, who desiring Mr. Weatheral to speak the truth, and nothing but the truth as God should put it into his heart; Mr. Weatheral was in a great Amazement, and being ordered to under∣go the torture of water, and told, that if water would not make him to confess, fire should; he prayed them to tell him what he should say, or to write down what they themselves pleased, and he would subscribe unto it; but being told that he needed no Tutor, and that they would make him to confess of himself, having hoysted him up four several times, and perceived that he knew not what to say, they did read unto him the Confession of the other Men that had been Examined, and asked him from point to point, and he observing very well which way the world did go, and that his Life must become a Sacrifice to the Rage and Rapine of the Dutch, did still answer yea unto all. On the 26 of February old stile, the Prisoners were all brought into the great Hall of the Ca∣stle to be prepared for death, by their Ministers, being solemnly Condemned the day before, some few of them found mercy, and had their lives saved; Captain Towerson, was kept apart from the rest, and so was Mr. Emanuel Tomson, but some of them by writing found the oppor∣tunity
to leave a Testimony of their Innocence behind, amongst whom was Captain Towerson, who in the end of a Bill or Obligation wrote these words; Firmed by the Firm of me Gabriel Towerson now appointed to die, guiltless of any thing that can justly be laid unto my Charge, God for∣give them their guilt and receive me into his Mercy. Amen. William Griggs, also did leave a paper to be sent to Mr. Welden Agent at Banda, which came af∣terwards into his hands; the Tenour of it was in these Words: We whose Names are here specified, John Beau∣mont, William Griggs, Abel Price, Robert Brown, Prisoners in the Rotterdam, being appre∣hended for Conspiracy for blowing up the Castle of Amboyna, being adjudged to Death, were through Torment constrained to speak that which we never meaned or imagined, the which we take upon our deaths and salvation, for they tortured us with that extreame torture of Fire and Water, that Flesh and Blood could no wayes endure it; and this we take upon our deaths, that they have put us to death being guiltless of our Accusation: So therefore we desire that those who im∣ployed us may understand these wrongs, and that you your selves would have a Care to look to your selves, for their intent was to have brought you in also; They
asked concerning you, and if we had been Tortured on that particular, we must have confessed you also. And so Farewell. Master Welden having perused this Letter, and observed the bloody and inveterate Malice of the Dutch against the English, did not long af∣terwards leave the Island of Banda to the Dutch, and the English Factories in the Mollucco Islands did follow his Example. Samuel Colson, also in a Psalter which he had, did leave this Attestation of his Innocence. The Japoners were taken and brought to Exami∣nation, and being most Tyrannously Tortured were as∣ked if the English had any hand in their Plot, which Torture made them say, yea; Immediately Mr. Tom∣son, Mr. Johnson, Master Collins, and John Clark were Examined, and burned under the Arms, Arm-Pits, the Hands, and Soals of the Feet, with an∣other most miserable Torment, of Water; some of them being almost Tortured to Death, were forced to confess that which they never knew, by reason of the great Torment, which Flesh and Blood is not able to endure. Then were the rest of the English Men called, (amongst whom I was one,) being wished to confess, or else I must go to Torment; they withall cau∣sed Master Johnson, who was before Tormented, to witness against me, or otherwise he should be Tormented
again, which rather than he would endure, he said, he would confess whatsoever they would have him: And for my part, I also must confess that which I never knew, or else I must go to Torment, which rather than I would suffer, I confessed that, which (as I shall be sa∣ved before Almighty God) is not True, being forced to it for fear of Torment. At the last they did make us to bear witness against Captain Towerson, and by the same violence for fear of most Cruel Torments, they made Captain Towerson▪ to confess the like, for which we all must dye. As I hope to have pardon for my sins, I know no more than the Child unborn of this Business, for which we all must suffer. Written with my own hand the first of March, Stilo novo. Samuel Colson. Other Attestations there are to the same ef∣fect, which for brevities sake I omit, I shall only insert, that all things being prepared for Execution, the Condemned were brought forth out of the Hall, and passed along by the Cham∣ber where the Acquitted and Pardoned were, who stood in the door to give and take the fare∣well of their Country-Men that were then go∣ing to the Execution; Making a little stay for this purpose, they intreated and charged those that were saved to bear witness to their Friends in England of their Innocence, and that they died not like Traytors, but as so many Innocents
meerly murthered by the Hollanders, whom they prayed to God to forgive their blood-thirsti∣ness, and to have mercy on their own souls. It is observable, that being brought into the Yard, their Sentence was there read unto them from a Gallery, and from thence they were car∣ried to the place of Execution, together with Nine Japons and one Portugal, whom their spe∣cious malice to give a better pretense unto their cruelty, had contrived to be of the same Confederacy: They did not go the ordinary and short way, but round about through the Town, and were guarded with five Companies of Souldiers, Dutch and Amboyners, and the Na∣tives of the Island flocked together to behold this Triumph of the Dutch over the Innocent and Condemned English. And it is not to be forgotten, that, on the day before, the English de∣sired of the Dutch Ministers, that they might all receive the Sacrament, as a Seal of the forgive∣ness of their sins; which by no means would be granted them; whereupon Master Colson said unto them, You declare unto us the danger of dissimulation in this Case; But tell us, if we suffer guiltless, being true believers in Christ Jesus, what shall our Reward be? The Minister Answered, By how much the more Innocent you are, by so much the Glorious shall be your
Resurrection; Upon that word Mr. Colson im∣braced him, and gave him his Purse and such money as was in it, saying, Sir, God bless you, tell the Governour I freely forgive him, and intreat you to exhort him to repent of his Bloody Tragedy wrought up∣on us poor Innocent Souls, and proceeding in his Discourse, he spake with a loud voice in these words, According to my Innocence in this Treason▪ so O Lord pardon all the rest of my sins, and if I be guilty thereof more or less, let me never be partaker of thy Heavenly Joyes; At which words every one of the rest cryed out, Amen for me, Amen for me, good Lord. This being said, each of them know∣ing whom they had Accused, addressed them∣selves one unto another, begging forgiveness for their false Accusations, being wrested from them either by the pain, or by the fear of Tor∣ture; whereupon they all of them freely did forgive one another, for none of them had been so falsely Accused, but he himself had as falsely Accused another. In particular George Sharrock kneeled down to John Clark and craved forgive∣ness at his hands, who freely did forgive him, Saying, How shall I look to be forgiven of God, if I should not forgive you, having my self so falsely Ac∣cused Captain Towerson and Others. This Master Colson had contrived a Prayer in writing which he did read to his Fellows the night before their
Suffering, and now also at the place of Execu∣tion, where having devoutly pronounced the same, he let the Paper fall from his hand, which the Governour caused to be brought unto him, and he kept it. The Names of those that Suf∣fered were, Cap. Gabriel Towerson, Samuel Colson, Emanuel Tomson, Timothy Iohnson, Iohn Weatheral, Iohn Clark, William Griggs, Iohn Fardo, Abel Price, Robert Brown. They had prepared a Cloath of black Velvet for Captain Towerson's Body to fall upon, after his Head had been severed from it, which be∣ing stained, and defaced with his Blood, they sent to the English Company and put it on their Account. They sent the Mourning Cloath to the English, but the Scarlet of their Blood-Guil∣tiness they retained to themselves. Having thus given you an Account of the Barbarous Cruelty of the Dutch in the East-In∣dies, it is now high time to look to their Pro∣ceedings in the West-Indies, where we shall find their Cruelty as unparallel'd as their Avarice. The Perfidiousness and Ingratitude of the Hollanders to the English may be traced all along ever since the shook of their Obedience to the
King of Spain even unto this present time. But we will pass from their Hypocrisie and Cruelty practised abroad, and look on their Actions at Home; How, almost but the very other day, did they labour to impose upon His Majesty, and Sir George Downing, his Envoy Extraordinary, by delivering Papers to many Publick Ministers of State at the Hague, as if His Majesty and his En∣voy had been prepossessed with them, when they had not the least notice of any such thing? How have they seemed to be most desirous of Peace, when at the same time they have omit∣ted no dayes, even those appropriated for Holy Duties to drive on their preparations for War? How have they stood in defence of their vio∣lent and unjust Proceedings, and instead of re∣dressing their Injuries, they have increased them? About three years since, they concluded a Treaty with the English, and having ingaged, that better order should for the future be obser∣ved, they have since heaped new Injuries to the utter over-throw of all the Trade of His Maje∣sties Subjects in the East and West-Indies; Wit∣ness our Ships, the Hope-well, the Leopard, and some others in the East-Indies; And the Charles, the James, the Mary, the Sampson, the Hopefull Adventure, the Speed-well on the Coast of Africa▪ And after all these Acts of the Highest Injustice,
and their utmost endeavours for driving on a War, they would make the world believe that his Majesty is the first undertaker of it, who from his own Mouth to their Ambassadour in Eng∣land, and by his Injunctions to Sir George Down∣ing his Minister at the Hague hath given so ma∣ny, and such Remarkable Demonstrations to the contrary: What can they say to the Me∣morial of the complaints which Sir George Down∣ing exhibited to the States General, importing that in the space of a very few years almost twenty English Ships with their whole Lading, to a very great value, have been seized upon in a horrible manner, and the Men in them most Barbarously, and most Inhumanely Treated, being put into stinking and nasty Dungeons, and Holes at Castel. del. Mina, where they did lye bedded and bathed in their own Excre∣ments, having nothing but bread and water gi∣ven them, and not enough of that neither to su∣stain Nature, [their Bodies being under the Fury of Exquisite and Horrid Torments;] and when any of them died, the living and the dead were left together, and such as out-lived that cruelty, were exposed in the woods to famine, or to the mercy of wild beasts in those deso∣late Countries, or to be carried into Captivity by the Natives by which means several Hun∣dreds
of His Majesties Good Subjects have pe∣rished and been destroyed; And unto this hour, notwithstanding all sollicitations and endea∣vous of his Majesties Envoy, not one penny of Satisfaction can be had, either for the loss of the Ships, or the Persons concerned in any of them, but to the contrary they have ever since hin∣dred, and shot at the English Ships that have An∣chored by them, and have took by force all the Boats of those Natives who have endeavoured to come aboard them, and have seized also up∣on the English Boats that would go on shore, and deprive them of all manner of Provision, nor suffer so much as fresh water to be brought un∣to them; And to give a further proof of their Confidence and Ambition, they have published a Declaration, wherein they assume and chal∣lenge to themselves a Right to that whole Coast, to the Exclusion of all other Nations; Al∣though, by Order from His Majesty, Sir George Downing, both in Publick Conferences with the Deputies of the Lords General, as also with those of Holland in particular, hath at large Re∣monstrated His Majesties Right, and Interest in some part therein, having by his Subjects bought the Ground of the King of that Country for a valuable Consideration, and built a Facto∣ry thereon; And yet for all this, some of the
Dutch-West-India Company by Fraud and Trea∣chery have got into the place, and no hopes of the Restitution of it, but they are resolved to keep by violence what they have gained by de∣ceit. Moreover, what can they say for them∣felves concerning their stirring up the King of Fantin by rewards and sums of Money, and sup∣plying him with all manner of Arms and Am∣munition for the surprizing of his Majesties Castle at Cormantin in the West-Indies; so that an absolute Necessity is imposed upon his Ma∣jesty, and his Subjects, either of losing all that have been actually taken from them, and aban∣doning for ever that Trade it self, or of beta∣king themselves to some other wayes for their Relief; And what Hope is there of their Resto∣ring back any place which they have once ta∣ken. The Island of Polleroon hath been upon surrendring back to the English, ever since the year, 1622. at which, by a Solemn and Particu∣lar Treaty it was promised to be done; and a∣gain, by another Treaty in the year, 1654. and by an Order of the States General, and the East Company of that Nation in the year, 1661. and again by another Treaty in the year follow∣ing; And yet to this day, there is not the least mention of any thing Restored; And should any Man then think it strange, that His Majesty
after so long an experience of the perversness and deceitfulness of that Nation should suffer his Subjects to repossess themselves of those places, which by the hand of Violence and Op∣pression they have forced from them. Now as for the business of the New-Neather∣lands, as they are pleased to call it, It hath been abundantly else-where prov'd, that the said Land is part of the Possession of His Majesties Sub∣jects of New England, which their Charter plain∣ly and precisely expresseth: And those few Dutch that have lived there heretofore, have li∣ved there meerly upon the connivence and suf∣ferance of the English, which hath been permit∣ted to them so to do, so long as they demeaned themselves peaceably and quietly; but the Dutch not contenting themselves therewith, have in∣croached more and more upon the English, im∣posing their Laws and Customs, and endeavou∣ring to raise Contributions and Excises on them, and in those places where the Dutch had never been, whereupon they have been neces∣sitated several times to send Souldiers for the repulsing of them: Since the Conclusion of the late Treaty the Dutch have made new Incursions upon the English, and given them many new Provocations, and have ordained a Tryal of Causes amongst themselves, and a proceeding
by course of Arms, without any appealing into Europe at all. And can any Prince then think it strange, especially the King of France, if His Majesty of England suffer his Subjects to rescue themselves from such continual Vexations, see∣ing the King of France himself hath been plea∣sed this year, to Order his Subjects to re-possess themselves by force of Arms of a certain place called Cayen, which the French alledge hath been wrongfully kept from them by the West-India-Company of the Neatherlanders. As for the busi∣ness of Captain Holmes at Capo Verde in Guiney, a complaint was no sooner made to His Majesty, this last year, in the Moneth of June; But His Majesty immediately returned Answer, that he had given no Order nor Direction therein to Captain Holmes, and that upon his Return, he would examine the business, and see that Right should be done according to the nature of the Offence: In order whereunto, when Cap∣tain Holmes was returned, His Majesty sent him to the Tower, and being afterwards allowed the liberty of some few dayes to follow his particu∣lar business, he was again Commanded back, where being strictly and throughly Examined touching the management of the whole matter complained of, he so fully, and so clearly upon every point did acquit himself, that His Maje∣sty
was graciously pleased to grant him his In∣largement, and to restore him again to His Princely Favour. We might in the next place alledge De Ruyters leaving the English Fleet, when with United Councils and Forces, they were to Act against their Common Enemies, the Pyrats and Barbarians in the Midland-Seas. We may alledge their Instructions this last year given to Van Campen, at what time His Majesty entertained not any open War against them; which Instructions was in down-right Terms, To Attach and Fall upon His Majesties Subjects in the West-Indies, and to carve out their own Satisfaction and Reparation.Vide, The Discourse of Sir George Downing. And if this be not Affront enough to provoke His Majesty to maintain the Justice of His Cause by the Force of Armes, we leave to the World, and to His Enemies themselves to Judge, and surely that Sword is to be feared, which striketh with the Hand of Justice. FINIS. The LOYAL MARTYROLOGY, Or brief Catalogues and Characters of the most Eminent Persons who suffered for their Con∣science during the late times of Rebellion; either by Death, Imprison∣ment, Banishment, or Sequestration; Together with those who were Slain in the Kings Service. As also, Dregs of Treachery: With the Ca∣talogue and Characters of those Regicides, &c. And are to be sold by Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Brittain, 1665.
