C4978 18579214 108084
ENGLAND's Improvements. In Two PARTS. In the Former is Discoursed, How the Kingdom of ENGLAND May be Improved, In STRENGTH, EMPLOYMENT, WEALTH, TRADE. By En∣creasing The Value of Lands, The Revenues of the Crown and Church, Peace and Amity with Forein Nations, Without any Charge to the Subject. In the Latter is Discoursed, How the Navigation of ENGLAND May be Increased, And the Soveraignty of the British Seas more Secured to the Crown of England. TREATISE III. By ROGER COKE. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Brome, at the Gun at the West-end of St. Pauls. 1675.
To his Highness The most Illustrious, Heroick & Highborn PRINCE, RƲPERT Count Palatine of the RHINE, AND Duke of BAVARIA and CUMBERLAND, &c. THe Common Law of England (most eminent Prince) makes great difference between the Inheritance of the Crown of England and the E∣states of Subjects: for the next Heir, though of half Bloud, shall inherit the Crown. Thus did Queen Mary inherit the Crown from Edward, though but of half Bloud to him: So did Queen Eliza∣beth from Queen Mary, yet was but of half Bloud to her. But no Subject of half Bloud shall inherit any Estate; but for want of an Heir of the whole Bloud, it shall Escheat to the King, or the Lord upon whom the Estate was held. And as the Common Law makes this difference in Bloud, so does it in the Inheritance of the Crown, and men born out of the Allegeance of the King. For no person born out of the Allegeance of the King, shall Inherit any Estate from any English Subject: but the Heir of the Crown shall Inherit
wheresoever he be born. Thus did King James (your Highness Grandfather, and the happy Ʋniter of the British Monarchy) Inherit the Crown of Eng∣land, yet was not born in the Allegeance of it. The King of England, though born a Forreigner, may purchase and hold an Estate in England; but no other Forreigner; though born of Subjects to the Crown of England, shall take an Estate by Purchase, but the King shall have it. The Reason of these differences I do not understand: For as the Law secures the Inheritance of the Crown, so doth it make a bar between this Nation and all others who desire to become Subject to it. But if there were anciently any reason for this Law, it is now ceased; since the peopling the American Plantations, the repeopling Ireland, the Wars, and late Great Plague, have lost and consumed so many people out of Eng∣land. As the Common Law debars the Nation of any future supply for all these Losses, so some Acts of Parliament have put the Nation into a Hostile con∣dition with the World. There was a Law made in the 5 of Rich. 2. c. 3. which forbid the English to carry forth, or bring in Merchandize, but in Ships of the King's Allegeance, and the Marriners, or more part, Subjects: but this Law was so intolerable, that the next year, viz. 6 Rich. 2. c. 8. the English had liberty to Trade in Forrein Vessels, where others could not be had. But this Law thus qualified by the Authority of the 1 Eliz. cap. 13. caused great displeasure between Forrein Princes and the Kings of this Realm, and the Merchants were sore grieved and damaged thereby. Therefore for the encrease
and Continuation of Amity, both the Laws made by Rich. 2. were Repealed, and the English had liberty given them to carry out and bring in Merchandize in any Vessels, paying Strangers Duties; but if there were War, or any restraint of English Ships, then to pay but ordinary Duties. But the English had liberty given them at all times to import Masts, Raff, Pitch and Tar, in any Vessels, paying ordinary Duties; the former being for the preservation of the Timber of England, the latter for the benefit of the Navy. But the Rump-Parliament designing a War against the Dutch, without any consideration of this Law, or of the Statute of 14 Rich. 2. c. 6. whereby the Merchants of England in any Realm might freight forrein Ships to that Realm, if the Ships of that Realm would not take reasonable Gains; or of the 35 Eliz. 11. for the preservation of the Timber of England; or of the 17 Car. 1. for Importation of Gunpowder, which themselves had made; (all which yet stand in force, and are unrepealed.) made a Thing, Intituled, An Act for encouragement and en∣crease of Shipping and Navigation, commonly called The Act of Navigation, whereby the English are forbid to import any forrein Goods unless in English-built Ships, whether they can get them or not, and Sailed by ¾ English, upon penalty of confis∣cation of Goods, Guns, Tackle, Apparel, and Am∣munition. A War they designed, and a War they had with the Dutch, which lasted longer than their Government; and so they left the Nation engaged in a War abroad, and the Laws at War at home. But though the Nation be freed from the Tyranny
of the Rump, yet it still labours under the miserable effects of this Law; for with some few alterations it twice received the Royal Stamp, viz. 12 Car. 2. 18. and 13 Car. 2. 14. As the terrour of this Law has put this Nation into a Hostile condition with the World, so hath it suspended all those good Laws made by Queen Elizabeth and King Charles the first, for preservation of the Timber of England, and the maintenance and support of the Navy Roy∣al, whereby the Nation may be best secured from the danger of a forrein War. Your Highness at your leisure may read how many other ways the Trade and Navigation of England have suffered under this Law, as well in the former Treatises, as these which now implore your Highness Protection. In this condition then was the Nation involved in a War with the Dutch, under the Glory and Conduct of your Highness (who though descended from the Royal Extraction of the first Monarch of Great Bri∣tain, yet is your Highness a Forreigner born, and so not regarded by these Laws, and therefore had lit∣tle reason to expose your self to such imminent dan∣ger in defence of them, if your innate affection for the Honour and Happiness of the English Nation did not otherways transcend all obstacles against it.) The Nation, as well as his Majesty, by a universal suf∣frage, was satisfied with the necessity of your Conduct for the preservation of it. I wish it were as well understood, that these Laws, and some other Grants and Ʋsages, have made the Dutch so powerful to oppose it, and the Nation in no better condition to prescribe Laws to them. But Sir, the vertue of your Noble minde, is not
circumscribed within the Pale of Military Disci∣pline, but extends to an Integrity and Judgement in Counsel, equal to your Valour and Conduct in War. And the Nation stands not in less need of your Counsel at home, than it did of your Conduct abroad: for as the Case stands, though God should have Crowned your Conduct with such desired success, as to have obtained an entire Victory against the Dutch; yet could not this Nation, (the Trade and Navigation of it being restrained to Companies, and English-built Ships and Marriners) but o∣thers, reap the benefit from it. Your Highness is doubly qualified; so as the Nation may be happy in your Counsel, as your Highness is a Privy-Councellor to the King, and a Member of the House of Peers. And if the Nation by your Counsel shall partake of those benefits which the Enemies of it enjoy, this will be so much more an Eternal Monument of your never-dying Fame, by how much the difficulty of overcoming these Laws, and the prejudice of the times is more. To the vertues of your Noble Minde, is added your being born free from Subjection to these Laws; and so with more indifference your Highness may better judge between them and the Interest of the Nation, than another born in Subjection, and who by a long habit hath wonted to them. Ʋnder all these Attributes of your Highness Ex∣cellencies, do these Humble Treatises implore your Protection, of all which they stand in need: For though one end designed by them is to procure Peace abroad, yet will they have a War at home with three sorts of people: the Ignorant, Prejudiced, and Par∣tial.
I do not (God knows) sully your High Name with Flattery, or private designe of mine own: nor could a less excitation than the Honour and Happiness of the Nation have invited me to make this Humble Address to your Highness. With a sincere Heart then (so well as I am able) from cau∣ses before known, from which all the Consequences are inferred, I submit these Treatises to your Cen∣sure. If I fail in my end, yet I do not understand how otherways I could have so well attain'd it; and therefore hope it will in some measure plead a Pardon for this Presumption in (Most Eminent Prince) Your Highness most devoted and obedient Servant, ROGER. COKE.
APOLOGY TO THE READER. ALL men naturally desire to know. By Knowledge here, I do not mean Intellective, Memorative, or Sen∣sitive, (which God without any Humane Assistance endues man with, and can never be learned or taught) but Ratio∣nal (which never comes to pass but by Education, Experi∣ence, and Conversation.) And although all men natural∣ly thus desire to know, and to be accounted Rational men; yet rarely do they submit to those Anxieties of minde which ever attend it. From whence it comes to pass, that Books Rationally written are restrained to few Readers, and are commonly more beholden to subsequent Ages, than the pre∣sent Times. Whereas Books which please theheat and humour of the Times, though they contain neither Truth, Learning, or Rea∣son, are not therefore least esteemed, but Swarms of them are admired, and devoured in an instant; but these, like the E∣phemeris (which, if you believe Hist. An. L. 5. c. 19. Aristotle, is be gotten of the Fire too) do die, and are forgot∣ten in a day. As all Learning and Reasoning is ever attended by care∣ful consideration and Method; so Ignorance neglecting these, abounds in Pride and Suspition, in both which she claims such a prerogative, that ignorant men so much more
censure and suspect, by how much less they understand: They Triumph as Victorious in every Censure, and think they have prevented some designe by each suspition. So that I do not question but if Socrates out of the Dust could be∣hold this present Age, he would perceive a generation of men, who less knowing, seem more wise than the Atheni∣ans did in his time. Since the publishing of the Reasons of the decay of the Strength, Wealth, and Trade of England, and the encrease of the Dutch Trade, though I never heard or read one Proposition confuted, or the method of Reasoning contradicted; yet from several parts I have been censured, for designing to un∣dermine the Church, and Academical Learning, and to in∣troduce a Commonwealth, which is only capable of ad∣mitting Freedom of Trade and Religion, without which Trade can never be encreased. I will add one more (which in some sense is true) that I may be accounted a busie-body in medling with other mens business, which is a signe I have little of mine own; and that I contend against many opponents, and have but few or none who will second me, or know I endeavour theirs or the Nations Interest; and therefore none but Fools will assert such an Interest. For the last, I say, it may be the Fate of many hundred Younger Brothers, as well as my self, that even Conscience, in the late times, would not permit them to take any Em∣ployment; and it was too late to begin when the King was restored: yet it may be none but one in my Condition could have spent so much time in enquiring into the present State of England, compared with other Countries, as I have done: for mens business generally relates to their Individual per∣sons; which is either Mechanical, where from unknown Causes, men by a habit in doing things get a Livelyhood; or by Learning in some Art or Science, to excel other men in Fortune and Reputation. These they so intend, that their whole life is too little to answer the necessities of the one, or the desires of the other: so that it is necessary for a third person to undertake a business of this nature. For my endeavouring to undermine Academical Learn∣ing,
I say, it is as free for me to oppose it, as it is for any man to defend it, and observe the method of Reasoning I pro∣pound. And I say moreover, that if any asserter of Aristotle, or the Logick taught in our Universities, can give any one instance, that from the Authority or Learning of either, ever any progress of Learning in any Art of Science was propa∣gated in any one Proposition, I will yield the Cause. I acknowledg I was by Gods Grace baptized a Christian in the Church of England, and have ever been so constant an observer of it, that in all the persecutions of it, I never Communicated with any other: and I say, that all men are more obliged, in Conscience as well as Gratitude, to give God publick praises with other men, who alike partake publick Benefits with them, than to give him private thanks for the private benefits they enjoy; for these are contained in the publick. So that if Religion be a Communion of giv∣ing God publick Thanks (which must be prescribed by pub∣lick Authority) by many men, for publick benefits they all alike enjoy; as, that they are alike Christians, and are protected by the King and Laws in their Lives and Fortunes; which differing in divers places, it is necessary the Religion or publick Worship of God should be different. But though all Nations be not of the same Religion, yet all Nations subsist in Society and Commerce; and as every man stands in need of being supplied by another, so does e∣very Country. To restrain therefore the Society and Com∣merce of Nations to those of the same Religion, is to violate an Institution of God in the conservation of Humane Socie∣ty, and to deny the benefits which places mutually receive from one another. Every man when he comes into any for∣rein Government, becomes subject to the Government of it, not to the Religion of it; and though God often punished the Jews for not observing the Religion and Ceremonies he pre∣scribed them, yet for conservation of Society and Commerce does he often pronounce great Judgments to them, if they op∣pressed the Stranger in the Land, though perhaps in less than paying Strangers duties. Nor did I ever read of any forrein people, who in any Country where they enjoyed a Religion
they were bred in, did make any disturbance upon the account of it. But suppose (which I do not grant) that liberty of Reli∣gion to the Natives of a place be necessary for inlarging Trade and Commerce; yet is this more tolerable in a Monarchy than a Commonwealth: For Monarchy is one and Indivi∣sible, and therefore diversities or Factions in Religion can make no Confusions in it; whereas Popular Governments be∣ing compounded of many, are easily obnoxious to both. Nor is it necessary that Trade and Commerce should only flourish in Popular Governments; but within such places where it is more free, and men are more secure, their Interests may be better advanced. This is evident, in that the State of Genoua imposing 16 per Cent. upon goods imported, made the Trade uneasie; and the Duke of Florence (who is as ab∣solute a Prince as any with whom the Pope has to do) ta∣king the advantage of this Imposition by the States of Genoua, did make Legorne a free Port, whereby it is now, under a Prince, become the most flourishing place of Trade within the Streights. And I have it from a good hand, that when the French King, about seven years since, made Marseilles a free Port, the Jews in Legorne considering that Marseilles was a better Harbour, and France a nobler Country for Trade than Italy, resolved to leave Legorn, and establish themselves at Marseilles. The Duke of Florence hereupon made an Edict, That in case any Christian bought a Jews house, it should be forfeit; and this kept the Jews constant to Legorne; where as in England if a Jew buys a house, it is forfeit to the King. I now desire my Reader to consider me in manifold re∣spects, and to bear with the Imperfections, which I, or it may be any other man may be subject to in a work of much less moment than one of this kinde: For the Introduction of any business is more difficult than the progress. And I do not know of any which has made an attempt upon this Subject, in the differing parts of it, before me. I am also assured these Trea∣tises will encounter many difficulties and discouragements. Difficulties in being opposed by the Ignorant and Interessed, (for many particular persons may be interessed to the pub∣lick
Detriment) and these are known, and many; where∣as in contending for the Publique, I know not one who will be my Second. Besides, no man can so establish any Humane Action or Learning, but he must submit the ends he designes to Gods Blessing; which in a Luxurious and Effeminate Age cannot reasonably be expected: yet I am assured no man can justly accuse me of any private designe of mine, or reward I propound to my self, other than if it pleases God now or hereafter to bless me, so that these Trea∣tises or any part of them, may be useful to my Country, or any one in it, I may thank God I have not spent all my life in vain.
PETITIONS. 1. MOney is Treasure. 2. The Admission of forreigners to purchase Lands in England, will add so much money to that of England, as is expended therein. 3. The admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in Eng∣land, will cause so much greater numbers of people in England, as the Purchasers are more. 4. The admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in Eng∣land, will cause so many less numbers of those in other places who may be Enemies of England, as the Purchasers are more. 5. Ʋnwrought Wools are Principles in Woollen Manufa∣ctures. 6. The unwrought Wools of England and Ireland are more than are wrought in Woollen Manufactures in England. 7. Tin and Iron are Principles in the Manufactures of Tin-plates. 8. Lead and Potters Earth are Principles in many sorts of Earthen Manufactures. 9. The Tin and Iron of England, are more than is used in the Manufactures of Tin Plates. 10. The Lead and Potters Earth of England, are more than are used in Manufactures in England. 11. The French and Dutch may have the Wools of Ireland, Lincoln-shire, Kent, Sussex and Hampshire, cheaper than the Wools of Ireland, Derby-shire, Nottingham-shire, and other Midland Countries of England can be had at Colchester and Norwich. 12. The free admission of Forreigners to work Woollen Ma∣nufactures in England, will add so many more Agents therein, as the Forreigners are more.
13. The free admission of Foreigners to work Tin Plates in England, will add so many more Agents in them, as the For∣reigners are more. 14. The free admission of Forreigners to worke Earthen Ware in England, will add so many Agents therein, as the Forreigners are more. 15. Forreigners may work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, with less charge than in France or the United Ne∣therlands, viz. by the height of the Kings Duties upon Salt and Wine, &c. and the height of the Excise upon all sorts of Commodities consumed in the United Netherlands. 16. Forreigners are more safe in working Woollen Manu∣factures in England, than in France or the United Nether∣lands. 18. The free admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, will cause so many more peo∣ple in England, as the Forreigners are more. 19. Employment of people is a mean to encrease Trade. 20. The free admission of Forreigners to instruct the Natives of England in Woollen and other Manufactures, may more in∣struct the Natives of England. 21. The free permission of the Natives of England to work Woollen and other Manufactures in the Corporations of Eng∣land, may so much more Employ the Natives of England, as the Permission is more free. 22. Corporations are the most convenient places in England to increase Trade. 23. The free admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, will cause so much greater numbers of people in England, as the Forreigners are more. 24. The Crown, Church, State, Laws, Trade, and Liberties of England are protected by the strength of England. 25. The buying the Woollen and other Manufactures of Eng∣land, is a mean to vend them in forreign Trade. 26. The Pre-emption of Freemen of Corporations, restrains the buying our Woollen and other Manufactures to the Free-men of Corporations. 27. Freedom in Trade, is a mean to vend our Woollen and other Manufactures in forrein Trade.
28. Trading in Companies exclusive to other men, restrains the freedom of Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures to such Companies. 29. Exchanging forrein Goods for our Woollen and other Manufactures, is a mean to have a Domestick Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. 30. The Act of Navigation restrains the Importation of Forreign Goods to English-built Ships, and Sailed by ¾ English, or the Ships and ¾ of the Natives, whether they have Ships or Mariners or not. 31. The Returns of Forreign Commodities, Exchanged for our Woollen and other Manufactures, is a mean to con∣serve a Forreign Trade of our Woollen and other Manufa∣ctures. 32. The Act of Navigation restrains the Importation of Forrein Goods, exchanged for our Woollen and other Manu∣factures, to English-built Ships, and Sailed by ¾ English. 33. The free admission of Forreigners to buy the Wool∣len and other Manufactures of England, will add so much more Money to the Money of England, as is expended there∣in. 34. Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and many other Forrein Commodities, may be made more valuable than the Manufactures exchan∣ged for them, in building Ships and Houses, and in the Ma∣nufactures of Ropes, Nets, Sails, and in Dying our Woollen Manufactures, as they are more and cheaper. 35. The free admission of Forreigners to exchange Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and many other Forreign Commodities, for our Wool∣len and other Manufactures, may make those more and cheaper in England. 36. Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and many other forrein Commodities, may be made more valuable by employing our people in Building and Manufactures, than the Money paid for them, as they are more and cheaper.
37. The free Permission of Forreigners to sell Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and many other forrein Commodities in England, may make them more and cheaper. 38. Less Treasure will be expended in Norway-timber, Pitch, Tar, forrein Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and all other forrein Commodities, if they be cheaper vended in England. 39. The free permission of Forreigners to import all forrein Goods, may make them cheaper vended in England. 40. The Importation of Irish Cattle, is a mean whereby the Kingdom of Ireland may hold a Trade with us for our Woollen and other Manufactures. 41. The Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. makes the Importation of Irish Cattle more into England. 41. Goods are Riches. 42. The free admission of Forreigners to import Goods into England, may add so much more Goods to those of England, as the Importation is more free. 43. The Exporting forreign Commodities with our Ma∣nufactures, those of our Plantations, and the Fish caught upon our Coasts, is a mean to encrease the forreign Trade of them. 44. The free Importation of forreign Goods, may so much encrease the Exportation of them, with our Manufa∣ctures, those of our Plantations, and the Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, as the Importation is more free. 45. The free Permission of Forreigners to import forreign Goods into England, will cause so many greater numbers of people in England, as the Forreigners importing Goods are more. 46. The Ports of England are more, better, more conue∣nient and safe, than those of France or the United Nether∣lands. 47. The forreign Trade of forreign Goods with our Woollen
and other Manufactures, is a mean to encrease the forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. 48. The free Importation of forrein Goods into England, may make them so much cheaper, as the Importation is more free. 49. The free Exportation of Money, with our Woollen and other Manufactures, may cause more Money to be Exported in the forreign Trade of them. 50. The Returns of Commodities, Exchanged in For∣reign Trade for our Woollen and other Manufactures, is a mean to encrease the forrein Trade of them. 51. The Returns of forrein Commodities, exchanged for our Woollen and other Manufactures, may be so much more, as the Returns are more free. Common Notions, or Axioms. 1. EVery thing will be so much encreased, as is added to it. 2. Things may be so much cheaper done, as the Principles may be cheaper had. 3. If things may be encreased, they may be en∣creased by more Agents. 4. Things may be so much cheaper done, as done with less charge. 5. Things may be more securely done, where the Agents are more safe in doing them. 6. Things may be so much encreased, as the means are more. 7. Things may be more conveniently done, where the places are more convenient. 8. Things will be so much more secure, as the means of protecting them are encreased.
9. Things will be so much endangered, as the means of doing them are restrained. 10. Any place will be so much enriched, as things are made more valuable than the charge. 11. Things will be so much conserved, as they are less expended. 12. Things may be so much cheaper done, as the means are cheaper. 13. Things may be so much conserved, as the means are encreased. 14. If more be added to more, the whole will be more.
ENGLAND's Improvements. Prop. 1. Theorem 1. THe Admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in England, will so much encrease the Treasure of England, by how much more Money is Expended therein. Act. The Admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in England. Question. Whether it will so much encrease the Treasure of England, &c. I say it will. 1 Ax. 3. For every thing will be so much encreased, as is added to it. 1 Pet. 3. But money is Treasure. 2 Pet. 3. And the Admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in England, will add so much Money to that in Eng∣land, as is expended therein. Therefore it will so much encrease the Treasure of Eng∣land; which was to be demonstrated.
Annot. And we retain the Land still, and so the Gain is clear to the Nation. Mr. Mun in his Excellent Treatise, chap. 4. of English Treasure by Forreign Trade, affirms it to be the onely expedient to encrease the Treasure of the Nation; whereas it is demonstratively apparent, that the Admission of For∣reigners to purchase Lands in England will encrease it, and that more certainly and surely. I say this will more certain∣ly encrease the Treasure of England; for it necessarily so much encreases it, as the Money expended in it does amount to: Whereas sometimes the Merchant loses by Forrain Trade, whereby the Nation, as well as Merchant, loses of the Treasure of the Nation. And in the Purchasing of Land by Forreigners the Nation ventures nothing, and so cannot lose any Treasure or Land by it: whereas oftentimes the Ships and all the Lading is lost in Forrain Trade, to the loss of the Nation, and undoing the Merchant. But the Purchasing Lands by Natives, does not encrease the Treasure of England, but diverts so much Money from carrying on the beneficial Trades of England, as is expended therein; and many other Inconveniencies accrue to the Nation by it, which do largely appear in the Annot. upon the 3d Cor. of the 26 Prop. of the Equal Danger of the Church, State, and Trade of England. Prop. 2. Theorem 2. The Admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in England, will so much encrease the Va∣luable Trades of England, as the Purchasers are more. Act. The Admission of Forreigners to purchase Land in England. Question. Whether it would so much encrease the Valu∣able Trades of England: I say it would.
2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the Effects will be as the Causes are. 2 Pet. 1. But greater numbers of People encrease Trade. 3 Pet. 3. And the Admission of Forreigners to Purchase Lands in England will cause so much greater numbers of people in England, as the Purchasers are more. Therefore it will so much encrease the Valuable Trades of England; which was to be demonstrated. Annot. Greater numbers of People encrease Trade. This is evident, as hath been said, in the Nature of Man, in that every man stands in need of being supplied by another. Every one of these Forreigners, and of their Family, will wear Clothes, Stockings, Shooes, and other necessaries, and furnish their Houses; whereby so much a greater Trade must ensue as the Forreigners are more; and so many poor people employ∣ed by them, who otherways can have no Employment. By the Rule of Contraries then, so many People as leave the Country to encrease other places, so much decreases the Trade of the Country, and encreases it in those other places. And I appeal to any man who hath been conversant in the Country these last twenty years, whether he hath not found this to be so by Experience. Coroll. By the same Reason, the Admission of Forreign∣ers to Purchase Lands in England, will so much en∣crease the Value of the Lands of England, as the Purchasers are more. 6 Pet. 1. For Lands are valuable as the Trade of the place is. Prop. And the Admission of Forreigners to Purchase Lands in England, will so much encrease the valuable Trades of England, as the Purchasers are more.
Annot. As these Forreigners would employ so many more people in supplying their Necessities, as the Forreigners are more; whereby those people would be enabled to pay for what they buy of the Country-Farmor: so would the Forreigners them∣selves eat & drink, whereby the Farmor's Vent would be still encreased, and so the Lands both ways become more Valua∣ble. It is an old saying and true, That Plenty makes Cheap∣ness. Wheresoever therefore that Lands are plentiful in Proportion to the People, there the Lands are Cheap. And wheresoever the people are plentiful in Proportion to the Lands, they are Dear. I may give an instance herein, in Ireland, and the Isle of Ely, and many other places of England, where though the Lands themselves be fruitful, yet by reason of the Thinness of People, and little Trade, they are of little Value. Whereas the Lands of the Pro∣vince of Holland, not so good, by reason of the multitudes of People, and greatness of Trade, were lately at 40 years purchase. Mr. Mun in the 5th Chap. of England's Treasure by Forrain Trade, affirms it to be the onely mean or expe∣dient to improve the Value of the Lands of England: where∣as from the Reasons in this Coroll. the Admission of Forreign∣ers to Purchase Lands in England will more certainly and securely do it, though it be onely upon the account of the encrease of Our Domestick Trade. Thus we see that Lands which lie near places where great Markets and Fayrs are kept, though upon things in our Domestick Trades, are so much more valued, as the Markets and Fayrs are greater. If Lands be only Valuable as the Trade of the places is, It is unreasonable then to have so many Courts of Judica∣ture in reference to the Title and Security of the Lands of England, and none for the Trade of it, whereby they onely become Valuable.
Coroll. 2. By the same reason, the Admission of Forreign∣ers to Purchase Lands in England, will so much encrease the Value of the Revenues of the Church of England, as the Purchasers are more. 7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands are valuable. Cor. 1. And the Admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in England will so much encrease the value of the Lands of England, as the Purchasers are more. Annot. And so would this Admission encrease the Revenues of the Crown, not only in the value of the Crown-Lands, but in the consumption of all Exciseable Commodities; which will be so much more, as the Purchasers are more. Coroll. 3. By the same reason, the Admission of Forreign∣ers to purchase Lands in England, will so much en∣crease the Strength of it, as the Purchasers are more. 4 Pet. 1. For greater numbers of People, encrease Strength. 3 Pet. 3. And the Admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in England, will cause so much greater numbers of People in England, as the Purchasers are more. Annot. The Glory, Majesty, and Grandeur of every Prince, con∣sists not in the greatness of their Territories, but in the
number of their Subjects, and good government of them; but the Subject must first be, before they can be well gover∣ned. From hence it is that the Ʋnited Provinces dare op∣pose two so great Monarchs as the King of Great Britain, and the French King, by Sea and Land, though their Terri∣tories be above three hundred times greater, more Healthful, and better seated for Trade. And I think, that though the Countries of Norway, Finland, Lapland, and Muscovy be above ten thousand fold more; yet the one Province of Hol∣land was more considerable for Strength and Wealth than all of them: for though the numbers of those People be above one thousand fold more than them of Holland, yet by reason of the vastness of those Territories, the people are Thin in proportion to the Lands, and therefore neither for Strength or Commerce scarce useful. By the Admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in England, we Conquer without a War: we make no man miserable, or impose any unwilling subjection upon any man: we run no hazard of uncertainty: we impose no Taxes; and by it we encrease the Treasure and Trade of the Nation, the value of the Lands of the Nation, and of the Revenues of the Crown, and Church, and of the Strength of the Nation. Coroll. 4. By the same reason, the Admission of Forreign∣ers to purchase Lands in England, will so much di∣minish the strength of those who may be Enemies of England, as the Purchasers are more. 5 Pet. 1. For lesser numbers of People, diminish strength. 4 Pet. 3. And the Admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in England, will cause so many less numbers of those who may be Enemies of England, as the Purchasers are more.
Annot. So that the Admission of Forreigners to purchase Lands in England, is doubly beneficial to it; not only in strength∣ning of it, but in diminishing the strength of them who may be the Enemies of it. I believe no man thinks, but if the Progenies of so many Progenitors of English and French as were born in the Ʋnited Netherlands, when they supported them against the Spaniard, were now in England and France, but that England and France would have been much more able to have opposed them, and the Dutch in so much worse a condition to have made War against either. Prop. 3. Theorem 3. Woollen Manufactures may be so much encreas∣ed in England, as the unwrought Wools of Eng∣land and Ireland are more. Subject. Woollen Manufactures. Question. Whether they may be encreased in England, &c. I say they may. 1 Ax. 3. For things may be so much encreased, as the Principles are more than are used. 5 Pet. 3. But unwrought Wools are Principles in Woollen Manufactures. 6 Pet. 3. And the unwrought Wools of England and Ire∣land are more than are used in Woollen-Manufactures in England. Therefore Woollen-Manufactures may be encreased in England. Annot. If we encrease our Woollen-Manufactures in England, these Benefits will accrue to the Nation. First, If one pound
of Wooll worth one shilling made into one piece of Cloath or Stuff, becomes worth ten shillings; then is the Manufacture nine times more valuable to the Nation than the Land on which it is renewed, and ten times more peo∣ple are employed therein than the Shepherds and Clippers of the Wooll are: And this Employment not only at one time of the year, as the Shearing of Sheep is, but always. Secondly, This would be a great comfort and encourage∣ment to the Country Farmer to pay his Rent, and maintain his Family; whereas now the Wools of England not being wrought at home, and so the Farmer not finding a Market at home, becomes undone, and not able to pay his Rent; and if he seeks a Market abroad with it to sustain his Family and pay his Rent, he commits Felony, by the Law made 14 Car. 2. 18. Thirdly, The working the Wools of Ire∣land in England, would be ninefold more beneficial to Eng∣land, than the Wools to Ireland; whereas by Transporting our Wools, other places get so much benefit to our loss. Corollary 1. By the same Reason, the Manufactures of Tin-Plates may be encreased in England. 7 Pet. 3. For Tin and Iron are Principles in the Manu∣factures of Tin-Plates. 9 Pet. 3. And the Tin and Iron of England are more than is used in the Manufactures of Tin-Plates. Annot. If we wrought the Manufactures of Tin in England, the Nation would not only gain so much as the Manufacture becomes more worth than the Principles in Forreign Trade; but we might employ many thousands of poor people, who are and will be a Burthen to the Nation, and also preserve all that Treasure which is expended by buying them of the Dutch and Hamburger.
Coroll. 2. By the same Reason, many sorts of Earthen Ma∣nufactures may be encreased in England. 8 Pet. 3. For Lead and Potters Earth are Principles in many sorts of Earthen Manufactures. 10 Pet. 3. And the Lead and Potters Earth of England are more than are used in Manufactures. Annot. It is almost incredible what sums of Money are yearly sent into Holland, for Earthen-ware, though it be evident they have their Lead and Potters Earth from England; whereby we do as much inrich them, as impoverish our selves by not working them in England. But our Manu∣factures both in Tin and Earthen-ware, are so inconsider∣able in England, that Lead and Tin is Transported, paying the King some Duties; but by reason of the benefits which accrue to the Nation by Woollen-Manufactures, Wooll is totally prohibited to be Transported: whereas if the Ma∣nufactures of Lead and Tin were established in England, the Reason against Exportation of them would be the same as of Wooll. Prop. 4. Problem 1. How the Dutch and French may and do work Woollen-Manufactures, made of the Wools of Ire∣land, and the Eastern and Southern parts of Eng∣land, cheaper than the English at Colchester and Norwich. Agents, Are the Dutch, French, and English.
Question. How the Dutch and French may and do work Woollen Manufactures, &c. cheaper. Construction. By the 11 Pet. 3. the Dutch and French may have Wools from Ireland, the Coast of Lincoln-shire, Kent, Sussex, and Hampshire, cheaper than the Woolls of Ireland, Derby-shire, Nottingham-shire, Lincoln-shire, &c. can be had at Norwich or Colchester, by Water and Land-carriage. I say the Dutch and French may work the Manufactures chea∣per. 2 Ax. 3. For things may be so much cheaper done, as the Principles may be cheaper had. 5 Pet. 3. But Wools are Principles in Woollen Manufa∣ctures. 11 Pet. 3. And the French and Dutch may have the Wools of Ireland and Lincoln-shire, &c. cheaper by Water, than they can be had at Norwich, and Colchester, by Land and Wa∣ter-carriage. Therefore the Dutch and French may work the Manu∣factures cheaper. Annot. Though the smalness of the difference of the Prices of Land and Water-carriage from Ireland and the Midland∣parts of England to Norwich and Colchester, more than the Water-carriage from Ireland, Lincoln-shire, &c. to the Ports of France or the Ʋnited Netherlands seem inconsiderable; yet in the prospect of the consequences of it in reference to the Forrein Trade of them, it is very considerable. For if it be better, as it is, for any Nation to earn one thousand pound more or less by the employment of People, as in the Ʋnited Netherlands, than to have one thousand pound gotten to a Nation, and the People not employed in it, as in Spain. And if two in the hundred charge in any place, more than in another not subject to it, may gain the whole hundred pound, where otherwise they Trade upon equal terms, then the whole hundred pound, as it will be lost to that place, will be gain'd to this.
It is true indeed, if we had a Monopoly of Vending our Manufactures in Forrein Trade, small charges were inconsi∣derable; but now the Swede, Silesians, the Elector Palatine, and other Princes of Germany, have established Woollen Ma∣nufactures in their Countries; and the French, Dutch, and Venetians have enlarged their Forrein Trades of Woollen Manufactures: we are only secure of a Forrein Trade of our Woollen Manufactures, so long as we can supply the World cheaper and better than they can. Having so often given instances in the former and this Treatise, of the Subject, Agent, Act and Question of every Prop. for the future we shall omit repeating them. Coroll. By the same Reason, the English may work Wool∣len Manufactures made of Irish wooll in the We∣stern parts of England and Wales, and also Wool∣len Manufactures made of the Wools of the Mid∣land, Eastern and Southern parts of England, chea∣per than the French or Dutch. 5 Pet. 3. For Wools are Principles in Woollen Manu∣factures. 12 Pet. 3. And the English in the Western parts of Eng∣land and Wales, may have the Woolls of Ireland cheaper than the French or Dutch. 13 Pet. 3. So the English may have the Wools of the Midland, Eastern and Southern parts of England cheaper. Annot. And as they have the Wools cheaper, so may the Wools of Ireland be wrought in the Port-Towns of the West of England and Wales: And the Wools of the Midland, Southern and Eastern parts of England, may be wrought in Port-Towns, or places where the Manufactures without
much Land-carriage of the Wools, and may be Transported to Forrein parts by Water: As if Staples of Woollen-Manu∣factures were erected at Nottingham, Gainsborough, Lincoln, Boston, Stamford, Bedford, Cambridge, Lyn, Oxford or Ab∣bington, Ware or Hartford, Windsor, and Winchester; where∣as the bringing the Wools of Gloucester-shire, Lincoln-shire, Leicester-shire, Oxford-shire, Warwick-shire, Northampton, and Rutlandshire, &c. being by a tedious Land-carriage, and commonly in the depth of Winter, to Colchester and Norwich, the charge by Land is above treble to the Water-carriage from Lincoln-shire to Holland; or from Kent, Sussex, Hampshire, or Dorset-shire into France. This is one Reason, to many more, which makes our people more miserable in working them than the Dutch or French. Prop. 5. Theorem 4. The free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen-Manufactures in England, may encrease them in England. 3 Ax. 3. For if things may be encreased, they may be encreased by more Agents. 3 Prop. 3. But Woollen-Manufactures may be encreased in England. 12 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen-Manufactures in England, will add so many more Agents, as the Forreigners are more. Therefore it may encrease Woollen-Manufactures in England. Annot. By free Admission here, I mean in all places of England where these Manufactures may be most conveniently wrought, and the Wools cheapest bought: and if hereby Forreigners would be invited to work them, these benefits
would (among many others) accrue to the Nation. First, Every Forreigner which improves Woollen-Manufactures tenfold, more or less, above the value of the Wooll in For∣reign Trade, gains so much to the Nation; but if he so in∣struct our Youth, that more be so instructed in any Manufa∣cture, this will be infinitely so much more, as the Youth in∣structed is more. The Walloons whom Edw. 3d invited in∣to England, and taught our English the Mystery of working the Manufactures of Cloath, were very inconsiderable in numbers to those who now work them; so were the Wal∣loons Queen Elizabeth permitted to work in Norwich, Col∣chester, and places thereabout, the Stuffs, Bayes, and Sayes, &c. which are now wrought in them. And if this permission, obtained by Jumps in the Reigns of these two Princes (as prudent as any who ever swayed the English Scepter) had been constantly continued, the Dutch and French would not have supplied so many other places and themselves with Woollen-Manufactures; our Wools, Fullers-Earth, and all things else conducing to the Instruments of Woollen-Ma∣nufactures, being so much cheaper and better here in Eng∣land. As the Improvement of Woollen or any other Manufa∣cture would thus be infinitely beneficial to the Nation, as the Improvement is more; so the losing of Woollen, or a∣ny other Manufacture in England, will be equally mischie∣vous to it. In the years 1636, 37, and 38. when Ecclesi∣astical discipline was so severely exacted, about two hundred Families left the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and plan∣ted themselves at Leyden, Alkmare, and other places of Hol∣land, where they instructed the Dutch in the Woollen-Ma∣nufactures of Norfolk and Suffolk. And I have heard Sir Charles Harbord (a person of great Wisdom and Insight in Forrein as well as the Interest of this Nation) say, that if all the Bishopricks of England were sold, and given to the Nation, it would not neer compensate the loss the Nation sustained thereby.
Coroll. By the same Reason, the free Admission of For∣reigners to work the Manufactures of Tin-Plates, may encrease them in England. 1 Cor. Prop. 3. For the Manufactures of Tin-plates may be encreased in England. 13 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Forreigners to work Tin-plates in England, will add so many more Agents in them, as the Forreigners are more. Annot. If Forreigners by this freedom, or further encourage∣ment, could be invited to work the Manufactures of Tin here in England, the benefits which would redound to the Nation hereby, would be the same as in the increasing our Woollen Manufactures. Herein this difference happened, that those most Excelling Princes Edward 3d and Queen Elizabeth gave encouragement to Forreigners to instruct our Natives in Woollen-Manufactures, but no King of England ever did it to Forreigners in the Manufactures of Tin; whereby though we have Tin in England, in greater aboundance than any other place has, and as I am told the Iron made in England is more temperate and pliable than any other for making Tin-plates, yet to this day we know not how to make one. Coroll. 3. By the same Reason, the free Admission of For∣reigners to work all sorts of Earthen ware, may encrease the Manufactures of them in England. Cor. 2. Prop. 3. For Earthen Manufactures may be en∣creased in England.
14. Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Forreigners to work Earthen Ware in England, will add so many more A∣gents, as the Forreigners are more. Annot. As no Prince ever permitted or gave encouragement to any Forreigner to instruct the Natives in the Manufactures of Tin; so neither have they in the Manufactures of Earthen Ware, though our Lead and Potters-Earth be more plenti∣ful here in England than elsewhere. And the Dutch have little Lead or Potters-Earth for all those incredible quan∣tities of Earthen Ware which they vend here, and in other Countries; and also supply themselves with but what they have from us: So that we are but their Drudges to seek Mines and work them, for their enriching and employment of their people. Nor do we more enrich them hereby, than impoverish our selves; for we pay above sixfold to them for the Manufactures, more than we receive for the Principles. In this Discourse I desire the Improvement of the Manu∣factures which proceed from our own Principles, more than those which proceed from Forrein, as of fine Linnen and Silks, &c. for these Reasons. First, We may cheaper em∣ploy our people on them, than Forreigners can be in other Countries, so much as the Principles are cheaper had here; whereas we must have the Forrein Principles dearer. Second∣ly, We are more secure of our Employments, having the Prin∣ciples in our own power; whereas in cases of War or Interest, it is in the power of other Princes whether our People shall be employed or not in any Manufacture, whose Principles are in their power. Even here in England, though we be at Peace with all the world, yet we permit not our Woolls to be exported to any part of the world: And how mis∣chievous it must be to any place, to have People bred to an Employment, and to want matter to work on, I leave it to o∣thers to judge.
Prop. 6. Theorem 5. Forreigners may cheaper encrease Woollen Ma∣nufactures in England, than France, or the Ʋnited Netherlands. 1 Ax. 3. For things will be so much cheaper done, as done with less charge. 3. Prop. 3. But Forreigners may encrease Woollen Manu∣factures in England. 15 Pet. 3. And Forreigners may work Woollen Manu∣factures in England, with less charge than in France, or the Ʋnited Netherlands. Therefore they may cheaper encrease them. Annot. If Forreigners did cheaper encrease the Woollen Manu∣factures in England, which the Dutch supply Hamburg, Sweden, Poland, Muscovy, Spain, Italy, and Turky with; and which the French supply Spain, Italy, and Turky with; and with which the French and Dutch cloy our Markets here in England; we might then, so far as the Woolls of England and Ireland would permit, not onely cheaper supply all those places which the French and Dutch do, but also so much better, as our Woolls and Fullers-Earth is better in England than in France or the Ʋnited Netherlands: And also conserve all that Treasure in the Nation which is ex∣pended in buying the Dutch Blacks, French Druggets, and other Woollen Manufactures of those Countries. An ingenious Gentleman, not long since, said, that the Dutch supplied Sweden with course Woollen Clothes, for the Souldiery and poor people of Sweden; and that by order of the Councel of Trade there (I wish such a thing might ever be heard of in England) many people attempted without Success, and much loss, to make these Clothes in
Sweden. But about four years since, the Lord Landscroone (of a Merchant made one of the Nobility of Sweden, and a Member of the Council of Trade) propounded the wor∣king these Manufactures in Sweden, in case the Council would represent it to the King when he came to his Majori∣ty as an acceptable service, and that for some time the Council would take of the Manufactures at the same terms the Dutch supplied them. The Council assented to both; and a piece of those Clothes was divided, and the Arms of Sweden and of the Lord Landscroone stamped upon both, that the Goodness of the future Cloath to be made in Swe∣den, might be compar'd with the Dutch. Hereupon Land∣scroone, at his own charges, hires Artificers from England and Holland, who so well plied their business, that last year Sweden was supplied with these Clothes by the work of the Natives, and upon the same terms the Dutch supplied them. And for the future, the Lord Landscroone expects to be a considerable gainer, as he well deserves; I am sure the King∣dom of Sweden will be much more. Prop. 7. Theorem 6. Forreigners may more securely encrease Wool∣len, or any other Manufacture in England, than in France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. 5 Ax. 3. For things may be more securely done, where the Agents are more safe in doing them. 6 Prop. 3. But Forreigners may encrease Woollen Manu∣factures in England. 16 Pet. 3. And Forreigners are more safe in working them in England, than France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. Therefore they may more securely encrease them in Eng∣land.
Annot. After mens Interest, they consult their Security: and here∣in, as Forreigners may encrease Woollen Manufactures chea∣per and better in England than France or the Ʋnited Nether∣lands; so are they more secure in working them than in ei∣ther, or any other place upon the Continent, by reason they are more secure from the Invasion of Forreign Princes and States. It is true indeed, that one great reason of the encrease of the Strength and Trade of the Ʋnited Netherlands, was the secu∣rity men apprehended there, as well as Freedom: For the great Power of the Dutch by Sea, was such as was not to be controuled by any, or all other Princes, except the King of England; and the weakness of the bordering Princes by Land was such, as the States gave Laws to them at plea∣sure. But the terrour of the French Invasion in 1672, has much abated the opinion the World had of their Security in the Ʋnited Netherlands. And now the Marquiss of Brandenburg (the most powerful of all the Princes in Ger∣many) has recovered the Dominion of Wesel, Rees, Emrick, and Orsoy, which Commands the Rhine, and is possessed of Skinkersconce, which Commands the Rhine and Wael, the opinion of this Security is not only much abated, but the Dutch Trade to Germany and other places up and down the Rhine, must be precarious, as the Marquiss pleases. Nor will the Dutch easily free themselves from the Neighbour∣hood of the French in Maestricht, Maseike, and other pla∣ces. Prop. 8. Theorem 7. The free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen or other Manufactures in England, will so much encrease Trade in England, as the For∣reigners are more.
2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the effects will be as the causes are. 4 Pet. 1. But greater numbers of People encrease Trade. 18 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, will cause so many more People in England, as the Forreigners are more. Therefore it will so much encrease Trade in England. Annot. This is evident, as hath been said, in that every one of these must wear Hats, Shooes, Clothes, and many other ne∣cessaries, whereby Trade and Employment of other people would be so much more, as these Forreigners by this free Ad∣mission shall be more. Prop. 9. Theorem 8. The free Admission of Forreigners to instruct the Nation of England in Woollen and other Ma∣nufactures, may so much encrease Trade in England, as the Natives Instructed in those Manufactures are more. 7 Ax. 3. For things may be so much encreased, as the Means are more. 19 Pet. 3. But Employment of People is a mean to en∣crease Trade. 20 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Forreigners to In∣struct the Natives of England in Woollen and other Manu∣factures, may so much employ the Natives, as the Natives instructed are more. Therefore it may so much encrease Trade in England. Annot. So that this Admission of Forreigners to work and in∣struct
the Natives of England in Woollen and other Manu∣factures, doubly encreases Trade in England, viz. In the per∣sons of the Forreigners, but much more by instructing the Natives, whereby they may be enabled better to maintain themselves and Families with all sorts of Conveniencies, than if they were worse employed, or not employed, which is worst of all; for then they become a Charge and Burden to the Nation. The numbers of the Walloons which Edw. the 3d and Queen Eliz. invited and permitted in England, and who first instructed the English in Woollen Manufactures, were very inconsiderable to the numbers of the Natives of Eng∣land who are now employed in them, and by that means only are enabled to provide for themselves and Families, to the en∣crease of Trade to those people from whom they are sup∣plied. So that that saying, That there is but such a Trade in the world, is only true by accident, not necessarily; for many thou∣sands of people might encrease Trade in the world if they had means, which being denied, they cannot do. Corollary. By the same reason, the free admission of the Na∣tives of England to work Woollen and other Ma∣nufactures in Corporations in England, may so much encrease Trade in England, as the Natives so Admitted are more. 19 Pet. 3. For Employment of People is a mean to en∣crease Trade. 21 Pet. 3. And the free admission of the Natives of Eng∣land to work Woollen and other Manufactures in the Cor∣porations of England, may so much more employ the Na∣tives, as the admission is more free.
Annot. If five pounds given with an Apprentice to be instructed in the Mystery of Woollen or any other Manufacture, by which means he afterwards earns Thirty pounds per An∣num, this in twenty years becomes six hundred pounds: therefore if it be better for a Nation to earn six hundred pound, or more or less, by employment of People, than to have six hundred pound more or less given to a Nation, & the people not employed; this five pounds thus paid for binding out such an Apprentice, becomes more valuable to the Nation, than if six hundred pound had been given to the Nation, and the Apprentice not employed. To invite therefore Forreigners to Instruct the Natives of England in Woollen and other Manufactures, and freely to admit them in all places to improve Manufactures, will be a more certain Re∣venue to the Nation, than can be hoped for by the returns of the Spanish Plate-Fleet, where the Fate of Spain depends upon the miscarriage of it. It's believed, above twelve thousand of the King's Scottish Subjects yearly go out of Scotland into Poland, Sweden, Germany, France, Holland, and other places, and never after return into Scotland; whereby the King not only loses the Soveraignty of them, to the diminution of his Grandeur, but those places gain great benefits by them. If therefore five pound binding out of an Apprentice to any Manufa∣cture may be in twenty years five hundred pounds gain to the Nation, the benefit which might accrue to the Nation by imploying them here, in twenty years might be above six Millions; and this supply will be so much more seasona∣ble, by how much the peopling of our American Planta∣tions and the repeopling Ireland, has depopulated the Nation of its Inhabitants. But as the Law against Naturalization permits not For∣reigners to partake equal benefit with the Natives by impro∣ving Manufactures in England, and instructing the Natives in them; So does the priviledges of the Free-men of Corpora∣tions
exclude all the other Natives of England from encreas∣ing Manufactures in them. And the Act of the 5 Eliz. 4. provides, that no person shall take an Apprentice for Woollen Manufactures in any Town Corporate, except such Appren∣tice be his Son, or else that the Father or Mother of such Ap∣prentice have the clear yearly value of forty shillings Inhe∣ritance. Nor shall any person in Market-towns, or Villa∣ges not Corporate, take an Apprentice, or instruct any in Woollen Manufactures, unless he be his Son, or the Parents have the clear yearly value of three pound Inheritance. Consequences, From whence it follows, that the Corporations being poor, and scarce half Inhabited, by not admitting others to supply their number and defects, become daily more poor, and less Inhabited. And the Children of poor people in Villages, by the Act of the 5 Eliz 4. not being permitted to be bound Appren∣tices in Market-Towns and Corporations, in the Art or My∣stery of Woollen Manufactures; and being denied by the Act of 31 Eliz. 7. to erect Cottages: when they become more than the Tenements can receive, or be employed in Husbandry, they necessarily become vagrant, Beggars, Stea∣lars, Canters, or at best, if they forsake not the Nation, to swell the Suburbs of London, already too big, be Hors, Tap∣sters, Drawers, and sellers of Strong waters; and the Corpora∣tions and Market-Towns by reason hereof declining, the Farmor findes less vent for his Commodities, and small or no encouragement to employ poor people in Tilling or Im∣proving his Grounds. And as the Act of the Eliz. 4. has brought all these mischiefs upon Town and Country; so was it a necessary preparative for the Enacting the 43 Eliz. 2. for maintaining Idle and Lazy persons in all the Parishes in England, which have produced the very many Inconve∣niencies complained of in the Annot. upon the 24 and 25 Prop. of the Danger of the Church, State, and Trade of Eng∣land, and their Corollaries.
Prop. 10. Theorem 9. The free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in Corporations, may more conveniently encrease Trade in England. 8 Ax. 3. For things may be more conveniently done, where the places are more convenient. 22 Pet. 3. But the Corporations of England are the most convenient places in England to encrease Trade. 9 Prop. 3. And the free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease Trade in England. Therefore it may more conveniently do it in Corpora∣tions. Coroll. By the same reason, the free permission of the Natives of England to work Woollen and other Ma∣nufactures in Corporations, may more convenient∣ly encrease Trade in England. 22 Pet. 3. For Corporations are the most convenient pla∣ces in England to encrease Trade. Cor. Prop. 10. And the free Permission of the Natives of England to work Woollen and other Manufactures, may encrease Trade in England. Annot. upon this Prop. and Coroll. So as the benefit which would accrue to the Nation by this Admission, would begin at the Corporations, by reason of their Convenience; whereby the people would not only be employed, but the Corporations much more peopled, the Markets more frequented, and better supplied with all
sorts of Provisions, the Houses repair'd, and new ones built. It is said, that about a year before Queen Eliz. planted the Walloons (which could not endure the severity of Alva's Government) in Norwich and Colchester, that it was pro∣pounded in the Council to demolish both those places, as Receptacles of vagrant and Idle persons, which were bur∣thensome to the Nation, and dangerous to the Government: whereas now it is said, that the weekly returns of Colchester for the Woollen Manufactures of that place, amount to neer thirty thousand pound, and of Norwich to near twen∣ty thousand pound. But these Corporations which might be Seminaries for employment of people, to the incredible happiness and en∣riching of themselves and the Nation, by mistaking their own Interest as well as that of the Nation, in insisting upon their Priviledges, are become so poor and unfrequented, that the Governing part have little to do but to Tax one part of the Inhabitants to maintain the other, though the Town-lands, and other Revenues for maintaining them, be ve∣ry considerable. The Tradesmen are generally Retailers, who understand little more, than that more of them would eat the Bread out of one anothers Mouths; and therefore their chief care is to keep out all others. These Elbow-men, as they are Idle, and bred up in no honest Calling, so by their Priviledges they impose what Taxes they please upon the labours of the poor Artificers, (who are the Soul of a Nation) take what they please of them, and at what prizes they please. But then these Lords in their Exempt Juris∣diction put another value upon them to all Forreigners to their Priviledges; so that a Gentleman may buy our own Manufactures in Italy or Turky cheaper than of them: and if ever a Noble or Gentleman gets into their Books, they rarely ever get out, unless they sell Lands to cross their Books; and these are the Honourable Priviledges these Pa∣triots of Corporations are incorporated into.
Prop. 11. Theorem 10. The free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease the value of the Land of England. 2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the Effects will be as the Causes are. 6 Pet. 1. But Lands are valuable as the Trade of the place is. 6 Prop. 3. And the free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease Trade in England. Therefore it may encrease the value of the Lands of Eng∣land. Coroll. 1. By the same reason, the free Admission of the Natives of England to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease the value of the Lands of England. 6 Pet. 1. For Lands are valuable as the Trade of the place is. Coroll. 3. Prop. 10. And the free Admission of the Na∣tives of England to work Wollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease Trade in England. Annot. upon this Prop. and Coroll. So that though the Benefits which the Nation will reap by the free Admission of Forreigners and the Natives of England to work Woollen and other Manufactures, would begin at Corporations, yet would they not end there. For
Lands are onely valuable as the Crop or feeding Cattle on them finde a Market; and therefore no man will Plow, Sow, or seed Cattle, when he cannot hope for a Market; and by consequence, Lands are of little or no value, where the people are few or none; or if the people be poor, they are of a poor value. But both ways, the free Admission of Forreigners and the Natives of England to work Woollen and other Manufactures, will not only encrease the Markets with more people, but also enable them to give the Farmor so much better prices for his Commodities, as their Employ∣ments are better; and therefore the Interest of the King, Nobility, Gentry and others, who are owners of Lands, are so much concerned herein, as the value of their Lands would be hereby improved. Coroll. 2. By the same reason, the free Admission of For∣reigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease the value of the Revenues of the Church. 7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands of England are valuable. Prop. And the free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease the value of the Lands of England. Coroll. 3. By the same reason, the free Admission of the Natives of England to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease the value of the Revenue of the Church of England. 7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands of England are valuable.
Coroll. 1. And the free Admission of the Natives of Eng∣land to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease the value of the Lands of England. Annot. upon the 2d & 3d Corollaries. As this free admission would encrease the value of the Revenues of the Church of England, in reference to the Glebe-Lands, and the Tythes of the Crops renewed upon the Lands in Villages; so would it encrease the value of the Revenues of the Church in Corporations, by how much the places would be better and more built, and inhabited by a richer and better sort of Inhabitants. And as this Ad∣mission may encrease the value of the Revenues of the Church, so it may the Revenues of the Crown, not only in the value of the Lands of the Crown, but in the consumption of Beer, Ale, and all other Exciseable Commodities in Eng∣land; which will be so much more, as the Forreigners by this Admission are more; and may be so much more, as the Na∣tives by this mean may be better enabled to eat and drink more and better. Coroll. 4. By the same reason, the free Admission of For∣reigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease the strength of England. 4 Pet. 1. For greater numbers of People encrease strength. 23 Pet. 3. And the free admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, will cause so much greater numbers of People in England, as the Forreign∣ers are more. Annot. Though Tradesmen and Artificers make not so good and
hardy Souldiers as those who live in the Country, and are of more robust lives, yet I am sure they are better than none: and the late King found by woful experience, that the Compa∣nies made up of the Apprentices and Tradesmen of London, were very good Souldiers; and by good experience found, that both were very serviceable to him. Prop. 12. Theorem 11. The free Admission of Forreigners to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, may more secure the Crown, Church, State, Laws, and Liberties of England. 9 Ax. 3. For things will be more secure, as the means of Protecting them be encreased. 24 Pet. 3. But the Crown, Church, State, Laws, Trade, and Liberties of England are protected by the strength of England. Coroll. And the free admission of Forreigners to work Wollen and other Manufactures in England, may encrease the Strength of England. Therefore it may more secure the Crown, Church, State, Laws, Trade, and Liberties of England. Annot. Though I could not give particular instances hereof in England, yet I am as well assured of the reason in this Pro∣position, as if I could. Sure I am, it was the errour of Chri∣stian Princes, especially of Spain, by first imposing upon their Subjects in their Religion, and neglecting to take care of preserving them in their native Countries; which hath so encreased the Dutch strength by Sea and Land, that they are not only able to protect their own Trade, Church, State, Laws, and Liberties; but to give Laws to very many of the Princes in Christendom, and to most of the Mahumetan
Princes in the East-Indies. Besides, this free admission of Forreigners to work Woollen Manufactures, as it will en∣crease the strength of England so much more as the For∣reigners are more, and so much more secure the Crown, Church, State, Laws, Trade, and Liberties of England; so it will so much weaken those places from whence the For∣reigners come, as the residue will be less able to endanger the Crown, Church, &c. of England. But all these benefits, as they receive their birth by the free admission of Forreigners and the Natives of England to work Woollen and other Manufactures in England, so will they necessarily be strangled in their future growth, if with equal freedom they finde not vent in Forrein Trade; where∣by the Nation may be as well supplied with Forrein Com∣modities, whereof it stands in need; as also other parts of the World enabled to hold Traffique and Commerce with us, by mutual Exchange for our Manufactures, whereof they stand in need. But before we proceed herein, it is requisite to introduce this Proposition and Corollaries; which though more proper for the Treatise of The Danger of the Church, State, and Trade of England, yet not being said there, it is convenient they be inserted here. Prop. 13. Theorem 12. The pre-emption of Freemen of Corporations endangers the vent of Woollen and other Manufa∣ctures in Forrein Trade. 10 Ax. 3. For things will be so much endangered, as the means of doing them is restrained. 25 Pet. 3. But the buying our Woollen and other Ma∣nufactures is a mean to vend them in Forrein Trade. 26 Pet. 3. And the pre-emption of Freemen of Corpora∣tions, restrains the buying our Woollen and other Manufa∣ctures to the Freemen of Corporations. Therefore it endangers the Forrein Trade of them.
Annot. So long as this pre-emption is continued, the best the Na∣tion can hope for, is, that the Inhabitants of the Nation cannot expect any further Employment, than the abilities of these Freemen can arise to. So that it will be impossible to enlarge our Forrein Trades of Woollen and other Manu∣factures, beyond their abilities; or to conserve the Forrein Trades we now enjoy of them, if by War or other accident, their abilities become less. And as the Retailers in Corpo∣rations neither Labour, nor take care in labouring for the production of our Woollen and other Manufactures, but only how to impose upon the labourer and those they sell to: So these pre-emption-men, neither labour, take care in La∣bouring, or to bring the Manufactures of England to their Corporations; yet not only the Artificer must be at their mercy in buying, but all the world in selling. No question then but these men will thrive, though the Nation and all the world suffer. Yet I would be glad to be instructed in any one particular, what need the Nation or World hath of any one of these men: I cannot tell for France, but am confident not one of this kinde of men can be found in the Ʋnited Netherlands. In truth I have often admired, the German Empire and Kingdom of Poland should give protection to Hamburg and Dantzick; for no member of the Empire or Kingdom is permitted to be supplied with Forrein Commodities, or to vend the Commodities of Germany or Poland in either place, but as they buy of, or sell to the Burgers of them; which are Impositions as injurious as can be imposed upon a Conquered Nation. And though Hamburg be otherwise a great Trading place to many places of the world by Navi∣gation, and very considerable in the Groenland-fishing; yet the Town of Dantzick hath little or no Trade, but their pre-emption of all sorts of Forrein Commodities, where∣with the Dutch and other Nations supply them, and they Poland; and by pre-emption of all the Commodities of
Poland, which these Burgers sell again to the Dutch and o∣ther Nations. For my part, as I esteem the City of London to be a great ornament to the Nation, and equally with any man desire the Grandeur and Prosperity of it, so I wish the Grandeur and Prosperity of it were otherwise founded, than by pre-emption of the Commodities of the Nation, and such o∣ther means, whereby the Nation necessarily becomes im∣poverished; which must of necessity be more dangerous to the City, than Country: For the Country may subsist, though poorly, without a Forrein Trade, or a Trade with the City. But if the City loses the Forrein Trade of our Commodities, and if the Country by its poverty cannot en∣tertain a Commerce with the City, the City cannot subsist at all. Whereas, if by reason of the cheapness and freedom of vending our Commodities the Country be enriched, though this pre-emption were taken away, the City being the Head of a Noble Nation, and having the residence of the King's Court, and all the Supream Courts of Judicature, and the best Navigable River of Christendom, or perhaps of the World, to supply it with Forrein Commodities, and to vend our Native; it may hold a much better Trade with the Nation than now it does. Corollary 1. By the same reason, the Trading in Companies exclusive to other men, endangers the Forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. 27 Pet. 3. For freedom in Trade, is a mean to vend our Woollen and other Manufactures in Forrein Trade. 28 Pet. 3. And Trading in Companies, exclusive to o∣ther men, restrains the freedom of Trade of our Woollen Ma∣nufactures to such Companies.
Annot. As the pre-emption of Freemen of Corporations, restrains the Forrein vent of our Woollen and other Manufactures by Forreiners, to what these pre-emption-men please to sell, and at what prices they please to impose: So this Trading in Companies restrains the Forrein vent of our Woollen and other Manufactures by the Natives of England, to what these Companies please, and at what terms they please. So that it will be impossible to encrease the Forrein Trade of our Wollen and other Manufactures beyond their pleasures and abilities; or to conserve the Trade the Nation now has under them, if by War or other accident their abilities be∣come less; whereby the Nation loses all the inestimable bene∣fits which might accrue to it by the Forrein Trade of its Manufactures: and the wretched People, whose Livelyhoods depend upon the Forrein Trade, become undone: for want of Employment. And as by this kinde of Trading we endan∣ger our own Forrein Trade of our Manufactures, so we make room for the Dutch and other industrious Nations, who are not subject to the charges and restrictions we lie under; and fix and establish Trades by these Commodities in other Countries, so much more as we charge or restrain ours. Heretofore, the East-Country-Company, above all others, was the most flourishing, and by Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the first, termed, The Royal Com∣pany; for it supplied Muscovy, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, and Lifeland, with our Woollen Manufactures, and made very advantageous returns by Treasure, (especially Hungaria Duckats) and the Commodities of those Countries, into England. This Trade till King Charles his Reign the Eng∣lish solely enjoyed. About the beginning of King Charles his Reign, the Dutch began to be Interlopers, rather than Traders with the English in it. But it fell out unluckily, that in the years 1636, 37, and 38. about two hundred Fa∣milies of zealous people in Norfolk and Suffolk, who would
not endure the severe Injunctions of Ecclesiastical Discipline; forsook their Habitation; and being bred up in the Woollen Manufactures wherewith those East-Countries were supplied from England, and planted themselves in Holland, they there instructed the Dutch in those Manufactures; so that we returned the Dutch a kindness, with another sort of peo∣ple the Dutch did us. Afterwards the Fatal Civil Wars en∣sued, so that the East-land-company not so fully supplying the East Country as formerly. Consequences. The Dutch found an opportunity of encreasing their Trade of Woollen Manufactures; and the Polanders giving en∣couragement to the Silesians (who bordered upon them, and then only made course Sleses) to work Woollen Manufactures in Poland; and the Wools of Poland being much finer than those of Silefia, these Silesians by themselves, and much more by instructing the Polanders, have in a great measure so sup∣plied Poland with Woollen Manufactures, that whereas before the year 1640, the East-land Company vended yearly 20000 broad Clothes, they now do not 4000: of 60000 Kerseys, now not 5000: of 40000. Doubles, now not 2000. About the middle of King James his Reign, the State of that part of Suffolk and Essex was in so flourishing a con∣dition by reason of the East-land Trade, that Sir Edward Coke, at the request of the Inhabitants of Ipswich, built Ful∣ling Mills at Bourn-Bridge, a mile from Ipswich. When they were built, the Town proffered him 240 l. per Annum, in case he would let them to the Town; but Sir Edward told them, at their request he built them for a publick benefit, and so he would continue them. In his Grandson Sir Edw. Coke's time these Mills fell to 80, 60, and 40 l. per Annum; and of late, in his Son Sir Robert Coke's time, they fell to six pounds per Annum, though the Mills cost above 2000 l. the building: and at last the Rent would not pay the sixth part of the charge of Repairing them; so as now they are thrown up for want of Work.
Nor is the Fate of the Hamburg-Company much better than that of the East land, and from the same cause: for after the Civil Wars broke out here in England, and the City of London zealously affecting the Cause, and preferring it before any Temporal Interest; the Company either out of Zeal, Necessity, or both, did not so well supply Hamburg as be∣fore; which the Dutch took the benefit of, and have so well managed that advantage, that, as before we supplied Jutland, Holstein, and the North and North-west parts of Germany with Woollen Manufactures, we now scarce go halves with the Dutch in that Trade; and this Company is become so poor, that they can hardly maintain their half in it. Even the Turky-Company (which we so much glory in) by their Monopoly of vending our Woollen Manufa∣ctures once in two years to Turky, and exposing the West-Country-Clothiers to bring up their Clothes to London be∣fore they please to buy them, (a charge equal to Turky from Bristol, or other Western parts) and then to send them as far East, and then through the Channel, makes but room for the French, Dutch, and Venetians to establish Trades of Woollen Manufactures in Turky; and so much better, by how much this Company charges and restrains ours. Coroll. 2. By the same reason, the Act of Navigation en∣dangers a Domestick Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. 29. Pet. 3. For Exchanging Forrein Goods for our Woollen and other Manufactures, is a mean to have a Dome∣stick Trade of Woollen and other Manufactures. 30. Pet. 3. And the Act of Navigation restrains the Im∣portation of Forreign Goods to English-built Ships, and sailed by ¾ English, or the Ships and ¾ of the Natives, whe∣ther they have Ships or Marriners or not.
Annot. No creature endewed with less Prescience than Omni∣science, can foresee the mischiefs the Act of Navigation brings upon the Nation by this restriction. For as every man stands of need of being supplied by another, so does every Country. No man shall ever be well supplied by ano∣ther, who will be only supplied by those men who imme∣diately do things he needs, or by his own Servants: for the men who do the things I stand in need of, it may be are out of distance, or have no means to convey them to me. But when things are made convenient for Humane use, they are commonly sent to the most probable place where they may finde a Market, and there men resort to be supplied, and to sell or exchange other things for them. For my part, I am no Merchant, and therefore cannot give those instances which Merchants can hereof, in the Trade of the Nation; yet am I as morally assured of the reason of this Gorollary, as if I could give a Thousand particular instances of it. 1. It was prov'd before a Committee of the House of Commons, the 12 of Feb. 1668. That before the Rump-Parliament contrived the Act of Navigation, the Trade to Norway for Timber, Pitch and Tar, was generally driven by the English in Barter of our Manufactures, but then by Dollars, and the Treasure of the Nation: and those Manu∣factures which were exported into Norway, were rarely ex∣ported but by Norwegians. 2 That the Prices of Norway-Timber was become neer double. 3. That our own Timber was much wasted, by reason of the Dearness of the Norway-Timber. 4. That we had not built one Ship for that Trade since the Law, nor could ever hope to do, so long as it stood in force, because a Forreign Ship might be built for half the price, and be more free for Trade; whereas the Norwegians had doubled their Ships, and built them twice as big, and encreased their Marriners from 600 to 6000, and yet Tra∣ded
to no place but England; whereby the English in a short time would necessarily be excluded the Trade of Norway, unless they drive it by Norwegians and in Norway Bot∣toms. 5. That the English were then almost wholly laid aside, the Trade of Norway being generally driven by the Norwe∣gians and in Norway Bottoms. 6. That the English were wholly left to the King of Den∣mark's disposing, whenever he pleased to impose any fur∣ther abuses than were then complained of; which were, that the English ever since 1646, and by a Treaty made between the Kings of England and Denmark 1660, paid ⅘ of a Rix∣dollar per Lasts for the growths of Norway; (except the Town of Bergen) but since the late War with the King of Denmark, they paid for Timber a Rixdollar and half per Last; for other growths a Rixdollar and ⅘; others 2 and ⅖; and for others 3 Rixdollars: and in measuring the Lastage, the same Ships which before the War had their Measures adjusted were raised some 35, others 40 Lasts. 7. That it was the Interest of the King of Denmark to make the Trade of Norway insupportable to the English; for thereby the Act of Navigation did reduce the whole Trade to the Norwegians. As this success attended this restriction by the Act of Navigation, in reference to the Trade of Norway, both for our Manufactures and the Com∣modities of Norway: So did it not much better succeed in the Trades of our Manufactures, and of the Hemp and Flax imported by the Dutch in exchange of them. For the English, from the reasons in the first Coroll. upon this Prop. having lost so inestimable a Trade into the Sound, and by consequence the beneficial returns of Ruff Hemp and Flax from Riga, Revel, and other places within the Sound, before the year 1640; and the Dutch by reason of the greatness of their Trade into the Sound, not of Woollen Manufa∣ctures only, but of Fish, Salt, Wines, Brandies, Spice, and other Commodities, returned such vast quantities of Ruff Hemp and Flax, and by reason of the cheapness of their Navigations, and smalness of Duties, supplied the English
so cheap with Hemp and Flax, that the poor people upon the Eastern Coast of England, and here in London, were able to make Cordage, Nets and Sails almost sufficient to supply the Navigation and Fishing upon the Eastern parts of Eng∣land; and the returns of these by the Dutch, were chiefly for Clothes and other Manufactures and growths of Eng∣land. But the Act of Navigation not permitting the Dutch to import these; and the English having so lost their Trade into the Sound; and the Inhabitants of Riga, Revel, and other places of the Sound from whence the best Hemp and Flax comes, little Trading with us into England; and the Act of Navigation permitting the Dutch to import the Ma∣nufactures of Cordage, Nets and Sails, Consequences. It came to pass, that as the Natives lost a great exchange of their Woollen and other Manufactures for Hemp and Flax, so did many thousands of poor people their Employ∣ment in making Cordage, Nets and Sails: Even the Town of Yarmouth in Norfolk, before the Act of Navigation, made yearly 2800 Tun of Cordage, now not ten. And the fitting up of Ships with Cordage and Sails be∣came so dear, that in the year 1650, several persons of good knowledge and experience in building Ships, and any self built a Vessel of 100 Tun, and fitted her out to Sea for 505 l. Four years after, the same Builder built another (both for the Newcastle-Trade) of 110 Tum, and this Ship fitted out to Sea cost above 800 l. And the reason of this dearness, the Builder ascribed to the excessive prices of Pitch, Tar, Cor∣dage and Sails. Corollary 3. By the same reason, the Act of Navigation en∣dangers a Forrein Trade of our Woollen and o∣ther Manufactures.
31 Pet. 3. For returns of Forreign Commodities, ex∣changed for our Woollen and other Manufactures, is a mean to conserve a Forreign Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. 32 Pet. 3. And the Act of Navigation restrains the returns of Forreign Goods exchanged for our Woollen and other Manufactures to English-built Ships, and sailed by ¾ Eng∣lish. Annot. And what are these English-built Ships, but neer double as dear built, and sailed with neer double the charge of the Dutch and other Nations? so as this charge added to the re∣striction by the Act of Navigation, Consequences. It comes to pass, that it will be impossible to enlarge ei∣ther the Forreign Trade of our Woollen and other Manu∣factures, or the returns of them beyond this Navigation; and the Merchant computing the charges he is hereby ob∣liged to, findes so much less vent for our Woollen and o∣ther Manufactures, as the Returns become so chargeable, that no profit arises to the Merchant thereby. But besides this inestimable loss which the Nation hereby sustains in the Forreign vent of our Manufactures, these two mischiefs necessarily attend this restriction and charge of this Navi∣gation. One, that we impose a necessity of consuming the Forrein Goods returned in Barter of our own Manufactures, which is generally in Luxury and Pride: or if any of the returns be employed in our Manufactures, the dearness of these returns imposes a further dearness upon our own Ma∣nufactures both in the Forein and Domestick Trade of them. But it is time to proceed to the Expedients by which the Forrein Trade of our Manufactures may be enlarged.
Prop. 14. Theorem 13. The Repealing the Acts made the 18 and 20 Car. 2. c. 1. against Importation of Irish Cattle, may encrease the Trades of our Woollen Manufactures, and for Beer, Hops, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, Hides, Fruits, Sugars, Tobacco's; all sorts of Silk, as well wrought as unwrought; Ribbons, Gold, Silver and Silk-Lace with the Kingdom of Ireland, and the Trade of Victualling ships by the Natives of England and Forreigners in the Ports of England. 13 Ax. 3. For every business may be so much encreased, as the means are more. 40 Pet. 3. But the importation of Irish Cattle is a mean whereby the Kingdom of Ireland may hold a Trade with us for our Woollen Manufactures, and Hops, Beer, &c. 41 Pet. 3. And the Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may make the importation of Irish Cattle more. Therefore it may encrease the Trades of our Woollen Manufactures, and of Beer, Hops, &c. with Ireland, and of Victualling Ships in the Ports of England. Annot. If the Repealing these Acts would encrease the Trades of our Woollen and others Manufactures and growths to 210000 l. per Annum, besides Victualling ships, as they were before these Acts, and are now fallen to less than 20000 l. per Annum, as Mr. John Du Boise (a worthy Citizen) has calculated; This would be more beneficial to the Nation, than if 170000 l. per Annum were given to the Nation, al∣lowing 40000 l. per Annum for Principles, than to continue it in the same condition it is in, now these Laws stand in force.
But though the Nation might hope for some relief by the Repealing or Expiration of these Laws, it can hope for none by repealing the Act of the 15 Car. 2. cap. 7. Intituled, Trade encouraged, for all sorts of Wire, Hats, Ribbons, Buttons, Gloves, Bandstrings, Hangings, Stools, Chairs, Knives, Sythes, Sickles, Cizars, Sheaths for Knives, Stockens, Caps, course Shifts and Frocks, with the Kingdom of Scotland: for the Scottish Nation, offended by this Law, imposed 90 l. per Cent. upon all Goods imported into Scotland from Eng∣land; and making use of opportunities, have established these Trades and Manufactures among themselves, to our Loss, as appears more largely in the Annot. upon the 15th Prop. of the Equal Danger of the Church, State, and Trade of England. Prop. 15. Theorem 14. The repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may encrease the value of the Lands of England. 2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the effects will be as the causes are. 6 Pet. 1. But Lands are valuable, as the Trade of the place is. 14 Prop. 3. And the repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may encrease the valuable Trades of England with Ireland. Therefore it may encrease the value of the Lands of Eng∣land. Annot. Suppose 15000 people before these Acts were employed in those Commodities, wherewith this Nation supplied Ire∣land; this Employment enabled them to pay for the Pro∣visions they bought of the Country-Farmor: But the Trade
of England with Ireland being interrupted by these Laws, the employment of these people became proportionally les∣ned; and by consequence, the means by which they were en∣abled to pay for the Provisions they formerly bought of the Farmour; and so the Lands of England so much less valua∣ble. By the Rule of Contraries then, the repealing these Acts, will so much encrease the value of the Lands of Eng∣land, as the Trades of England with Ireland are encreased, whereby poor people may be employed, and so enabled to give the Farmor better prices for Provisions, than otherwise they could. Corollary 1. By the same reason, the repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may encrease the value of the Revenues of the Church. 7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands of England are valuable. 16 Prop. 3. And the repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may encrease the value of the Lands of Eng∣land. Annot. And so the repealing these Laws may encrease the value of the Revenues of the Crown, not onely in the value of the Crown-Lands, but in repairing the Customs which the King received for the Cattle imported out of Ireland into England; which did amount to 30000 l. per Annum, for which these Laws make no compensation to the King.
Prop. 16. Theorem 15. The Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may so much better conserve Peace and Amity between England and Ireland, as the Trade between them shall be more. 13 Ax. 3. For every business may be so much conserved, as the means are more. 8 Pet. 1. But Trade is a mean to conserve Peace and Amity. 15 Prop. 3. And the repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. may encrease Trade between England and Ireland. Therefore it may so much more conserve Peace and A∣mity between them. Annot. As the Crown of Ireland is a Crown subject to the Crown of England; so the mutual Trade and Correspondence be∣tween them, will strengthen the Obligations so much more, as their mutual Interests are hereby united. These, and ma∣ny other benefits attend both Kingdoms, by Repealing these Laws. The Mischiefs and Inconveniencies which have ensued by making them, in some measure appear by the Annot. upon the 18, 19, and 20 Prop. of the Danger of the Church, State, and Trade of England. Prop. 17. Theorem 16. The free Admission of Forreigners to buy the Woollen and other Manufactures of England, will so much encrease the Treasure of England, as the Money expended in it is more.
1 Ax. 3. For every thing will be so much encreased, as is added to it. 1 Pet. 3. But Money is Treasure. 33 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Forreigners to buy the Woollen and other Manufactures of England, will add so much more Money to the Money of England, as the Money expended therein is more. Therefore it will so much encrease the Treasure of Eng∣land. Annot. By free Admission, here, I do not mean the Freedom which English men enjoy, viz. to buy them at the second hand of the Free-men of Corporations, and after they have been charged with Land-carriage to London; but at the next Ports, or places where they are made. Prop. 18. Theorem 17. The free Admission of Forreigners to exchange Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and many other Forrein Goods, for the Woollen and other Manufactures of England, may so much enrich the Nation, as the Goods exchanged may be made more valuable in the Manufactures, by employment of our own people. 11 Ax. 3. For any place will be so much enriched, as things are more valuable than the charge. 34 Pet. 3. But Timber, Pitch, Tar, Salt, rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, & many other Forrein Goods, by employment of our People, may be made so much more valuable, than the Manufactures exchanged for them, in our building of Ships and Houses, in the Manufactures of Ropes,
Nets and Sails, and in Dying our Woollen and other Manu∣factures of England, as they are more and cheaper. 35 Pet. 3. And the free Admission of Forreigners to ex∣change these for our Woollen and other Manufactures of England, may make Timber, Pitch, Tar, &c. more and chea∣per in England. Therefore it may so much enrich the Nation. Annot. As the free buying our Woollen and other Manufactures of England will encrease the Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures, whereby the Inhabitants will be so much more employed in them; so by Exchanging Goods for our Manufactures, we to our own enriching, add another employment to our People; and this so much more valua∣ble than the Money wherewith the Goods are bought, as the Goods become more valuable in other Manufactures than the Money. And therefore it is an errour in the Act of Navigation, to permit all Nations to import Money into the Nation, and to restrain the importation of Goods to the English and Natives: for if we did too much abound in Money, this would be a burthen to the Nation, and of ill con∣sequence to the King and Subject. For if a man, as the case stands, may buy that for 100 l. which if Money were five-fold encreased, he shall pay 500 l. for it, he hath five times the trouble in it. And all Commodities being valued according to the plenty of Money, the Revenues of the Crown, and Leases granted by the Nobility, Gentry, and Church, would be but one fifth of the value, if the Money were five times more; for they must pay five times more for the Commodities renewed upon their Farms, and yet receive but the Rent at first reserved when the Commodi∣ties bore but ⅕ of the Money. And therefore it was a pru∣dent Institution of Cardinal Poole (who being chosen Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, when from the Spanish Indies the Money became so plentiful in England, that the Members of the University could scarce buy Bread
upon the Rents reserved on their Leases) to have one third to be paid in Corn, or so much as the prices of Corn should amount to in Cambridge market the Market-day before our Lady day and Michaelmas. And therefore if our Treasure were more than our Neighbouring Nations, I did not care whether we had one fifth part of the Treasure we now have. I have often said in Coffee-houses, (and I am sorry I could not finde a more convenient place in England to speak it in) at the beginning of the War between the French and Dutch, That the French Nation would be exceedingly im∣poverished thereby, and to the undoing of many thou∣sands of the French: For the French Trade for Wines, Salt, Paper, Linnen, and other the Manufactures of France, was above all other Nations, carried on in Forrein Trade by the Dutch Navigation, whereby the Natives were employed, and the Kingdom and Natives exceedingly enriched: but the Dutch Navigation being removed by reason of the War, all these Commodities of France, which were Transported by the Dutch Navigation in Forrein Trade, finde not like vent; and by consequence, the Nation loses much of the wealth it gained thereby, and the Inhabitants their Employ∣ment. Nor is it in the power of France to redress this, with∣out restoring the Dutch Navigation: for admit the French King should take measures by our Act of Navigation, (as they say he does) and endeavour to establish a Forrein Trade of the Commodities of France by his own Subjects; and could make ships of Oyster-shells and Shingle, and in an instant create Factories, and make all the returns the Dutch do of the Commodities of France; and without Experi∣ence or Instruction make Navigators and Marriners at his will, of his Subjects; yet so, many of his Subjects as he makes Sea-men, so many sewet he will leave to plant Vine∣yards, make Paper, Linnen, Salt, and other Commodities of France, and so much lessen the Manufactures of France, as he encreases his Navigation. But the Dutch War is but an accident of the time, and it is probable when the French King pleases, he may make Peace
with the Dutch, and so restore the Dutch Navigation again to the trade of France. But alas! who can ever untwist the Treefold Cord of the Law against Naturalization, the Act of Navigation, and the Freedom of Corporations here in England! Each of these is more mischievous to us here in England, than the Dutch-War is to France: for France, as it is a Kingdom above threefold greater than England, so in that proportion it is doubly more peopled, and therefore may much better endure the Sequestration of the Dutch Navigation, and establish it upon the account of the French than we can; our Coast being almost desolate, and so poor, that they can scarce maintain their poor; and so have nei∣ther Men nor Means to conserve the little Trades they have, much less to encrease them; and the Country scarce half In∣habited, and so the Lands of England not half improved: and at this day I believe the Nobility and Gentry have above twenty thousand Farms in their hands; and to take these from Husbandry, to people our Coast, and encrease our Navi∣gation, will leave so many fewer in the Country; yet to Eternity, for ought is known, we must continue in this Con∣dition. Coroll. 1. By the same reason, the free permission of For∣reigners to sell Timber, Pitch, Tar, Rough Hemp and Flax, and many other sorts of Forrein Com∣modities in England, may so much enrich the Nation, as they may be made more valuable by the employment of our people. 36 Pet. 3. For Timber, Pitch, Tar, &c. may be made more valuable by employing our people in building, and their Manufactures, as they are more and cheaper. 37 Pet. 3. And the free permission of Forreigners to sell these in England, may make them more and cheaper.
Annot. Though Trade where the Commodities are consumed to loss, becomes so much more prejudicial, and impoverishes any place so much as such consumption is: And therefore as all beneficial Trades ought to be made free, and by all means encouraged; so it may seem reasonable, that destru∣ctive Trades where things are vainly consumed, and the em∣ployment of our people hindred thereby, as are our Trades to France and Spain for Wines; and to France for fine Lin∣nen, Lace, Points; and the importation of Dutch Black Clothes, and French Hats and Druggets, whereby the em∣ployment of our people is hindred, and so much of the Treasure of the Nation exhausted as is spent in our consump∣tion of them, ought totally to be prohibited; yet neerly looking into it, such prohibition will prove dangerous to our Trade at home and abroad, and also to the Peace of the Na∣tion. For first, as every man stands in need of being supplied by another, so does every place; and therefore, if we should prohibit the Importation of the Commodities of France, though it be evident the Nation consumes them all to loss, (except Salt and Sails) yet we cannot then but expect the French will likewise prohibit the Importation of our Welch Frizes, and Exeter Carseys, Leather, Gloves, Ribbons, and several other Commodities; whereby the employment of all our Artificers in them, being taken away, they become mise∣rable, and the Lands on which the Wools and the Cattle were renewed, become less valuable. The reason is the same, if we prohibit the Importation of Dutch Black Clothes, who take off many of our White Clothes, and other Manufactures of England. Secondly, If we prohibit the French Hats, Druggets, and Dutch Black Clothes, we put our selves and the World upon the Monopoly of having only such as the English make, who will soon know the prerogative they enjoy hereby, and make the English pay more for worse work than they did before, and make them so dear and
bad, that we shall establish the Forrein Trade of such things to the French and Dutch; whereas the Importation of these will be an Awe upon the English, to make ours so good and cheap, as to supply us and the world better, or they will lose their employment. And Lastly, Such Prohibition causes Hared and Heart-burning between Princes, whereby often∣times Wars ensue, though under other pretences. Therefore, if my opinion were worthy to be admitted, no Goods of any sort should be Prohibited: but if any be imported which are Luxuriously consumed, with little or no employment of the people, as the Wines imported are, they should pay the King the full value in their consump∣tion; but little or nothing, if they could be again Trans∣ported: for the importation is beneficial to the Nation, by improving the Rents of Houses, the employment of Peo∣ple in Lading and Ualading, and in vending our Corn and Provision to the Importer. But if an employment may happen to the People of the Nation, if things were not imported, as in fine Linnen, Lace, Points, Blacks and Druggets, encouragement should be given to all people to instruct ours in those Manufactures; and such duties for some time imposed on the Importation, that better hopes might be expected here, than otherwise, in working them. Prop. 19. Theorem 18. The free permission of Forreigners to Import Timber, rough Hemp and Flax, all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and all sorts of Forrein Goods, will so much conserve the Treasure of the Nation, as they are cheaper sold. 12 Ax. 3. For things will be so much conserved, as they are less expended. 38 Pet. 3. But less Treasure will be expended in Norway-Timber, Pitch, Tar, Forrein Hemp and Flax, and all sorts of Dying-Stuffs, and all other Forrein Commodities, if they be cheaper vended.
39 Pet. 3. And the free permission of Forreigners to im∣port Forrein Commodities, will make them cheaper ven∣ded. Therefore it will so much conserve the Treasure of the Nation. Annot. Mr. Mun observes in his 4th chap. of England's Improve∣ments by Forrein Trade, that as Legorne is the most flourish∣ing part in the Mediterranean in Trade, so the Inhabitants have little Trade but for Goods imported by the Dutch and English, which they buy for ready Money; and that the Great Duke lent him 40000 Crowns for a year gatis, though he knew it would be presently sent out of Italy into Turky to buy Commodities; the Great Duke well understanding the returns would be profitable to him and his Subjects; yet not by Manufactures, which is the most profitable by em∣ploying people, but by vending them, and that by Land-carriage, to Milan, Piedmont, and other places in Italy. But if by reason of the Freedom of Legorne, wrought Goods imported by Forreigners, and bought with ready Mo∣ny, be so profitable to the Duke of Florence and his Subjects; I am sure the free Importation of unwrought Goods into England by Forreigners, might be much more profitable to the King and his Subjects, by employment of the English in their Manufactures. And if that Permission which Oli∣ver dispensed to the English Norway-Traders for Timber, had been continued by the King since his Restauration, all that Money had been still conserved in the Nation, which was expended in dearer buying Norway Timber imported by the Norwegians, in building the City and Suburbs of London and other places, and in building and repairing the Navy Royal, and other ships of the English Navigation: and so might all that superfluous dearness of rough Hemp and Flax, whereby our people lost their employment, yet in all England, the King's duties did not amount to little more than 1500 l. per Annum; and perhaps 20000 people might have
been employed in the Manufactures of Cordage and Sails: so we needed not have vainly been necessitated to have bought them of the Dutch, and in our Wars with them, of the French. Prop. 20. Theorem 19. The free Admission of Forreigners to import Goods into England, will so much encrease the Riches of England, as the Goods imported are more. 1 Ax. 3. For every thing will be so much encreased, as is added to it. 41 Pet. 3. But Goods are Riches. 42 Pet. 3. And the free admission of Forreigners to im∣port Goods into England, will add so much Goods to those of England, as the Importation is more free. Therefore it will so much encrease the Riches of Eng∣land. Annot. I say, this free admission of Forreigners to import Goods into England, will more certainly enrich the Nation, than can be reasonably expected by the returns of the Growths and Manufactures of England and our Plantations in For∣rein Trade. For the Nation is necessarily enriched so much, as the value of the Goods imported by Forreigners amounts to: Whereas the Merchant in return of Goods by Forrein Trade, is not so secure but he may become a loser: or, if he or the Nation gains by the returns, yet the gain is no more than the value of the Goods returned exceed the value of the Goods Exported; which if 1/10, is very considerable; whereas the Nation entirely gains the value of the Goods imported by Forreigners. And in case the Merchant loses the outward Fraught, or the returns of the Goods of Eng∣land
or our Plantations, the Nation loses so much as the va∣lue of the Goods amount to. But the Nation ventures nothing by the Importation of Goods imported by For∣reigners, yet necessarily gains so much as the Goods im∣ported amount to in value. And herein I observe, that Goods being valuable as they can be vended, the places where they are vended generally receive greater benefit by the Intercourse of People, and the varieties of Trades and Traders, than the places whereon the Goods are wrought and renewed. So that though nei∣ther London, Amsterdam, Hamburg, Legorne, and many other frequented places have little or no Good; of their own growth or Manufactures yet by reason of the frequencles of people, in many varieties of Trades, they receive much greater benefit than the places on which the Goods are wrought and renewed. And I see no reason but if the Im∣portation of Goods were as free in England, as in Holland, Zealand, Hamburg, Gottenburg, Legorne, &c. but that our Ports might be as rich and flourishing as these; and so much more, as ours are better, and more convenient. Whereas, by denying the World this freedom, we continue the Pover∣ty of the Towns upon the Coast of England, which daily decline, and even become desolate, and necessitate the world to enrich and strengthen other places with those Riches and People which might be much better and securely enjoyed by us. Prop. 21. Theorem 20. The free Importation of Forrein Goods into England, may better, more safely and convenient∣ly encrease Riches in England, than in France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. 8 Ax. 3. For things may be better, more conveniently and safely done, where the places are better, more convenient and safe.
41 Pet. 3. But the Ports of England are more better, and more convenient and safe than those of France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. 20 Prop. 3. And the free Importation of Forrein Goods into England, will so much encrease Wealth in it, as the Goods imported are more. Therefore it may better, more safely and conveniently encrease Wealth in England, than in France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. Annot. If the Ports of England were as free as those of the Ʋnited Netherlands, Hamburg, or Gottenburg, can any man believe the world would pass Falmouth, (the most excellent Port of the world, and the most convenient for the Southern, Western, South-Eastern and South-western Trades) the noble Ports of Plymouth, Dartmouth, Exmouth, Falmouth, the famous Ports of Portsmouth and Harwich, (equal to any other, and of all others the most convenient for the Trade of the East and North-East parts of the World) to encounter the Sands upon Zea∣land, or the Rocks before Gottenburg, or to be conveyed through the Vly and Texel into the Zuyder-Sea, where they are so far from safety, that 500 Sail have been stranded by one nights Tempest? Our Ports and always as open for any Forrein Trade, especially to the South or West, as safe for Ships to come in. Theirs are dangerous in the approach, are unsafe within, and commonly frozen up three or four Moneths in the year. We have no need of the Mould of Genoua, nor take care to draw our Ships over any Pampus, to secure them from Storms in the Winter. Though Hamburg be a mighty Town of Trade; yet we have neither Gluestadt, or Stoad, to give Laws to our Trade in any of our Ports, as both those do to Hamburg. We have nothing to say for our selves, but though God and Nature never did any thing in vain, yet we have made our Ports vain to all the World, and almost to our selves. The King was pleased about the beginning of the late
War with the Dutch, to Issue out a Proclamation, to invite the Dutch to come into the Ports of England, and they and their Ships should enjoy as much priviledge as if they were Natural-born English, and their ships English-built: But then they had incurred the danger of Confiscation of Ships, Goods, Guns, Tackle, Apparel, and Ammunition, by the Act of Navigation. They could not have unladed their Goods in any Port of England, because they were not Free-men of Corporations; they must have paid the King above twenty times the Duties before they broke Bulk, more than at Hamburg or any Port of the Ʋnited Netherlands; where∣by they could never hope for any Forrein Trade by them, or expect to vend one half of them in England. And this must have been much to the detriment of the English Mer∣chant, who either had sufficient, or expected to supply Eng∣land in his future Trade; so as not one Vessel came in upon that Proclamation. The King was also pleased in that Pro∣clamation to invite all sorts of Artificers to come into Eng∣land, and they should enjoy the benefits of Natural-born English, but if they had come, and had enjoyed them, yet all other English-men are Forreigners to the Freedom of Corporations, and so these could have little expected to have been employed in any Art or Manufacture, either for their own or the Countries benefit, being excluded out of all places where they might hope to employ themselves or others; so the success was the same in both. And as our Ports are so excellent and safe for Ships to harbour in; so by a certain benignity of Nature, peculiar to our Country, the Rivers of England are not so Rapid as those of the Rhine, Maze, Seine, Loire, and Garrone. As by their Flowing they procure a benefit for bringing Goods into the Country to supply it, and employing the people of it; so by their Ebbing they invite us to supply the World with our Goods, and to enjoy the fruits of our own La∣bours.
Prop. 22. Theorem 21. The free Importation of Forrein Goods into England, may so much encrease the Forrein Trade of our Manufactures of our Plantations, and the Fish caught upon the Coast of England and Scot∣land, as the Goods imported are more. 16. Ax. 3. For business may be so much encreased, as the Means are more. 47 Pet. 3. But the Exporting Forrein Commodities with our Manufactures, those of our own Plantations, and of the Fish caught upon our Coast, is a mean to encrease the For∣rein Trade of them. 44 Pet. 3. And the free Importation of Forrein Goods, may so much encrease the Exportation of Forrein Goods with our Manufactures, as the Importation is more free. Therefore it may so much encrease the forrein Trade of our Manufactures, &c. Annot. As this free Importation of forrein Goods, will so much enrich the Nation, as the goods imported are more; so it may so much encrease the forrein Trade of our Manufa∣ctures, Plantations, and of the fish caught upon our Coast, as the goods imported are more. The Dutch, we see, by im∣porting French Wines, Brandy, and Salt, and exporting them with their Fish, Woollen Manufactures, and Spice, send yearly 1500 Sail of Ships into the Sound; and forty to Muscovy; whereas we, though our Woollen Manufactures are better, and it may be, if we had those Trades, might be sold cheaper, yet in a year we send not above seven into the Sound, (two whereof are Laden with Woollen Manufactures, the other five with Balast only, which pay for their Lading commonly by Money upon Bills of Exchange from Hamburg) and to
Muscovy scarce two in three years. The reason hereof, is the Greatness of the Dutch Trade with all these sorts of Commodities; so that in case their Woollen Manufactures will not bear so profitable a Price, yet they may make pro∣fitable returns, if upon the whole the returns be profitable. Besides, the great Exportation of many other Commodities to Muscovy, and places in the Sound, establishes so great a Commerce with the Dutch, that those people supplied by them, dare not buy Woollen Manufactures of others who cannot supply them with other Necessaries. Moreover, many places in the Sound take of Ladings, part Salt, Wine, Brandy, Spice, Fish, and Woollen Manufactures, which can∣not take off an entire Lading of Fish, or Woollen Manu∣factures. And this is the principal reason, that even in our Sou∣thern Trades to forrein parts, we can scarce from any Port of England vend our Woollen Manufactures but from the Port of London, where they finde a mixture of fraught with Lead, Tin, Sugars, Tobaccoes, and other Goods from our Planta∣tions. Prop. 23. Theorem 22. The free Importation of Forrein Goods into England, may more conveniently and safely en∣crease a Forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures from the Ports of England, than from those of France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. 8 Ax. 3. For things may be more conveniently and safely done, where the places are more convenient and safe. 41 Pet. 3. But the Ports of England are more convenient and safe, than those of France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. 22 Prop. 3. And the free Importation of forrein Goods into England, may encrease a forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. Therefore it may more conveniently and safely be done from the Ports of England than from those of France or the Ʋnited Netherlands.
Annot. Though I believe God has endued this Nation with more benefits for forrein Trade and Commerce than any other, yet for the benefit of Mutual Commerce, as every man stands in need of being supplied by another, so does every Coun∣try: And many places in the World, as they stand in need of our Commodities, so want those whereof we of our selves cannot supply them. And many parts of the World which cannot take off an entire Lading of our Commodities, may ½, ⅓ or ¼; and if the residue of the Fraught be made up of other Commodities, by this means this half or third, &c. of our Commodities findes vent. Prop. 24. Theorem 23. The free Importation of Forrein Goods into England, may cheaper encrease a forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. 17 Ax. 3. For things may be so much cheaper done, as the means are cheaper. 47 Pet. 3. But the forrein Trade of forrein Goods, with our Woollen and other Manufactures, is a mean to encrease the Trade of them. 48 Pet. 3. And the free Importation of forrein Goods into England, will make them so much cheaper, as the Im∣portation is more free. Therefore it may cheaper encrease a forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. Annot. So that this Importation, as it may more conveniently encrease our Woollen and other Manufactures, so it may cheaper do it. If a Vessel half fraught with our Commo∣dities,
and half with forrein, can sell the forrein well, this may enable the Merchant to sell our Manufactures so much cheaper, as he better sold the forrein: Whereas, if the for∣rein had been dearer bought, the Markets for both might have been lost. But the benefits which would arise to the forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures, by the free permission of Forreigners to import forrein Goods, does not end here: for by it our Manufactures might be vended from the next Port; whereas now they are generally brought up to London by long and tedious Land-carriages, and forestalled by the Freemen before they can finde any mixture of other Commodities to be vended with them in forrein Trade. And as we thus vainly charge our Manu∣factures by Land-carriage to London, before they must pass the Seas in forrein Trade; so do we the Lead and Tin Transported to Spain, Italy and Turky: and to what pur∣pose this must be done, I would fain know. Prop. 25. Theorem 24. The free Exportation of Money with our Woollen and other Manufactures, may encrease a forrein Trade of them. 3 Ax. 2. For more business may be done by more means. 30 Pet. 1. But Money is a mean to encrease Trade. 49 Pet. 3. And the free Exportation of Money with our Woollen and other Manufactures, may cause more Money to be Exported with our Woollen and other Manufactures. Therefore it may encrease the forrein Trade of them. Annot. I will never believe that any man or Nation ever well at∣tain their ends by forceable means, against the Nature and Order of things. Money is that by which all Commodi∣ties
are valued, and is of no other use: if therefore a man should give me 100 l. never to make use of it, I should scarce thank him for it. The most profitable use of money, is so to buy, as to sell to profit. So that in forrein Trade, the best use a Merchant can make of his Money, is, so to buy, as to sell a∣gain to profit: But if the Goods the Merchant thus buys be sold again in forrein Trade to profit, a double benefit hereby accrues to the Nation as well as Merchant. This appears in the East-Indie-Trade by our East-Indie-Company, where though the Company send great quantities of Treasure to the East-Indies, yet the returns of them, in the Trade to Spain, and other places, produce greater quantities of Trea∣sure. Though I can give but one instance hereof in our Trades, I believe Instances hereof might be given in all the Trades the Dutch drive in the World. It may happen, that many places of the world stand in need of our Commodities, and some people of those places have Commodities to exchange for ours; others have Com∣modities which they will not exchange for ours, to the Mer∣chant's profit, but will sell for ready Money, so that the Merchant may make profit of them; and so a Merchant may fraught a ship so, as to make profitable returns: but in case the Merchant be prohibited the Exportation of Mo∣ney, this may hinder the forrein vent of all the Manufa∣ctures, which otherwise might finde a Market. Coroll. 1. By the same reason, the free Returns of Commo∣dities exchanged in forrein Trade for our Woollen and other Manufactures, may encrease the forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. 50 Pet. 3. For returns of Commodities exchanged in for∣rein Trade for our Woollen and other Manufactures, is a mean to encrease a forrein Trade of them. 51 Pet. 3. And the returns of Forreign Commodities exchanged for our Woollen and other Manufactures, may be so much more, as the returns are more free.
Annot. To the encrease of the forrein Trade of our Woollen Ma∣nufactures by this free return, which I understand to be by all ways whereby they may be as cheap imported into Eng∣land, as into Hamburg, or any of the Ports of the Ʋnited Netherlands; may be added another forrein Trade of these Commodities, and of the returns of those Commodities into the Ports of England, and of those again, and so infi∣nitely. The Dutch we see have no other Principles of Trade, but the Fishing Trade upon the Coasts of England and Scot∣land, to Groenland, and of late to Iseland and Westmony fishing; yet from these Principles, by their cheap Navi∣gation, and smalness of Duties imposed upon the re∣turns of their Fish and other Commodities imported, were enabled to manage a more considerable and profitable Trade in the World, than all the Princes and other States of the World could do. Whereas all these Fishing trades (especially for those caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland) might cheaper and more conveniently be managed from the Ports of Eng∣land, as shall be shewed: And we have the Principles of our own growths and Manufactures, and also of our Plan∣tations, to establish a forrein Trade upon; and ten times more and better Harbours than those of the Ʋnited Nether∣lands, to secure the returns of them, and establish another Trade into other forrein parts of the World, upon the ac∣count of them. Prop. 52. Problem 2. How Woollen Manufactures may be cheaper, more conveniently and safely vended in forreign Trade from the Ports of England, than those of France, or the Ʋnited Netherlands.
Const. By the Coroll. Prop. 4. the Woollen Manufa∣ctures of England may be cheaper wrought in England than in France or the Ʋnited Netherlands, and may be vended in forrein Trade from the next Ports. I say Woollen Manu∣factures may be cheaper, more conveniently and safely ven∣ded in forrein Trade from the Ports of England, than those of France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. 19 Ax. 3. For if more be added to more, the whole will be more. Const. But Woollen Manufactures may be cheaper wrought in England than France, or the Ʋnited Netherlands. 22 Prop. 3. And Woollen Manufactures may be more conveniently and safely vended in forrein Trade from the Ports of England, than those of France or the Ʋnited Ne∣therlands. Therefore they may be cheaper, more conveniently and safely vended from the Ports of England, than those of France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. Annot. As the Wools of Ireland may be cheaper wrought in Wales and the Western Ports of England, so may the Wools of the Midland, Southern, and Eastern parts of England be cheaper wrought upon Navigable places in England, than in France or the Ʋnited Netherlands. And as the Ports of England are more better, and more convenient and safe than those of French or the Ʋnited Netherlands; so the Eastern Ports of England stand more apposite and conve∣niently for the Trade to Hamburg, Norway, Muscovy, and into the Sound, than those of the Ʋnited Netherlands, and nearer than those of France. And as our Western and Southern Ports are more better, more convenient and safe than those of France, so are they nearer than those of the Ʋnited Netherlands in all Trades to the South, South-East, Western and South-West parts of the world. But since Woollen Manufactures may be cheaper wrought in England than France or the Ʋnited Netherlands; what
reason is there the Wools of the Midland and other parts of England should by a tedious Land-carriage be brought to Norwich and Colchester; and when they are wrought into the Manufactures of those places, by another Land-carriage (almost equal to the charge of carriage of the Wools) be brought to London; and then none but pre-emption and Free-men buy them? To what purpose are the Western Clothes under the same Charge and Restrictions brought up to Lon∣don; and then by a Navigation twice as dear as from our Western and Southern Ports, vended in Spain and Portugal? Why after all these Charges and Restrictions must they be vended in forrein Trade, in Ships neer double as dear built, sailed with neer double the charge of the Dutch and other Nations? Why do we deny our selves the benefit of com∣pounding Fraughts in forrein Trades with our Woollen Ma∣nufactures, as hath been often demonstrated? And why do we impose above twentyfold Charges upon their returns, more than if imported to Hamburg or Holland? For these are the Reasons the French and Dutch are well maintained in Woollen Manufactures, and our People miserable in it; and that they supply many places of the world better than we do, and even cloy our Markets at home with them. And since our Ports are so much better and convenient for forrein Trade than those of France or the Ʋnited Nether∣lands, why must the Turkie, East-Indie, and Guiny Trades (and for ought I know the Trades to Hamburg, Muscovy, and into the Sound) be driven from this one Port of Lon∣don? And if two in the hundred charge in any Trade in one place above another, endangers the loss of the Trade to that other; I wish it were calculated with how many two's in the hundred we, besides the Restrictions, vainly charge all the forrein Trades we drive in the world upon the account of Woollen and other Manufactures.
Prop. 27. Theorem 25. The free permission of Forreigners to Import forrein Goods into England, will so much more conserve peace abroad, as the Goods imported are more. 15 Ax. 3. For things may be so much more conserved, as the means are encreased. 8 Pet. 1. But Trade is a mean to conserve Peace. 44 Pet. 3. And the free permission of Forreigners to im∣port forrein Goods, will so much encrease Trade in England, as the Goods imported are more. Therefore it will so much conserve Peace abroad. Annot. So that to this Plenty, Wealth, and Employment of our people at Home, this permission will establish forrein Trades which we are strangers to, and also add the blessing of Peace abroad. The Interest of Princes and their Subjects em∣ployed in this Trade, will have the same Influence on any other who would endeavour to interrupt it, as our jealou∣sies are upon any who should attempt to invade our Proper∣ties in our Lands and Goods. In case of War, their Interest would be involved with ours. Hereof you may more large∣ly read, in the Annot. upon the 11 Prop. of the Reasons of the encrease of the Dutch Trade. Whereas when the State of the Nation was much more free in reference to Trade, than it now stands by the Act of Navigation; yet by the Authority of the 1 Eliz. 13. this caused great displeasure between the Kings of this Realm and forrein Princes, as well as the Merchant and people were sore damaged and agrieved thereby.
Prop. 28. Theorem 26. The free permission of Forreigners to import forrein Goods into England, will so much encrease the valuable Trades of England, as the Forreigners importing Goods are more. 2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the Effects will be as the Causes are. 2 Pet. 1. But greater numbers of people encrease Trade. 45. Pet. 3. And the free permission of Forreigners to im∣port forrein Goods into England, will cause so much greater numbers of people in England, as the Forreigners impor∣ting Goods are more. Therefore it will so much encrease the valuable Trades of England. Annot. They would, for the many reasons heretofore said, en∣crease Trade in themselves, and also enable many poor peo∣ple to Trade, and procure a livelyhood, by lading and unla∣ding their Vessels, by mending and trimming their Vessels, Sails and Rigging; and more other benefits would accrue to poor people, which can neither be well foreseen, or enu∣merated. Coroll. 1. By the same reason, the free permission of For∣reigners to import forrein Goods into England, will so much encrease the value of the Lands of England, as the Forreigners importing Goods are more. 6 Pet. 1. For Lands are valuable, as the Trade of the place is valuable.
Prop. And the free admission of Forreigners to import forrein Goods into England, will so much encrease the va∣luable Trades of England, as the Forreigners importing Goods are more. Annot. If this number of Ships now employed in the Ports of England makes Lands of such value, by victualling these Ships, and employing people in them; then if the number of Shipping be encreased, so would be the employment of the people, who thereby would be enabled to buy the Farmors Commodities; and the Farmor too would finde so much more vent for his Commodities in victualling Ships, as the Ships are more. By means whereof, not only the wast and untill'd Grounds upon the Coast might be improved, but even those in Mediterrane places might finde encourage∣ment and vent for their Commodities; the Houses in the Towns upon the Coast would let better to receive the Goods imported, and new ones would be built for the same pur∣pose. Coroll. 2. By the same reason, the free permission of For∣reigners to import forrein Goods into England, will so much encrease the value of the Revenues of the Church, as the Forreigners importing Goods are more. 7 Pet. 1. For the Revenues of the Church of England are valuable, as the Lands are valuable. Coroll. 1. And the free permission of Forreigners to im∣port forrein Goods, will encrease the value of the Lands of England.
Annot. And so they would encrease the Revenues of the Crown, not only by the comsumption of all sorts of forrein Com∣modities which pay the King Duties, but also of all the Beer, Ale, and all other Domestick Exciseable Com∣modities, which they consume and freight their Vessels with.
EPILOGƲE. THus by freedom of working our Woollen and other Manufactures, and by the benefit of free Importing and Exporting Forrein Commodities with them in For∣rein Trade, the Reader may understand how many ways the Nation may be Strengthened, Enriched, and poor people employed; whereas by restraining and unnecessary charging these, we weaken and impoverish the Nation, con∣demn many thousands of people to Misery and Poverty, and establish all the benefits we might enjoy, in other places, to the endangering the Trade and Employment of people we now possess. I know nothing worse resented in our Parliaments, or in ordinary Discourse, than Monopolies, and that deservedly; for they render the Ingenuity and Industry of many people useless, and the Improvement of any new Invention for the publick more difficult; whilst the Monopolists do things dearer, and worse. Therefore I wish that encouragement were given to Inventors of any beneficial Mystery any o∣ther way than by Patent of the sole use for fourteen years: for by that means the use of it becomes less and dearer to us, and may be more useful and cheaper to other Nations who do not Monopolize it, whereby they may enjoy more benefit by it than can be hoped for by us. But if a Monopoly be the restraining, the doing, or ven∣ding things exclusive to other men, I do not understand, but the restraining the benefit of the Improvement of the Growths and Manufactures of England to the Natives, is a Monopoly to all the world besides. And the restraining
the free exercife of Arts and Mysteries in any Manufacture to the Freemen of Corporations, is a Monopoly to all the Nation befides: so is the forrein Trade by Companies, of our Growths and Manufactures, exclusive to other men, a Monopoly to the World, as well as Nation: and the pre-emption of Freemen, a Monopoly and grievous to both. And the restraining the vending the Growths and Manu∣factures of England in forrein Trade, and to make returns into England only in English-built Ships, and Sailed by ¾ English, is a Monopoly to both Trades: So is the vending Cattle to the Eastern and Southern parts of England by the Scots, Northern and Western people of England, exclusive to the Irish, a Monopoly. I speak this only in reference to Trades which are benefi∣cial, especially those which more depend upon Employ∣ment of people at home: For it is advantageous in Trades which impoverish and debauch the people, to have them driven by few, and in Companies, and those restrained both to managing the Trades, and the prices of the things im∣ported; as in the Trades for French Wines and Brandies, Italian and Spanish Wines and Fruits, and all sorts of fine Linnen, Lace, and Ribbons, &c. which are consumed a∣mong us: for by this mean, so much cheaper as they are imported and restrained, so much more the Nations Wealth and Stock is preserved. Before 1641, the Canary Trade was managed by a Company, the Prices were set, and the Wines imported were in Barter of our Commodities, so as the Nation was not considerably damnified by that Trade. But aster that Trade by the Company was left, the Vintners in London, to get the Flowers (as they call them) of those Wines, outbid one another so high, that the prices became near double; and rather than lose them, they would pay in the Canaries ready Money. And so we lost the Barter of our Commodities for them to boor: but as well in the Benefi∣cial as Hurtful Trades of the Nation, we invert the means by which those may be more improved, and these rendred less hurtful: For almost all the outward Trades of our Growths and Manufactures are managed by Companies
clogged with pre-emption of Freemen: But the inward Trades of French, Italian and Spanish Wines and Fruits, and of fine Linnen, Ribbons, Lace, &c. and which are all consumed among us, are driven at large by any English, or other people of those places who will import them. And as by our Monopolizing Trade we restrain the Em∣ployment of our people, and the Wealth and Strength of the Nation to what the Monopolists please; so we had bet∣ter charge Lands 40 per Cent. than the forrein Trade of our Manufactures two: For Lands are only valuable as our Trades, especially Forrein, are valuable: and therefore, in case we could doubly encrease the forrein. Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures, our Lands would be of double the value; whereas in case we charge the forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures two per Cent. above another place, we endanger the whole, and fix the Trade in that other place. See more in the Annot. upon the 26 Prop. of this Discourse.
HOW THE NAVIGATION OF ENGLAND MAY BE ENCREASED, AND THE SOVERAIGNTY OF THE British Seas More SECURED TO THE CROWN of ENGLAND. TREATISE IV. By ROGER COKE. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Brome, at the Gun at the West-end of St. Pauls. 1675.
PREFACE TO THE READER. TO Introduce a happy Reign, Queen Eliz. before she called a Parliament, fitted up and repaired her Navy Royal, so as it was far superiour to any other; this gave her Reputation at home, and Fame abroad: And well knowing how highly the safety of her Sub∣jects did depend upon conserving the Soveraignty of the British Seas, though afterwards she protected the Infant Dutch States, to give a check to the growing Austrian Greatness, yet would she never permit the Dutch to build such Men of War, as thereby to be ena∣bled to question her Dominion in the Seas which beat upon the English Shores. And it is said, that when Henry the great of France, after the Peace of Ver∣vins, designed to enlarge the Dominion of France as well by Sea as Land, she forhad his building great Ships, or she would fire them in his Harbours; whereupon this great Monarch did desist. King James, however he loved Peace, did rightly judge he could no way secure it so well, as by forti∣fying the strength of his Navy Royal; and to that
left by Queen Elizabeth, he added the Prince Royal, the Old James, and several others. King Charles the first, (a Prince of Sacred me∣mory) not knowing where the swelling Dutch Na∣vigation would end, and how much it might tend to the diminution of his Honour, and endangering the safety of his Subjects, judged it necessary for conser∣vation of both, yet further to enlarge his Navy, yet was unhappy, that his Subjects did not, or would not, rightly understand him in it. This was a Navy so Invincible to any Humane Power, that though Sir William Batten in 1648, carried a very considera∣ble part of it to his now Majesty; yet with the re∣sidue of it, and the Speaker and Warwick Frigats, (one of the third rate, the other of the fourth rate) conjoyned with some Hired Merchants-ships, the Rump-Parliament in 1651, 1652, and 1653, without difficulty overcome the Dutch in all Fights, and had without doubt subdued them, if Oliver had not first turned them out, and after in 1654, made an un∣setled and dishonourable Peace with the Dutch. The Dutch secured by this Peace, to prevent the Ruine of their State by another War with the Eng∣lish, immediately built much larger and more Men of War than they had; which could not be con∣cealed from Oliver, who encreased the English Fleot with many more and very considerable men of War. And after the King's Restauration, before the next Dutch War in 1664, the King added many more, so as the English Navy Royal was more than twice as formidable as it was when the Rump Engaged the Dutch. But the Dutch having greater quanti∣ties, and more choice of Timber, and many more
Builders than could be found in England, though the experience the English acquired in Naval fights with the Dutch in the former War were much aug∣mented, yet could not the English obtain so easie a Victory as before: and at this time, it is said, the Dutch have above 50 Men of War more than the King has, and of equal, if not greater Bulk in the main; and above 2500 pieces of Cannon. The Kings of Sweden and Denmark, and much more the French King, Alarm'd by this encrease of the English and Dutch Fleets, in proportion enlarged theirs; so that the French Fleet is in number, and bigness Superior to the English; but by reason of want of Mariners, none of them is comparably so formidable. But because Ships without Mariners, and Mariners without Ships, signifie but little in War, let us see from what Causes the Dutch are become so formidable to the English by Sea, above the French, Dane, or Swede. After Queen Elizabeth had fitted and repaired the Navy Royal (as has been said) in the first Par∣liament of her Reign, chap. 13. she enlarged the Trade of the Nation, by permitting the English to Trade in any Vessels, paying Strangers Duties: as this encreased the Trade of the Nation, so did it Mariners, whereby her Navy might be more and bet∣ter supplied by them. This paying strangers Duties for Goods Imported into England, was the principal cause the Dutch found an easie Foundation of their future great Trade and encrease of Mariners above what could be employed from the Ports of England: For about fourteen years after the Dutch Government began to
Bud int o States; and being pressed in their Wars against the Spaniards, permitted all Nations to Import and Export Goods, paying small Duties; whereby they became enabled, not only to make pro∣fitable Returns of the Fishing Trade to many other parts of the World, but of French Wines, Salt, Clothes from England, and many other Commodi∣ties from Germany and other places, and establish∣ed other Trades upon the returns of these; whereas the payment of Strangers Duties upon Goods Im∣ported into England, necessitated a Consumption of them here; and so the outward Trade and the Re∣turns became impossible to us, and by consequence the employment of all those Mariners who depended upon them. This Liberty and smalness of Duties upon Goods Imported and Exported by the Dutch in Queen E∣lizabeth's Reign, swell'd the Dutch Trade out of the bounds of Europe into the East and West-Indies; which afterwards in the Reigns of King James and Charles the first became incredibly encreased. Whereas, notwithstanding the Liberty granted to the English by the 1 Eliz. 13. the English being op∣pressed in the Fishing Trade, by reason of paying such great Duties upon Goods imported for Fish vended in forrein Trade above the Dutch; and to∣wards the latter end of her Reign, the people upon the Coast expecting to reap a greater benefit by the Newcastle-trade, deserted the Fishing Trade in for∣rein parts for white Herring, Ling and Cod; which being presently possessed by the Dutch, they thereby so much encreased their Mariners and Navigation, as the English became losers in both. And this was so
much more pernicious to the English, by how much the Fishing Trade was diffused generally from the Eastern Ports of England, and all sorts of people employed in it; whereas the Newcastle-trade is driven but by few, and none but younger men em∣ployed in it. The Loss of the forreign Trade for Fish from the Ports of England, was not sensibly perceived in King James his Reign, by reason of the encrease of the Newcastle-trade, and of the Spanish Trade, whereof the English became upon the matter Pro∣prietors, by the Peace the King made with Spain; and also about the middle of his Reign the Barba∣does and Virgina-Trade became considerable, and the Trade of the English to the East-Indies was much encreased, whereby the Nation became incredibly enriched, more than it was in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, or in any other Prince's before her. The Seeds of these Trades thus laid in King James his Reign, sprung up exceedingly in King Charles his Reign; and the Plantations of Mary∣land and New-England were added to those of Vir∣ginia and Barbadoes: But in the mean time the Dutch encreased their Trades to Muscovy, into the Baltick, up the Elb, to Turky and Italy; so that I cannot tell whether we employed more Mariners by encreasing our Western Plantations, or lost the employment of more in the Trades which the Dutch sought to supplant us in. The War breaking out in 1641, between the King and Parliament, streightned the English from fully supplying the East-Country and Germany with Wool∣len Manufactures; whereupon the English upon the
matter have lost the Trade into the Sound, and the Mariners their Employment; and the Trade up the Elb is much reduced. And the Murther of the King in 1648, extinguished that part of the Trade to Muscovy, which the Dutch had left for the Eng∣lish share. And as the Act of the 1 Eliz. 13. did so much preserve the English Timber, by how many more for∣rein Vessels were employed and bought by the Eng∣lish; and the 35 of Eliz. 11. was purposely made for further preservation of it: so the Terrour of the Act of Navigation hath made both these wholsome Laws ineffectual to the Nation, and to the charge of Duties upon Goods imported into England, ad∣ded the dearness of Shipping to it of about ⅓; so that all those Trades which could not overcome these Charges became lost to the Nation, and by conse∣quence the employment of those Mariners which de∣pended upon them. The last (I may say) fatal Acts to the English Navigation and Mariners, were those of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. against Importation of Irish Cattle, whereby the means of Intercourse between the two Nations being violated, all the Trades, as well For∣reign as Domestick, which depended thereon, be∣came lost to this Nation; and by consequence, the employment of all those Mariners which before sought their Living in them. I say this, to shew that it is the Dutch Navigation, and multitude of Mari∣ners, as well as greatness and numbers of men of War, which makes them so formidable to the Eng∣lish above the French, Dane, or Swede: and in case we take no care to encrease our Navigation and
Mariners, the English Navy Royal may become as little formidable to them, as the French, Dane, and Swede are to us: Especially now the Dutch can build twenty men of War, and of equal Dimensions, to one the King of England can, and in less time; and have above tenfold the Mariners the English have, whereof fivefold are Mariners whose Inte∣rest purely depends upon the Dutch Government; whereas the Mariners of England (now the Trade between England and Ireland is lost) have little or no dependence upon the Nation, in all the for∣rein Trades of it, and to our Plantations: but in case the Dutch, or any other Nation will give them better pay, it is our Mariners Interest to serve them. In a Book Printed by Authority of the Rump-Parliament 1652, with Mr. Selden's Treatise of the Dominion of the British Seas, Intituled, The Ri∣ches and Commodities of the British Seas, Fol. 488. it is affirmed the number of the Dutch Ships Fish∣ing upon the Coasts of England and Scotland to be 8400; and if twenty men be allowed to each Ship, the Mariners and Fishers amount to 168000, out of which Number they daily furnish their lon∣ger Voyages to all parts of the World: for by this mean they are enabled to brook the Seas, and in∣structed in Navigation and Pilotage; from whence their Greatest Navigators have had their Educa∣tion. And Mr. Evelyn in his late Book Intituled, The Original and Progress of Navigation and Com∣merce, mentions their Number of Mariners and Men sit for Sea-Service in their Wars, to amount to 120000.
Of the Strength, Charge, and Number of the English Navy Royal in the times of our late Princes, with their Designes, as also of the strength of the Navies of our Neighbours the Dutch and French, Colonel Thompson, a quondam Commissioner of the Navy, is said to have very good and large Historical Collections.
PETITIONS. 1. THe forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufa∣ctures, is a Principle to the Navigation of them to and from the Ports of England. 2. The free premission of Forreigners to make returns of our Woollen and other Manufactures into the Ports of England, and export them, may encrease trade to & from the Ports of England. 3. Trade between England and Ireland, is a Principle to the English Navigation between England and Ireland. 4. The Navigation of England is a mean of preserving the Soveraignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. 5. Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a Principle of Navigation to and from the Ports of England. 6. The free admission of Forreigners to inhabit in England, and in any Vessels to Fish and Trade into forrein parts for Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, may encrease the Trade of England. 7. Fishing and Trading Vessels are Riches. 8. The free admission of Forreigners to inhabit in England, and in any Vessels to fish upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and to trade into forrein parts, will add so many Ves∣sels to those in England, as they fish and trade in. 9. The free admission of Forreigners to make returns of Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and to export them, may encrease the trade of England to and from the Ports of England. 10. Navigation is a mean of preserving the Soveraignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. 11. The encrease of the English Navigation by Forreigners, will so much diminish the Navigation of others who may be Ene∣mies to the Crown of England. 12. So much less English Timber will be expended in building ships for all other trades but the Newcastle, East-Indy and Turky, by how many forrein ships the English buy in those other Trades. 13. The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other but the East-Indie, Newcastle, and Turky Trades may cause so many more forein ships to be bought, as the permission is more free. 14. The Newcastle, East-Indie and Turky Trades, and the Soveraignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England, e more secured by Ships built of English Timber.
15. The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turky Trades, may encrease Ships in England. 16. The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all o∣ther Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turky Trades, may cheaper encrease Ships in England. 17. Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, are principal means in the Manufactures of Cordage, Nets and Sails. 18. The free permission of Forreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, may encrease these cheaper, as the Impor∣tation is more free. 19. So much less of the Treasure of the Nation will be ex∣pended in buying Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, as they are cheaper. 20. Ropes, Sails, and Timber, are means in building and fitting up of Ships. 21. The free permission of Forreigners to import Timber, may cheaper encrease Timber in England. 22. The forrein Trade of Newcastle-Coal, is a Principle to the Navigation of England. 23. The free permission of the English in English-built Ships to export Newcastle-Coal, and make returns into the Ports of England, may encrease the forrein Trade of it. Axioms. 1. Business may be so much encreased, as the Principles are encreased. 2. Things may be so much more secured, as the means of pre∣serving them are encreased. 3. Things may be so much encreased, as the means are en∣creased. 4. Things may be so much cheaper encreased, as the means are cheaper. 5. Things may be so much more and cheaper encreased, as the means of preserving them are cheaper encreased.
HOW THE NAVIGATION Of England May be INCREASED, &c. Prop. 1. Theorem 1. THe free Importation of Forrein Goods into England, may encrease Navigation to and from the Ports of England. 1 Ax. 4. For every business may be so much encreased, as the Principles are encreased. 1 Pet. 4. But the forrein Trade of the Woollen and o∣ther Manufactures of England, is a Principle of the Navi∣gation of them to and from the Ports of England. 21 Prop. 3. And the free Importation of forrein Goods, may encrease a forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures. Therefore it may encrease Navigation to and from the Ports of England.
Annot. Britain being an Island, and so as another World divided from the Continent, the encrease of Navigation and Mari∣ners is more proper to it and desirable, than where the Sea lies but on part of the bounds of the Country: and this En∣crease is so much more desirable, by how much the Coast a∣bounds with many Excelling and Noble Ports, and the Coun∣try Naturally watred with Rivers more apt for Navigation than any other, and which through those lose themselves in the Ocean. But Navigation and Marriners cannot be o∣therwise encreased, than from such Principles as God and Na∣ture has ordained. Trade therefore being a Principle to Navigation, is superiour and more excellent than it, and may subsist without Navigation; but Navigation never without Trade. A Nation may be rich and flourishing by Trade, yet upon the Navigation of other Countries. The great Ri∣ches which France lately enjoyed, did arise chiefly from the English and Dutch Trading into their Ports. So Legorne and Florence grow rich by the Trade which the English French, and Dutch Navigation bring into Legorne. So it is in the Turkie, East Indie, and Muscovy Trades, by the English, French, Dutch, and Venetians, whereby those Countries grow vastly rich, yet employ no Shipping or Navigation to procure it. Trade being a principle to Navigation, Navigation may be infinitely encreased, as Trade is encreased: I desire there∣fore Navigation to and from the Ports of England might be encreased by the forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufactures, rather than by the Newcastle-trade, or the Trade to our Plantations: For the home-vent of the New∣castle-trade employs few of the Natives but Miners and Ma∣nners, and those but half the year, and is driven to the loss of the Nation: for we consume the Coals; and besides the Consumption of our Timber in the Shipping in this Trade, we generally buy the Pitch, Tar, Cordage and Sails employ∣ed in it, of the French, Dutch, Swedes, and Norwegians.
Add hereto, that this Trade has caused, vast destruction of the Wood-land-Grounds of the Eastern, Southern and Mid∣land parts of England; which by reason of the plenty and cheapness of Newcastle-Coals, can finde no vent. Whereas Navigation, which would arise from the forrein Trade of our Woollen and other Manufacturers, would so much en∣rich the Nation, as the value of the Manufactures is more than the Principles of them are in value. And I prefer the Navigation which may arise from encreasing our Ma∣nufactures at home, before that Navigation which arises from our Trades to our Plantations; because the Nation hereby would be more and better peopled, and the Lands of the Crown, Church, Nobility, Gentry and others of Eng∣land, would become so much more valuable, as Trade and Navigation would be hereby encreased: whereas the Planta∣tions rob us of our people, to the weakning the Nation, and diminishing the value of the Lands of it; and that besides Mariners, few people in England except Retailers, Sugar-Ba∣kers, Porters, and Car-men, are employed in the Trades of them. And the Riches which arise by the Trade of them, accrews to few but the King, Merchant, Sugar-bakers, and Retailers. And I do not question, but the value of the Consumption of the Commodities of the Plantations here in England, is much more than the profit of them by forrein Trade: And yet we have little else but the forrein Trade of our Woollen Manufactures, so Taxed, so Restrained, and so Endangered, as hath been in all the Three precedent Treatises demonstrated, to sustain the Loss the Nation re∣ceives by the Newcastle-trade, the Trade to our Plantations, and the Trades to Norway France, the Canaries, and for Lin∣nen. I desire as much as any man, that Navigation and Mari∣ners may be encreased by the Natives of England, and Eng∣lish Ships, so far as the Natives of England in such Shipping can maintain Navigation, yet both must be done in time, and by such means as God and Nature have ordained, viz. by encreasing Trade in England: and if both Trade and Navigation cannot be carried on by the Natives alone, I
see no reason why (at least at present) Trade (which is more excellent than Navigation) should not be encreased, though upon the account of forrein Navigation. And I say, it is impossible, as the case stands, that the forrein vent of our English Manufactures, and the Fish caught upon the Coasts of England, and Scotland, can be encreased by Eng∣lish Mariners in English-built Ships: For the Towns upon the Coast of England generally are become so decayed, that they are not neer half Inhabited; and so poor, that they have no Means to build Ships, or to buy our Woollen or other Manufactures, or the Fish caught upon our Coast; nor have Factories or Correspondence in forrein parts to establish Trade and Commerce: yet if they had, it is impos∣sible long to continue the Navigation we now possess in English-built Ships, therefore less possible to encrease it. It's believed, the French Nation, before their War with the Dutch, gained above 6000000 l. yearly by the English and Dutch trading into their Ports, for Wine, Salt, Brandy, Linnen, Paper, and other Commodities of France: Suppose the French King upon the account of encreasing the Navi∣gation and Mariners of France, should have excluded the English, and Dutch trading into his Ports, and by Edict have Commanded, that all the Commodities of France ven∣ded in forrein Trade, should first be brought to Paris, there none to buy them but Free-men and Companies, (if they have any) and they only to vend them in French-built Ships, and Sailed by ¾ French, whether they have Ships or Mariners or not; and that the Returns of them should pay the King twenty times the Duties they should in case they were imported into Holland or Hamburg: whether the em∣ployment of the Shipping and Mariners of France would have countervailed the loss France would have sustained thereby? Or Reader consider (chainging the places) if this be not the Condition of England, in reference to the forrein Trade of the Manufactures, and the Fish caught up∣on the Coast of it.
Coroll. 1. By the same reason, the free Permission of For∣reigners to make Returns of our Woollen and o∣ther Manufactures into the Ports of England, and to export them, may encrease Navigation to and from the Ports of England. 1 Pet. 4. For Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a principle of Navigation to and from the Ports of Eng∣land. 2. Pet. 4. And the free admission of Forreigners to make Returns of our Woollen and other Manufactures into the Ports of England, and export them, may encrease Trade to and from the Ports of England. Annot. As the free permission of Forreigners to work Manufa∣ctures in England and export them, would encrease Navi∣gation to and from the Ports of England; so would the free permission of Forreigners to make Returns of them into our Ports, and export them; and so would the Returns of these, and the exporting them again, and so infinitely; whereby Navigation to and from our Ports may be infinitely encrea∣sed. The Dutch and Hamburger, we see, have no principles of Trade or Navigation of their own; yet from the princi∣ples of the Fishery upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and the Groenland Fishery, and the Trades and Navigation depending thereon, and the principles they acquire from o∣ther places, by reason of their free Importation and Expor∣tation, employ more Shipping and Mariners than all the Christian Princes and States in all the world besides. The seeming Objection against this Permission, we hope to avoid in the Annot. upon the Coroll. of the 16 Proposition of this Treatise.
Corollary 2. By the same reason, the Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. against Importation of Irish Cattle, may encrease the Navigation of England. 3 Pet. 4. For Trade is a principle of the English Naviga∣tion between England and Ireland. 13 Prop. 3. And the Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20 Car. 2. cap. 1. against Importation of Irish Cattle, may en∣crease the Trade between England and Ireland. Annot. After the Navigation which may arise by the forrein vent of our Woollen and other Manufactures, I desire the Na∣vigation of England may be encreased from the Trade be∣tween England and Ireland▪ not only as the Crown of Ire∣land is depending upon the Crown of England; but also, because the benefits and Security of the English Nation are more interwoven between them, than can be expected from any other Country. The Navigation which the Trade between England and Ireland before these Acts did maintain, was, First, about one hundred Sail, and a proportionable number of Mariners were employed in bringing over Cattle. Secondly, A consi∣derable number of English Ships and Mariners (Mr. John De Boyse can better inform the Reader the number than I) were employed in the Trade of the Returns for their Lean Cattle, in Beer, Hops, Hats, Stockens, Cloath, and Stuffs of all sorts, all sorts of Dying-stuffs, Hides, Fruit, Sugars, To∣baccoes, and many other Commodities to Ireland. Thirdly, The Returns of these in Hides, Tallow, Wools, Yarn, &c. from Ireland in forrein Trade, was generally in English Ships, and sailed by English Mariners. But all this Naviga∣tion
depending upon the first Intercourse between England and Ireland for their Lean Cattle, the Cause of Importing Cattle ceasing, the Navigation which depended upon it ceas∣ed: and the Trade as well as the Navigation the Nation formerly enjoyed, is not only lost to it, but established in forrein Nations, to the Endangering as well as Impo∣verishing this: and of which you may more largely read in the Annot. upon the 18, 19, and 20, Propositions of the Trea∣tise of The Equal Danger of the Church, State, and Trade of England. Prop. 2. Theorem 2. The Repealing the Acts of the 18 and 20. Car. 2. cap. 1. against Importation of Irish Cattle, will so much more secure the Soveraignty of the Bri∣tish Seas to the Crown of England, as Navigation shall be thereby encreased. 2 Ax. 4. For things will be so much secured, as the means of preserving them are encreased. 4 Pet. 3. But the Navigation of England is a mean of preserving the Soveraignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. Coroll. 2. Prop. 1. And the Repealing the Acts against Importation of Irish Cattle, may encrease the Navigation of England. Therefore it will so much secure the Soveraignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. Annot. I say, the Repealing of these Laws may encrease, or ra∣ther restore the Navigation of England which it formerly enjoyed before them. And in truth I am content this Trade and Navigation should, so far as it can, be carried on only by
English; yet in such Vessels, as the English can manage it to their best benefit, whereby only this Nation might be the Store-house of supplying the Irish with all sorts of Com∣modities they want; and that the Nation might have the home-benefit of working their Wools, and the forrein be∣nefits of vending their Hides, Tallow, and Yarn, &c. for it is as much our Interest the English should enjoy these Trades and Navigation depending thereon, as that only the Eng∣lish should have the benefit of the Trade and Navigation to our Plantations; or the Dutch Interest alone to have the Spice-Trade and the Navigation which depends thereon. But since Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sove∣reignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England, the loss of it is as much dangerous to it. It is not the number and greatness of the French Navy Royal which makes the French King neer so formidable at Sea as either the English or Dutch, but their want of such Trades as might encrease their Navigation and Mariners. Prop. 3. Theorem 3. The free admission of Forreigners to inhabit in England, and in any Vessels to Fish and Trade in∣to forrein parts with Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, may encrease the Navi∣gation of England. 1 Ax. 4. For business may be so much encreased, as the Principles are encreased. 5 Pet. 4. But Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a principle of the Navigation of England. 6 Pet. 4. And the free admission of Forreigners to inha∣bit in England, and in any Vessels to fish and trade into for∣rein parts with Fish, &c. may encrease the Trade of Eng∣land. Therefore it may so much encrease the Navigation of England.
Annot. After the Navigation which may arise from the Trade of our Manufactures, and the free Intercourse between England and Ireland, I desire Navigation in England may be encreas∣ed by the Fishing Trade, especially of the Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, not only as the Fish may be more conveniently caught by such as fish from the Ports of England, if the King pleases to deny others to dry their Nets, or take in Fresh Water in any of his Dominions; but also the Freighting of Vessels with Beer and Provisions may be cheaper in the Fishery and forrein vent of Fish from the Ports of England; besides, the employment of many thousands of our poor people, would be of infinite benefit to the Lands of England, as the Fishery and forrein Trade of them should be encreased; and the Towns upon the Eastern Coast of England, which are now even desolate, would be∣come rich and populous. Moreover, it is a Scandal and dis∣honour to the Crown of England, which contains the So∣vereignty of the British Seas, that the benefits which arise from these Seas should be lost to this Nation, and established in others, to their enriching, and encrease of Navigation. I say, this free admission of Forreigners to inhabit in Eng∣land, and in any Vessels to fish and Trade into forrein parts with Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, may encrease the Navigation of England; for thereby their Interest being planted in the Nation, it would enjoy the fruits of their Trade and Navigation. Nor do I under∣stand, how otherwise (at least at present) this Nation can hope to enjoy the Fishery upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, or the forrein Trade of it, or any part of it: For the Inhabitants upon the Eastern Coast of England are so thin, that the Towns upon it (except Great Yarmouth) are even desolate, and so poor, that they have no means to build or buy Vessels for this Trade; nor have Factors or Agents in forrein parts whereby to entertain Trade and Commerce: And also the Timber of England is so destroyed
by the niggardly Trades we now enjoy, (whereby we can do little more than consume in England the Returns of our Manufactures, and the Product of our Plantations) that it is not long possible by it to maintain these Trades; therefore less possible by it to establish the Fishing Trade, which, it may be, will require more Shipping than we now employ in all the Trades we drive in the World. Or in case we had quantities of Timber sufficient for carrying on the Fishing Trade, yet would it be of no benefit to us in this Trade: for the Fish cost nothing but the catching, and the Hull of a Vessel for the Fishing Trade or Fishery, may be built for ⅔ of what one of equal dimensions can be built in England; and those built of English Timber are so heavy, that they require ½ more Sails and Cordage to fit them up, and so more Hands to manage them; whereby it becomes impossible to the English to Fish and Trade so cheap as the Dutch and Hamburger. Nor is this Mischief (as the case stands) pos∣sible to be remedied by Vessels built of forrein Timber in Eng∣land; for by reason of the high Duties upon it, and the Ad∣vantages the Norwegians have by imposing their own Terms upon us, the English at this day pay 30 l. per Cent. more for Timber imported, than the Dutch or Hamburgers do. Prop. 4. Theorem 4. The free Admission of Forreigners to Inhabit in England, and in any Vessels to Fish upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and to Trade into for∣rein parts, will so much encrease the Riches of Eng∣land, as the Vessels they Fish and Trade in are va∣luable. 1 Ax. 3. For things will be so much encreased, as is ad∣ded to them. 7 Pet. 4. But Fishing and Trading Vessels are Riches. 8 Pet. 4. And the free admission of Forreigners to inhabit in England, and in any Vessels to fish, &c. and Trade, &c.
will add so many Vessels to those of England, as they Fish and Trade in. Therefore it will so much encrease the Riches of Eng∣land. Annot. This Admission of Forreigners to inhabit in England, &c. as it will so much enrich the Nation as the Vessels they Fish and Trade in are in value, in case they bring Vessels into Eng∣land, so will it so much enrich the Nation, in case they bought the Vessels here in England, and employed them from the Ports of it: For then the Nation retains the Ves∣sels still; and so much as is expended therein, will be added to the Treasure of the Nation. Since therefore the Nation will be so much enriched, as the Vessels wherein Forreigners Fish and Trade from our Ports are in value; I say, that in case a Revenue for some time were established, to pay every Forreigner who would inhabit in England, and Fish upon the Coasts of England and Scotland from any of the Ports of England ⅓, or half the value of his Vessel, the Nation would be ⅔, or twice so much a Gainer, more than if any Native bought such forrein Vessel: and for my part, as poor as I am, I should most willingly Contribute to such a Tax. Prop. 5. Theorem 5. The free permission of Forreigners to make Re∣turns of the Fish caught upon the Coasts of Eng∣land and Scotland into the Ports of England, and to export them, may increase the Navigation of England. 1 Ax. 4. For business may be so much increased, as the principles are increased. 5 Pet. 4. But Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a principle to the Navigation of England.
9 Pet. 4. And the free admission of Forreigners to make Returns of Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland into the Ports of England, &c. may increase the Trade of England to and from the Ports of England. Therefore it may increase the Navigation of England. Annot. And this Navigation may be so much better, more conve∣niently and safely increased, as our Ports are better, more convenient and safe than those of Hamburg or the Ʋnited Netherlands. Which being so, I see no reason but that the Groenland Fishing, and the returns thereof, may be better, more conveniently and safely carried on from the Ports of England, than from Hamburg or the Ʋnited Netherlands, in case the Fishing and Returns were as free here as there. As the free Fishery upon the Coasts of England and Scot∣land may increase the Navigation of England, so will the forrein vent of Fish, and so will the Returns, and Expor∣ting them again from the Ports of England, &c. But as the dearness of Navigation may strangle the forrein vent of our Fish, and fix the Trade and Navigation to other places; so unless the Returns be as free and cheap in England, as other places, whereby they may again finde vent in forrein Trade, though the outward Trade were as free and cheap as in o∣ther places, yet it would be impossible to increase the fishing trade beyond the consumption of the Returns in England, and the Moneys paid for them. Prop. 6. Theorem 6. The free admission of Forreigners to Inhabit in England, and to Fish and Trade in any Vessels to Forreign parts for Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, may more secure the So∣vereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of Eng∣land.
2 Ax. 4. For things will be so much more secured, as the means of preserving them are increased. 10 Pet. 4. But Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. 3 Prop. 4. And the free admission of Forreigners to inha∣bit, Fish and Trade, &c. may increase the Navigation of England. Therefore it may more secure the Sovereignty of the Bri∣tish Seas to the Crown of England. Coroll. By the same reason, the free permission of For∣reigners to make Returns of Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and to Export them, may more secure the Sovereignty of the Bri∣tish Seas to the Crown of England. 10 Pet. 4. For Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. 5 Prop. 4. And the free permission of Forreigners to make Returns of fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scot∣land into the Ports of England, and export them, may in∣crease the Navigation of England. Annot. upon this Prop. and Coroll. Navigation is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England; which being so, the Navigation which arises from the Fishing-trade, and the Re∣turns into the Ports of England, and exporting them again, &c. above all others, will more secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas. For in the Navigation which arises from the forrein Trade of our Manufactures, it may be, we employ not one Mariner to one thousand of those who are employed in working the Manufactures; and it may be, not one Ves∣sel to ten thousand: whereas even in the catching and cu∣ring
the Fish, we employ Vessels in Navigation; and all the Men are Mariners, or such as by it become Mariners. Be∣sides, the Bulkiness of the Fish in forrein Trade, employ so many more Vessels and Mariners, as they are more Bulky than other Goods: and the free Importing and Exporting of the Returns, creates a new Trade, and by consequence a new Navigation, to the further employment of Shipping and Mariners: so may the free returns of these, and expor∣ting them again, and so infinitely; whereby the Sovereignty of the British Seas may be infinitely more secured to the Crown of England. Prop. 7. Theorem 7. The free admission of Forreigners to Inhabit in England, and to Fish and Trade into forrein parts with Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and freely to make returns into the Ports of England, and Export them, will so much diminish the Navigation of those who may be E∣nemies to the Crown of England, as the Naviga∣tion of England shall be thereby increased. 2 Ax. 1. For in every thing, the Effects will be as the Causes are. 11 Pet. 4. But the increase of the Navigation of Eng∣land by Forreigners, will so much diminish the Naviga∣tion of others who may be Enemies to the Crown of Eng∣land. 3 Prop. 4. And the free admission of Forreigners to In∣habit in England, and to fish and trade into forrein parts, &c. will increase the Navigation of England. 5 Prop. 4. So will the free permission of Forreigners to make Returns into the Ports of England, and Export them, &c. Therefore it will so much diminish the Navigation of those who may be Enemies to the Crown of England.
Annot. It is said in a Treatise Licensed by the Authority of the Rump-Parliament, in the additional Evidences, p. 488. af∣ter Mr. Selden's Mare Clausum, that the Dutch in the Fishe∣ry upon the Coasts of England and Scotland employed 8400 Vessels, and 168000 Mariners and Fishers; which however it may seem incredible, yet if we consider the vast Fleets they yearly send into the Sound, to Muscovy, France, Spain, and Italy, whose Freight is in a great measure made up of Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, be∣sides the Busses and Mariners employed in the Fishery; and the multitudes of Shipwrights, Carpenters, Smiths, and all sorts of people employed in making Ropes, Nets and Sails for the Fishery, and Trades depending upon it: without doubt the employment of people is very considerable, and the Navigation even incredible; it being the Basis of all the Trades the Dutch drive in the world, all their other Trades and Navigation being upon the Principles acquired from other places originally derived from the Fishing-Trade. It is a Shame and Scandal then (besides the danger of it to the English Nation) that it was never in any well-weigh∣ed Counsel considered, from what Causes the Dutch in nu∣merous Fleets for four Moneths in the year follow the Her∣ring from Scotland to Yarmouth, whilest the wretched peo∣ple upon our Coast stand starving and looking on, and can∣not employ one Vessel or Mariner in it. Even in the Her∣ring-fishing before Yarmouth, we fish little above one fort∣night, and in that fishing the Dutch employ above threefold the Vessels we do, and above twofold the Mariners. Consequences. From whence the Dutch are able, without Pressing, to Man their Men of War against us, and at the same time to drive
incredible Trades abroad; when we by Pressing, and Land-Souldiers to boot, though we drive no Trade if we had not advantage by the goodness of our Men of War, finde it diffi∣cult enough to oppose them; whereas in case this Fishery, and the Trades and Navigation depending thereon, were driven by these Dutch-men, or any numbers of them, from the Ports of England, the Dutch would have so much less means to oppose the English, and dispute the Sovereignty of the British Seas, and the English would have so much more means to defend themselves, and bring the Dutch to Rea∣son. Prop. 8. Theorem 8. The free permission of the English to buy for∣rein Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, will so much more preserve the Timber of England, as the Ships so bought are more. 11 Ax. 3. For things will be so much preserved, as less of them is expended. 12 Pet. 4. But so much less English Timber will be ex∣pended in building English Ships for all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, by so many forrein Ships as the English buy in other Trades. 13 Pet. 4. And the free permission of the English to buy forrein Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-In∣die, and Turkie Trades, may cause so many more forrein Ships to be bought, as the permission is more free. Therefore it may so much preserve the Timber of Eng∣land. Annot. And if it may preserve the Timber of England, I am sure it is more than time the English were permitted to buy
Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades: for by reason the Act of Navigation con∣fines the English to Trade and make Returns into the Ports of England only in English-built Ships; the English have not only not been able to build one ship for the Norway-trade for Timber, or the forrein Trade of white Herring or Cod caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, since the Rump-Parliament contrived the Act of Navigation, but to maintain the niggardly Trades we now drive; wherein upon the matter we consume all the Returns of our Manufactures, and the Product of our Plantations: The Timber of England is so wasted, that in any conveni∣ent distances for building Ships, there is not ¼ of Timber left standing, as was when the Rump-Parliament invented this Law. See more hereof, in the Annot. upon the 10, 11, 12 and 13 Propositions of The equal Danger of the Church, State, and Trade of England. I have with as much Zeal endeavoured, yet without suc∣cess, to represent this to the Parliament, and the dire Conse∣quences of it, so far as I understood the Timber of England to be wasted upon the Coasts of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Es∣sex. And being last Easter-Eve was twelvemonth at Bristol, some Gentleman and I went to see the Oxford Frigat, then ready to be Lanched, and built by Captain Baily (a very Civil person, and I believe an excellent Builder.) After some discourse, I asked him if English Timber were plentiful in the West of England; and he told me, he with great diffi∣culty got Timber to build this Frigat; and that in building the Edgar-frigat, he bought the Timber twelve miles beyond Worcester, which is 50 miles from Bristol. I then asked him, what he thought of the State of the Nation, as it now stands, in reference to the Navigation of it, in English-built Ships, whenas the Ring with such difficulty built one Man of War: he told me, it was impossible to be continued, and that he had more reason than another to know it; for be∣sides his long being accqstiomed to build Ships, he had order from the King to survey his Western and Southern Forests, and to return an Account of it to the King himself. I
thanked him, and told him I was equally sorry with him for the condition of the Nation, yet was glad a man of his Knowledge and Experience had the same apprehensions as I had; though with all the Sollicitations I could use, I was so far from getting relief to the Nation herein, as that I could not get the Apprehensions he had herein, to be received by the Parliament. Prop. 9. Theorem 9. The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, will more secure them, and al∣so the Sovereignty of the British Seas, to the Crown of England. 2 Ax. 4. For things will be so much more secured, as the means of preserving them are more. 14 Pet. 4. But the Turkie, East-Indie, Newcastle-Trades, and the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England, are more secured by means of ships built of English Timber. 8 Prop. 4. And the free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, will more preserve the Timber of England. Therefore it will so much more secure the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trade, and the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. Annot. If we consider how much the Newcastle-trade increases, as does the East-Indie-trade; and how much greater the Dutch War-fleet is than the King's of England; And that, as the case stands, the Newcastle-trade is necessary, and the East-Indie-trade very beneficial to the Nation; it may be a question if the growth of these Trades, and the necessities of increasing the Navy Royal, will not require greater
quantities of Timber than for the future can be found in convenient distances in England; however, to preserve these, it is very reasonable the English be permitted to buy Ships in all their other Trades. Prop. 10. Theorem 10. The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all their other Trades but the Turkie, East-Indie, and Newcastle-Trades, may increase the Navigation of England. 3 Ax. 4. For things may be so much increased, as the means are increased. 22 Pet. 1. But Ships are means in Navigation. 15 Pet. 4. And the free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle-trade, &c. may increase the ships of England. Therefore it may increase the Navigation of England. Annot. So that this permission, as it will more secure the Sove∣reignty of the British Seas, the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, so it may increase the Navigation of Eng∣land in our Trades to and from our forrein Plantations, the Trades to Hamburg, into the Sound, Muscovy, France and Spain, but especially to Norway for Timber, Pitch and Tar; in which Trade, as we never built one ship since the Act of Navigation, nor, as the case stands, can ever hope to do: so in time of War between the Dutch and French, the New∣castle-ships are so employed in other Trades, as the home-vent of Coal is not only not throughly supplied, but our Norway-Merchants cannot hire enough to furnish us as at other times, especially in our Trades to Dromen Northward of Bergen; as Mr. Hammond a Norway-Merchant, who af∣firms, that in this Trade he vends more of our English Ma∣nufactures,
than all our Norway Merchants do in all their other Trades to Norway, has often complained to me. And though the King has been pleased to permit our Norway Merchants to buy about 50 Flyboats, yet these, with the ad∣dition of the Dutch Prizes taken in the late War, will not neer supply the defect. And I say moreover, in case the English be not permitted to buy Ships in this Trade, and in our Trades to our Plantations, Hamburg, Muscovy, to France, Spain, Guiny, and into the Sound, and other places, we shall endanger the loss of these Trades, as well as the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, and the Sovereignty of the British Seas: And that the Title of the Act of Navigation is a contradiction, in affirming it to be for Increase and En∣couragement of Navigation and Mariners, yet confining them both to English-built Ships, and sailed by ¾ English. Prop. 11. Theorem 11. The free permission of the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, may cheaper increase the Navi∣gation of England. 4 Ax. 4. For things may be so much cheaper increased, as the means are cheaper. 22 Pet. 1. But Ships are means in Navigation. 16 Pet. 4. And the free permission of the English to buy ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, may cheaper increase ships in England. Therefore it may cheaper increase theNavigation of England. Annot. May cheaper increase Ships in England. I could rarely discourse this point; but it would still be objected against me, that though forrein ships be cheaper than English-built, yet English ships are more strong and durable: and this con∣tended with such heat, as would not admit of a compari∣son
of the benefits which might accrue by the strength and durableness of ours, and the cheapness and convenience of forrein ships. I confess, for ought I know, the strength and durableness of English-built ships may be a reason to have the King's Men of War, and ships for the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, built of English Timber, so long as the Timber of England can afford it. But in our other Trades, though we had Timber sufficient, and it were my opinion it were better to carry on these Trades in English built ships; yet I say, no man less conversant in any business, understands so well, as a man more conversant in it, by what means he can best carry on his business; and therefore if the English Mer∣chant findes he can better carry on his business in English-built ships, no question but he will prefer them before forein. But if the English Merchant be confined to English built ships in his trades, and can get none; or if they be so dear, or incon∣venient (for we do not understand how to build convenient ships for all Trades) as not to finde profit; not only the Mariners lose their employment, but, it may be, the employ∣ment of a thousand other people, whose Labours depend upon that Trade, will be hereby lost. Corollary. By the same reason, the free permission of For∣reigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax into England, may cheaper increase the Manufa∣ctures of Ropes, Nets and Sails in England. 17 Pet. 4. For Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, are Prin∣cipal means in the Manufactures of Ropes, Nets and Sails. 18 Pet. 4. And the free permission of Forreigners to im∣port Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, may so much increase these cheaper in England, as the Importation is more free. Annot. After the establishing Religion and Justice, no greater happiness attends any Nation, than the constant imployment
of people: And I say, both Religion and Justice may much better be propagated upon people bred up in honest Profes∣sions, than upon those who subsist by Pilfering, Cheating, Stealing, Canting, and Begging; and therefore all those Laws, or other means, which take away the employment of people in honest Professions, do not onely make them mise∣rable, and a burthen to the Nation, but hinder the growth of Religion and Justice. And if the Importation of Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax were permitted to be as freely im∣ported into England, as Hamburg or the Ʋnited Netherlands, I see no reason but many thousands of poor people in the Suburbs of London, and in all the Towns upon the Eastern Ports of England, might better and cheaper be employed in making Ropes, Nets and Sails, than in Hamburg or the Ʋnited Netherlands, by how much the Inhabitants may cheaper subsist, and be maintained, than those in Hamburg or the Ʋnited Netherlands. Before the Act of Navigation, the English by the 1 Eliz. 13. might import Pitch and Tar in any Vessels; and before the year 1640, the English by reason of the goodness of their Trade into the Sound, returned such quantities of Ruff Hemp and Flax, that the poor people upon the Eastern Coast of England did make sufficient Ropes, Nets and Sails for the Fishery and Navigation of it. And after the Eng∣lish had, for reasons before-said in the former Treatises and this Preface, almost lost the Trade into the Sound; yet be∣fore the Act of Navigation, having free liberty to import Pitch and Tar, and the Dutch importing Ruff Hemp and Flax upon reasonable terms; this employment continued, to the incredible support of the poor Inhabitants in the Towns upon the Coast: But the Act of Navigation prohi∣biting the English to import Pitch and Tar, unless in English-built ships, and the English not being able to build one ship for the Trade of them, they were reduced to have it upon such terms as the Norwegians pleased to impose upon them. And though Oliver permitted the Norway Traders to import Timber in any Vessels, notwithstanding the Act of Navigation; yet the Law still was in force against Im∣portation
of Pitch and Tar; and theDutch not being permit∣ted to import Ruff Hemp & Flax, and the English Trade into the Sound every day decaying, few returns from Riga, Revel, Narve, or Quinborough, of Ruff Hemp and Flax, was made into England, but in English Vessels outward fraught with Ballast, and bought with ready Money; whereby Ruff Hemp and Flax became so dear, that the poor English lost the employment. In the Town of Yarmouth, before the Act of Navigation, the Inhabitants made yearly 2800 Tun of Cordage, besides Nets and Sails: now, for the Reasons afore∣said, they make not ten, and neither Nets or Sails; for the Dutch importing Ruff Hemp and Flax, and Pitch and Tar ⅓ cheaper, can work these so cheap, as the English cannot: and then the Act of Navigation permits the English to buy them, and the Dutch to import them; but sure this is not made either for employment of our people, or for increase of Religion or Justice in England. Prop. 12. Theorem 12. The free permission of Forreignes to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, will so much more preserve the Treasure of the Nation, as the Importation is more free. 11 Ax. 3. For things will be so much more preserved, as less is expended of them. 19 Pet. 4. But so much less of the Treasure of the Na∣tion will be expended in buying Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, as they are cheaper. 18 Pet. 4. And the free permission of Forreigners to im∣port Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, will make them so much cheaper, as the Importation is more free. Therefore it will so much preserve the Treasure of the Nation.
Annot. This permission will not only preserve so much of the Treasure of the Nation, by how much Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax are cheaper sold; but by how much the Manufactures of Ropes, Nets and Sails made of them, arise in value above their Principles. Therefore, the not permit∣ting this Importation, both ways Exhausts the Treasure of the Nation, and that to such a degree, that I remember before the Act of Navigation, I was a part-Builder in a Vessel for the Newcastle-trade; and about four years after, the same Builder and Owners (when the poor people upon the Coast had lost their employment in making Cordage and Sails) paid above ⅓ more in proportion for the fitting out this Ves∣sel, than we did for the former. Prop. 13. Theorem 13. The free permission of Forreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, and Timber into England, may cheaper increase the building and fitting up of Ships in England. 4 Ax. 4. For business may be so much cheaper increased, as the means are cheaper increased. 20 Pet. 4. But Ropes, Sails, and Timber are means in building and fitting up of Ships. Coroll. Prop. 11. And the free permission of Forreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax into England, may cheaper increase the Manufactures of Ropes and Sails in England. 21 Pet. 4. And so this permission may cheaper increase Timber in England. Therefore it may cheaper increase the building of Ships in England.
Annot. Though I desire the Trade and Navigation of the Na∣tion should be increased by permission of the English to buy Ships in all other Trades but the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trades, yet I had rather all their Trades were car∣ried on by Ships built in the Ports of England: for if it be better for a Nation, that in any profitable employment the Inhabitants earn 10000 l. or a greater or lesser sum, than to have 10000 l. or a greater or lesser sum given them, and the people not employed; then so much better it is for this Nation to have ships built in the Ports of it, than to buy them, by how much the Labours of the people in buil∣ding and fitting up of ships are valuable. But to attain to this in England, it will not be only ne∣cessary freely to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, and Timber; but also to permit all forrein Ship-wrights to inhabit, and have equal freedom to exercise their Professions in all convenient places in England for building Ships; for no man is born an Artificer, but it comes to pass by Educa∣tion, Labour, and Experience: and the English are un∣acquainted in building Busses for the Fishing Trade, and in building ships for the Norway or Groenland Trades, and many other. The Dutch build ships for all Trades accor∣ding to the best convenience: we only know how to build Men of War; and our ships for other Trades are of like figure, whether it be convenient or not. Consequences. From hence it is, that the English are not able so to build one Buss or Vessel for the Fishery and forrein Trade of White Herring caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, as to turn to profit; or for the Groenland Fishery and for∣rein Trade of it, or for the Norway Trade: But Trading in Newcastle-ships to Norway, and the ships being dear and In∣convenient
for that Trade, enables the Norwegians to impose like Rates upon us for Pitch, Tar, and Timber, as the English can import these in those dearer and more inconve∣nient Ships they are restrained to. The King's Duties, and employment of English Mari∣ners, are opposed to this free Importation of Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp, Flax, and Timber. For the Kings Duties, upon an enquiry, about four years since, I found the King's Duties for Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax imported, did amount to about 1600 l. per Annum: and if the payment of Searchers and other Officers of the Custom-house were deducted, perhaps not 1000 l. per Annum came clear to the King: So that if the whole Duties hereof were taken a∣way, the Revenue of the Crown would not be hereby much diminished. It is true, the King's Duties for Timber im∣ported since the burning the City of London, are considera∣ble; yet not so to the King, for it is Farmed out, and the Farm to the King is (as I am informed) 6000 l. per An∣num; whereas, if the inward Freight of these were as cheap as into Holland or Hamburg, besides the employment of our people, the King's Duties, by the greatness of the Trade, might be so much more, as the Trade is greater; and the King save more, by the cheapness of Timber, in buil∣ding and repairing his Men of War and Palaces, than now his Revenue for Timber amounts to. In the employment of our Mariners to import Ruff Hemp and Flax, two Considerations arise. First, The num∣ber of Ships and Mariners employed. Secondly, The Em∣ployment. The number of ships employed (so well as I can learn) are about nine, whereof two are fraught out∣ward with Cony-skins and Woollen Manufactures; the other seven take Bills of Exchange from Hamburg, and have no outward Lading but Ballast: so that the number of Ships being nine, allowing thirteen Men to every ship, and the Voyage to Dantzick, Queenborough, Riga, Revel, and Narve to be four Moneths, the whole amounts to 117 Mariners, who being employed but ⅓ of the year, the constant employ∣ment of 39 Mariners is equivalent to it. But if we con∣sider
the employment, the outward Voyage of seven of these ships is lost time to the Mariners, and loss to the Nation in the Ware and Tare of the Ships for want of a Freight, and so much more as the Hemp and Flax is bought with ready Money, for want of Goods to exchange for them. So I leave it to any to judge, whether the employment of 39 Ma∣riners, whereof above 30 are not only in half of their employ∣ment idly employed, but to the loss and impoverishing the Nation, be comparable to the constant employment of (it may be) above 100000 people, by the free importation of Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp, Flax and Timber, in building ships, and in the Manufactures of Ropes, Nets and Sails. Coroll. By the same reason, the free permission of For∣reigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp, Flax, and Timber, may cheaper increase the Navigation of England. 22 Pet. 1. For Shipping is a mean to increase Navigation. 13 Prop. 4. And the free permission of Forreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp and Flax, and Timber, may cheaper increase Shipping in England. Annot. It is said, the Dutch build Busses and Vessels for the Nor∣way Trade, of little other Timber but Fir; and that in the Fishery these Busses will weather a Storm, when the Dutch Men of War cannot abide it. And if the Importation of Ruff Hemp and Flax, Pitch, Tar and Timber were as free in England as the Ʋnited Netherlands, we might have the convenience of building and fitting up Busses and Vessels for the Fishery and Norway-Trade as cheap as the Dutch, and also have the convenience of our Ports, better, more safe and convenient than theirs for the Fishery and Norway-Trade to boot; besides the benefit of fresh Water, and drying our
Nets in the Fishery; which the King, in case it were esta∣blished from our Ports, might deny to them; and also can cheaper freight Vessels for the Fishery and Norway Trade, than can be from Hamburg or any Port in the Ʋnited Nether∣lands; whereas by restraining and charging the Importa∣tion of Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp, Flax, and Timber, we do not only lose all these benefits, but establish them to the Dutch and Norwegians, who will never thank us for it. Prop. 14. Theorem 14. The free permission of Forreigners to import Pitch, Tar, Ruff Hemp, Flax, and Timber, may more and cheaper secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. 5 Ax. 4. For things will be so much more and cheaper secured, as the means of preserving them are cheaper in∣creased. 4 Pet. 4. But Navigation is a mean of preserving the So∣vereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. Coroll. And the free permission of Forreigners to import Pitch, Tar, &c. may cheaper increase the Navigation of Eng∣land. Therefore it may more and cheaper secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. Annot. This permission will not only more and cheaper secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas, by how much more the King may draw out so many more Mariners to man his Fleet, as Navigation shall be hereby cheaper increased; but it will also so much more secure the Sovereignty of the Bri∣tish Seas, the Newcastle, East-Indie, and Turkie Trade, by how much the plenty and cheapness of forrein Timber may supply the building and repairing Houses, Ships, and
Inclosures, &c. in England, whereby our English Timber will be so much preserved, which otherwise would be ex∣pended in them. Prop. 15. Theorem 15. The free permission of Forreigners to Import and Export all sorts of forrein Commodities into the Ports of England, may cheaper increase Navi∣gation to and from the Ports of England. 1 Ax. 4. For business may be so much increased, as the Principles are increased. 1 Pet. 4. But the forrein Trade of our Manufactures, is a principle of Navigation to and from the Ports of Eng∣land. 23 Prop. 3. And the free permission of Forreigners to Import and Export all sorts of forrein Commodities, may cheaper increase the forrein Trade of our Manufactures. Therefore it may increase Navigation to and from the orts of England. Annot. This permission may increase Navigation, as the for∣rein Trade of our Growths and Manufactures, and the fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland is increased; and it will much more increase Navigation to and from the Ports of England, upon the account of the Goods themselves which are imported and exported. The free Importation and Exportation of French Wines, Brandies, Salt, Spice, Fish caught upon the Coasts of England & Scotland, and the Woollen Ma∣nufactures of the Ʋnited Netherlands, is the general Composi¦tion of those stupendious Fleets which the Dutch yearly send in times of Peace into the Sound; whereas we, for want of these, send not above nine, and seven of these out∣ward laden only with Ballast. To Muscovy, by the benefit of
these outward fraught, they usually employ above forty, we not above three in two years. But in case Forreigners were permitted to inhabit and trade for Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scot∣land, and to import and export from the Ports of England Salt, French Wines and Brandies, as free as from Hamburg or the Ʋnited Netherlands; let us see if these Trades into the Sound and Muscovy might not be better, and more beneficial∣ly carried on from the Ports of England, than either from Hamburg or Holland. Herein I know but of one advantage the Dutch have over us, that is in the Spice-trade, which in this respect is very considerable, that having the sole Trade of it, they can raise or fall the Prices of it, so as to vend the rest of their Commodities cheaper than another Nation which cannot Counterpoise this some other way. But in case the outward vent of Fish, Salt, Wine, and Brandies were as free from the Ports of England as those of the Ʋnited Ne∣therlands, we should First have the benefit of our Ports, more, much better, more convenient and safe than theirs. Secondly, We should have the benefit of vending our Manufactures at the best terms, whereby we should have so much more bene∣fit than the Dutch, as our Wools and other Principles are better and cheaper than can be had in the Ʋnited Nether∣lands, and as men can fare and be maintained cheaper here than there. Thirdly, We may Ballast all the Ships outward fraught with Coals, as occasion serves, cheaper than the Dutch. Fourthly, We can supply the people within the Sound better with Pepper, than the Dutch. Fifthly, We may be may have as much benefit in vending our Sugars and Tobaccoes in this Trade above the Dutch, as the Dutch have in the Spice-trade above us. Sixthly, We have the be∣nefit of Trading for Cony-skins, Lead and Tin, which the Dutch have not. So that in case the other Trades into the Sound were as free from the Ports of England as Holland, I see no reason, not withstanding the Dutch Monopoly of the Spice-trade, but we might drive a much greater, and more considerable Trade and Navigation from England: and the reasons are the same in the Trade and Navigation to Mus∣covy.
And if the free permission may establish a better Trade and Navigation from England to the North, and North-East, than can be from the Ʋnited Netherlands, so I see no rea∣son but if we could vend the Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, so well as the Dutch, in France, Spain and Italy, and were permitted to vend our Growths and Manufactures from the next Ports, but we should have a much greater advantage above the Dutch in the South and South-East Trades and Navigation, than in the North and North-East: For without doubt we might under-sell the Dutch in all those Woollen Manufactures they vend in Spain, Italy and Turkie: we have the benefit of compoun∣ding Freights with Pepper and Callico's better than they; and if we please, may have as much benefit above them in Ballasting Ships with Coals, and with compounding Freights of Lead, Tin, Leather, Calve-skins, of Sugars, and Cho∣coletta, Tobacco's and other products of our Plantations, as the Dutch have over us in their Spice-trade, which takes up but little lading in these Trades and Navigation. Coroll. By the same reason, the free permission of For∣reigners to make Returns of Goods exported into the Ports of England, and to export them, may increase Navigation to and from the Ports of Eng∣land. 1 Pet. 4. For Trade to and from the Ports of England, is a principle of Navigation to and from the Ports of England. 2 Pet. 4. And the free permission of Forreigners to make Returns of Goods exported into the Ports of England, and export them, may increase Trade to and from the Ports of England.
Annot. This permission will increase Navigation to and from the Ports of England; so will the Returns of these, and expor∣ting them again, and so infinitely. And in all these Trades and Navigations, the forrein Trades of our Manufactures and Growths, and Fish caught upon our Coasts, will receive this benefit, that if any part of the World wants any of these Goods, and but in a little measure stand in need of our Goods, these Goods of ours may finde forrein vent, which otherwise would not of themselves pay the charge of the Voyage. This permission also would create a constant Trade and Navigation to and from the Ports of England, whereby the people upon the Coast, and from all parts of England, would finde a constant employment, & infinite other benefits would accrue hereby to the Country and Lands of England, in Victualling Ships, &c. which can neither be foreseen or enumerated. This King's Duties, and the employment of English Ships and Mariners, are usually opposed to this Permission. But the Opposition is without consideration of the nature of Trade, the King's Revenue, or Navigation: For Trade be∣ing a principle to the King's Revenue, and Navigation which depends upon it; both the King's Revenue and Navigation may be infinitely increased, as the forrein Trades of the Nation, or the forrein Trade of other Commodities driven from the Ports of England, are increased. But if men begin at the Consequences, viz. the King's Revenue and Navigation, and Tax Trade higher than it can bear; or restrain it only to such Ships, so that Trade hereby becomes lost, so does the King's Revenue, and the Navigation. But because of the Importance of it, we will therefore more intently compare the Loss the King shall receive by this Permission, and what will be the damage of our English Navigation and Mariners; and if any be to either, whether it may not be otherways over-ballanced. Herein I say, that this permission of Forreigners to inhabit
and Fish from the Ports of England, and to vend their white Herring in forrein Trade, and to import and export all sorts of forrein Commodities, and make Returns into the Ports of England, will not diminish the Kings Revenue, though they paid no Duties; nor the employment of English Ships and Mariners, for we employ no Shipping or Mariners in it, nor hath the King any Revenue thereby: whereas by it the King's Revenue would be hereby so much increased, as the consumption of Beer, Ale, and all other Exciseable Commodities are more; and our English Mariners, in all outward and inward Voyages, may finde employment. I do not believe (unless it be for French Wines imported and consumed in England) the King's Duties imported and exported out of Harwich-Haven (from whence all the Trade the Dutch drive in the East and North-East, might be better driven, than from all the Ports of the Ʋnited Netherlands) amount to 300 l. per Annum. Nor do we employ one Vessel or Mariner to any part of the World from thence, upon the forrein Trade of Goods imported: Even the Town of Tarmouth (which we so much boast of) is so far from carrying on any Trade upon this account, that, I am told, they cannot supply any part of the World with a piece of Norwich-stuff, though the Navigation between Nor∣wich and them be very commodious. Is it not a shame then, that such prodigious Trades and Navigations upon this account should from the other side of the Water be dri∣ven from worse and more incommodious Harbours, whilest we employ not one Vessel or Mariner in any of them? And what is affirmed of Yarmouth and Harwich, I believe, is as true of all the other Ports of England, except London. As Harwich is of all others the most opportune and excellent Harbour for the East and North-East parts of Europe; so is Falmouth for the South, South-East, West and South-West parts of the World. I cannot tell what the King's Duties for Goods imported there yearly arise to; nor whether within the Harbour there be any good Towns for reception of Mer∣chants, and Storehouses for Goods: But I think I may safe∣ly affirm, that in all Christendom is not so healthful and
delicate a place for Warehouses and reception of Merchants as Ipswich is: the Town so clean, though an even Level, that after the greatest Rains in the depth of Winter, a man in Slippers may walk the Town over without wetting his Feet: And though Ships of 200 Tun burthen may come up to the Key, yet every Street is watered with the purest and sweetest Water of any place I ever came in. To these may be added, that standing in the Bosome of the most Fertile County of Suffolk, which conjoyns with the no less Fertile County of Essex, it is, or, I am sure might be supplied with all sorts of Provisions by Land equal to any other. And if these two Ports were made free for Importation and Exportation of Goods by all Nations, and the same Revenue continued to the King; and that it were free for all people to inhabit in England, and to Fish, and Trade with Fish into forrein parts, and make Returns into England; I should be content the rest of the Ports of the Nation should enjoy their Priviledges so long as they pleased. The King of Sweden made Gottenburgh free but for seven years, which has made it the most flourishing Town for Trade in the North-East: So did the Duke of Florence Legorne, whereby it excels all other Ports in the Mediterranean; yet neither of these any ways comparable in any respect to Falmouth or Ipswich. But if this cannot be had, I must submit; yet I hope it will not be urged, it will be to the detriment of the King's Revenue, or hinder the English Navigation, or employment of our Mariners. Another Objection made against the free permission of Forreigners to import Goods, is, that the greatest Returns which the Dutch make from Dantzick, is in Corn; whereby they supply their own necessities; which in case it were im∣ported into England, would make a glut here, and bring down the prices of our Lands. To this I answer, First, That the Dutch do not onely hereby supply themselves plen∣tifully, so as the prices of Corn are constant and reasonable, and so as whatever happens in other places, they never fear a Famine; but also upon all occasions supply other places with Corn, so as a Famine or scarcity of Corn becomes their en∣riching:
whereas we are never at any certainty in the prices of our Corn; but if a plentiful year happens, whereby Nature has disburthened her self of more than she can renew the future year, the Tenants are necessitated to vend it abroad at low prices, to pay their Rent; and when the dear year succeeds, it may be we pay double for the same Corn again. And I say also, it is Plenty in all things which makes Cheap∣ness; and therefore wherever Corn is plentiful, in propor∣tion to the people or Market, it will be cheaper. But in case our Towns in the Mediterrane parts of England were re∣plenished with all sorts of Artificers, and the Ports of Eng∣land abounded with the Dutch Navigation, the prices of Corn would bear a proportion to the number of Artificers and Mariners, and the means which by their Crafts and Traffick they should be enabled to buy Corn withal: We then should not need to fear the Importation of Corn or Irish Cattle. And I believe it would be a happiness equal to any Temporal, both to the Land-lord and Tenant, to have the prices of Corn constant and reasonable; and that such stores were preserved in all great and Navigable places, so as to prevent a Famine in England, and to supply other places which labour under it. Queen Elizabeth in the first Par∣liament of her Reign, permitted the English in any Vessels to import Corn, paying ordinary and but reasonable Du∣ties; which Law stands yet in force. Corollary. 2. By the same reason, the free permission of the English in English-built Ships to export Newcastle-Coals, and make Returns into the Ports of England, may increase the Navigation of Eng∣land. 22 Pet. 4. For the forrein Trade of Newcastle-Coal by the English, is a principle to the Navigation of England. 23 Pet. 4. And the free permission of the English in Eng∣lish-built
Ships to export Newcastle-Coals, and make returns into the Ports of England, may increase the forrein Trade of it. Annot. By free permission, here, I intend such Duties only, as that Newcastle Coal may, with regard to the goodness of it, be cheaper vended in forrein parts, than Scotch-Coal from the Ports of Scotland; for whilst the Duties of exporting Newcastle-Coal continue so high, Forreigners paying above 16 s. per Chauldron, and the English above 8 s. all Nations, unless it be in working Iron Manufactures, generally take in lading of Coals from Scotland. We glory much, that the Newcastle-Trade, in our home-vent of Coals, above all other Trades, employs our Shipping and Mariners; yet, as has been said, this Employment is to the loss of the Nation, by how much Pitch, Tar, Cordage and Sails are consumed in it: whereas the forrein Trade of it, if free to the English, for ought I know, might employ more Shipping and Mari∣ners, and both the outward vent and the Returns may be profitable to the Nation. I am sure the Coals under ground are no benefit to the Nation; nor need we fear, in case the collieries were drained, ever to want Coals to supply our selves or Forreigners. It is true, Forreigners in France, Flanders, Holland, and other places, by this permission might work Iron Manufactures cheaper, by how much cheaper the English should import Newcastle-Coal. But to this I say, that all Nations (except the English, in consuming Wines im∣ported) designe some benefit by Goods bought and sold; and therefore in Traffick, men compare the benefits in buy∣ing and selling; and it is great Wisdome in any Nation, so to establish Trade and Commerce, that the Nations Traf∣fick be improved: and therefore, in case the vending our Coals in forrein Trade, and making Returns, besides the em∣ployment of our Shipping and Mariners, be more beneficial to this Nation, than cheaper working Iron Manufactures be prejudicial to it, this Exportation is to be prefer'd.
Another Objection against this permission is, The King's Re∣venue will be hereby lessened, by how much the Duties are less. To this I answer, First, That the King's Revenue upon Trade, is a Consequence to Trade; and therefore, if the King's Revenue upon Trade be higher than it can bear, the Trade will be lost, and then necessarily will be the King's Revenue: and that it is the height of the Duties upon Coals exported, which establishes so great a Trade of Coals in Scotland, and makes our forrein vent so inconsiderable. Secondly, This Re∣venue upon Newcastle-Coals, in the forrein vent of it, is Far∣med; so that though the Duties be very high, yet it may be the King's Revenue is not considerable. Whereas, Thirdly, in case the forrein Duties were reasonable, the greatness of the Trade might much more increase the King's Revenue than as it stands, whenas the greatness of the Duties causes so small a Trade. To sum up this Discourse, and leave the Progress of so ex∣cellent a designe to others, whose insight and abilities are better able to improve the Trade and Navigation of the Na∣tion: I say, that in case we should reserve the East Indie, the Turkie Trades, and the Trades to our Plantations, as also the home-vent and forrein Trade of Newcastle-coals, to the Natives of England, and again establish the Trade and Navigation to Ireland, as it was before the Act against Im∣portation of Irish Cattle, and permit all Nations to inhabit and Fish from the Ports of England, and import and export freely French Wines, Brandies and Salt from France, and Tim∣ber, Pitch and Tar from Norway, and Ruff Hemp and Flax from the Ports within the Sound; I know not of any Trades or Navigation we should be in danger to lose, so as not to employ our Shipping and Mariners, but those to France, Muscovy, and into the Sound. For the Trade and Navigation to Muscovy and into the Sound, by English ships and Mari∣ners only, we have examined it in the Annot. upon the 13th Prop. the Coroll. and 14th Prop. of this Treatise, and finde it not only prejudicial to the Trade and Navigation of the Nation, but dangerous to the conserving the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. In the French
Trade for Wines and Brandies I observe, that this Trade a∣bove all others impoverishes the Nation, not only as we de∣bauch and impoverish our selves in drinking all the Wines, good or bad, imported; but also in the Ware and Tare of the Vessels wherein we import them; and the outward freight is with little else than Ballast, and the Returns as well as out∣ward Voyage in the most perillous seasons of Navigation of all others, wherein we lose more Shipping and Mariners than in all our other Trades & Navigation besides. Whereas in case we should increase a forrein Trade of Newcastle-coals, and restore the Trade we had to Ireland; both these Trades would be profitable to the Nation in the outward freight, so might the Returns; the Trades and Navigation might be constant, and in the seasonable Times of Navigation: and for ought I know, we might constantly employ double the Sea-men and Mariners in these Trades, to the Mariners and Navigation we employ for French Wines and Brandies in the Moneths of October, November, and December. For the Importation of Salt, I say, it may be one Vessel of Salt may with that Commodity supply a hundred Vessels for the Fishing Trade, &c. And in case Forreigners import Salt cheaper than the English, all these hundred Vessels will have the benefit of it. And whether we ought to prefer the Eng∣lish Navigation for one Vessel of Salt, or the Fishery of a hundred Vessels, and the Navigation which depends upon it, I leave to any one to judge. Besides, the cheap Importa∣tion of Salt, has not onely an Influence upon the forrein Trade of it, but upon all the Vessels which take in Provisions of Salt-Beef and Pork, &c. Prop. 17. Theorem 17. The free permission of the English in English-built ships to export Newcastle-Coals, and make Returns into the Ports of England, may more se∣cure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England.
2 Ax. 4. For things will be so much more secured, as the means of preserving them are increased. 4 Pet. 4. But the Navigation of England, is a mean of preserving the Sovereignty of the Brittish Seas to the Crown of England. 2 Coroll. And the free permission of the English in Eng∣lish-built ships to export Newcastle-coals, and make Returns into the Ports of England, may increase the Navigation of England. Therefore it may so much more secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England. Annot. This permission will not only secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England, by how many more Mariners are employed in it, whereby the King upon all oc∣casions may have them to help to man his Fleet; but even Colliers ships make very good Men of War, as the Nation found in all the late Wars with the Dutch. But if the in∣crease of Mariners and English ships secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England, then by the Rule of Contraries, the loss of English Shipping and Mari∣ners in Trading for French Wines by English, and in Eng∣lish-built ships in the dangerous seasons of Navigation, so much more endangers the Sovereignty of the British Seas to the Crown of England, by how many more Mariners and Ships we lose in so fruitless and unnecessary a Navigation.
EPILOGUE. THus have I, so well as I can, endeavoured to describe the benefits which may arise to my native Country, from those Natural Endowments wherewith God has adornd it above any other. But as the Law against Naturalization re∣strains the Improvement of our Native Commodities only to English, whereby infinite benefits might accrue to the Nation; and the priviledges of Corporations restrains the improvement of very few, yet veryer poor Freemen; where∣by both ways the Navigation, as well as the Forein and Do∣mestick Trade of the Nation is hindred: So the Act of Na∣vigation restraining the forrein vent of our Commodities, and making Returns into the Ports of England, not only by the scarcity and dearness of Shipping endangers the Trade and Navigation of the Nation, but prohibiting upon terms of Confiscation of Ships, Goods, Guns, Tackle, Ammuni∣tion and Apparel, all Nations to import Goods into any of the Ports of England, unless by the Natives, and Ships of the place; not only the export of French Wines, Salt, Brandies and other Commodities, with the growths and Manufactures of the Nation becomes impossible, to the infinite hindrance of the forrein Trade of them; but also by reason of the dearness and scarcity of Pitch, Tar, Timber, Ruff Hemp and Flax, and all sorts of Dying stuff, the Domestick working of our Manufactures, as well as the forrein Trade and Naviga∣tion which depends thereon, is forely damnified. Add hereto the intolerable injuries all the Natives of England suffer (un∣less in the Turkie and East-Indie-Companies) by the Masters of all ships, in almost all the Trades they now drive in the World; nor is it possible to be remedied, as the case stands: for if the Nation be not content herewith, they must have no forrein Trade at all. Whereas it hath been always the practice of the Wisest Princes and States, by all just means to enlarge the Trades and Navigation of their Countries; and where Nature hath not granted them convenient Ports, by Art to supply Natures
defects. With what wonder is the Mole of Genoua foun∣ded for reception of Shipping, whereby to enlarge Trade to and from it! The Pen of Great Yarmouth is a rarity equal to any the Nation can boast of; by the benefit whereof, this Town (after London and Bristol) excels all others of England in Trade and Navigation. Our King in his Prince∣ly Wisdome, at great expence, endeavours to finish the Mole at Tangier, thereby reasonably hoping that that place may become famous for Trade, and a secure Harbour for his Men of War and the Merchants of England upon all occasions, both in Peace, but more in time of War. With a diligence and industry equal to his power, the French King endeavours to make the Port of Havre de Grace more deep and commodious for Shipping, thereby to advance the Trade and Navigation of France, especially of Normandy and Britain. Even the Act of Navigation with reason pro∣hibits the Trade of our Plantations to Forreigners, because thereby, though it would enrich them by how much more their Trade would become greater, yet this would be so much to the loss of the Nation: and permits a free Trade to Tangier, because it may enrich the place, and make it more frequented. I am sure the reason is the same by ma∣king the Ports of England free, which have no need of the Mole of Genoua or Tangier; nor is Trade to and from them interrupted by any Stoad, or Gluckstadt; the World by Trading to them, need not fear to encounter the Rocks before Gottenburg, or the Sands before Zealand, or the Mouth of the Maze. No danger of stranding ships in our Ports, as at Amsterdam, Harlem, Enchuysen, and other Ports within the Zuyder-Sea. By a benignity peculiar to our Country, no where else to be found in the same Cli∣mate, but in Ireland, so gentle a Temper thaws the sharp Frosts, so as our Ports are always open, and free for any Trade, especially to the Western, Southern, and South-East, and South-West parts of the World; whereas those upon our opposite Shores are commonly frozen three or four Moneths in the year: And though all the Shipping and Goods thus imported
by Forreigners, were no longer ours than the Merchants and Owners pleased; yet by reason of the Intercourse and Commerce, the Trade would so much more fix, as the Commerce is more free: the World would finde the bene∣fit of Traffick, from the Excellency, Convenience, and Openness of our Ports; which in time may invite them to establish their Riches and Trade in our Country, and leave them to their Posterities with us in England. In the mean time, the Country-Farn or would finde vent of his Commodities in Vctualling the Vssels, and poor peo∣ple employment in mending the Ships and Rigging, and in lading and unlading Goods; and many thousands of de∣solate Houses upon the Coast would let for good Rents, which now decay, and fall down for want of Inhabitants. By this free Importation of Goods into the Ports of Eng∣land, we may infinitely improve the benefits which will ac∣cure to a'l sorts of Artificers by the plenty and cheapness of all things they need, and to the forrein Trades of our Wool∣len and other Manufactures, by their Returns into the Ports of England: the multitudes of Shipping and Traders, will excite them to seek employment for their Shipping in all sorts of Commodities we can supply them with, and they the World. This Freedom and Intercourse in our Ports would establish an Interest with all those Nations which hold Trade and Traffick with us, so as their Interest would be∣come interwoven with ours in all discords and Wars between us and other Nations. And I am not affraid to say, that the City of London would equally, if not more than any o∣ther place, enjoy benefit by this freedom of Trade and Na∣vigation; for it is the Trade London now enjoys above a∣ny other place in England, which makes it so eminent above all other places of England; which might be so much more increased, as the Nation by this Freedom may hold a greater Commerce with it. Whereas, in case we continue still to Tax and restrain our forrein Trades, of all places London will suffer most: For the Country of England may subsist, though poorly, without a forrein Trade, or Trade with London: But in case the Nation loses the forrein Trade of
our Woollen and other Manufactures, and the Country becomes so poor as they cannot hold Commerce with London, London cannot subsist. But though all Humane Wisdome is Lame and imper∣fect, and, without a Blessing by God's Providence upon it, cannot reasonably hope to attain the designed end; yet no man can reasonably hope for God's Blessing upon business, where he designes by forceable means, more than the Nature of it, to attain his Ends. We have said the height of Duties upon Goods imported into England, was the Cause the Dutch are become so powerful in Trade and Navigation above us; and that it was the Imposition of 16 per Cent. upon Goods imported, which lost the Trade of Genoua to Legorne; and at this time we enjoy most infinite advantages above the Dutch, as well in our Country as Coast. And to these may be added the present Calamities the Dutch now labour under, by the terrible Inundation of Waters, which they can never securely prevent for the future. But as the Dutch in their long Wars with the Spaniards built a Fort called Lillo upon the Scheld, to interrupt the Traffick which many parts of the world held with Antwerp, thereby to gain that Trade to themselves: So the Act of Navigation, Free∣dom of Corporations, and the Law against Naturalization; are Lillo's upon all the Ports of England, yet was there no War between the Ports and Nation to cause them; and this not to gain a Trade to the Ports or Nation, but to establish it in other places. And though the forrein Trade of our Ma∣nufactures, and the Fish caught upon the Coasts of England and Scotland, and the Navigation depending thereon, be the Soul of the well-being and safety of the Nation; yet in it is not so much as a Council of Trade, or any established Power, to Govern or Regulate it. THE END.
