D1037 11903003 50624
THE NUPTIALS OF Britain's Genius and Fame. A Pindaric Poem ON THE PEACE. By Mr. DENNIS. Neque Te ut Miretur Turba Labores. Hor. Centum potiore signis Munere donat. Hor. LONDON, Printed for R. Parker, at the Vnicorn under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil; Sam. Briscoe, at the corner of Charles-street, Covent-Garden; and are to be sold by R. Baldwin in VVarwick-lane. 1697.
THE NUPTIALS OF Britain's Genius & Fame. A Pindaric Poem on the PEACE. I. WHat Divine Rapture shakes my Soul? What Fury rages in my Blood, And drives about the stormy flood? What makes my sparkling Eye-balls rowl? See, see the Goddess of the Lyre Descending in Tempestuous fire; Hence ye Prophane, be gone, retire; She leaves not Heav'n for you:
But for the few, the chosen few, Who to her Sacred Rites belong. Approach ye awful train, And while I sing a matchless strain, Which your Great Mistress deigns t' inspire, Attend th' Eternal Song. II. Now, now she rowls about my Breast▪ And now ascending in a flame, To my astonish'd Soul imparts immortal light, And now with insupportable Delight, She shakes my sinking frame: And lo! the Clouds are from my Fancy driv'n, Which eclips'd the Child of Heav'n: Which kept me from discerning Fate, And viewing a sublimer state; I see, I see, unbody'd Beings clear; And lo the Gods majestick forms appear!
III. Oh Transports of too Turbulent a Joy, Which Ravishing my soul my life destroy! Eternal glories upon whom I gaze, Who drown with your Empyreal blaze, The glaring Sun's Meridian Rays; Ye who can force to Mortals give To wvie Eternity, yet Live; Help, help me Gods to undergo; This stormy pleasure lightning in my mind, A fiercer bliss than Fate design'd That living man should know! IV. And Thou, Majestick God, and Thou! On whose sublime, yet lovely brow Such dreadful graces shine, With whom I see assembled now Ten thousand of thy bright celestial line; Thou, to whose guardianship divine, Fate and great Iove, Britannia did consign;
Who dost thy daring Sons inspire With such a furious all-commanding fire: Thy Godhead thro my Breast infuse, And add thy Towring spirit to the Muse: For who, O awful God, but he Whom thou inspir'st can sing of Thee? And celebrate with Godlike Flame Thy Nuptials with eternal Fame? V. And thou, Iove's Darling Child, Aethereal Fame, Who brightest shin'st to mortal Eyes, Of all the glories of the Skies; Whose potent charms can all the Gods inflame, And Men, resembling Gods, enslave; For from the Love of Thee is seen to flow Whate're is Great, and Beautiful and Brave, In Heav'n above and Earth below: For whom th' Aspiring Warrior fights, For whom the Godlike Poet writes, With not a Mortal flame; For whom the Soveraign of the Gods form'd this stu∣pendous frame.
While to thy Lovers glorious Arms Thou yield'st thy never-dying Charms, (For Age, which makes all human forms decline, Fresh force and lustre adds to thine) Be present to me, who thy Spousals sing; Each accent thro thy Golden Trump resound, Spread it the Universe around, And raise my Name on thy Empyreal wing. VI. The Bridegroom now, with Godlike state. On whom a thousand shining Virtues wait; And after him th' Imperial Bride, Ten thousand dazling glories by her side, And all the Loves and Graces in her Train That warm the world with genial fire, And have force to infuse desire Thro Land, and Air and Main. Thither direct their wondrous way, Where Phoebus with th' harmonious Sisters stands, Phoebus, the God of Glory and the Day, To joyn them in eternal bands;
And as th' Amazing pomp draws nigh, The flaming Ruler of the Sky Redoubling all his Rays, And shaking his illustrious Temples, says. VII. O all y' assembled powers, who here In pomp becoming this great hour appear; Than which ev'n I behold no nobler sight, Ev'n I, the sacred source of Light, The worlds Refulgent Eye; Who at one boundless view can see What is, and what has been, and what shall be, In Earth, and Air, and Sky; Ere we to Britain's losty Genius joyn, The Eldest born of Iove's Imperial line, Say, who the Honour has obtaind, VVhat God, or Goddess is by Fate ordain'd, To give th' Empyreal Maid, to crown the Lovers flame, And to the glorious God, consign th' eternal Dame!
VIII. He ends, the rest stand mute a while, But now with a transporting smile, A Goddess stepping forth, before him stands; The gentle Olive branching in her hands; And as with charming pleasure in her face, And in her mien inimitable grace; In sweet harmonious sounds she speaks, With transport all their ravish'd Souls she takes, The very God of sacred Rage, with blissful Rapture shakes. Hear me, she says, Ye pow'rs assembled Hear; Hear me, ye Heav'ns, and thou Earth give ear, When many Rival Gods of late For this Celestial Beauty strove, It was the soveraign will of Iove That I should end the fierce debate, And what's the will of Iove is Fate. To Britain's Genius then, for he Of all those Rival Pow'rs has done the most for me, I give th' Empyreal Maid, and crown the Lovers flame, And to the glorious God consign th' Eternal Dame.
IX. She says, and that Celestial voice Makes the attending World rejoice; That potent voice serenes th' Aethereal Sky, Lo, thro the boundless space the driving Meteors fly, And pois'd upon their airy wings the listning Tempests lye. That mighty voice on Earth below, Makes raging Discord cease; And makes all wondring Nature know The charming pow'r of Peace. Transported Seraphs stop th' harmonious Spheres, And all to that melodious voice incline their ravish dears. X. Why then approach, illustrious pair, Approach bright Fame, Celestial Fair, (The Days Resulgent God replys;) Desire of Gods and Men draw nigh: Before th' assembled Nations of the Skys; Thus in Eternal Golden Bands I tye, The Ravish'd Bridegroom to the Bride, No Fate, nor length of days your union shall divide.
XI. He says, thro all the Assembled pow'rs Th' extatick Joy of Gods appears, To the gay movement of the dancing hours: The Seraphs now reform the Spheres, The subjects of the Main record The Triumphs of the Ocean's Lord; And to the Music of the Sky The Tritons on their chorded Shells reply. And now while Plenty and the God of Wine, Th' Ambrosial Marriage-Feast prepare; Th' Harmonious Muses raise their voice divine, And ravish Sea and Land, and Heavn and Air. XII. And thus they sing, thrice happy God, Whom great Apollo joyns to Fame! See Iove consenting, with a nod, That shakes this universal frame. For ever in thy glorious arms His fairest, best belov'd must lye;
That Darling Daughter, that has Charms To please his own eternal Eye. Fair Peace, the softest of th' Aethereal line, Peace gives her to thee with that charming voice, That makes the listning world rejoice, For the worlds happiness depends on thine. XIII. Tune, Tune Celestial Harmony, To that blest voice tune eve'ry joyful string; And Discord bound in Golden Chains, T' exalt thy Triumphs, bring. Let her in German and in Belgian Plains From frantick Fury cease, And heightning each great Masters noble strains, Proclaim the pow'r of Peace. FINIS.
