D2430 11775103 48944
THE LIFE OF HENRY CHICHELE, Archbishop of Canterbury, Who lived in the Times of HENRY the V. and VI. Kings of England. Written in Latin by ARTH. DUCK. LLD. Now made English. And a Table of CONTENTS Annexed. LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard. MDCXCIX.
The most Reverend Dr. HENRY CHICHELE Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. MBurghers delin. et sculp.
To the most Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan. My Lord, WHILE the World is so fond of Voyages, and the Discoveries of Unknown Coun∣tries; I hope it will not be unacceptable to bring into view one of the best Lives of one of the Greatest Prelates of this Church; writ in Latin with great Judgment by a Man very emi∣nent in his Profession. If this Pre∣late had lived in happier Times, he would probably have exerted those
great Talents which he carried far in so dark an Age, in Services of a high nature. He had a true Judgment and firm Courage, with a generous Temper, and was a great Patron and Promoter of Learning; He despised Wealth, was free from aspiring, and asserted the Rights of the Crown, and the Liberties of this Church against Papal Usurpations. These were great Qualities, and so much the greater, because the Corruptions of the Clergy from the Papacy down to the Begging Orders, were then to an insupportable degree. In any other Age the publishing a Life which has so great a Relation to the most Glorious part of our History might have lookt like a reproach of the Time in which it came out. But the Present Age may well bear it, in which if we have not carried our Conquest in∣to France as was then done, yet we
see a GREAT PRINCE who has far out-done the Performances of that time. Then a Feeble King and divided Court made the Work as easy in it self, as it looks great in History: But we have seen a Mighty and United Power managed by Wise Counsels, flush'd with a long course of Success, that gave Law to All about it, stopt in its full career by a King born to be a Blessing to the present Age, and a Wonder to all Succeeding ones; to Whose Reign the most renouned Pieces of our History are but foiles to set it off, and make it shine the brighter. My Lord, I could not be long in suspence for the choice of a proper Patron to my small Interest in this Work, which is only the care of the Translation of it into English: The See that you do now govern with so Apostolical a Temper, and in none of the easiest Times, is not the chief reason of my addressing to
Your Grace the Life of one of the most Eminent of all Your Predecessors. I could give many more Reasons for the choice that relate immediately to Your Self, but I will rather leave it to the Reader to find out, than offer a thing so ingrateful to Your Lordship: I pay Your Grace so profound a Reverence, that I will not venture on that which I know will offend You, for I am with the truest Zeal, and the highest Re∣spect possible, My Lord, Your Grace's most Humble and most Obedient Servant.
THE LIFE OF HENRY CHICHELE, Archbishop of CANTERBURY. Born at High∣am Ferrars in Northamp∣tonshire. HENRY CHICHELE was Born at Higham-Ferrars, an ancient Town in Northamp∣tonshire, so call'd from the Ferrars, who were formerly Lords of it. His Father's Name was Thomas Chichele, his Mother's Agnes. The Family was but mean and obscure, but through his Virtue it became illustrious in after∣ages. In his Youth he applied himself to the Study of the Civil and Canon Law at Oxford, being made Fellow of Made Fellow of New-College Oxford▪ by William of Wyckam.New-College by William Wyckam, then Bishop of Winchester, who had lately at a vast Charge founded and endow'd with large Revenues two stately Col∣leges, one at Oxford, and the other at
Winchester. In these Studies of the Law he improv'd his good natural Parts by his great Industry, and com∣menc'd Doctor in that Faculty. Went to live with Mede∣ford Bishop of Sarum. He left the University at the instance of Robert Medeford Bishop of Salisbury, who took him first into his House and Family, and afterwards communicated also to him his most private and impor∣tant Concerns, with whom he ever after preserv'd a strict and intimate Friendship. He was preferr'd by him Made Arch∣deacon of Sa∣rum.to the Archdeaconry of Salisbury, which was his first step to Ecclesiastical Pro∣motions. But one Walter Fitzpers a Priest, commenc'd a Suit against him for this Dignity, claiming it by vertue of a Grant from King Henry the Fourth, under the Great Seal. The Cause be∣ing brought by Appeal before Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archdeaconry was adjudg'd to Henry Chichele, by the Auditor of the Arch∣bishop's Court, who was deputed with full Power to determine this affair. 1402.This was about the Years 1402 and 1403, in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth. He held this Dignity for a∣bout two years, and with great dili∣gence 1404.perform'd the Duty of his Office;
after which he was made Chancellor of Then Chancel∣lor of the same.Salisbury. For Walter Medeford, the Bishop's Brother, who enjoy'd that Place, made an exchange with him, which was allow'd to be lawful according to the Constitutions of the Canon Law; and having both quitted their several Dig∣nities, Henry was made Chancellor by the Bishop, and Walter Archdeacon. There was annexed to the Chancellor∣ship the Parsonage of Odyham, in the Dio∣cess Parson of O∣dyham.of Winchester, which was then void, and was given to him by the Bishop and he was immediately put in possession of it by the Custos Rotulorum of the See of Winchester, which was then vacant by the Death of William Wyckam, who on the 27th of September, chang'd a Life which he had spent very gloriously in the Service of that Church, for Immor∣tality. These Preferments he obtain'd by the favour of the Bishop of Salisbury, who always highly esteem'd him; and when he died, which was about three years after, made very honourable men∣tion of him in his Will, and left him a And chief Exe∣cutor to his Benefactor.golden Cup with a Cover, and made him the Chief of his Executors which were named in the same Will▪ His eminent Qualifications began now
to be generally taken notice of, and par∣ticularly by King Henry the Fourth, who afterwards employ'd him in many Negotiations. For besides his extraordi∣nary Learning, he had a sharp and pier∣cing Wit, which with his Experience and Skill in Civil Affairs, rendred him very dextrous in the management of Business. The first publick Employ∣ment that he had, beside those Affairs which he dispatch'd for the King here at home, with great Commendation, was in an extraordinary Embassy, which Sent Ambassa∣dor by H. 4. to Pope Greg. the 12th.was sent by the King to Pope Gregory the Twelfth, to Congratulate his late Advancement to the Papacy, or to re∣concile him to Benedict the Thirteenth, who assumed the Pontifical Dignity at Avignon. The Ambassadors arriving in Italy, took their Journey towards Rome; but in their way thither they met with the Pope at Siena, which is a very pleasant and noble City of Tuscany, at that time Commonwealth, and go∣vern'd by its own Laws; it was after∣wards subdued by the Medici, and is now subject to the Great Duke of Tus∣cany. There it was that In nemore unionis, cap. 31. Theodoric of
Nismes, who was Secretary to Pope Gregory, and was then in his Court at Siena, relates that he saw our Ambassa∣dors, who were all Men of eminent Note; but through the Negligence of Writers, their Names are not preserv'd in Memory. How well Henry Chichele acquitted himself of this Employment, and how much he gain'd the Pope's Fa∣vour upon this account, Gregory himself did soon after evidently demonstrate: For News being brought to the Court of Rome of the Death of Guido Mone▪ Bishop of S. Davids, who died this year on the 31st of August, which was after the Departure of the Ambassadors out of England, of his own voluntary Mo∣tion he created Henry Chichele Bishop of By whom made Bishop of St. David's.S. Davids, and consecrated him with his own hands, according to the ancient Form, on the 4th of October, and by Let∣ters written to Thomas Arundel Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, he acquainted him, that by the Advice of the Cardinals, he had promoted Henry Chichele Chancel∣lor of Salisbury, Doctor of Laws, and Priest, a Man of eminent Wisdom, In∣tegrity, and other Virtues, to the va∣cant See of S. Davids, desiring him up∣on his Recommendation, to make use
of his Assistance in the Administration of his Archiepiscopal Function. He at∣tended the Pope from Siena to Luca, and 1408.continued with him till the end of April the next year. He then return'd home, of an Ambassador being made a Bishop, and on the 26th of August he went to the Cathedral Church of Canterbury ac∣cording Accordingly took the Cano∣nical Oath in England.to the usual manner, and there took an Oath of Legal and Canonical Obedience and Reverence to the Arch∣bishop and his Successors. How fit he was esteemed by all Men for the Exer∣cise of this Function, the Bishops and Prelates of the Province of Canterbury assembled in Convocation at London in 1409.January following, did very amply and fully testify. For when it was debated Sent Delegate to the General Council at Pi∣sa.in the Synod about sending Delegates to the General Council at Pisa for the English Nation, Robert Hallum Bishop of Salisbury, Henry Chichele Bishop of St David's, and Thomas Chillirgdon Prior of Canterbury, were unanimously cho∣sen; and it was also decreed▪ that every beneficed Person should pay Four pence in the Pound out of their yearly Income toward the Charges of their Journey. This Council was appointed to be held at Pisa by the College of Cardinals as∣sembled
at Leghorn, for composing the difference between Gregory the Twelfth, Held to Recon∣cile the Com∣petitors for the Popedom.and Benedict the Thirteenth, who both set up for Pope, one at Rome, and the other at Avignon. But because we shall have occasion sometimes in the follow∣ing Narration to make mention of this Schism of the Popes, it seems agreeable to the design and method of this under∣taking to deduce it from its Original, and to explain briefly from whence it arose, and by what ways it increas'd and was carried on. After that Philip the Fair, King of France, slighting the Excommunications of Pope Boniface the Eighth, had by his Boniface the Eighth depo∣sed.Letters, which are extant in most of the Writers of that Age, sharply repre∣hended his Folly and Madness, and at length devested him of the Papacy; the Cardinals fearing the King's displea∣sure, elected into his room Clement the Clement the Fifth Elected Pope.Fifth, a Frenchman, and Native of Gas∣coigne; Who being created by the Col∣lege of Cardinals at Perusium in his ab∣sence, summon'd them all to Lyons, where in the Church of S. Justus, in the Presence of Philip King of France, Ed∣ward King of England, and Alfonsus King of Arragon, he receiv'd the Pontifical
Crown in the Year 1305, and the same Year having created a great many French Cardinals; he fix'd his Residence at A∣vignon, where also after his Death the six succeeding Popes, John the Twenty second of Cahors, Benedict thē Twelfth of Tholouse▪ Clement the Sixth, Innocent the Sixth, Ʋrban the Fifth, and Gregory the Eleventh of the Province of Limosin, Who with six Successors, all French, Resi∣ded at Avig∣non for seven∣ty Years.all Frenchmen, resided for the space of seventy Years, having quite forsaken Rome. Dell'inferno. Canto 19. & del Paradiso Canto 27. Dante Aligeri and Nella terza parte▪ sonetto. 8, 9, 10, & epist. 20.Francis Petrarch, two Italian Poets, who liv'd in those Times in the Court of Rome at Avignon, do very severely▪ reprehend the Rapine, the Debauchery, Luxury and Excess of those Popes, and particularly of Clement the Fifth, and John the Twenty-second; Most of them hated by the Italians for their Nation, or vitious Lives.which they did either out of their Ha∣tred to the French in general; or because being Men of Integrity themselves, they could not bear the debauch'd and pro∣fligate Lives of the Popes. Clement the Fifth is also mention'd often by the The Clemen∣tines added to the Canon Law.Lawyers upon the account of the Book of Clementines, which was put out by
him in the Council of Vienne, and added to the Canon Law. But Gregory being concern'd at the Decay of the City of Rome, and the Tumults of Italy, private∣ly left Avignon, and return'd to Rome Pope Gregory returned to Rome.in the Year 1376, and the 71st from the Departure of the Popes; where be∣ing receiv'd with incredible Joy, he be∣gan to repair the Churches, Palaces, the Walls and other Edifices of the City which were run to ruin. He dying two years after, the Cardi∣nals, who were almost all Frenchmen, fearing the outrage of the People of Rome, who demanded an Italian Pope, chose Bartholomew Archbishop of Bari, who chang'd his Name for that of Ʋr∣ban Was succeeded by Urban the Sixth.the Sixth; and with his Name soon chang'd his Nature also; for whereas before he was generally look'd upon as a Man of a moderate Temper; he now began to treat all the Cardinals with great Rigor; and one time when Otho of Brunswick, Prince of Tarentum, who had married Joan Queen of Sicily, pre∣sented him the Cup at Dinner upon his Knees▪ he let the Prince continue for some time in that posture, till being admonish'd of it by the Cardinals, with much ado he took the Cup from him.
The Cardinals being very uneasy un∣der this unseasonable Pride and Severity of the Pope, fled to Fundi, a City in the Kingdom of Naples; where having first declared the Election of Ʋrban to be void, as being made through fear, and by compulsion, they proceeded to For whose Ri∣gor and Pride, Clement the Sixth was set up against him.Elect Rupert Cardinal of Geneva, who took the Name of Clement the Sixth, and with his Cardinals retir'd to Avig∣non. Thus whilst one assumed the Pa∣pacy at Avignon and the other at Rome, and both of them made new Promotions of Cardinals, the whole Christian World was divided between them. For the Germans, the English, the Poles, the Hun∣garians, the Bohemians▪ the Danes, the Swedes, and most of the Italians, ac∣knowledg'd Ʋrban, but the French and the Spaniards submitted to Clement. Ʋrban, in the Eleven Years that he held the Pontificate, debas'd the Digni∣ties of the Church by promoting the meanest Persons to the Purple; and fo∣mented Urban, for preferring the Base, and fo∣menting of Wars, called Turbanus; a perverse and most cruel Pope.Wars between the Christian Princes; for which cause, instead of Ʋrbanus, he was generally call'd Tur∣banus. He exceeded all the Popes that ever possess'd the See of Rome in Cru∣elty; for of those Bishops and Cardi∣nals
who were accus'd as secret Fa∣vourers of Clement, some he imprison'd, others he put to the Torture, and at last put to death six of the most Eminent of the Cardinals, one of whom he caus'd to be inhumanly murder'd in his sight as they were travelling together on the Road; and the others, while he was at Genoa, to be sow'd up in Sacks, and thrown into the Sea. Neither did Cle∣ment, who was at Avignon, come far Clement not far short of Him in wick∣edness.short of his Rival in wickedness; for it is affirm'd on all hands, that he was ambitious, prodigal, self-will'd, proud, and one that had nothing to recom∣mend him but the Nobility of his Birth, for he was descended from the Earls of Geneva. After the death of Ʋrban, Cardinal Peter Tomacellus was chosen Pope at Rome, who was call'd Boniface the Urban suc∣ceeded Boni∣face the Ninth, andNinth; and Clement dying soon after at Avignon, the Cardinals, that they might not be without a Head, elected Peter de Luna, a Spaniard, who took the Name of Benedict the Thirteenth. Clement by Benedict the Third. Both worse than the former.These two surpass'd their Predecessors in all manner of wickedness; nor would either of them, to restore the Peace of the Church, quit their Pretensions to the Papacy.
Boniface before his election was not only expert in Writing, Singing, and all other kinds of Learning, except Boniface more Politician than Grammarian,Grammar, but was also very well vers▪d in the management of publick Affairs; and after his advancement, his whole design, during his Government, was to enrich his Nephews by the sale of all things belonging to the Church, which Trade he carried on in the most shame∣ful and scandalous manner that ever was practis'd by any of the Popes. It was he that first impos▪d the Tax Impos'd the Tax of An∣nates on the clergy.of Annates upon Ecclesiastical Prefer∣ments, by which every one that was presented to a Benefice in any place, was oblig'd to pay half the yearly income of it into the Pope's Treasury; which Im∣position was admitted by all Christian Nations, except the English; for with us it was exacted only of the Bishops, but all other Benefices were exempted from it. Nor was his Avarice satisfied with this Device; for he suffer'd Bi∣shopricks Suffered Bi∣shopricks to be sold by Auction.and Livings to be sold by Auction; in which kind of Traffick sometimes he made use of his Brothers and Nephews for his Factors, and ma∣ny times he sold them himself to those that bid most, and received the Mo∣ney
with his own hands; sometimes he would transfer a Benefice to a second Chapman that offer'd a better price, Sold the same Livings twice to several Chapmen,after he had received Money for it of the first, alledging that he had no wrong done him, who would have cheated him by paying less for it than it was worth; and would force the Purchasers most impiously to swear that Yet made the Purchaser swear he came fairly by it.they had not procur'd those Livings, for which he himself had taken the Money, by any Simoniacal Contract. Beside these Spoils of the Church, he extorted Money even from the Poor, whose Pe∣titions he refus'd to subscribe unless they would pay him for them a Floren each, Made poor Pe∣titirs pay a Floren apiece.which he valued more than the sacred Rites of Christianity, or even his own Soul; for in the time of Divine Service he us'd to ask those that were about him Enquired after Gs in the time of Divine Service.whether any body were there that had brought him any thing; and a few hours before he dy'd, when one ask'd Had no comfort when dying, but in Money.him how he did, he answer'd, he should be well if he had but Money. But though he was generally hated and abhorr'd for these sordid Practices, yet the Lawyers defended him, main∣taining Defended by the Lawyers.that the Pope was not guilty of Simony, though he sold Bishopricks
and Livings, which was also affirm'd by almost all Jo. Andr. Ancharan. Cardin. & Dd ad c. 1. de Si∣mon. Felin. in c. ex parte n. 1. de off deleg.the Ancient Canonists, who were too much engag'd in the Pope's In∣terests. But most of the Divines of that Age were so far from this sordid Flatte∣ry, that Theod. Niem. lib. 2. de Schism. cap. 32.they taught publickly while But opposed by the Divines.Boniface was alive, that the Pope was guilty of Simony if he sold the Digni∣ties and Benefices of the Church; which Opinion was receiv'd by Thom. 2. 2. qu. 100. art. 2. & ibi Cajetan. & omnes. Navarr. in manual. c. 23. n. 108. Paul▪ Anglic. in Speculo Aureo.all the Di∣vines afterwards, and by the more Panor. in repetit. c. extirpandae sect. Cj ia vero. n. 53. de Praeben. & in c. 1. de Simon. Bar t. ad c. cum pridem de pact. Barthol. Ugolin. de Simon. Tab. 1. cap. 3. sect. 5.Mo∣dern Canonists, Panormitanus, Barbatia and others. Benedict also at Avignon, though he had the Character of a Person of Wit, Learning and Prudence, yet in making a gain of the Goods of the Church he Benedict the like spiritual Robber.equall'd Boniface, for both of them set to sale all Dignities, Livings, Dispen∣sations, Indulgences, and the Lands and Lordships of the Church, so that the sa∣cred
Power of the Keys grew contemp∣tible in all mens Opinion through this scandalous Traffick of the two Popes. Baldus, an eminent Lawyer, and at that time Professor of the Civil Law at Pa∣dua, though he seems to have Bald. ad c. quia propter. de elect.approv'd the Election of Ʋrban, and to have look'd upon Clement as an Usurper, yet he inveighs against both Boniface and Benedict, comparing Bald. ad c. olim. de rescript.Boniface to an Boniface com∣pared to an Ox, Benedict to a wild Beast.Ox, and Benedict to a wild Beast, and affirms that neither of them was the Minister of God, or truly and lawfully Pope, because they fomented Seditions in the Church, and would neither of them quit the Chair to restore the Peace of it. Whereupon, when Boniface was dead, who govern'd the See of Rome fourteen Years, the Cardinals being as∣sembled to chuse a new Pope, they eve∣ry one solemnly swore with dreadful The Cardinal's Oath upon Bo∣niface's death, to resign if chosen.Imprecations upon themselves if they violated their Oath, that whoever should happen to be chosen to the Papa∣cy, he would immediately resign it, upon condition the other Pope would do
so too; which Oath had also been taken a little before by the Cardinals at Avig∣non upon the Election of Benedict. The choice fell upon Cardinal Innocent Boniface sue∣ceeded by In∣nocent the Seventh, who broke his Oath.Cosmatus, who was call'd Innocent the Seventh. But he little regarding the obli∣gation of his Oath, very stiffly retain'd the Pontifical Dignity, nor during the two years that he was Pope, could he be prevail'd upon to lay it down. He was A great Ca∣nonist, debaucht and covetous.a Person of great experience in the Ca∣non Law, but very prone to Debau∣chery, and too intent upon acquiring Wealth. After his death all the Cardinals in On his death the Oath re∣peated with Imprecations.the Conclave took the same Oath again with many Imprecations on the Per∣jur'd, and promis'd moreover to create no new Cardinals, if the other Pope would desist from doing it; and upon the last day of September, in the Year 1406. they chose Angelo Comaco a Ve∣netian, Gregory the Twelfth suc∣ceeded.who took the name of Gregory the Twelfth. After his Advancement to the Chair, he protested publickly with Tears that he would not have accepted the Papacy, as being the most unfit person for it in the World, but only that he might be∣come the Author of establishing Peace
in the Church; and he openly declar'd that he desired nothing more than that a time and place might be appointed for a Conference with Benedict, and that by the voluntary resignation of them both, the Church might be go∣verned again by only one Pastor. For which end he presently sent Letters to Benedict, to our King Henry the Fourth, Who treated with Bene∣dict for the Church's peace.and to all the Christian Princes and Bi∣shops, in which he exhorted and in∣treated them that they would not be wanting in their endeavours to put an end to this Schism in the Church; he also sent Ambassadors to Benedict, his Nephew Antony Cornaro Bishop of Bo∣logna, William de Vinea Bishop of Todi, and Antony de Butrio first Professor of Canon Law in the University of Bo∣logna, who makes mention of this Em∣bassy in his Anton. de Butr. ad cap. quod ad consultationem n. 3. de Sent. & re jud.Commentaries; Their In∣structions were to treat with Benedict about the place where this Resignation should be made. They met with him at Marseilles, and it was concluded that And for a Re∣signation by them both at Savona.by November following both the Popes should meet at Savona; which is a City
belonging to the Republick of Genoa, and situated upon that Coast; where after they had both resign'd the Papcy, a new Pope should be chosen: From Marseilles they went to Paris to treat Sends to Charles the Sixth of France about the same Af∣fair▪ Gregory harshly treated his Ambassa∣dors at their return.with Charles the Sixth, King of France, about this Affair, where they were re∣ceiv'd by all people with incredible joy; but when they had finished their Em∣bassy, and were return'd to Gregory, he treated them so harshly, that Antony de Butrio soon after dyed of grief. For all this was but a Trick of Gregory's to shift the imputation of these Dissentions from Drew back and shuffled.himself; for first he began to draw back from the Agreement, pretending that Savona was a suspected place, as be∣longing to the Genoeses, who acknow∣ledged Then plainly refused to stand to the Agreement.Benedict, and afterwards abso∣lutely refus'd to stand to it, alledging the Opinions of his own Divines, who being set on by him, taught the people publickly in their Sermons, that he could not without impiety desert the care of the Christian Flock which was committed to him by Christ the chief Shepherd. But before the end of the Summer, there being a hot discourse that Benedict was come to Savona, that the blame might not lie wholly upon
him, he departed from Rome, though very unwillingly, and the next year on Hearing Bene∣dict was come to Savona, he comes to Siena.the first of September came to Siena, where he staid till the end of the next January. During his stay There, beside the Am∣bassadors from Benedict, from Charles King of France, and other Princes, those from our King came thither also, among whom, as we said before, was Henry To whom Chi∣chele was one of the Ambas∣sadors from England, and there made Bi∣shop of St. Da∣vid's.Chichele, who was there made Bishop of St. David's by the Pope. These all ear∣nestly besought him to establish peace in the Church, which he had so so∣lemnly promis'd and sworn to do before the College of Cardinals. Pope Gregory goes to Lucca. From Siena he went to Lucca in the beginning of February, where though he were often press'd by our Ambassadors, who staid with him at Lucca till the end of April, to go to Savona, he absolutely Refuses to go to Savona.refus'd it, and dealt underhand with Benedict by his Emissaries, persuading him not to recede from his Pretentions to the Papacy; for which cause, when Trinkles with Benedict, is for his Hy∣pocrisy called Errorius.every one plainly perceiv'd that he plaid the Hypocrite, and design'd to impose upon all Christendom, instead of Gre∣gorius they call'd him Errorius.
The Cardinals displeas'd for his promoting Condelma∣rius. The Cardinals were very much trou∣bled, that against their will, and con∣trary to the obligation of his Oath, he had promoted to the Purple Gabriel Con∣delmarius his Nephew, who was after∣wards Pope, and three more, and had strictly charg'd the rest of the College to hold no correspondence with the Car∣dinals of Benedict, without his know∣ledge, which, as it was said, some of them privately carried on; and had al∣so depriv'd John Proset, Archdeacon of Norfolk of all his Preferments, for no other reason but because he spoke to some of the Cardinals of the contrary Faction. Whereupon those of his own His own Party fly to Pisa. They appeal from him to Christ, a ge∣neral Council, and the next Pope.Party in May 1408. fled to Pisa, which is distant from Lucca about ten Miles, and there by a publick Protestation they appeal'd from the Curses and Excom∣munications which Gregory had pro∣nounc'd against them, to Jesus Christ the Supream Judge, to a General Council, and to the Pope that should hereafter be This justified by Panormi∣tan.chosen; which appeal the Abb. ad c. Inquisitioni. n▪ 5. de Sent. Excom.Abbot Pa∣normitanus afterwards allow'd to be just and lawful, and that the Cardinals were
not at all affected with the Excommu∣nication of an unlawful Pope. And though some of Gregory's Crea∣tures taught publickly that he was freed from the obligation of the Oath that he had taken to extinguish the Schism, in that he might absolve himself from it by his own Authority; yet the best Lawyers, as Ancharan. Cons. 181. Card. Zabar. Cons. 150. Anton. de Butr. ad c. 1. n. 10. de Constit.Peter Ancharanus, Car∣dinal Francis Zabarella, and Antony de Butrio, who all flourish'd at that time, maintain'd the contrary, affirming that in this case both the Popes were guilty Both Popes ac∣cused of Perju∣ry by the best Canonists. The Cardinal's leaving the Pope, grateful to the Christi∣an Princes. The Kings of England and France with∣drew their Obedience from both the Popes.of Perjury, which Opinion was after∣wards follow'd by Philip Dec. in Consil. pro Authoritate Concilii supra Papam.Decius. This departure of the Cardinals from the Pope was very acceptable to most of the Christian Princes, and particular∣ly to our King Henry and Charles King of France, who being tired with the shifts and delays of the Popes, had late∣ly withdrawn their obedience from them both, which nevertheless the Hi∣storians of both Nations, who were Pen∣tioners to the Pope, have unfaithfully
☞ omitted. For the English, though they hitherto paid their obedience to Ʋrban the Sixth, and those Popes that were created after him at Rome so religiously, that Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Oath that he took to Boniface the Ninth, according to the Custom at his entrance into that See, did expresly promise that he would ac∣count Rupert, Cardinal of Geneva, com∣monly called Clement the Sixth, as an Usurper; yet in a Synod holden at Lon∣don this Year by the King's Authority, it was forbidden to pay any Money due to the Treasury of Rome out of Bisho∣pricks At the Request of the Cardi∣nal's Letters English Mo∣ney with-held.or Parsonages. This the Cardi∣nals requested by their Letters, which are yet to be seen in the publick Re∣cords, affirming that those vast Sums of Money which were carried to Rome eve∣ry Year out of this Kingdom, did incite the Popes to seek the Papacy, and hin∣dred them from laying it down when they had once obtain'd it; neither is this taken notice of by any of our Wri∣ters. And though the French had all along sided with the Popes at Avignon, yet now that King perceiving the obstinacy of Benedict, refus'd to obey him any
longer, as Bald. add. c. olim de rescript.Baldus relates, who also The French King with∣draws Obedi∣ence to Bene∣dict, defended by Baldus.proves that his withdrawing his obedi∣ence from him was just and reasonable: Afterwards by a Decree of the Parlia∣ment of Paris, the Cardinals and Offi∣cers of the Apostolick Chamber were forbid to meddle with the Profits arising out of Annates; and two of the Pope s Emissaries who had brought to Paris Two Bull-Car∣riers (the Pope's Emis∣saries) were ignominiously treated at Pa∣ris.his Bulls of Excommunication against the King and the Princes, were put in a Dungcart with Paper-miters upon their Heads, carried through that City in an ignominious manner; as Carol. Molin. de Monarch. Franc. n. 140, 141, 142.Charles Molinaeu, an Accurate Lawyer, not re∣lying upon the credit of the French Hi∣storians, hath prov'd out of the publick Acts of that Court. Wheresore Niem. lic. 3. de Schism. cap. 7. & nemore unionis, Tract. 6. cap. 31.Theodoric of Nismes doth deservedly accuse the Remissness of the Emperors. For Charles the Fourth, in Charles the Fourth of France did neither regard the Church nor his own Kingdom.whose time the Schism began, not only neglected the Calamities of the Church, but also shamefully weakned the Em∣pire by renouncing the Kingdom of Ar∣les
in France, and by alienating many of the Cities of the Empire; he after∣wards by dishonourable Means prevail'd upon the Electors to chuse his Son Wen∣ceslaus, a Man of a mean Spirit, King of the Romans, and to appoint him his Successor, who when he came to the Empire did nothing becoming a Prince. Whose Son's Successor Ro∣bert of Bava∣ria King the Romans si∣ding with Gregory, chiefly foment∣ed the Church-Divisions.Robert of Bavaria, who after the depo∣sing of Wenceslaus by the Electors, was made Emperor, little minded the Af∣fairs either of the Empire or the Church, for he suffer'd Italy, Avignon, and seve∣ral other Parts of the Empire to be de∣tained by those that had no right to them, and siding with Gregory he was accounted the chief Author of these Dissensions in the Church. The Emperors then were de∣generated. When their Power was most requisite to rectify the Pope's misma∣nagement. It is certain that the Emperors in those times were much degenerated from those of former Ages, who both C. Hadrianus, c. in. Synodo Dist. 63. c. Victor Ho∣norium Dist. 97.made and C. Si quis. 2. qu. 7. &c. nos si in compenter. ead.depos'd the Popes, and C. Hbeo librum. Dist. 16. c. Valentinianus. Dist. 63. c. mandastis. 2. qu, 4.call'd Councils for composing the Dif∣ferences of Christendom: And indeed there was never more need of such a
power in the Emperor than at this time, for through these Factions of the Popes, the Faith of Christians began to stagger, all holy things were bought and sold, the Manners of the Clergy were cor∣rupted without Censure; and the Popes themselves were men of such dissolute Lives, that these things would find but little credit with Posterity, if they were not deliver'd by two Writers of ap∣prov'd integrity, Theodoric of Nismes, and Baptista Platina, who were both Se∣cretaries to Popes, and lived in the Court of Rome, one under Sixtus the Fourth, and the other under Ʋrban the Sixth, Boniface the Ninth, Innocent the Seventh, and now at this time under Gregory the Twelfth. Gregory Re∣nounc'd by his Cardinals at Pisa. The Cardinals of Gregory's Party per∣ceiving that the Emperor was not very sollicitous in appeasing these Tumults in the Church, presently after their ar∣rival at Pisa, declar'd by a publick Edict that Gregory was the Author of the Schism, that he was devested of the Pa∣pacy, that whatsoever should be acted by him as Pope for the future, was actu∣ally void, forbidding the Bishops, Ab∣bots, Prelates, and all those that held of the Church, to pay to any of his Of∣ficers,
any Annates, Tribute, or other Dues; and having call'd into them the Cardinals of Benedict's Party, who had lately revolted from him at the persua∣sion Who with those of Bene∣dict, deprived them both of the Papacy.of Charles King of France, by a ge∣neral Consent they devested them both of the Papacy, and appointed a Coun∣cil to be held the next Year at Pisa, on the Feast of the Annunciation for chusing a new Pope; all which they signified by Letters to all the Princes of Chri∣stendom, desiring their favour and as∣sistance for setling the peace of the Church, to which end they enjoin'd all the Bishops of the Western Church to be present at the Council. For which some worldly Di∣vines charged them with Schism. Now although some of the Vide Niem. in nem. Union. Tract. 4. cap. 9.Divines of that Age, to serve their own Inte∣rests by flattering the Pope, maintain'd that the Cardinals were guilty of Schism, and that a C. Multis Dist. 17.Council could not be call'd without the Pope's Authority, yet Baldus, Cardinal Zabarella, and Peter Ancharanus defended them. For Bald. ad. d. c. olim de rescrip. & in c. quia propter de elect.Baldus says, that against such kind of Popes
they ought first to make use of fair words, then of Herbis.Bulrush-spears and at last of Stones and open Force, and that they are to be depos'd by a Council Zabar. in c. licet. n▪ 13▪ de elect. & in cons. 150. & in Tract, de Schismate hujus temporis. Ancharan. Cons. 181.. Za∣barella and Ancharanus who were present at the Council of Pisa, have very fully prov'd that the Cardinals have power to call a Council, in which the Pope may be call'd in question and depos'd, which Opinion of theirs is follow'd by Pnor. ad c. licet de vitanda. n. 8. de elect. Dec. in Consil. pro Concilio Pisano. Felin. ad c. super lite∣ris. n. 21. de rescript. Cardin. Jacob. de Concil. lib. 3. Art. 1. n. 11. Jo. Royas. de Haeret. n. 518.Ponormitanus, Decius, Felinus, and other more Modern Authors, who ex∣presly approv'd of the Council of Pisa; to which may be added the Niem. in nem. unionis Tract. 6. cap. 15, 16.sense of the Universities of Paris and Bologna, who put out their Decrees in favour of the Cardinals; and very lately, Card. Bellar. lib. 1. de Concil. cap. 8.Car∣dinal Bellarmine, a very rigorous De∣fender of the Pontificat Dignity, as he doth not plainly allow of the Authority of the Council of Pisa, so neither hath he ventur'd positively to deny it. The
King of Eng∣land and France, &c. favour the Cardinals, and their aforesaid Sentence in Council. Which the Cardinal of Bourdeaux with great zeal got rati∣fied in Eng∣land. Walsingh. minds of all the Christian Princes, espe∣cially of our King and the King of France, were very much inclin'd in favour of the Council; and this Year the Cardinal of Bourdeaux, a man of known Wisdom and Integrity, came from Pisa, first in∣to France, and afterwards into England, where in a long Oration before the King and Parliament, he so incensed them all against Gregory, that Thomas Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, being also induced to it by Letters from the University of Paris, had determined to go himself to the Council, but at the King's persua∣sion, who put him in mind of the care of his Health, the inconveniences of travelling, and the publick Affairs of the Kingdom, he laid aside that De∣sign, and it was unanimously agreed upon to send Delegates to assist at the Council in the name of the English Na∣tion. This was the state of the Church of Rome when the Council of Pisa was appointed. To return now to Henry Chichele; 1409.In the beginning of the Year 1409. Robert Hallum Bishop of Salisbury, Hen∣ry Chichele Bishop of St. David's, and the Prior of Canterbury, who were the
Delegates pitch'd upon by the Synod at H. Chichele one of the De∣legates to Pisa.London, took their Journey towards Pisa through France. Upon their arri∣val at Paris, John Gerson an eminent Di∣vine, and Chancellor of that University, Before whom and Associates a Learned Sermon preached. Hos. 1. 11.preach'd a learned and elegant Sermon before them upon these words of the Prophet Hosea, The children of Israel and the children of Juda shall be gather'd together; in which after he had spoken in praise of the University of Oxford, which had lately sent thither their De∣puties to promote the calling a Council, and establishing Decrees against the Contumacious Popes, and had dis∣cours'd very largely upon that Text of Scripture concerning the Power of an Oecumenical Council, he assured them that all the People of Paris congratula∣ted their arrival; he commended their Piety who would undergo such incon∣veniences for the Peace of the Church, and in the name of the University offer∣ed them all the assistance and friendly Offices that they were capable of per∣forming. This Sermon is extant among In vol. 1. Operum Jo. Gerson.Gerson's Works.
Having pass'd through France, they made a splendid entry into Pisa on the 27th of April, where they found assem∣bled in the Council One hundred and forty Archbishops and Bishops, besides Abbots and others of the Clergy who Bishop of Sa∣rum another Delegate made an eloquent Oration in the Council of Pisa.were there in great numbers. The Bishop of Salisbury, as superior in dig∣nity to the other Delegates, in an elo∣quent Oration exhorted them in the Name of the King his Master, to esta∣blish a Peace, and compose those Divi∣sions in the Church, which was ear∣nestly recommended to them by the Ambassadors from the other Princes, French, Spaniards, Scots, Portuguese, Hungarians, Danes, Suedes and Poles. Upon which the Advocatus Fisci. Fiscal having laid be∣fore the Council the Crimes of the two Popes, Gregory and Benedict, and pray∣ing that the Examination of them might be referr'd to some Persons deputed with full power of enquiring into them, they were both convicted by the testi∣mony of Witnesses who were cited for a punishment of their Contumacy, and by other proofs, and were e Niem lib. 3. de Schism cap 44. pronounc'd
by the Council, perjur'd, Schismaticks, Where both Popes were pronounced perjured, &c. and Alexan∣der the Fifth elected.Hereticks, and devested of the Papacy; and on the 7th of July the Cardinals by a power delegated to them from the Council, Abb. ad. c. licet de vitanda. n. 8. de elect.elected Peter Philardus, who was call'd Alexander the Fifth. This Alexander was by birth a Cre∣tan, but it is not certainly known who his Father was. When he was a Boy he was taken up by a certain Franciscan Fryer, as he was begging from Door to Who, when a Boy, had begg'd from door to door.Door, who perceiving good Parts in him, admitted him into his Order, and instructed him in Grammar and Logick whilst he was in Italy; from thence he sent him to Oxford, where applying himself to the Studies of Philosophy Afterwards, his Parts known, sent to Oxford.and Divinity, he attain'd to a very great perfection in both those Sciences, as he shew'd afterwards in his Lectures at Paris, and his close and subtile Com∣mentaries upon the Books of Sentences. After that, by the Interest of John Ga∣leatius Then made Archbishop of Milan; and created Cardi∣nal by Inno∣cent the Seventh.Duke of Milan, he was made Archbishop of that place; then he was created Cardinal by Innocent the Seventh, and now at last he was made
Pope: He was a man of great Learning and Integrity, but having been wholly addicted to study, and confin'd to a Monastick Life, he was generally esteem'd unfit for the Administration of Alexander was too honest, studious and Monastick to be politically qualified for the Chair. 'Tis thought he was poysoned.Publick Affairs. He enjoy'd not the See of Rome either long or peaceably; for the next Year going from Pisa to Bologna on the first of May, in the Tenth Month of his Pontificate, he was poi∣son'd, as it is believ'd, and Balthasar Cossa, whom he had made Legate of Bologna, a man of a fierce Disposition, and fitter for the Soldiery than the Priesthood, was chosen Pope by the College of Cardinals, partly through fear of the Soldiers that he kept in Gar∣rison in the City, and partly by bribing the poor Cardinals that were lately pro∣moted by Gregory, and took the name of John the Twenty third. He was suc∣ceeded by John the Twenty Third A papal Tri∣umvirate. Now while Alexander was Pope at Pisa and Bologna, Gregory assum'd that Title at Ariminum, and Benedict at Pa∣nischola a City of Arragon, so that three Popes sat at one time in St. Peter's Chair which could hardly contain the Pride of one, and by the just judgment of God their Vanity was made manifest, who would have the holy Flock of Christ
and the Faith of all Christians to depend upon a perpetual succession of Popes in that See. The Council of Pisa being broke up, and the Winter coming on, Henry Bi∣shop of St. David's, (who is mention'd in the Ann 11. H. 4. fol. 78. 8.Statute-Books this Year as the King's Ambassador) with the other De∣legates, return'd into England; and the two following Years he was call'd by 1410.the Archbishop to two Synods holden 1411.at London; as appears out of the pub∣lick H. Chichele returns from his Embassy.Acts of those Synods; the rest of his time he spent in visiting his Diocess examining into the Lives of the People; and all the other Duties of his Episcopal Was diligent in his Fun∣ction.Function, which he perform d with great diligence as often as he had leisure from publick Affairs, in which he was often employ'd by King Henry the Fourth, who always highly honour'd him for his great Wisdom. 1413. On the 20th of March 1413. Henry the Fourth dyed at Westminster, and Henry the Fifth, a very accomplish'd Prince, succeeded him, to whom, in respect of his excellent Endowments,
Allegiance sworn to Hen∣ry the Fifth before his Co∣ronation. the Nobility of their own accord swore Allegiance before he was crown'd, which we never read to have been done to any of our Kings before him. While he was in a private Capacity, he spent his younger days loosely and extravagantly; but when he came to the Crown, he chang'd his course of Life together with his Condition; for he presently put away from him all those that he had made his Equals, and who had serv'd him as Instruments of his Extrava∣gances, and took to him all the wisest and gravest men, whose Counsels his Father had made use of, amongst them Henry Bishop of St. David's, whom he ever after highly esteemed, and this ve∣ry Year, in the beginning of his Reign, he chose him out of all the rest, and sent him upon two very honourable That King sent our Henry Ambassador to the French King and Duke of Burgundy.Embassies, first to the King of France, and then to the Duke of Burgundy; the remembrance of which we owe to the French Writers, for ours have omitted this and many other passages. For a War was begun in France be∣tween Charles the Sixth and Henry the Fourth, occasion'd by the frequent In∣cursions of the French into Aquitain, which at that time was in the possession
of the English. This Quarrel was trans∣mitted, together with the Crown, to Henry the Fifth by his Father. But King Charles being taken up with the Intestine Divisions between his Brother Lewis of Orleans, and John Duke of Bur∣gundy, desir'd a Truce with the English, from which King Henry, being newly come to the Crown, and his Affairs at home being not yet throughly setled, was not much averse. Whereupon Enguerrant de Monstrellet. cap 106.Richard Earl of Warwick, and Henry Bishop of To the former, for a Treaty of Peace.St. David's, were sent out of England; and from the French King, the Master of the Horse, which is the highest Honour in France, and the Admiral, who meeting at Calais, concluded a Truce for one Year. When he was come back from France, he was Enguerrant de Monstrellet. chap. 109.sent again the same Year with To the latter about a Mar∣riage.the Earl of Warwick to demand the Duke of Burgundy's Daughter in marriage for King Henry. They met with the Duke at Lisle in Flanders, and treated with him according to their Instructions, but return'd without concluding any thing, either because they did not like the per∣son of the Lady, or because the King
Whilst the King seem'd more inclina∣ble to the French King's Daughter. was become more inclinable to a Match with the King of France's Daughter, and had sent Ambassadors into France at this very time to treat about it. Some few Months after his return, he receiv'd a very ample Reward of these Embassies and his other Merits. For the Creation of an Archbishop of Canterbury being in H. Chichele chosen Presi∣dent of the Council.consultation, he of all the Bishops of England was chosen without dispute as most capable of exercising the highest Office in the Kingdom next to the King himself, in whose Judgment he was look'd upon as the fittest Person to deliver his O∣pinion first in the Privy Council. For Tho∣mas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury dy∣ing on the 19th of February, in the Year 1414.1414. John Wodneburgh, Prior of Canterbu▪ and the Monks of that Church, desir'd The Monks de∣sire leave to elect an Arch∣bishop of Can∣terbury.leave of the King to elect a new Arch∣bishop, which was a Prerogative that the Kings of England had challeng'd to themselves since the time of Edward the Third, Polydr. lib 19. in Edvard. 3.who took it away from the Pope, and constituted Bishops by his own Authority, which practice of theirs Abb. ad. c. . de Consuet. n. 4. & Apostil. ibid.Panormitanus affirm'd to be agreeable
to the Constitutions of the Canon-Law. When they had obtain'd leave of the King by a Grant under the Great Seal, they first call'd home the absent Monks, and celebrated the Funeral of Thomas Arundel in Christ's Church in Canterbury, and on the 4th of May they all assembled in the Chapter-house, where after So∣lemn Service, and a Sermon, in which they were all admonish'd of their Duty out of the Holy Scriptures in a matter of so great importance, and having also caused the King's Grant to be red, Henry Bishop of St. David's was imme∣diately demanded by all their Voices, which demand was declared by John Langdon one of the Monks, in the name of the rest, to the People who were as∣sembled in the Church in great numbers expecting the Election of a new Arch∣bishop. Now he could not be elected to the Archbishoprick, but must only be de∣manded according to the Rules of the And Canoni∣cally demanded H. Chichele.Canon-Law, in which a Bishop is said to C. sicut vir. 7. qu. 1.contract marriage with his Church,
and C. inter corporalia extr. de translat. Episc.cannot part from it without the Pope's leave; so that a Bishop being engag'd to his See, is not elected to ano∣ther, but is Tot. tit. extr. de postul. Prelat.demanded, and is said not to be promoted to a second Bishoprick, but Tot. tit. de translat. Episc. & Rebust. in prax. be∣nefit. par. 1. tit. de translat. Episc.translated from the first; all which Which Custom was introduced by Papal Am∣bition.was introduc'd by the Ambition of the Popes, who by this Device got the dis∣posal of most of the Bishopricks in Chri∣stendom into their own hands. The same day two of the Monks of that Society, William Molesh and John Moland, were appointed Proxies for the rest, who on the 15th of March waited upon the Bishop at London, and ac∣quainted him with the desires of the Prior and Monks, humbly intreating him in their name to take upon him the government of the Church of Canterbu∣ry. At that time he answer'd only, that for the present he could determine no∣thing positively in a matter of so great concern, but desir'd a day's time to con∣sider of it. The next day, when they came to him again in the Bishop of Nor∣wich's
House, in the presence of Edward Duke of York, and several other Persons of the greatest Quality, he told them in express words, that he could not grati∣fy their desires, because it was not law∣ful for him to lay down his Bishoprick of St. David's without leave from the H. Chichele expects the Pope's leave.Pope; however, that he was not wholly averse from accepting their offer, if the Pope would consent to it, and therefore he referr'd their Petition to his Arbitre∣ment. Whereupon the Prior and Monks by their Proxies sent to Rome, humbly To obtain which, Proxies are sent to Rome,requested of Pope John the Twenty third, that he would confirm their Pe∣tion of Henry Bishop of St. David's to the vacant See of Canterbury; and at the With the King's Letters in his favour.same time King Henry signified by Let∣ters to the Pope, that he had granted leave to the Prior and Monks of Canter∣bury to elect an Archbishop, that upon their request of the Bishop of St. David's he had given his assent to their Petition, that the Bishop was a Person of eminent Note, and had deserv'd this Dignity by his Virtue, and that nothing now re∣main'd, but that he would do his part in this Affair. Now the Merits of the Bishop were well enough known to the Pope, first in
the Court of Gregory the Twelfth, with whom he sided when he was Cardinal, and after that in the Council of Pisa, where he was also present; so that the Proctors for the Chapter of Canterbury soon obtain'd of the Pope, who was then at Bologna, on the 27th of April, that by his Bull he would absolve the Bishop from the Bond by which he was The Pope di∣vorc'd H. Chi∣chele from St. David's. Made him Archbishop by way of provi∣sor.tied to the Church of St. David's, and translate him to the See of Canterbury; in which, notwithstanding he did not confirm the Demand of the Monks, but promoted him to the Archbishoprick by way of Provisionis titulo.Provisor, that so he might not depart from the received Custom of the Popes in assuming to themselves a right of donation of Bishopricks and Livings; he added moreover this Re∣striction, That he should not enter up∣on But he was first to be sworn to the Infallible Chair.the exercise of his Archiepiscopal Function till he had taken an Oath of Fi∣delity to him and the Church of Rome, before the Bishops of Winchester and Norwich; and lastly, by several Bulls sent to the Prior and Monks of Canter∣bury, to the Bishops of that Province, to the Prelates and Vassals of the Church, and to all the People he commanded them to obey Henry Archbishop of Can∣terbury,
and to pay him all the reve∣rence, honour, obedience, and other Services due to his Function. But beside the Petition of the Chapter and the Pope's Bull, there yet remain'd the Pall, which was an C. Significasti. 4. de elect.Ornament ta∣ken from the Body of St. Peter who is buried at Rome, and was worn C. Antiq. 23. de Privileg.only by Patriarchs and Archbishops, and some Bishops to whom it was granted by a particular Privilege, to C. nisi 3. de usu Pallii.denote that The Pall, de∣noting full power over the other Bishops,full power that they have over the infe∣rior Bishops, and that C. 1. eod. lit.only in the Churches of their own Province, and upon Holidays appointed by the Pope, and C. ex tuarum. 5. eod. tit.till they had receiv'd it, it was accounted unlawful for them to call a Synod, to make holy Water, to confer Orders, to consecrate Churches, or to exercise any part of their Function. This he obtain'd of the Pope by the means of Robert Apilton Canon of York, whom he sent to Bologna for that pur∣pose; which afterwards the Bishops of Winchester and Norwich, by a Power de∣legated
to them by the Pope's Bull, de∣liver'd Delivered him in the King's Palace of Sut∣ton.to him with great solemnity in the King's Palace of Sutton, in the pre∣sence of the King himself, Humfry Duke of Glocester, Richard Earl of War∣wick, George Earl of March, and many other of the Nobility; and there he took an Oath of Obedience and Fidelity to the Pope (without which they A c. Significasti. de Electi.could not deliver him the Pall) in these words. Where he took the Oath of Obedience.I Henry Archbishop of Canterbury, will be faithful and obedient to St. Peter, to the holy Apostolical Church of Rome, and to my Lord John the Twenty third, and his Successors that shall be canonically elect∣ed. I will not consent to, nor engage in any Design against their Life, Limbs or Liberty. The Secrets that they shall entrust me with, either by themselves, by their Legates, or by Letters, I will not willingly reveal to any one to their prejudice. I will assist them in maintaining and defending the Papacy, and the Rights of St. Peter, against all persons whatsoever, as far as it consists with my Order. I will honoura∣bly attend the Legate of the Apostolick See both at his coming and return, and will
supply him in his necessities. When I am call'd to a Council I will come, except I shall be hinder'd by some lawful Impedi∣ment. I will visit the Apostolical Palace every three years, either in my own person, or by my Deputy, except I shall be excus'd by leave from the Pope. The Possessions belonging to my Archiepiscopal See I will not sell, nor give away, nor mortgage, nor grant any new Infeoffments of them, nor any other way alienate without the consent of the Pope. So help me God, and his holy Gospel. But though he had obtain'd a power in Ecclesiastical Affairs from the Pope, The Pope gave the Church, but the King could only give the Land.yet he could not meddle with the Lands and Revenues of the Church without the King's Authority. Wherefore he went to the King at Leicester, where he was put in possession of them on the 30th of May, after he had sworn Alle∣giance to the King, and had expresly renounc'd all those Clauses in the Pope's Which was done after re∣nouncing of the Clauses de∣rogatory to the King's Power.Bull for his Translation which might prejudice the King, or derogate from his Royal Prerogative; after which the whole Revenue of the Archbishoprick, which upon the death of Thomas Arun∣del fell to the Exchequer, were by a par∣ticular favour granted him by a Patent
For his Patent he paid Six hundred Marks. under the Great Seal, after he had paid Six hundred Marks. He came to Leicester upon the ac∣count of the Parliament which the King had call'd there, that he might consult with his Prelates, Lords and Commons about making new Laws, raising Mo∣ney, and the State of the Kingdom in general. In this Parliament the Arch∣bishop by his great Wisdom averted a Secur'd the Church from the Envy of the two Houses.terrible Storm from the Church, which was rais'd against it by the envy of the Nobility and Commonalty at the Wealth of the Prelates, which had shewed it self at several times during the Reign of Henry the Fourth, but now seem'd to threaten them more nearly in this new Government. For ten years before this in a Parliament holden at Coventry in the Year 1404. when King Henry the Fourth demanded Money of them for his Wars with the Scots, the Welsh, the Bretons, the Flem∣ings, Being former∣ly voted to supply King Henry the Fourth by the Church's Wealth.and the French, the House of Com∣mons replied, that there was no other way of supplying the necessities of the Publick, but by diminishing the exces∣sive Wealth of the Clergy; and that such was the Condition of the People of England, that they not only advanc'd
Money continually for the Service of the War, but also expos'd their persons to the common Enemy, while the Cler∣gy staid at home, and neither serv'd their Country with their Persons, nor their Estates. To this Thomas Arundel Arch∣bishop Whilst the Church paid Tenths oftener than the Laity did Fifteenths, &c.of Canterbury, briskly replied, That the Clergy granted Tenths oftner than the Laity did Fifteenths, and that more of their Tenants and Domesticks serv'd in the Wars, than of those of the Nobility, beside their Prayers which they pour'd out to God day and night for the prosperity of the Kingdom. And presently turning himself to the King, he fell upon his Knees, and besought him that he would be mindful of his Oath by which he had solemnly promis'd Which Conside∣ration, but chiefly the In∣tercession of his Predecessor with the King, had then a∣verted the storm,before God and Man to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Church entire and unviolated; by which, and by engaging those of the Nobility whom he thought to favour his Cause, he prevail'd so far, that the Demands of the Commons were thrown out by a publick Act. Six years after this in another Parlia∣ment holden by Henry the Fourth at Another Ad∣dress of the Commons a∣gainst the Clergy.Westminster, the Commons in an Address presented to the King, set forth that
the Revenues of the Prelates and Monks which they consumed in Debauchery and Excess, were sufficient to supply the Necessities of the King and King∣dom, that out of them might be main∣tain'd Fifteen Earls, Fifteen hundred Knights, Six thousand two hundred Esquires, and One hundred Hospitals, and therefore they besought the King that he would seise them into his own hands, and out of them would defray the necessary Expences of the Kingdom. Which was de∣sign'd, as the then Bishop al∣ledg'd, for the enriching of themselves.To which Thomas Archbishop of Canter∣bury again replied, That the Commons did not desire the Lands of the Clergy to enrich the Exchequer, but to repair their own Fortunes, which were wasted by their Prodigality out of the rich Spoils of the Church; as it had for∣merly happened to the Monasteries in France, which in the Wars between the English and the French were brought King of France, said he, has not a Noble now of the Revenues of the Mona∣steries that were brought to the Exche∣quer. The Petition rejected.into the Treasury, out of which (said he) the King has not now so much as a Noble left. At that time also the King rejected the Petition of the Commons, whether it were that he fear'd an eter∣nal Infamy would attend him if he should rob the Church, or because he thought that the Promoters of this De∣sign
were secret Favourers of the Do∣ctrine of John Wickliff, to which he had always a great aversion. Henry the Fourth averse to Wickliff's Doctrine, abet∣ted by the Pe∣titioners. In Henry the Fifth's time the Address renew'd. From that time, during the Reign of Henry the Fourth, there was nothing at∣tempted against the Church. But in this Parliament at Leicester, the House of Commons in an Address petition'd the new King, that their demands against the Clergy which were represented four years ago, might be taken into conside∣ration again, and voted in both Houses. The Archbishop was extremely troubled at this; for he was very sollicitous that the Church should receive no prejudice under his Government; his greatest fear arose from the consideration of the King's Youth, which is generally bent upon hasty Designs and Innovations. Having therefore communicated this Affair to the Bishops, it was determin'd To avoid which the Clergy resolv'd to give the King Money for a War with France.by them that the Clergy should offer the King a great Sum of Money, and excite him to make war with the French, and to assert his Title to that Crown, which falling to Edward the Second by Mar∣riage, was by him transmitted to his Successors. Most of the Writers of that Age re∣late that the Archbishop upon this oc∣casion
For which a Synod is call'd at London. presently call'd a Synod at Lon∣don, yet none of their Decrees are now to be found among the publick Re∣cords. The Title of the Kings of England to France. Now our Kings claim'd the Crown of France by this Title, Charles the Fair King of France, who was the only sur∣viving Male-Heir of the Line of Philip Claim'd by Edward the Third.the Fair, his Father dying without Issue, Edward the Third King of England, Son to Edward the Second by Isabella, Daugh∣ter of Philip the Fair, by his Ambassa∣dors demanded the Crown of France of the Estates of that Kingdom, as next of kin to Philip the Fair his Mother's Fa∣ther, and Charles his Unkle. On the Whose Compe∣titor was Phi∣lip de Valois.other side, Philip de Valois, Son to Charles de Valois, who was Brother to Philip the Fair, maintained that he was next Heir by right of Succession, as Cousin German to the late King Charles the Fair, whereas Edward claim'd only in right of his Mother, as being Grand∣son to Philip the Fair by his Daughter, and Nephew to Charles the Fair by his Sister; which Claim was contrary to the Laws and Constitutions of France, by which the Crown is to descend upon the Male-line only; alledging the words of the Salick Law, that no Woman
should inherit in Salick Land, which Salick Land he affirm'd to be the King∣dom of France. The French therefore King Edward claiming by's Mother, reje∣cted under pre∣tence of the Salick Law, assumed the Title. Successfully in∣vaded France, and entail'd the Quarrel. Richard the Second waved the Quarrel. Henry the Fourth was rejected King Edward's Claim, and ac∣knowledg'd Philip for their King, whereupon Edward presently assum'd the Title of King of France, which our Kings have us'd ever since; and having invaded France successfully, he left the Quarrel entail'd upon his Successors, to∣gether with the Crown of England. After him Richard the Second, a weak Prince, desisted wholly from the War with the French; and Henry the Fourth, though he were a Valiant Prince, yet being taken up partly with the Rebelli∣ons of the Welch, and partly with the Intestine Divisions of his own Nobility, he could not employ the whole Force of the Kingdom against them. But in But the happy Juncture was in Henry the Fifth's time.Henry the Fifth all opportunities con∣curr'd for carrying on the War, a vi∣gorous Age, a great Courage, Riches and Peace at home. Beside which, the Archbishop was of opinion, that the As Chichele thought, for a more glorious Diversion.fierce and restless Disposition of the Young King ought to be employ'd in some difficult Enterprize; and that the only way to keep him from making any Disturbances at home, was to shew him
an Enemy abroad, as there is no other way to stop the fury of a Torrent, but by dividing the Water into several Cha∣nels. For this end he rose from his Seat in the House of Lords, and address'd himself to the King, who sate on his Throne, in this manner. May it please your Highness, His Speech to the King for that purpose. IN this Consultation about the publick Af∣fairs of the Kingdom, when so many things have been propos'd, tending to restrain the Vices of your Subjects by good Laws to the impartial Administration of Justice, and to the establishment of the Peace of the Kingdom, it would be accounted the highest ingratitude, if I alone, who by your bounty have been lately advanced to the highest pitch of Honour, should conceal those things which seem so necessary to me, for enlarging the Bounds of your Dominion, and advan∣cing your Reputation amongst Foreign Na∣tions. For although by establishing good and wholsome Laws, by the due administra∣tion of Justice, and by the settlement of peace at home, you may live safely and se∣curely; yet certainly you will have but lit∣tle Accommodates himself to the King's Heroic Temper.regard to your Honour, unless you look abroad, and consider how you may extend the limits of your Empire, and revenge the
Injuries done to you by your Enemies; for this Opinion hath been constantly received by all Princes whatsoever, that the eminence of Kingly Dignity doth consist not so much in the Nobility of their Birth, the enjoy∣ment of Pleasures, the abundance of all things, the Wealth of their Subjects, and the Peace of their Kingdoms, as in the extent of their Dominion, the multitude of their Subjects, and the number of their Towns. And though the Realms of England and Ireland, which are devolv'd upon you from a long series of your Ancestors, may suffi∣ciently furnish you with all these, yet they are very small if compar'd with the spacious Kingdom of France, which in number of Thinks France no less than the Envy of the World.People, the Wealth of its Cities, in strong Garrisons and fortified Towns, exceeds all the Kingdoms in the World; containing, as the French themselves report, above Eighty Provinces exceeding populous, One hundred and eight Bishops Sees, above One thousand Convents, and Thirteen thousand Parishes. All which descending to your Represents the King's Right.Highness by right of Inheritance from Ed∣ward the Third, your Great Grandfather, And insinuat the Injuries done his French Pro∣vinces.are unjustly detain'd by Charles the Sixth, commonly call'd King of France; to say nothing of those Injuries which are daily
offer'd your Subjects, in Normandy, Gas∣cogne, Aquitain, and the Provinces of Anjou and Maine, which your Ancestors long ago possess'd by another kind of Title, and with the consent of the French them∣selves. The Salick Law an Ob∣trusion. And that they may have some colour for this Injustice; they obtrude upon you the Salick Law made by Pharamond the first King of the Francs, by which Law they say it is provided, That no Woman shall succeed in Salick Land, affirming by a fal∣lacious Interpretation, that by the Salick Land is meant the Kingdom of France, And a Cheat to debar the Female Line.and by this Cheat they would debar the Fe∣male Line of their right of Succession, and defraud them of their Inheritance. Now the very Title of the Law does suf∣ficiently evince the novelty of this Interpre∣tation. For it is affirmed by most of the Gregor. Turon. lib. 2. Paul. Aemyl. in princ. Girard. du Haillan. livre 1.Not made by Pharamond, as pretended.Writers of that Nation, that Phara∣mond was only Duke of Franconia in Germany, that he never pass'd the Rhine, nor ever came near the Confines of France; but that Four hundred years after his death, when Charles the Great had conquer'd the Saxons, and brought them over to Chri∣stianity,
some of his Soldiers passing the Rhine, setled their Habitations upon the River Sala (who from thence were call'd Salick Francs) in that part of Germany which is now call'd Misnia; and that being very much offended at the immodest beha∣viour of the German Women, they made a Law, by which they excluded that Sex from inheriting any part of the Salick Land. So that this Constitution is absurd∣ly ascrib'd to Pharamond, which had its original from a People that sprung up four But Four hun∣dred years af∣ter him, and in Germany.hundred years after him, and can no more concern the French, than it doth the Bel∣gians, who at that time were contain'd within the bounds of France, or any other Neighbouring Nation. If it obliges the French, it relates to private Inhe∣ritances only; for, But suppose that it did oblige the French, yet even then it relates only to Franc. Hottom. in Franco-gall. cap. 10.private Inheritances, and not to publick Right of Government, or the Succession of the King∣dom; and therefore whenever the French Kings disputed the Title with one another, In dispute, one French King never us'd it against ano∣ther; forthey never made any account of this Law; but when they contended with Foreign Princes they then alledg'd it, that by this means they might exclude them from the Government.
Pepin claimed by a Female, For Pepin who depriv'd the Race of Pharamond of the Kingdom by deposing Childeric, claim'd the Cromn as next Heir to Blithild, Daughter to Clothaire the First, which Title was confirm'd by Pope Zachary, and by the consent of the People of France. and so did Hugh Capet. When his Posterity had reign'd for Two hundred years, Hugh Capet put by Charles Duke of Lorrain, who was the only surviving Heir of the Line of Pepin and Charles the Great, pretending himself to be lineally descended from Lingarda, the Daughter of Charlemain who was Grand∣son to Charles the Great, by which Title he obtain'd the Crown. And by the like Lewis the Tenth con∣firm'd his Right. His Grandson Lewis the Tenth, who was canoniz'd for a Saint, and whom all we Christians honour as such, being not very well satisfied with the right of his Grand∣father Capet, out of a religious scruple would have declined the Government, had he not call'd to mind, that his Grandmother Queen Isabel was next Heir to Ermingar∣da, Daughter and Heir of Charles of Lorrain, whom Capet had impiously de∣priv'd both of his Life and Kingdom▪ From him all these later Kings of France and this Charles the Sixth, who now reigns, are descended, and all these
obtain'd the Kingdom in right of Female Succession, which by the Salick Law they This Law made a Bug∣bear to Fo∣reigners, con∣temned by themselves.would now debar you of, and would fain terrify you with this Bugbear, which they themselves securely contemn. Nor can that be properly call'd a Law, which has no shew of equity or justice in it, nay which contradicts all Laws both Divine and Humane, but ought rather to be term'd a masque or shadow of a Law. For by the Civil Laws of the Romans, which are ap∣prov'd by the consent of all Nations, L. maximum intem. c. d. liber. praeterit. 1. lege 12. Tab. c. de legit. haered. sect. Si quis igitur. Anth. de haered. ab intest. sect. Item vetustas. Instit. eod. tit.Women 'Tis contrary to the Civil Law, andare admitted to inherit equally with Men, and the distinction of Agnation and Cogna∣tion is taken away upon very good grounds, for they that introduc'd it, seem'd to have laid the blame upon Nature for producing some Women as well as Men, and Women suffer through the fault of their Parents in being born of that Sex, and not of the Male. These Laws were afterwards admitted by the Sicilians, Neapolitans, Navarrois, Spaniards, Portuguese, Scots, and (to say nothing of our selves) by almost all Na∣tions, The Constitu∣tions of most Nations,by the Constitutions of all which,
Women for want of Male-heirs, are admit∣ted to the Government; and herein they all follow the prescription of that Divine And to the Divine Law.Law which God Almighty gave the Jews by Moses in the Twenty seventh Chapter of Numb▪ 27. 8.Numbers; If a man dye and have no Son, the Inheritance shall pass to his Daughter: To which Ordinance if any Laws in any Nation whatsoever be found repugnant, they are not Laws but Corrup∣tions, seeing they depart from that principal Rule of Justice which the great Lawgiver prescrib'd to his own People. But setting aside those Women who go∣vern'd that very People, and those Kings who inherited that Crown in right of their Mothers, we Christians do all acknowledge, Jesus Christ the Lawful Heir, by his Mother of the Jewish King∣dom.that Jesus Christ was the lawful Heir of the Jewish Kingdom; now they who deny a right of Succession to be deriv'd from the Female Sex, do not only oppose his Title, but also deprive us of those exceeding great Benefits which God hath promis'd to Man∣kind through Christ. For God having promis'd Abraham that in his Seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, because the Messias was to come out of his Family; and the Prophets Isaiah and Mi∣cah, by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, having prophesied many Ages before that
Christ should spring out of the Root of Jesse, and out of the Family of David, and that the Tribe of Juda should be the noblest of all the rest, because Christ was to arise out of it who should govern the People of Israel; if the right of Succession be taken away from the Female Sex, we shall find no truth in these Divine Oracles, for Christ being begotten by an Eternal Father, could not spring from the Seed of Abraham, from the Root of Jesse, from the House of David, and from the Tribe of Juda but by Inheritance from his Mo∣ther. The French rather deny the Bible, than submit to a Foreign Prince. But the French chuse rather to destroy the veracity of the Divine Promises, than to submit to a Foreign Prince; and they that call themselves most Christian, do prefer a supposititious Law of Pharamond a Hea∣then, before those sacred Laws given by God himself. I would ask the French why they exclude Women from a right of governing, whom all other Nations do admit? Is it because their Government is so much better than that of all other Nations, and even than that of the Jews, which was constituted by God himself, that only men are capable of administring it? or does France, which as they say produces the bravest men in the
World, bring forth the weakest and most despicable Women? or did your great Grandfather's Mother Isabella commit some heinous Crime, for which she a King's Daughter, and Sister to Kings, deserv'd to be depriv'd of the Crown? But though we should grant them all this, yet seeing they have formerly rejected your great Grandfather King Edward, and do now disclaim any Authority that your Highness hath over them, they are very manifestly convicted of Treason against you. For admitting the Salick Law to be in force in the Kingdom of France, let Fe∣males be excluded, and the Male Issue only inherit the Crown, yet by what words of The Salick Law literally excludes not the Sons of Females.that Law are the Sons of those Females ex∣cluded? Shall a Law that debars Women from inheriting, in respect of the natural Levity of their Sex, be made to contradict it self, and for a quite contrary reason, to put by Men also? or will they by a kind of malicious comprehension extend those words of the Law to the Male-Sex, which reach only the Female? Wherefore, though they exclude Isabella, why did they not admit her Son Edward, a magnanimous and pru∣dent Person? why do they not invite your Highness, a Prince every way qualified for
Government? For it is a received Maxim amongst the Lawyers, that one L. Si ex patronis. 10. sect. Julianus. ff. de bonis libert. l. Divi fratres. 17. ff. de jure patr. l. 1. sect. si filius. ff. de suis & legit. haered. l. cum dotem. 57 ff. ad leg. Falcid. l. 2. sect. nullum. ff. de decurion. l. in servitutem. 16. sect. si patroni filius. ff. de bonis libert. l. si. vellem. 4. sect. si deportatus. ff. eod. tit. l. 1. sect. filium. ff. de bon. poss. contr. tab.unworthy or incapable may transmit some sort of right to his Heir; and that Sect. néque Authent. de trient. & sereniss. d. l. maximum vitium c. de liber. praeter Bald. ad. l. 2. n. 7. c. quae sit. long. consuet. Bald. ad l. si defunctus. n. 8. C. de suis & legit. Anchor. ad c. Canonum statuta. n. 311. de Constit. Alex. Cons. 16. vol. 1. Bart. ad. l. cunctos populos. n. 33. C. de sum. Trinit.those Laws that take away from Females the right of Inheritance, are contrary to right Reason and natural Justice; that none but the strictest interpretation of them is to be ad∣mitted, and that they L. Curials. C. de praed. decur. lib. 10 l. filius fam. 7. sect. sed meminisse. ff. de donat. l. maritum. 42. ff. sol. matr. l. si vero. 64. sect. si vero. ff. eod.may not be stretch'd beyond the very Letter, L. Si ita scriptum. 45. in princ. ff. de leg. 2. Re∣buff. ad. l. 1. ff. de verb. sign.from Women to Men, nor to the L. Prospexit. 12. sect. 1. ff. qui & à quib. ma∣num. l. commodissim. 10. ff. de lib. & posthum. l. si cum dotem. 22. in princ. ff. sol. matr.exclusion of a Sex that is not mentioned in them, but ought rather
And is to be taken in the most favoura∣ble sense. The Archbishop asserts the King's Call as well as Right to France. to be taken in the most C. Statutum 22. de Elect. in 6.favourable accep∣tation. Seeing therefore (most mighty Prince) that you are call'd to the Kingdom of France by the Laws both of God and Man, assert that Right which is denied you by the French by force of Arms, strike off that Crown from the head of the King of France which he hath unjustly put on, re∣press the Rebellions of that People with fire and sword, maintain the ancient Ho∣nour of the English Name amongst Foreign Nations, and suffer not Posterity to accuse your Tameness in passing by those Affronts put upon you by your Enemies. For besides a very just Cause, which is commonly attended with the Divine Assi∣stance, you have all things that can be de∣sir'd With other great Encou∣ragements to the Expedi∣tion.for carrying on a War with success; a vigorous Age, a strong and healthful Con∣stitution, a loyal Nobility and Commonalty, and a flourishing Kingdom; and lastly, We your Subjects of the Clergy have granted your Highness a greater Sum of Money than your Predecessors ever received of our Order, which we very readily and chear∣fully offer you for the Charges of this War, and shall daily in our Prayers implore
the Divine Majesty, that by the prosperous success of your Arms he would make known Success a Good Sign in the Vertuous and Brave.to all the World the Justice of your Cause. The Archbishop having ended his Speech, the King seem'd very much affected with it. But Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmorland, President of the But the Earl of Westmor∣land advises a War with the Scots.North, fearing the Incursions of the Scots if the King should pass over into France, in a long Oration endeavour'd to persuade, That a War with the Scots was to be undertaken before that with the French; and after he had excused himself in the beginning of his Speech for his want of Learn∣ing, as not being able to contend with my Lord of Canterbury either in Eloquence or Knowledge, he ad∣ded, That he had learn't from Wise men, and from his own Experience, that Forces united are stronger than disjoin'd; and that it was less hazar∣dous to invade a Neigbouring Enemy, than one more remote. Thus the From the Ro∣man Example to begin with the lesser Ene∣my.Romans first reduc'd to their obedi∣ence the Samnites, the Fidenates, the Volsci, and those People of Italy that lay next to them, before they attempt∣ed
to meddle with Foreign Nations; and afterwards preferr'd the little Island of Sicily because it border'd up∣on Italy, before the vast Regions of Pannonia, Numidia and Germany. He shew'd that the War with the And the rea∣diness of Pro∣visions for the latter.Scots would be managed here at home where Soldiers and all other necessary preparations for War would be ready at hand, whereas against the French there was a necessity of providing a great Fleet and Army at a prodigi∣ous charge, when the Seat of the War was to be in the Enemies Coun∣try; With the easi∣ness of the Vi∣ctory.that the Victory would be easily obtain'd over the Scots, their King being Prisoner in England, and the state of Affairs there being in confu∣sion through the unseasonable severi∣ty of Alban the Regent; and lastly, The justice and necessary of the War.That the cause of this War would be very just, being occasioned by the Ra∣vages and Robberies daily committed by the Scots, which they would exer∣cise with greater fury while the Eng∣lish were engag'd with the French, who are in strict conjunction with the Scots by an ancient and even natural Alliance that is between the two Na∣tions, and therefore that it would be
very hazardous to invade the French, before England was secur'd from the Scots at home. The Earl An∣swered by Jo. Duke of Exe∣ter. To this Speech of the Earl's, reply'd John Duke of Exeter, a Man of great Wisdom and Learning, which he had acquir'd in the Universities of Italy, whither he was sent by his Father, who design'd him for the Church; He ve∣ry eloquently maintained, That the That the Scot's Strength (lying in the French) ought to be first attaqued.French ought first to be invaded, up∣on whose aid the Scots relying, in∣fested the English: That if they were subdued, the Scots would come in of themselves, according to this Apho∣rism of the Physicians, That the Reme∣dy must be first applied to the Cause of the Disease; and that in order to the healing a Wound effectually, the pec∣cant Humour must first of all be purg'd. For from whence, said he, do the Scots draw the first rudiments France once conquer'd, the Scots will be helpless. Advised to hinder the Scots At∣tempts in the King's absence. Which Opini∣on highly ap∣plauded either of Learning or Arms, but from their Education in France? How can the Scotch Nobility be maintain'd, if those Pensions should fail which they use to receive from France? or if that Kingdom should be subdued, with what Nation will the Scots main∣tain any Commerce, or from whom
will they implore Assistance? Not from Denmark; that King is allied to you by marriage with your Sister; not from Portugal or Castile, both those Princes are your Cousin-Ger∣mans; not from Italy, that is too re∣mote; not from Germany or Hungary, they are both in league with us; so that the Scots will submit to you of themselves when the French are con∣quer'd, as the Tree necessarily wi∣thers when the Sap fails. He also shew'd in the Instances of Malcolm and David Bruce, that the Scots never invaded England, but when the English were at war with France, and therefore he propos'd that the Earl of Westmorland should be sent with some choice Troops to hinder them from attempting any thing in the King's absence. He con∣cluded, that the Conquest of France would be a rich and plentiful reward of their Victory, in comparison of which that of Scotland was but poor and inconsiderable. And War with France was the Cry of the House. The King and the Nobility were so much inclin'd in favour of this Opini∣on, but especially the Dukes of Clarence, Bedford and Glocester the King's Bre∣thren,
who were enflam'd with the de∣sire of acquiring Honur and Renown in the War with France by the Exam∣ple of their Ancestors, that when it came to be voted after the usual man∣ner, they all concurred in their Opini∣on with the Archbishop, and cried out confusedly in the House, War, War with France. The Archbi∣shop's renown∣ed for the wisdom of his Counsel. By this means the Archbishop ob∣tain'd great commendation of Posterity for his Wisdom, who by this Counsel of his promoted a very successful War, and averted a very great Calamity from the Church. The King having dissolv'd the Parlia∣ment, with great diligence provided his Army and Navy, and made all other The King pro∣vides Army and Navy.necessary preparations for such a War, designing to invade France the next Year. In the beginning of which, that  he might proceed according to the Law of Nations, he sent Ambassadors into France the Bishops of Durham and Nor∣wich Sends Ambas∣sadors to de∣mand France.to demand the Kingdom of King Charles, who receiv'd them civilly, and told them, that he would shortly send Ambassadors into England to return an Answer to their Demands. The Fleet and Army being ready for this Expedi∣tion,
and the Soldiers being order'd to The Army's Rendezvouz at Southam∣pton.rendezvouz at Southampton, in order to embark on Board the Fleet, The King in his Journy thither staid some time at Winchester, where the French Ambassa∣dors came to him, who were the Earl of Vendosme, William Bouratier Archbi∣shop of Bourges, Peter Fremell Bishop of Lisieux, and Walter Cole Secretary to the King. The Archbishop of Bourges made an Eloquent Oration in the name of the rest; in which, after he had largely and floridly describ'd the Miseries of War, and the Advantages of Peace, he offer'd the King in marriage the Lady Catha∣rine, The French Ambassadors, in Answer, offer the French King's Daughter in Marriage.King Charle's Daughter, if he would desist from the War, promising for her Dowry a great Sum of Money, and some part of those Provinces which the King demanded by right of Inheri∣tance. The King only answer'd at that time, that he would consider of the Con∣ditions which they propos'd, and the next day sitting on his Throne, and at∣tended with a great number of the No∣bility, the Ambassadors being call'd in, Their Condi∣tions not thought ho∣nourable by the King.he told them that the Conditions which they offer'd were such, as he could not accept of with honour; and calling Henry Archbishop of Canterbury, he
commanded him to give a fuller Anser to the Archbishop of Bourges Oration; which he did to this effect. The Archbi∣shop's more full Answer. That the King as soon as he came to the Crown, thought nothing of greater impor∣tance than to maintain peace as well at home amongst his own Subjects, as abroad with Foreign Princes. For which cause he had call'd a Parliament, in which having setled his Affairs at home, he had sent Ambassadors into France to claim his right, and to demand that part of the Kingdom of France which the Kings of England had held for some Ages by a lawful possession. But seeing his Ambassadors had brought That the French King had not an∣swered King Henry's De∣mand.back no Answer from King Charles, that he had levied an Army, and provided all things necessary for the War, and that he was now ready to pass over into France, and revenge the wrong they had done him when he perceiv'd they made no account of his Right. Nevertheless, that he might testify to all the World, how averse he was from shedding Christian Blood by the mu∣tual Butchery of War, that he would remit something of his Right, that he would dis∣band his Army, and establish a Peace be∣tween the two Nations by marriage with Catharine, upon condition that they would
restore to him the Dutchies of Aquitain and Anjou, and the other Dominions which Who insisted only on the Dominions his Ancestors had enjoyed.his Ancestors enjoy'd in France neither for∣cibly, nor clandestinely, nor precariously. That unless these Conditions were accepted, the King would immediately enter France with his Army, and lay it waste with Fire and Sword; nor would he ever desist from slaughter and revenge, till he had reduc'd it to his obedience, and had recover'd the Do∣minion transmitted to him by right of In∣heritance from his Predecessors. And lastly, That he call'd God Almighty both for a Witness and Avenger of his Cause, whose Majesty he trusted would be propitious to so just a War. Which Answer the King con∣firms. When the Archbishop had done speaking, the King interpos'd, and with his Royal Word confirm'd all that he had deliver'd in more copious and Rhetorical Terms. To which when the Archbishop of Bourges began to reply with reproachful Language, and to reflect upon the King with more freedom than consisted with the Cha∣racter of an Ambassador, the King on∣ly The French Ambassadors remanded.reprimanded him for the liberty which he took, and commanded the Ambassadors to depart the Kingdom under safe Conduct.
The King sets sail. The King soon after follow'd them, setting sail from Southampton with his whole Army on the 13th of August; And at his first arrival in Normondy, he took Harflew, a very strong Town, Takes Har∣flew.after a Month's siege; the Winter com∣ing on, he march'd from thence to∣wards Calais, and having pass'd the Seine, and being provok'd and set upon in his march by the French, he defeat∣ed them in a pitcht Battel near Agin∣court Deseats the French at Agincourt.on the 25th of October. It is cer∣tain that the English never fought with greater success, than in this Battel; for of the French Ten thousand were slain, Of whom Ten thousand are slain.with the loss of Two hundred only on our side, as the Paul. Aemyl. in Carol. 6.French Writers them∣selves have recorded it, and the Dukes And many No∣ble Prisoners.of Orleans and Bourbon, with a great many of the Nobility of France, were taken Prisoners, and brought over into England. In the King's absence, the Archbishop arms the Clergy in Kent. Whilst the King was in France, by his command the Archbishop of Canter∣bury order'd all the Clergy of that Dio∣cess to be in Arms, lest the French should in the King's absence make any
attempt upon the Coast of Kent, which lay expos'd to their Invasion; after which he appointed a Synod of his Calls a Synod.Province to be held at London on the 28th of November: The first day of their meeting was taken up in Religious Solemnities; For after Mass, which was celebrated in the Morning by the Archbi∣shop on the High Altar in St. Paul's, Wil∣liam Lyndewood Chancellor of Canterbu∣ry preach'd before the whole Body of the Clergy (which was assembled in S. Ma∣ry's Chappel in that Cathedral) up∣on these words of the Prophet Jeremy (cap. 6. v. 16.) Stand ye in the ways and see. The following days the Bishops and Abbots met in St. Mary's Chappel, and the Priors, Deans, Archdeacons, and Proctors of the several Diocesses withdrew into the Chapter-house, ☞where they consulted separately about the Affairs of the Church, from whence they are generally call'd the Upper and Lower House of Convocation. In which two Tenths are granted for the War. In this Synod two Tenths were grant∣ed to the King for the War with France out of all Ecclesiastical Revenues and Benefices that us'd to pay Tenths, one of them to be paid at St. Martin's day next following, and the other on the
same day the next Year: On the 2d of December the Archbishop dissolv'd the Synod; after that, at the King's desire, and with the consent of both Houses, he had appointed the days of St. George, St. David, St. Cedda, and St. Winifred, to be observ'd as Holidays. This De∣cree is still to be seen amongst the C. Ineffabilis. de feriis. Lyndw.Eng∣lish Constitutions. The next Year he held another Synod  at London on the first of April, to con∣sult Another Sy∣nod.with the Bishops and other Prelates about sending Delegates to the Coun∣cil at Constance. For Christendom was Christendom divided be∣tween Three Popes.still divided between three Popes, John the Twenty third, who exercis'd the Pontifical Function at Rome, Gregory the Twelfth at Ariminum, and Benedict the Thirteenth at Avignon. For both By two of whom the Council of Pi∣sa refused. A General Council ap∣pointed by the Third. Gregory and Benedict had refus'd to sub∣mit to the Sentence pronounced against them by the Council of Pisa. But John being sollicited by all the Christian Princes to put an end to the Schism, had two years before this appointed a General Council of all Christendom to be held at Constance in Germany, though
it were with great reluctancy and un∣willingness, fearing that the Council would deprive him of the Papacy, which afterwards happened, as we shall hereafter shew. The Archbishop appears at Constance by Proxy. The Archbishop being cited by the Pope's Bull to Constance, had sent thi∣ther two years ago as his Proxies, Ro∣bert Apulton Canon of York, and John Forst Canon of Lincoln, to assist in his Name at the Council; and at the same time the Earl of Warwick, the Bishops of Salisbury, Bath and Hereford, with the Abbot of Westminster, and the Prior of Worcester, were sent thither also as Delegates from the King, and the Bo∣dy of the Clergy, whose number being diminish'd by the death of Robert Hal∣lum Bishop of Salisbury, and Robert Mas∣cal Bishop of Hereford, who died at Constance; and because the Deputies of other Nations appear'd at the Council in greater numbers, therefore in this Synod, Richard Clifford Bishop of Lon∣don, and twelve Doctors, together with the Chancellors of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge were chosen for Their Charges 2 d. per l. out of the Cler∣gy's Revenues.this Employment, and Two pence in the Pound out of the Livings and Re∣venues of the Clergy was allow'd them for their Expences.
The Emperor comes to Eng∣land as Me∣diator. About this time the Emperor Sigis∣mond came first into France, and after∣wards into England, to endeavour by his mediation to establish Peace as well in the Church by deposing the contuma∣cious Popes, as betwixt the two Kings of England and France by putting an end to the War. At his request, the Whereupon the Delegates are press'd to Constance.King press'd the Archbishop and the Sy∣nod to dispatch their Delegates to Con∣stance with what speed they could. Where a De∣cree pass'd a∣bout Wills and Administra∣tion. In this Synod also it was decreed, That the Goods of Persons deceas'd should be deposited in the hands of a Trustee, till their Will should be exhi∣bited and prov'd; that Administration should not be granted to their Executors till they had made a true Inventory of the Goods, and that they should meddle only with those Goods that were contain'd in the Inventory; it was further added (ac∣cording to the Circumstances of those Times) that no more than Five Shil∣lings should be demanded for the Re∣gistring That 5 s. shall be paid for a Probate. And that the Clergy shall bring in the Tenth six Months sooner. or Probate of Wills; and last∣ly, to gratify the King, it was order'd that the Clergy should bring in the Tenth, which by a Decree of the for∣mer Synod was to be paid at the Feast of St. Martin, six Months sooner.
The Mediation in vain be∣tween the Two Kingdoms, But Sigismond labour'd to no purpose to compose the Differences between the French and the English. For whilst a Treaty of Peace was carried on with the French Ambassadors, who came over in∣to Harfleu be∣ing besieg'd, and Four hun∣dred English slain by the French.England with the Emperor, News was brought out of France that Harfleu was besieg'd by the French, and that Four hundred English were slain in a Battel lately fought with John Earl of Armag∣nac; the King was so incens'd at this Defeat, that from that time he was wholly averse from the least mention of Peace, and would have gone over forth∣with into France, if he had not been dissuaded from it by the Emperor; Wherefore the King sends his Brother the Duke of Bed∣ford, to Normandy. Presents the Emperor with the Garter,wherefore he sent his Brother John Duke of Bedford with a Fleet and Army into Normandy; and having presented Sigis∣mond with the Order of the Garter, and made a League with him, after he had magnificently entertain'd him in Eng∣land for four Months, about the end of And conducts him to Calais.August he conducted him as far as Calais, being attended with a very splendid Re∣tinue, and a numerous Fleet. The Emperor goes to Con∣stance. The Emperor went from thence to Constance to assist at the Council; but the King staid there some time to order his Affairs in France, and the Archbi∣bishop,
when the Synod was broke up, The Archbishop goes to France.came thither out of England. Ambassadors from the French to King Henry at Calais. While the King was at Calais, there came to him John Duke of Burgundy, the Archbishop of Rhemes, and other Ambassadors sent from Charles King of France to sue for Peace at a very un∣seasonable time, when the King upon the late Injuries receiv'd of the French, was wholly intent upon preparations for War, lest he who the last Year was Conqueror in the Battel of Agincourt, should now, upon the account of his late Losses seem not to give, but to re∣ceive Conditions of Peace. Wherefore having setled his Affairs in France, he return'd soon after into England, and held a Parliament at West∣minster, Who returning got a Supply from the Par∣liament.of which he easily obtain'd a supply of Men and Money for the service of the War with France the next Year. At the same time the Archbishop came back from Calais, and by the King's Command call'd a Synod at London on the 9th of November, in which, at the request of Henry Beaufort Bishop of Win∣chester, the Earl Marshal, and Henry Ware (who from Chancellor of Canter∣bury had some time before been made
Keeper of the Privy Seal) who for that purpose were sent thither by the King, he prevail'd with them to grant the And Two Tenths from the Synod.King two Tenths for his Expedition in∣to France. There was nothing else done in that Synod, but on the Days of John of C. Anglicanae de feriis.Beverley, and of Crispin and Crispi∣nian, Martyrs, on which the Battel of Agincourt hapned, were made Holi∣days. The King set∣ting sail, left the Duke of Bedford Vice∣gerent. The King, having commanded the Nobility to attend him, and having le∣vied a choice Army, and equip't his Fleet, sail'd over into Normandy on the  1st of August 1417. leaving John Duke of Bedford to govern the Kingdom in his absence. When he was gone, the Arch∣bishop commanded all the Bishops of his Province to cause solemn Processions to be made to all Churches and Chappels for the safety of the King, and the suc∣cess of his Arms. The same Year by a signal Example of his Justice and Courage, he shew'd how much all People whatsoever in that Age stood in awe of the Authority of the Church. For on Easterday the Lord
Strange, with the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, and a great Train of Servants at∣tending them coming to St. Dunstan's Church to Vespers, and meeting Sir John Trussel there, with whom he had an an∣cient Quarrel, his Servants drew their Swords in the Church, wounded Sir John, his Son, and some others of his Family, and kill'd one Thomas Petwardy a Citizen of London, who to accommodate the matter between them, had thrust him∣self into the Scuffle. The Matter being The Archbi∣shop interdicts the Church of St. Dunstans.brought before the Archbishop, he in∣terdicted the Church, which had been polluted with Blood, the Authors and Accomplices of the Crime were pub∣lickly excommunicated and curs'd be∣fore Excommuni∣cates the Cri∣minals, viz.the People at Paul's Cross, and the Archbishop sitting as Judge in St. Paul's Church, after he had examined into the Lord Strange, Lady and Ser∣vants. The two for∣mer with Ta∣pers, and all in their Shirts and Drawers only, did pro∣cessional Pen∣nance from St. Paul's to St. Dunstan's; for purifica∣tion of which Fact, impos'd this Penance on the Lord Strange and his Lady, who fell on their knees before him, and humbly begg'd pardon of the Church; That their Ser∣vants in their Shirts and Drawers only, and he and his Wife with Tapers in their hands, should go through the great Street of the City from St. Paul's to St. Dunstan's, all which was according∣ly perform'd with great solemnity; and
when the Archbishop purified St. Dun∣stan's The Lady fill'd the Vessels with water▪Church, the Lady Strange fill'd the Vessels with Water; they were also commanded to offer each of them a Pyx and Altarcloath. In the mean time the matter was hotly debated in the Council of Constance about taking away the Schism in the At Constance they dispute about a new Pope.Church by the creation of a new Pope; and restraining those Persons who with a great deal of liberty inveigh'd against the Pride of the Popes, the Luxury of the Clergy, the lazy Lives of the Monks, and the innumerable Corruptions of the And against John Wick∣liff.Church of Rome. Of these John Wick∣liff was accounted the chief, who in the Reign of Edward the Third, and Richard the Second, by his publick Lectures at Oxford, and afterwards by his Books which he put out, drew to his Party a great many not only of the Students of that University, but also of the Nobility By whom the Seeds of sound Doctrine had been dispersed. Particularly among the Bo∣hemians.and common People. By him the Seeds of sound Doctrine were dispers'd among other Christian Nations, and particu∣larly among the Bohemians, who em∣brac'd his Tenets so readily, that they had already in a manner renounced the Pope.
Wickliff pro∣nounc'd Here∣tick. And decreed that his Bones be taken up and burnt. And his Fol∣lowers be pro∣secuted as He∣reticks. To put a stop to their progress, John Wickliff was pronounced a Heretick by a Decree of the Council; and it was fur∣ther ordained that his Memory should be accurs'd, that his Bones should be taken out of his Grave and burnt, and that all those who maintain'd his Opini∣ons should be prosecuted as guilty of Heresy. Then they proceeded to the Bohemi∣ans, and having likewise condemned their Opinions, John Huss and Hierome John Huss, and Jerom of Prague, con∣demn'd to Flames.of Prague were adjudg'd Arch-hereticks and condemn'd to the Flames. The death of these two Persons brought a great deal of infamy upon the Emperor Whose death made the Em∣peror and Council infa∣mous.Sigismond, and the whole Council; for being cited to Constance, they came thi∣ther under the security of the publick Faith, which Sigismond had engag'd to Ladislaus, King of Bohemia, for their safe return; Which being so shamefully violated, the Bohemians were so incens'd, The publick Faith being shamefully violated, The Bohemi∣ans revenge it.that having made John Zisca, a valiant Commander, their General, they af∣terwards brought the Emperor into ve∣ry great Straits. But the Council, to take away the infamy of this Action, decreed that Faith was not to be kept
The Council decreed; Faith is not to be kept with He∣reticks. with Concil. Const. Sess. 15.Hereticks, having first consulted Panormitanus and Ludovicus Romanus, two Lawyers of great repute, who deli∣ver'd this as their Opinion, as did also some others whom the Fathers of the Council could Mar. Salomon. ad l 2. sect. exactis. ff. de orig. jur. Petr. Plac. lib. 1. Epit. delict. c. 37.sway by their Autho∣rity. Notwithstanding the more Menoch. lib. 2. de Arbit. Jud. Cent. 4. Cas. 336. Farrinac. in prac. Crim. tit. de carcerib. & carcerat. q. 20. & Menoch. Cons. 100.Mo∣dern Lawyers were of a contrary Opi∣nion, Of which the Papists asha∣med, kept it to Luther and others.and the Papists themselves were so asham'd of this Decree, that they did not offer to violate the publick Faith gi∣ven to Bodin. lib 5. de repub. cap. 6.Luther at the Dyet of Worms, and afterwards to the Protestants which came to the Petr. Aerod. de ord. Judic. par. 4. n. 15.Council of Trent. For what can be more absurd, or indeed more impious, than that Christians should make no account of their word, which was always esteem'd sacred even by the Heathens themselves? After these things the Council was wholly intent upon composing the Dif∣ferences between the Popes. For when
the Emperor Sigismond was return'd out of England, several hainous Crimes were Pope John the Twenty third charg'd for not leaving the Papacy;alledg'd against John the Twenty third, because he had not laid down the Papa∣cy, as he had solemnly promis'd; where∣upon he fled privately, and in disguise, from Constance into Austria; but being pursued by the Emperor, he was taken in the Habit of a Fencer, or a Hunts∣man, and brought before the Council, by whom he was committed to Prison; and some of the chief Men out of every Nation there present being deputed to examine into his Actions, he was accu∣sed before them of Adultery, Incest, And accused before the Council of A∣dultery, Incest, Witchcraft, &c.Witchcraft, Murther, and other horrid Crimes, particularly of Simony, that being first made Cardinal, and after∣wards Pope, through Bribery, he had set to sale Livings, Dignities, Bishopricks and Cardinalships, Orders, Indulgences, and all other things belonging to the Church; all which being prov'd by Witnesses, by the Sentence of the Coun∣cil he was divested of the Papacy, and condemned to Imprisonment. There remain'd yet Gregory the Twelfth, and Benedict the Thirteenth. Gregory, when he saw that he must sub∣mit, sent Charles Malatesta Prince of Ari∣minum,
as his Legate to Constance, with a large Commission, in which full power was granted him to lay down the Pontificate in his Name. Where∣upon the Legate putting on the Pontifi∣cal Robes, and sitting in the Papal Gregory by Proxy resigns the Chair, as did also Bene∣dict.Chair, as representing the Person of Gregory, read his Commission publickly, and resign'd the Papacy. Benedict also being deserted by Ferdi∣nand King of Arragon, who had hither∣to obey'd him, by the Sentence of the Council was divested of the Popedom. And that these Depositions of the Popes might appear to be lawful, it was de∣termin'd by a Decree of the Council, ☞that a Sess. 4, & 5.General Council doth derive its At Constance a Council is decreed supe∣rior to the Pope.Power immediately from Christ, and that the Pope is subordinate to it. After this they consulted about chu∣sing a new Pope, and it was agreed up∣on by the Council, that six men out of each Nation should be deputed to go in∣to the Conclave with the Cardinals, Five Nations compos'd the Council.and elect a Pope. Now all things were manag'd in the Council by the Suffrages of five Nations, the Germans,
the Italians, the English, the French, and the Spaniards; for it was in this Council that the English were first al∣low'd to be a Nation. Out of them were chosen the Bishops of London, Bath, Worcester and Litchfield, with the Abbot and Dean of York. The third day after their entrance into the Conclave, the Bishop of London leading the way with these words, I Richard Bishop of Lon∣don, come to my Lord Cardinal Colonna, all the rest follow'd his Example, and chose Otho Colonna a Roman Prince, and Cardinal of St. George of the Golden Fleece, on the 11th of November, which being St. Martin's day, the Pope took Martin the elected Pope.the Name of Martin the Fifth. This Sess. 12.Decree of the Council of Con∣stance concerning the power of a Gene∣ral Council, extreamly troubled the succeeding Popes, insomuch that it was repealed by Leo the Tenth in the last The D cree of the Council's Power re∣peal'd by Leo the Tenth.Lateran Council; since which a great many of the Canonist. ad c. si Papa. Dist. 40. &c. significasti de elect. Canonists in their Com∣mentaries, and the Bellarm. lib. 2. de Concil. Author. cap. 14. Sander, lib. 7. de visib. monar.Popish Divines in
their long Disputations have disallow'd it, either out of flattery to the Popes, or else out of fear, as having lost that li∣berty of speaking and writing which every one enjoy'd at the time of the Council of Constance when there was no Pope. For Ancharan. Cons▪ 181.Peter Ancharanus who was Advocate of the Council Bald. ad. c. olim. n. 32. de rescript., Baldus and Abb. ad c. quia diligentia. n. 2. de Elect. & ad c. significasti. n. 4. eod. tit. & ad c. fraternitatis. n. 1. & 2. de haeret.Panormitanus gave it openly as their Opinion at that time, That the Pope was subordinate to a Council, and might be depos'd by it, following herein the Au∣thority of the Gl. ad. c. si Papa dist. 40.Gloss of Archidiac. & Gemin▪ ad c. in fidei favorem. de haeret in 6.Archdiaconus and Geminianus, who had deliver'd the same before in their Writings, with whom Felin. ad c. super literis. n. 21. de rescript. Dec. in Consil. pro Authoritate Concilii supra Papam. late. Cardinal. Jacobat. lib. 3. de Concil. art. 1. n. 11. Jo. Royas de haeret. n. 18.Felinus and other more modern Authors do agree, who approve the Council of Constance, and maintain the same Opinion.
A Council not to be re∣strain'd by a new Pope; Nor is the Power of a Council re∣strain'd within such narrow limits, that immediately upon the creation of a Pope it loses its Authority, and can make no Decrees without the consent of the new Pope, as Philip Decius ad c. Osius. n. 2. de Elect.Decius imagin∣ed, who is therefore deservedly censur'd by In notis ad Decium. ded. c. Osius.Charles Molinaeus; and Abb. ad. c. licet de vitanda n. 8. de elect.Panormita∣nus further adds, That if the Pope dye, or And that, on the Pope's death, a new Election be∣longs to the Council.be depos'd in the time of a Council, that then the power of Election is in the Council, and not in the Cardinals, alledging this In∣stance of the Council of Constance, in which Martin the Fifth was chosen by the Cardinals and others, to whom that Power was delegated by the Council. But though this Decree was esta∣blish'd at that time in this Sess. 19.Council of Constance, yet it was afterwards of no force in the Council of Trent, in which Yet during that of Trent, the Cardinals chose Paul the Third.the Ambition of the Cardinals pre∣vail'd, who upon the death of Paul the Third, who Thun. lib. 4. histor.died in the time of the
Council, posted from Trent to Rome to That of Con∣stance gave order about the Money due by England to Rome.create a new Pope. But the Council of Constance by vertue of their Supream Authority in the beginning of their Ses∣sion gave Commission under the Seals of the several Nations to Henry Bishop of Winchester, and John Bishop of Litch∣field, to gather the Moneys due to the Chamber of Rome in England. The Election of Pope Mar∣tin was migh∣tily liked. The Election of Martin the Fifth caus'd an incredible joy all over Chri∣stendom, for every one thought that by this means the Peace of the Church would be re-establish'd. The first notice of it in England was given by the Arch∣bishop to the Synod, and was presently divulged by Thanksgivings and solemn Processions. This Synod was appointed by the Archbishop to be held at London on the 26th of November upon a Com∣mand from the King by Letters out of France. Thither came Thomas Bishop of Durham Lord Chancellour of Eng∣land, Thomas Beaufort Duke of Exeter, Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, and Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmorland, being sent from the Regent John Duke of Bedford to desire of the Clergy a sup∣ply of Money for the King, who was then carrying on the War successfully
in France; which being seconded by London Sy∣nod grants the King two Tenths.the Request of the Archbishop they granted two Tenths. In this Synod also Robert Gilbert Doctor of Divinity and Warden of Mer∣ton College, in a long and eloquent Ora∣tion, having first prais'd the University of Oxford, laid before them the misera∣ble Condition of the Students there, who after many years spent in the stu∣dy of the Sciences, were not call'd thence to receive any reward of their Labours, but were suffer'd to grow old in the University. His Example was follow'd by Thomas Kington Doctor of Law, and Advocate of the Arches, who pleaded the same Cause for the Univer∣sity of Cambridge; they both intreated in behalf of both Universities, that by a Decree of the Synod some care might be taken to prefer them. Whereupon By a Decree therein Stu∣dents of both Universities were provided for.it was decreed, That all Livings whose yearly income amounted to sixty Marks, should by the Patrons be given only to Do∣ctors of Divinity, Law or Physick; those that were worth fifty Marks a year, only to Licentiates in those Faculties, or Batchelors of Divinity; and those which did not exceed forty Marks yearly, only to Masters of Arts or Batchelors of Law. This
related to those Benefices to which was annex'd the Cure of Souls; The same Order almost was taken in those which are call'd Sinecures, according to their re∣spective Values. It was further added, That this Decree should not extend to those who had taken Degrees by some particular Grace. But because it was provided by the Statutes of both Universities, that the Students of Divinity should take no Degree in that Faculty, till they had commenc'd Masters of Arts, and that no Student of Canon Law should be created Doctor, except he had studied the Civil Law, this Condition was added to the Decree in favour of the Monks and Canon Lawyers, that it should not be in force unless those Statutes were repeal'd. For which purpose Thomas Felde Dean of Hereford, and Thomas Lentwar∣dyn Chancellor of St. Paul's in London, were sent by the Synod to Oxford to treat about this Affair with the Masters of Arts, by whose Suffrages the Univer∣sity is govern'd. This was also signified to the Masters of Arts of Cambridge by Letters from the Synod; but they all refusing the Condition, lest they should be accounted inferior to the Doctors in Presentations to Livings; this Decree
which would have been for the good of Which was opposed and laid aside.both Universities, was at that time laid aside. When the Synod was ended, the in∣jurious proceeding of Martin the new Pope, began to be enquir'd into. For Pope Martin at pleasure fill'd the Epis∣copal Sees in England;about this time several Bishops dying in England, the Pope substituted others at his own pleasure. In the beginning of the next year he made Benedict Nicoll Bishop of St. David's, William Barrow Bishop of Bangor, John Chandeler Bishop of Salisbury, and Philip Morgan Bishop of Worcester, by vertue of that absolute Power which the Popes in that Age ar∣rogated to themselves in disposing of the Bishoprickes of England. Whose Clergy were quiet du∣ring the Coun∣cil of Con∣stance. The Clergy here had been quiet for some time during the Council of Con∣stance after the deposing of John the Twenty third. For the Bishops of Salisbury and Hereford dying at that time, two new Bishops were made by the free Election of both those Chap∣ters; nor could the whole College of Cardinals by their Letters written from Constance, prevail upon the Chapter of Salisbury to demand John Bishop of Litchfield the King's Commissioners at the Council for their Bishop.
Martin first claim'd an universal Right of Pre∣sentation. But Pope Martin having now got quiet possession of the See of Rome, be∣came far more insolent than his Prede∣cessors; for in the beginning of his Pon∣tificate, he claim'd a Right of presenta∣tion to all Churches whatsoever, re∣serv'd to himself the Donation of all Bishopricks by provision, disannull'd all the Elections of Bishops made by the In two years made thirteen Bishops in the See of Canter∣bury.Chapters, and within two years time made thirteen Bishops in the Province of Canterbury, taking his opportunity, while the King was engag'd in the War with France, to venture upon an Acti∣on which Edward the Third and Richard the Second had prohibited by most se∣vere Laws; he also made his Nephew Prospero Colonna, a Youth of Fourteen years of Age, Archdeacon of Canterbury by Provision, to whom some years af∣ter, to gratify the Pope, the King granted the Profits of as many Benefices in England as did not exceed fifty Marks yearly. Besides this, Complaints were made of his promiscuous uniting of His Appropria∣tion. censur'd.Churches (which are commonly call'd Appropriations) and Consolidations, of his easiness in granting Dispensa∣tions, by which Priests were excus'd from residing upon their Benefices, and
Laymen were permitted to hold Spiri∣tual Preferments; and lastly, that there The English neglected in the Grants of the Roman Dignities.was no notice taken of the English in the distribution of the Dignities of the Court of Rome. The King's Commissioners at the Council of Constance, John Bishop of Litchfield, and John Polton Dean of York, were order'd to represent these Grievances to the new Pope, who soon obtain'd a concession of some Privileges to the English, which in the Instrument it self are call'd Agreements between Mar∣tin Martin after∣wards agreed to some redress; In uniting Pa∣rishes; And for a power to Bi∣shops therein; For avoiding the Unions made in time of the Schism;the Fifth, and the Church of England. These were, That the uniting of Parishes should not depend wholly upon the Pope's pleasure, but that the Bishops of the several Diocesses should have power to examine into the reason of it; That the Ʋnions of Churches and Consolidations of Vicarages made in the time of the Schism, should be made void; That those Dispensations grant∣ed For recalling Dispensations for nonresi∣dence;by the Pope, by which Priests were ex∣cus'd from Residence, and Laymen and Monks were made capable of holding Li∣vings, should be recall'd; That for the future For Lessening the Number of Cardinals, and for their equal promotion.the number of Cardinals should be lessen'd, and that they should be promoted equal∣ly out of all Nations, and that the English
should be admitted to all other Offices in the Court of Rome. The King re∣quired that Pope not to meddle with his Presenta∣tions. About the same time the King sent another Embassy to the Pope to desire him not to intermeddle in the dispo∣sing of those Livings in England, the Presentation of which belong'd to him as well by Agreement made be∣tween the Kings of England and the Popes, as by his Royal Prerogative; That no French be preferred in Aquitain, &c.that no Frenchmen might be preferr'd to any Bishopricks or Livings in Aqui∣tain, or any other of the King's Do∣minions in France; that Dignities and That Irish Li∣vings be given to those that understand English; That the Bi∣shops there pro∣mote the Eng∣lish Speech only; That French be not preser'd to Monasteries in England; That the Pope supply the King with some of the English Money. The Pope not answering fa∣vourably, Benefices in Ireland might be conferr'd only upon those that understood Eng∣lish; and that the Bishops of that Kingdom in their respective Diocesses might take care that the People should speak only English; That for the future no Frenchmen might be ad∣mitted into the Monasteries founded by the French in England, and that the Pope would grant the King a Sup∣ply, who was now making war in defence of the See of Rome, out of the Money that was paid to the Trea∣sury of Rome in England. To which Requests, when the Pope return'd no favourable Answer, the Ambassadors
added, that if he did not speedily satis∣fy their demands, they were command∣ed to declare openly that the King would make use of his own Right in all 'Twas declared the King would take his course.these things, which he had desir'd of him not out of necessity, but only to shew his respect to his Holiness, and to put in a publick Protestation concerning these Matters before the whole College of Cardinals. The French also and the Germans pro∣tested The French and Germans declare against the Pope's Provisions. The former re∣vived the Laws to re∣strain him. That if he were refracto∣ry, they'd dis∣own him. The Pope's In∣terdict of the Church of Ly∣ons remov'd by the Parlia∣ment of Paris. An Appeal from the King to the Pope High Treason. against these Provisions, and other Artifices of the Pope: For the Estates of France being assembled at Paris Carol. Molinae de Monar. Fran. n. 145.in May this Year, by their Edict reviv'd all the Ancient Laws that had been made to redress the Grievances, and re∣strain the Tyranny of the Popes; in which Edict it was further added, that Martin should not be acknowledg'd as Pope by the French, unless he would subscribe to this Decree; and when he had interdicted the Church of Lyons, the Interdict was taken off by the Par∣liament of Paris, and the Rector of that University was tried for High Treason, for appealing from the King's Edicts
to the Pope. The Germans also about The Oppress'd Germans not redress'd.this time being pillag'd by the Extor∣tion of the Pope's Receivers, desir'd of him a redress of their Grievances, but they were put off with Indulgences and Pardons, as In Epistolis passim.Aeneas Sylvius relates, who liv'd at that time in Germany. Toward the end of this Year the Archbishop of Canterbury, after he had visited the Diocess of Rochester, being sent for by the King, pass'd over into France, leaving John Wodnesburgh, Pri∣or of Canterbury, his Vicar-general. He found the King at Roan in Normandy, who since his arrival in France, had ta∣ken partly by storm, and partly by sur∣render, Caen, Cherbourg, Allenson, Con∣stance, Falaise, and several other strong Towns in Normandy, and had then laid siege to Roan, the Capital City of that Province. The King be∣sieges Roan the Capital City of Nor∣mandy. Proposal of a Treaty betwixt England and France. About this time it was agreed upon by the two Kings to send Commissio∣ners on both Sides to treat of a Peace, who were to meet at Pontlarch, a Town lately taken by King Henry, situated up∣on the Seine about eight Miles from
Roan. On the King of England's part From our King were sent the Archbishop and Earl of War∣wick;were sent the Enguerr. de Monstrell. cap. 200.Archbishop of Canter∣bury, and the Earl of Warwick; from the French King, Philip Morvillier, Pre∣sident of the Parliament of Paris, the Bishop of Beauvais, and Reginald Tolle∣ville, Knight; and from the Pope, Car∣dinal And Cardinal Ursini, as Me∣diator from the Pope. The Commis∣sioners did not conclude. Ʋrsini, who was to mediate the Peace on both Sides. The Commissio∣ners debated fifteen days about compo∣sing Matters, but came to no conclu∣sion: For the French shew'd up and down the Picture of Catharine King Charles's Daughter, very curiously drawn, whom they propos'd in Mar∣riage to King Henry; but the English demanding for her Dowry a Million of Our King de∣manded a Mil∣lion of Crowns, Normandy, Aquitain, and Ponthieu Dowry with his Mistress. The French straitned, re∣fused all Terms▪Crowns, together with Normandy, A∣quitain, and the County of Ponthieu, in∣dependent of the Sovereignty of France, the French at length openly refus'd all Terms of accord, conceiving that King Charles was not capable of transacting any thing, having lately lost his Senses; nor the Dauphin, who acted in right of another, and not for himself; nor the Duke of Burgundy, who had no power
to alienate the Dominions of the King∣dom of France. Roan holds out obstinately; All this while the People of Roan held out very obstinately, though they were reduc'd to the greatest Extremi∣ties. For after six Months siege, in which Six thousand Men perished, partly by the Sword, and partly by Fa∣mine, those that remain'd were forc'd to feed upon the most loathsome Ani∣mals, as Dogs, Horses and Mice, and they were reduc'd to so great a scarcity of all things, that as it is reported, an Where 'tis said an Apple was sold for 3 s. a Dog for 10 s. The Citizens helpless, their King being Lunatick, and the Kingdom in a Civil War. Apple was sold for Three Shillings, and a Dog for Ten; nor could they any longer hope for Relief, for King Charles was not well in his Wits, and the Princes were engag'd in a Civil War, in which all France was involv'd, be∣ing divided between Charles, the Dau∣phin, and John Duke of Burgundy. Wherefore two of the Nobility, two of the Clergy, and two of the Citizens, with a Herald, were sent out of the Town, who falling down at the King's Feet, humbly sued for Peace. The King sent them to the Enguerr. de Monstrell. cap. 202.Archbishop's Tent, to
whom he had given power, together with the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, the Lord Fitz-hugh, Sir Walter Hunger∣ford, Sir Gilbert Ʋmfrevil, and Sir John Robsert, to treat with the Besieged about the Conditions of Surrender. The Arti∣cles being agreed on, which were, That the Inhabitants should be safe both in their Persons and their Fortunes, and that they should pay 365000 Crowns, they deli∣ver'd Upon  made, they surrenderd, paying 365000 Crowns.up the Town. This was in the beginning of the Year 1419. and on the 19th of January the King entred the Town with his Army in a triumphant  manner, and having fortified it with Here the King setled his Ex∣chequer and Courts for the Affairs of Normandy.some new Works, he setled there his Exchequer, and the principal Court of Judicature for all matters relating to the Province of Normandy. After this he conquer'd the rest of Normandy in a little time. For first he took Meudon, and then Pontoise by storm. Took Meudon and Pontoise by storm; And others by surrender.The other Towns being terrified by the example of that of Roan, surrender'd of their own accord. The Archbishop of Canterbury staid some time with the King at Roan, be∣ing entertain'd in a Convent of Preach∣ing Fryers there, and afterwards attend∣ed him in his Camp at Meudon and Pon∣toise,
serving him both in the quality of a Confessor and a Counsellor, and did not leave him till the end of August. At which time he return▪d into England, that he might hold a Synod and take care of the Government of his Pro∣vince. This Synod was appointed to be held at London on the 30th of October, that the Clergy might consult about grant∣ing a supply of Money to the King, who was carrying on the War in France with success, which the King had given in charge to the Archbishop at his depar∣ture out of France, and again very late∣ly Half a Tenth granted the King in a Sy∣nod, whereby Letters. The Synod granted half a Tenth upon all Livings; and it was also agreed, that those that held Chap∣pels or Chantries, or that receiv'd Sti∣pends for saying Mass, should pay to the King 6 s. 8 d. each; but withal a publick Protestation was made by Willi∣am Lyndewood in the name of the Pro∣ctors for the Clergy, that this Conces∣sion should be no prejudice to them hereafter, nor be made a Precedent for succeeding Ages. Walker a Priest con∣victed of Witchcraft, for There was brought before this Synod one Richard Walker, a Priest, in the Diocess of Worcester, who was accus'd
of Witchcraft; and several Books, Waxen Images, Stones, and other In∣struments of Charms and Conjuration were produc'd, which were afterwards own'd by him, and burnt at Paul's Cross, John Welles Bishop of Landaff preaching a Sermon upon the Occasion. He him∣self having done solemn Penance in a publick Procession, abjur'd that wicked Which he ab∣jured,Art. After this some Persons were ac¦cus'd before the Synod for embracing the Tenets of John Wicklyff, who were And some of Wicklyff's Followers re∣canted. Processions for the King's Success, with whom forc'd to recant, and thus the Synod broke up. The Archbishop afterwards order'd Processions to be made to all Churches for the King's success in France, who at this time, by the Providence of God, began to conceive some hopes of redu∣cing the Kingdom of France without bloodshed through the Divisions of the French. For Philip Duke of Burgun∣dy, Duke of Bur∣gundy made a private League;in revenge of his Father's death, whom Charles the Dauphin had treache∣rously slain at Montereau, under pre∣tence of conserring with him, made a private League with King Henry by his Ambassadors, and promis'd him the Lady Catharine in marriage, with all other assistances for the prosecution of
his Conquests. He only desir'd him to come in person to Troyes, and there con∣clude a Peace publickly with King Charles. Who then had King, Queen and Daughter of France in's power. The Duke of Burgundy had at that time in his power King Charles, Queen Isabel, and their Daughter Catharine, with Paris the chief City of the King∣dom, and the whole management of the Government; for Isabel, who hated the Dauphin, had put him by, and ad∣vanc'd the Duke of Burgundy to the Regency. The King, that he might not let slip so fair an opportunity of managing all things to his own advantage, and being much taken with the great Beauty of the Lady Catharine, came with all speed Our King at Troyes mar∣ries the said Daughter Ca∣tharine, On agreement, himself should be Regent, and their Chil∣dren succeed to the Crown of France.to Troyes; where he receiv'd her in mar∣riage at the hands of Charles and Isabel, upon these Terms; That King Henry, during the life of Charles his Father-in-law, should have the Government of France with the Title of Regent, after whose death he or his Children begotten of the La∣dy Catharine should succeed in the King∣dom, and that the Dauphin should be look'd upon as disinherited, and a publick These Condi∣tions ratified.Enemy. To these Conditions the Princes and Nobles of France, who were there
present in great number, gave their as∣sent, and with the Duke of Burgundy, who first took the Oath, swore Allegi∣ance to King Henry; for they conceiv'd a greater esteem of his Wisdom and Courage when they saw him present amongst them, than they had done be∣fore from the bare admiration of his Actions at a distance. It was toward the end of May, 1420.  when the Nuptials were solemnized at Troyes; the News of which being brought into England, the excess of joy where∣with it was universally receiv'd▪ almost lessen'd the belief of the truth of it. The Archbishop of Canterbury, having left the Office of Vicar▪general to John Prior of Canterbury, and that of Audi∣tor to William Lyndewood, on the 10th of June took shipping at Winchelsea, and The Archbishop goes to France to congratulate the King.sail'd over into France▪ to congratulate the King upon his late Marriage, and by his Counsels to confirm his new Go∣vernment. He arriv'd at Troyes just as the King was departing thence to go against the Dauphin, who was the only Who goes a∣gainst the Dauphin his only Enemy. Took Monte∣reau.Enemy he had now remaining. In the beginning of July the King march'd toward Sens, and having taken Montereau, his next Attempt was upon
Melun, which after a Siege of four Melun sur∣render'd.Months, was surrender'd to him in the beginning of November. There were present at this Siege with King Henry, Charles King of France, James King of Scotland, Philip Duke of Burgundy, Wil∣liam Duke of Bavaria, with several other Princes; the Archbishop also con∣tinued all the while in the Camp, and after the surrender of the Place, attend∣ed the King with his Father-in law and both the Queens to Paris, from whence The King re∣turns to Eng∣land.he return'd into England about the end of November. In the beginning of February 1421. the King having left the management of his Affairs in France to Humprhy Duke of Glocester, and Philip Duke of Burgundy, came over into England with Queen Catharine, where he was receiv'd with incredible applause, and universal demonstrations of joy, and by the Arch∣bishop's Processions for four days.command Processions were made to all Churches and Chappels for four days together. Soon after his ar∣rival in England, he desir'd Money for the War with France of the Parliament assembled at Westminster, during whose Queen Catha∣rine Crowned.Session the Queen was solemnly crown'd with great splendor by the Archbishop
of Canterbury, who about this time call'd a Synod at London, and obtain'd of them a Tenth for the service of the The Synod gives a Tenth,King, which was granted upon some Conditions which were put in by Wil∣liam Lyndewood in the name of the Pro∣ctors for the Clergy. They were these: That the King's Purveyors should not med∣dle with the Goods of the Clergy; that they should not be committed to Prison, but upon manifest conviction of Theft or Murther; that for all other Crimes they should only find Sureties for their appearance at their Trial, but should not be imprison'd; and that it should be Felony to geld a Priest; On condition. That it should be Felony to geld a Priest.all which the King confirm'd in this Parliament. Beside the Bishops and other Prelates, there were call d to the Synod by the Archbishop's Mandate John Castell Chancellor of Oxford, and John Rykynghall Chancellor of Cam∣bridge, both Doctors of Divinity, who in two eloquent Speeches requested in Moved to pub∣lish a late De∣cree with a Clause in fa∣vour of Monks and Priests.behalf of both Universities, that the Decree made in the Synod four Years before, about conferring Benefices upon those only who had taken Degrees in the Universities according to the value of the several Livings, and the dignity of the Degrees might now be published,
with the addition of the Clause formerly put in, that by repealing those Statutes of the Universities, Monks might be ad∣mitted to Degrees in Divinity before they were Masters of Arts, and Priests might commence Doctors of Canon Law, though they had not studied the Civil Law, which the Masters of Arts of both Ʋniversities having chang'd their minds, had at length consented to. Moreover, to restrain the Avarice of Bishops and Archdeacons, Decreed a Bi∣shop take only 12 s. for In∣stitution, and an Archdea∣con for Indu∣ction.it was Decreed, That no Bishop should take more than Twelve Shillings for Insti∣tution, nor an Archdeacon for Induction, and that Orders should be given gratis. Also Simon Terraminus, one of the Pope's Receivers, in a handsome Speech desir'd Money of the Synod for Pope Pope Martin denied Money besides the Tenths, &c.Martin, but they gave no ear to him, conceiving that the Tenths, Annates, and other Perquisites which were paid yearly into the Pope's Exchequer, were more than sufficient to supply his Ne∣cessities. The Archbishop having dissolv'd the Synod, employ'd his care upon that Juris∣diction which he had hitherto exercis'd In order to unite the two Churches of France and England.in France, that so the same Peace which had reconcil'd the two Kingdoms, might also unite both the Churches▪
To which end he recall'd those Judges The Archbishop recalls the Judges from the Conquests, And com∣manded the French to obey their Or∣dinaries.which he had plac'd in most of those Diocesses that were conquer'd by the King, and by his Letters commanded all the People of France, that for the future they should obey their Bishops, and the Ordinaries of the Places in which they liv'd. After this, the King having receiv'd news of the death of his Brother Thomas Duke of Clarence, who was slain in a Battel lately fought with the Forces of the Dauphin in Anjou, hastned into The King hastens to France on his Brother's death. His Son Hen∣ry born at Windsor. France, leaving the Queen big with Child, who on the 8th of December was deliver'd of a Son at Windsor, who was Christen'd by the Archbishop with great Solemnity, and nam'd Henry. His God∣fathers were John Duke of Bedford, Re∣gent of England, and Henry Bishop of Winchester, the King's Uncle; and his Godmother was Jaqueline Countess of Holland. Afterwards, when he came to the Crown, he us'd to call the Archbi∣shop Godfather, and always paid him a great deal of respect. In the beginning of April, 1422. the  Queen being recover'd of her lying in, The Queen re∣covered, goes to France.was conducted into France to the King by the Duke of Bedford, and Humphry
Duke of Glocester was left Regent in England. The time was now at hand in which another General Council was to be held according to the Decree of the Sess. 39.Coun∣cil of Constance, by which it was ordain'd that at the end of five years a Council should be call'd, seven years after that another, and so every ten years con∣stantly. It was now the fifth year since the dissolution of the Council of Con∣stance, Pavia chosen by Pope Mar∣tin for a Ge∣neral Council, according to that of Con∣stance. A Provincial Synod at Lon∣don. whereupon this Year Pope Mar∣tin pitch'd upon Pavia for the place of their Session. In England the Archbishop call'd a Synod of the Province of Canterbury at London on the 4th of August, in which many Persons out of the whole Body of Bishops, Prelates and Doctors were no∣minated, who were to be referr'd to the King's approbation; and it was con∣cluded Whence Dele∣gates were de∣signed.that the Archbishop should sig∣nify their Names by Letters to the King, who should chuse whom he pleas'd out of them to represent the English Nation at the Council of Pavia, and that there should be allow'd for their Expences
Three pence in the Pound out of all Benefices that paid Tenths, and Eight pence out of those that did not come under that Tax. But this Affair came to nothing. For Alfonsus King of Arragon, having a quarrel against Pope Martin, because at his instigation, Joan Queen of Naples had put him by, and appointed Lewis of Anjou her Successor in the Kingdom, sent his Ambassadors to Pavia, who with Gifts and Promises promoted the Interest of Benedict the Thirteenth, But through Benedict the Thirteenth's Interest the Pavian Coun∣cil is dissolved, Called to Siena, And seven years after to Basil.who was still alive, and acted as Pope at Panischola; whereupon Pope Martin presently dissolv'd the Council which had been begun at Pavia, and from thence by reason of the Plague was re∣mov'd to Siena, and appointed another to be held seven years after at Basil. In the Synod at London one William White a Priest, and one Henry Webb of H. Webb for preaching without Or∣ders, whipp'd in three prin∣cipal Cities.Worcester, were accus'd of Heresy; the first for preaching publickly without a Licence, who was therefore forc'd to recant before the Synod; and the other for saying Mass without being in Orders, who was sentenc'd to be whipp'd in three of the chief Cities, London, Worcester and Bath. Also one William
William Taylor's honest Princi∣ples condemned as impious. Taylor a Master of Arts, was call'd in question for spreading abroad again some Opinions which he had recanted in the Synod two years before, for which he was said to be relaps'd into Heresy. His Tenets were these: That God alone was to be invok'd by the Prayers of the Faithful; that that Worship was due to Christ himself not upon the account of his Human Nature, but of his Divine Nature only; that it was not lawful to pray to Saints, or any other created Being; that those that offer'd Gifts to the Image of the Cross, or of the Saints were guilty of Idolatry; that a Monastick Life was contrary to the Institutions of Christ; that the Administration of Civil Affairs and all Secular Government was forbidden to Priests by Christ himself; and that ma∣ny of those Opinions that were condemn'd as impious by the Council of Constance, were Orthodox. All these Assertions were referr'd by the Archbishop as Judge in this Affair, to the four Orders of Mendicant Fryers, who were to ex∣amine whether they were agreable to the Holy Scriptures, and the Sense of the Fathers; and the Lawyers were or∣der'd to consider what punishment was to be inflicted on one relapsed into He∣resy.
The Divines deliver'd their Opi∣nion, That the Tenets maintain'd by him were impious, and contrary to the Holy Scriptures and the Decrees of the Church of Rome. As to matter of Law, William Lyndewood, Official of the Court of Arches, Thomas Brown, Dean of the same Court, and the other Lawyers an∣swer'd, That one suspected of Heresie, was to be debarr'd from the Communion of the Church for a year, and if after this pro∣bation he repented of his Errors, he was to be receiv'd again into the bosom of the Church; but if he relaps'd into Heresy again, he was to be reputed guilty of a capital Crime, and deliver'd over to the Secular Power; whereupon by the Sen∣tence of the Synod he was declar'd a Heretick, and solemnly devested of his Orders. Soon after the end of this Synod, the whole Kingdom was seiz'd with the greatest consternation imaginable upon the News of the King's death, who ha∣ving pursued the Dauphin with too much heat as far as Bourges, on the 31st of August died at Bois de Vinciennes, King Henry the Fifth dies of a Fever at Bois de Vin∣ciennes.about three Miles from Paris, of a vio∣lent Fever, which he had contracted by his excessive Fatigues. He died in
For which his Father-in law pining away, died with grief within twenty days. The King's Bo∣dy buried at Westminster. a very unlucky time; for King Charles his Father-in-Law, pin'd away with grief for the death of his Son King Hen∣ry, who was very dear to him, and died within twenty days after. The King's Body was brought over into England, and buried at Westminster. The Inhe∣ritance of both Kingdoms descended to Henry the Sixth▪ who was then an In∣fant, the government of which was left by the late King in his Will to his two His Brothers were left his Son Henry's Guardians.Brothers; that of England to Humphry Duke of Glocester, and that of France to John Duke of Bedford, till his Son should come of Age, the care of whose Educa∣tion was committed to Henry Beaufort Bishop of Winchester, and Thomas Beau∣fort Duke of Exeter his Great Uncles. Certainly no King of England ever excell'd King Henry the Fifth in all ver∣tuous Qualifications; nor was there any one whose death was so prejudicial to Great loss of a King so ver∣tuous, So generally and princely qualified,the Kingdom. He was adorn'd with all the Accomplishments both of Body and Mind, that could be desir'd in a Prince; with Prudence, Courage, Constancy, Modesty, Bounty, Eloquence, Beauty Of singular good fortune and esteem thereupon.and Strength; all which being attended with a singular good Fortune, procur'd him a wonderful esteem amongst Fo∣reigners,
and are celebrated as well by the French Writers, as by those of our own Nation. Duke of Glo∣cester calls a Parliament. The Duke of Glocester, that he might settle the Affairs of the Kingdom ac∣cording to the Injunctions of his Bro∣ther King Henry, call'd a Parliament at Westminster on the 9th of November; and first of all he commanded the Rotul. Parlia. Ann. 1. H. 6.Archbishop of Canterbury to de∣clare to both Houses the cause of their meeting; for Thomas Bishop of Durham upon the death of the King had resign'd the Seal and other marks of the Chancellorship (to which this Office belongs) to the Duke of Glocester at Windsor, and had laid down the Place. The Archbishop having spoken largely in praise of the Vertues of King Henry the Fifth, and made honourable mention of his Actions in France, came to speak of the Young King; and affirm'd that it was by the special favour of Al∣mighty God that a Son of such promising The hopes the Archbishop conceived of young King Henry.hopes should succeed so great a Father; that his very▪ Title of the Sixth was attend∣ed with a lucky Omen, for as the number
Six was the most compleat of all the rest, because in so many days God Almighty had made this vast Fabrick of the World, so this King Henry, the Sixth of that Name, would be the greatest of all his Predecessors, that he would compleat what his Father had so prosperously begun in France; and that as he was descended both from the Kings of England and France, so he would at length enjoy both those Crowns which were devolv'd to him by lawful Inheritance. That he, in the King's Name did declare to the Peers, and all the People, that they should enjoy all the Privileges and Immu∣nities granted to them by his Highness's Predecessors, and that he was commanded Three Reasons for calling the Parliament, viz. to assign the King Go∣vernors, and consult about the Peace, and for the defence of the Realm.to give them three Reasons for calling this Parliament: Which were; That Gover∣nors might be assign'd the King by a pub∣lick Act; that they might consult about the Peace of the Realm, and the Administra∣tion of Justice; and that they might pro∣vide for the defence of the Kingdom against the Insults of Foreign Enemies. Lastly, Jethro's Ad∣vice.He exhorted them by the Example of Je∣thro, Moses's Father-in-law, to make choice of the best and wisest of the Nobility to take upon them the government of the King and Kingdom, and besought them that they would use their utmost endeavours
for the safety of the King, and the bene∣fit of their Country. When the Archbishop had done speaking, the Protectorship was unani∣mously confirm'd to the Duke of Glo∣cester, The Duke of Glocester con∣firmed Pro∣tector, and the Archbishop named First of the Council.and some of the most Eminent of the Bishops and Nobility were appoint∣ed to be of the Privy Council till the King should come of Age, of which the Archbishop was nam'd first. But he having lost his King and Patron, who had advanc'd him to the highest Honors, and who dearly lov'd him, when the Parliament was dissolv d, retir'd within the Bounds of his Province, in which he perform'd the Duties of his Function But he retired to his Functi∣on.with great diligence. For the Year af∣ter the death of Henry the Fifth, by his  Metropolitical Authority he visited the Diocesses of Chichester and Salisbury, and the next year that of Lincoln, in which  Visitations he revers d all those things that had been acted amiss by the Ordi∣naries, and examin'd into the Faith and Manners of the People. In his journy through the Diocess of Lincoln he came to Higham Ferrers, the Founded a College at Higham Fer∣rers,Town where he was born, in which out of a pious and commendable design of adorning the Place of his Nativity, he
dedicated a Noble College which he had formerly begun there, to the Honour of the Virgin Mary, of St. Thomas of Can∣terbury, and King Edward the Confessor, and plac'd in it Eight Chaplains or Fel∣lows, Four Clerks, Six Choristers, and over all these a Master, who were to pray for the Souls of the deceased. He And a large Hospital.also built a large Hospital for the main∣tenance of the Poor of that place, both which Foundations he endowed with ample Revenues, which were after∣wards The Considera∣ble Revenues of which were augmented by his Brothers Robert and William.augmented with great Legacies, which his Brothers Robert and William Chichele, two Eminent Citizens of Lon∣don, left them in their Wills. After his return from his visitation of the Diocess of Lincoln, he held a Synod A Synod held by him at London.at London on the 12th of October, being sollicited by Letters from the King to demand a supply of Money of the Cler∣gy for the War with France. For after the death of Henry the Fifth, and Charles the Sixth, the Dauphin supposing that the Name of King would be of great advantage to him, caus'd himself to be The Dauphin crown'd King of France at Poictiers.crown'd at Poictiers, and took upon him the Title of Charles the Seventh, King of France; and a great many Princes and Governors of Towns com∣ing
in to him, who still retain'd an affe∣ction for the Name of France, he made Whereupon preparation was made for War.preparations for War with greater vi∣gour. On the other side John Duke of Bedford, who by his Brother's Will was appointed Regent of France, having The Regent of France and Duke of Bur∣gundy oppose the Dauphin.contracted a stricter League of amity with Philip Duke of Burgundy by mar∣rying his Sister Ann, attack'd the Dau∣phin in several parts of France, and ha∣ving divided the Forces betwixt him∣self and Philip Duke of Burgundy, he sent Thomas Montacute Earl of Salis∣bury, toward Sens, with some choise Troops, and desir'd of Humphrey Duke The former sent for Sup∣plies from England.of Glocester Regent of England, a fresh Supply of Men and Money. Whereupon Henry Bishop of Win∣chester Lord Chancellor of England, John Stafford Bishop of Bath Lord Trea∣surer, Richard Earl of Warwick, Willi∣am Alnewyke Keeper of the Privy Seal, Lewis Lord Bourchier, and Ralph Lord Cromwell, were sent from the Duke of Glocester to the Synod. The Bishop of Winchester in a formal Speech having The Bishop of Winchester moves for Mo∣ney in the Sy∣nod.laid before them the present condition of Affairs in France, exhorted and in∣treated them to bestow some part of their Revenues for subduing the remains
of the Dauphin's Forces. But then it plainly appear'd how much they were Which now wants Henry the Fifth.all affected with the loss of King Henry the Fifth. For whereas they had grant∣ed Tenth's so frequently and so readily in former Synods (as we have related before) they now stuck at the very first demand of the new King, thinking that As Henry the Sixth is like to go without their Money.all the hopes of conquering France de∣pended upon Henry the Fifth, and that nothing could succeed now he was gone. For when the Proctors for the Clergy had debated the Matter several days, William Lyndewood was deputed by them to return their Answer, which was, That The Clergy's Estates being already so much drained,the Estates of the Clergy were so drain'd by the continual expences of the War, that they were hardly sufficient to maintain them and their Families handsomely; that the value of a great many Livings was so fallen, And Livings fallen so low.that there were not Priests to be sound who would supply the Cures; and in Being also al∣ledged, that the power of granting Tenths was taken away. The Bishop suc∣ceeded no bet∣ter in the Lower House; and soshort, That in the Commissions of all the Proctors for the Clergy the power of grant∣ing Tenths was expresly taken away. Up∣on this the Bishop of Winchester went to the Lower House, and in a long and pres∣sing Oration besought them to supply the Necessities of the Publick; but when he could obtain nothing of them,
who excus'd themselves upon the nar∣rowness of their Commissions, The Sy∣nod The Synod was adjourned.was adjourn'd by the Archbishop to the 26th of January following. At which time the Bishop of Win∣chester with the rest of the Lords came thither again, and having made a Speech to the Bishops, Abbots and Priors of the Ʋpper House in the Name of the King, At the next Sessions half a Tenth was granted by the Higher House on con∣dition the Proctors con∣sented;they granted half a Tenth, protesting withal, that This Concession should not ob∣lige them, unless the Proctors for the Clergy would consent to it, for that a division of the two Orders of the Clergy in the matter of granting Tenths being introduced by this Example would be of very pernicious con∣sequence to Posterity. But the Lower But refused by the Lower House.House persisting stiffly in their former Resolutions, were not at all mov'd with the importunate Demands first made by the Bishop of Winchester, and afterwards by the Archbishop and the rest of the Bi∣shops. Whereupon the Archbishop pre∣sently The Synod dis∣solved.dissolv'd the Synod, and appoint∣ed another to be held two Months af∣ter on the 23d of April, thinking that by the Election of new Proctors the business would be more easily af∣fected.
When this Synod was assembled, the Archbishop first of all commanded the Lower House to chuse their Speaker, (who is commonly call'd the Prolocutor) who pitch'd upon William Lyndewood, of which he himself makes mention C. Quoniam. v. provinciam de decim.in his Commentaries. After which the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, Willi∣am Alnewyke Keeper of the Privy Seal, the Lord Scrope, the Lord Cromwell, with some others of the Privy Council, came again to the Synod; and the Lord Chan∣cellor with his florid Speeches, and the rest of the Lords engaging them several∣ly At the next Half a Tenth's given with much ado.by Flatteries, Threats and Promises, at length with much ado they obtain'd half a Tenth. When this business was over, one Hoke and Drayton's Heresy; andRobert Hoke, and one Thomas Drayton, both Priests, one of the Diocess of Lin∣coln, and the other of Canterbury, were brought before the Synod, and accus'd of Heresy. It was alledg'd against them, That they would not kneel before the Cruci∣fix, and that they had in their possession certain Books, in which it was said, that the Priest could not change the Host in the
Sacrament into the Body of Christ; that a Monastick Life and Auricular Confession were the Inventions of the Devil, and that amongst Christians all things ought to be in common; which Opinions they ab∣jur'd publickly at Paul's Cross. But the sharpest Accusation was brought against one William Russel of the Order of Minor Russell denies personal Tythes to be Jure Divino.Fryers, for teaching the People in his Sermons, That personal Tythes were not commanded by God, but that it was lawful for all Christians to bestow them in charita∣ble uses upon the Poor as they pleas'd them∣selves. This extreamly troubled and perplex'd the Clergy, who fear that if this Opinion should spread it self among the People, they should lose this part of their Income, by which the Wealth of their Order would be greatly dimi∣nish'd. Wherefore he was order'd by the Synod on a day prefix'd to recant out of the Pulpit at Paul's Cross, but before the time came he fled out of England, whereupon he was pronounc'd contu∣macious by Edicts set forth against him, and afterwards in open Court proclaim'd a Heretick, and his Opinion was adjudg'd In his absence proclaimed an Heretick,to be impious by the Decrees of both Ʋniver∣sities, which the University of Oxford presently signified by their Letters to
the Archbishop, and the Synod, which are Liter. Academ Oxon. in Archiv. ep. 20.yet extant. Shortly after the Synod being in∣form'd that he was at Rome, sent Mes∣sengers And prosecuted at Rome.to apprehend him, and accuse him before the Pope, who were allow'd a Farthing in the Pound out of all Eccle∣siastical Preferments. The Examina∣tion of this Matter being referr'd by the Pope to Branda Cardinal of Placenza, he was condemn'd to perpetual Impri∣sonment, unless he repented of his Er∣ror; but afterwards escaping out of Prison, he return'd into England, and having preach'd a Sermon at Paul's Afterwards he abjured his Error in Eng∣land.Cross, he abjur'd his Error with a for∣mal Oath. The Archbishop also by his Mandate enjoin'd the Franciscans, that as often as they preach'd to the People, they should teach them, that personal Tythes were commanded to be paid both by the Laws of God, and the Con∣stitutions of the Holy Fathers. The same Year after the Synod was ended, the Archbishop by his Prudence dispell'd a dreadful Storm that threatned the Kingdom, which was rais'd by the
Dissentions of the Nobility. For Henry H Beaufort Bishop of Win∣chester, an open Enemy to the Lord Protector.Beaufort, Son to John Duke of Lancaster by Catharine Swinford his third Wife, being puff d up with the nobility of his Birth, and the great Wealth which he had got together out of the Bishoprick of Winchester, and not brooking the Rule of Humphry Duke of Glocester the Lord Protector, he began to maintain an open enemity against him; the Quar∣rel being afterwards more enflam'd on both Sides, and many of the Nobility Great Parties on each sideand others engaging in either Party, they both went Arm'd, and attended with their Servants and Adherents, and a great number of Profligate and Sedi∣tious Persons wearing Arms by their Example went about the Streets of Lon¦don; Appear in the Streets of London.and their Number was so great, that the Citizens shut up their Shops, and left off their Trades, and were forc'd to keep Guard Day and Night in all the Streets of the City to repress the Inso∣lence of these Mutineers. Upon this The Archbishop interposed.the Archbishop, accompanied with Peter Duke of Conimbra, Son to the King of Portugal (who was lately come into England to visit the King his Cousin) rid through the City eight times in one Day betwixt the Duke's and the Bi∣shop's
Palaces, and prevail'd so far up∣on them both by his Authority and In∣treaties, They then laid down their Arms.that they laid down their Arms, and Matters were compos'd for a time. But the Bishop, though he had quitted his Arms, had not yet relin∣quish'd his Hatred; for soon after by The Bishop of Winche∣ster accuses the Protector to the Duke of Bedford.Letters sent into France to the Duke of Bedford, he accus'd the Duke of Glocester, desiring the Duke of Bedford to come over into England with all speed, if he tender'd the Safety of the King, and the Peace of the Kingdom, which other∣wise must of necessity be involv'd in Blood, and the devastations of a Civil War. The Duke, though the War went on succesfully in France, by the sur∣render of a great many strong Towns, and the defeat of a great Army of the French in a pitcht Battel at Vernoil, yet esteeming the success of Affairs in France to depend upon the Peace of England; immediately upon the receit of these Letters, he committed the Administra∣tion Who hastens into England.of his Office to Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and came with all speed into England in the beginning of  the Year 1426. and having call'd a Par∣liament Calls a Par∣liament.at Leicester, he examin'd the Quarrel between his Brother and the Bi∣shop.
When they had both shew'd the Finds out the causes of the Quarrel,causes of their discontent, and from ar¦guing began to break out into greater heats, at the Duke of Bedford's entreaty And inclines them to the arbitration ofthey agreed to refer all Differences on both Sides to the determination of Arbitrators; of whom Rotul. Parliam. an. 4. H. 6.Henry Arch∣bishop The Archbishop and Duke of Exeter, &c.of Canterbury, was nam'd first, after him Thomas Duke of Exeter, John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Bishop of Durham, Philip Bishop of Winchester, John Bishop of Bath, Humphry Earl of Stafford, William Alnewyke Keeper of the Privy Seal, and Ralph Cromwell, who order'd them to join hands, and in a set form of words to be repeated by them both, to forgive all Injuries on both Sides, and be friends with one another; which Reconciliation was confirm'd by Their Recon∣ciliation con∣firm'd by the Votes of the whole Parlia∣ment, Which granted Money for Le∣vying Men.the Votes of the whole Parliament. In this Session a supply of Money was granted for levying Soldiers; for which end also about this time the Archbishop assembled a Synod at London on the 15th of April. Thither came John Kempe Archbishop of York and Lord Chancel∣lor of England, with Walter Hungerford
Lord Treasurer; and the Lord Chan∣cellor having extoll'd the great pains and diligence of the Duke of Bedford in an And Half a Tenth granted in the Synod. Bishop of Winchester made Cardi∣nal.Eloquent Oration, the Synod granted the King half a Tenth. The Bishop of Winchester who was created Cardinal thsi Year by Pope Mar∣tin, the next Year went over with the Duke of Bedford into France, and at Ca∣lais, in the great Church of that Place, he put on the Cap and other Ensigns of that Dignity with great solemnity on Candlemas-day. He had sought this Ho∣nor with great earnestnss eight years be∣fore in the time of King Henry the Fifth, and had obtain'd a Promise of it of Pope The Cap, with a Legacy for England, had been promised him by John the Twenty third. But the Arch∣bishop had shewn that the Pope's Legates derogated from the Royal Dig∣nity, &c. John the Twenty third; who design'd to promote him very speedily, and to appoint him his Legate à latere in Eng∣land with a very large Authority. But the Archbishop perceiving his Ambi∣tion, at that time interpos'd with the King, who was then in France, by Let∣ters which he wrote to him in a grave and modest style, in which he shew'd, That the Power of the Pope's Legates did derogate very much from the Dignity of the King, from the Laws of the Land, and from the Privileges of the Church of England. A Copy of this Letter, the
Original of which is yet to be seen, Which he did in a Letter to the King.written with the Archbishop's own Hand, we have here subjoin'd. Wherein there is a Specimen of the English Language at that time. Sovereyn Lord, as your hum∣ble Prest and debout Bede∣man, I recommand me to your Hygnesse, desyreing evermore to heare and knowe of your graci∣ous speed, hele of body and of soule, also my Lordys your brethren and all your royal hoste. And as hert∣ly as I can, or may thanke Al∣mightie God and Lord of all strengths and hostes that so gra∣ciously hath continued his mygty hond upon you sythen the time of your beginning hedirtoward into your most worship, your Leige menys most hertly gladnesse, and abating of the hy pride of your enemies. And besech God both day and night with all your sub∣getts both spirituel and temporel so continue his hy Grace upon you and yowre that the mow come to the effect of your hy labor, pees of both your regmes after your hertly desires. Gracious Lord like it to remember you that be your
moost worthie letters written at your towne of Caen rrb. day of September you charged me, that be the abys of my Lord your bro∣ther of Bedford, and of your Chaunceler sholde be ordeygned that all maner of men of your subgets wat astaat or condicion that thei were should abstyne let∣ter No Suit to be made to the Pope, after Election, till the Pope has wrote to the King, and has got an An∣swer.of wrytes or pursuit making to the Pope after his election, till the time that he have writen to you, and ye againe to him, as it hath be acustumed of honeste of your lond. for the which cause nei∣ther I, nor non odir man as fer∣forth as it may be knowe, hath yit written nor sent, ne no leve hath of passage to the Cowrte, wow it so be that many lych at London to pursue to my Lord your bro∣ther, your Chaunceler, and your Counseil for to have leve and let∣ters of passage. Werfore Sove∣rain Lord my Lord your brother charged me write to you, and in as miche as your letter forseid was direct to me, to wite, in wat wise we shol governe us herafter, for if ye have resteyned our holy
faders letters, or written to him it is unknowen to us unto this time. Like it therfore, gracious Lord, to write to my Lord your brother in wat maner wise this matier schal be governed here∣after. Forthermore gracious Lord, of trowth that I am bound to you be my ligeaunse, and also to quite me to God, the chirch of your lond, of the wich God and, ye gracious Lord, have maked me governor, howeth to open to you this matier that suyeth, of the wich I have herd pribily, but now it is more opend, and in such wise that cre∣dence shold bee yive to by reson; that is to seyne, that my brother of Winchester shold be maked a Car∣dinal, if ye wold give your asent therto, and that he shold have his Bishoprich in comende for terme of his life, and therto have a stat, and sent to your rengme of Yng∣land as a legat a latere, to the wich manier of legacie non hath be acustumed to be named but Cardinals, and that legacie also to ocupie thorgh all your obey∣saunce,
saunce, and all the time of his life. Sovereyn Lord and most Christien Prince, what instanse A Pope's Le∣gate in Eng∣land durante vitâ, without Precedent.schall be maad to your Hignesse for this matier, I wot not, but blessyd be Almightie God undir your worthie protection, your Chirche of Yngland is at this day, I dare boldly say, the moost Hono∣rable The Doctrine andChirche Christien as weel as debin servise, as honest living therof, governed after streit lawes, and holy constitutions, that be maad of hem withowten any gret erorbitaunses, or any thing that migt torne to by shlaundre of your forseid Chirch, or of your lond, and if any trespases of mannys Discipline of the Church dispensable by the Ordina∣ries, &c. not Legates.frelte falleth we may be coretid and punished by the Ordinaries there as the caas falleth. But wat that this offis of legacie to be ocupied in the forme aforseid, and suich comendis of Bishopriches not used in your holy Aunsetres time here afore, wold extend to, or gendre ageines the good gover∣nanse of your subgets, in your by wisdom I trist to God ye will consider. And forasmich as ye schal
be enformid what the office of suych manier of legacie extendith to, and appyly your Clerhys have not in minde, for it hath shelde be seyn, and have not alle here bookys with hent pleynly to enforme you in this time of your grete labor, I send you a scrowe writen with The Archbshop sends a Minute of the Legate's Office or In∣structions to the King.inne this letter conteyning that is expressed in the Popis lawe, and fully concludyd be Doctors. And over that what he may have in special of the Popis grace no man wot, for it stond in his wille to dispose as hym good liheth. And be inspection of lawes and croni∣cles was there never no Legat a latere sent in to no loud, and spe∣cially in to your rengme of Yng∣land Such Legacies are extraordi∣nary, and not without great and notable cause; and no resident above two Months at most.withowte great and notable cause. And thei whan thei came after thei had done her legacie abiden but lytul wyle, not over a yer, and summe a quarter, or two monethes, as the nedes re∣queryd: And yit over that he was tretyd with, or he cant into the lond whon he schold have exercise The Instructi∣ons to be ex∣press and li∣mited.of his power, and how myche schold be put in erecucion. An
aventure after he had be reseyved he whold have used it to largely to greet oppression of your peple. Wherefore moost Cristien Prince and Sovereyn Lord, as your trewe Preest, whom it hath lyked you to sette in so hy astaat, the wych with owte your gracious Lord∣ship, and supportation I know my self insufficient to ocupie. beseche you in the moost humble wyse that I can devise or thenke that ye wile this matier take tendirly at herte, and see the staat of the Chirche be meyntenid and susteyuid, so that everich of the Ministers theroffe hold hem content with her owne part: for trewly he that hath leest hath inow to rekene fore: And that your poore pepul be not pyled, He deprecates the Oppressions and cormorant Exactions of the Legates.nor oppressyd with diverse eracti∣ous and unacustumed, thorgh wych thei schold be the more fe∣ble to refresche you owre liege Lord in time of nede and when it lyketh you to clepe up on hem, and alle plees and sklaundre cese in your Chirche. Towchinge oure holy fadir the Popis Ambassiat that late cam in
to your lond, I wot wel my Lord your brother wryteth to you pleyn∣ly, and also of odir governance of your lond, the wych blessed be God stond in good quiet pees and reste withowte any grete ryotis or de∣batys and al your trewe peple have her herys opyn to here good tydinges of you and continuely pray for your prosperite and al yowrys, the mych Almighty God graunte for his mercy Amen. wryten at Lambyth vi day of March. Your Prest. H. C. Indorsed Au Roy nostre Souverein. S. The King was so mov'd with this Letter of the Archbishop's, that he commanded the Bishop of Winchester not to take upon him the Cardinalship, Upon this Let∣ter the King forbad the Bi∣shop of Win∣chester the Cardinal's Cap.and protested several times that he Polychron. in Hen. 5.had rather see him wear the Crown than the Cardinal's Cap. During the King's Life the Bishop desisted; but now rely∣ing
upon the Infancy of the King, and the Favour of his Nephew the Duke of Bedford, he attempted it again, and After the King's death he is created Cardinal.was created Cardinal by the Pope with the Title of Priest of S. Eusebius; which easily occasion'd their mistake, who Antiq. Britan. in Henr. Chich.instead of Henry Bishop of Winche∣ster, For whom our pious Henry Archbishop was mistaken.relate that Henry Archbishop of Canterbury was made Cardinal of S. Eu∣sebius, who was a Man of such Piety and Moderation, that he was never known to court a Preferment, by which being engag'd in the Interests of the Pope, he must necessarily have swerv'd from that Loyalty to his Prince which he had always preserv'd entire and un∣tainted. A Vigorous Defender of the King's Au∣thority.For he was a most vigorous De∣fender of the King's Authority, and the Rights of the Kingdom against the Am∣bition of the Popes, and the Oppressions of the Court of Rome; by which at this very time he drew upon himself the Whence he in∣curr'd the dis∣pleasure of Pope Martin the Fifth.heavy displeasure of Martin the Fifth. For the Epist. Academ. Oxon, 36. in Archiv.University of Oxford by Letters bearing date the 24th of July this Year interceded for him with Pope Martin; in which after they had given him a very
extraordinary Character, calling him the The Archbi∣shop's Chara∣cter from Ox∣ford.mirror of Life, the light of Manners, a Person most dear to the People and Clergy, a golden Candlestick set up in the Church of England, they besought him that he would not suffer the Credit of so eminent a Prelate to be blasted by the secret Calumnies of De∣tractors; to which purpose also in the Parliament at Westminster Rotul. Parliam. an. 6 H. 6.the House of Commons petition'd the King to send an Ambassador forthwith to the Court of Rome to intercede with the Pope in be∣half Great Inter∣cession mads for him.of the Archbishop, who had in∣curr'd his displeasure for opposing the excessive Power of the Court of Rome. And indeed it was but reasonable that he, who for promoting the common good of all, and maintaining the Honour of the Kingdom, so little dreaded the Pope's Anger, should be defended by the publick Authority. Bishop of Winchester is Legate in England, with a Facul∣ty. But the Bishop of Winchester, beside his Title of Cardinal, had the power of Legate in England conferr'd upon him by the Pope, with a very large Commission (or as they commonly term'd it) a Fa∣culty; which Power he exercis'd with
So exercis'd the Power, that he was stiled the Rich Cardinal. so great Avarice, and got together such a prodigious Wealth, that he was generally styl'd the Rich Car∣dinal. The Year after this he return'd into England, and having open'd his Com∣mission in the presence of Humphry Duke of Glocester the Protector, and many of the Bishops and Nobility, Joan. Foxius in Martyrolog. sub H. 5.The Cardinal opposed by R. Caudray the King's Proctor.Richard Caudray who was appointed Proctor for the King by the Duke of Glocester and the Privy Council, expres∣ly declar'd, That by a particular Prero∣gative of the Kings of England, which they had enjoy'd ever since the memory of man, no Legate from the Pope could come into England without the King's leave; and therefore if the Cardinal of Win∣chester, by vertue of his Legantine Office, should act any thing contrary to this Right of the King's, that he in the King's Name did interpose, and disown all his Authority. Promises not to exercise his Office without the King's leave.Whereupon the Cardinal promis'd open∣ly before the Duke of Glocester, and all that were present, that he would not exercise his Office of Legate without the King's leave, and that he would act
nothing in it that might any ways in∣fringe or derogate from the Rights, Im∣munities and Privileges of the King or Kingdom. Eodem jure semper usi sunt Gallire Reges, quorum injussu Legatis Pontificum nunquam licuit Galliam ingredi, aut mandata promulgare, Sicuti clarissimus Advocatus Regius L. Servn aux play∣doier. vol. 4.Ludovi∣cus Servinus coram Senatu Parisiensi Tu∣ronibus tum sedente demonstrabat, cum Ann. MDXC. Cardinalis Cajetanus ad Henricum IV. Galliae Regem Legatus mitteretur.Now upon his being made Cardi∣nal and Legate, he was oblig'd to lay down his Place of Lord Chancellor, Laid down the Office of Chan∣cellor, as ob∣liged;which he did the Year before in the Par∣liament at Westminster; he ought also to have been removed from the Privy Coun∣cil; but in respect of the Nobility of his Birth, and his near alliance to the King, by a particular favour he was allow'd to keep his Place there, except when any But kept his Place in the Council, with exception.matter was to be debated between the King and the Pope, for then it was ex∣presly concluded that he should not be present; which Limitation was con∣firm'd Rot. Parliam. ann. 8 H. 6.the next Year by Act of Parlia∣ment, and order'd to be entred in the Journals of the Privy Council.
Now the chief Reason that mov'd the Pope to create the Bishop of Win∣chester a Cardinal, was, that he might employ him in the War that he design'd The Pope rais'd imm against the Bohemi∣ans, Who had pull'd down the Mo∣nasteries, &c.against the Bohemians, who having em∣brac'd the Doctrine of Wickliff, had pull'd down the Monasteries and Images, and having abolished almost all the Rites and Ceremonies of the Romish Church, had openly revolted from the Government of the Pope. He there∣fore The Cardinal made General in the Bohe∣mian War, &c.made him his General in the Bohe∣main War, and appointed him Legate in Hungary, Bohemia, and all Germany, with a far larger Commission, by which He could par∣don Rapes on Nuns, &c.he was impower'd to pardon Rapes committed upon Nuns, to dispense with Marriages contracted within the fourth degree of Consanguinity, with the Age of Persons to be admitted to Orders and Benefices, with Interdicts, and many other things which were contrary to the Constitutions of the Canon Law; He was to de∣mand a Tenth of the English Clergy for the War.he was also order'd to demand a Tenth of the English Clergy for the Service of this War. For this cause the Archbi∣shop being sollicited by the Pope's Bull, and being also press'd by Letters from the King to consider of raising Money for carrying on the War in France, call'd
a Synod at London which began on the 5th of July. In their first Session, at the request of the Archbishop of York Lord Chan∣cellor, and Walter Hungerford Lord Treasurer, they granted the King half In the next Synod half a Tenth is given the King.a Tenth. The Synod was afterwards prorogu'd by reason of the excessive heat of the Summer, to St. Martin's day in November following, and then again to the 29th of October the next Year; at  which time the Archbishop of York was sent to them again from the King, toge∣ther with the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Warwick, Stafford and Salisbury, th e Lords Cromwell, Tiptoft and Hunger∣ford, at whose desire a Tenth and a half And in ano∣ther a Tenth and an half.was granted, and solemn Processions were order'd to be made for the success of the Duke of Bedford, who went on Duke of Bed∣ford had be∣sieg'd Orle∣ans.prosperously, and had now besieg'd Or∣leans, a noble City upon the River Loyre. These Concessions of Tenths which were granted so readily by the 8 H. 6. c. 1.Synod, were▪rewarded by an Act made in the Parliament holden at this time at West∣minster, by which The same Priviledge
was granted to the Clergy, which the Mem∣bers of the House of Commons do enjoy when they are chosen to serve in Parlia∣ment, For those Grants, the Members of the Synod, &c. were freed from Arrests.which was, that neither they nor their Servants should be arrested while they were assembled in Convocation, nor in their journy thither. But Conzo Zuolanus the Pope's Nun∣tio, came often to the Synod, and plead∣ed in behalf of the Pope, but to no pur∣pose: The Pope's Nuntio pre∣vail'd not in the Synod;When he could not obtain of them a Supply for the War with the Bohe∣mians, which he had sollicited in a long and pressing Oration, he produc'd the For shewing his Letters for a TenthPope's Letters before the Synod, in which he signified that he had impos'd a Tenth upon the Kingdom of England for the support of the Bohemian War; which so incensed the whole Synod, that they absolutely denied to grant a Tenth. However at the importunity of the Pope He was deni∣ed, but got 8 d. per Mark from Livings, With a Salvâ praerogativâ Regiâ.they gave him Eight pence in every Mark out of all Benefices according to their respe∣ctive values, provided that this grant were not contrary to the King's Prerogative and the Laws of the Land. After this John Jourdelay, John Galle, Robert Heggley, Ralph Mungyn, Thomas Garenter, all men in Orders, with seve∣ral others, were brought before the Sy∣nod,
who were accus'd of Heresy, for holding divers corrupt Opinions concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, the Adoration of Images, Religious Pilgrimages, and the Invocation of Saints; for maintaining that the Pope was Antichrist, and not God's Heresy in hold∣ing the Pope to be Anti∣christ, &c.Vicegerent; that the Divine Oracles were contain'd only in the Scriptures, and not in the Legends or Lives of the Fathers; and for keeping privately by them several Books of John Wickliff, and others, con∣cerning matters of Religion, written in the Vulgar Tongue. All which Opinions Some recanted, others were imprison'd.some of them recanted before the Sy∣nod, and the rest were committed to Prison. After them one Joan Dertford Joan Dert∣ford, by means of her Answer, acquitted.being question'd about the same Tenets, clear'd her self of the Accusation by an uncertain Answer; saying, That she had learnt only the Creed and Ten Command∣ments, and never durst meddle with the profound Mysteries of Religion, upon which she was committed to the Bishop of Winchester's Vicar▪general to be in∣structed by him. The Ordinaries also The Ordinaries charg'd to persecute the Wicklevists and Lollards.of every place were commanded vigo∣rously to prosecute those that dissented from the Church of Rome, whom they call'd by the invidious Names of Wicle∣vists and Lollards, and whose number
daily increas'd, and William Lyndewood Official, and Thomas Brown Chancellor of Canterbury, with some other Lawyers And Process ordered to be form'd against them.both Canonists and Civilians, were or∣der'd to draw up a Form of the Process against them. Pope Martin troubled that he obtain'd not the Tenths. But Pope Martin was very much trou∣bled to see the Power of the Keys de∣crease daily in England both by the de∣nial of a Tenth for his War with the Bo∣hemians, and several other Affronts that he pretended to have lately receiv'd: For some years before this having by his Bull of Provision translated Richard Flemming Bishop of Lincoln to the See of York, which was then vacant by the That his Bull was opposed at York,death of the Archbishop; the Dean and Chapter of York oppos'd his entrance into their Church, so that the Pope was forc'd by a contrary Bull to transfer him back again to the See of Lincoln. The That his Le∣gate was im∣prisoned,Year after John Opizanus the Pope's Le∣gate was imprison'd for presuming by vertue of that Office to gather the Mo∣ney due to the Pope's Treasury contrary He expostula∣ted with the Duke of Bed∣ford.to the King's Command; which Mat∣ter the Pope by his Letters sharply ex∣postulated with the Duke of Bedford. He would certainly have call'd to mind all these things, if he had not
been diverted by the more important Concerns of the Council of Basil which The Pope is diverted with the prospect of the Council of Basil.was now to be call'd. For the time prefix'd for the assembling of it was now at hand, the seventh Year being almost expir'd since the end of the last Council; for which cause the Archbishop of Can∣terbury call'd another Synod at London in the beginning of the next Year, on  the 19th of February, in which Dele∣gates Wherefore De∣legates are chosen in a Synod at Lon∣don with 2 d. per l. Charges.were chosen to be sent to Basil, and Two pence in the Pound was al∣low'd them out of all the Revenues of the Clergy. Their Instructions were, To desire in the name of the Church of Eng∣land, Their Instru∣ctions did run Against Plu∣ralities, And Non resi∣dence, &c.That a stop might be put to that vast number of Dispensations which were daily granted, by which some were permit∣ted to hold two Livings beside Dignities, others had leave to be absent from their Cures, and some who were scarce at Age, were admitted to the highest Offices in the Church; and that no Ʋnions of Churches might be made but where there were Con∣vents within the bounds of the Parish. The Synod gave the King a Tenth The Synod also granted the King a whole Tenth at the sollicitation of John Kempe Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of England, who in a long Oration told them, That the Siege of
For the Siege of Orleans. Orleans was rais'd by the death of the Earl of Salisbury a Renown'd Com∣mander, Many other Towns revolt∣ed.that Troyes, Beauvais, Rhemes, and many other Towns, had revolted to King Charles, that a great number And many English slain at Patau.of our Men were lately slain in a Bat∣tel at Patau, and that all France would soon come under the obedience of Charles, unless Supplies of Money were rais'd in England; that for this cause he, with several others of the Privy Council, were sent to them from the King. The Synod also made an Order which concerned the general good of the King∣dom, The Synod de∣creed just Weights.That Tradesmen should be oblig'd to sell their Goods by a full weight, and prohi∣bited any one under pain of Excommunica∣tion, to make use of a certain deceitful Weight with which they cheated their Cu∣stomers. But Pope Martin, though it were Popes generally afraid of Councils.with great reluctancy that he had call'd the Council at Basil, fearing lest his Life and Actions should be inquir'd into (for which cause also the Fr. Guicciard. lib. 9. & Paul. Jov. lib. 2.succeeding Popes were always very averse from
calling a General Council) yet because this was the Place and Time appointed both by his own Edicts and the determi∣nation of the Fathers assembled first at Constance, and then at Pavia, that he might not seem to equivocate in the opinion of all Christendom, appointed Julianus Caesarinus Cardinal of S. Angelo to preside in his Name at the Council; Martin ap∣points a Pre∣sident.who at that time was his Legate in the Bohemian War against the Followers of Hus, the Cardinal of Winchester, be∣ing lately recall'd from that Post. But before his journy to Basil, in the begin∣ning of the next Year Pope Martin died  at Rome, and Gabriel Condelmarius, who The Pope dies before he took his Place.was created Cardinal at Lucca by Gre∣gory the Twelfth, as is before related, was chosen into his room on the 3d of March, and chang'd his Name for that of Eugenius the Fourth; by whom also Eugenius the Fourth succeeds him; and con∣tinues the Pre∣sident who was his Legate.Caesarinus being continued in the Office of Legate, he went to Basil, and open'd the Council there in the beginning of December. In which the matter was hotly de∣bated concerning the Power of the Pope; and on the 15th of February it  was Determined, That a General Council doth derive its Authority immediately from
Sess. 2. Christ, and that the Pope is subject to it; The Pope ad∣judged subject to the Council, &c.that he hath no power to remove or pro∣rogue it; that if the Pope die in the time of their Session, the right of erecting a new one is in the Council, and that the supreme Sess. 4.Government of the Church is committed to a Council, and not to the Pope; and by vertue of this supreme Authority they con∣stituted By their su∣supreme Au∣thority, the Council makes a Legate of Avignon, &c. The Pope a∣larm'd, re∣moves the Council to Bologne. Is opposed.Alfonsus Cardinal of S. Eustace Legate of Avignon, and forbad Eugenius to make any new Cardinals before the end of the Council. The Pope being alarmed at these De∣crees, by his Edict remov'd the Coun∣cil from Basil to Bologna, which Tran∣slation the Fathers by a contrary Edict disanull'd, and both of them by their Letters cited the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, one to Basil, and the other to Bo∣logna. Upon this the Archbishop call'd a Delegates from London Sy∣nod to the Council of Ba∣sil, and others to the Pope.Synod at London on the 15th of Septem∣ber, and advis'd with the Bishops and Prelates what course was to be taken in the Dissention between the Council and the Pope; who unanimously con∣cluded, To send Delegates to the Fathers at Basil, and others to Pope Eugenius, to compose the Differences on both sides; to whom they voted a Penny in the Pound out
of all the Profits of the Clergy, besides the Two pence granted in the former Synod. They also gave the King half a Tenth, Half a Tenth given the King.which was demanded of them in an Eloquent Speech by John Stafford Bi∣shop of Bath, and Lord Chancellor of England, with whom came also to the Synod William Lyndewood, who was lately made Keeper of the Privy Seal. This William Lyndewood was esteemed one of the Wisest and most Learned Men of that Age; he was very much belov'd by the Archbishop, who remov'd him first from the Chancellorship of Salisbury to that of Canterbury, afterwards he made him Official at the Court of Ar∣ches, and gave him several rich Li∣vings; he also recommended him to both the Kings, Henry the Fifth and Sixth, the first of which sent him Am∣bassador into Spain, and afterwards in∣to Portugal, and now under Henry the Sixth he was made Keeper of the Privy William Lyndewood Keeper of the Privy Seal,Seal, and soon after Bishop of St. David's. Amongst Jo. Balae. de scriptor. Angl. Cent 7.other of his Works, which are now lost, he got a great deal of re∣putation with Posterity by his learned
Writ excellent Commentaries n the English Constitutions. And was sti∣led, the Light of the Law. Complaint in the Synod a∣gainst the Vi∣cars General, &c. Commentaries upon the English Consti∣tutions, which Work he dedicated to the Archbishop, whom for his In Epist. Dedic.great knowledge in both Laws, he stil'd the light of the Law. In This Synod the Clergy of the Lower House complain'd to the Bishops, that their Vicars General, Commissaries and Officials were for the most part ig∣norant both in the Civil and Canon Law, and that they had never taken any degree in the Universities; where∣upon Decreed, that a Judge of a Spiritual Court must have some degree of the Law.it was Decreed, That no one should be made a Judge in any of the Spiritual Courts, unless he had taken some degree in Law: After which the Synod broke up. In speaking of This Synod we made mention of John Stafford Bishop of Bath, who was made Chancellor in the room of John Kempe Archbishop of York, who being lately advanc'd to the Purple with the Title of Cardinal of S. Balbina, had laid down that Office. Between him and the Archbishop of Canterbury there arose a very sharp Dispute about Prio∣rity. For in the Parliament holden
shortly after at Westminster, the Arch∣bishop of York, in respect of his Cardi∣nal's Archbishop of York as Car∣dinal, claim'd precedence of Canterbury,Dignity, claim'd precedence of the Archbishop of Canterbury, which he on the other side rightly maintain'd to belong to him by the ancient Preroga∣tive of his See. The Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry on the con∣trary by anci∣ent Preroga∣tive. Referred to the Pope. The cognizance of this Affair through their mutual Contentions being referr'd to the Pope, the Archbishop of Canter∣bury pleaded his Cause himself by Let∣ters, and appointed Antony de Capharel∣lis his Proctor at the Court of Rome, who in his Name maintain'd, that the Archbishop of Canterbury was within his The Arguments for Canterbu∣ry urgent.own Jurisdiction, in which it was fit that he should take place of every one, and that in the Province of Canterbury no respect ought to be had to the Digni∣ty of Cardinal possess'd by my Lord of York, who being remov'd from the Pope's presence, was depriv'd of the bright∣ness of those Raies, whose splendor he receiv'd by communication from his Holiness; and that even a Bishop, Abb. ad c. sane n. 4. de for. comp.while he is in another Bishop's Dio∣cess, is look'd upon but as a private Person, and not as a Bishop.
But the Pope out of his desire to main∣tain the Honour of the See of Rome, and of the Cardinals his Brethren, being more enclin'd to favour the Archbishop of York, writ back to the Archbishop of Overborn in the Cardinal's favour.Canterbury, That the first Degree in the Church next to the Papacy, be∣longed to the Cardinals; that they were those venerable Priests men∣tion'd by Moses in the Seventeenth Chapter of Deuteronomy; that they were afterwards instituted by St. Pe∣ter, and were to be accounted as Members of the Pope's Body, and that the whole Church did turn upon them as upon its Hinges. Seeing there∣fore that it hath obtain'd by the Cu∣stoms and Constitutions of particular Churches, that in the same Province a Priest should take place of a Dea∣con, a Bishop of a Priest, and an Archbishop of a Bishop, that much more the Laws of the Catho∣lick Church ought to be univer∣sally observ'd; for as every Archbi∣shop presides in his own Province, so the Cardinals are set over the Uni∣versal Church by the Pope. Lastly, He exhorted and intreated the Arch∣bishop to submit to the Customs of
the Church of Rome, and give place to the Cardinal, promising both him and the whole See of Canterbury all the kindnesses that could be expected from a most affectionate Father. This Letter is inserted at length by Cardinal Jacobatius in his Lib. 1. de concil. art. 12.Book of Councils, when he comes to discourse about the degrees of Cardinals and Patriarchs. By this it plainly appear'd to Posteri∣ty how strenuously the Archbishop de∣sended the Dignity of the Church of England against the Pope, whose dis∣pleasure he had incurr'd, as we said be∣fore, for maintaining the King's Au∣thority. The Differences betwixt Eugenius and the Council of Basil, gave occasion to the calling another Synod the next A Synod call'd at London on occasion of the difference be∣tween the Pope and Council.Year: For after that Eugenius had re∣mov'd the Council from Basil to Bolog∣na, and had been urg'd in vain by the Fathers at Basil to revoke his Decree, they commanded him by their Edict to  submit to the Council, and repair to Ba∣sil The Pope is summoned to Basil.within sixty days, otherwise they de∣clar'd that they would proceed against
him as contumacious, and devest him of the Papacy. Whereupon, in a Synod begun at London the 7th of November, the Arch∣bishop commanded the Proctors for the Clergy, and all the Prelates of the Of which London Sy∣nod consults.Lower House to consult and determine whether the Pope might dissolve a Ge∣neral Council at his own pleasure, and And what Pope they should obey, if another be set up.in case the Fathers at Basil should depose Eugenius, and set up another Pope, which of them they ought to obey? To which Questions some days after Tho∣mas Bekyngton, Official of the Archbi∣shop's Court, answer'd in the name of Alledged 1 st, that the Pope might dissolve a Council; and if another be set up, the Synod is to obey Eugeni∣us.the rest, That the Pope by his sole com∣mand might dissolve a Council, and that they were not to withdraw their Obedience from Eugenius, though another Pope should be created at Basil. For the Affections of a great many People in England be∣gan some time ago to be alienated from the Fathers at Basil upon the account of By which they resent a De∣cree made at Basil, trans∣ferring Votes from the Na∣tions to a few Delegates,a Decree made by them, which took away the Custom of voting by the Suf∣frages of every Nation, and referr'd all things to the determination of some par∣ticular Delegates; whereupon the Eng∣lish Representatives then at Basil, Tho∣mas Bishop of Worcester, William Prior
of Norwich, Thomas Brown Dean of Sa∣lisbury, Peter Patrick Chancellor, and Robert Borton Precentor of Lincoln, John Sarysbury Doctor of Divinity, and John Symondisborough Licentiate in the Canon Law, protested against it; which was also done at the same time here in Which was protested a∣gainst on the place.England, by William Lyndewood, Proctor for the King, who repeated a set form of Appeal, in which he protested against the Decree as unjust, for that this way of voting might hereafter be prejudicial to the King, and the Rights of the Clergy and Parliament. After this the Archbishop consulted with the Synod about nominating more Eight new De∣legates nomi∣nated.Delegates, because several of those that were sent before, were dead at Basil; and eight Doctors of Divinity and both Laws were chosen, who were to be sent to Basil, provided the Fathers would admit them without imposing upon them any new Oath. At this time our Affairs in France de∣clin'd daily, by the revolt of the chief Cities to King Charles, who had been lately crown'd at Rhemes with great so∣lemnity; King Charles crown'd at Rhemes.for which cause the Duke of Bedford who was lately come into Eng∣land, and his Brother the Duke of Glo∣cester,
thought it expedient to raise a A new Army against France designed.new Army here in England, and John Stafford Bishop of Bath Lord Chancellor, the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, the Lord Treasurer Cromwell, and the Lords Scrope and Tiptoft were sent to the Synod Money desired of the Synod.to desire Money of them. The Chan∣cellor in an elegant Speech laid before them the miserable state of Affairs in France, and the poverty of the Exche∣quer, and brought them to supply the Necessities of the King and Kingdom. After a denial, At first they absolutely refus'd to grant any Supply, alledging that the Wealth of the Clergy was ex∣hausted by their advancing Money continually for the use of the War; by the Rapines of the King's Purvey∣ors, and by unjust Citations to the King's Courts. But some other Lords soon after coming to them, as the Earl of Huntington, the Lords Hungerford, Audly and Cornwallis, who urg'd again the same Reasons, and reckon'd up the extraordinary Benefits conferr'd on the Church by the Kings of England, they They gave three quarters of a Tenth.at length obtain'd three quarters of a Tenth. For at that time the Clergy com∣plain'd grievously of the unjust pro∣ceeding
of the King's Judges, and the The Grievan∣ces of the Church at that time.common Lawyers; That Priests a∣gainst all Law and Equity were brought to their Secular Courts, that the Power of the Ecclesiastical Judges was restrain'd by their unjust Prohi∣bitions, and particularly that by a fraudulent interpretation they wrest∣ed a strict Law of Richard the Se∣cond against Provisors, and turn'd it upon those Persons who were Judges in the Spiritual Courts of those Causes which they pretended to belong to their Jurisdiction. For which cause the Archbishop held another Synod at London the next Year on the 7th of  October; where in a pathetical Speech, he express'd how solicitous he was that the The Archbishop zealous to res∣cue her from the Oppressions of the Lawyers.Church might receive no prejudice under his Government, that it might be deliver'd from the illegal Oppressions of the Lawyers, and restor'd to its ancient dignity; and commanded them all to consider what mea∣sures were to be taken to ease the Clergy of the weight of these Oppressions. But the Plague breaking out in the City, the By reason of the Plague, the Synod dissol∣ved.Synod was quickly dissolv'd, having on∣ly appointed a Holiday to be kept in ho∣nour of S. Frideswide the Protectress of the Ʋniversity of Oxford, and denounc'd
excommunication against any one that should detract from the Privileges and Ju∣risdiction of the Church. After this the Archbishop applied himself industriously to the Govern∣ment of his Province, and call'd never another Synod in three Years, till the Necessities of the Exchequer call d up∣on the Clergy for a Supply to maintain the Charges of the War with France. The Duke of Burgundy re∣volts to the French, and Bedford dies; The former occasion'dThe revolt of the Duke of Burgundy to the French, and the death of the Duke of Bedford, which hapned the next Year, gave a terrible blow to our Af∣fairs in France. For about that time, by the media∣tion of Pope Eugenius and the Council of Basil, Commissioners from our King, from Charles King of France, and the The ill success of the Treaty at Arras.Duke of Burgundy, met at Arras in or∣der to treat of a Peace; But the English and French not agreeing by reason of the extravagant Conditions demanded on either side, the Burgundians at last went over to the French; and soon after the Duke of Bedford fell sick and died, whose death soon caus'd a great altera∣tion  in the posture of Affairs. For the The English driven out of Paris, &c.next Year the People of Paris conspir'd privately together, and drove the Eng∣lish
out of the City; and many other Towns being stirr'd up by their exam∣ple, and in a manner all the People of France, as if they were impell'd by a And generally the French surrender'd to Charles.fatal necessity surrender'd themselves to King Charles. Wherefore to preserve the remains of our Dominion in France, the Duke of Glocester with a great Army and a gal∣lant Fleet sail'd over to Calais, which A new Eng∣lish Army set sail for Calais.was then besieg'd by the Duke of Bur∣gundy, and the King by Letters to the Archbishop of Canterbury press'd him to move the Clergy for a supply of Money for levying more men; who having as∣sembled the Bishops and Prelates of his Province at London on the 30th of April,  easily obtain'd of them a whole Tenth; The Clergy grant a Tenth.for they all earnestly desir'd the recovery of France. The Archbishop had design'd a long time ago to erect some noble Monu∣ment for the service of the Church, of Religion and Learning, and for his own glory in the University of Oxford, which out of a pious regard to his Education there, he desir'd to adorn as much as was possible: For at that time the Estates of almost all private Persons, as well as the publick Revenues being ex∣hausted
by the long continuance of the French War, the Ʋniversity was so thin and empty, that most of the Colleges and Halls which were formerly full of Students, were now quite forsaken and uninhabited; and of those many Thousand Scholars that us'd to flock thither, there was not one remaining; which Epist. Acad. Oxon. 125. in Archiv.they heavily lamented in their Letters to the Archbishop and the Sy∣nod. Wherefore that he might by his Bounty repair the decays of Learning occasion'd by the general poverty of the Kingdom▪ he gave Orders for building a large and stately Edifice of a square form in the North part of the Suburbs The Archbishop built a stately Edifice at Ox∣ford;of Oxford, which he design'd for a Col∣lege; but when the Work was almost finish'd, whether it were that he found fault with the Builders, or that he did not like the situation of it, he chang'd his mind, and gave it to the Monks of Gave it to the Monks of St. Bernard.S. Bernard, that the Novices might be sent thither out of all the Convents of that Order to study the Arts and Divi∣nity; afterwards in the general Cala∣mity
of Monasteries it was seiz'd by Seiz'd in Hen∣ry the Eighth's time. Purchased by Thomas White, Mer∣chant, who Founded there St John the Baptist's Col∣lege. From whence came many Reformers. King Henry the Eighth, of whom Sir Thomas White, Merchant of London, a very great Favourer of Learning, pur∣chas'd it, and founded there the noble College of St. John Baptist, which hath since produc'd a great many eminent Men in all Faculties, and particularly in Divinity, who labour'd very succes∣fully in carrying on the Reformation in the Church of England. This prudent Person shew'd by his excellent Example that those sacred and stately Houses which were taken from the licentious Monks, and afterwards unjustly seiz'd on by the Avarice and Luxury of pri∣vate Persons, should have been applied towards the advancement of Learning, the relief of the Poor, or the publick good of the Church and Kingdom. But the Archbishop chose another place for building a College, very commodious for the Students, in the middle of the Town, near S. Mary's Church. In which place having pull'd down the Houses that stood there, which he bought of the Owners, he laid out a The Archbishop chose another place for a College.square Court; and on the 10th of Fe∣bruary this Year, the first Stone of this Auspicious Building was laid, and the
inspection of the Work was committed to the care of one John Druell a Clergy∣man, who perform'd that Trust with great integrity and diligence. In the mean time, Pope Eugenius be∣ing threatned by the Edict of the Fathers The Edict of the Council of Basil against the Pope, backt by the Em∣peror.at Basil, as we said before, which was seconded by the Authority of Sigismond the Emperor, who came to Basil ac∣companied with a great many of the German Princes, revok'd his Translation of the Council to Bologna, and confirm'd Sess. 16. Con∣cil. Basil. The Council's Translation re∣voked. Sess. 19, 24. Ambassadors to the Council from Greece and Constan∣tinople, where The Emperor and Patriarch designed to be present, If the Council would secure them, and de∣fray their Charges. their Session at Basil, whither also he sent his Legates, the Cardinal de Santa Cruce, and the Bishop of Padua, to sup∣port his Interests there. There arriv'd also at Basil Ambassa∣dors from John Paleologus Emperor of Greece, and Joseph Patriarch of Constan∣tinople, who were receiv'd with great joy, and declar'd, that the Emperor himself, the Patriarch, and the Bishops of the Greek Church would come to the Council in order to compose the Differences between the Eastern and Western Churches in matters of Faith, if the Council would engage the pub∣lick Faith for their security, and de∣fray Which was agreed.the Charges of their Journey. Both which the Fathers immediately
promis'd and confirm'd by their Ambas∣sadors sent to Constantinople. But the Emperor Sigismond, who was a valiant But on Sigis∣mond's death the Pope re∣moves the Council to Ferrara, Sess. 29.and wise Prince, dying this Year, Eu∣genius being freed from his Apprehen∣sions, remov'd the Council from Basil to Ferrara, and by Letters sent into England, he desir'd the King to send his Ambassadors thither, and com∣manded the Archbishop of Canterbury to assemble all the Bishops of his Pro∣vince in the beginning of the next Year,  and order them to go to Ferrara; Whether he summon'd the Bishops from England. Sess. 32. which he signified also by Letters written at the same time to all the Princes and Bishops in Christendom. This opposed by the Council. On the other side, the Fathers at Basil forbad any one to appear at Ferrara; and indeed almost all Nations detested this double dealing of Pope Eugenius; for most of the Italians, the Germans, and the Spaniards, sided with the Fathers at Basil, and Charles the Seventh King of France not only forbad the Prelates of that Kingdom to go to Panor. Tract. de Concil. Basil. n. 6. Carol. Molinae. de Monarc. Franc. n. 149.Ferrara, but also having call'd an Assembly of the Estates of France at Bourges in Berry,
King Charles of France puts forth the pragmatical Sanction a∣gainst An∣nates, &c. he put forth the Pragmatical Sanction against Annates, Provisions, and other Extortions of the Popes, which con∣tain'd in a manner nothing else but the Decrees of the Council of Basil, and commanded it to be receiv'd for Law in the Kingdom of France. This San∣ction curb'd the Power of the Popes in France for a long time, till the Reign Which curb'd the Pope's Power there, till the time of Lewis the Twelfth. The English generally sided with the Pope. of Petr. Rebuff. Tract. de nominat. quaest. 2. n. 2.Lewis the Twelfth, who at last was prevail'd upon by the Sollicita∣tions of Pope Leo the Tenth to abo∣lish it. But almost all the English sided with Eugenius; for first of all the King ap∣pointed some Persons of eminent Qua∣lity King Henry sent Ambassa∣dors to Fer∣rara.to be sent Ambassadors to Ferrara, to whom the Bishops assembled in Con∣vocation voted an Allowance suitable to their Quality, which notwithstand∣ing But their al∣lowance was disputed.was denied by the Proctors for the Clergy in the Lower House, who were more inclin'd in favour of the Council of Basil; only the Proctors for the Convents granted Four pence in the Pound out of their Revenues.
In this Synod holden at London, the Archbishop complain'd heavily of a late Injury offer'd him by Pope Eugenius, who by his sole Authority had given the Bishoprick of Ely in Commendam to Lewis Archbishop of Roan, and by his The Pope gives away the Bi∣shoprick of Ely, in Com∣mendam. The Archbishop in Synod op∣poses the Af∣fair, Bull had confirm'd him in the Go∣vernment of that See, and therefore he order'd the Synod to consider how to put a stop to this Affair, which was ne∣ver attempted before by any Pope. And indeed such a Precedent as this would have been of very pernicious conse∣quence to Posterity; but Philip Morgan, who was then Bishop of Ely, outliving the Archbishop of Roan, by this means Which was frustrated by the Survivor∣ship of the then Bishop.the Pope's Design was frustrated. After this Richard Carpenter Chan∣cellor of Oxford, desired of the Synod (which had been prorogued to the 6th of October) in the name of both Univer∣sities, that the Decree about conferring Propos'd in Sy∣nod to Renew a Decree, that those not in Orders should not be benefi∣ced.Benefices upon those only that had ta∣ken Degrees in the Universities, which was made in the Years 1417, and 1421. and limited to a certain term of Years, which were now expir'd, might be again renew'd. The King also by his Wherein the King concur∣red; and ob∣tain'd it.Letters desir'd the same of the Synod, who readily assented to it upon the Con∣ditions
mention'd in the former De∣crees. Eugenius had now begun the Council at Ferrara, and by his importunity and fair Promises had drawn thither John Palaeologus the Emperor, and some of the Greek Bishops; but the Plague break∣ing out there, in the beginning of the  next Year he remov'd the Council to The Council begun at Fer∣rara, by occa∣sion of the Plague remo∣ved to Flo∣rence. Where the Greeks pre∣sent submitted in Opinion to the Latines. Which so of∣fended the Greek Church, that after their death, they were not allow'd Chri∣stian Burial. Sess. 33. The Council of Basil main∣tain'd its Au∣thority; Florence; where after long Disputes about the Procession of the Holy Ghost, about Purgatory, the Supremacy of the Pope, and some other Controversies be∣tween the two Churches, the Greeks who were there present, submitted to the Opinion of the Latines. For which they were so detested by the rest of the Greek Church, that after their death they were not allow'd Christian burial, nor would the Greeks recede from one Article of their ancient Creed. In the mean time the Fathers at Basil being incens'd at the obstinacy of Euge∣nius, by vertue of their Supreme Au∣thority declar'd, That the Pope was sub∣ordinate to a General Council, that he had no power to dissolve, transfer or prorogue it, and that Eugenius for attempting all these things was guilty of Heresy; they Deposed the Pope.also divested him of the Papacy, being
convicted of Contumacy, Simony, Per∣jury and Impiety; and Aene. Sylv. lib. 2. de act. Concil. Basil.having chosen Thirty two of the greatest note out of the four Nations, Italians, French, Ger∣mans (The English going to Fer∣rara)and Spaniards (for the English were all gone to Ferrara) who were deputed with full power to elect a new Pope, Amedeus Duke of Savoy, who had left the Dukedom to his Son, and retir'd to an Hermitage, was created Pope, and took the Name of Felix the Fifth. There were then at Basil And by the Deputies of four other Na∣tions, Felix the Fifth ele∣cted Pope.two of the greatest Lawyers of their time, the Abbot Panormitanus and Ludo∣vicus Romanus, who were sent Ambas∣sadors out of Italy from Alfonsus the great King of Arragon. These two in a great many Speeches maintain'd, that the Authority of a Council was superior to that of the Pope; and condemn'd the Acti∣ons of Eugenius with so much sharpness and Eloquence, that no one durst pretend to contradict them; all which they have left recorded to Posterity in their Wri∣tings. For Panormitanus in a Panorm. tract. de Concil. Basil. in 5. vol.Book A defence of the Council at Basil.which he put out in defence of the Coun∣cil of Basil against Eugenius, shews
clearly, That the Authority of a Council is more sacred than that of the Pope; that the Pope hath no Juris∣diction over a Council, but on the contrary is subordinate to it, and may be call'd in question, imprison'd and depos'd by it; and that this punish∣ment was justly inflicted upon Euge∣nius, as contumacious, a Deserter of the Faith, an Enemy to the Church, and guilty of Simony, Perjury and Murther: And in Panor. ad c. significasti. n. 4. de elect. ad c. licet de vitanda. n. 8. eod. tit. ad c. fraternitatis n 1. de haeret.several places of his Commentaries he speaks of the power of a Council as superior to that of the Pope. Ludovicus Romanus in his Responses maintains, That an Appeal may lawfully be made Rom. Cons. 521.from the Pope to a General Council, that his Com∣mand for the Rom. Cons. 522.dissolution of it ought not to be obey'd, and that he may be Rom. Cons. 523.depos'd by a Council. He was a The high Cha∣racter of Lo∣dovic. Ro∣manus.man (saith Aene. Sylv. lib. 2. de act. Concil. B sil.Aeneas Sylvius) worthy not only of Rome, but also of Heaven it self; and had he liv'd to have doubled
his Age, would have given matter not only of admiration, but of astonishment to the World; but Fortune envied Italy so extraordinary a Person, and took him away at Basil, where he died of the Plague, having hardly past the Thirtieth Year of his Age. Aeneas Sylvius also himself was pre∣sent and assisted at the Council both by his approbation of their Proceedings against Eugenius, and by two Books which he put out of the History of that Council; which afterwards, being made Pope by the Name of Pius the Second, he call'd in, and would fain have suppress'd. And indeed all the Gl. in c. si Papa dist. 40. Archid. Gemin. & Fran. ad c. in fidei favorem de haeret. in 6. Card. Zab. cons 150. Anchar. cons. 181. Felin. ad c. super literis. n. 21. de rescript. Jo. Royas. de haeret. n. 518. Fr. Marc. decis. 944.Lawyers held this Opinion concerning the power of a Council over the Pope, as long as they maintained the liberty of speaking and writing; but in the next Age be∣ing brought under the subjection of the Popes, they began to flatter them; and having positively Card. Jacobat. lib. 3. de Concil. n. 85. Hier. Al∣ban de potest. Pap. n. 240. Cataldin. de Boncompag. de potest. Pap. n. 31. Alfon. Hoied. de benefic. incompat. par. 1. n. 86.condemn'd the Coun∣cil
In the next Age the Coun∣cil of Basil is condemned. of Basil, they rais'd the power of the Pope above that of a Council and the whole Church; and this power the Card. Bellar. lib. 2. de Concil. cap. 18.Divines in the following Ages did affirm to be so inherent in the See of Rome, that the Pope could not divest himself of it, nor any way make himself inferior to a Council. Before the end of the Year in which these things pass'd at Basil, the Arch∣bishop A Synod call'd at London,call'd another Synod at London, which began on the 21st of November, but being hinder'd by some indisposi∣tion, he could not be there that day: However he came some days after, and in a long Speech, in which he could hardly refrain from Tears; He reckon'd up the grievous Miseries of the Church, proceeding from the Penalties daily inflicted on the Ecclesiastical Judges, which by the Where the Sta∣tute of Prae∣munire is reckon'd a la∣mentable Church-Grievance;Statue, commonly call'd the Statute of Praemunire, were design'd against Provi∣sors, and from the Citations of the Clergy as well as others to the Secular Courts. Whereupon it was unanimously agreed that the Archbishop should present a Petition to the King in the name of the
Clergy, wherein they set forth, That the Penalties which by the 16. R. 2. 15.Sta∣tute of Richard the Second were de∣signed against those that should sue any of the King's Subjects in any of the Pope's Courts either at Rome or In so far as a Suit in an Ec∣clesiastical Court is con∣strued a suing in Rome.elsewhere, by a cunning interpreta∣tion of the Common Lawyers were turn'd maliciously upon those that had any Cause depending in the Spi∣ritual Courts here in England, the cognizance of which they challeng'd to themselves; by which means all People being deterr d from coming to their Courts, the Ecclesiastical Juris∣diction was very much diminish'd, and the Privileges granted to the Church by his Highness's Predeces∣sors became insignificant. Where∣fore They petition the King to limit the Pe∣nalties to those who sue in a Foreign Court strictly taken.they besought the King that he would settle it by Act of Parliament, that those Penalties should be taken to extend only to those that com∣menc'd any Suits, or procur'd any Writs or publick Instruments at Rome, or any where else out of Eng∣land, and that no one should be pro∣ceeded against upon that Statute for any Sute in the Spiritual Courts of this Kingdom; and that if the Eccle∣siastical
Judges exceeded the bounds of their Jurisdiction, they might be restrain'd by Prohibitions, and other lawful Punishments. The King answer'd the Archbishop who pleaded in behalf of his Brethren, The King pro∣mises them im∣unity till a Parliament be called.That he would consider of their Petition in the next Parliament, and that in the mean time he would take care that no one should be molested by his Judges upon the account of that Statute, unless the Cause were first approv'd by himself or the Privy Council. This Answer procured the ing a Tenth. This gracious Answer of the King's so pleas'd the Synod, that they imme∣diately granted him a whole Tenth, with this Condition, which was par∣ticularly express'd, that the Revenues and Benefices belonging to the Col∣lege of All Souls should not be inclu∣ded in the Concession. This was the last Provincial Synod that the Archbishop held: From that time he bent all his thoughts, as far as publick business would give him leave, upon finishing his College, which he designed to dedicate to the service of Learning. For by this time the Walls of it, which were very stately and mag∣nificent, were built, and the Workmen
had begun to lay the Roof; the Arch∣bishop had also purchas'd Lands and Mannors for the perpetual maintenance of his Foundation, all which he ac∣quainted the King with, and humbly besought him that he would permit the College to be founded in his Name, be∣cause The Archbishop pray'd the King to suffer his College, al∣most finished, to be founded in his Royal Name.the Lawyers were of opinion, that the Splendour and Authority of the King's Name was of great importance toward founding a College in due and lawful manner. Now the King was always very fa∣vourably inclin'd towards the good of the Church, and the encouragement of Learning, and had a great love and ve∣neration for his Godfather the Archbi∣shop. Wherefore by his Letters-Patent Letters Pa∣tent accord∣ingly granted.under the great Seal he erected into a College this Building which the Arch∣bishop had endow'd with all the Lands which he had purchas'd, and granted it very large Privileges; he also gave leave to the Founder to place in it a Warden and Fellows, and to make Laws and Statutes to oblige both them and their Successors. Upon which he went the next Year to Oxford, where he solemnly consecrated the Chappel The Chappel consecrated.of his College, and made Richard An∣drew,
A Warden of the College made. And twenty choice Fellows, with power to elect twenty more Doctor of Law and Chancellor of Canterbury, Warden of it; he also made Twenty Fellows, who were all choice men pickt out of the whole Uni∣versity, to whom he gave power to elect into their Society Twenty more: Out of which Number he order'd that Twen∣ty for Divinity and Sciences, And the Civil and Canon Law.four should study Divinity and the Li∣beral Sciences, and the other Sixteen the Civil and Canon Law. He also com∣manded all the Members of his Founda∣tion to pray for the Souls of King Henry the Fifth, of Thomas Duke of Clarence, and of the Nobility and common Sol∣diers that had been kill'd in the French War, and for all Christians in general according to the custom of those Times; being troubled in Conscience, as it should seem, that he had been the Au∣thor and Promoter of that War, in which a vast number of men had lost their Lives; for which cause he order'd Wherefore the Archbishop cal∣led the College All Souls, &c.his College to be call'd the College of All Souls departed in the Faith in Oxford. He added also two Chaplains, several Choristers and Servants who were to attend upon the publick Service of the College. Prescribed them Statutes. After this he prescrib'd them Laws and Statutes, by which their Studies
and Manners, their Offices and Profits were to be regulated; and lastly, ha∣ving inspected John Druel's Accounts of the Building thus far, he committed the care of beautifying it within, and en∣larging it without to Roger Keyes, who was afterwards made Warden. For the Cloysters, and that part of the Building that faces the great Street of the Town, were built, as it is said, some part in his life-time, and the rest after his death. After the Foundation of this College, we find no mention of any publick Action done by him either in the Re∣cords of the Kingdom, or in the Histo∣rians of that Age: only some noble Be∣nefactions of his to the University of Was very libe∣ral to Oxford and Canter∣bury Church.Oxford and the Church of Canterbury are recorded, with which we shall con∣clude the History of his Vertues. There had been begun some time ago at Oxford by the Munificence chiefly of the Duke of Glocester, a lofty and mag∣nificent Structure, the upper part of which was design'd for a Library, and the lower for the publick Divinity Laid out a great Sum on the Structure begun by the Duke of Glo∣cester▪Schools. To this Work the Archbi∣shop gave a great Sum of Money him∣self, and was very earnest in solliciting
all the Bishops and Peers who came to the Parliament at Westminster, to contribute something toward it; all which is grate∣fully acknowledg'd by the University, in their Epist. Acad. Oxon. 26.Letters to him. And Two hun∣dred Marks to the publick Chest of the University. He also gave Two hundred Marks to the publick Chest of the University, which he order'd to be kept by three Masters of Arts, two Regents and one Non-regent, who were to be chosen yearly▪ and were bound by an Oath to the faithful discharge of that Trust, out With the Me∣thod of its dis∣posal,of which the University might borrow for the publick use Five Pounds, every particular College Five Marks, a Master of Arts Forty Shillings, a Licentiate or Batchelour Two Marks, and an Under∣graduate One; with this Condition, That every one should deposite a suffi∣cient Pawn, which, if the Money were not repaid within a Month, was to be forfeited. Besides the De∣cree mentioned concerning graduated Dignitaries. He also did the University a signal piece of service by that Decree, which we mention'd before, concerning the bestowing Benefices upon those only that had taken Degrees which was
made by the Synod at his intercession. For they esteem'd it as a singular kind∣ness, and often Epist. Acad. Oxon 1. 124, 125, 143, 144. in Archiu.return'd him thanks up∣on this account with the highest expres∣sions of gratitude; for before this Con∣stitution was made, Men, though they had attain'd to the knowledge of all Sciences, spent their whole Life in the University. These and many other Fa∣vours conferr'd by him upon the Uni∣versity, are honourably mention'd by them in their Letters; and that the me∣mory of them might remain for ever, it was ordain'd by a Stat. cist. Chich▪ in Archiv.publick Decree, that his Name should be register'd His Name de∣creed to be Re∣gistred among the Benefa∣ctors of Ox∣ford Univer∣sity.among their Benefactors, and read eve∣ry Year in the Publick Schools by the Chaplain of the University, and that a solemn Mass should be said for him on the Anniversary of his Death. All this was justly due to him, who had increas'd the glory of the University by Having found∣ed two Col∣leges, &c.the soundation of two Colleges, and by so many publick Benefactions, beside his private Charities to many poor Stu∣dents, to whom he allow'd yearly Sti∣pends,
as appears out of his private Accounts. He adorned the Cathedral of Canterbu∣ry. Repaired Christ's Church there, building and furnishing a Library, &c. Beside this, he very much adorn'd his Cathedral Church of Canterbury; he there laid out a great deal of Money in repairing Christ's Church, and building a Library and Steeple; he also gave a great many Jewels and Ornaments to that Church, and furnish'd the Library with many valuable Books in all kinds of Learning; which are all reckon'd up in a publick Instrument made by the Prior and Monks of Canterbury, and describ'd among the publick Acts of that Church; in which they promise on their part that his Body should be laid in the Tomb that he had caus'd to be built on the North side of the Chancel, and that no one beside should ever be buried in that place, which they and their Successors would take care to see perform'd. He also gave very liberally toward Gave liberally towards the building of Croydon Church, and Rochester Bridge.the building of Croydon Church▪ and Rochester Bridge. I omit the rest of his Benefactions, lest the enumeration of every smaller Deed of Charity should seem to detract from the glory of his more Illustrious Actions. Thus having left the Monuments of his Piety and Liberality in all Places,
being worn out with Age, he departed this Life on the 12th of April, in the His Death, Apr. 12. 1443. and magnifi∣cent Burial.Year 1443. His Body was laid in the Tomb which he had built himself, as we said before, in the upper part of which is his Statue very handsomly cut in White Marble, and on the side of it this Epitaph is written. Hic jacet HEN∣RICUS CHICHELE Legum Doctor, quondam Cancel∣larius Sarum, qui anno septimo Hen∣rici IV. Regis ad Gregorium Papam XII. in ambasciata transmissus, in ci∣vitate Senensi per manus ejusdem Pa∣pae in Menevensem Episcopum conse∣cratus est: Hic e∣tiam Henricus an∣no secundo Hen∣rici quinti Regis in hac sancta Ecclesia in Archiepiscopum postulatus, & à Jo∣anne Papa XXIII. ad eandem transla∣tus est, qui obiit anno Domini mil∣lesimo quadringen∣tesimo quadragesi∣mo tertio, mensis Aprilis die XII. Here lies HEN∣RY CHICHELE Doctor of Laws and sometime Chancellor of Salisbury, who in the Seventh Year of King Henry the Fourth, was sent Ambassador to Pope Gregory the XIIth. and was consecrated Bishop of S. David's by the hands of the Pope in the City of Siena. The said Henry in the Se∣cond Year of King Henry the Fifth, was demanded for Archbishop in this Holy Church, and translated to it by Pope John the Twenty third. He died in the Year of our Lord 1443. on the 12th of April.
Soon after which, a Fatal Change in England. Soon after his death follow'd a very deplorable Turn in the State of this Kingdom. For Queen Margaret, a Woman of a Masculine Spirit, by the assistance and Counsels of William Pole Duke of Suffolk, got the Government of the King, and the whole management Which came to be governed by Queen Mar∣garet. Whence the Kingdom was divided, and the People op∣pressed. The French also under a Female Revolt to King Charles. Normandy, then Aqui∣tain lost, after 300 years possession. of the Kingdom into her own hands; upon which the Nobility was divided in∣to Factions, and drew along with them the rest of the People who were op∣press'd with Exactions. The French also who were under the English Domi∣nion being encouraged by our Divisions, revolted to King Charles, and first we lost Normandy, and then all Aquitain, which we had held ever since the time of King Henry the Second, almost Three hundred years. The Kingdom was em∣broil'd in Civil Dissentions within, and labour'd under a Foreign War without.
For the Kentish men under Jack Cade Jack Cade's Insurrection.took Arms, and rais'd an Insurrection; the French invaded the Coast of Kent on one side, and the Scots on the other ra∣vaged the Northern Borders; and to compleat all our Miseries, the Family The French invade Kent, and the Scots the Borders. The Civil War from the House of York, in which King Henry was imprison'd, exil'd, depriv'd of Crown and Life by Ed∣ward the Fourth. Our Chi∣chele's Wis∣dom supported the Kingdom. From the Ca∣lamities of which he was by his happy Fate delivered. of York took occasion from hence to raise that lamentable Civil War, in which King Henry being twice taken Prisoner in the Field, forc'd to fly out of England, and by the mockery of Fortune restor'd again to his Kingdom, was at last de∣priv'd both of Life and Crown by Ed∣ward the Fourth. If we consider all these things, Henry Chichele died in a very seasonable time, and deserv'd of Posterity a Character both of Wisdom, seeing the Kingdom which had been supported by his Counsels, fell with him, and also of Happiness, in that God Almighty did not suffer him to live to see the Calamities that were just coming upon the Kingdom.
WHAT is here related con∣cerning the Government of the Church or Kingdom in gene∣ral, is taken from the English and French Historians, who wrote of the Affairs of those Times. The rest of the Story relating to the Church of England, and to Henry Chichele in particular, is taken out of the Books of the publick Acts of the Lord Archbishop of Can∣terbury, which are carefully kept by the Vicar-general's Secretary, and out of some Manuscripts which Sir Ro∣bert Cotton furnish'd me with; This I thought fit to acquaint the Reader withal, as well that he might be sa∣tisfied of the authority of those things that are here deliver'd, as that I might not be forc'd to crowd the Margin with Authors Names and Quota∣tions. FINIS.
THE TABLE TO THE Life of Archbishop CHICHELE. BOrn at Higham-Ferrars in Northamptonshire, Page 1 Made Fellow of New-Col∣lege, Oxford, by Wil∣liam of Wyckam, Ibid. Went to live with Mede∣ford Bishop of Sarum, 2 Made Archdeacon of Sarum, Ibid. Then Chancellor of the same, 3 Parson of Odyham, Ibid. And chief Executor to his Be∣nefactor, Ibid. Sent Ambassador by Henry the Fourth to Pope Gre∣gory the Twelfth, 4 By whom made Bishop of St. David's, 5 Accordingly took the Canoni∣cal Oath in England, 6 Sent Delegate to the General Council at Pisa, Ibid. Held to Reconcile the Com∣petitors for the Popedom, 7 Boniface the Eighth deposed, Ibid. Clement the Fifth elected Pope, Ibid. Who with six Successors, all French, resided at Avig∣non for seventy Years, 8 Most of them hated by the Italians for their Nation, or vitious Lives, Ibid. The Clementines added to the Canon Law, Ibid. Pope Gregory returned to Rome, 9
Was succeeded by Urban the Sixth. Ibid. For whose Rigor and Pride, Clement the Sixth was set up against him, 10 Urban, for preferring the Base, and fomenting of Wars, called Turbanus; a perverse and most cruel Pope, Ib. Clement not far short of Him in wickedness, 11 Urban succeeded by Boniface the Ninth, and Ib. Clement by Benedict the Third. Both worse than the former, Ib. Boniface more Politician than Grammarian, 12 Impos'd the Tax of Annates on the Clergy, Ib. Suffered Bishopricks to be sold by Auction, Ib. Sold the same Livings twice to several Chapmen, 13 Yet made the Purchaser swear he came fairly by it, Ib. Made poor Petitioners pay a Floren apiece, Ib. Enquired after Gifts in the time of Divine Service, Ib. Had no comfort when dying, but in Money, Ib. Defended by the Lawyers, Ib. But opposed by the Divines, 14 Benedict the like spiritual Robber, Ib. Boniface compared to an Ox, Benedict to a wild Beast, 15 The Cardinal's Oath upon Bo∣niface's death to resign if chosen, Ib. Boniface succeeded by Inno∣cent the Seventh, who broke his Oath, 16 A great Canonist, debaucht and covetous, Ib. On his death the Oath repeat∣ed with Imprecations, Ib. Gregory the Twelfth suc∣ceeded, Ib. Who treated with Benedict for the Churche's peace, 17 And for a Resignation by them both at Savona, Ib. Sends to Charles the Sixth of France about the same Af∣fair, 18 Gregory harshly treated his Ambassadors at their re∣turn, Ib. Drew back and shuffled, Ib. Then plainly refused to stand to the Agreement, Ib.
Hearing Benedict was come to Savona, he comes to Siena, 19 To whom Chichele was one of the Ambassadors from England, and there made Bishop of St. David's, Ib. Pope Gregory goes to Lucca, Ib. Refuses to go to Savona, Ib. Trinkles with Benedict, is for his Hypocrisy called Er∣rorius, Ib. The Cardinals displeas'd for his promoting Condelma∣rius, 20 His own Party fly to Pisa, Ib. They appeal from him to Christ, a general Council, and the next Pope, Ib. This justified by Panormi∣tan, Ib. Both Popes accused of Perjury by the best Canonists, 21 The Cardinal's leaving the Pope, grateful to the Chri∣stian Princes, Ib. The Kings of England and France withdrew their O∣bedience from both the Popes, Ib. At the Request of the Cardi∣nal's Letters English Mo∣ney with-held, 22 The French King withdraws Obedience to Benedict, defended by Baldus, 23 Two Bull-Carriers (the Pope's Emissaries) were ignomini∣ously treated at Paris, Ib. Charles the Fourth of France did neither regard the Church, nor his own King∣dom, Ib. Whose Son's Successor Robert of Bavaria King of the Ro∣mans siding with Grego∣ry, chiefly fomented the Church Divisions, 24 The Emperors then were dege∣nerated, Ib. When their Power was most requisite to rectify the Pope's mismanagement, Ib. Gregory Renounc'd by his Cardinals at Pisa, 25 Who with those of Benedict, deprived them both of the Papacy, 26 For which some worldly Di∣vines charged them with Schism, Ib. King of England and France, &c. favour the Cardinals, and their afore∣said Sentence in Council, 28 Which the Cardinal of Bour∣deaux
with great zeal got ratified in England, Ib. H. Chichele one of the Dele∣gates to Pisa, 29 Before whom and Associates a Learned Sermon preached, Ib. Bishop of Sarum, another De∣legate, made an eloquent Oration in the Council of Pisa, 30 Where both Popes were pro∣nounced perjured, &c. and Alexander the Fifth elect∣ed, 31 Who, when a Boy, had begg'd from door to door, Ib. Afterwards his Parts known, sent to Oxford, Ib. Then made Archbishop of Mi∣lan; and created Car∣dinal by Innocent the Seventh, Ib. Alexander was too honest, studious and Monastick to be politically qualified for the Chair, 32 'Tis thought he was poysoned, Ib. He was succeeded by John the Twenty Third, Ib. A Papal Triumvirate, Ib. H. Chichele returns from his Embassy, 33 Was diligent in his Function, Ib. Allegiance sworn to Henry the Fifth before his Coro∣nation, 34 That King sent our Henry Ambassador to the French King and Duke of Bur∣gundy, Ib. To the former, for a Treaty of Peace, 35 To the latter about a Mar∣riage, Ib. Whilst the King seem'd more inclinable to the French King's Daughter, 36 H. Chichele chosen President of the Council, Ib. The Monks desire leave to elect an Archbishop of Canterbury, Ib. And Canonically demanded H. Chichele, 37 Which Custom was introduced by Papal Ambition, 38 H. Chichele expects the Pope's leave, 39 To obtain which, Proxies are sent to Rome, Ib. With the King's Letters in his favour, Ib. The Pope divorc'd H. Chi∣chele from St. David's, 40
Made him Archbishop by way of provisor, Ib. But he was first to be sworn to the Infallible Chair, Ib. The Pall, denoting full power over the other Bishops, 41 Delivered him in the King's Palace of Sutton, 42 Where he took the Oath of Obedience, Ib. The Pope gave the Church, but the King could only give the Land, 43 Which was done after re∣nouncing of the Clauses▪ derogatory to the King's Power, Ib. For his Patent he paid Six hundred Marks, 44 Secur'd the Church from the Envy of the two Houses, Ib. Being formerly voted to sup∣ply King Henry the Fourth by the Church's Wealth, Ib. Whilst the Church paid Tenths oftener than the Laity did Fifteenths, &c. 45 Which Consideration, but chief∣ly the Intercession of his Predecessor with the King, had then averted the storm, Ib. Another Address of the Com∣mons against the Clergy, Ib. Which was design'd, as the then Bishop alledg'd, for the enriching themselves, 46 King of France, said he, has not a Noble now of the Revenues of the Monasteris that were brought to the Exchequer, Ib. The Petition rejected. Ib. Henry the Fourth averse to Wickliff's Doctrine, abet∣ted by the Petitioners, 47 In Henry the Fifth's time the Address renew'd, Ib. To avoid which the Clergy re∣solv'd to give the King Money for a War with France, Ib. For which a Synod is call'd at London, 48 The Title of the Kings of England to France, Ib. Claim'd by Edward the Third, Ib. Whose Competitor was Philip de Valois, Ib. King Edward claiming by's Mother, rejected under pretence of the Salick Law, assumed the Title, 49
Successfully invaded France, and entail'd the Quarrel, Ib. Richard the Second waved the Quarrel, Ib. Henry the Fourth was di∣verted by Intestine Com∣motions, Ib. But the happy Juncture was in Henry the Fifth's time, Ib. As Chichele thought, for a more glorious Diversion, Ib. His Speech to the King for that purpose, 50 Accommodates himself to the King's Heroic Temper, Ib. Thinks France no less than the Envy of the World, 51 Represents the King's Right, Ib. And insinuates the Injuries done his French Provinces, Ib. The Salick Law an Obtru∣sion, 52 And a Cheat to debar the Female-Line, Ib. Not made by Pharamond, as pretended, Ib. Put Four hundred years after him, and in Germany, 53 If it obliges the French, it relates to private Inheri∣tances only; for, Ib. In dispute, one French King never us'd it against ano∣ther; for Ib. Pepin claimed by a Female, 54 And so did Hugh Capet, Ib. And by the like Lewis the Tenth confirm'd his Right, Ib. This Law made a Bugbear to Foreigners, contemned by themselves, 55 'Tis contrary to the Civil Law, and Ib. The Constitutions of most Na∣tions, Ib. And to the Divine Law, 56 Jesus Christ the Lawful Heir, by his Mother of the Jewish Kingdom, Ib. The French rather deny the Bible, than submit to a Foreign Prince, 57 The Salick Law literally ex∣cludes not the Sons of Fe∣males, 58 And is to be taken in the most favourable sense, 60 The Archbishop asserts the King's Call as well as Right to France, Ib.
With other great Encourage∣ments to the Expedition, Ib. Success a Good Sign in the Vertuous and Brave, 61 But the Earl of Westmor∣land advises a War with the Scots, Ib. From the Roman Example to begin with the lesser Enemy, Ib. And the readiness of Provi∣sions for the latter, 62 With the easiness of the Vi∣ctory, Ib. The justice and necessity of the War, Ib. The Earl Answered by Jo. Duke of Exeter, 63 That the Scot's Strength (ly∣ing in the French) ought to be first attaqued, Ib. France once conquer'd, the Scots will be helpless, Ib. Advised to hinder the Scots Attempts in the King's ab∣sence, Ib. Which Opinion highly applaud∣ed, Ib. And War with France was the Cry of the House, 64 The Archbishop's renowned for the wisdom of his Counsel, 65 The King provides an Army and Navy, Ib. Sends Ambassadors to de∣mand France, Ib. The Army's Rendezvouz at Southampton, 66 The French Ambassadors, in Answer, offer the French King's Daughter in Mar∣riage, Ib. Their Conditions not thought honourable by the King, The Archbishop s more full Answer, 67 That the French King had not answered King Hen∣ry's Demand, Ib. Who insisted only on the Do∣minions his Ancestors had enjoyed, 68 Which Answer the King con∣firms, Ib. The French Ambassadors re∣manded, Ib. The King sets sail, 69 Takes Harflew, Ib. Defeats the French at Agin∣court, Ib. Of whom Ten thousand are slain, Ib. And many Noble Prisoners, Ib. In the King's absence, the Archbishop arms the Clergy in Kent, Ib.
Calls a Synod, 70 In which two Tenths are granted for the War, Ib. Another Synod, 71 Christendom divided between Three Popes, Ib. By two of whom the Council of Pisa refused, Ib. A General Council appointed by the Third, Ib. The Archbishop appears at Constance by Proxy, 72 Their Charges 2 d. per l. out of the Clergy's Revenues, Ib. The Emperor comes to Eng∣land as Mediator, 73 Whereupon the Delegates are press'd to Constance, Ib. Where a Decree pass'd about Wills and Administration, Ib. That 5 s. shall be paid for a Probate, Ib. And that the Clergy shall bring in the Tenth six Months sooner, Ib. The Mediation in vain be∣tween the Two Kingdoms, 74 Harfleu being besieg'd, and Four hundred English slain by the French, Ib. Wherefore the King sends his Brother the Duke of Bed∣ford, to Normandy, Ib. Presents the Emperor with the Garter, Ib. And conducts him to Calais, Ib. The Emperor goes to Con∣stance, Ib. The Archbishop goes to France, 75 Ambassadors from the French to King Henry at Calais, Ib. Who returning got a Supply from the Parliament, Ib. And Two Tenths from the Synod, 76 The King setting sail, left the Duke of Bedford Vice∣gerent, Ib. The Archbishop interdicts the Church of St. Dunstans, 77 Excommunicates the Crimi∣nals, viz. Ib. Lord Strange, Lady and Servants, Ib. The two former with Tapers, and all in their Shirts and Drawers only, did processional Pennance from St. Paul's to St. Dun∣stan's; for purification of which the Lady fill'd the
Vessels with water, 77, 78 At Constance they dispute about a new Pope, Ib. And against John Wickliff, Ib. By whom the Seeds of sound Doctrine had been disper∣sed, Ib. Particularly among the Bo∣hemians, Ib. Wickliff pronounc'd Heretick, 79 And decreed that his Bones be taken up and burnt, Ib. And his Followers be prose∣cuted as Hereticks, Ib. John Huss, and Jerom of Prague, condemn'd to Flames, Ib. Whose death made the Em∣peror and Council infamous, Ib. The publick Faith being shame∣fully violated, the Bohe∣mians revenge it, Ib. The Council decreed; Faith is not to be kept with He∣reticks, 80 Of which the Papists asha∣med, kept it to Luther and others, Ib. Pope John the Twenty third charg'd for not leaving the Papacy, 81 And accused before the Coun∣cil of Adultery, Incest, Witchcraft, &c. Ib. Gregory by Proxy resign's the Chair, as did also Bene∣dict, 82 At Constance a Council is decreed superior to the Pope, Ib. Five Nations compos'd the Council, Ib. Martin Vth. elected Pope, 83 The Decree of the Council's Power repeal'd by Leo the Tenth, Ib. A Council not to be restrain'd by a new Pope; 85 And that, on the Pope's death, a new Election belongs to the Council, Ib. Yet during that of Trent, the Cardinals chose Paul the Third, Ib. That of Constance gave or∣der about t h M due by England to Rome, 86 The Election of Pope Martin was mightily liked, Ib. London Synod grants the King two Tenths, 87 By a Decree therein Students of both Universities were provided for, Ib.
Which was opposed and laid aside, 89 Pope Martin at pleasure fill'd the Episcopal Sees in Eng∣land, Ib. Whose Clergy were quiet du∣ring the Council of Con∣stance, Ib. Martin first claim'd an uni∣versal Right of Presenta∣tion, 90 In two years made thirteen Bishops in the See of Can∣terbury, Ib. His Appropriations censur'd, Ib. The English neglected in the Grants of the Roman Dignities, 91 Martin afterwards agreed to some redress, Ib. In uniting Parishes, Ib. And for a power to Bishops therein, Ib. For avoiding the Unions made in time of the Schism, Ib. For recalling Dispensations for nonresidence, Ib. For lessening the Number of Cardinals, and for their equal promotion, Ib. The King required that Pope not to meddle with his Presentations, 92 That no French be preferred in Aquitain, &c. Ib. That Irish Livings be given to those that understand English, Ib. That the Bishops there pro∣mote the English Speech only, Ib. That French be not preferr'd to Monasteries in Eng∣land, Ib. That the Pope supply the King with some of the English Mony, Ib. The Pope not answering fa∣vourably, 'twas declared the King would take his course, 93 The French and Germans declare against the Pope's Provisions, Ib. The former revived the Laws to restrain him, Ib. That if he were refractory, they'd disown him, Ib. The Pope's Interdict of the Church of Lyons remov'd by the Parliament of Paris, Ib. An Appeal from the King to the Pope High Treason, Ib. The Oppress'd Germans not redress'd, 94 The King besieges Roan, the Capital City of Norman∣dy, Ib.
Proposal of a Treaty betwixt England and France, Ib. From our King were sent the Archbishop and Earl of Warwick, 95 And Cardinal Ursini, as Mediator from the Pope, Ib. The Commissioners did not conclude, Ib. Our King demanded a Milli∣on of Crowns, Norman∣dy, Aquitain, and Pon∣thieu Dowry with his Mistress, Ib. The French straitned, refu∣sed all Terms, Ib. Roan holds out obstinately, 96 Where 'tis said an Apple was sold for 3 s. a Dog for 10 S. Ib. The Citizens helpless, their King being Lunatick, and the Kingdom in a Civil War, Ib. Upon suit made, they sur∣renderd, paying 365000 Crowns, 97 Here the King setled his Ex∣chequer and Courts for the Affair of Normandy, Ib. Took Meudon and Pontoise by storm; and others by surrender, Ib, Half a Tenth granted the King in a Synod, where Walker a Priest convict∣ed of Witchcraft, for which he abjured, and some of Wickliff's Followers re∣canted, 98, 99 Processions for the King's Suc∣cess, with whom the Duke of Burgundy made a pri∣vate League; who then had King, Queen and Daughter of France in's power, 100 Our King at Troyes marries the said Daughter Catha∣rine, on agreement, him∣self should be Regent, and their Children succeed to the Crown of France, Ib. These Conditions ratified, the Archbishop goes to France to congratulate the King, 100, 101 Who goes against the Dau∣phin his only Enemy, Ib. Took Montereau, Ib. Melun surrender'd, 102 The King returns to Eng∣land, Ib. Processions for four days, Ib. Queen Catharine Crowned, Ib. The Synod gives a Tenth, on condition, that it should be
Felony to geld a Priest, Ib. Moved to publish a late De∣cree with a Clause in fa∣vour of Monks and Priests, Ib. Decreed a Bishop take only 12 s. for Institution, and an Archdeacon for Indu∣ction, 104 Pope Martin denied Money besides the Tenths, &c. in order to unite the two Churches of France and England, Ib. The Archbishop recalls the Judges from the Con∣quests, and commanded the French to obey their Or∣dinaries, 105 The King hastens to France on his Brother's death, Ib. His Son Henry born at Windsor, Ib. The Queen recovered, goes to France, Ib. Pavia chosen by Pope Martin for a General Council, ac∣cording to that of Con∣stance, 106 A Provincial Synod at Lon∣don, Ib. Whence Delegates were de∣signed, Ib. But through Benedict the Thirteenth's Interest the Pavian Council is dissol∣ved, called to Siena, and seven years after to Basil, 107 H. Webb for preaching without Orders, whipp'd in three principal Cities, Ib. William Taylor's honest Principles condemned as impious, 108 King Henry the Fifth dies of a Fever at Bois de Vin∣ciennes, 109 For which his Father-in-law pining away, died with grief within twenty days, 110 The King's Body buried at Westminster, Ib. His Brothers were left his Son Henry's Guardians, Ib. Great loss of a King so ver∣tuous, so generally and princely qualified; of sin∣gular good fortune and esteem thereupon, Ib. Duke of Glocester calls a Parliament, 111 The hopes the Archbishop con∣ceived of young King Hen∣ry, Ib.
Three Reasons for calling the Parliament, viz. to assign the King Governors, and consult about the Peace, and for the defence of the Realm, 112 Jethro's Advice, Ib. The Duke of Glocester con∣firm'd Protector, and the Archbishop named First of the Council, 113 But he retired to his Function, Ib. Founded a College at Higham Ferrers, Ib. And a large Hospital, 114 The Considerable Revenues of which were augmented by his Brothers Robert and William, Ib. A Synod held by him at Lon∣don, Ib. The Dauphin crown'd King of France at Poictiers, Ib. Whereupon preparation was made for War, 115 The Regent of France and Duke of Burgundy oppose the Dauphin, Ib. The former sent for Supplies from England, Ib. The Bishop of Winchester moves for Money in the Synod, Ib. Which now wants Henry the Fifth, 116 As Henry the Sixth is like to go without their Money, the Clergy's Estates being already so much drained, and Livings fallen so low, Ib. Being also alledged, that the power of granting Tenths was taken away, Ib. The Bishop succeeded no bet∣ter in the Lower House; and so the Synod was ad∣journed, 116, 117 At the next Sessions half a Tenth was granted by the Higher House on condition the Proctors consented; but refused by the Lower House, Ib. The Synod dissolved, Ib. At the next half a Tenth's given with much ado, 118 Hoke and Drayton's Here∣sy; and Russell denies personal Tythes to be Jure Divino, 118, 119 In his absence proclaimed an Heretick, and prosecuted at Rome, 119, 120 Afterwards he abjured his Error in England, 120
H. Beaufort Bishop of Win∣chester, an open Enemy to the Lord Protector, 121 Great Parties on each side ap∣pear in the Streets of Lon∣don, Ib. The Archbishop interposed, Ib. They then laid down their Arms, 122 The Bishop of Winchester accuses the Protector to the Duke of Bedford, Ib. Who hastens into England, Ib. Calls a Parliament, Ib. Finds out the causes of the Quarrel, and inclines them to the arbitration of the Archbishop and Duke of Exeter, &c. 123 Their Reconciliation confirm'd by the Votes of the whole Parliament, which grant∣ed Money for Levying Men, Ib. And half a Tenth granted in the Synod, 124 Bishop of Winchester made Cardinal, Ib. The Cap, with a Legacy for England, had been pro∣mised him by John the Twenty third, Ib. But the Archbishop had shewn that the Pope's Legates de∣rogated from the Royal Dignity, &c. Ib. Which he did in a Letter to the King, 125 Wherein there is a Specimen of the English Language at that time, Ib. No Suit to be made to the Pope, after Election, till the Pope has wrote to the King, and has got an An∣swer, 126 A Pope's Legate in England durante vitâ, without Precedent, 128 The Doctrine and Discipline of the Church dispensable by the Ordinaries, &c. not Legates, Ib. The Archbishop sends a Mi∣nute of the Legate's Office or Instructions to the King, 129 Such Legacies are extraordi∣nary, and not without great and notable cause; and no resident above two Months at most, Ib. The Instructions to be express and limited, Ib.
He deprecates the Oppressions and cormorant Exactions of the Legates, 130 Upon this Letter the King forbad the Bishop of Win∣chester the Cardinal's Cap. 131 After the King's death he is created Cardinal, 132 For whom our Pious Henry Archbishop is mistaken, [in Antiquit. Britan.] Ib. A vigorous Defender of the King's Authority, Ib. Whence he incurr'd the dis∣pleasure of Pope Martin the Fifth, Ib. The Archbishop's Character from Oxford, 133 Great Intercession made for him, Ib. Bishop of Winchester is Le∣gate in England, with a Faculty, Ib. So exercis'd the Power, that he was stiled the Rich Car∣dinal, 134 The Cardinal opposed by R. Caudray the King's Proctor, Ib. Promises not to exercise his Office without the King's leave, Ib. Laid down the Office of Chan∣cellor, as obliged; But kept his Place in the Council, with exception, 135 The Pope rais'd him against the Bohemians, who had pull'd down the Monaste∣ries, &c. 136 The Cardinal made General in the Bohemian War, &c. Ib. He could pardon Rapes on Nuns, &c. Ib. He was to demand a Tenth of the English Clergy for the War, Ib. In the next Synod half a Tenth is given the King, 137 And in another a Tenth and an half, Ib. Duke of Bedford had be∣sieg'd Orleans, Ib. For those Grants, the Mem∣bers of the Synod, &c. were freed from Arrests, 138 The Pope's Nuntio prevail'd not in the Synod, Ib. For shewing his Letters for a Tenth, he was denied, but got 8 d. per Mark from Livings, with a Salvâ praerogativâ Regiâ, Ib.
Heresy in holding the Pope to be Antichrist, &c. 139 Some recanted, others were imprison'd, Ib. Joan Dertford, by means of her Answer, acquitted, Ib. The Ordinaries charg'd to per∣secute the Wicklevists and Lollards, Ib. And Process ordered to be form'd against them, 140 Pope Martin troubled that he obtain'd not the Tenths, Ib. That his Bull was opposed at York, Ib. That his Legate was impri∣soned, Ib. He expostulated with the Duke of Bedford, Ib. The Pope is diverted with the prospect of the Council of Basil, 141 Wherefore Delegates are cho∣sen in a Synod at London with 2 d. per l. Charges, Ib. Their Instructions did run against Pluralities, and Non-residence, &c. Ib. The Synod gave the King a Tenth for the Siege of Or∣leans, 141, 142 Many other Towns revolted, Ib. And many English slain at Patau, Ib. The Synod decreed just Weights, Ib. Popes generally afraid of Councils, Ib. Martin appoints a President, 143 The Pope dies before he took his Place, Ib. Eugenius the Fourth suc∣ceeds him; and continues the President who was his Legate, Ib. The Pope adjudged subject to the Council, &c. 144 By their supreme Authority, the Council makes a Legate of Avignon, &c. Ib. The Pope alarm'd, removes the Council to Bologne, Ib. Is opposed, Ib. Delegates from London Sy∣nod to the Council of Basil, and others to the Pope, Ib. Half a Tenth given the King, 145 William Lyndewood Keep∣er of the Privy Seal, writ excellent Commentaries on
the English Constitutions, 145, 146 And was stiled, the Light of the Law, Ib. Complaint in the Synod a∣gainst the Vicars General, &c. Ib. Decreed, that a Judge of a Spiritual Court must have some degree of the Law, Ib. Archbishop of York as Car∣dinal, claim'd precedence of Canterbury, 147 The Archbishop of Canter∣bury on the contrary by ancient Prerogative, Ib. Referred to the Pope, Ib. The Arguments for Canter∣bury urgent, Ib. Overborn in the Cardinal's favour, 148 A Synod call'd at London on occasion of the difference between the Pope and Council, 149 The Pope is summoned to Ba∣sil, Ib. Of which London Synod consults, 150 And what Pope they should obey, if another be set up, Ib. Alledged 1st, that the Pope might dissolve a Council; and if another be set up, the Synod is to obey Euge∣nius, Ib. By which they resent a De∣cree made at Basil, trans∣ferring Votes from the Na∣tions to a few Delegates, Which was protested a∣gainst on the place, 150, 151 Eight new Delegates nomi∣nated, Ib. King Charles crown'd at Rhemes, Ib. A new Army against France designed, 152 Money desired of the Synod, Ib. After a denial, they gave three quarters of a Tenth, Ib. The Grievances of the Church at that time, 153 The Archbishop zealous to res∣cue her from the Oppressions of the Lawyers, Ib. By reason of the Plague, the Synod dissolved, Ib. The Duke of Burgundy re∣volts to the French, and Bedford dies, 154
The former occasion'd the ill success of the Treaty at Arras, Ib. The English driven out of Paris, &c. Ib. And generally the French surrender'd to Charles, 155 A new English Army set sail for Calais, Ib. The Clergy grant a Tenth, Ib. The Archbishop built a stately Edifice at Oxford, 156 Gave it to the Monks of St. Bernard, Ib. Seiz'd in Henry the Eighth's time, 157 Purchased by Thomas White, Merchant, who founded there St. John the Bap∣tist's College, Ib. From whence came many Re∣formers, Ib. The Archbishop chose another place for a College, Ib. The Edict of the Council of Basil against the Pope, backt by the Emperor, 158 The Council's Translation re∣voked, Ib. Ambassadors to the Council from Greece and Con∣stantinople, where the Emperor and Patriarch de∣signed to be present, if the Council would secure them, and defray their Charges, Ib. Which was agreed, Ib. But on Sigismond's death the Pope removes the Coun∣cil to Ferrara, whether he summon'd the Bishops from England, 159 This opposed by the Council, Ib. King Charles of France puts forth the Pragmatical Sanction against Annates, &c. 160 Which curb'd the Pope's Power there, till the time of Lewis the Twelfth, Ib. The English generally sided with the Pope, Ib. King Henry sent Ambassa∣dors to Ferrara, Ib. But their allowance was dis∣puted, Ib. The Pope gives away the Bi∣shoprick of Ely, in Com∣mendam, 161 The Archbishop in Synod op∣poses the Affair, which was frustrated by the Sur∣vivorship
of the then Bi∣shop, Ib. Propos'd in Synod to renew a Decree, that those not in Orders should not be bene∣ficed, Ib. Wherein the King concurred; and obtain'd it. Ib. The Council begun at Ferra∣ra, by occasion of the Plague removed to Flo∣rence, 162 Where the Greeks present sub∣mitted in Opinion to the Latines, Ib. Which so offended the Greek Church, that after their death they were not allow'd Christian Burial, Ib. The Council of Basil main∣tain'd its Authority, Ib. Deposed the Pope, Ib. (The English going to Fer∣rara) 163 And by the Deputies of four other Nations, Felix the Fifth elected Pope, Ib. A defence of the Council at Basil, Ib. The high Character of Lo∣dovic. Romanus, 164 In the next Age the Coun∣cil of Basil is condemned, 166 A Synod call'd at London, where the Statute of Prae∣munire is reckon'd a lamentable Church-Grie∣vance; in so far as a▪ Suit in an Ecclesiastical Court is construed a suing in Rome, 166, 167 They petition the King to li∣mit the Penalties to those who sue in a Foreign Court strictly taken, Ib. The King promises them im∣punity till a Parliament be called, 168 This Answer procured the King a Tenth, Ib. The Archbishop pray'd the King to suffer his College, almost finished, to be found∣ed in his Royal Name, 169 Letters Patent accordingly granted; Ib. The Chappel consecrated, Ib. A Warden of the College made, and twenty choice Fellows, with power to elect twenty more for Di∣vinity and Sciences, and the Civil and Canon Law, 170
Wherefore the Archbishop cal∣led the College All Souls, &c. Ib. Prescribed them Statutes, Ib. Was very liberal to Oxford and Canterbury Church, 171 Laid out a great Sum on the Structure begun by the Duke of Glocester, and two hundred Marks to the publick Chest of the Uni∣versity, 171, 172 With the Method of its dispo∣sal, besides the Decree men∣tioned concerning graduated Dignitaries, Ib. His Name decreed to be Re∣gistred among the Benefa∣ctors of Oxford Univer∣sity, 173 Having founded two Colleges, &c. Ib. He adorned the Cathedral of Canterbury, 174 Repaired Christ's Church there, building and fur∣nishing a Library, &c. Ib. Gave liberally towards the building of Croydon Church, and Rochester Bridge, Ib. His Death, Ap. 12. 1443. and magnificent Burtal, 175 Soon after which, a Fatal Change in England, 176 Which came to be governed by Queen Margaret, Ib. Whence the Kingdom was di∣vided, and the People op∣pressed, Ib. The French also under a Fe∣male, Revolt to King Charles, Ib. Normandy, then Aquitain lost, after 300 years pos∣session, Ib. Jack Cade's Insurrection, 177 The French invade Kent, and the Scots the Borders, Ib. The Civil War from the House of York, in which King Henry was impri∣son'd, exil'd, depriv'd of Crown and Life by Ed∣ward the Fourth. Ib. Our Chichele's Wisdom sup∣ported the Kingdom, Ib. From the Calamities of which he was by his happy Fate delivered, Ib. FINIS.
ERRATA of Moment are these Two. PAge 27. line 2. for Bulrush Spears, r. Poisons or Medicines. P. 35. l. 14. for Master of the Horse, r▪ Constable. Others less material, are left to the Candor of the Reader.
