D2695 R20542 11774310 48913
A View of the GOVERNMENT AND Publick Worship of God In the Reformed Churches beyond the SEAS. Wherein is shewed their Conformity and Agreement with the Church of ENGLAND, as it is established by the Act of Vniformity. By JOHN DUREL Minister of the French Church in the Savoy, by the special appointment of His MAJESTY. DEVS NOBIS HAEC OTIA FECIT blazon or coat of arms LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, MDCLXII.
PErlegi hunc Tractatum D. Johan∣nis Durelli, Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbyteri, coetusque Gallici in Sa∣cello Sabaudico, ex Mandato Regiae Majestatis, Ecclesiastae; quo Confor∣mitas & Consensus caeterarum Ecclesi∣arum Reformatarum cum nostra An∣glicana plenissimè demonstratur: qui liber adeo nihil continet bonis moribus aut Doctrinae quam nos in Ecclesia Anglicana profitemur, repugnans, ut illum apprimè utilem, quin & dignissi∣mum judicemus qui Typis mandetur. Georgius Stradling S. Th. Professor & Reverend. in Christo Patris Gil∣berti Episcopi Lond. Sacellanus Dome∣sticus.
intalgio of 12 figures sitting below the sun 2 Acts. 1. V. 4. OF THE GOVERNMENT and PUBLIKE WORSHIP OF GOD in the reformed Churches beyond ye SEAS London printed for R: Royston
To the Right Honourable, EDWARD Earle of Clarendon, Viscount Corn∣bury, Baron of Hindon, Lord High Chancellor of England, and Chancellor of the most famous University of OXFORD. MY LORD, WE being such a dull Gene∣ration of Men, as I think the like was never heard of before; I doubt whe∣ther there be many that take notice, as they ought, of that no less Pious than Ingenious Motto engraven under your Lordships Coat of
Arms, DEUS NOBIS HAEC OTIA FECIT; which I would English thus in the Language of Scripture, This is the Lords doing; wherefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give Glory; supposing your Lordship would have it understood chiefly in that sense, though not excluding the other, which it may have. As for me, My Lord, I make it the Ordinary Text of my Daily Meditations, and so I conceive every man in these three Nations ought to do, from him who is the supreme Head and Governour over all, to the meanest and most inconsiderable Member of the Body. Surely it is God that hath restored the King to his Throne, the Church to her Rights, the Parliament to their Priviledges and Ho∣nour, and the whole Nation to its true Li∣berty. And it is through the favour of that good, wise and just God, that now, in the head City of this Kingdom, where not long since Loyalty was Treason, and true Piety Superstition, I may freely and safely, not only speak but set forth my mind in Print, in behalfe of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, under the Patronage of
the Lord High Chancellor of the Realme. Deus nobis haec otia fecit. But yet, My Lord, although God be the principal Authour of this miraculous Restitution of all things amongst us, and his Invisible and Almighty Hand hath seldom appeared more visibly, or wrought more powerfully than in this most bles∣sed change, even to the astonishment of those that were Instrumental therein, who saw things succeed beyond their endea∣vours and expectation, (and some perhaps beyond their wishes and intentions too:) yet I say, My Lord, some instruments there were which God was pleased to make use of for that great work. He that un∣der God hath done the most in it, is with∣out all doubt the King himself, though he had contributed thereunto but that high repute of Justice, Wisdom, un∣daunted Courage, Constancy, and unpa∣rallell'd Goodness and Clemency, which His Majesty so deservedly acquired to Him∣selfe, even to admiration, during His af∣flictions, both abroad and at home, in the
esteem of all men that observe His Royal Person, as well Enemies as Friends. Un∣der that high Heaven, that Primum mobile of all, there were less Orbs which moved their several wayes to attain this rest: And it cannot be denied but some of them have had very noble and succesful Mo∣tions, the propitious influence whereof we now enjoy to our unspeakable comfort, and their immortal glory. But truly, My Lord, we should be unjust to him, who, under the Kings most Excellent Majesty, is the common and most impartial Dispen∣ser of Justice and Equity unto all in the Nation, if we did not acknowledge, that your Lordships part hath been the chiefest. For, although your Lordships place was such, as that by it, like the Spring in a Watch, which moveth all, & is not so much as seen it self; your Lordship did act much more than the World knows, or is fit to be known, by reason of the mysterious managing of State-affairs; nevertheless we all know far more than, I am sure, your Lordships Mode∣sty will give us leave to speak. No man can be ignorant, that though the King is now
the most accomplished Prince in the World, yet time there was that both His Age and the low Condition He was brought to, did need such a Wise and Faithful Counsellor, as the good Providence of God blessed Him with, when your Lordship was made to approach His Majesty. So great a Monarch was never put to so great straites. He was expelled His own Country, and bereaved of all, having not so much left as where to rest his Head in three great Kingdoms; and the might of His rebellious Subjects was come to such a height, that they thought themselves in a condition to say in Antichristian, that is, their own Language, We shall see no sorrow. And the truth is, they so long and so won∣derfully prospered, that in the apprehensi∣on of most men, both Friends and Foes, at home and abroad, they were looked up∣on as past all fear of being overthrown. Whence it was doubtless, that, most men being commonly led by their own Interest, His Majesty was so neglected for a long time by some of His Friends at home, and by His nearest Allies abroad. In that most sad and deplorable conjuncture, the King
needed two men; the one a Terentius Varro, qui de Republica non desperavit, who when Hannibal was Master of all, yet was so strong∣ly perswaded of the good Fortune of Rome, that he did not despair to see her deliver∣ed out of the hands of so powerful an E∣nemy: the other a Fabius Maximus, qui cunc∣tando restituit Rem, who by temporising, and watching prudently for a good oppor∣tunity, shewing himselfe now and then to the Enemy, to let him know that he had yet an Opposite, at last overthrew him. The one to cherish and keep up the hearts of honest men; the other wise∣ly to improve all occasions to the best ad∣vantage. I may truly say, My Lord, that your Lordship was both a Terentius Varro, and a Fabius Maximus to His Majesty. Nay, I may say, that your Lordship did go be∣yond them both, as indeed the difficulties you had to overcome, and the enemies to encounter, were far greater. Teren∣tius Varro is commended quod non desperave∣rit, in that he did not despaire of the good Fortune of Rome; and Fabius Maximus, in
that he did not precipitate any thing, but warily and patiently waited for favou∣rable Junctures and faire Opportunities of doing his business. But your Lordship did not onely, non desperare, not despaire, but alwayes bene sperare, hope well, nay, never so much as doubted of the good Fortune of England, that is, of the Kings Restau∣ration, of which your Lordship ever spoke as of a thing infallible, in the worst of times, and when it seemed scarce possible to any man. And it was ever your Lord∣ships judgement, that time having made known the Usurpers, and brought the Na∣tion to a right understanding of themselves, all things would come about to that bles∣sed pass we see them now; That Subjects weary of being slaves under the vilest Ty∣rants that ever were, would remember the good Old Dayes; and knowing that they had a lawful Prince, whom God had adorned with such Royal Endowments as would certainly make them happy under his just Government, their own interest would force them to cast themselves down at His Majesties Feet, that they might
have him to reign over them. So that it was chiefly required cunctare, to watch with Patience and Prudence, only letting the Rebels know, by appearing now and then, that they had a Master, who would call them one day to an account; And good Subjects, that they had a lawful and gra∣cious Soveraign, who was mindful of them. And thus it was, My Lord, that unus ho∣mo nobis, your Lordships most wise Coun∣sels by bringing in the King, and ending a long and most cruel Warre without bloodshed, did not only restituere, restore, but augere rem, encrease the glory and well∣fare of the Kingdom. For all which both we that are now alive, and they that shall succeed us in these now Fortunate Islands, must ever praise God and Honour your Lordships Name and Memory. One thing more, My Lord, was necessa∣rie to the compleating of our happiness; That as our civil broyles ended peaceably, so our Controversies of Religion should be decided in the like manner, and our Temple built up anew, like that of Solo∣mon, without any noyse of Hammer or Ax, or
any other tool heard about it. And it is known to all, and to those very men, who I fear will at last be judged on all hands wor∣thy to be called the Sons of strife, how great and earnest your Lordships endea∣vours have been, to bring all such dif∣ferences to an happy issue, nothing being more dear to your Lordship than the Peace of the Church. But as God when he had brought the Children of Israel into the promised Land, left amongst them some of the old Inhabitants, to be as Thorns in their sides; so it seemes he is pleased in his Wisdome that some Canaanites, I mean some Zelots, should still remain in this Land whither he hath brought his peo∣ple back, to be incentives to set us for∣ward in well-doing. Nevertheless I con∣ceive it the duty of all those who love the peace of the Church, to contribute what they can to procure it. Hence it is, My Lord, that I have endeavoured to do something that way, by shewing them who are not satisfied with our Church-Government and Publick Worship by Law e∣stablished, That they are the onely men in
the World of all those that profess the Protestant Religion, who scruple to sub∣mit to the one, and joyn with us in the other; And that if they refuse to con∣form in all those things which are impo∣sed by lawful Authority upon all the Mem∣bers of the Church of England; they must likewise renounce the Communion of all other Reformed Churches, there being not one in all the World, but doth impose things of like nature, against which the same Exceptions may be made with as much reason; nay all and every one of those Ceremonies which are here impo∣sed, being also imposed in one or other of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas; and all and more, in some of them, which yet are not therefore accounted Su∣perstitious in the judgement of other Chur∣ches which do not use the same. Now, My Lord, many Reasons there are which have moved me to set forth this Essay of mine under your Lordships Patro∣nage. First, I certainly know that any thing tending to Peace and Unity in the Church, is most welcome to your Lorship. Next,
though I confess that it is too mean a thing to be offered to a Person in so high a Place yet that great Bounty and Kindness of your Lordship, whereof I have so often had ex∣perience beyond the Seas, being nothing altered now at home; And that Prosperity wherewith God hath blessed your Lordship, both in your Personal, so well deserved Pre∣ferments, and in your Royal Alliance by that most accomplished Princess with one of the most Illustrious Princes under Hea∣ven, having not rendred your Lordship in any thing more haughty or less accessible, but that you are still the same to all your Servants; it might be thought an injury to your Lordship to entertain the least doubt, that it would not be acceptable by reason of its meanness. But the chiefest Reason I have, My Lord, is this, that it being my intention to contribute something towards the bring∣ing of those that stand yet at a distance from our Church, to a better understanding of her, and so to full Communion with her, I thought that I was to prefix no other name to my Work, but such an one as might be well liked of them all; And such is I
conceive, or ought to be, your Lordships Name, unless they be the most ungrateful of all men. But I have trespassed upon your Patience and against the Publick Interest, by detaining your Lordship so long, for which I crave your pardon, humbly desi∣ring leave to entitle my selfe thus publickly with all due respect, MY LORD, Your Lordships Most humble and most obedient Servant, JOHN DUREL.
THE CONTENTS. The Introduction. THe Presbyterians have given out that the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, were as much averse to the Go∣vernment and publick worship of God in the Church of England, as themselves. Others likewise have been so perswaded both abroad and at home, and by what means. They all mistake; the design to un∣deceive them, by shewing that the Reform. Churches beyond the Seas are no stran∣gers or enemies either to our Church-Government, or publick worship. The whole Treatise divided in two parts, pag. 1, 2, 3, 4. SECT. I. Of the conformity of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas with the Reformed Church of England. THe Reformed Churches that follow the confession of Augsburgh have the same Ceremonies with the Church of England, and many more of the same kind; yet approved by the Ref. Churches of France, p. 4. Subordination of Pastors in all the said Churches, and in some Bi∣shops and Archbishops both name and thing, p. 4, 5. They have all set Forms of Prayers, they observe Holy dayes, they have set times for Fasting, magnificent Churches, Organs, Surplice, Church-Ornaments, Cross in Baptism. They re∣ceive the Communion kneeling. All which notwithstanding it is reported that the Presbyterians offer to have communion with them, p. 56. & p. 314. Subordination of Pastors in the Ref. Churches more peculiarly so called, p. 6. Superintendents in effect the same with Bishops, p. 7. No aversion against the name of Bishops in the Ref. Churches, the reason why not used in some of them, p. 7. Bishops in several Ref. Churches name and thing, Ibid. Episcopal Go∣vernment opposed in Hungary & Tran∣sylvania by some schismatical Innova∣tors; defended by an Epistle of Paraeus, and upheld by Dr. Basire, p. 8, 9. Cano∣nical obedience sworn to Bishops, p. 10. Subordination of Pastors acknowledged to be of Apostolical Institution, p. 11. How sollitous the Ref. Churches of Bo∣hemia, called Fratres Bohemi, were to preserve lawful Bishops over them, p. 11, 12. Set Forms of Prayer and Liturgies in all the Ref. Churches, not one excep∣ted, p. 13. To be always used. Smectym∣nuus mistake in this, p. 16, 17. Calvin for imposing set Forms, not only for the ordinary occasions of Church Assemblies, but for extraordinary, p. 18, 19. He u∣sed the Bidding of Prayer. Proper Psalms at Geneva, not only for Sun∣days, but for certain hours of the day, p. 20. In other Ref. Churches they have the Epistle and Gospel of the day, Ibid. The Kirk of Scotland used the Book of Common Prayer at the beginning of Re∣formation, p. 21. Of the Apparel of Ministers in the
Ref. Churches; They wear a Gown and Cassock with a Girdle; They wear Caps; Calvin wore always a Gown and a Cap, p. 21, 22. At Geneva and in France the Ministers leave their ordinary appa∣rel and take other Vestments when they perform Divine Service, p. 23. Surplices used by Reformed Ministers at the time of Divine Service, p. 24. Of Holy dayes kept in the Reformed Churches of Switzerland, Holland, Germany, Poland, Lithuania, Bohe∣mia, Hungary, Transylvania, p. 25, 26. Sermons proper for Holy days, in the Ref. Churches, ib. Set Fasts, Fridays, Ember-weeks kept in Ref. Churches, 27. Of Churches. In Holland, Ger∣many, Switzerland, Geneva they have kept the very same Churches, and in the same manner as in time of Popery. Historical Pictures in the glass windows at Geneva, p. 28. Cros∣ses on Churches, the use of the Cross for meer signification allowed, p. 29. So∣lemn Dedications of Churches. The Chancels stand as in former times. They have their Fonts of stone. They have and use the very same stone Altars whereon Mass was said. The name Altar used in Ref. Churches, p. 30. I is indifferent in it self which way the Communion Ta∣ble standeth, so the publick Order of the Church be not violated. When it is in the midst of the Church, Presbyterian-wise, it standeth Altar-wise, and not when it standeth against the wall at the upper end of the Church, p. 30. 31. Silver and guilt Chalices and Basons for the Com∣munion, p. 32. They enter reverently into the Church, ibid. How they behave themselves in the Church, p. 33. Reverence had at the naming the name of Jesus, p. 34. Morning and Evening Prayers read every day of the week out of the Book of their set Forms. The con∣tents of their Books of Common Prayer, ibid. Calvin approved that the Ab∣solution of sins should be pronounced by the Minister to the people kneeling; ne∣vertheless it is wanting in the Lturgy of Geneva, and why, p. 35. Proper Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels, the Epistle read at the Altar. The three Creeds vsed, the Lords Prayer often repeated, and said before and after meals, p. 36. The Ministers ought to say some Prayers standing, whilest they for whom he pray∣eth are down upon their knees. The peo∣ple standeth at the rehearsal of the Creeds, Noble men and Gentry did use to draw their Swords at the same time. Prayers said aloud by the people after the Minister. The Lords Prayer and the Creed sung, p. 37. The Magnificat, Be∣nedictus, Nunc dimittis, and the Ten Commandments sung. A short Prayer in Rhime sung in the French Ref. Chur∣ches afer the Ten Commandments by the people, falling at that time upon their knees. The Nunc dimittis sung like∣wise by the people kneeling in the same Churches. Psalms sung by course, p. 38. They sing Anthems. Instruments of mu∣sick used in the Church, Organs, several Hymns and Spiritual Songs besides them of the Scripture, p. 39. The Te Deum. Collects for the day. Collects on the seven last words of Christ, and for the hours
of Christs Passion. The people sayes Amen aloud at the end of the Prayers. The Litany said every Friday after the manner of the Church of England by the Minister and people, and in Lent every Wednesday besides, and upon o∣ther Fasting days, p. 40. The Gloria Patri sung after most Hymns, p. 41. The sign of the Cross used in Baptisme, and other parts of Divine Service. Ma∣ny Children of the French Reformed Church of Charenton christned in the Kings and Lord Embassadors Chappel at Paris according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, ibid. Significant ceremonies used in the Reformed Chur∣ches, against which the same objections may be made as against ours, and that with greater reason, p. 42. Confirma∣tion in many of the Reformed Churches, Calvin wished it might be restored ac∣cording to the use of the Primitive Church, p. 43. The Communion con∣stantly celebrated at certain set times, p. 44. Calvin for a Communion at least once every month, p. 45. The holy Communion received kneeling, what opi∣nion the Bohemian, Polonian, and Lithuanian Churches have of those that sit at the Communion, p. 46. The Minister breaketh the Bread when he mentions the breaking of it, and he ta∣keth the Cup in his hands likewise at the naming of it. Ring in Marriage and in Sponsalibus, p. 47. The Churching of Women. The solemn Burial of the dead with Hymns, Prayers, &c. p. 40. The Communion of the Sick; Calvin for it, p. 49. The Ministers of the French Reformed Churches would administer it to them, if they were permitted, p. 50. Alienation and Detention of Church Lands accounted Sacriledge, p. 51. Ʋni∣formity in every Reformed Church, p. 53. Subscription required, p. 54. The French Reformed Churches forbid sit∣ting at the Communion, and will have all to conform without any variety, p. 55. How they proceed against such as move debates about their set Forms of Prayer, &c. p. 56. How Calvin would have Non-conformists used, p. 59. SECT. II. That in those things, in which some Reformed Churches be∣yond the Seas differ from the Reformed Church of England, they do not pretend she should rather conform to them, then they to her, and that they never desired the abolition of our Church-Government, or of our Book of Common-Prayer, but that they approve of both, and wish we may ever enjoy the benefit of both in peace and quietness. THe bold presumption of the Au∣thors of the Petition for Peace, (so called) when they say the Pastors of most of the Reformed Churches abroade take the Conformity with the Church of England to be a sin; and by what means they are fallen into it, p. 60. No dislike of our Church Govern∣ment, or publick Worship of God in
the publick Records of any Reformed Church, p. 61. The general silence of the Reformed Churches about those things in which they differ from us, is a sufficient Ar∣gument that they do not condemn the said things as sinful, p. 62. Those of the Reformed Churches be∣yond the Seas who come over, joyn with us in our publick Worship, by the advice of their Pastors; and the Pastors them∣selves, whereof many instances, p. 63. Those of the Reformed Churches a∣broad joyn with us in our publick Wor∣ship in their very Country when there is any congregation where it is celebrated, p. 65. If it happens that any member of the Reformed Churches abroad speake a∣gainst the Reformed Church of Eng∣land, he is censured for it by their Sy∣nods, p. 67. That the Ministers of the Refor∣med Churches abroad blame those that refuse to conform to the Church of Eng∣land, when occasion is offered, and that they hold them for Schismaticks, and are scandalized at them, whereupon a Letter of Monsieur de l'Angle one of the Ministers of the Reformed Church of Roan, p. 70. A whole French Reformed Congre∣gation hath conformed to the Reformed Church of England, p. 73. Approved by the Reformed Chur∣ches in France; by that of Paris, p. 76. A Letter of the Princess of Tu∣renne, p. 78. The submitting of the French Con∣gregation well taken at Geneva, p. 81. False reports made abroad against the Church of England, to beget a mis∣understanding betwixt her and other Reformed Churches, p. 85. The submitting of the French Con∣gregation well taken at Bordeaux, p. 86. A Letter of Monsieur Goyon one of the Ministers of the Reformed Church of Bordeaux, p. 87. A Letter of Monsieur Rondelet, one of the Ministers of the same Congre∣gation, p. 89. The submitting of the French Con∣gregation approved by the Ministers of Caën and by them of Roan. Ex∣tracts of two Letters written by Mon∣sieur du Bosc Minister of the Refor∣med Church of Caën, and Monsieur de l'Angle the Son Minister of that of Roan, p. 90, 91. Several Ministers of most of the Re∣formed Churches conforming to the Church of England, and joyning with the said congregation, p. 92. The Reformed Churches beyond the Seas have admitted into Livings the English Ministers that were expelled during the late troubles, p. 93. All the Reformed Churches hold that every National Church hath pow∣er to make Laws for her self in outward things, and that they may vary, p. 95. Proved 1. by their Practise, p. 96. Proved 2. by the express words of the
several confessions of their Faith; by that of the Bohemian and Moravian Churches, p. 96. And by the confes∣sion of the Helvetian, Polonian, Hungarian, Transylvanian and other Reformed Churches, p. 99. And by the confession of the Belgick Churches. And by the confession of the Reformed Churches of France and of Geneva, p. 101. The Church of England of the same judgement, 103. So is Calvin, p. 105. what he and others mean when they say, such Laws as are made by every National Church for regulating of outward things, ought not bind the Consciences, p. 107. Beza of the same judgement, p. 113. And Zanchius, Paraeus, Alstedius, Spanhemius, p. 115. The conclusion of the Premises, p. 116. Those few Reformed Churches that want Subordination of Ministers, ap∣prove the Episcopacy of the Church of England. The Reformed Churches of Holland do not condemn Episco∣pacy, p. 117. Nor the Reformed Churches of France, p. 118. How it is come to pass that they have no Bi∣shops, and that they have Reformed outward things in the manner we see them, p. 119. When any Bishops hath embraced the Reformed Religi∣on, they have shewed their readiness to submit to them. An example of this in their submission to the Bishop of Troyes, p. 120. A Letter of Monsieur du Bosc Minister of Caën, p. 122. The Extracts of two Letters of Monsieur Gaches Minister of Paris. A very Remarkable Letter of Monsieur le Moine Minister of Roan about Episcopacy, p. 126. A notable Letter of Monsieur de l'Angle upon the same subject, and His Majesties Restauration, p. 141. What opinion they of the Reformed Churches of France have of the English Pres∣byterians when known to them, p. 144. The Extract of a Letter of Mon∣sieur Drelincourt Minister of Paris, printed at Geneva, p. 147. Doctor Peter du Moulin hath maintained the Rights of the English Bishops in the publick Schools of the the Ʋni∣versity of Sedan, p. 150. Moses Amyraldus will have Episcopacy maintained in these Reformed Chur∣ches where it is established, finding as much ground for it in Scripture as for Presbytery, p. 149. The Reformed Church of Geneva doth not condemn Episcopacy. Pres∣bytery a Foundling, p. 151. Ge∣neva a Free and Imperial City, p. 152. Her Priviledges and the pow∣er of her Bishops, p. 154. Their Disputes. They were Papists not Pro∣testants that forced the Bishop out of the City, p. 158. The Emperor Charls the Fifth doth acknowledge them to be a Free and Imperial City, and for∣bids them to swear Allegiance to any but Himself and the Empire, p. 159. The Bishop of Geneva fled from the City two years before Reformation, p. 160. when the City was Refor∣med, they offered to submit to their Bi∣shop
if he would embrace the Reformed Religion, ibid. Calvin no enemy to Episcopacy, p. 161. He rather holds it to be of Dvine and Apostolical Institution, p. 164. He will have the Bishops that embrace the Reformed Religion to keep their place and authority over their Diocese, p. 164. Calvin no Co∣venanter, p. 165. His reverence to the Bishops of the Church of Eng∣land, p. 166. Beza professes himself to be no ene∣my to the Bishops of the Church of England, p. 167. A Caution for the reading of the Writings of the Divines of the Refor∣med Churches, p. 168. Jacobus Lectius a Senator of Ge∣neva, and a publick Reader of the Laws in the Ʋniversity, acknowledges the Bishops of England to be Scripture Bishops, p. 169. Spanhemius writing from Geneva gives the Arch-Bishop of Armagh all his Titles, and prayes that the Pre∣lates of Great Britaine may ever enjoy their Authority, p. 170. Doctor John Diodati blameth them that did rise against their Pastors in the Church of England, and is astonished at the change of the most beauteous face of our Church, p. 171. Geneva hath acknowledged neither Parliamentary nor Synodical Authority in the late Rebels, though by them pre∣tended, p. 173. The name of Jesus thus abridged I H S, and thus inserted in the Picture of the Sun used by the Church of Ge∣neva for her Seal, p. 174. The fate of the Church of England to be blamed for using the same ceremonies that other Reformed Churches use with∣out any offense, p. 175. The Office for the Communion read at the Communion Table, ibid. The words quoted out of one of Cal∣vins Letters, In Anglicana Liturgia, qualem describitis, multas video, &c. no disparagement to the present Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England, p. 176. Calvin made the Liturgie of Geneva as inoffensive as possible to Papists, so that many of them use the Prayers thereof, p. 180. He sayes of his own Liturgy and Reforma∣tion, that it is not perfect but only tole∣rable, p. 181. Calvin never saw our Liturgy, and speaks of it upon the In∣formation he had of the enemies thereof, wherefore he sayes, qualem discribitis, which words are omitted by the Author of the History of the troubles of Frank∣fort, p. 182. The way of singing Psalms used by the Presbyterians judged inept by a National Synod of the Reformed Chur∣ches of France, p. 183. What opinion the Reformed and Papists abroad have of the Litur∣gie of the Church of England, p. 184. Ludovicus Capellus Divinity Rea∣der at Saumur hath written a whole Treatise, wherein he sheweth the law∣fulness, use, and necessity of a set Form of Liturgy against the new in∣vention
of a Directory, which the Pres∣byterians intended to introduce into the Church of England, and had a publick Dispute thereof in the Divinity School, where he defended our Book of Com∣mon Prayer as good and sound, against the Presbyterians, whom he calls fro∣ward, peevish, and supersti ions, p. 191. What would be in all likelihood the judgement of a Council of the Dele∣gates of all the Ref. Churches, if called to decide the present controversies which the Church of England hath with some of her children, p. 199. Such a oun∣cil feigned & supposed to be called toge∣ther; The Delegates whereof, for the Belgick Churches, Bogermannus the Praeses of the Synod of Dort, Ludovi∣cus de Dieu, Andreus Rivetus, and Fridericus Spanhemius. For those of France, Dr. Peter du Moulin, Mon∣sieur de l'Angle the Father, Mr. Dre∣lincourt, Mr. Goyon, Mr. Daillé, Mr. Amyraut, Mr. Capel, Mr. Bo∣chart of Caën, Mr. Bochart of Alen∣çon, Mr. Vauquelin, Mr. Martel, Mr. Gaches, Mr. du Bosc. Mr. de l'Angle the Son, Mr. le Moyne, Mr. Morin, Mr. Daillé the Son, Mr. Ron∣delet. For the Church of Geneva, Calvin, Beza, Sadeel, Danaeus, Di∣odati, Mr. Chabret. For the Pala∣tinate, Hieronymus Zanchius. For Hessen, Mr. Fisher. For the other Reformed Churches of Germany, Mar∣tin Bucer. For the Switzers, Oeco∣lampadius, Bullinger, Peter Martyr, Gualterus. For the Fratres Bohemi, Joannes Amos Comenius. For the Lithuanian and Polonian Churches, Johannes de Kraino Krainski. For the Hungarians and Transylvanians, Dr. Isaac Basire, p. 200. Lay-Elders supposed to be admitted into the Council. For Geneva, Jacobus Lectius and Casaubon. For Holland, Slmasius. For France, Dr. Porraeus, For the Reformed Churches accor∣ding to the confession of Augsburgh, Philip Melancthon, and George Prince of Anhalt, p. 201. Calvin supposed to be chosen the Praeses, ibid. All our present controversies compre∣hended in four general Quaeres propoun∣ded to them to be considered and decided, and their judgment required upon seve∣ral peculiar uses, customs, and ceremo∣nies of the Church of England, now most excepted against by some men, as the Surplice, the Sign of the Cross, kneeling at the receiving of the Com∣munion, reading of the Apocrypha, keeping of Holy dayes, bowing at the naming of the name Jesus, the Lenten Fast before Easter, set Forms, Instru∣ments of Musick in the Church, ibid. Joannes Amos Comenius, p. 202. Martin Bucer, p. 215. Peter Martyr. p. 239. Hieronymus Zanchius, p. 252. Bogermannus, p. 268. Ludovicus de Dieu, Rivetus, Spanhemius, Peter du Moulin, Mr. de l'Angle the Father, p. 269. Mr. Drelincourt, Mr. Goyon, Mr. Daillé the Father, p. 270. Mr. Amyraut, p. 271.
Ludovicus Capellus, Mr. Bochart of Caën, p. 276. Mr. Bochart of Alençon, p. 277. Mr. Vauquelin, Mr. Martel, Mr. Gaches, Mr. du Bosc, p. 271. Mr. de l'Angle the Son, Mr. Mo∣rin, Mr. Daillé the Son, Mr. Ronde∣let, Mr. le Moine, p. 279. Theodorus Beza, p. 280. Sadeel, Danaeus, Diodati, p. 281. Mr. Chabrey. p. 282. Many things observed in the Mass-Book by the Reformed Ministers a∣gainst Popery, p. 283. Bullinger, p. 286. Gualterus, p. 290. John de Kraino Krainski, Doctor Basire, p. 292. Mr. Fisher, Melancthon, p. 293. George Prince of Anhalt, p. 294. Jacobus Lectius, p. 295. Casau∣bon, p. 296. Salmasius, p. 297. Doctor Porraeus, p. 298. Mr. Calvin pronouncing in the name of all upon every one of the Quaeres propounded, p. 306. The Conclusion, p. 309. The Appendix. THe Preface of the Agenda of the Polonian and Lithuanian Chur∣ches, p. 321. An Extract of Paraeus his Letter Ad Fratres Hungaros, p. 337. A Letter of Doctor Peter du Moulin the Son touching a passage left out of Blondel's Apologia pro Hiero∣nymi Sententiâ, p. 439. An Ex∣tract of a Letter of Monsieur Leger, one of the Ministers of Geneva in the name of his Collegues, to Doctor Isaac Basire being at Constantinople, An. 1653. p. 341. The Liturgy of the Church of England asserted in a Sermon Prea∣ched at the Chappel of the Savoy, before the French Congregation, upon the first day that Divine Service was there celebrated according to the Liturgy of the Church of England.
A View of the Government and Publick VVorship of God in the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas. THE INTRODUCTION. IT hath been observ'd by others as wel as by my self,The Introdu∣ction into the following Treatise. that those who did not approve of the Government & Publick Worship of God by Law established in the Church of England, and who have called themselves by the name of Pres∣byterians, and have been of late years so called by others, have alwayes pretended a Conformity with the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas; giving out, that the said Churches are of the same judgement with them, as
touching these matters; That they blame the same things which they themselves find fault with in our Church; That no such things are practiced in any other Reformed Churches; And that the said Churches are no less zealous then they to have the Church of England Reformed after the pattern of their new Reformation here amongst themselves. And they have delivered this their Assertion with such con∣fidence, that they have therein gained belief, not only from the simpler sort of their Disciples, but likewise from many of their Adversaries here in England, and from most of the Protestants abroad at first, till they were better informed; nay, to our amazement, themselves seem to have been so perswaded, though there is no such thing at all, as I shall undoubtedly make it appear by this following Treatise. 2. Through this their pretended conformity with Pro∣testants in forraign parts, they endeavoured to get credit both abroad and at home. And the truth is, that for a time they missed not of their aim. But our Brethren of the Re∣formed Churches beyond the Seas have long since been un∣deceived by those whom God was pleased to disperse a∣mongst them, during the late captivity of this Church, and usurpation of His Majesties Authority. Nevertheless divers of our English Brethren, and likewise some of the best and most obedient Sons of the Church of England, continue still in the same mistake. Wherefore I hope that by clearing it, I shall oblige them both, at least I shall displease neither. I speak of them both as being in one common error. For so indeed they are; but with this difference, that the anctent Protestants have been deceived by the new Presbyterians, and the Presbyterians have deceived themselves., 2 Tim. 3.13. As for the Protestants, they deserve in some measure to be excused; for who would not be apt to believe, that, There is such a vast difference between the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England and the Liturgies of all other Reformed Churches, as that it keeps them at a distance from us, and us from full Commu∣nion with them; and that all other Reformed Churches, though they use Liturgies, yet do not bind their Ministers to the use of them; when so grave an Author asSect. 2. q. 1, 2. Smectymnuus, that is,
several worthy Divines of great note and fame in the Church of Christ, asMr. Mnton in his Preface: one of their own characteriseth him, did affirm it for a most certain verity? And who could reasonably doubt, that the Book of Common Prayer had proved an of∣fence to the Reformed Churches abroad, and that it was abolish∣ed, and the Directory set in its place, to answer the expectation of other Reformed Churches (and yet mark that Smectymnuus confesseth they have all Liturgies, and no Directory) when it was thus given out by the Lords and Commons assembled in Par∣liament,In the Ordi∣nance for ta∣king away the Book o Com∣mon Prayer, and in the Preface to the Directory. and by the Assembly of Divines sitting at Westmin∣ster? But as for either Lords and Commons, though assem∣bled in Parliament, or an Assembly of Divines, though pre∣tended to have been chosen out of all the Kingdom, to have delivered so manifest untruths (I beg their pardon for speak∣ing so plainly, and I protest I would forbear it, if I could express my self otherwise without prejudice to truth) and that in an Ordinance, and in a Preface to a Directory for the publick worship of God throughout the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, I confess I know not what excuse can be found for them. For they have done it either knowingly and maliciously, with a design to put a cheat upon the three Nati∣ons and the Christian world; or ignorantly and by meer mi∣stake, believing that it was so indeed. I have more charity for most of them, then to suppose they did it knowingly and maliciously. And if they did it ignorantly, let others judge what blame they deserve for so bold a presumption, and what credit is to be given to what they say without good evidence. 3. Now to undeceive both them and others that have been misled by them, (which is my only intention at present; though I am not out of hopes, and it is my most earnest de∣sire, that God may send his blessing upon this my endeavour, to bring nearer one to another, those that stand yet too far off, in part upon the aforesaid untrue suppositions.) I will first report what Conformity other Reformed Churches have with this our Reformed Church of England, both in Government and publick Worship (which are the two Points in question) ac∣cording as I observed when I was amongst them, or as I have
learned out of their publick Records and private Books, or heard from some members of the several Churches, which I will mention here, who are men worthy of credit for what they say. Secondly, I will shew by the same evidences that in those things in which they differ from our Church, they do not condemn her, nor pretend we should rather conform to them then they to us: and that they never desired the abolition of our Church-Government, or of our Book of Common Prayer, but that they approve of both, and wish we may ever enjoy the benefit of both in peace and quietness; and that, besides the aforesaid evidences, by many private Letters written of late, by the most renowned, pious, lear∣ned Ministers that are now living in the French Reformed Churches, and at Geneva. SECT. I. Of the Conformity of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, with the Reformed Church of England. The Refor∣med Churches that follow the confession of Augsburgh, have the same Ceremonies with the Church of England.1. I If we take for Reformed Churches those which follow the Confession of Augsburgh, as I see no reason but we should (the French Reformed Churches do I am sure, as to the points in controversie.) If, I say, we take those Churches for Reformed, we shall find amongst them the very same both Government and Worship in every particular, at which some are offended here amongst us. Nay they go far beyond us in many things of the same kind, which our Church hath thought fit to lay aside; and nevertheless a National Assem∣bly of the Reformed Churches of France held at Charenton, Anno 1631. hath declared, that there is neither Idolatry nor Superstition in their publick Worship. Subordinati- of Pastors in all the said Churches.2. There is never a National Church amongst them, but hath Subordination of Pastors. In the Imperial Towns and other Free States, as Strasburg, Ʋlm, Augsburg, Nuremberg,
Hamburg, Lubeck, &c. and in all the Territories of the So∣veraign Princes of Germany, Saxony, Brandenburg, Lawenburg, Brunswick, Luneburg, Baden, Onspach, Mecklenburg, &c. who have not the Title and Dignity of Kings, there are ei∣ther Abbots, as in the Dukedom of Wirtemberg, who are the Superiors of a certain number of Churches, and who have a Praepositus over them all, who is as the Arch-Bishop; or Su∣perintendents, as in all the afore-mentioned States and Coun∣tries. These Superintendents have the power of Ordination, as the Bishops of the Church of England have; and they are accounted for no other then Bishops, though they have but the Latine title of that Office. Of which I shall shew anon the reason, which is far other then some men do imagine. And in Denmark, Sweden and Norway,And in some Bishops and Arch-Bishops. which are the only three Kingdoms, that have embraced the Augustan Confession, they have Bishops and Arch-Bishops, both name and thing, as suiting best with Monarchy. 3. As for the publick Worship of God,All of them have set forms. they have all of them set Forms of Prayer, not one excepted, some differing from ours, some being in a manner the same. They observe Holy dayes; they have set Times for fasting; they have very mag∣nificent and stately Buildings very richly adorned for their Churches. They sing not only Psalms, but many Hymns and spiritual songs, whereof some were anciently used in the Church, and some are of Luthers own making: And they sing them with Organs and other instruments of Musick. They sing An∣thems in the same manner that we do. In many places they wear Surplices and other Church-Ornaments. They use the Cross in Baptism; they receive the Communion kneling. In fine, they have Conformity with us in all Rites of Divine Worship, and yet in all these no Idolatry nor Superstition, ac∣cording to the judgement of the French Reformed Churches. And I insist the less upon it, because I take it for granted; and because those of the Presbyterian perswasion will say perhaps that they did not intend to conform to them, but that they would rather have reformed them in all the said things. Though it is well known their good friend Master Duraeus, who hath been so often in Germany, sometimes from
the Presbyterians, sometimes from the Independents, some∣times from both, never moved any thing about their Litur∣gies and Ceremonies, when he propounded to unite them all as Brethren professing the same Religion; approving, or at least tolerating in them, those very things (and some which according to their known principles, they must hold to be far the worst) for which they have judged their Mother-Church worthy of that hard usage she hath received at their hands. Subordinati∣on of Pastors in the Refor∣med Churches more peculi∣arly so cal∣led.4. But to speak now of those other Churches, more pe∣culiarly called Reformed, with whom we agree in all Doctri∣nals, and indeed in the main both for Discipline and Rites, not∣withstanding some small things in which we differ, as all National Churches do one from another. For I do not know any two, unless it be perhaps them of England and Ireland, which are alike in all things. I have observed that as some Gentlemen in France, when they have put all their titles and petty Signories after their name, use to adde an &c. as if they had many more; so the Presbyterians, I suppose by a meer mistake, not out of any bravery, when they have reckoned the Reformed Churches of France, Holland and Geneva (which are the only Churches they can pretend any right to beyond the Seas, though with less reason then they believe, as shall appear) they usually add their &c. Nay some out-going the French Gentlemen, or following the Cadets of great houses (who use to take their eldest brothers titles, though they en∣joy nothing by them) as of late he that hath written the Pres∣byterian Apology, have added the Churches of Switzerland, as being of their society,Mr. Corbet. against all reason. For it is known of all who have enquired after it, that in the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, there is a Subordination amongst their Mini∣sters, viz. Superintendents, Pastors, and Deacons. And so in all other Reformed Churches in the Palatinate, in Hessen; in the Elector of Brandenburg his Dominions, as well amongst them whom they call Calvinists as amongst the Lutherans; in the Princedom of Anhalt in the City of Bremen; in Poland, and in the great Dukedom of Lithuania, &c. No Ministers in any of these Churches ought to be ordained, according to their
Discipline, without the Inspector or Superintendent; and in some, the Superintendent alone gives the imposition of hands, without the assistance of other inferior Ministers (though cal∣led before to have a part in the examination) which is a thing that the Bishops of the Church of England never do, but al∣ways call some of the inferiour Clergy to lay hands with them on the ordained Minister. And in those Countries where the Churches are so numerous, as to have many Su∣perintendents and Inspectors, they have their Superintendents and Inspectors General, who are as our Arch-Bishops, for Or∣ders sake. 5.Superinten∣dents in effect the same with Bishops. And let no man tell me here that these Superintendents are not Bishops. For though they have not perhaps so ample Revenues as some Bishops of the Church of England, because they do not live in so wealthy Countries as this, and under so potent and so liberal Princes as our Soveraign; or because some sacrilegious hands have shared with them; or because the Romish Bishops enjoy, if not all, yet the greatest part of Church-lands; as for example at Strasburg and at Basil: Ne∣vertheless they have all that which is essential to the Fun∣ctions of true Bishops, viz. the power of Ordination, and Juris∣diction. Nothing is done without them, and great respect is had to them. I remember that being at Basil not long agoe, the Superintendent of the Churches of that City and the Ter∣ritory thereof, was called by the Ministers who were far el∣der (for he is not forty years old) Reverendus Dominus Anti∣stes, as he is indeed worthy of great respect, having been chosen very young for his great worth and learning. 6. Neither is it out of any aversion to the name of Bishop,No aversion against the name of Bi∣shops in the Reformed Churches. that they are called by another (which is wholly the same in signification, that of Bishop being Greek, and found in ori∣ginal Scripture; and that of Superintendent being Latine, and only found in Translations.) But it is, as I have been told by several of them upon the question, because in many Cities where they have Superintendents, there are also Romish Bi∣shops, which being great Princes, would not suffer any to take the same title with them. As in those two Cities I na∣med now; The Arch-Duke Leopold, who is the Emperors
own Uncle, being at present Bishop of the one; and the Bi∣shop of the other being Prince of the Empire by his place. And to shew that they have no adverseness to the name of Bishop,Bellarm. de Notis Eccles. l. 4. c. 8. Oecolampadius, who reformed the City of Basil, is sty∣led Bishop of that Church upon his Tomb, of which Bellarmine himself was an eye-witness in his time much against his will. Bishops in se∣veral Refor∣med Churches boh name and thing.7. But what need I alledge any other argument to prove that the Reformed Churches abroad are not averse to Bishops either thing or name, then this one, that the Hungarian and Transylvanian Churches held commonly by all other Prote∣stants to be as pure and as Reformed as any whatsoever, are divided into Dioceses, the Rulers whereof are Bishops, as here in England, and are commonly so called without the of∣fence of any other Reformed Church: every one of their Bishops hath under him many Seniors, as they call them, not Lay Elders, but as a kind of Suffragans; or perhaps as the Chorepiscopi of the ancient Church; or in manner as our Arch-Deacons here in England, except that they have power of Ordination, so that their Bishop is properly an Arch-Bishop. And these Seniors have under them between twenty and thirty Churches, some more, some less. 8. This Episcopacy begun in the said Churches with Refor∣mation, and although they have had their Diotrephes, as well as the Church of England, who because they loved to have the first places, endeavoured to overthrow their lawful Superi∣ours by rising up against Episcopal Government, yet God was pleased to preserve it among them until this time. It was at∣tempted in that part of Hungary that belongs to the Prince of Transylvania in the year 1613. Lucas Hodaci being then Bishop, the sixth they had since Reformation. One Emeri∣cus Vifalvi rose up against Episcopal Jurisdiction, and trou∣bled much the peace of those Churches, who thereupon re∣quiring the judgment of David Paraeus, then Professor at Heidelberg in the Palatinate, received a notable Epistle from him, in confirmation of their Episcopacy, and condemnation of the Schismatical fellow, who being delivered over to the secular power, died in prison. Transylvania it self was likewise troubled with dividing spirits, who having been
corrupted here in England where they lived during the late troubles, did fiercely attempt a change in Church Govern∣ment, Anno 1653. and the years following: But the most Illustrious Prince George Rakoczi the second, who was no less learned then valiant, knowing what sad events had fol∣lowed the like beginnings in these Kingdoms, did vigorous∣ly oppose their designs. And it is very observable, that not long before by a singular Providence, that worthy Son of the Church of England, Doctor Isaac Basier Prebend of Duresme, and Arch-Deacon of Northumberland, was intrusted with the Divinity Chair in the Schools; who joyning his lear∣ning with the Princes authority, did contribute very much to the defeating of the Plot, having had many Disputations with the Schismaticks, both in Writing and in the presence of the whole Court, as well as in the publick Schools, and specially in the Synod held Anno 1657. at Marosvaharheli, where no less for the credit of our Church then for his own, he had the honour to be President. But again Anno 1659. When Achatius Barcsyai, the great Rebel (who sold Prince Rakoczi his lawful Master, unto the Turks, swearing to de∣liver him up unto them) had subjected almost all the Coun∣try, the Innovators brake out anew against Episcopacy; and the Tyrant to ingratiate himself with the multitude, did give his consent to erect Presbytery, a very considerable part of the Clergy for fear or favour, being drawn into the Faction. Yet notwithstanding they prevailed thus far, the Nobility joyning with such of the right Clergy as stood for the anci∣ent Government, it was and is maintained until this day. But of all this and many other remarkable passages pertaining to the same Subject, we are to expect a better account of the learned Pen of the worthy Doctor, unto whom I must ac∣knowledge my self a Debtor, not only for most of these par∣ticulars, which I had before, but by publick fame, but also for many observations in this Treatise, some of which he hath confirmed according to the information I had from o∣ther hands, and some he hath imparted anew. Onely before I proceed any further, I'le mind the Reader to observe how the spirit of division is like himself in every place, and how
Episcopacy hath the same friends and the same enemies, in England and in Transylvania. The rude multitude, a great, but the worst part of the Clergy, and open Rebellion, against it: The Prince, the Nobility, the best and learnedst part of Church-men, and Loyalty for it. Canonical obe∣dience sworn to Bishops.9. I must not forget to observe that in the said Churches the inferior Ministers swear Canonical obedience to the Bishop, and to the Seniores their Ordinaries. I think it will be some sa∣tisfaction to the Reader to see here the form of the Oath at length and in terminis, as it is set forth in the Book of Canons of that part of Hungary which consisteth of the Counties of Mosonien, Posenien, Comaromien, Nitrien, Barsien, and others; agreed upon in one of their general Synods, Anno 1623. and Printed at Papai, Anno 1625. The Latine words are in the Margent,Ego N. N. ju∣ro coram Deo vivo, qui est Pater, Filius, & Spiritus Sanctus, & coram sanctis ejus Angelis, & in praesen∣tia Sanctae hujus Synodi, quod in Fun∣ctione sacri hujus Mini∣sterii, quod nunc à vobis servis Dei, & mysteriorum ejus dispensa∣toribus fidelis∣simis summa cum reverentia accipio: solam fidem Catholicam, libris Canonicis Pro∣phetarum & Apostolorum comprehensam, secundum expositionem Helveticae nostrae Confessionis praedicaturus, Canones item Ecclesiasticos fideliter observatutus, Epis∣copo & Senioibus tanquam Superioribus meis debitam obedientiam praestiturus, d ni∣que vitae meae, Sanctimonia vocationem hanc ornaturus, ac malis moribus neminem scandalizaturus sum. Haec omnia, quod pro gratia, & viribus divinitus mihi datis ef∣ficere contendam; Sic me Deus adjuvet, Pater, Filius & Spiritus Sanctus. Ausen. Canon. Ecclesiastici Synodi Comiathinae, in Hungaria, Class. 3. Can. 8. which I translate thus. I N. N. swear before the living God, the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, and be∣fore his holy Angels, and in the presence of this holy Synod, that in the Function of the Sacred Ministry, which at present with the greatest reverence I receive from you the Ministers of God, and the most faithful Dispensators of his mysteries, I shall preach the only Catholick Faith contained in the Canonical Books of the Pro∣phets and Apostles, according to the exposition of our Helvetick Confession; I shall also faithfully observe the Canons of the Church; that I shall yield unto the Bishop and the Seniors all due obedience, as being my Superiours; Lastly, that I shall adorn this my vocation wtth holiness of life, and that I shall give no scandal unto any by ill manners. That all these things I shall endeavour to perform accor∣ding to the grace and strength given me from God; So help me God, the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost.
10.Subordination of Pastors ac∣knowledged to be of Apostoli∣cal institution. I cannot forbear to transcribe in this place another Canon of the same Synod, by which the Reader may know whence they derive the Subordination of Pastors among them; which I do the rather, because the said Book of Ca∣nons is very scarce to be had, and I believe that there are few other Copies in England besides that one which was brought lately out of Transylvania by Doctor Basier. The aforesaid Canon runneth thus.Cum Aposto∣lus Paulus cer∣tos numeret gradus eorum qui regere & gubernare te∣nentur Eccle∣sias, & ipse in∣quiens, Eph. 4.11. Dedit a∣lios quidem Apostolos, ali∣os vere Pro∣phetas, alios autem Evan∣gelistas, alios autem Pastores, alios Doctores ad instaurationem Sanctorum, in opus administrationis, in edificationem corporis Christi, &c. Ac idem Apostolus, alibi, 1 Tim. 3. Tit. 1. Episcoporum & Presbyterorum meminerit; nos quoque in Ecclesiis nostris hos ordines vel gradus ita agnoscimus ut certos habeamus Episcopos, Presbyte∣ros item eminenter sic dictos seu Sniores, qui caeteros Dei Ministros & Ecclesiaum Pastores Scripturae phrasi sic vacatos, certis legibus regere debeant. Ibid. Class. Con. 2. Whereas the Apostle Paul numbreth cer∣tain degrees of such as are bound to rule and govern the Churches, and saying himself, Eph. 4.11. He hath given some to be Apo∣stles, some to be Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Doctors for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Mini∣stery, for the edification of the Body of Christ, &c. And that the same Apostle, 1 Tim. 3. Tit. 1. doth mention Bishops and Presbyters; we also do acknowledge in our Churches these Orders and Degrees, in so much that we have certain Bishops, as also Presbyters, eminently so called, or Seniors, who ought to govern with certain Laws, the other Ministers of God and Pastors of Churches, so called in Scripture phrase. 11. To these Churches that have Bishops, both name and thing, I must adde the Churches of the unity of the Bohemian Brethren (as they call themselves) who having Reformed the Christian Religion from Popery, above two hundred years ago, have always since had Bishops, both name and thing, until their last calamity which hapned about five years since, some of them being yet alive. And here I may not omit (though it had been doubtless observed by others before) to relate how sollicitous they were to have lawful Bishops over them. After a long time of persecution from them who were addicted to the errors and superstitions of the Roman See; they resolved to quit all whatsoever they had,
and retire into the woods and mountainous places and holes of the earth, that they might serve God with a good Con∣science, and there keep themselves out of the way of their persecutors. But nothing so troubled them in this their sad condition, as when they thought, that they might come to want a lawful Ministry, after those faithful Ministers who took then the care of their souls, were deceased. For to expect till some that had the Romish Ordination, should come to them for the Gospels sake, was but a very uncertain hope; Therefore it was thought meet by them to settle an Ordina∣tion among themsesves, and whilest there were yet alive a∣mongst them some men in Orders, that they should give Ordination to others, and these to others again from time to time,Quassabat a∣nimos metus, an satis legiti∣ma foret ordi∣natio, si Pres∣byter Presby∣terum crea∣ret, non vero Episcopus? Et quomodo talem ord na∣tionem, si lis moveatur, de∣fensuri essent, sive apud a∣lios, sive apud suos? Comme∣nius in Fratr. Bohem. historia Sect. 59. quam Vide. that there might be a succession of Ministers preserved. But though they were thus enclined, yet doubts and fears did arise in their minds, whether such an Ordination, by which a Presbyter and not a Bishop, should create another Presbyter, would be lawful; and how they should be able to maintain such an Ordi∣nation as well against others, when opposed, as to their own people, if by them questioned. At last after the anxious deliberation of some years, there met Anno 1467. out of Bohemia and Mo∣ravia about seventy men of chief note among them, who having offered up unto God their hearty Prayers with many tears, that it might please him to shew whether he liked their design, and whether it was a fit time for the prosecu∣tion of it, they resolved to enquire of the will of God by casting Lots. Wherefore they chose out of themselves by plurality of Votes, nine men whom they judged most fit to be made Ministers; and having called in a Child, who knew not what they were about, they gave him twelve small pieces of Paper wrapt up, to give unto the nine elected men, each of them one. Of these twelve nine were left blanck; and in three of them only was written, EST, It is, viz. the will of God which they desired to know. Now it might have so hapned that every one of the nine should have had a blanck given him, without any thing written on it: which would have been taken for a sign of Gods denial. But it came to pass that the three written Notes were delivered to
three of them, viz. Matthias Kunwaldius, Thomas Prelaucius, and Elias Krenovius, the first a very Pious, the second a very Learned, the third a very Active man, all three very worthy persons, though each of them in a several way. Great was the joy of the whole company to see the Lots so happily fallen; and the three elected Ministers were received by the rest of their Brethren, as if they had been sent down from Heaven to them; But they were still at a stand about their Ordination, till they heard that there were some of the Wal∣denses upon the confines of Moravia and Austria, whither they were fled for conscience sake. Thither they sent one Michael Zambergius, a Minister, with two others, to ac∣quaint them with their condition, and with what passed a∣mong them about the election of their Ministers; and having found Stephanus their Bishop, after they had imparted to each other their sufferings, and declared their Faith and Doctrine; the said Michael Zambergius with his two Collegues were consecrated Bishops by Stephanus and another Bishop, with some Ministers whom they called and joyned with them in that work, and so returned home with Episcopal power; which was by them transmitted to their Successors until this day. 12. As for the Churches of Geneva, and the others that have an equality amongst their Ministers, I shall make it ap∣pear in the second Section, that they are no enemies to Epis∣copal Government. The French Churches I am certain are so far from any averseness to it, that they rather wish they were in a condition to enjoy that sacred Order, and to reap the benefit that may come to the Church of God through the same; all understanding men amongst them saying plainly, That if God Almighty were pleased that all France should em∣brace the Reformed Religion, as England hath, the Episcopal Government must of necessity be established in their Churches; as now the equality of their Ministers,Set Forms of Prayer and Li∣turgies in all R formed Churche, not one excepted. is for many reasons found the fittest in the low condition they are in at present. 13. Now for things pertaining to the outward Worship of God; though the Lords and Commons assembled in Parlia∣ment were pleased to say in their Ordinance for abolishing
the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England, that they did take it away, and set the Directory in its place, to reform this Church according to the example of the best Reformed Churches; let all the world know that there never was, nor is yet, any one Reformed Church that hath only a Directory, and not a Book of Common Prayer, for the publick Worship of God: Those Reformed Churches according to the example of which they pretended to reform the Church of England, be∣ing mere Chimeras and Ideas; which, like the Ʋtopia of Sir Thomas More, never existed but in their brain. For take this for a most certain truth, that all the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, not one excepted, have set Forms of Prayer, and for the Administration of Sacraments, for Marriage, &c. If those for the undeceiving of whom I write, know any one that have no set forms for these things, let them name it, and I will confess that I have been deceived my self, and shall ac∣knowledge my self beholden to them for that favour. I do not speak this only by conjecture; for I have either used their set forms my self, being a Minister amongst them du∣ring the time of my banishment; or I have seen them in print, or have had them in writing translated into Latine out of their several Languages, or have been so informed by di∣vers Members of the said Churches upon my enquiring. If there be any man that doubts of this, let him use the same means, and he will know the truth; unless he be pleased to expect a while, till I set forth a collection of the severall Liturgies of all the Protestant Churches, as I intend to do, God willing, as soon as I shall have it perfect, to save him and others that labour, and to force all them who have been the greatest despisers of the Liturgy of the Church of Eng∣land, if they have any freedom of judgement left, and if they will but take the labour to compare it with the Liturgies of other Reformed Churches, to confess that, If any one must be the pattern for others to be Reformed by it, there is none that can challenge that advntage with so full right as that of the Church of England. 14. If there be any that are not pleased to give credit to this report of mine, of the gaeneral use of Liturgies and set
forms in all Reformed Churches, I will produce here for their greater safisfaction an eminent witness, that shall depose the same: and that is the learned and famous Lodovicus Capellus late Minister, Divinity Reader, and Professour in Hebrew at Saumur. After he hath spoken of the abuses and superstiti∣ons that corrupted the publick Liturgy of the Church, But, sayes he, 140. yeares agoe,Verum ubi ante 140. an∣nos facto est à Romana Eccle¦sia sssio, & populu Chri∣stianus è Bby∣lone egiens subdxt se pon sae ∣anna, à Re∣formationis, qae tum cta est, authoibus repurgta est Liurgia sacra ab omni illa spestitione & dololatria Papist ca; ea∣que omnia sub∣ata sunt quae nimium one∣rosa & opeo∣sa erant, vl prem aut ni∣il omnio: ad Edificatinm Eccesiae faci∣bant: tque sic tum passim varae a variis Reformationis authoibus condiae & p aescriptae sunt S. Li∣turgiae formulae, simplices & purae, in Germania, Gallia, Anglia, Scotia, e gio, &c. quam minimum fieri potuit ab antiquis formulis Primitivae Ecclesiae abscedentes, quibus hactenus Reformati quque in sua gente & districtu felicitur & cum fructu us ut. Donec tandem nuperrimè exorti sunt in Anglia Morosi, scrupulosi, & dlcatuli nimam (nè supersttius planè dicam) homines, quibus Ecclesiae suae hactenus usurpata Litur visa est multis, sed levissimis nullius{que} penè Momenti, de casis, non improbanda solum, verùm etiam planè abroganda, & penitus unà cum toto Episcoporum hierarchico regi∣mine abolenda & obliteranda, in cujus locum Diectorium suum, quod vocant, substitue∣runt, &c. Lud. Cappell. Thes. Salm. Th. de Litug. part. 3. Thes. 6. & 7. when the separation was made from the Church of Rome, and that the Christian people coming out of Babylon did cast off the Popes tyranny, the sacred Liturgy was purged of all that Popish Superstition and Idolatry, and all such things as were overburthensome, or which did contribute but little or nothing toward the edification of the Church. And so were framed and prescribed in severall places divers set forms of holy Liturgies by the several Authors of the Reformation that then was, and those simple and pure in Germany, France, England, Scotland, the Netherlands, &c. differing as little as possible from the ancient set forms of the Primitive Church: Which set forms the Reformed have used hitherto with happinesse and profit, each of them in their several Nations and Districts: Till at last of very late there did arise in England a froward, scrupulous, and over-nice (that I say, not altogether superstitious) generation of men, unto whom it hath seemed good for many reasons, but those very light and almost of no moment at all, not only to blame, but to cashire and abolish wholly the Liturgy-used hitherto in their Church, together with the whole Hierachical Government of their Bishops, instead of which Liturgy they have brought in their Directory, as they call it, &c. I will bring in the rest in another place. In mean while the Reader may observe by the way. 1. That all Reformed Churches have Liturgies, 2. That the Liturgy of the Church of England is judged by this great man, not only simple, and
pure, and free from all Popish Superstition and Idolatry, but also from all such things as were over onerous and troublesome, or which did contribute but little to the edification of the Church, as well as the Liturgies of other Reformed Churches. 3. If those Litur∣gies ought to recede as little as possible from that of the Pri∣mitive Church, as he doth intimate, undoubtedly the Litur∣gy of the Church of England is the best and most perfect of them all, as coming nearest unto it. 4. That of all them who call themselves Reformed,Hoc alii surio∣si insani ad∣dunt, non li∣cere ullâ ver∣bis prescriptis conceptâ for∣mulâ in preci∣bus, tum publi∣cis in conven∣tu sacro, tum privatis domi, uti, &c. Ibid. the Presbyterians are the first that ever left the use of set Forms of Prayer. 5. That the ma∣ny reasons for which the Presbyterians have rejected the Book of Common Prayer are very light and almost of no moment at all. And lastly, that as for the Presbyterians themselves, (who are the known Authors of the Directory) they are in his judge∣ment a froward, peevish, and superstitious generation of men. And I am afraid that too many of them will be found of that sort of men whom he calls furious and mad, for rejecting all use of set forms of prayer. Set Forms to be alwayes used.15. But what if they have all set forms? Though they use them, they do not bind their Ministers to the use of them. So saith Smectymnuus. Which if it were so, it would amount but to thus much, that though they have no law, they do of themselves the things whieh are of the law, and are law to themselves. And it were to be wished that Smectymnuus and his followers would do the like; that they having a law, would not be transgressors of the law, and by so doing cause the good name of God to be blasphemed among the common enemies of Prote∣stants. I would at least that they should leave their pretense of conformity with those Churches, which being supposed that they are not bound to use set forms, yet use them alwayes, whereas Smectymnuus and all Smectymnuans being bound most of them by oath to use set forms,SMECTYM∣NUUS is a f igned name made up of the first ltters both of the Name and Surname of five severall Ministers. never use them. But Smectym∣nuus is mistaken. And if he had had better information, I doubt not but he would have spoken otherwise. And better information he might have had easily, if he had been pleased to spare two couples of the letters that make his name; one to peruse the Rubriks of those Liturgies, the use of which is questioned; and the other, to goe beyond the Seas in person
to see and to hear what is done there; that by the practise (which is the best Commentary upon Rubriks) he might better understand than he doth the meaning of those few he quoted.In his Vndica∣tion of the an∣swer to the hum∣ble Remon∣stance. For he taketh it for certain that the Ministers of the Reformed Churches of France do not use alwayes their set forms, and that they are not bound to the use of them, because one of the Rubriks of their Book of Common Prayer saith, that upon Sundays in the morning, the following form is commonly used. Whereas the meaning of it is, as the con∣stant and uniform practise doth shew, that it is to be alwayes used and no other. This I can speak with confidence: for I was above eight yeares a Minister in one of the said Chur∣ches; and though my occasions have called me into most Provinces of that Kingdom, and that I have been present many times in several of their Synods, I am certain I have alwayes used their set forms, not only because I was willing so to do, but also because I was bound to it by their Injun∣ctions. I have seen their other Ministers do the like; and I am sure it is imposed upon every one of them to use the same. And if any one should happen to be so unwise and so peevish as to blame and reject them, or so self-conceited with his gift of prayer as to presume to begin Divine Service with an extemporary Confession of sins, or an other kind of prayer of an hour long, instead of that short one which they use alwayes, and no other, it would not be suffered. Witness that which happened lately at Geneva, in the Germane Church there. A Tigurine Minister who was ordered to preach to that Congregation, being observed not to rehearse the Creed af∣ter all the Morning prayer, as the custom is with them, was presently questioned for it. By which you may see that the Church of Geneva is as strict for the using and imposing of her set forms as the Church of England ever was. And before I end this Section I will produce one of the Canons of the French Reformed Churches, by which all such as question the use of the set forms of their Liturgy, and who will not rest satisfied after a fair hearing, ought to be excommunica∣ted. Nay, they are so far from affecting a variety of new conceived prayers every time they pray, that though they
have liberty by one of their Rubricks to use what words they please in that prayer which is to go immediately before the Sermon, in which they ought not to expatiate, as the use is here among some men, but only to call for Gods blessing upon their preaching; there is not one Minister in all France but hath made unto himself a set form, which he useth alwayes, and no other. Now besides what I have already said of the practise of the said Churches, I may produce the testimony of a man of great worth and fame amongst them, the Learned and Eloquent Monsieur Martel, Minister in the Church of Mont-Alban, and Divinity-Reader in the Univer∣sity; who in a Letter I received from him, about a year agoe, after he had testifyed his joy for the most happy Restauration of His Majesty, being solicitous also for our Church, hath these very words you read in the margin, which I translate thus; I wonder to hear that some are found in England that are altogether averse from any set forme of Laturgy to be observed ge∣nerally one and the same in all the Kingdome.Miramur au∣tem si (quod fertur) utique reperiantur in Anglia, qui prorsus ab∣horreant ab omni exemplar; Liturgiae forma, quae una sit & eadem apud omnes in eodem regno Nobis sanè nullibi par est illius usum abjicere quae à Calvino uit adornata, &c. Among us it is no where permitted to reject the use of that Liturgy which was made by Calvin, &c. There will be no other place fitter for what followeth in the same letter. Calvin for im∣posing of set Forms.16. Now both in France, and at Geneva, and likewise in Holland, (where there are also set forms prescribed and al∣wayes used, notwithstanding the vel dictarte spiritu, quoted out of the Canons of their National Assemblies,In the Vindica∣tion of the an∣swer to the Humble Re∣monstrance. which hath only relation to some peculiar occasions, they do but follow the judgement of Mr. Calvin in this their imposing of set forms. These are his words in his Epistle to the Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector of England in King Edward the 6th. his Minority;Quod ad for∣mam precum & rituum Ec∣clesiasticorum, valde probo ut certa illa exstet, à qua Pastoribus discedere in functione sua non liceat, tam ut consulatur quorudam simplicitati & imperitae quàm ut certiùs i a conster omnium inter se Ecclesiarum consensus; postren ò etiam ut obviàm eatur desultoriae quorundā levitati, qui novatione quasdam effectant. Calv Ep. ad Protect. Angl. As touching the form of Prayers and Ceremo∣nies of the Church, I approve very much that it be set, and that
it be not lawful for the Ministers to recede from it in their function; as well to help the simplicity and unskilfulnesse of some, as that the uniformity of all the several Congregations may better appear; and finally that the desultory and capricious lightnesse of such as affect novelties may be encountred and stopped. Let the impartial Rea∣der judge now, whether Smectymnuus were well informed, when he said, that the Reformed Churches do not bind their Ministers to the use of set forms; and whether he apprehen∣ded well the meaning of the Rubrik for the order of Morn∣ing prayer upon Sundayes in the French Liturgy, the Author whereof is Calvin himself, who doth not think it lawfull for the Ministers to recede from set forms. And if Calvin were now living at Geneva, and that the King should do him the same honour that he received from the Duke of Somerset, what answer doth Smectymnuus think that he would make upon the question, Whether there must be an uniformity in the Church of England, and whether set forms, ought to be prescribed from which it should not be lawful for Ministers to recede in their function? Specially if he were well informed of what hath passed here among us, since the counsel he gave to the Pro∣tector was rejected, and the set forms of Common Prayer abolished. Certainly unless Calvine were as much changed from himself, as they who pretend, against all Justice and Reason, to be his followers, are far from being such, he would answer, VALDE PROBO, I approve it very much: And, as he saith in the same Epistle,Statam esse oportet Sacra∣mentorum ad∣ministratio∣nem, publicam item precum formulam, Ibid. Statam esse oportet, &c. There must be an established form for the celebration of Sacraments, and likewise of Common Prayer, to help the weaknesse of the un∣skilful, to encounter and to stop the caprices and the desultory levity of the lovers of novelties, and to make an uniformity appear in all Congregations of the Land. Another thing I find in Calvin, which sheweth how much he was for imposing and using of set forms.Quoniam pe∣stis in Germa∣nia saeviebat & altera ex parte bollum, feciut suppli∣cationes extra∣ordinariae de∣cernerentur Precationes quibus in iis uterentur conscripsi. Calv. Epistol. l. p. 585. Edit. Genev. There was besides the War, a mighty Plague that infested Germany, the effects whereof were so sad, that the City and Church of Geneva, out of their Christian Cha∣rity and tender compassion, resolved to have a solemn day of Humiliation in behalf of that poor Country, to avert Gods wrath from it. Whereupon a set form for the work
of that day, was made by Calvin, to be used by the other Ministers of the Commonwealth, as well as by himself, just in the same manner as is usual in this Church and King∣dom upon like occasions. And here again, judge what opi∣nin Calvin would have had of those here among us, who despise such imposed set Forms by lawful Authority, upon so∣lemn days, and chuse rather to venture upon their pretended gift of Prayer; imposing that upon the Congregation, which they will not have imposed upon themselves. 17. Before I leave honest Calvin (for so I suppose I may call him without offence to any man that is not a lover of novelty and deformity in the Church; specially if I pass my word for him, as I do most confidently, that he shall shew himself anon as right for Episcopacy as he hath done for set Forms, and that he shall give satisfaction for the word supposed by Smectymnuus to be said by him, namely, against our Common-Prayer-Book, and to be a great blemish put up∣on it.) I must not forget that in his Liturgy he enjoyned, and used himself when he preached,The Bidding of Prayer used by Calvin. the Bidding of Prayer. The Injunction thereof is at the end of the Rubrick, before the Prayer which is always to be said after Morning Sermon, in these words, When Sermon is ended, the Minister after the exhortations to pray, (which are the same with the Bidding of prayer) shall, &c. And if any one hath a mind to see how he did use it himself and obey his own Law, let him but look at the end of his Sermons upon Job, which are very common, and there he shall find it as I say. There is yet another thing imposed in th Church of Geneva, I suppose by Calvins Order, or at least his approbation, which I must take notice of here, before I go any farther; and that is, their proper Psalms, not only for Sundays, but also (which some here would take for gross superstition, for certain hours of the day: such a Psalm being appointed to be sung after the Bell hath tolled the first time;See the Psalms in Frnch Mee∣ter printed for the use of the Church of Geneva. such another after it hath tolled twice, &c. and this for Morning and Evening Service. 18. In other Reformed Churches, as in those of the Palatinate, of Hessen, Poland, Lithuania, Hungaria, Transylvania, and in∣deed in most, they have the Gospel and Epistle of the day, which
are always read according as they are appointed, in some places at the Communion-Table, as shall be observed; and the Text for the Sermon is usually, and by some alwayes, taken out of them, as thousands of Printed Sermons do clear∣ly testifie. But of this anon more at large. 19.The Kirk of Scotland used the Book of Common-Pay∣er at the begin∣ning of Rfor∣mation. And here I must not forget to impart the information I had of the state of the Church of Scotland (before it was troubled by busie men) from a right Reverend Bishop of that Church, the only one whom God hath kept alive until the times of restitution of all things (it I may so say, as I think I may, as to things here amongst us) viz. That the said Church subscribed to the worship of God, and the rites used in the Church of England,Scoti ante aliquor annos, &c cultui & ritibus cum Anglis com∣munibus sub∣scripserunt. Buchanan. l. 19. Chron. p. 232. Edit. Ednb. fol. An. 1581. as may be seen in an Author by them not to be su∣spected. And Knox in his History hath these words, that Anno 1558. in November, The Lords and Barons professing Christ Jesus convened frequently, and concluded these heads. 1. It is thought expedient and ordained, that in all the Parishes of this Realm the Common Prayers be read weekly on Sunday, and other festival days publickly in the Parish Churches, with the Les∣sons of the Old and New Testament, conform to the order of the Book of Common-Prayer, &c. This was another kind of Re∣formation then that which was intended by the late Covenan∣ting Reformators, and indeed a Reformation according to the example of the best Reformed Churches, as may ap∣pear by what hath been said hitherto. Thus much about set Forms and the use of them in general. As for the things of which they consist, and fot the manner of using them, they must be considered of in another place. I am now to speak of other particulars in which the Church of England and other Reformed Churches have a Conformity. 20. The Ministers of France,Of the Appar∣rel of Mini∣sters. in the Towns where the greatest part are Protestants, and where they may freely appear for what they are (as at Bergerac in Perigort, Mont-Alban in Querci, Castres in Languedoc, &c.) never go out of their houses into the open street without a long Cassock or narrow Coat down to the very ground, and a Gown over it,They wear a Gown and Cassock. with a Girdle upon the Coat: And it would be taken very ill if they should appear without this decent apparrel. In so
much that not two years ago some of the people of Mont-Alban made it an Article of accusation against one of their Ministers, that he had been seen sometimes in a short Cloak, such as some here in England did wear, that they might be confor∣mable (as they pretended) to the Reformed Ministers abroad; though the truth is, that he never left wearing his Gown and Coat, but when he was going into the Country, or when he came thence into the Town: For the party is a person of more worth, and of better judgment then to have been a Non-conformist out of any superstition. But howe∣ver the accusation against him was prosecuted as far as to their last National Assembly held at Londun, about two years ago. In Hungaria and Transylvania Ministers never go abroad without their long Cloak and Cassock, just as here. In other Reformed Churches they wear commonly either a long Cloak, as in Germany; or a Gown and a long Cap, as at Basil in Switzerland;They wear Caps. that they may be distinguished from men of other professions; And if the Painter be not mistaken, and he that made the Latine verses which are under Master Calvin his Picture, when he did teach both in the Church and in the Divinity School at Geneva, he wore always a Gown of the same form with them which the Divines use to wear here in England,Calvin wore always a Gown and a Cap. and withal a Cap; and was never accounted Popish or Superstitious for so doing, except it was once by a foolish woman, of whom he maketh himself the story in one of his Epistles.Nuper huc venit Frumen∣ti uxor. Per omnes taber∣nas & per om∣nia ferè com∣pita declama∣vit adversus longas vestes. Cum id mihi fuisse indicatum sciret, excusavit se ri∣dendo dixisse, aut nos indecenter vestiri cum magno Ecclesiae offendiculo, aut vos fal∣sum docuisse, cum diceretis à longis vestibus dignosci posse falsos Prophetas. Cum tam putidam calumniam refurarem, coepit etiam Spiritui Sancto adscribere quod vobis im∣pegerat. Quid sibi vult, dicebat, locus ille Evangelii? Venicut ad vos in longis vestibus. Respondi, me nescire ubi esset illa sententia, nisi forte inveniretur in Evangelio Mani∣chaeorum. Sic enim extat locus Luk. 20.45. Cavte à Scribis, qui volunt ambulare in flo∣is. Non autem, venient ad vos, &c. quod ex Matth. 7. intepolaverat. Cum sentiret se rgeri, conquesta est de nostra tyrannide, quod non cuivis liceret quidvis garrire. Cal∣vin. Farello, p. 83. The wife of Frumentius (saith he to his Friend) being newly come to Town, declaimed in all the shops, and almost in every publick place against long Habits. She knowing that I had notice given me of it, exused her self, as if she had said it in jest, that either we used undecent apparrel, to the great scandal
of the Church; or that you teach falsly, when you say that the false Prophets might be known by their long Cloaths. When I confuted so base a calumny, she begun to ascribe unto the Holy Ghost what she had attributed unto you. What is the meaning (said she) of that place of the Gospel? They shall come unto you in long Habits. I answered that I knew not where that sentence was, unless perad∣venture it were to be found in the Gospel of the Manicheans: For so is that rendred by them, Luk. 20.45. Take heed of the Scribes which love to walk in long Robes. And not, they shall come to you, &c. according to this Womans interpolation, out of Matth. 7. When she felt her self pressed, she did complain of our Tyranny, because every body was not permitted to prate foolishly, and habble any thing as they pleased. We may see by these words of what brood that woman was; what the judgment of Cal∣vin was of such as find fault with the decent apparrel of Church-men; and how groundless their complaints be, when they call Tyranny the most reasonable and moderate ways used by their Superiors to instruct, and to bring them to a right understanding of those things which agree not with their fancy. But this only upon the occasion offered. Now to proceed. 20.At Geneva and in France the Ministes leave their or∣dinary Apparel, and take other Vestments, when they perform Divine ∣vice. In all the Reformed Churches of France except perhaps in some poor Country or persecuted Church) the Ministers leave their ordinary apparrel, and take a Gown, and in some places a Gown and Cassock, when they are to officiate. They do the like at Geneva. And at Charenton, where there must be four Ministers to distribute the Communion, where∣as there are but two that preach, the two others put on their Gowns upon that occasion and for that service. They do the like at Roan, at Caen, and, I suppose, in all other Churches where there are many Ministers. But I speak only of what I have seen and practised my self. For what do I make this observation? to shew that the Reformed Churches abroad do not count it superstition for Ministers to change their or∣dinary apparrel, and to take another more decent, when they are to perform Divine Service. Nay in Aquitain, when there is a burial, the Minister must take his Gown: And when a Minister is buried, the neighbour Ministers that be present,
must all have their Gowns, if Gowns can conveniently be had. Now this changing of apparrel for Divine Service is the very same thing for which the Church of England is by some men reputed Popish and Superstitious, when she will have her Ministers to wear Surplices upon the same occasions. For I hope that the pretended Popery and Superstition is not in the colour of the apparrel, but in the changing of it. Of which Popery and Superstition the French Reformed Mini∣sters are as guilty as the Protestant Ministers of the Church of England. I am not ignorant that some say that Ministers should not wear white, because the Romish Priests use to wear that colour and abuse it, when they say their Mass. But do not they wear black also? Are there not black Fryers as well as white? and do they not abuse black in their Mona∣stick life? 22. If this do not satisfie, we must find out some of the best Reformed Churches which have thought it no Superstition for their Ministers to wear a white Surplice when occasion is offered.Suplices used R formed Ministers at the time of Di∣vine Service. We find this gentle and rational and accommodable disposition in the Ministers of three several Reformed Chur∣ches. Those are the Protestants called Fratres Bohemi, the Protestants of Poland, and those of the great Dukedom of Lithuania. When the Ministers of any of these Churches had occasion to preach in the Churches of the Augustan Confes∣sion, where white Surplices were used, for then and upon the like occasions the Ministers as well as other members of the said Refor. Churches, were all to conform to the Rites & Cere∣monies of the Lutherans, as likewise the Lutherans were to con∣form to them upon the same occasions, according to the agree∣ment made among them atVid. Consens. Sondemir. Sandomir in their general Assem∣bly. And so they did for a long time, as long as they were wise enough to keep the said happy agreement. By which con∣descension they shewed that they were wiser then to scruple at Colour, and to be offended at white (which is the colour in which Angels and Saints of Heaven are represented in Scrip∣ture) rather then at black, against which it might be alledged by contentions men, that it is the colour of darkness, and of the Children and the Prince thereof. The Ministers of the
Reformed Churches which are in other places amongst the Lutherans in Prussia, as at Dantzick, Thoren, Elbing, and elsewhere, do the like at this day upon occasions; which are oftner, they in some of these places preaching common∣ly in the same Churches with the Lutherans, and to the same Congregation consisting of men of both perswasions; and where the Reformed have their Churches by themselves, when any of them are buried in those Churches which are the Lutherans, they conform to them; and their Ministers put on the white Surplices when they preach the Funeral or other Sermons; none of them ever scrupling at it, no more then at the Candlesticks, Candles and Tapers which are lighted upon their Altars in the time of Divine Service; though they do not light them when they are alone by themselves, the Lu∣therans not requiring it of them. 23.Of Holy days. The Protestant Churches of Switzerland keep all the days which the Church of England hath set apart for comme∣moration of the mysteries of our Redemption through Christ, viz. the Nativity, Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and the sending of the Holy Ghost. The shops are shut upon those days; no manner of work is done publickly in them; all the people are to go to Church; Sermons are made upon the day, to instruct the Congregation about the mystery then commemorated. In Holland they keep not only the dayes of the Nativity, Resurrection, and Pentecost, but also the next day following; besides the Circumcision, and Ascension. These are the words of the Synod of Dort;Les Eglises observeront outre les jours de Dimanche, les jours de Noel, Pasque, & Pentecoste, avec le jour ensuivant, & pource qu'en la plus part des villes & Provinces de Pays Bas on observe le jour de la Circoncision & Ascension de Jesus Christ, les Ministres es lieux ou cest usage n'est point encore, tra∣vailleront à l'endroit de leur Magistrat a ce qu'ils se conforment à la coustume des au∣tres Eglises. L'ordre Ecclesiastique des Egl. Ref. des Pays Bas tant de l'une que de l'autre langue, conclu au Syn. Nat. de Dordrecht: 6. 8. & 1619: Article 67. The Churches shall observe, besides Sundays, the dayes of the Na∣tivity, Easter, and Whitsunday, and the day next following. And because that in most of the Towns and Provinces of the Low-Countries the days of Circumcision and Ascension are kept, the Ministers of such places as have not yet this custom, shall make their addresses to the Magstrate, to the end they conform themselves to the use of the other Churches.
24. The like is done in other Reformed Churches, in Ger∣many, Hungaria and Transylvania. In them of Hessen the feasts of the Nativity, Easter, and Whitsunday are kept three days very strictly. They have two Sermons upon those dayes, except the last, in which they have but one in the morning, and Prayers in the afternoon. And Hymns proper for the days are sung in most of the said Churches. The Reformed Churches of the great Dukedom of Lithuania, which are very numerous, and those of Minor Polonia, as well as the Fratres Bohemi, and others in Major Polonia, as likewise those of Moravia, have other Holy days besides, for comme∣moration of the blessed Virgin and of the holy Apostles and o∣ther Saints and Martyrs. They have one also for commemora∣tion of all the Saints. All which dayes they keep after the same manner that they are kept here in England, according to the Ecclesiastical constitution and common use of the Church. These are the words of the Churches of Bohemia and Moravia upon this matter;Praeterea Sanctorum memoriae cele∣brantur, ut Beatissimae Virginis, Apo∣stolorum, ut aliorum item, sed corum praesetim quorum Scrip∣tura meminit. Ecclesiar. Bo∣hemicar. & Moravicar fi∣dei Confesso Edit. Genev. Moreover the commemoration of Saints is celebrated, as of the most blessed Virgin, of the Apostles, as also of others, but specially of them whom the Scripture doth men∣tion. 25. In France the Protestants meet usually upon all the said days, but never fail upon the days of the Nativity, Cir∣cumcision,The famous Dallaeus hath set forth two Volumes of Smons for those days. &c. There are many Sermons in Print made by their Ministers upon those days. And though at Geneva the said days be not observed, yet they are nor against the kee∣ping of them in the manner aforesaid, having subscribed the general Helvetick Confession, which hath these words up∣on this subject, which I conceive will not be amiss here, though it be not altogether their proper place;Deligit quae∣vis Ecclesia sibi tempus certum ad pre∣ces publicas, &c. Non licet autem cuivis Ecclesiae Ordinationem hanc convellere. Ac nisi otium justum concedatur Religionis externae exercitio, abstrahuntur cerrè ab eo negotiis suis homines. Unde videmus in Ecclesiis vetustis non tantùm certas fuisse horas in septimana constitutas coetibus, sed ipsam diem Dominicam, ab ipsis Apostolorum tem∣poribus, iisdem sacroque otio fuisse consecratam, &c. Praeteria, si Eccl siae pro Chri∣stiana libertate memoriam Dominicae Nativitatis, Circumcisionis, Passionis. & Resur∣rectionis, Ascensionis item in coelum, & Missionis Sancti Spiritus in Discipulos, Reli∣giose celebrant, maximopere approbamus. Every Church chuseth for her self a certain set time for Common-Prayers, &c. And it is not lawful for any man to overthrow at his pleasure this
Order of the Church. And unless a just cessation of work be gran∣ted for the exercise of Religion in outward things, it is certain that men are diverted from it by their private businesses. Hence it is that we see in the ancient Churches that there was not only certain set hours in the week for their meetings, but that the Lords day it self was from the very times of the Apostles consecrated to the same meetings, and to a holy cessation of work, &c. Besides, if the Churches using their Christian liberty do religiously celebrate the commemoration of the Lords Nativity, Circumcision, Passion, and Resurrection, also of his Ascension into Heaven, and of the sending of the Holy Ghost upon his Disciples: We do approve of it exceedingly. And af∣ter they have rejected the abuses of the other holy days of the Church of Rome, they add this caution;Interim fate∣mur, non in∣utiliter San∣ctorum me∣moriam Suo loco & tempo∣re, in sacris concionibus populo com∣mendari, & omnibus San∣cta exempla Sanctorum imitanda pro∣poni; Confess. Helvet. c. 24. Genevae. See the Colle∣ction of Con∣fssions Printed at Geneva. Of Fasting-days. Set Fasts. The mean while we confess that it is not without profit that the memory of the Saints is commended in Sermons unto the people, and that the holy examples of the Saints are propounded unto all, in their FIT PLACE and PROPER TIME. I will shew hereafter Calvin's dis∣like of the abrogation of holy days at Geneva. I might cite here also other confessions to the same purpose: but when I have cited this, I have cited them all in a manner, this con∣fession, though it beareth but the name of the Helvetick Chur∣ches, having been subscribed not only by the Ministers of Switzerland, and the Grisons, with other their Confederates, but also by those of the Churches of Poland, Lithuania, Hun∣garia, and Geneva; Nay, and of Scotland it self in the year 1566. The ministers of that Church being then of another judgement, and of a temper far different from that their suc∣cessors have shewed of late years. 26. That there is no Reformed Church but doth Fast some time or other, I think it not questioned. But set Fasts I find also in the Churches of Poland, and in the Bohemian and Lithuanian Churches likewise.Fridayes. Every Friday in the week is commonly kept fasting among them all the year song. They have also the Jejunia quator temporum, the Ember weeks.Ember-weeks. The fifteenth Canon of the general Assembly of the said Churches held at Thoren in the year 1595. runneth thus; We do observe that it is most necessary that we altogether unanimous∣ly in all our evangelical Churches, ON CERTAIN SET TIMES
AND DAYES,Animadverti∣mus rem esse apprimè neces∣sariam ut iram Dei publicis precibus cum Jejuniis & maceratione corporum in conspectu Do∣mini concer∣diter omnes in omnibus Ecclesiis nostris Evangelicis, temporibus & diebus certis placare studeamus. Ut verò ab hanc tem nova quaeramus tempora, dies consuetos, quos vulgò, An∣garia vocant, hujusmodi Jejuniis & precbus publicis, quater in anno dicamus. Harm. Confess. Edit. Genev. endeavour to appease the wrath of God by publick Prayers, with fasting and maceration of our bodies in the presence of the Lord. And now, that we look not out new times for this, we dedicate four times a year, the accustomed days, which they call commonly Ember weeks, to these Fastings and publick Prayers. They have likewise more frequent Fasting andRatio Discipl. Fratr. Bohem. cap. 3. preaching in the time of Lent, and specially the week immediately before Easter, to prepare themselves for the more worthy receiving of the Lords Supper. Of Churches.27. The aforementioned confession of the Helvetian Chur∣ches hath these words about places to meet for Gods service; Let there be places for the faithful to meet,Sint autem loca in quibus coent fideles, honesta, & Ecclesiae Dei per omnia commoda, ae∣dea amplae aut Templa; Hel∣vetic. Confess. cap. 22. Historical Pi∣ctures in the Glass-win∣dows at Gene∣va. Crosses on Churches. comely and in every re∣spect commodious for the Church of God; let there be great large Rooms or Churches. In Holland, in Germany, in Switzerland, at Geneva, and other Countries and Cities where the Magi∣strates have embraced the Reformed Religion, they have kept their old Churches, & keep them still, in the same manner as in the time of Popery, except only the Images of carved work of Gold, Silver, Brass, Stone, & Wood, or flat Pictures a∣gainst the wals, which they have taken down or defac'd. And as for historical Pictures in glass windows, Geneva hath preserv'd hitherto the very same that they had of old, though they have not thought fit to make any new ones since the Reformation. 28. Neither have the Crosses been pulled down from the top of Churches, unless perhaps in some popular storm; But, which is worthy of observation, because the Cross is now taken by some among us for a manifest sign of Popery (though it were used in the first, and surely the best age of the Church for the outward badge of Christianity) some of the best Reformed Congregations, have set up Crosses on new-built Churches, as namely on that where the Prote∣stants of the Town of Caen in Normandy use to meet. I might alledge other examples, but that one will suffice, be∣cause
it is known of so many in this Nation.The use of the Cross for meer signification allowed. There are o∣ther things beside that shew that the Reformed Churches beyond the Sea are not against the use of the Cross simply for meer signification. It is known that those of Geneva make the Christian Religion (in the Embleme thereof which useth to be before their Psalms, and some of their Editions of the Bible) to lean upon a Cross. And the question having been propounded unto the National Assembly of the French Refor∣med Churches held at St. Maixant in the year 1609. whether those who were maimed in the Wars, and had not wherewith to maintain themselves, might with a good conscience,See the Mr∣get of the Di∣scipline of the French Refor∣med Churches Printed at Saumar. Ch. des Regle∣ments. be entred in those places which the King gave unto such as were reduced to that condition; by which places, much like to them of the Poor Knights of Windsor, they ought to wear a Cross upon their Cloaks; it was resolved, that they might; and that, notwithstanding the said Crosses upon their Cloaks, they should be admitted to the Sacrament. 29Solemn D di∣cantions of Churches.. It appears also by the Book of the Rites used among the Fratres Bohemi, that they have solemn Dedications of Chur∣ches, which Ceremony is to be performed with them by the Bishop, in the same manner as with us here in England. All the people meet; they begin with a sacred Hymn. The Bi∣shop declareth, First, the end for which the Church is built, viz. to be a BETHEL, the house of God,Ratio Disci∣plinae Fratr. Bohem. and the gate of Hea∣ven. Secondly, That it is God who sanctifieth all things; wherefore they ought all to call upon him, that he would be pleased to put his name there. Thirdly, Then they all fall down upon their knees, and pray, in imitation of King Solomon, 1 Reg. 8. Fourthly, An exhortation followeth, with a protestation, that the said place shall never be put to any other use but that of the worship of God. Fifthly, Af∣ter all this cometh in the Sermon: and when it is finished, there is a Communion. Sixthly, And in the last place, the name of God is called upon for his blessing on all them who shall worship him in the said place. And there is hardly any Reformed Church that doth not use some such solemn pray∣ers in the like case. Those of France do, I am sure, though it is not prescribed by their Discipline: The reason where∣of
is this doubtless, that the thing is in it self so just and so be∣coming rational and christian men, that it needeth no Law to impose the same.See the Agen¦da of the said Churches. All the Reformed Churches of Poland and Lithuania have also a set form for Dedication of Chur∣ches, as may be seen in the Book of their Agenda. 30. The Chancels in most of the Churches that are used by the Reformed stand as in former times. At Basil, in the Ca∣thedral Church,Fonts. they have their Fonts of stone, and use them for the Baptism of Infants, as we do here. They have them and use them alike in the City of Bremen; and so in other places. By which we see that they are not of the same judg∣ment with the Directorians,Direct. Of Baptism. who find Popery and Superstition in the very placing of them. Stone Altars, or Communion Tables.31. In the said Cathedral Church of Basil they have also their Stone Altar, or Communion Table, the very same whereon Mass was said. In the Cathedral of Berne and in that of Lausane they have Altars made of black Marble, and in most Country Churches of that Canton, if not in all, they are commonly made of a dark blew Stone. They have kept up theirs also in all the Churches of Hessen in the same places & in the same ways as before Reformation. They call them in all these places, as likewise at Bremen, where they are also made of Stone,The name AL∣TAR, used in Reformed Churches. by the name Altars, without the offence of any other Reformed Church; because it is known of every one that the said name was anciently used promiscuously with that of holy Table, for the same thing. They were called by the same name in the Palatinate before the troubles of that Country;Ratio Discipl. Frat. Bohem. de inaugurat. Ministr. n. 5. and so I suppose they are still. The Bohemian Brethren gave them also the same name ever since Reformation. 32. I observe they stand in all the aforesaid Churches in the same place and the same way;It is indifferent which way the Communion-Table standeth. not that I think it of the least moment in what place or which way the Communion-Table standeth, so the publick order of the Church be not violated, or the uniformity broken (which ought to be in every National Church observed as much as possible,) but to shew that some of the best Reformed Churches beyond the seas (for such indeed are those I named now) are wiser then to pick a quarrel with the Church of Rome, and to shew a spirit
of contradiction for such trifles. And I know none that did ever so much as move the question, in what place and which way the Communion-Table ought to stand (so it be seated where the people may hear and see) except the new Scotch and English Presbyterians.The Communi∣on-Table, when in the midst of the Church standeth Atar-wise, and not when it stand∣eth against the wall at the up∣per end of the Church. For that which they say common∣ly, that if it standeth against the wall with the side East and West, it standeth Altar-wise, is out of meer and voluntary ignorance. Let them read the Books both of the Jews and of the Heathens, who had Altars properly so called, and let them but view the greatest and most renowned Churches that are in the Countries where the Romish Religion is establish∣ed, where they pretend also to have true Altars, and they will find that it is but a meer fancy grown in their brain I know not how, without any the least ground, to say the Communion-Table standeth Altar-wise if it be against the wall, with the side East and West. For who knoweth not that David saith in one of his Psalms. that he will go round a∣bout, or compass the Altar of God; And who hath not read that the Poet likewise speaketh of doing the same thrice?Ter altaria circum. which could not have been effected if the Altars stood against the wall. And as for the Altars in the Churches that ac∣knowledge the Bishop of Rome for their supream Head and Governor, that which is the most eminent of them all, viz. the great Altar of Saint Peters Church in the very City of Rome, standeth in such a distance from the wall, that the Priest may easily go about, if credit may be given to seve∣ral Eye-witnesses from whom I have it. In the Greek Chur∣ches likewise at this day there is a space left purposely be∣twixt the Wall and the Altar, that they may go in Processi∣on round about it, as the custom is among them. So that I may say here, not to offend any, but only to speak what is truth, Dum vitant stulti vitia, &c. that is to say, That con∣trary to what is pretended, when the Communion-Table is re∣moved from the Wall and brought into the midst of the Church, it standeth properly Altar-wise. And is it not strange that the learned among the Presbyterians, which ought to know this, should keep the simpler sort of their Disciples in so gross an errour, to the disturbance of the peace of Gods Church?
Let them look how they will be able to answer it: for surely the mistakes of such as ought to be by them instructed do stand chiefly at their door, and it shall be required at their hands. And here, though my design be chiefly to speak of matter of fact, and not to dispute of the right of things, yet by reason this hath been so hotly pursued, I cannot but argue thus upon the matter; That if the Communion-Table must be removed from the Wall in our Church, because in the Church of Rome it standeth near to it, supposing it to be so; I say, the Pulpit by the same reason must be removed from the Pillar, or from the Wall, because it standeth commonly near one of them in the Church of Rome, and be placed in the midst of the Church. Nay the very Churches themslves must be pulled down for the same reason, and be built other∣wise. For why should the houses of God among us, stand like the Romish Churches, rather than Gods Board like the Romish Altar; Why should our Churches remain Cross-wise as most Cathedrals are, and also that of Saint Peters at Geneva, ra∣ther then our Communion-Tables Altar-wise? If there be reason for one, there is the same for all; and if there be not reason for all, there is reason for neither. Silver and guilt Chal ces and Basons for the Communion.33. In France they have great Silver Chalices, in all their great Churches, as at Charenton, Roan, Caën, &c. and Silver Basons for the Communion: And in Princes Chappels in Germany and other parts they have them guilt. They have the ten Commandments in Letters of Gold. upon two great Ta∣bles, where they are able to be at the charge of it: And in some places they have also the Creed and the Lords Prayer in the same manner, conformable to one of the Constitutions of the Church of England to the same purpose.They enter re∣verently into the Church. 34. In all Reformed Churches men use to enter into the places of publick Worship with their Hats off. In France the Women that are persons of quality unmask themselves. And the devoutest sort both of men and women use to kneele, and make a short Prayer for Gods blessing on the service they come to perform, before they sit down; Yet theDirect, of the Assembling of the congregati∣on: where ado∣ration and pri∣vate Prayers are forb dden to all when they enter into the Church. Directory (though it pretendeth conformity with them) prohibiteth these very things, which are likewise used upon the same occasions▪
35.How they be∣have themselves in the Church. In some places all the people stand bear as long as they are in the Church, as in Hungaria and Transylvania, where the Prince himself useth to be uncovered. In others they stand bare only during the Service, as at Geneva, where they are covered only at Sermon. In Poland and Lithuania they sing, and both read and hear the Scripture standing, and they beat their breast at the end of their Prayers. Every where they use to kneel at Prayer; and if all do not kneel when they may conveniently, it is scandalous. It was or∣dered by the last National Assembly of the Reformed Churches of France held at Loudun,See the Acts of that Synod. that all should be bare∣headed whilest the Office of Baptism is read. Which was not so much a new constitution as the renewing of an old one as may be seen in their Discipline, which will have those censured that shall not uncover themselves when Sacraments are celebrated.Discipl. des Egl. Ref. de France c. 10. art. 2. And although there is too much irreverence in the said Churches both at the administration of Sacraments and at all other holy duties performed in the Congregation, it is well known that it is against the mind of the Ministers, who very often use to reprehend the people for this abuse, and exhort them to behave themselves more reverently in the house of God. By which we may guess what judgement they would make of those of the Presbyterian Congregati∣ons, who never kneele, and never uncover their heads, or only a little the top or one side of them, at Prayer; like the fools and Fanfaroons, who carry their Hats upon one ear. And because this outward reverence is so slighted and almost laught at by some, though great pretenders to Reformation, I think it not amiss to transcribe here at length the very words of the Discipline established in the French Reformed Churches, by which may be seen how much they value it;On corrigera l'irreverence laquelle s'ap∣percoit en plu∣sieurs, los∣qu'ils sonpre∣sens aux Pri∣eres publiques cu domestiques, de ne se decouvrir point le chef, & de ne flechir point les genoux, chose qui repugne à la piere, donne supçon d'orguiel, & peut scandaliser les bons. Et pourtant les Pasteurs seront avertis, comme aussi les Anciens & chefs de fa∣mille, de veiller sogineusement à ce que durant lesdites Prieres, un chacun sans ex∣ception, ou acception de personnes, donne par ces marques exterieures resmoignage de l'humilité de sone coeur & del l'hommage qu'il sait à Dieu. Disc. des Egl. Ref. de France. cap. 10. art. 1. That irreverence shall be mended which is seen in many when they are present at Common Prayer in the Church, or at their private
Prayer in the Family; not to uncover their head, and not to bend their knees; a thing which is contrary to piety, giveth suspicion of pride, and may offend the godly. Wherefore the Ministers shall be warned, as likewise the Elders and Heads of Families, to watch carefully, that during the sad Prayers every one, without excep∣tion or acception of persons, do by these outward signs t stifie the humility of their hearts, and of that inward hommage which they yield unto God. Reverence had at the naming the name of JESUS.36. In the Churches of Lithuania and Polonia, where they have their Hats on at Sermon, they always put them off at the name of JESƲS; and the women, if they be sitting, bow down their head; if they they stand, they make a Curtesie. The Reformed Church of Bremen do the like. And the same reverence was used at the naming of that holy name by a great many,See the Pals∣graves Decla∣ration, Loudun 1637. though not by all, nor always, before the Wars in the Palatinate, and no doubt but they do so still. Morning and Evening Pray∣ers read every day of the week out of the Book of their set forms.37. In Transylvania and Hungaria they have Prayers twice a day, morning and evening, which are read out of the Book of Common-Prayer all the week long; and upon Wed∣nesday and Friday they have Sermons besides Prayer. In Hessen likewise they have Common Prayers, which are read out of the Book every day of the week about noon-time, with∣out any Sermon or Exposition of Scripture. The like is done in many of the Reformed Churches of France. This I observe because I am told it is denied by some; who can have no other reason for this their denial, but perhaps mis-informa∣tion, or only that they would have it to be so. 38. And now to speak of the things contained in their Books of Common-Prayer.The contents of their Books of Common Pray r Most have morning and evening Prayer. as the Hungarian, Transylvanian, Lithuanian and Po∣lonian Liturgies; also that of Hessen, &c. All have, besides the Confession of sins, general Prayers for all the necessities of the Church and members thereof; Prayers for Kings and other Magistrates,See their Litur∣gies and Agen∣da. and for the Clergy. Many have the Li∣tany. They have all of them peculiar Offices in set forms for the administration of Sacraments, and for Matrimony, which are always used. Many have set forms for Confirmation, for Chur∣ching of women, for Burial of the dead, for Dedication of Churches:
All which shall be further declared hereafter. They all begin with a Confession of sins; and some, as that of the Reformed Churches of France, first with a short Prayer for Gods assi∣stance; the Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini, &c. the same with which the Roman Office beginneth, (and yet they have the good luck not to be accounted Popish for it) and then with on exhortation to confess and acknowledge their sins, in substance like unto that of our Liturgy. The Ab∣solution followeth in most. It is wanting in that of the French Reformed Churches. Wherefore in the Church of Mets, and some few others about the same City where they use the same Liturgy (though they never meet at any of their Sy∣nods, they making a Classis which is governed by it self) it hath been thought fit that the Minister, after the confessions of sins, whilest the people is yet a kneeling, should pronounce the Absolution unto all that are penitent: which he doth al∣ways accordingly. But indeed it was not Calvins fault that the Absolution is wanting in the said Liturgy of the French Chur∣ches, whose Author he is, as was before observed by Mon∣sieur Martel. There is none of us, saith he,Confessioni publicae ad∣jungere in∣signem aliquā promissionem, quae peccato∣res ad spem vniae & re∣conciliationis erigat, nemo nostrum est qui non ag∣noscat utilis∣simum esse. Atque ab ini∣tio hunc mo∣rem inducete volui: sed cum offensionem quidam ex no∣vitate metuerunt, nimium facilis fui ad cedendum; ita res omissa est. Nunc verò non esset opportunum hic quidquam mutare: quia antequam ad finem Confessionis ven∣tum fuerit, magna pas incipit surgere. Quo magis optamus, dum vobis integrum est, populū vestrū ad utrū{que} assuefieri. Calv. Ep. ad quaest. de quibus āritibus. p. 452. Edit. Genev. who doth not ac∣knowledge, that to joyn unto the publick Confession (of sins) some signal Promise, by which sinners may be lifted up in hope of Pardon and Reconciliation, is a thing very profitable. And I would have introduced that custom at the beginning: but some fearing it might give offence, because of the novelty, I yielded too easily: so the thing was omitted. And as for this present, it would not be sea∣sonable to bring in here any change; because for the most part they begin to rise, before the end of the Confession, Wherefore we are most earnest in desiring, that whilest it is in your power, you use your people to do both, that is, to have the Absolution pronounced unto them, and to hear it upon their knees. By which we see that the peevish fear of giving scandal to some unreasonable men, and the irreverence of the people of Geneva, were the cause that the Absolution is wanting in Calvins Liturgy; and no
doubt but some such things are the causes of the defects which may be found in those Reformed Churches which are called by his name.The Palsgraves Declaration, Loudun. 1637. In the Churches of the Palatinate the Absoluti∣on, according to the order commonly used among them be∣fore the troubles of that Country, was pronounced upon Communion-days immediately after the Confession of sins, that was then made immediately before they received. Lssons appoin∣ted.39. In the Churches of Hungaria and Transylavania at Mor∣ning Service the Lesson (for they have but one) is taken out of the Old Testament; and at Evening Prayer out of the New. In Hessen they have likewise proper Lessons for every day.Epistles and Gospels. In Poland, Luthuania, Hungaria, Transylvania, and in∣deed in most Reformed Churches, they have Gospels and Epistles for every Sunday and other Holy days; and the Mini∣ster is to take his Text out of the Gospel. In some places, as in Hessen, he is to expound the whole Gospel of the day; which is the reason that he doth read it in the Pulpit, and not at the Altar, which otherwise he would surely do, as well as he doth the Epistle.The Epistle read at the Altar. For so is the Order and use of the Re∣formed Churches of that Princedom, that the Minister who readeth the Service goeth from the Desk to the Altar (for so they call the Communion-Table, as hath been observed be∣fore) and there standing and turning his Face to the people, that he may be better heard, he readeth the Epistle. The Churches of Lithuania and Poland have the three Creeds,The three Creeds. that of the Apostles, that which beareth the name of Athanasius, and that of Nice or Constantinople,The Lords prayer often repeated. The said forms are to be seen at the end of the Injunctions of the Synod of Dort. The Lords Prayer said be¦fore and after meales. all which are rehearsed in their fit places. 40. The Lords Prayer is the conclusion of all other, and therefore is repeated many times. And so in the Reformed Churches of France the Minister doth say it commonly three times over before he cometh down from the Pulpit. They do the like in Holland and elsewhere. In Holland they have been so cautious to have it in every several Office, that they have added it at the end of the set forms of Prayer that are used by them upon the admission both of their Ministers and El∣ders. And it is worthy observation, that they, as well as the Lutherans, use to say itVide Corpus Discipl. of the Dutch Church of London. at Meals after their Graces. And so
do likewise the Translvanians and Hungarians. And, good God! what a scandal would it be in all Reformed Churches, beyond the Seas, if their Ministers should quite leave out of their Service that most complete and most Divine form of Prayer, as most, if not all, Directorians have done for a long time here in England! And how hard is it to make those our transmarine Brethren believe that there have been any such men here amongst us, and those the very men that pretended Conformity with them! 41.The Ministers say some Pray∣ers standing. Because I see that exception is taken here at those Rubricks of the Book of Common Prayer, by which the Mi∣nister is ordered to say some Prayers standing, that being in the judgement of some men, either superstitious or imperti∣nent; I would have them take notice that they make the French Reformed Churches guilty of the same superstition and impertinency: The said Churches requiring that the Ministers who ought to use the Ceremony ofEt alors lui mettra les mains su la teste; celui qui prie estant debout, & ce∣lui pour le∣quel il prie à genoux, &c. D scp. des Egl. Ref. de France, ch 1. rt. 8 The people stand at the Creeds. Imposition of Hands upon those that are to be admitted to the Ministry among them, should pray standing on that occasion, the new received Minister and the whole Congregation kneeling at the same time. 42. In the Churches of Poland and Lithuania the people useth to stand at the rehearsing of the Creeds. And heretofore the Nobles did draw their swords naked at the same time, to signifie that they were ready to use them for the defence of the Christian Faith 43. In the said Churches of Poland and Lithuania,The Prayers said aloud of∣ter the Mini∣ster. and likewise in them of Transylvania and Hungaria, the people useth always to say the Prayers aloud after the Minister, just as we do in the Church of England. Such was also the use of all the Churches of the Ʋnity of the Fratres Bohemi. 44. In the aforesaid Churches they often sing their Prayers,The Lords Prayer and the Creed sung. In honesta & publica con∣g egatine re∣citantur aut canuntur precationes & Symbolum; Et lectiones cum sacris canticis, distributae in die∣festes. Polon. Consens. Sadomir An. 1570. cap. de coena Dom. and also the Creeds. That of the Apostles, and the Lords prayer, is sung likewise in the Churches of Hessen. And I am sure that both the French and Dutch Reformed Churches have them in meeter with musical Notes at the end of their
Book of Psalms; though the French do not sing them now by reason both the Rhyme and the Language are some thing course and old. But the Dutch sing them stil, together with the Magnificat,The Magnifi∣cat, Bendi∣ctus, and Nunc Dimittis sung. On chantera en l'Eglise seulement les 1 50 Pseaumes de David; les X Comman∣dments; No∣stre Pere; les XII. Articles de nostre Foy¦les Cantiques de Marie, Za∣charie, & Si∣meon, L'ordre Ecclesiastique des Egl. R f. du Pays Bas tant de l'une que de l'autre longue, Art. LXIX. The Nunc Di∣mittis sung kneeling. Psalms sung by course. the Benecdictus, and the Nunc Dimittis, accor∣ding as they are allowed to do by the National Synod of Dort. In the Church shall be sung only, saith the Synod, the 150. Psalmes of David; The X. Commandments; Our Fa∣ther; The XII. Articles of our Faith; The Canticles of Mary, Zachariah, and Simeon, &c. And it is known of all them who have frequented the French Reformed Churches, that they use to sing the ten Commandments when they have a Com∣munion, and that they fall upon their knees when they are at the end, and sing kneeling four verses, which are in effect the same thing with that short Prayer we use to say at the same place, Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy Laws in our hearts; For they run thus; O Dieu, ton parler d'efficace Sonne plus clair que fin alloy En nos coeurs imprime la grace De t'obeir selon ta loy. 45. They sing also the Nunc Dimittis kneeling upon Com∣munion days, after they have received. In Hessen they have a very peculiar kind of alternation in singing their Psalms; which is thus: The Praecentor or Master of the Musick with his Scholars, who are like our Singing-Boys and Choristers, sing out the first verse with all the people; then the Organs play the second; and if any follow, it is with so low a voice that they can hardly be heard. The Musicians and people sing the third verse as the first, the Organs play the fourth as the second; and so all along. What would some people say if the Church of England should do the like? The Reformed Church of Bremen useth also to sing by course, and that so musically, specially on Sundays and great Festivals; that but few of the people can joyn with the Singers: for Singers they have likewise. 46. In Hessen when all the Service is done, and Sermon
ended, they sing Anthems in consort, not only with Organs,Anthems. Instuents of Musick used in the Church. but with loud Instruments and Violons too. I received a Letter very lately of a Minister of Cassel, who is Chaplain in Or∣dinary to the Landgrave of Hessen, and constant Preacher at his Highnesses Court both in the French and German Lan∣guages; who writes to me, that at his Installation, there wasSon Altsse S. m'ayant fait l'honneur de m'appeller pour estre Mi∣nistre de sa Cour, je fus, instalé la se∣maine passé avec une mu∣sique ravis∣sante laquelle si quelques uns de vos An∣glois eussent entendue, ils auroyent dit que tous Pa∣pistes ici. M. Fishr in a Letter Dec. 9. 1661. Organs. ravishing Musick, and such, saith he, that if some of our English had been present at it, (for the Gentleman was in Eng∣land not long since, and knoweth the temper of some in the Nation) they would have taken them all to be Papists, though the world knows they are very sound Protestants, and one of the most eminent of those Reformed Churches of Germany, which are commonly called Calvinists, to distinguish them from those who go under the name of Lutherans. At Berne they have Cornets and Saquebuts, which play in their Churches when they sing the Psalms. Upon Fetival days they have al∣so Trumpets in Hungaria and Transylvania, which play at the Church-door. At Cassel in Hessen upon Festival days they sing the Te Deum in consort, as it is sung in the Church of England. And yet they are counted nevertheless for pure and best Re∣formed Protestants by all others, who are not so great lovers of Musick. 47. As for Organs, they have them in most Reformed Churches where they can be at the charges of them; in Hes∣sen, as hath been said; in many Churches of Holland; though they do not use them every where at their Service, but only after Service is done. There are also Organs at Basil, and in other Churches of Switzerland; at Heylelberg, and almost every where in the Reformed Churches of Germany, and in other parts where they can have them. 28. In the Churches of Poland and Lithuania they have,Hymns and spi∣ritual Songs. besides Psalms, above 300. Hymns and spiritual Songs for se∣veral occasions, which they sing accordingly. The Veni Sancte Spiritus is often sung in the said Churches. It was sung likewise in the Bohemian Churches at the ordination of Ministers. In the Churches of Hessen, and other Reformed Churches of Germany and Switzerland, they have also divers Hymns, most of them made by Luther, which they sing on several occasions.
49. The Te DeumThe TE DE∣UM. is sung always by most of them on days of solemn thanksgiving. It was sung unanimously at the con∣clusion of that famous Assembly held at Sandomiri, An. 1570. which consisted of the Delegates of all the Reformed Churches of Polonia Major & Minor, of them of Moravia, and of them of the great Dukedom of Lithuania; where though they followed three several Confessions, viz. the Helvetick, the Bohemian, and the Augustan, it was agreed that they should ackowledge each other for brethren, having but the same Faith. The which that they might the better testifie, they all, when they had signed the agreement,Post obsigna∣tum consen∣sum, hymnum exultationis & gratiarum actioni, Te Dum Laudamus, uno ore, una Eclesia facti omnes, cecinerunt. Vid. Act. Syn. San∣dem. 1570. in Harm. Confss. being become as it were one Church, and as if they had had but one mouth (as it is expressed in the Acts of the said Assembly) sung the TE DEUM LAUDAMUS, which is a Hymn of joy and thanksgiving, before they parted. Collects for the Day. Collect on the last words of Christ.50. In the Common-Prayer-Book of the Churches of Po∣land & Lithuania there are Collects for the Day and for the Hour; Nay, and for the hours of the day of the Passion, for every hour, one; and one likewise upon every one of the last Speeches our Saviour uttered at his death on the Cross, called commonly Septem verba, the seven words. For those most pious and most devout Reformed Christians remain that whole day fasting and praying in their Churches. Exclamat u nanima voce totus fidelium populus, Amen, post solennes publicas pre∣ces aut denunciatam benedictionem. Quod neque novum neque superstitiosum esse, patet ex Apostolo, 1 Cor. 14.16. Commenius Annot. ad Ration. Fratr. Bohem. ad pag. 48. Litt. N.51. In the Bohemian Churches the people doth always say Amen at the end of the Prayers, in the same manner that we do in the Church of England; which custom that it is, nei∣ther new, nor superstitious, may appear, say they, out of 1 Cor 14.16. The Litany.52. The said Churches have the great Litany in form and substance the same with ours; and they usually say it and sing it in the same manner as we do, every Friday; and in Lent every Wednesday besides, and upon other Fast days. I said the great Litany, because the said Polish and Lithuanian
Churches have other lesser Litanies, which are used upon other days and occasions. Most of their Hymns end with the Gloria Patri, &c.GLORIA PATRI. And it is sung sometimes alone after Ser∣mons; and likewise the Regiseculorum, &c. The Transylva∣nians and Hungarians use it also at the end of some of their Hymnes. 53. The Reformed Churches of the Confession of Augs∣burgh for the most part use the Cross in Baptism,The sign of the Cross. and in other parts of Divine Service. As for the other Reformed Churches, although they do not use the same, yet they are not enemies to that sign, and they do not repute it superstitious. Those Divines who have been Chaplains to His Majesties Embas∣sadors in France, may testifie that at Paris they have often bap∣tized many Children of the Church of Charenton according to all the Rites of the Church of England. And the right Re∣verend Father in God, that eminent Sufferer and Confessor, the most learned and pious Lord Bishop of Duresme, Doctor Cosin, is a witness of the same above all exception. I have already observed, that before the Bible and Psalms Printed at Geneva for the use of that Church, in the embleme of Chri∣stian Religion, she is represented leaning upon a Cross; and that in France and other parts the Reformed have set up Cros∣ses upon their Churches, with the intent doubtless to declare that in those places Christ crucified is worshipped, and that they are consecrate to the service of that good God, who died for mankind upon the Cross. Let any man judge by this, whether it is likely that such as do not think the Christian Religion sufficiently represented without the figure of a Cross, and who set up Crosses upon their Churches for a token that they are Christian Churches, should disallow that the sign of the Cross be made upon newly baptized Infants, in token that they are Christians, received into the Congregation of Christs flock, and (as it is in the Office of Baptisme) that hereafter they shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ cru∣cified. It is known how frequent the use of it is among them who follow the Confession of Augsburgh, not only in Bap∣tism, but upon other occasions. Nevertheless the National Assembly of the French Reformed Churches hath declared,
(as was observed before) that there is no superstition in their worship. And therefore the Reformed Ministers who live a∣among them in Prussia, when they preach in their Chur∣ches to a mixt congregation, partly Lutheran and partly Calvinist, do make sometimes the sign of the Cross with their hand in the aire when they give the blessing to the people, saying, The Lord be with you, as well as the Augustan Mi∣nisters. Ceremonies sig∣nificant used in Reformed Chur∣ches.54. But if they do not use the Crosse in Baptisme, they have in most places of Germany, in Poland, Lithuania, Hungary, Transylvania, and here among our Neighbours of Holland, and nearer yet in the Dutch Church of London, an other Ce∣remony of which the Presbyterians ought to have as bad an opinion as that of the Crosse, viz. the trina aspersio, that is, the sprinkling of water thrice, upon the Infants forehead, once at the name of the Father, a second time at the name of the Son, and the third at the name of the Holy Ghost. For their main reasons against the Crosse in Baptisme are these two, as I conceive out of their writings; first, that it is a Ceremony significant: And so is the Trine aspertion, having been institu∣ted, and being at this time used in all the aforesaid Churches, to signifie the three Persons of the most blessed Trinity. Secondly, they disprove the Cross in Baptisme, because they conceive (though without any ground or reason) that it is an addition unto it: And so are the two last sprinklings of wa∣ter, which do twice over again that which hath already been done sufficiently the first time; if the Baptisme of this our Church and of the Reformed Churches of France which is done at once, be sufficient, as doubtless it is, and is so ac∣accounted all the world over. And I am confident that ac∣cording to the fate of the Church of England, to be blamed for doing the same things for which other Churches are not so much as taken notice of, if the trina aspersio were used in it, or if she had retained the trine immersion, as at the begin∣ning of King Edward the 6th. his Reign, it would be counted a great superstition,The Ministers taketh in his arms the In∣fants when he baptiseth them. though nothing is said against other Churches for their using of the same. In the Polish and Lithuanian Churches the Ministers take the Infants in their arms when they Baptise them.
55. I find ConfirmationConfirmation. used in most of the Reformed Churches, in some with greater, in some with lesser solem∣nity; and in some with imposition of hands,Ratio Disci∣plinae fratr Bohemer. Agenda Ec∣cles. Ref. in di∣tionib. Reg. Pol. as among the Fratres Bohemi, in Hessen, in Poland, in Lithuania, in some without. But however it is every where the same in substance, though it hath not every where the same denomination nor the same circumstances. Which it should have had, if Cal∣vins judgement had been followed. His words are worthy to be here inserted, as they are to be read in that Master∣piece of his, called the Institution of Christian Religion: It was, saith he,Hic mos olim fuit ut Chri∣stianorū libe∣ri, postquam adoleverant, coram Episco∣po sisterentur: ut officium illud imple∣rent, quod ab iis exigebatur qui se ad Bap∣tismum adulti offerebant. Hi enim inter ca∣techumenos sedebant, do∣nec ritè fide; mysteriis in∣stituti, pote∣rant fidei con∣fessionem co∣ram Episcopo & populo edere. Qui ergò baptismo initaiti erant Infantes, quia fidei confessione apud Ecclesiam tunc defuncti non erant, sub finem pucritiae, aut incunte adolescen∣tia, representabantur iterum à Parentibus, & ab Episcopo examinabantur secundùm formulam catechismi, quam tunc habebant certam ac communem. Quò autem haec actio, quae alioqui gravis sanctàque meritò esse debebat, plus reverentiae haberet ac dignitatis, Ceremonia quoque adhibebatur manuum impositionis. Ita puer ille fide sua approbata cum solenni benedictione dimittebatur. Hujus moris saepe mentionem faciunt veteres.—Talem ergò manuum impositionem, quae simplicitur loco benedictio∣nis fiat laudo, & restitutam hodiè in purum usum velim, &c: Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 19. Sect. 4. de confirm. Utinam verò morem retineremus quem apud veteres fuisse admonui, &c. Idem ibid. Sct. 13. the custom in old time that the Children of Christian parents, when they were grown to the age of adolescence, should be presented to the Bishop, that they might perform that which was required of them who presented themselves to Baptisme when they were men of age. For such did sit among the Catechumenes, till they being rightly instructed in the mysteries of the faith, were able to utter before the Bishop and the people the Confession of their faith. Wherefore such as were baptised in their infancy, because they did not then make a confession of their faith before the Church, at the end of their infancy, or at the beginning of their adolescence, were again presented to the Bishop, and were by him examined according to the Catechisme which they had then in a certain set form. Now that this act, which otherwise was to be with good reason grave and holy, might be had in greater reverence and honour, the Ceremony of imposition of hands was used in it. And so the youth, after the approbation of his faith, was dismissed with a solemn blessing. The Ancients do often mention this custom, &c. Therefore I ap∣prove and praise such an imposition of hands, which is used simply
as a blessing, and I would that the practice of it were at present re∣stored to its pure use. And after he hath confuted the abuses of the Church of Rome about Confirmation, he addeth, But would to God that the custom which I said was in use among the Ancients, were by us retained, &c. The Communion constantly cele∣brated at cer∣tain set times.56. The holy Communion is constantly celebrated at cer∣tain set times in all Reformed Churches. And they can hard∣ly be perswaded that not only they who reject wholly the Sacraments, or have but a very slender opinion of the use of them, but those also who professe themselves to be Ortho∣dox in this point, have either altogether neglected this holy Ordinance for many yeares in most Parishes of these three Kingdoms, and in both Universities; that of Oxford having had no Communion for above twelve yeares; or only ad∣mitted some few choice persons to the same, refusing it to all others, though their outward carriage was sober, honest and religious: whereas all the Reformed world over no man that is not a notorious ill-liver, is debarred from that comfort which Christ hath left to his Church, not for those that think themselves perfect and just, but for the sick and weak, as a medicine against their diseases, as Mr. Calvin saith very well in the Communion-Service of the Liturgy he com∣piled. The Reformed Churches beyond the seas are so far from approving the debarring of any, that is not a scandalous person from the Communion under whatsoever pretense, that they use to call to account all such as neglect that holy duty. The Polonian and Lithuanian & Bohemian Churches excommuni∣cate whosoever is a whole year without receiving the Communion,Quicunque sacra Commu∣nione & usu coenae Domi∣nicae sine ju∣stis causis & sententiâ mi∣nistri sui non requisitâ ab∣stineat, post tertiam, aut sanè per de∣cursum unius anni, sacrae Communionis neglectionem, publicé in coetu aut &c. excom∣municetur. Polon. Consens. Can. 7. Synod. General. Torum. an. 1595. un∣less it be by the advice of the Minister and for just causes, as may be seen in the Canons of their General Assembly held at Thoren in the year 1595. And Calvin was so far from allowing any neglect of the holy Communion, as that he is in nothing more earnest, than in making the use of it as frequent as may be with convenience. But now, saith he, (in one of his E∣pistles wherein he answereth some questions touching Rites
and Ceremonies I would be most for a Communion once e∣very moneth:I am verò singulis mensibus coenam celebrari maximè nobis placeret: modo ne usus frequentior negligentiam pariat. Nam dum major pars à communione abstinet quoddam modo dssipatur Ecclesia. Malîmus tamen singulis mensibus invi∣tari Ecclesiam, quam quarter duntaxat in singulos annos; ut apud no fieri solet. Quum primum veni, non distribuebatur nisi ter qu ttannis mihi placebant singuli menses: sed cum minimè per∣suaderem, satius visum est populi infirmitati ig∣noscere quam pertinacius contendere. Curavi ta∣men referi in acta publica vitiosum esse morem nostrum ut posteris facilior esset ac liberior cor∣rectiò. Calvin Epist. l. p. 452. ad quaest. De qui∣busdam Eccles. ritibus. so that the fre∣quent use of it do not breed neg∣lect. For whilst the greater part abstaineth from Communion, the Church is in a manner dissi∣pated. Neverthelesse, we had ra∣ther that the Church should be invited (to the Communion) eve∣ry moneth, than only four times a year, as is usual amongst us. When I first came hither, there was no Communion but three times a year. I was for a Com∣munion each moneth. But when I could not perswade it, I thought it better to bear with the peoples infirmity, than to dispute it with grea∣ter obstinacy. Neverthelesse I caused it to be written in the publick Records, that this our custom is ill, to the end that posterity may with more ease and freedom mend the same. This is only for once every moneth, but in his Institution of Christian Religion,Sepissimè & singulis ad mi∣nimum hebdo∣madibus. Cal. Ins. l 4. c. 18. 43. Talem fuisse Ecclesiae Apo∣stolicae usum Lucas in Actis commemorat. Ib d. he would have a Communion at least once every week, for which he sheweth many very good reasons; and having said that it was the practise of the Apostolical Church, as doth ap∣pear by the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, where we read that they continued in the Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in Prayer, he addeth, thatSic agen∣dum omnino erat, ut nullus Ecclesiae con∣ventus sieret sine verbo, o∣rationibus, participatione coenae & elemosynis: His scilicet constitutionibus volebant sancti viri retinore ac tueri frequentem communionis usum ab ipsis Apostolis traditum quem fidelibus maximè salu∣tarem esse, vulgi autem negligentia sensim obsolescere videbant. ibid. so it ought altogether to be; no Church Assemblies without the Word, Prayer, Receiving of the Lords Supper and Almes. Confirming this his opinion, be∣sides the practise of the Church of Corinth, by sundry Canons and Constitutions of the Church from time to time, by recom∣mending the frequent receiving of the Communion unto all God∣ly people, as most conducing to the good and salvation of their souls. And speaking of the custom of receiving but once a year, which prevailed in the Christian Church for a
long time;Et sanc haec consuetudo quae femel quotannis communicare jubet; certis∣simum est Di∣aboli inven∣tum. Ibid. n. 46 he saith, it is most certainly an invention of the Devil. What would he have said of those that neglected it for so many years in this Land, and were like to bring it quite out of use, through their neglect, had not Almighty God out of his infinite goodness prevented it, by restoring in his fit time, both King and Church unto their just Rights, and so enabling them to redress such things as were put out of order during the late troubles. The holy Com∣munion recei∣ved kneeling.57. As for the manner of receiving the holy Communion, it is known that the Bohemian Churches, who are the first that Reformed Religion from Popery to true and primitive Chri∣stianity above two hundred years agoe,Etprocumben∣tibus interim in genua di∣sibuunt. Bo∣hem. Confess. A t. 13. Ne in usu sit sessio ad men∣sam Domini, &c haec cere∣monia tantum infidelibus Arianis cum Domino pari folio sese col∣locantibus propia. Syn. General. Wlo∣dislaviensis, 1583. Act. 6. Mr. Owen, in the Preface of his Book against Socinianism. Cum itaque Sessio potissimum occasione & malo auspicio illorumque miserimè ex nobis exciderunt, & Dom. quae nos redemit, abnegarunt, in consuetudinem irrepsit aliquot nostris Eccle∣siis, rogamus & hortamus omnes istos coetus & fratres nostros in Domino ut sessionem commutent in Ceremonias nobis in Ecclesiis Evangelicis per Europam consuetas, sci∣licet ut administretur Coena Domini partibus vel genua flectentibus (cum protestatione contra artolatriam Papistis consuetam) quem utrumque ritum, prout in quibusdam Ec∣clesiis hactenus usitatus est, nobis liberum fine scandalo & vituperatione invicem re∣linquimus & approbamus. Ubi suprà. receive it kneeling at this day, in that poor remnant of them which God hath been pleased to preserve from utter dissipation. The Ministers do distribute the Sacrament, say they in the Confession of their Faith, to the people being fallen down upon their knees. And when the said Churches did joyn with those of Polonia Major and Lithuania, it was unanimously forbidden to receive that blessed Sacrament sitting, because (among other reasons) that unmannerly and irreverent gesture was peculiar to those miscreants the Arrians amongst them, who blaspheming Christ our Lord and Redeemer, and taking him for a meer man, did think themselves as good as he, and good enough to sit with him at his own Table. And they make this ob∣servation (which may be also ours in this Church, if what one sayes be true, as it is very likely, that there is not a City, a Town, scarce a Village in England, but hath some of those miscreant Socinians) that the custom of sitting at the Lords Table was first brought into some of their Churches by those who most miserably falling from their Communion did renounce the Lord who redeemed them: wherefore they intreat and exhort most
earnestly all their Brethren into whose Congregations it hath crept by the ill example of such Infidels, to forbear the using of the same any longer, and to change it into either of those other two ways of receiving used in the Evangelical Churches of Europe, that is, Standing or Kneeling. For they did not blame those Churches whose established custom was to re∣ceive standing, because that is also a respectful gesture, and used with an intent to reverence our blessed Saviour. But those that received standing when they were at home, made no scruple at all to receive kneeling when they were in those Churches which use that humble and reverent gesture at the Communion. This may appear by what is said at the end of the Acts of the General Assembly of Cracovia, Anno 1573.Denique sacrâ Synax Cor∣pus & Sangui∣nem Domini simul percipi∣entes is cere∣moniis quas Ecclesia Cra∣coviensis in usu habet. that all the Brethren of the three Confessions, viz. the Bohemian, Augustan, and Helvetick, Superintendents, Seniors, Ministers, &c. did receive together the holy Communion of the body and blood of the Lord with such ceremonies as are used in the Church of Cra∣covia; which being one of those of Minor Polonia which joyned themselves with the Fratres Bohemi, used to receive kneeling, and no otherwise. For such was their agreement, to keep the uniformity in every Church of each Confession, that all the Delegates of the Churches of the other Confessi∣ons should conform to the Rites and Uses of that Church wherein they should assemble from time to time. I must not omit, that in the Churches of Transylvania and Hungaria the Minister useth to break the bread when he nameth the breaking of it in the words of the institution of the Lords Supper; and that he taketh the Cup likewise at the naming of it at the same time. 58.Of Mt imony. In all Reformed Churches Matrimony is celebrated in the publick Congregation, and by the Minister. Those that are to be married present themselves before the Mini∣ster, who reads unto them that part of the Liturgy which is appointed for that Ceremony, and which is in substance the same with ours. In Hessen they marry with a Ring;Ring in Mar∣riage. they do the like in Poland and Lithuania, and other places. And I think all use it in sponsalibus. They use it, I am sure, in France, in Germany, Switzerland, Hungary, Transylvania.
In Poland and Lithuania the new-married couple, both man and woman, speak after the Minister, and say, I such a one do take thee such a one for, &c. Almost the very same words with our Liturgy. The Minister holdeth their hands joyn∣ed together, and doth declare them Husband and Wife in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost; ad∣ding these words, Whom God hath joyned together, let no man put asunder. The Churching of Women. Agenda Ec∣cles. Regni Polon.59. The Churching of Women is used in the Hungarian, Po∣lonian, and Lithuanian Churches. When the Woman who hath brought forth a Child, is able to go abroad, she must go to Church, and kneeling neer the Communion-Table, there publickly give thanks for her Delivery, speaking out the Prayer with the Minister. Which reasonable and Chri∣stian-like custom I always saw very much approved of by all them that have but heard of it, though it were not used in their Churches. The solemn bu∣rial of the dead with Hymns, &c.60. In most of the Reformed Churches in Hessen, Hunga∣ria, Transylvania, Poland, Lithuania, &c. they bury their dead with great solemnity. The Minister with Singing-Boys going before the Corps, sing out some proper Hymns from the House to the Grave: They continue the same singing till the party is buried,Cantu dedu∣cunt mortuos fideles ad se∣pulturae locum ibique funebri concione pro re nata, &c. Ratio Discipl. Fratr. Bohem. as also for a time after. In most pla∣ces they have Funeral Sermons. The Hungarians and Tran∣sylvanians have commonly two or three, one in the House, one out of the House, and one at the Grave. The Prote∣stants of the Bohemian Churches used to have but one, and that at the Grave. The like is done in some of the Refor∣med Churches of France, as namely, in Constantin, in the Church called l'Eglise des Véz; where by reason of the great number of the Reformed Gentry in those parts, they have more liberty then in other places. There the Minister maketh a short funeral speech. In other places they bury their dead for the most part very late, when it is almost night, and with a very small company, so many as are permitted, and no more: Wherefore they must do what they can, and may not do what they would. And this their sad condition is the cause that they are not conformable in this and in some
other things to the rest of the Reformed Christians. An eminent man amongst them writeth to me thus upon this ve∣ry matter, by name Monsieur Drelincourt; I am so far from allowing the custom of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, where the Ministers are silent at dead mens burials, that I would think it unsufferable, were it not for the condition under which we live. And he addeth, That having perused and carefully exa∣mined all that is read and sung according to the Common-Prayer-Book of the Church of England, he seeth nothing at all contrary to Piety or pure Doctrine and the service of God. But this onely upon the occasion offered, for there will be a fitter place for it. 61.The Communi∣on of the sick. Polon. Con∣sens. Synod. General. Pe∣tricov. Concl. 5. edit. Ge∣nev. Ratio Discipl. Fratr. Bohem. c. 3. n. 6. I had almost forgotten to speak of the Communion of the sick; which is used in most Reformed Churches, as in Hun∣garia, Transylvania, Poland, Lithuania, Hessen, &c. when any sick person desireth it, provided (as here with us by the Ru∣brick) that there be a sufficient number of Communicants. Calvin was as much as any, for giving this ghostly comfort to them that have occasion to require it. I might quote ma∣ny places of his Writings to this purpose: but one will suf∣fise for all, and that is an Epistle of his to Gasper Olevianus his Kinsman, being an answer upon this matter. There he saith, That from the nature, end, and use of the Mystery,Ex natura quidem, fine & usu myste∣rii probe mhi colligere vi∣deor, non esse tanto bono privandos qui vel diuturno morbo labo∣rant, vel de vita periclitantur. Ad fidei confirmationem valet, tesseram accipere quasi ex Christi manu, qua certiores fimus nos in ejus corpore censeri, cane ejus & sanguine Pasci in spem aeternae vitae. Ita que coenae perceptio nos ad obeundas spirituales pugnas in∣struit. Jam si pius quispiam è mundo migrandum sibi videat, quia fieri non potst quin oppugnetur ac vexetur multis tentationibus, merito se armari cupet ad sustinendos conflictus. An eripiendum est singulare adjumentum, quo fretus ad luctam alacrius descendat, & victoriā obtineat? Jam prohibere quominus liceat profiteri & testatum fa∣cere pietatis consensū cum Ecclesia, durum est ac mali exempli, sive quis in lecto du jaceat, sive morti fit vicinus. Atqui Coena sanctae inter Filios Dei unitatis, &c. Calv. Ep. l. p. 455. (viz. of the Lords Supper) he doth conclude rightly, that so great a be∣nefit is not to be denied to such as have been long sick, or are in dan∣ger of death: Because it is no small confirmation of our Faith, to receive as it were from Christs own hand, a token by which we are made sure to be accounted for members of his Body, and that we are fed with his Flesh and Blood into hope of Eternal Life. So that the receiving of the Communion enabling us for the spiritual warfare,
if a godly man being upon departing out of this life, and desiring to arm himself against all those temptations wherewith he may be compassed and assaulted, shall he be denied this singular great help through which he will with more chearfulness encounter the ene∣my, and get the victory over him? Moreover saith he, The Lords Supper being a badge of that Ʋnion which is among the Sons of God, it would be very hard, and of very ill example, if one having been long sick in a Bed, or being near death should be hindred from professing and testifying his piety and agreement with the Church. But notwithstanding he was so well grounded in this, he could not prevail so much as to have it used in the Church of Geneva; where he found opposition against many other wholsome things, whereof some have been before observed, as occasion was. And though the French Reformed Churches do not use the same, because they are not permitted to exercise their Religion but in some certaine publick places appointed by their Kings authority, they are so far from condem∣ning our Church, or any other who give that ghostly Comfort to such as desire it, that their Ministers openly declare and profess they would do the like if they were permitted. I will alledge one for all, the same that I cited even now, Monsieur Drelincourt, a person very well known by many very usefull Books which he hath set forth, all with the opprobation of his Collegues the Learned and Worthy Ministers of Charenton: If we were permitted,Que s'il nous estoit permis de prescher à Paris, & d'y administrer la sainte Cene, j'estime que ce feroit une couvre pieuse & charitable que de donner ceste consolation è de povres malades, qui de puis plusieurs années sont attaches au lict, & ne peuvent aller à Charenton, qui est le lieu de nos exercises ordinaires. M. Drelinc. en son Faux Pasteur Convaincu. Art. 10. saith he, to preach at Paris, and there to minister the holy Communion, I am of this persuasion, that it would be a pious and charitable work to give that comfort to those poor sick persons who have kept their Bed for many years, and are not able to go as far as Charenton, which is the place of our ordinary exercises of Religion. This he saith in a Book a∣gainst a Jesuite, who said, that the Reformed Churches of France did not allow the Communion of the sick.
62. Because I see that many here among us,Dr. Burges. and some of them Presbyterian Ministers, make nothing of purchasing and detaining Church-lands;Alienation and Detention of Church-lands accounted a Sacriledge. I think it also my duty to let them see the judgement of the Reformed Churches upon the said abuse, which by them is counted no lesse than a Sacriledge. In the Conclusions of the General Assembly of the Bohemian, Polonian and Lithuanian Churches held at Pe∣trikou, Anno 1578. you read these words;Decimas caeteráque bo∣na Templis dicata Domi∣ni Patroni de∣bent Deo, Mi∣nistris & usi∣bus Ecclesiae fideliter red∣dere, si con∣scientiâ & fa∣mâ bonâ in domo Domi∣ni fruivolunt. Conclus. Synod. Petricov. Conclus. 9. The Lords Pa∣trons ought to restore faithfully unto God, unto the Ministers and uses of the Church, the Tithes and other goods dedicated to Chur∣ches, if they mean to have a good Conscience and fame in the house of God. And the Helvitique Confession, which (as I obser∣ved before) was subscribed by most Reformed Churches, even by that of Scotland, speaketh thus;Opes habet Ecclesia Chri∣sti ex munifi∣centia Princi∣pum ac libe∣ralitate fideli∣um, qui facul∣tates suas Ec∣clesiae dona∣runt Opus e∣nim habet Ecclesia fa∣cultatibus, & habuit ab antiquo facultates, ad res Ecclesiae necessarias sustinendas. Si verò opes Ecclesiae per in juriam temporum & quorundum audaciam, inscitiam aut ava∣ritiam translatae sunt in abusum, reducantur à viris piis & prudentibus ad sanctum usum. Neque enim connivendum est ad abusum Maximè Sacrilegum. Helvetica Confes. c. 28. The Church of Christ hath riches bestowed upon her by the munificence of Princes and the liberality of Believers, who have given their meanes unto the Church. For the Church needeth to have meanes, and hath had meanes from ancient times, to sustain the necessary Charges of the Church. Now if the meanes of the Church through injury of the times, (mark our case) and the boldness, ignorance, and avarice of some, have been abused, let them be reduced anew by pious and wise men to a holy use. For there must be no conniving to an abuse EXCEEDINGLY SACRILEGIOUS. To these I must adde the Reformed Chur∣ches of France, which declare as much as any against that sacrilegious abuse. Here followeth one of the Acts of the National Synod of Figeac;Ceux de la Religion qui de leur authoritè jouissent des Dismes que les Ecclesiastiques souloyent lever, seront exhortes de les employer du tout a bons usages, come a l'entre∣tien du Ministere, subvention aux necessites & instructions des Escoliers, come pepi∣niere de l'Eglise, & non a leur profit particulier, sur peine destre censures, jusqu'à suspen∣sion de la Cene, s'ils n'aquiescent a cestavis juste & raisonnable. Syn. de Fig. 1579. ar. 24. Those of the Religion who have intruded themselves into the possession of the goods which Clergy∣men were wont to enjoy, shall be exhorted to employ them wholly to pious uses, viz. to the maintenance of Ministers, to help to∣wards the necessities and instruction of Scholars, as being the Semi∣nary
of the Church, and not to their private profit, under the pe∣nalty of being censured so far as to be debarred from the Commu∣nion, if they do not acquiesce to this just and rational advice. At another National Synod it is ordered that the very Tenants of Church-lands, because they usually have them at a low rate,La compagnie a juge que ls dits fer∣miers (des dismes & au∣tres biens Ec∣clesiastiques) seont exhor∣tes selon leur devoir de con∣tribuer nota∣ble partie de leur gain pour suvenir aux affaires de l'Eglise, aus∣quells ce re∣venu est natu∣rellement af∣fecté, Synod de Vtré 1583. art. 13. des faits partic. shall contribute a considerable part of their profits towards the charges of the Church, unto which the Revenues of the said Lands do belong, as being naturally setled upon her. How much Calvin was against the Sacriledge that is committed by alie∣nation and unjust detaining of Church Revenues, and how earnest he was to have them restored to their proper and lawful use, may appear by the addresses he made to the Se∣nate at Geneva for this purpose, and by the joy he was tran∣sported with, when he learned by a Letter of Farel, that in the County of Neocum, the Church had her goods restored to their proper uses.Quod de bonis Ecclesiae in verum u∣sum redigen∣dis à vestris impetratum est, dici non potest quanta laetitia me perfuderit. Calv Epist. l. p. 575. It cannot be expressed, saith he, how great my joy was, to hear that it was granted by your Magistrates, that the Churches Revenues should be reduced to their true use. Again in an other place in his Book of Scandals.Ego vero, siqui replendis suis crumenis Ecclesiae bona praeda∣ti sunt, non excuso. Et libri nostri, quantopere abhorreamus ab ejusmodi Sacrilegiis, dserti sunt testes Calv. lib. de Scandalis p. 876. As for my part saith he, if any have plundered the Churches goods to fill up their purses, I do not excuse them. And our books are expresse witnesses, how much we abhor such Sacriledges. And again in an other Treatise, where he writes of the necessity of Reforming Re∣ligion in his time, granting that there was some abuses com∣mitted by some Protestant Princes of Germany, who diverted the Revenues of the Church to profane uses; He sayes frank∣lyJam quidem testatus sum, nolle me omnia quae apud nos fiunt excusare: qin potius non majorem alicubi rationem ha∣beri, ut in eos tantum usus impendentur Ecclesiae reditus, quibus sunt dedicati, mihi di∣splicere profite or: Mecum etiam id gemunt omnes boni. Calv. de Necessit. Reform. Eccles. p. 453. that he doth not excuse all that is done by them in that particu∣lar. But in the contrary that he professeth, it doth displease him to see in some places, that no more care is taken, that the said Reve∣nues be put to such uses only as they are dedicated to. Adding that all good men do groan with him, because of the same abuses. If so,
how would it have grieved his heart to see, not only the Soul∣diers once more cast lots upon our Saviours Garments, but the Priests likewise comply and share with them; some carrying his Coat (a Bishoprick) entire away without renting? Once more surely he would have said. Mecum etiam id gemunt omnes boni. All honest men with me are grieved at it. 63. By what hath been said hitherto, I hope it is clear that the Government and Rites & Ceremomies of the Refor∣med Church of England are not so unknown and unpractised in the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas as was pretended, there being indeed hardly one of her Rites and Ceremo∣nies that is not used in some one Reformed Church or other. 64. But a main point,Uniformity in every Reformed Church. in which they all and every one agree at full together with her, is that of Ʋniformity. None of them doth intend to prescribe or impose any thing upon other National Churches, as shall appear in the second Se∣ction of this Treatise. For they know that it is not necessary that all National Churches should use the same Rites and Ceremonies. And though it is to be wished it might be so, for the greater unity of Christians one with another. Ne∣vertheless, as that Universal Uniformity hath never been yet, it may be counted in a manner a thing of a moral im∣possibility. But that every National Church ought to have Uniformity within it self, it hath alwayes been the judge∣ment of all sober and wise Christians, and is at this day the good example of all the Reformed Churches in the world, (as much as their condition will bear it) except the now, as to that, yet unhappy Church of England. Nay those very men who at this time are so much against Uniformity in this Church, because they do not see themselves in a condi∣tion to force all others to conform to them, were as much for it, not very many yeares since, as any of those with whom they are displeased for pressing the same upon them now. Witnesse the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons 3. January 1644. for establishing and observing the Directory in all exercises of the publick Worship of God in every Congregation, Church, Chappel and place of publick Worship within the King∣dom
of England, &c. And the Preface of the said Directory, wherein the Authors acknowledge they have promised Ʋnifor∣mity in Divine Worship in their solemn League and Covenant. And I would it were out of mans memory how they dealt with them who were the then Non-conformists, and who would not violate a Law Established by Act of Parliament and confirmed by a long, continued and general practise, and forswear themselves, to comply with the times. Take a view of all the Canons and Ecclesiastical Constitutions and Injunctions of any Reformed Church, and you will find that they are to be obeyed by all and every Member of the said Church, whether Minister or others, every one according to his place and calling. If every Member of this Church would but yield the same obedience to the Rulers thereof, that is yielded to the Rulers of other National Churches by their se∣veral Members, we should see in a very short time, through the blessing of the God of Peace and Order, all things quiet and secure with great happinesse in this Nation. For indeed nothing more is by them demanded of any of those whom the Word of God, the Constitutions of this Church, and the Lawes of the Land have put under their subjection. And can therebe any reason why disobedience, schisme and Independency should be suffered in the Church of England rather than in any other Reformed Church? I will instance here but in what is done in the Reformed Churches of France about the great point of Uniformity, because they are best known here a∣mong us. No man is to be ordained a Minister, nor admit∣ted to any other Office in the said Churches,Subscription required. but he must subscribe, besides the publick Confession of their faith, the Canons and Constitutions agreed upon at Paris, Anno 1559. which they call their Discipline.Ceux qui se∣ront esleus signeront la Confession de Foy arrestée entre nous, & la Discipli∣ne Ecclesiasti∣que, tant es Eglises ou ils seront esleus, qu'es Colloques ou ils seront envoyes. Disci∣plin. Eccl. des Egl. Ref. de France Chapter 1. des Minist. Article 9. Those that shall be chosen Mi∣nisters shall subscribe the Confession of Faith which is established amongst us, and the Ecclesiastical Discipline, as well in the par∣ticular Churches wherein they shall be chosen, as in the Classis whi∣ther they shall be sent. This is one of the Injunctions of the a∣foresaid Discipline upon which the National Synod of Gap
Anno 1603. hath these words;L'article 9. de la Disci∣pline sera signeusoment observe. Et à ceste sin y aura en tous les Synodes Provinciaux, Colloques et Consistoires, une copie tant de la Confession de Foy que de la Dscipline Ec∣celsistique. The 9th. Article of the first Chapter of the Discipline shall be carefully observed. And to this end there shall be in all Provincial Synods, and in all Classes and Consistories, a copy as well of the Confession of Faith as of the Di∣scipline Ecclesiastical.Thes Acts are kept in the chiefest Chur∣ches of every Provincial Sy∣nod as at Cha∣reron, Roan, Bodeaux, &c. Where th y are to be seen. Whosoever hath perused the Acts of the several National Assemblies held in France by the Pro∣testants since the Reformation, may have observed that the Churches of the Principality of Bearn, King Henry the fourth his Native Country, could never be admitted into the said Assemblies to sit and Vote in them as Members thereof, be∣fore they subscribed the observation of their Discipline in all its particulars. Which was yielded to by them but in the year 1631. at the National Synod held at Charenton. And yet it is observable, that the aforesaid Churches are in a Country by themselves, which is seldom frequented by the French; so that the variety of their Rites and Discipline would have been less subject to offence and disputes. But being they were to constitute one National Church with them, they would have them conform, or leave them to themselves as they were before the Principality of Bearn was incorporated to the Kingdom of France. In the said Acts also, among many others to the same purpose, there is a ve∣ry markable one to shew how zealous they are to keep Uni∣formity amongst themselves. For whereas there were a few Churches which did receive the holy Communion sitting, it was ordered by the National Assembly of St. Maixant, that the said Churches should conform to the others which use to receive it standing. Nay they presse Uniformity so far, as not to suffer the people to come at once about the Communion-Table, as many as it can hold, though they should receive standing, as it was the use of some Congrega∣tions; but will have them all to come one by one:Afin que dorenavent toutes les Eg∣lises de ce Royaume se conforment en l'administrati∣on de la Sainte Cene, les unes aux autres, sans aucune differen c, &c. il est enjoin à tous Pasteurs de grader la simplicité ordinaire, & s'abstenir de toutes façons nouvelles & particulle∣res, comme, &c. Et aussi la coustume de faire ranger le peuple à Tablés assis ou debout, au lieu de faire passer les fideles les uns apres les autres, &c. Et les Colloques, & Sy∣nodes auront l'ocit sur ceux qui feront autrement pour les ranger à leur devoir par censures convenables. Synode de St. Maixant, 1609. To the end, saith the said Synod, that hereafter all the Churches of this Realm may conform each to other in the Administration of the Lords
Supper without any difference, &c. it is ordered that all Pastors shall stand to the common simplicity, and shall abstain from all novelties and peculiar wayes, as, &c. and shall give over also the custom to make the people beset the Table round about, either sitting or standing, whereas they are to make them come one after another, &c. And the Classes and Synods shall observe such as shall do otherwise, to order them by censuring them accordingly. Now if it happeneth that self-concei∣ted men move any question about their set forms, rites, &c. to the breaking of Uniformity, they are proceeded against in this manner according to the Discipline of the said Chur∣ches:Si un ou plu∣sieurs du peu∣ple esmeuvent debat, pour rompre l'uni∣on de l'Eglise, sur quelque point de Do∣ctr ne ou de Dscpline, ou sur le Formu∣laire du Cate∣chisme, de l'Adminstrati∣tion des Sacra∣ments, ou des Prieres Publiques, & de la Benediction du Mariage; & qu'a cela les particulieres admonitions ne puissent suffisamment remedier; le Consistoire du lieu raschera promptement de resoudre & appaiser le tout sans bruit, & avec toute douceur de la Parole de Dieu. Et si les contredisans ne veulent acquiescer, le Consistoire du lieu priera le Colloque de s'assembler en temps & lieu le plus convenable, ayant preal∣lablement fait faire ausdits contredisans promesse expresse & en regist ée de ne rien semer de leurs opinions en sorte ou maniere quelconque, en attendant la Convention dudit Colloque; sur peine d'estre censures comme Schismatiques; sauf toutefois de conferer avec les Pasteurs & Anciens, s'ils n'ont este enseignes. Et au cas que lesdits contredisans refusent de faire lesdites promesses, ils seront censures comme Rebelles, se∣lon la Discipline Et le Colloque assemble procedera comme dessus. Et si ledits contre∣disans, ayans esté ouis patiemment, & refutes, demeurent satisfaits, le tout sera enre∣gisté; Sinon le Synode Provincial sera requis de s'assembler, mesme extraordinaire∣ment si besoin est, au temps & lieu que ledit Colloque jugera le plus propre, apres la pomesse telle que dessus reiteée par lesdits contredisans. Le Synode assemble avisera preallablement avec bonne & meure deliberation & consideration, de la matiere, des lieux du temps & des personnes, s'il sera expedient que la conference auec lesdits con∣tredisans se face en la presence du peuple a huys ouverts, & qu'on donne audiance à qui∣conque des assistans voudra parler; sans que toutefois la decision en appartienne à autres qu'aux convoques de la Province, & le tout suivant l'ordre porte par la Discipline. Et alors si lesdits contredisans ne se vulent ranger, ils feront les mesmes promesses que dessus, & seront renvoyes au Synode National, ou ordinaire, ou, si la necessie le re∣quiert, extraordinairement assemble, lequel les orra en toute sainte liberté Et la sera faite l'entiere & finale resolution par la Parole de Dieu; à laquelle s'ils refusent d'aqui∣escer de point en point, & avec expres desaveu de leurs erreurs en registrees, ils seront retrenches de l'Eglise. Discipl. des Egl. Rform. de France, Ch. des Consistoires, Art. 31. If one or more should move any debate, to the breaking of the Churches unity, upon any matter of Doctrine or Discipline, or upon any point of the set Form of Catechism, or Administration of Sacra∣ments or Common-Prayer, or the Office for Marriage; and that the private admonition be not a sufficient remedy against that evil;
The Consistory of the place shall endeavour to appease all without noise, and with all meekness of the word of God. And if those who contradict be not willing to acquiesce, the Consistory of the place shall pray the Classis to assemble at the fittest time and place, having first required of the gainsayers an express promise, and that recor∣ded, that they shall not in any way or manner whatsoever spread any thing of their opinion, under pain of being censured as Schismaticks, save only that they may communicate with the Ministers and Elders, if they have not been instructed. And in case that the said gain∣sayers refuse to give the said promises, they shall be censured as Rebellious, according to the Discipline. And the Classis being assembled, shall proceed as abovesaid. And if the said gainsayers, being heard patiently, and confuted, remain satisfied, the whole business shall be recorded; otherwise the Provincial Synod shall be required to assemble in extraordinary, if need be, at the time and place that the said Classis shall think fittest, the abovesaid promise be∣ing reiterated by the said gainsayers. The Synod being assembled first of all shall advise and consider with mature deliberation about the matter, place, time and persons, whether it shall be convenient the said dispute be had with the said gainsayers before the people openly, and whether any one of them that shall be present, and that have a mind to speak, shall be heard; provided always that no body shall have power to decide but such as are called of the Province, according to the Discipline. And then if the said gainsayers will not be ruled, they shall make anew the same promises as before, and shall be referred to the National Synod ordinarily, or if the case requireth it, extraordinarily assembled, which shall give them a holy and free hearing. And there shall be the full and final resolution out of the word of God; unto which if they refuse to acquiesce punctually, and with an express renunciation of their errors recorded, they shall be cut off from the Church. Thus the French Reformed Churches usually proceed against the disturbers of their setled Govern∣men and publick Worship. And so indeed ought to do all National Churches that have a mind to preserve peace and unity among themselves. But though this may seem hard to them who may be concerned in it, yet if they could con∣sider the thing in it self, laying aside all passion and private interest, they would think it most rational and just. For
granting there must be a National Church, whose Represen∣tatives ought to have a coactive power against dissenters, (which thing none but Independents will deny) either the Church (I mean the whole Assembly of her Representatives) must be brought to yield to the Gain-sayers, though not per∣swaded by them (which no rational man will grant) or the Gain-sayers, continuing to be such, must be proceeded a∣gainst according to the French mode: Or every body must be left free to himself to do what seemeth good before his own eyes; which is a disorder never to be suffered in Israel as long as there is a King in it. 65. The afore-quoted Canon of the French Reformed Churches is made properly for the ordering of Contentious Lay-men, who being supposed to want instruction, and trespasse against the Established Lawes of the Church out of ignorance, ought to be taught and dealt gently with, that they may be recalled, if possible, before they be excommu∣nicated. But as for Ministers, nay Elders also, which ought to be understanding and knowing men, when it happeneth that any of them disturbe the peace of the Church, not only a∣bout Doctrinals, but likewise about Church-Government & the set forms of Common Prayer, if they refuse to submit to what is ordered thereupon in the Classical Assembly, (which some∣times consists but of three Ministers) the Ministers are forth∣with silenced without any more adoe, and the Elders suspen∣ded from the Function of their Office, by this following Constitution;Un Pasteur ou Ancien rom∣pant l'union de l'eglise, ou esmouvant contention sur quelque point de Doctrine ou de la Disci∣pline qui'l av∣roit soussigne, ou sur le formulaire du Catechisme, ou de l'administration des Sacrements, ou Prieres publiques, & Benediction du Mariage, ne se voulant range à ce que le Col∣loque en aura determiné sera dessors suspendu de sa charge, pour estre procedé plus outre au Synode Provincial au National. Discip. des. Egl. Ref. de France, Ch. des Consist. Art. 32. A Pastour or an Elder breaking the union of the Church, or raising debate about some point of Doctrine, or of the Discipline by them subscribed, or about the set form of Catechisme, or Administration of Sacraments, or Common Prayer, or the Office for Matrimony, refusing to submit to the determination of the Classical Assembly, shall be thenceforth suspended from his Office, to be further proceeded against at the Provincial or Nationall Synod.
66. I must end with these following words of Mr. Calvin,Cavins judge∣ment about Non-confor∣mists. not only because his Authority may be of great force upon some men, but because also that of themselves, though they had any other Author whosoever he were, they are full of good sense and are grounded upon Scripture. There was in a Church of the County of Neocum, a certain Non-conformist Minister. Calvin was desired to go in person to help them to bring the party to some reason. But his occasions not permitting him to grant them thus far their request, he writeth thus to Farell who was among them:Consiliū in∣terea fratribus non possum a∣liud dare, nisi ut Collegam tuum coram Magistratu ad∣moneant ut se patiatur in ordinem redi∣gi. Quòd si pervicaciter recusare insti∣terit, denunci∣ent sibi non esse loco fra∣tris qui com∣munem Disci∣plinam contu∣maciâ suâ per∣turbat. Semper hoc in Ecclesia valuit quod veteribus Sy∣nodis fuit de∣cretum, ut qui subjici com∣munis Disci∣plinae legibus noluerit, mu∣nere abdice∣tur. Neque hîc querenda est hominum au∣thoritas, cùm Spiritus Sanctus de talibus pronunciaverit, Ecclesiam non habere morem contendendi. Valere ergò eum jubeant qui communis societatis jura respuit. Cal. Farel. p. 122. Edit. Ge∣nev. fol. The mean while I can give the Brethren no other advise but this, that they admonish your Collegue before the Magistrate, that he suffer himself to be ruled. If he continueth obstinately to refuse to do so, let them declare unto the party that they hold him no longer for their Brother, since he overthroweth the com∣mon Discipline by his contumacy. This hath been alwayes of force in the Church, as being ordained by the Decrees of ancient Councils, that he who will not subject himself to the Lawes of common Disci∣pline should be deposed from his office. And there is no need here to seek for humane Authority, since the holy Ghost hath pronounced of such, that the Church hath not accustomed to be contentious. Where∣fore let them put out such a fellow who despiseth the rights of com∣mon Society. And so they use to do at Geneva, where the Ma∣gistrates shew great rigour against them that are disobedi∣ent to the orders of the Church; insomuch that if any man be so unwise as to despise them, he is openly punished with ba∣nishment or otherwise.Siquis praefractè Auctoritatem Eccelsiae spernat, nisi ante elapsum annum à con∣tumacia destiterit, à Senatu in exilium annuum ejicitur. Siquis etiam protervius se gerat, Senatus causam suscipit & animadvertit. Calv. Epist. l. p. 311. If any one, sayes Calvin, doth obsti∣nately slight the Authority of the Church, unlesse he leaves his contu∣macy, he is banished by the Senate for a year. And if any one sheweth himself unruly and stubborn, the Senate doth take the cause to him∣self, and punisheth the party. And certainly, though as I said be∣fore, this may seem hard to offenders and unruly Independent spirits, yet thus and no otherwise ought it to be in all King∣doms, States, Churches and Societies, that will preserve peace and unity within themselves.
SECT. II. That in those things, in which some Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, differ from the Reformed Church of England, they do not pretend she should rather conform to them, then they to her; and that they never desired the abolition of our Church-Government, or of our Book of Common-Prayer, but that they approve of both, and wish we may ever enjoy the benefit of both in peace and quietness. 1. AFter I had finished the first Section of this Treatise, there came forth in Print a thing called, A Petition for Peace, &c. In which I find that the Authors thereof do still continue to alledge as a main reason, to excuse their op∣posing the publick worship of God, by Law established in the Church of England, That, the Pastors of most of the Reformed Churches abroad take the conformity with us, in those things that they themselves dislike and scruple at, to be a sin: which is the same, as when they said in their Preface to the Directory, that the Book of Common-Prayer kept the said Churches from full Communion with us, and us with them. And this they affirm anew, with as much confidence, as if it were not only most true, but most evident, and so out of question, that it needeth not to be proved. For they do not so much as bring any one evidence for it, but only say, that so it is; taking it for a thing granted on all sides, and commonly known of every body. This, without all doubt, will seem very strange to many, to me it doth not: For although the said Assertion be as far from Truth, as Heaven is far from Earth; they have given it out for true so often since the first time, that now it is very likely they take it really to be true; whereas at first they either knew it to be most false, as it is; or (as I am more apt to believe) they delivered it rashly upon mis-information, or upon very light grounds. Now
this is the unhappinesse of all such as use themselves to speak an untruth, or venture to affirm any thing rashly; that though at first they are conscious of the Truth, and know very well how things stand, or at least have some doubts a∣bout the same, yet notwithstanding, by telling them over and over again to others whom they would deceive, at last they are also deceived themselves. And I am heartily sorry that such a misfortune should befall tender Consciences, who profess the love of Truth, and who therefore should be (as I wish they were) sincere lovers of it, when known to them. My work therefore in this Section, must be to vin∣dicate the Reformed Churches abroad from this scandalous aspersion, and to bring our deceived Brethren out of their Er∣rour in this point, as I hope I have done in the former; by shewing that the said Churches are no Enemies (as I have shewed they are no Strangers) to our Church-Government and Publick Worship of God. 2. By the Lawes of fair disputation,No d sl ke of our Church-Gvernmnt or Publick wor∣ship of Go, in the Publick Re∣cords of any Reformed Church. they should prove what they affirm, and not I what I deny. But though the Negative be not alwayes easie to be proved, I will undertake to make this good. It is said that the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, take those things in which they differ from the Reformed Church of England to be sinful, and that there∣fore they would have her conform to them. This I deny. And first of all I demand of them that say so, what proof they have for what they thus give out? Can they bring any Article of the Publick Confession of Faith of any Reformed Church, whether of the Bohemians, or Poles and Lithuani∣ans: or of Hungaria and Transylvania, or of the Cities of Bremen and Embdem: or of Hessen: or the Palatinate; or of the Reformed Churches that are in the Elector of Brandenburgh his Domini∣ons; or in either of the Silesia's, or of the Cantons of Switzerland: or of Holland, France, Geneva, and the Grisons? Can they shew us any of their Ecclesiastical Injunctions, or any Rubrik of their Books of Common Prayer, or of any other of their libri Sim∣bolici; wherein the received opinions of the several Chur∣ches of the afore-named Countries, are contained and made publick to the world; by which it appeares that they would
have us conform to them, in those things in which we differ from them, as they do themselves one from another, and that they take conformity therein with us to be a sin? If no such thing can be produced out of any publick Record wht∣soever, upon what ground do they presume so to say, and so to write in so many printed Books, to the great prejudice of Peace and Truth, and of their own Credit and Honesty? The general si∣lence of the Re∣formed Churches about those things in which they differ from us, is a suffici∣ent argument that they do not condemn the said things as sinful.3. This general silence of all the Reformed Churches a∣broad, is a sufficient argument to vindicate them from that scandalous aspersion of being Enemies both of the Govern∣ments and Rites of the Reformed Church of England. For sure they are not so uncharitable, if they should see us their Brethren in a way of sin, as not to advertise us of it, and to recall and bring us back from it. And if they did so little regard the salvation of our souls as to neglect us wholly; yet knowing that many of their Members come over to us and conform with us, in several parts of this Kingdom, they ought in conscience to forewarne them of our ill wayes; if they are persuaded we have any such, and forbid them to conform and comply with our pretended sins. And where could they have given this necessary Caveat, and made this prohibition more fitly and more profitably, than in some of their publick Records, that none might pretend igno∣rance thereof? No doubt therefore, but that they approve of those things which they no way nor any where condemn, or at least that they do not take them to be sinfull, but hold them to be of themselves simply indifferent, as indeed they are (I speak of outward Rites) and good only in the good use of them; and in reference to the good end for which they are instituted, and to the honouring and obey∣ing (as duty requireth) the lawful Authority by which they are enjoyned and imposed. 4. But although it were enough for me, simply to deny that which is thus affirmed without any the least proof; and that the silence of the Reformed Churches about the things questioned, is sufficient evidence to shew they are not by them condemned; especially having such occasions offered them to speak their mind thereon: Neverthelesse, for their
greater vindication, and for the bettter satisfaction of us all, I will bring some positive reasons to demonstrate the same. 5. Silent as I have said they are all about these matters,Thse of the Re∣formed Chuches beyond the Seas, who come over, joyn with us in our Publick Worship, by the advise of their Pastors. but not only thus. For whensoever any of their Members come over from beyond the Seas to us, and that they are to live in such parts of this Kingdom or City, as that they can∣not conveniently go to any of those Stranger Churches, whe∣ther French, Italian, or Dutch that are amongst us; they tell them that they may, and that they ought to come to our Churches, to be present at our Service, to say Amen to our Prayers, to receive the Holy Communion with us, and after our way; and to perform all Church-duties, according to our usual Rites and Ceremonies by Law Established. When they return to their several Countries and Churches, none of them is questioned for having conformed with us. Of this I could produce many hundred witnesses, but I will name only one, who is a man beyond all exception in this matter; and that is Dr. John Colladon, one of the Kings Physitians in Ordinary, born in the Town and bred up in the Church of Geneva, and known for a sound Protestant, and who had the Honour to congratulate His Majesties most happy Restauration from the City and Church of Geneva, and from the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland. Enquire of him and he will tell you, that when he came over into England, not knowing whether there would be a French Church in those parts of the Kingdom or City, where his occasions might oblige him to settle and abide; before he parted, being not fully informed what the judgement of the Church of Geneva was about the Church of England, he put this Quaere to the Rulers of his said Church; whether it was lawful for him to joyn with the Church of England in Pub∣lick Worship, and receive the holy Sacrament according to the usual Rites thereof? It was answered that he might, and that it was not to be questioned. And so he did, and so doth at this very day, and ever did upon occasions all such as have come over, unless they be infected and withdrawn from their own principles, by some of their and our contentious Semi-In∣dependent
Brethren here amongst us. This which I say of their joyning and conforming with us in all Church-duties, with∣out any scruple when they are in this Kingdom; is testifyed many years since by an eminent Witnesse, Monsieur Bochart the famous Minister of Caën, in a Printed Letter of his, to that most worthy Prelate in all respects, the now Lord Bishop of Worcester, Dr. Morley; where he hath these words in the Margent,Neque enim orum (Re∣formatorum) in Britannâ quisquam fuit qui nn l ber∣ter inteesset Sacris V stris postquam ali∣quem Anglici se mnis sibi comparavrt usum, & ab Episcopalibus Pesbyteris, aut etiam ab Episcopis ipsis si res terret, sac am recipe∣ret Communi∣onem. Quod & mihi aliquo∣ties non sine fructu conti∣gisse p ofiteor, dum Londini & Oxonii S. Th∣olgae dabam operam Sm. Bochartus in Ep st. ad C∣riss. Morleium. which I translate thus: There never were any of our Communion in England, after they atained the understanding of the English Tongue, but did assist willingly at Gods Service in your Churches, and received the holy Communion of the Episcopal Mi∣nisters, and also of the Bishops themselves when occasion was offer∣ed. This I profess that I have done sometimes my self, not with∣out benefit, when I studied Divinity at London and at Oxford. And who knoweth not that the famous Peter du Moulin did conform in every thing to the Church of England when he was in the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, whereof he was made Prebendary by King James. I might adde Dr. de Laune Minister of the Walloons Church at Norwich, who speaking both languages performed often Divine Service in English Congregations, according to the Book of Common-Prayer of the Church of England. And Reverend Mr. Calendrin one of the Ministers of the Dutch Church in London, and many more who have done the like upon occasions. All this, I trust, is somewhat towards the proving that the Pastors of the Refor∣med Churches do not take the conformity with the Church of England to be a sin, and I hope the impartial Reader will give more credit to what the said Pastors say of themselves, and of the judgment and practice of their own men, and to what he seeth himself that they do, then to what some men talk of them without any ground or colour of reason. 6. But it will he said perhaps (as men are ingenious to de∣ceive themselves) that when those of the Reformed Churches abroad joyn with us here in England in our publick worship of God, it is for want of other Congregations with which they might joyn. But this cannot reasonably be excepted against by the instances I now made; not against that of Monsieur Bochart who speaks of his joyning with us in the
Service of our Church, as well when he was at London, where there is a French Church, as when he was at Oxford where there is none; nor against those of the others afore-named: the two last Doctor de Laune, and Master Calandrin, being ordinary Preachers to two several Congregations, one of Walloons, the other of Dutch. There was likewise a Walloon Church at Canterbury for Doctor Peter du Moulin to joyn with. And suppose there had been only such want of other Congregations, what reason had that been for them to joyn with us in a sinful worship, if they had thought ours to be such? There can never be any reason to comply with sin. Besides that Monsieur Bochart saith, that it is an usual thing for those of the Reformed Churches, when they have attained the knowledge of the English Tongue, to come to our Churches, and that not for want of a better, or out of any constraint, but libenter, of their own accord, and willingly. 7. If this doth not satisfie, I adde further,Those of the Ref. Churches abroad, joyn with us in our publick wor∣ship in their very Country when there is any Congregati∣on where it is celebrated. that those of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, who understand English, do come in great numbers, and most willingly to our Ambassadors Chappels, in their own Country; they joyn with us in our Common-Prayer, they receive the holy Communion with us, with that reverent gesture which is used in our Church; and when they have occasion, they bring their Children to our Baptisme, and are Sureties for them. Of this I call to witness the right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Duresme, and the Learned and truly Pious Doctor Earles the Reverend Dean of Westminster, and most worthy Clerk of His Majesties Closet, and all others who have served in any of the Kings or the Lord Ambassadors Chappels in France, Germany, Holland, or elsewhere. And if their testimonies need to be confirmed by the deposition of other witnesses not at all to be suspected, (though there would be no need of any confirmation of what is testified by persons of such worth, had we to do but with ingenuous and well-meaning men, who were a little less in love with their own errors and prejudicate opinions;) I will here set down what Monsieur Gaches Minister of Charenton, one of the most eloquent and most zealous Preachers the French Reformed
Churches have at this day, and known to be one of the best men living, writes to me in a Letter I received from him in June last.Il y a long temps que je l'ai leüe (la Liturgie) & que j'en ai esté merveil∣leusement edi∣fie: Et vostre grand Prelat de Duresme vous peut tes∣moigner que j'ai assiste plus d'unefois au Service qu'il faisoit au Palais Royal, & en l'autre maison qu'on leur avoit donné. Et il n'y a que peu de jours que j'y ai encore assisté dans la Maison ou Myl de St. Alban fait au∣jourdhui ses exercises. Mr. Gaches Min. de Chrenton. I read your Liturgy, saith he, a long time since, and I was wonderfully edified with it; and your great Prelate of Du∣resme may testifie unto you; that I assisted more then once at the Divine Service which he performed in the Palace Royal, and in the other house which was given them. And it is but few dayes since that I was again present at it in that house, where my Lord of Saint Albans hath his Chappel at this day. If again another confir∣mation of this be required, I hope I have found one which will prove fully satisfactory, and that is a passage in an Epi∣stle of Fridericus Spanhemius, sometimes Preacher and Divini∣ty Reader at Geneva, prefixed to the third Part of his Dubia Evangelica, which he dedicates to the late Lord Primate of Ireland, to the Earle of Pembroke, to the Earl of Angus, and to the Earle of Lauderdale, now His Majesties Secretary of State for the Kingdom of Scotland. This Author is so well known for his Piety and Learning, that when I have named him I need say no more: only I would mind them for whom I write, that Dr. Spanhemius was Divinity Reader at Geneva, when he spake thus;Causas edisserui, Paesul Reverendissime, Comites Illustrissimi, cur Nomina vestra huic operi praescribenda duxerim, & cur publicè profiteri voluerim, quam prolixè mihi de affectu vestro gratuler. Soepè ego animo repeto verè fortunatas illas Insulas vestras, & felicitatem ill m priscam quae ex reliquio orbe Euroaeo in vestrum propè modum commigrasse videtur: vestrae illa pietatis Appendix est, quam in Britannia vestra flo∣rentem in summi & imi subsellii hominibus ante complures annos summa cum volupta∣te observavi. Obversatur mihi crebro grata ista Ecclesiarum vestrarum Facies, ista in Publicis Pietatis excercitiis Reverentia, ista attentio, iste vestratium in Dei cultu fer∣vor, iste Magnatum & Privatorum zelus, ista publica fimul & domestica pietas, patria genti vestrae virtus, cui geminam frustra poenè alibi quaeras, vix certè reperias. Quan∣tum hoc Dei munus sit, in quo alia omnia sita sunt, & à quo expectari debent, illi no∣runt, qui res suo pretio aestimae solent, & vitae suae rationes soepè cum Deo subducere. Spanhem. in Epist. 3. Part. Dub. Evangel. Genevae. I have given the reasons, most REVEREND PRELATE, and you most Illustrious LORDS, why I thought it fit to prefix your names to this Work, and why I was desirous publickly to testifie, how happy I think my self in the honour of your good affe∣ction. I often call to mind those truly fortunate Islands of yours, and that ancient happiness, which one would think hath fled to you from all the other places of Europe. This happiness is an Appen∣dix
of that Piety of yours, which with the greatest delight I observed many years since, to flourish in England in men both of the highest and lowest degree. That beauteous Face of your Churh doth often represent a self before mine eyes; likewise tha Reverence in the publick Wrship of God, that attention, that fervour of your countrey-men at Gods Service, that zeal as well of great Persons as prvate men, that publick piety in the Church, and private devo∣tion in the Family, the proper vertue of your Nation, whose like elsewhere you'l seek almost in vain, and hardly find. How great a blessing of God this is, in which all others are contained, and from which they are all to be expected, those know, who use to value things according to their worth, and call themselves often to an ac∣count with God. There is much more in this passage than I have need of now: For whereas I bring it in here onely to shew, that those of the Reformed Churches abroad frequent our Churches, and are willing to be present at our Service, and joyn with us in the publick Worship of God, according as it is performed here in England, he speaks even with ad∣miration of the beaueous Face of our Church, and delights himselfe in the very remembrance of the Reverence used here among us in the publick Worship of God, and doth not stick to say and publish to the whole world, even from Gene∣va (which the Presbyterians here would make us believe not∣withstanding, to be so differently affected to them and to us, as the Kirk of Scotland was during the times of her confusions and distempers) and thatIbidem. Bona Superiorum venia, with the good leave of the Governors thereof, that the publick Piety, that is, the publick Worship of God in the Church of England is matchless, and hath not its like in any other place whatsoever; be∣ing the peculiar advantage of this Nation, and of these for∣tunate Islands, as he calleth them, and as they might truly be, if they pleased,If it happens that any member of the R formed Churches a∣broad speaks a∣gainst the Ref. Church of Eng∣land, he is cen∣sured for it by their Synods. and as I hope in our good God they will be at last. 8. That some may be found notwithstanding this, and they Ministers perhaps as well as others in the Reformed Churches abroad, who out of a froward, peevish, and supersti∣tious humour (as Ludovicus Capellus saith of the English Pres∣byterians) or because they are in love with those things to
which they are accustomed; or that they are mis-informed, knowing only so much of our Church, as is represented un∣to them by partial hands, and by such as make it their work to disfigure us, and to make us odious to our Brethren. That, I say, some may be found in the Reformed Churches abroad, who upon these and the like grounds, or out of some weak∣ness of judgement and distemper of mind, do over-value their own way, even to the vilifying of all others, and think no∣thing so well as what they are used to, wishing thereupon, that all the world would follow it, I nothing doubt. For there is ignorance, weakness, and humour in other Countries, as well as in England. And there is never a National Church in Christendom, wherein there are not some Members that find fault with one thing or other of the Government and publick Worship thereof: whence it is, that every Church hath made Laws very strict against such contentious unquiet Spirits to suppress them, as I have shewed out of the Disci∣pline of the French Reformed Churches. But as the peevish∣ness, the fantastical opinions, and rash speeches of such men against the Government and Worship of their own Churches, cannot be imputed to the said Churches which are thereby disturbed; neither ought we in justice and reason to ascribe to any of the Reformed Churches the impertinent and foolish talking of any of their men, if peradventure some be found (which I am confident are very few) that dare speak any thing against the Church of England. And this ought we the less to do for that when their Synods have notice given them of such senseless brain-sick fellows, a censure is forth∣with passed upon them for their scandalous rashness. Of this their wise and Christian-like proceeding in such cases, I'le bring one instance here, which I trust, will be found to the purpose, and this it is: One Mr. Coignart of the Town of Roan, first a Physician, next a Lawyer, then a Divine, writ a Book of Controversie against the Church of Rome; and be∣cause the Book had many good things in't, and that the man was not rich, he had a summe of money allowed him to∣wards the Printing of the same, as the custom is in like cases: When the Work was out in Print, he presented his Petition
to the Synod of the Province, that he might receive the summe of money appointed for him. Whereupon complaint being made of some scandalous expressions of his Book, a∣gainst the Reformation of the Church of England; those whose Office it was to examine Books before they were li∣censed for the Press, were called in question. One of them being present, by name Monsieur de l'Angle, President of the Assembly, protested that he advised Coignart to take out of his said Book those scandalous expressions against the Church of England, and that he gave him Licence to put forth his Book, but upon condition he should do so; which ha∣ving failed to do, his opinion was, that Coignart instead of receiving the summe which formerly was promised him, should be censured by the Synod; which was done accor∣dingly, every one of the Assembly approving and following the Overture made by the Moderator thereof. This hap∣pened in the year 1657. When the Church of England did lie as it were dead and buried, and in the apprehension of most men, almost out of hope of a Resurrection, which is worthy observation: the Synod was held at Caën in Normandy, in the house of the afore mentioned Monsieur Bochart. I was present at it, being sent thither from My Lord Duc de la force, whose Chaplain I was at that time. Monsieur le Couteur the now worthy Dean of the Island of Jersey, being then one of the Ministers of the Reformed Church of Caën was there likewise. We both rejoyced exceedingly to see so much right done to our Church, notwithstanding her low condition, and that so handsomely, so unanimously, in such a juncture of affaires, and with so little ado on our part, that though we were not wanting to our du∣ty in representing the wrong done to our Mother-Church, we were conscious that the whole Assembly, one of the most considerable of all France, both for the number and for the worth of the Members thereof, did do nothing in that but what was according to their usuall known Principles, without any the least regard to us. 8. But this is not all, they declare themselves yet farther
in behalf of the Church of England.That the Mini∣strs of the Re∣formed Chur∣ches abroad blame those that refuse to Con∣form to the R∣formed Church of England when occasion is offered, and that they hold them for Schis∣maticks, and are scandalized at them. For besides, that there is not one word spoken against her in any of their Publick Records; that they joyn with her in the Publick Worship she renders unto God, when they are here among us; That they frequent the Lords Ambassadors Chappels beyond the Seas; That they pass their Censures upon such of their Members as dare to let go in their Printed Books any hard expression against the Reformation of our Church, and that in the time of her lowest condition; Besides all these testifi∣cations of their good liking of our Common-Prayer, Rites, and other Customs used in Publick Worship, according to our Ecclesiastical Injunctions; They express their high dis∣like of such as are so peevish and weak, to say no more of them at present, as to refuse to joyn with us in Church Duties when occasion is offered, and account them for no lesse then scandalous and schismatical persons. This may be seen by the following Letter of the same Reverend Divine Monsieur de l'Angle, one of the Ministers of the Reformed Church of Roan, a person of great worth and fame and known integri∣ty; who hath been often Delegate to the National Assem∣blies of the Reformed Churches of France, in the last of which he was one of the Moderators, and who hath been likewise several times their Delegate, to make their addresses unto the French King in their behalf. The Letter was writ∣ten to me in May last, soon after the French Congregation (now) of the Savoy, had submitted to the Government of the Church of England, and used the Book of Common-Prayer, upon some rumors that were among those of the Walloons Church of London, as if the Reverend Ministers of Roan had been displeased at it. Sir, my honoured Brother, I Think I have told you by my former Letters that I rejoyced very much at the establishement of the Angli∣co-Gallicane Church that the King your Soveraign hath
made, wherein his Majesty hath ordered you to be Mi∣nister. And I rejoyced speci∣ally at the scope of that set∣tlement, viz. To make known to the whole world that Communion which is be∣twixt us, and that the Re∣formed Churches of France have not that aversion a∣gainst the Discipline of the Church of England, which some men report they have. I am certain that my Col∣legues were of the same mind when I imparted unto them the news of your new established Church, and we are all still of the same judg∣ment. And I marvel that any one dare tell you that I have changed my opinion, and that I do approve of what some give out concerning those of the French Church of London; (and which to say the truth, I cannot believe) that they make difficulty to entertain Communion with you when any occasion is of∣fered. I hold them to be wiser, and better enclin'd to peace then so. They know that the Illustrious Mousieur du Moulin the Father preach∣ed before King Iames, and that he received the Lords Supper at the same time that
His Majesty did receive, as also some of the Bishops, to shew the Communion which is betwixt the Church of En∣gland and our Churches; and that the things we differ in are but as the many colours of Ioseph's coat, our Doctrine being altogether the same. They know also that Dr. Primerose their late Pastor was at the same time one of His Majesties Chaplains. But if those of that Church were now of another mind, the Reformed Churches of France are very far from approving of such scandalous procee∣dings.
Monsieur & treshonoré frere, JE croy vous avoir tesmoigne par mes dernicres que je m'estois fort resioüi de l'esta∣blishment que le Roy vostre maistre a fait de l'Eglise Angli∣co-Gallicane, ou il vous a
establi Pasteur & sur tout du but qu'on s'y est proposé de faire conoistre a tout le monde la Com∣munion qui est entre nos Eglises & de faire remarquer par la que les Eglises Françoises n'ont point l'aversion qu'on leur attri∣bue pour la Discipline d'An∣gleterre. Je sai bien que c'est la mesme disposition en laquelle j'ai vû Messieurs mes Collegues quand je leur fis part de cette nouvelle. Et je sai bien qu'eux & moy y perseverons encore, Et je suis fort estonné que l'on vous die que j'aye changé d'avis ni que j'approuve ce que j'ap∣prens de l'Eglise Françoise de Londres & que pour vous dire vrai, je ne puis croire, qu'ils facent difficulté de com∣munier avec vous quand l'oc∣casion s'en presente. Je les tiens trop sages & trop amateurs de la Paix pour en estre venus la. Ils savent bien que Monsieur du Moulin l'Illustre pere a pres∣ché devant le Roy & communié avec lui & ses Evesques pour marquer la conformité de nos Eglises avec les Angloises & que les differences qui se ren∣contrent entre nous ne sont que comme les diverses couleurs du Hoqueton bigarré de Ioseph & qu'en la Doctrine nous conve∣nons absolument. Ils savent bien aussi que feu Mr. Prim∣rose
leur Pasteur estoit en mesme temps Chappelain du Roy. Mais si ces Mrs. e∣stoient maintenant d'un autre sentiment, les Eglises de France sont bien elongnées d'approu∣ver une conduite si scanda∣leuse. And Mr. Primerose Grand-child to the afore named Dr. Primerose, who is at present one of the Ministers of the Walloons Church of London, is a person of so much worth and honesty, that I am sure he will not deny that he hath heard Monsieur de l'Angle say, that if any did refuse Communion with our Congregation, which is now a Member of the Church of England, he holds such for no other then Schisma∣ticks. Before I have done I will shew that he is not alone of that opinion, but that it is the judgement of all understan∣ding men in the Reformed Churches abroad. Now whilest it comes into my mind, for fear I might forget it, I shall hear impart to the Reader what hath passed betwixt the two French Congregations that are within the two Cities of Lon∣don and Westminster; not to renew their ancient quarrels one with another, which are now composed; nor to blame ei∣ther of them; but only that it may be known on what oc∣casion and upon what ground one of them hath submitted to the Pastoral Care of the right Reverend Bishop of London,
and taken up the use of the Book of Common-Prayer; that be∣ing also a very considerable Argument to vindicate the Re∣formed Strangers from the imputation of being enemies, or any way averse to the Church of England; and such a one doubtless, as would have hindred all men pretending to be rational and not prejudicate, from giving out so ill reports of them, but such only as think they know better the things of a man, then the spirit of man which is in him; and pre∣sume to be better informed of the judgement of the Refor∣med Churches beyond the Seas, than those who were born and bred up in them, and have been Ministers therein. 9. About twenty years since the Duke of Soubize,A whole French Reformed Con∣gregation hath conformed to the Reformed Church of En∣gland. living near the Court, and finding it troublesome, and sometimes unpossible for him, by reason of his infirmities, to go to Church as far as Thredneedle-street, where the Walloons have their Church, he had commonly a French Sermo preached before him in his own House every Sunday. Thither the French who live in those parts did usually resort, to save themselves the labour and toil of going up so great a way in∣to the City. This they found so commodious, that after the Duke was dead, they resolved to set up a French Church a∣bout the Strand, and wholly to leave going to that of the City, except such men as continued to pay their usual stipend (as some there were that did) towards the maintenance of their Ministers, and others sometimes upon occasion. But this notwithstanding, those of London so highly resented the erecting of that new Church, that ever since they endeavou∣red by all means possible to pull it down. Their last assault against the same was since the most happy restauration of this Church and Kingdom. For no sooner almost was the King returned, but they made their Addresses to his Maje∣stie, to have the French Congregation of Westminster (for so it was called, as being within the Liberties thereof) broken and forbidden ever to Assemble any more thenceforth; gi∣ving for reason of this their humble Petition and earnest De∣sire, That the said Congregation was not established by any lawful Authority, and that by their Priviledge, all those of the French Language, wheresoever they lived, in either of the
Cities of London or Westminster, have but one only place, where they are permitted to assemble for the publick Wor∣ship of God in their own Tongue. They of Westminster to keep up their Congregation presented their humble suit to His Majesty, that he would be graciously pleased to consi∣der what trouble and toil it would be for them, especially such as had great Families, and young Children, to goe every Sunday to Church at such a distance. The King, all things considered, out of his wonted goodness, found out a way in his Wisdom, to grant them both their requests; by breaking the French Congregation of Westminster, according to the desire of those of the VValloons Congregation of Lon∣don, as being established indeed without any lawful Autho∣rity; and by setting up a new Church under the immediate Jurisdiction of the right Reverend Father in God the Bishop of London, wherein Divine Service should be performed in French, according to the Book of Common-Prayer by Law established in this Realm; His Majesty being graciously pleased to provide for the maintenance of a Minister, to be therein a constant Preacher; and leaving it to every ones Liberty to joyn with those of the old VValloons Congregati∣on of London, or to become Members of the new French Church of VVestminster, which is likewise permitted by his Majesties gracious Letter, to adde to that Minister for whom his Majesty is to provide, as many others as by them shall be thought convenient for the advancement of Gods glory and their own edification, provided the said Ministers be presented to the Bishop of London for the time being, to be by him Instituted. His Majesties pleasure being thus to them signified, the Ministers and Elders, and the Heads of Families of the said Congregation met to advise together what was to be done: two or three (for I think there were no more) utterly refused to submit; and indeed their carri∣age had been such during the troubles, that no other thing was to be expected from them. Of the others some few were of a mind that the Ministers and some of the Elders in the name of the whole Congregation should write beyond the Seas, to ask the judgement of the Divines of the Reformed
Churches of France and Geneva, to know whether they might with a good conscience leave that Liturgy they had used hi∣therto, and take that of the Church of England, subjecting themselves to the Bishop of Londons Jurisdiction. But they were but few of this mind, and their number became lesse, when they had heard Monsieur Hierosme the eldest of their two Ministers, now my Reverend and dear Collegue, a man of an excellent judgement, who was the Moderator in that Assembly, and who being well acquainted with the opinion the Reformed Churches of France have of the Reformed Church of England (having been many years a Minister in one of them before his coming over) represented unto them that they should wrong both themselves and the Churches of France, and all other Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, as well as the Church of England, to ask such a question, and to doubt of such a thing. Nay, he shewed them further, that such an opportunity being offered to clear the Reformed Churches of France of that aspersion which was put upon them by some men, as if they condemned the Church of Eng∣land; it would be taken very ill by all wise men among them, if they should not wipe it off, by entring themselves freely without any more ado into the Communion of the Church of England, by that fair door which was opened to them by the Royal hand of His Majesty. So that he, toge∣ther with the other Minister and the Elders, as also the most part of the Heads of Families unanimously agreed to submit to the Church of England, thinking it a great happiness to become in every respect Members of so sound a Body, from which they never accounted themselves stangers, though they differed in some outward things in which the Essence of Religion doth not consist. It was also resolved at the same time, that a good number of the Elders with the Mini∣sters, in the name of all should render their most humble thanks to the Kings most Excellent Majesty for his good∣nesse, and declare that they most willingly submitted. The same were ordered likewise to go in the name of the rest of their brethren, to the right Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of London to acknowledge him for their
Pastor. All which was performed accordingly. 10. Now because no manner of force was laid upon any, it was left free for such as were not fully satisfied in their judgement, to advise thereupon with whom they pleased, either here or beyond the Seas; who therefore writ to the Consistory of the Reformed Church of Paris, and to that of Geneva, as also to the Ministers and Elders of Bordeaux in Aquitain. The Quaere they put to them was this, Whether they might with a good Conscience become Members of the French Church newly erected by the Kings Majesty, wherein Divine Service was to be performed according to the Liturgie of the Church of England? The Consistory of Paris made no answer, partly for the same Reason for which Mr. Hierosme would not have had that Quaere put to them, in the name of the whole Congregation, viz. That there is no question to be made of such a thing; all the world knowing that the French Reformed Churches ever since Re∣formation, have been very careful to entertain Communion and good correspondence with the Church of England; part∣ly because if such a Question were to be debated and deci∣ded anew, it would have been counted a great presumption for the Ministers of one single Church, be it never so consi∣derable, and be they never so many, or so learned, to take upon themselves a business of so high concernment. But that these men might be brought out of that uncertainty and doubt wherein they seemed to be, such of the Ministers as were acquainted with them, returned this answer for their satisfaction, That they ought not to make any scruple to sub∣mit to the Order of our Church. This information I have from Monsieur Drelincourt, one of the said Ministers; who ad∣deth further in his Letter, that he praiseth God, that notwith∣standing the endeavours of the Walloons Church of London, to pull down the French Church of Westminster, She doth yet subsist by the Goodness and Liberality of the King. Monsieur Gaches another of the Ministers, having received of Mr. Hie∣rosme an account of what passed in this new establishment, & of the reasons for which he so freely submitted to the Church of England without taking any counsel of any beyond the
Seas, he doth approve of this action of his, and saith, that he is much edified thereby; Vos sentiments de charité & de paix m'edifient beaucoup, saith he, this charitable and pacifique mind of yours is much edifying to me. And he is so far from advising any to forbear going to this new established Church, because of the form of publick Worship which is used therein, different from that which was used in it before, that he would have them of the Walloons Church that keep their former way, to come sometimes and be present at our Service, and receive the Lords Supper with us, to shew that they are not contrary to our way, though they use another. Si l'on vous voyoit vivre en une estroite intelligence, que vous as∣sistassies quelquefois au Sermon & a la Communion de nos freres de Londres, & qu'eux a leur tour assistassent a vos Sermons & a vo∣stre Communion, cela produiroit le plus bel effet du monde. Where∣in he giveth the same counsel which he useth himself upon occasions, as I shewed before out of another Letter. But I conceive that I cannot better let the world know how the setting up of this French Church after the way of the Church of England, was taken by all those of the Reformed Church of Paris, as well Ministers as others, then by inserting here the following Letter all at length in both Languages, advising all them that understand French, to read onely the Original, and not my poor Translation, through which, though true and faithful, it receiveth certainly great disadvantage. The Letter is from a person of the other Sex, the most Illustrious Prncess of TƲRENNE, a person so well known for those eminent endowments of all moral and intellectual Vertues, true godliness, and fervent zeal to the Protestant Religion, wherewith God hath adorned her, that when I have named her Highness, I have said all. Onely I must adde this, that though I have had many experiences of her High∣nesses Charity, during the time I had the honour to be Chaplain to her Highnesse's Father, my Lord Duke de la Force his Grace, yet I know that I trespasse so much against her incomparable Modesty, that I may justly feare her high displeasure for putting thus her Highness in Print. Neverthelesse I must venture it, because as she her selfe
acknowledgeth, The Publick Good must ever carry it before Pri∣vate Interest. I Have received almost at the same time both your Letters, by which I am infor∣med of the setting up of your new French Church, where∣of I heard nothing before. I was very sorry that I could not steal a moment to con∣gratulate you there upon Sa∣turday last, as I did most earnestly desire to doe; And though I have scarce any time to spare this mor∣ning, I think it better to scribble in haste these few lines, than to keep any lon∣ger to my self the joy that I have for it; yet you know that it is a joy tempered with regret, and that I take enough to heart my Fathers and my Mothers interest, to be sensibly affected with the losse that their family will sustain by being depri∣ved of a Pastor so dearly be∣loved, and so much honoured of them. But because the Publick interest must carry it before that which is par∣ticular, and that the interest of the house of God, must go before that of our private houses, I confess my sorrow doth cease, when I consider
the advantages of this esta∣blishment, and that it is not only a multiplying of the Churches of our language amongst you; but likewise an evidence, that if the Dis∣ciplines of these two King∣doms differ in some things, it is by reason of the diffe∣rence of our conditions and not of our perswasions; and that we all agree in this, that for things external, whereof our Lord hath left the dispo∣sal to his Church, she may vary them as times and pla∣ces do require, and accor∣ding to the wisdom of those to whom God hath entrusted the Government thereof. And that in such things pri∣vate persons have nothing to do, but to submit and subject themselves with great Docibleness and Hu∣mility to the order of their Superiours, and to such cu∣stomes as are received and established, in the Ortho∣dox Congregations of the countries where they live. I ever longed to see London, and to be an eye witnesse of the wonders that God hath wrought in it of late, for which we have praised his name here. But I must con∣fess I do wish it more then
ever I did, now that I may say Amen in my own lan∣guage, to your Thanksgi∣vings, and to the holy Pray∣ers of your excellent Liturgy, and answer in your congre∣gation to your Letany, which I do say often by my selfe in my closet, there being here no publick congregation where I may say it. I do extreamly rejoice that you take the care to have that good Book newly printed in French. I assure you that the fifty Co∣pies you promise me will not lie long by me. There is not one left of the old Edition in our Booksellers shops, and every body seeks after them. I have promised some to se∣veral persons. I gave the last I had to Monsieur Drelin∣court. I doubt not but he will write to you, to testifie his joy of this new French Church, and of the choice your King hath made of your person to be Minister therein. There is not one of our Ministers that I have seen since I received your Letters about it, but shewed himself very well satisfied therewith; as also the De∣puty General of our Chur∣ches. And I am persvvaded that all men that understand
these matters ne'r so little will praise God for it. Indeed for my part, I cannot wonder e∣nough, & I am almost astoni∣shed, when I hear of those in your Provinces, who so much oppose the use of the Book of Common Prayer. I beseech God to send you all the spirit of Unity and Peace; the spirit of Humility, and of the Fear of his Name; the the spirit of Holiness, of O∣bedience, and of good Or∣der; and to pour his blessing upon the pains you take in your new employment.
J'Ay receu Monsieur, presque en mesme temps vos deux Lettres qui m'aprennent vostre nouvel establissement. Je n'en avois rien appris que ce que vous m'en avés mande j'eu tous les regrets du monde de ne pou∣voir samedy derober un moment pour vous en feliciter comme j'en avois une envie impatiente, & quoy que j'aye bien peu de temps ce matin j'ayme mieux vous en escrire avec precipitati∣on quelques lignes barboüillées que de tarder davantage avous en tesmoigner ma joye. Vous scavez bien pourtant que c'est une joye meslée de regret, & que les Interests de mon Pere & de Mere me sont asses a coeur pour ne pouvoir sans douleur, voir perdre a leur maison un Pa∣steur qui y estoit si cherement aymé & honoré. Mais parce qu'il faut que l'interest publiq l'emporte pardessus le particu∣lier, & celui de la Maison de Dieu par dessus celuy des no∣stres, j'avoüe que mon deplai∣sir s'evanouit lors que je pense a l'utilité de cet establissement, & que je considere que c'est mul∣tiplier chéz vous les Eglises de nostre langue, & faire voir que si les disciplines des deux Roy∣aumes
ont quelques differences, elles viennent de la dfference de nos conditions & non pas de celle de nos opinions & que nous sommes tous d'accord que pour ces choses exterieures dont no∣stre Seigneur a laissé la disposi∣tion a Son Eglise, elle peut les varier selon l'exigence des lieux & des temps conforment a la prudonce de ceux que Dieu a commis pour sa conduite, & qu'en cela les fideles particuliers n'ont q'ua se sou-metire & a s'assuietir avec grande docil té & humilité aux ordres de leurs Superieures & aux coustumes receües & estables dans les as∣semblées Ortodoxes des lieux ou ilz font leur demeure. J'a∣vois de tout temps grande envie de voir Londres, & d'estre tes∣moin oculaire des merveilles que Dieu y a faites depuis quelque temps & dont nous l'avons loüé d'icy, mais il faut que j'avoue que j'en auray plus d'envie que jamais, apresent que je pourrois en ma langue dire Amen a vos actions de graces & aux Saintes prieres de vostre Excellente Liturgie, & respondre a vostre Litanie que je dis sou∣vent seule dans mon cabinet, n'ayant pas la commodité de la pouvoir dire icy dans une assem∣blée publique. Ie suis ravie que vous fassies reimprimer ce beau
liure, je vous asseure que je ne se∣ray pas empeschée des cinquante exemplaires que vous me pro∣mettes de me faire aveir. Car tous nos libraires d'jey en sont epuisés & tout le monde en cher∣che, j'en ay promis  quantité de personnes; le dernier aqui j'en ay donné c'est Monsieur Drelincourt. Ie ne doute pas qu'il ne vous escrive pour vous tasmoigner la joye qu'il a de cet etablissement q'ua fait vostre Roy & du choix qu'il a fait de vostre personne. Tout ce que j'ay veu de Messieurs nos Mi∣nistres depuis que j'ay receu cette nouvelle, m'ont tesmoigne en estre tres ayses & Mon∣sieur nostre Deputé aussi, & je crois qu'il n'y peut pas avoir de personnes tant soit peu Intelligeantes sur ces ma∣tieres qui n'en louent Diell. Il est vray que je suis dans un estonnement estrange quand j'oy parler de gens dans vos pro∣vinces qui s'opposent si forte∣ment a l'usage de la Liturgie Dieu veüille mettre parmi vous l'Esprit d'Ʋnion & de Paix; l'Esprit d'humilité & de crainte de son nom; l'Esprit de Sancti∣fication & d'obeissance & de bon Ordre, & benir les soins que vous prendres en vostre nouvel employ.
11. I believe the Reader by this time is desirous to know, how the submitting of the French Congregation to the Go∣vernment and Publick Worship of the Church of England,The submitting of the French Congregation well taken at Geneva. was taken at Geneva. And that he will learn best from Re∣verend Monsieur Chabret, one of the eldest and gravest Mi∣nisters of that Church, who writes as followeth in a Letter to Doctor Colladon upon this matter; the Copy whereof I have by me, written with Doctor Colladon his own hand. Sir, BEsides that which Judge Colladon imparted to me out of his Letters concerning the business of the Liturgy, I received your last a fourth night ago, by which I was informed more at large, see∣ing therein, the translation of your Congregation into another place; the Kings
Orders for the Common Pray∣er, and subjection to the Bi∣shop of London; the establish∣ing of a Minister, &c. where∣unto the most part of your Congregation were ready to acquiesce, there being but ve∣ry few that scrupled at it, de∣siring to be advised thereup∣on from other parts, and like∣wise from this place, as pri∣vate persons. The reasons for which we delayed a little to deliberate about it in our company, and give our answer, were chief∣ly to avoid the imputation of being inclined to prescribe Laws to those of other Coun∣tries; and also that we would gladly know if that Liturgy be the same with that of Q. Elizabeth her Reign, or of K. James, yea, or of the late King; or a new one compi∣led by Arch-Bishop Laud, of which it is reported that it hath been occasion of much clamour, and ground of fears and jealousies, through which so many were led to embroyle themselves in the late Commotions. For if the question be only about Common-Prayer mor∣ning and evening, which doth not at all thwart the form of Service used in France and
in this place, there being an uniformity of Doctrine, you know very well that those small differences were not stuck at, and that as those of our way may communicate with the Church of England, so the English Nobility and others of the same Nation, who have passed this way, have communicated with us in France and in this Church, to testifie this perfect Union. Seeing that if we should stick at such things, there is no particular Church in Swit∣zerland or Germany, nay, nor in the Low-Countries, which hath not its proper Ceremo∣nies, at which no offence is taken, there being nothing in them which savours of Idolatry or Superstition. As either we see nothing resem∣bling (viz. Idolatry or Super∣stition) in the said English Liturgie brought in at the Re∣formation. And since the King by the Letter, whereof a Copy hath been sent to us, enjoynes onely that the said Liturgie of Common Prayers, Gospels, Epistles, Collects, &c. be used in your Congregati∣on, without specifying any other thing: and that which is yet most advantagious, that His Majesty is graciously
pleased to provide for the subsistence of a Minister, gi∣ving them leave to call in o∣thers to his assistance, if it be necessary, under such condi∣tions as are therein contai∣ned: and that to expresse the height of his favour, he leaves the Walloons Church in her present condition, without diminishing her pri∣viledges: such a manner of proceeding cannot but be well taken.
Monsieur, OUtre ce que Monsieur le Lieutenant Colladon m'a∣voit communique des siennes, touchant l'afaire de la Liturgie, je receu la vostre derniere il y a quinze jours qui m'en instruisit plus amplement en m'apprenant la translation de l'Assemblée en un autre lieu, les Ordres du Roy pur les Common Prayer,
& la despendance de l'Evesque, l'establissement d'un Pasteur, &c. a quoy le plus grand nombre de vostre Assemblée estoit prest d'acquiescer & n'y en avoit que bien peu qui en fissent scrupule demandans en avoir avis d'ailleurs & mesme d'ici comme particuliers. Les raisons qui nous ont fait un peu differer a en pren∣dre avis en nostre compagnie & a y respondre ont esté principalement pour eviter qu'on ne nous mit sus de vouloir nous mesler de donner des reglements a ceux de de∣hors & aussi que nous serions bien aises de savoir si cette Liturgie est la mesme que cel∣le du temps de la Reine Eli∣zabeth, ou du Roy Jaques, ou mesme du dernier Roy; Ou une nouvelle dressée par l'Arch-Evesque Laud, que l'on dit a∣voir donné suiet a beaucoup de bruit, & au suiet de laquelle tant d'Esprits ont pris om∣brage & se sont laisses em∣porter aux remuements passes. Car s'il ne s'agissoit que des prieres Communes du Matin & du soir qui ne choquent point du tout la forme de Service en France & ici, y ayant unifor∣mité
en la Doctrine, vous voyes bien qu'on ne s'est point aheurté a ces petites diversites & comme ceux de nostre sentiment peuvent avoir Communion avec les Egli∣ses Angloises, aussi les Seigneurs Anglois & autres du mesme pais qui ont passé ici ont com∣munié avec nous en France & ici, en tesmoignage de cette par∣faite union. Veu que s'il fallou regerder a cela, il n'y a Eglise particuliere en Suisse ou Alemag∣ne & mesme es Pays Bas, qui n'ait ses Ceremonies particulieres lesquelles n'offensent personne, n'y ayant rien qui ressente l'Idolatrie ni la superstition. De mesme que nous ne voyons rien de semblable en la dite Liturgie Angloise in∣troduite par la Reformation. Et puisque sa Majesté par sa Lettre dont on nous a envoyée Copie, ordonne seulement qu'on observe dans vostre assemblée ladite Liturgie de prieres Com∣munes, Evangiles, Epistres, Collectes, &c. sans specifier aucune autre chose: Et ce qui est encore de meilleur, qu'elle a la bonté de pourvoir a la subsi∣stance d'un Pasteur & permet d'y en appeller d'autres s'il est necessaire, sous les conditions y contenües. Et que pour comble de grace, il laisse l'Eglise Wal∣lone en l'estat ou elle est, sans aucune diminution de ses privi∣leges,
cela ne peut estre que bien interpreté. The same person in another Letter directed to the said Doctor Colladon hath these words. I See by your last that your Congregation having be∣gun to use the form of Litur∣gie observed in the Island of Jersey, the Ministers of Paris have by their answer approved it. We may do the like, since we do not hold the said Churches for Schismatical or Superstitious no more then all the English and Irish Churches, with whom we are perfectly uni∣ted in Doctrinals, and par∣take with each other in the same Sacraments, when we meet together without any scruple of conscience. JE voi par vostre derniere sur ce que vostre assembléea com∣mencé a user de la Liturgie pra∣ctiquée dans l'Isle de Jersai, que Mrs. les Pasteurs de Paris ont respondu avec approbation, Nous en pouvons bien faire le semblable, puisque nous ne tenons point ces Eglises la pour Schis∣matiques ni Superstitieuses non plus que toutes les Eglises An∣glicanes & Irlandoises avec les∣quelles nous avons une parfaite Communion en Doctrine & participons reciproquement a mesmes Sacraments quand on se rencontre les uns parmi les au∣tres sans scrupule de conscience. 12. Before I proceed, I must mind my Reader to reflect a little upon what he seeth that Monsieur Chabret saith of a new Liturgy of the Church of England, supposed to be compi∣led by the late Lord Arch-Bishop, and that so differing from
the Liturgies of Queen Elizabeth, and King James,False reports made abroad a∣gainst the Church of England, to beget a ms∣understanding betwixt her and other Re∣fomed Chur∣ches. yea and of King Charles the First, that though nothing is found in any of them that savours either of Idolatry or Superstition, yet that pretended one of the late Arch-Bishop is not to be al∣lowed of, because it is supposed to have a smack of Idolatry or Superstition, or both. All England will marvel to see a grave Divine make such exceptions against a thing that ne∣ver was; and all judicious men observing that he speaks so upon mis-information, will easily guess from what hnds he was so well informed of the Arch-Bishops doings. It is just such another tale as that of Doctor Cousin, now the Re∣verend Lord Bishop of Duresme's buying of a Knife of one thousand pound price to cut the Communion Bread; which was given out for true in France, and was maintained for such to his Lordships own face, by one who did not know the Tale had been made of him. There is a Father of lyes and an Accuser of our Brethren. And no doubt but they who accused the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, of not binding their Ministers to the use of their set forms of Prayer,See the 1. Sect. N. are the same that have accused the late Lord Arch-Bishop of making a new Book of Common Prayer, other then those that were used in the times of our three last Soveraigns. Thus they are told that the Convocations of the Church of England consist only of Arch-Bishops and Bishops, and that the infe∣riour Clergy is not admitted to sit and vote in them; where∣as the Informers know very well, and the continued pra∣ctise ever since Reformation sheweth, that in every Convo∣cation there are two Houses, the Ʋpper and the Nether House, and that this wholly consisteth of the inferiour Clergy, viz. the Reverend Deans, Prebendaries, Arch-Deacons, and Pro∣ctors of the Clergy; and that nothing is concluded in the Upper House of Arch-Bishops and Bishops, without their advise and consent. And that it was ever so from the be∣ginning of Reformation, unto the beginning of the over∣throwing of the same by the late troubles in Church and State, doth appear by the very Title of the 39. Articles, and the so much spoken against, and so much resisted Canons of the Convocation holden Anno 1640. That of the Articles
running thus, Articles agreed upon by the Arch-Bishops and Bi∣shops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy. And that of the Canons thus; Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, treated upon by the Arch-Bishops of Canterbury and York, Presidents of the Convocations for the respective Provinces of Canterbury and York, and the rest of the Bishops and Clergie of those Provinces. They are told likewise that every one of our Bishops is a Pope, nay, more then a Pope in his Diocese, prescribing and im∣posing of himself what he pleaseth to his Clergy; whereas every Bishops authority is limited by his subscription to the 39. Articles, by his acknowledging the lawfulness of the Book of Common Prayer, &c. by the Constitutions and Canons Ec∣clesiastical, and by the Laws of the land, according to the Prescript of which he is to rule his Diocese, and no other∣wise; calling always to joyn with him in Imposition of Hands, and other matters of weighty concernment, some of the Prebends of his Cathedral, or other grave Ministers of the Diocese. I could relate here many other such false reports which are made abroad of our Church-Government and Polity to defame it and make it odious to other Reformed Churches; All which I know by my own experience, ha∣ving had often my ears beaten with such Tales. Wherefore hereafter wonder not, if when you are beyond the Seas, you find now and then in some men of the Reformed Religion a mis-understanding of us, but inform them aright and you are agreed. The Lord rebuke all slanderers, and stop the mouths of all them who speak ill of Sion. And by them of Bordeaux.13. Now to go on; As for those of Bordeaux, they did not answer at all to this Question in their return to our doubt∣ing Brethren; but supposing upon mis-information or mis∣apprehension, that if they should joyn to the new established French Church of Westminster, the old one of London would be destroyed, they advised them to become members of the same to uphold it. When this answer was received by them, some there were that made a loud noise of it, as if it had been the doom not only of that particular Congregation, but of the whole Church of England, whereupon having written to one of the Elders of the Reformed Church of Bordeaux, two of
the Ministers returned this answer in the following Letters directed to my self. The first is of Monsieur Goyon, one of the gravest and learnedst Divines of all the Province of Aqui∣tain, and as well versed in Antiquity as possible, and one who was Delegate from the Synod of his Province to the National Assembly of the Reformed Churches of France held at Charonton, Anno 1644. Sir, my honoured Brother, I Was told by Mr. de la Vie that the Letter of our Consistory written to some private persons of the French Church of London, was cause of some troubles amongst them who are desirous to embrace a good agreement in the Profession of Religi∣on. It is true that those Gentlemen having asked our judgement, whether they might with a good consci∣ence submit to that French Congregation which was to be set up in Westminster, un∣der the Government of the Bishop of London, and with the use of the English Liturgy; our company did not answer directly to the question. Not that we think the conscience wounded to live under that Government. No man can be of that judgement, unless he hath lost his understand∣ing, or is ignorant of the rules of true Piety: But it was because they were per∣swaded that the setting up of that new Church would be
the utter ruine of the Wal∣loons Church, which had al∣wayes subsisted to this day. So that the greater number of votes carried it, that I should make them only that answer which you have seen in the Copy of our Letter. I remember that presently after that, I writ to you what my judgement was upon the matter, and how I was a∣shamed that I had not an∣swered the Question punctu∣ally. But you know that in this Country we are bound to submit to the greater number of Votes. And since that our Letter is occasion of troubles among you, I pro∣mise, you shall have an au∣thentick explanation of the same, as soon as our Consi∣story shall meet again. In the mean while I may assure you that there is never a one of the Pastors of this Church, nor of the whole Province, who thinketh that the con∣science is wounded by living under the English Liturgy. Those are in a dream and dote that have such an opini∣on; and those Gentlemen among you do wrong us ve∣ry much when they quote us to foment their Schisme, which cannot but be ex∣tremely scandalous. Monsieur & treshonoré frere, J'Ai appris de Monsieur de la Vie que la lettre de nostre Con∣sistoire escrte a quelques parti∣culiers de l'Eglise Françoise de Londres, causoit du trouble parmi ceux qui ne desirent que d'entreteni une bonne union en la profession de la Religion. Il est vrai que ces Messieurs nous ayans demandé avis s'ils pou∣voyent se soumettre en conscience a l'Eglise Françoise qu'on vou∣loit establir a Westminster sous le regime de l'Evesque de Lon∣dres & la pratique de la Lutur∣gie Anglicane, nostre com∣pagnie ne respondit pas directe∣ment a cela. Ce n'est pas qu'elle estime que la conscience soit blessée de vivre sou ce regime; Il faudroit avoir perdu le sens ou atout le moins ne savoir pas les regles de la pieté, pour estre touché de ce sentiment. Mais c'est qu'on creut que l'establisse∣ment de ceite nouvelle Eglise ruineroit entierement l'Eglise Wallonne, qui avoit tousiours subsisté jusques alors: si bien que la pluralité des voix l'em∣porta, que je leur respondrois
seulement ce que vous aves veu dans la copie de nostre lettre. Il me souvient que je vous escri∣vis incontinent mon sentiment sur cela & la honte que j'avois de n'avoir pas respondu cate∣goriquement a la question; Mais vous scaves que nous despendons en ce pays de la pluralité des voix. Et puisque nostre lettre cause du trouble parmi vous, je vous promets de la faire authentiquement expliquer des que nostre con∣sistoire se pourra rassembler. Je puis bien vous assurer ce pendant qu'il n'y a aucum des Pasteurs de cette Eglise ni de toute la Province qui estime que la conscience soit blessée de vivre sous la Liturgie An∣glicane. Ce sont des resver∣jes d'avoir cette opinion. Et ces Messieurs de dela nous font grand tort de nous alle∣guer pour fomenter leur Schisme qui ne peut qu'estre extremement scandeleux.
The following Letter is of Monsieur Rondelet a learned and eloquent Preacher, to the same Reformed Congregation of Bordeaux, whither he was lately called from the Town of Barbezieux, as the custom is in France, when there are any Ministers of eminent parts in small Congregations, to translate them to others greater and more considerable. COncerning your Church, we have been told that the answer our Consistory made lately to some private persons of that congregation, who consulted it about some scruple they made of submit∣ting to the English Liturgy, hath produced some ill ef∣fects; and that such as affect not the order of the Church of England, did draw the same to their advantage, as if it favoured their opinions. I know not upon what those men ground their judgment in this particular: For I do not see that they can give any sense of that Letter of our Company that is favou∣rable unto them: And if it be read carefully, there will be found never a word in it that thwarts the English Li∣turgy, or that may occasion the least scruple of submit∣ting to the same. There passed nothing, there was nothing said in our compa∣ny against the honour and authority of the Discipline
of the Church of England, or against the manner of her Government, to which we bear a singular reverence, the establishing whereof, that I may also give my own judg∣ment thereon, I esteem very holy and most lawful; and which is more, the fittest of all, to keep men in good or∣der and due respect, to sup∣press scandals, and to extir∣pate Heresies. Thus much Sir, my good Brother, I thought my self obliged to write to you, to make in a manner our Apology, and to clear our judgement to such as might have a mind to mis-interpret the same.
A Propos de vostre E∣glise, nous avons ap∣pris que la response que no∣stre consistoire fit derniere∣ment a quelques particuliers de ce troupeau qui le consul∣terent sur quelque scrupule qu'ils faisoyent de se soumettre a la Liturgie d'Angleterre, avoit eu des suittes fascheu∣ses; & que ceux qui n'ai∣ment pas l'ordre Ecclesiastique d'Angleterre, entiroyent avan∣tage, comme si elle favori∣soit leurs sentiments. Je ne sai surquoy c'est que ces per∣sonnes la fondent leur opi∣nion; car je ne voy pas qu'ils puissent expliquer favorable∣ment pour eux, la lettre de nostre compagnie, & si on la lit exactement, l'on n'y trouve∣ra aucun terme qui choque la Liturgie Anglicane, ni qui puisse faire naistre la moindre difficulté de s'y sou mettre. Il ne se passa rien & il ne fut rien dit en nostre compagnie qui blessast l'hon∣neur & l'authorité de la Dis∣cipline des Eglises d'Angleterre,
ni la forme de leur Gouver∣nement, qui nous est en sin∣guliere veneration & dont j'estime, pour en donner en particulier mon avis, l'esta∣blissement tres saint & tres legitime, & qui plus est, le plus propre pour tenir les hommes dans l'ordre & dans le respect, pour reprimer les scandales & pour extirper les heresies. C'est de quoy Mon∣sieur & frere, j'ai cru estre obligé de vous escrire, pour faire en quelque facon nostre Apologie, & pour justifier nos sentiments dans l'esprit de ceux qui les voudroyent mal expliquer. And by them of Caen.13. How well the news of the setting up of this French Church according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, was received in other places, would be needless to report, after the judgement and testimonies of the afore named Di∣vines of Roan, Paris, Geneva, and Bordeaux: However I can∣not forbear to adde to them two more of two of the choicest men for Learning, Eloquence, and true Piety, that ever the French Reformed Churches had till this time; those are Monsieur du Bosc Minister of Caën, and Monsieur de l'Angle, the worthy Son of a most worthy Father, whose Collegue he is in the Reformed Church of Roan. They write but few Words, but those very comprehensive and to the purpose. Those of Monsieur du Bosc are as followeth. YOu shall be as dear to me under the Surplice of En∣gland, as under the Robe of
France; and I will embrace you with as good a heart in the Chappel of the Savoy, as I have ever done in the Tem∣ple of Bourg l'Abbé.
JE vous cherirai sous le Sur∣plis d'Angleterre, com∣me sous la Robe de France,
& je vous embresserai d'aussi boncoeur dans la Chappelle de la Savoye, que je fis jamais dans leThe place where the Rs. Church of Ca∣en useth to as∣semble, where I have preached several times. Temple du Bourg l'Abbé. This Gentleman is none of those that think it a sin to wear a Surplice,And by them of Roan. and to conform to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England; but his words need no Comment. These that follow are Monsieur de l'Angle's, whereby you may see whether it be true or no, that the Book of Common Prayer keepeth the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas from full Communion with us, and us from them, as is here reported by them that would have it to be so. I Know not who it is that hath told you I did not ap∣prove of your establishment. But whosoever he be, I assure you that he is very ill infor∣med of my mind. I rather look upon that business, (viz. the submitting of a whole French Reformed Congre∣gation to the Government and publick worship of the Church of England) as upon a means the Providence of God intends to make use of, to knit yet closer together that bond wich ought ever to be be∣twixt the Church of Engl. & the Ref. Churches of France. JE ne sai qui vous a dit que j'ai improuvé vostre e∣stablissement. Mais qui qu'il soit, je vous assure qu'il est tresmal informé de mes sen∣timents. Au contraire je re∣garde cette affaire la, com∣me un des moyens dont la pro∣vidence de Dieu se vent ser∣vir pour estreindre de plus en plus le lien qui doit tousiours estre entre l'Eglise Anglicane & les Eglises Reformées de ce Royaume. 14. Before I leave this,Several Mini∣nisters of most of the Ref. Chur∣ches conforming to the Church of England. I must shew yet further by ano∣ther evidence, that the Ministers of the Reformed Churches abroad like very well our Publick Worship. And this I prove by their joyning with us in this our Anglico-Gallicane
Church, as Monsieur de l' Angle calleth it very properly. For ever since we have begun to use the Book of Common-Prayer, though Providenee hath brought over many Ministers from beyond the Seas, some from Geneva, some from France, some from Germany, some from Poland, some from Lithua∣nia, some from Piemont, that is, almost from all the Refor∣med Churches; as also some Students in Divinity, some Elders, and other private persons of all conditions, we have seen none of them that ever made any difficulty to assist at Divine Service, and to conform. All of them that have been present upon Communion dayes having devoutly received the Lords Supper kneeling, and those that have preached, and a∣mong them two of Geneva, both of them very worthy men, by name Monsieur Calendrin and Monsieur Buisson, have all of them acknowledged in their Prayer the Kings Majesty Supreme Governour in this Realm and others His Majesties Dominions, over all Persons, and in all Causes, as well Ecclesia∣stical as Civil; and prayed for the most Reverend Arch-Bi∣shops, and the Right Reverend Bishops, as well as for infe∣riour Ministers of the Church, just as it is in the Bdding of Prayer. Among them who have thus conformed to us, and preached to our Congregation, I may not omit that pious and learned man, Reverend Mr. Heraut the eldest of the Ministers of the Walloons Congregation of London, who is known for a person that both feareth God and honoureth the King, and is be∣hind none in true zeal for the Reformed Churches. I must set down here likewise the worthy Italian Minister Reverend Mr. Bresmal who gave us a Sermon upon Christmass day last, to shew that he is no Separatist from the Church of England, though he followeth the same Discipline with the other stran∣gers Churches in London. Mr. Gaillard Minister and Divinity Reader designed in the University of Mont Alban; and Mr. Escofier Delegate of the Piemontan Churches are likewise of them who have conformed, and preached very learnedly to our congregation. Now let the unpartial Rea∣ders recollect the several Arguments I have made use of hi∣therto for the Negative of this Proposition, that the Pastors of most of the Reformed Churches take the Conformity with
the Church of England to be a sin; viz. their silence, none of them having ever declared against her in any of their pub∣lick Records, though they have not wanted occasions so to do, if it had been their judgement; their joyning with us at Gods Service here in England in our Churches; and abroad in the Kings and the Lord Ambassadors Chappels; their ad∣vising such of their Members as come over, to conform with∣out scruple; their censuring those that dare to be so bold and rash, as to shew in their Writings any dislike of the English Reformation, and that, when the Church of England was at the lowest; the submission of a whole French Congregation, as well Ministers and Elders as others, to the Bishop of Londons Jurisdiction; and their taking up the use of the Book of Common Prayer; the approbation given thereunto by the most famous Divines both for Learning and true Piety, that are now living in France, and by them of Geneva; their censuring and counting for no other than Schismaticks, such as make any difficulty to acknowledge the Church of Eng∣land for a true Reformed Church, and to entertain commu∣nion with her in all respects, and the late, and as yet present example of so many French, German, Poloman, Lithuanian, Genevan, Piemontan Ministers conforming to our publick worship: let the unpartial Readers, I say, recollect all these things, and judge whether I have not made my Negative good, and shewed the Affirmitive to be most false. 15. But this is not all,The Reformed Churches be∣yond th Sas have admitted into Livings the English Ministers, that were expelled, during the late troubles. there is something more to be said in behalf both of the said Churches and this our Church; for here they are joyned in the same cause, and have but one and the same enemy, The Accuser of our Brethren. It is known how great the persecution was against all Ministers, who ad∣hered to the King and Church of England during the late trou∣bles. Those who were more gently dealt with, were onely plundered, turned out of their Livings, or imprisoned. There were others whom it was thought fitter to cast out of the land, or who at least were compelled to withdraw of their own accord, as things stood then, and to go into a vo∣luntary exile. Monsieur le Couteur now Dean of the Island of Jersey, of whom I have spoken already; and Doctor Bre∣vint
now Prebend of Duresme, a person whose worth is very well known, and my self among the rest were of this num∣ber. We were all three one after another expelled out of the Island of Jersey our native Country. I had the honour, though unworthy of it, to go out first; and though it was well known in France, how zealous I was for my Mother Church, having received Episcopal Ordination at Paris pub∣lickly in the Chappel of that Honourable and truly Noble person, Sir Richard Browne, then His Majesties Resident in France (where all the exiled English went to Church) from the hands of the Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas now Lord Bishop of Orkney, then of Galloway; I had no sooner acquainted my friends with the condition I was in, but the Reformed Church of Caën invited me very kindly by an ex∣press sent to me to Saint Malo's, where I was, to come and be one of their Ministers in the absence of Monsieur Bochart, who was then going into Sweden. And not long after the Landgrave of Hessen having written to the Ministers of Paris, to send him a Minister to preach in French at his Highnesse's Court, I was by them recommended to that Prince, of whom likewise I received a very kind invitation by several Letters, which I have yet to shew. For what do I say all this? not to speak of my self, but to let the world know that a Priest, and a true Son of the Church of England, though expelled by the pretended Reformers, is counted a true Minister of the Go∣spel by the Reformed Churches abroad, and by them che∣rished and invited to exercise his Ministry in the midst of them, though judged unworthy thereof by those that would make poor silly people believe they are of the same judge∣ment with the said Churches. Now the Providence of God, not permitting me to go to either of these places whither I was invited, but calling me to another, to wit, to be Chap∣lain to his Grace my Lord Duke de la Force, as I have intima∣ted before; and Monsieur le Couteur being invited likewise at the same time to the Reformed Church of Caën, and Do∣ctor Brevint soon after to another Church in Normandy (whence he was preferred to be Chaplain to the most Illu∣strious and Renowned Prince of Turenne) we all three met
together at the Synod of that Province, there to have the Assemblies approbation; we exhibitted to them our Letters of Ordination, and others, shewing the cause of our banish∣ment; after which they first expressed much grief for the sad condition of our King and Church, and then desiring us on∣ly to conform to their Rites and Ceremonies, and Orders of their Church, for the time we should live amongst them, (for a Non-conformist Minister is a thing unknown, and ne∣ver suffered in those Churches) we were instituted into our several Churches, as the custom is, by the authority of the Synod, and that with so general a consent, that one onely who was a little possessed with Cromwell sme, having but said a word against us, was very sharply reprehended by the same Reverend Monsieur de l' Angle, I have already named more then once, who was one of the Moderators of that Assembly. What I have said before of Reverent Doctor Basire Prebend of Duresme and Arch-Deacon of Northumberland, sheweth how much he was made of by that great Prince George Ra∣gokci the second, Prince of Transylvania, by whom he was in∣trusted with the Chair in the Divinity School. Now this is certainly a strong Argument to shew what opinion the Re∣formed Churches abroad, have of the Reformed Church of England. For doubtless if they had that opinion of her, which the Authors of the pretended Petition for Peace, would make us believe they have, they would not so earnestly in∣vite, and so kindly and readily admit her Ministers to ex∣ercise their Ministery among them, without any recantati∣on and repenting of their pretended superstitious ways. 16.All the Rfor∣med Churches bold that every National Church hath power to m ke Laws for Her self in outward things, and that they may vary. They that were deceived hitherto by such as give out so confidently that the Ministers of the other Reformed Churches are not less enemies to our publick Worship then themselves, do see by this time, I hope, that they have been mis-informed; and I know nothing that can be alledged by their Informers to hold them any longer in their error, but this only, that these are but the private opinions and actions of some particular men. But although to speak thus, is nothing else but to shew a spirit of contradiction; and a resoluteness never to recal what hath been once delivered, be it never so
far from truth; nevertheless let us beat them out of this hold also, which I shall think that I have done sufficiently, if I prove tht all the aforesaid Declarations and actings both here and abrd of the Divinity-Readers, Ministers, and other private persons, and of whole Congregations of those of the Reformed Religion beyond the Seas, (by which they mani∣fest to the World how far they are from condemning us,) are conformable to a known general Principle, which is common to all the Reformed Churches in the World, viz. That every National Christian Church hath power to make Laws for Her self, in all such outward things as are not expresly either comman∣ded or forbidden in the Word of God, and that they may vary ac∣cording to Times, Places, Persons, and the like Circumstances, and that without prejudice of that Unity which is to be in the Universal Church of Christ, in things essential; provided always that Uniformity be kept as much as possible in the several congregations of each National Church, and that all the Member of them humbly submit themselves to the Laws thereof. For if this be their maxime, as certainly it is, they must, if they mean to stand to it, mutually approve of the several Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiastical of each other. Povd si t by their Practise.17. Now that this is the common Maxime of them all, appears first by their general practise. For there is not one of them who hath not used this liberty of making Laws and Constitutions for Her self, and some of them differing from the Laws of all other Churches, as is known to all them that have either been diligent searchers into things of this nature, or travelled abroad and observed the same. Proved second∣ly by the express words of the several Confes∣sions of their Faith; and first by that of the Bohemian and Moravian Churches.18. This appears secondly, by the express words of the several Confessions of their Faith or Ecclesiastical Constitu∣tions, and by the private Writings of men of chief note amongst them. I will not insist here either upon the Con∣fession of Augsburgh, which is common to all those Refor∣med Churches which are called by the name of Luther, or upon any of their particular Confessions, because as I said in the first Section, I take it for granted, that they doe not condemne the Church of England, neither in Her Government nor Publick Worship, but that they
approve of both, using themselves the very same. Where∣fore I shall begin with the Confession of the Bohemian and Moravian Churches, the most ancient of all those which more peculiarly are called REFORMED. They deliver their judgement thus as to this matter: That none ought to be offended at one another,Docent deinceps ne ob Ceremonia∣rum, Consuetudinum & Rituum dis∣crimina, quae in variis Ecclesiis inter Christianos videre est, nec recla∣mant aut officiunt pictati, alii in aliis offendantur, aut se vicissim, contemnant, oderint & persequan∣tur. Nec etiam sectas aut Seditiones excitantes, se ab Ecclesiae unitate alienen aut distrahant, cum nun∣quam in Ecclesiis eaedem fuerint, nec nunc quoque sint. Eccles. Bohem. & Moravic. fid. Confes. Art 15. nor to contemn, and hate, and persecute each other for the difference of ceremonies, customs and rites which are found in several Christian Churches, and are not contrary or prejudi∣cial to Piety: Neither ought they to alienate and seperate themselves from the Ʋnity of the Church, by RAISING OF SECTS, and MAKING SEDITIONS (upon the account of variety of Ceremonies) being they ne∣ver were nor yet are now alike in all Chur∣ches. But let not the meaning of this their Article be here mistaken, as is by some that known passage ofEccles. Hist. Socrates, which is much like to it, and hath been so much abused of late; namely, by applying to particular congregations, what is therein to be understood of the National Churches of several countries. For that the said Bohemian and Moravian Churches do not understand the preceding Article of their Confession, of particular congre∣gations, as if they had been always, were yet, and might be different one from another in Discipline and outward Wor∣ship, appears by the same Confession, where they require and profess subjection and obedience to the publick Order of the Church, according to the word of God and the Ancient Canons;Docent praete∣rea in Eccle∣sia ordinem servari opor∣tere, &c. ideo nostri eum summo studio observant. Ibid. Art. 8. Vide Ibid. Art. 15. And they speak always of their Rites and Ceremonies, as be∣ing uniform in all their particular congregations, as well as common to their whole Church. But they are so far from con∣demning either the Church of England or any other for using those Rites and Ceremonies which they think most fit for themselves, that they declare expresly, That although they do not keep the Rites and Customs of all other Christians; which thing, say they, cannot be; neither is it necessary, that the same Rites and Ceremonies should be kept every where in all
Churches;Quanquam etiam nostri, non omni∣um ritus ac mores servant, quod ne∣que fieri potest, neque ut ubi ubi in omnibus Ecclesiis iidem ritus & Ceremoniae serventur, necessarium est. Nulli tamen bono picque ritui adversantur, nec adversari animus est. Et si hujusmodi ritus nonnulli, non perinde necessarii videantur, modo tamen nihil obsint pietati, nec quicquam fidei, quae una & justifi∣cat & beatos reddit, detrahant, non rejciendos putant. Bohem. & Mo∣ravic. Confes. Art. 15. Nevertheless they are not, nor mean to be averse to any good and pious Rite. And although some Rites of this nature seem not to be so necessary, yet if they be not prejudicial to Piety, and that they take no∣thing from Faith which only justifieth and makes happy, they do not think that they ought to be rejected. Mistake them not again, and mistake not your selves, by saying they would judge our Rites pre∣jud cial to Piety, &c. For besides that they receive the Communion kneeling, as was observed before, and that they are conformable to the Church of England almost in every thing. It is known, that at the General Assembly of Sandomir,Vide consen∣sum Sandomi∣riensem. they joyned with the Churches of the Augustan Confession that are in the King∣dom of Poland, and agreed to conform to their Rites and Ceremonies whensoever they should have occasion to be present at the service of God in their congregations. Before I leave these Churches, I must add another passage of the Confession of their Faith, by which it will appear how much they differ from those mens judgment, or rather humour and fancy, who think it a sufficient ground for abolishing any Use or Rite of the Church, if they are not satisfied with the Authors thereof, or with such as have used the same. The passage runneth thus,Nostri eos ritus tantum & traditiones quae fidem cultum Dei, aliaque bona inter fideles provehunt, a∣luntque con∣cordiam & pacem in po∣puo concili∣ant & retinent, ac politiam & harmoniam quandam constituunt, quoscunque tan∣dem Authores habeant, Synodum, Pontificem, Episcopum, aut alium quemvis, servan∣dos docent. Nulli siquidem in illorum Authoribus offendi debent, quominus si nihil habent incommodi, eas observent. Ibidem. Our men teach that only such Rites and Traditions ought to be kept as promote Faith, the Worship of God, and other good things, among the Faithful, and nourish Concord, and beget and maintain Peace, and constitute a good Order, and as it were a Harmony among the people; whosoever be the Authors of them, whether a Council, or a Pope, or a Bishop, or any other: For none ought to be offended at the Authors of them, as not to observe them, so they have nothing of inconveniency. Happy had been all the Christian Reformed World (and I am per∣swaded
it would have been all Reformed) if as the said Churches were the first that Reformed themselves from Popery, the way of their Reformation had been followed by all o∣thers who Reformed after them, as it was here in England. I am confirmed in this my Opinion by as learned and as ju∣dicious a Divine as ever lived in the Out-landish Reformed Churches, and that is Hieronymus Zanchius, who having been informed of the Doctrine, Government, and Rites of the said Bohemian Churches, maketh this judgement of their Refor∣mation and that of other Churches;Non solum ibi doctrinam universam consentaneam esse cum sacris litteris: ve∣rum etiam mi∣hi visus sum videre since∣ram & vere Christianam cordium iplo∣tum pietatem; quippe qui scopum in hac Confessione hunc sibi pro∣posuisse viden∣tur, non ut quicquid est in Ecclesia Ro∣mana, totum ipsum ab ipsis usque fundamentis sine ullo discrimine ut faciunt Socinia∣ni penitus subruent atque comvellant; sed ut ad veram & Apostolicam, eoque salu∣tarem pietatis normam, suas exedificent Ecclesias, rejectis rejiciendis, correctis cor∣rigendis & retentis quae erant retinenda, quae tandem vera est & legitima Reforman∣darum Ecclesiarum ratio. Atque utinam omnes horum optimorum fratrum exemplo, in idem studium incumbeemus. Plus certe Pietatis, Concordiae, Charitatis, quibus Deus glorificatur regnumque Christi promovetur, & in nobis ipsi sentiremus, & in aliis conspiceremus. Zanch. Cratoni Caesar. Majest. Medico. Epistolar. l. 1. I have not only seen, saith he, in one of his Letters, their Doctrine to be agreeable to holy Scripture: but it seemed to me also, that I saw the sincere and truly Christian Piety of their Hearts. For they seem to have had this aim in the Confession of their Faith not to pull down and over∣throw from the very foundation, whatsoever is found in the Roman Church (as the Socinians do) but to model their Churches accor∣ding to the true Apostolical, and so saving Rule of Piety; having rejected such things as were to be rejected, mended such as needed emendation, and retained such as were to be retained; which indeed is the true and lawful way of Reforming of Churches. And would to God that we all studiously endeavoured to follow the same course, after the pattern of these our most worthy Brethren. No doubt but we should both feell in our selves and see in others, more of Piety, Con∣cord and Charity, by which God is glorified and the Kingdom of Christ promoted. 19. But let us go on,And by the con∣fession of the Helvetian, Po∣lonian, Hun∣garian, Tran∣sylvanian, and other Churches. and see whether other Reformed Churches have the same complaisance with them of Bohemia and Moravia, and allow each other the liberty of making and enjoyning different Laws about Rites and Ceremonies, and such outward things. And sure if we find it among
the Switzers, who (as some would have us believe) have not so much of that sweet, amicable, civil disposition, we may be confident to find it among all other Nations. And in∣deed (notwithstanding that opinion to their prejudice) the Reformed Churches of that Nation have so much of it, that almost all other Reformed Churches may seem in a manner to have borrowed from, and been taught the same by them. Their general Confession by me already often mentioned, is so express in this point, that one would think they extend that mutual toleration to each particular congregation of a National Church; but that it is known to be the confession of all the Protestant Cantons of Switzerland, which though they are but one and the same Nation, yet are divided into seve∣ral Free States and Commonwealths, not subjected to one another. So that they constitute also several Churches, as it were National, which have every one of them their peculiar Rites and Ceremonies, but always with Uniformity within each Canton. Now that this variety of Rites and Customs, that are to be seen in the Churches of the several Cantons, may not give occasion to any to think or say that they are divided in Religion, and that they condemn each other in those things that they do not use, They declare, that it is to be di∣ligently observed wherein the Truth and Ʋnity of the Church doth chiefly consist,Observandum praeterea do∣cemus, in quo potissimum sit sita veritas & unitas Eccle∣siae, ne temere Schismata excitemus, & in Ecclesia fo∣veamu. Sita est illa non in Ceremoniis & externis riti∣bus, sed magis in veritate & unitate fidei Catholicae Fides Catholica, non est nobis tradita humans legibus, sed Scriptura Divina, cujus compendium est Symbolum Apostolicum. Unde legimus apud veteres rituum fuisse diversitatem variam, sed eam liberam, qua nemo unquam existimavit dissolvi unitatem Ecclesiasticam. Confessio Ecclesiarum Helvetiarum, Cap. 17. ad finem. for fear men should rashly make and maintain Schismes in the Church: and that it doth consist not in Ceremonies and outward Rites, but rather in the Truth and Unity of the Ca∣tholick Faith; which was not given us by humane Laws, but by the Scripture of God, of which the Apostles Creed is the summe: wherefore we read that there was among the Antients variety of dif∣ferent Rites, and that free, by which no man ever thought the Churches Ʋnity to be broken. The Confession out of which these words are extracted, may very well pass for the general confession of the Reformed Churches, having been subscri∣bed,
besides those of the several Cantons of Switzerland and their Confederates by the Hungarian, Transylvanian, Polonian, Lithuanian, Genevan Churches; every one of which hath an Uniformity within it self, suffering no Ministers amongst them, but such as subscribe and conform to their established Laws and Government; which thing I do expresly again observe of them all in this place, as I observed even now of the Helvetian; lest this passage be mis-interpreted, as if it were meant of every particular congregation, whereas it is to be understood onely of National Churches. 20.And by the con∣fession of the Belgick Chur∣ches. The Reformed Churches of Holland are not behind those of Switzerland in allowing to other Churches the power of regulating of outward Rites, so as to them seems fittest. For they declare openly, that forEs choses in∣diferenes ne sera loisible de conamner les Eglises des autres Provin∣ces qui userent d'autres cou∣stumes que les nostres. l' Ordre Eccles. des Egl. Ref. du P z bas. Art 85, 86. And by the con∣fession of Faith of the French Rf. Churchs, and by that of Genva. things indifferent, such as are Rites, Ceremonies, and other like citcumstantials to the Worship of God, the Churches of other Countries, that do dif∣fer from them in the said things, and have other customs, ought not to be condemned; Adding further, that the Articles made at their famous National Assembly of Dort, touching the lawful ordering of the Church, are not such as that, if the edification of the Church should require it, they may not be changed, enlarged, or diminished. 21. It were strange after that if the Reformed Churches of France should be less complying then those who use to learn civility and complaisance of them. Wherefore theyNous croy∣ons qu'il est bon & utile que ceux qui sont esseus pour este Su∣perintendans, avisent entre eux quel moyen ils deutont tenir pour le regime de tout le corps: Et toutefois qu'ils ne declinent nullement de ce qui nous en a essé odon é par nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ, cequi n'empesche point qu'il n'y ait quelques Ordonnances particulieres en chacun lieu, selon que la commodité le requerra. Confes. de Foydes Egl s s Ref. de France, Art. 32. de∣clare also that it is good and useful, that those who are elected Super∣intendents, advise among themselves, what course they must take to govern the whole body; yet without swerving from what Christ our Lord hath prescribed to us; which doth not hinder but that there may be peculiar constitutions, in every several place, as convenien∣cy shall require. And it is to be observed that in the Margin they cite for proofs of this Article, the Acts of the Apostles chap. 6.3. & 14.23. & 15.5, 25, 28. and 1 Cor. 14.40.
and 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. for Ordination of Presbyters, (who were then made by the Apostles) and of Deacons, as likewise for the holding of Ecclesiastical Councils or Synods; the keeping up of Decency and Order in publick Assemblies, and taking the Inspection, that is, the Episcopacy of others, as Saint Paul and Saint Peter did. All which I trust, may be as properly applied that I say not far more both to the Government and publick Worship of the Church of England (where there are Bishops and divers useful and decent Rites and Ceremonies) as to their own Churches or any other Reformed Church whatsoever. Observe also by the Texts of Scripture by them thus quoted for Confirmation of this point of their belief, what those things are which they conceive, ought to be left to the disposal of the Governors of the Church, viz. Govern∣ment it self, Ordination, of Presbyters and Deacons; the holding of Ecclesiastical Conventions; Decency and Order in publick As∣semblies, and the like; provided there be no swerving from what Christ our Lord hath prescribed unto us. What I have quoted here out of the Confession of the French Reformed Churches, must be looked upon as the judgement of the Church of Ge∣neva, which hath no other peculiar Confession of Faith then that very same. 22. But I should do both the Publick and the Bohemian and Polonian Churches of the Augustan Confession much wrong, if I should not produce here an Article which they made for Confirmation of that famous Agreement made at Sandemir, Anno 1570. betwixt them and the Lithuanians and Polonians who follow the Helvetian Confession. For whereas the said Agreement was made among them all in the month of April; because many of those Churches that have subscri∣bed the Bohemian Confession are seated in the same parts of Poland, which are inhabited by them who are Reformed ac∣cording to the Confession of Augsburg, and so are intermixt the one with the other, having their several Congregations in the same Towns, fearing lest this neighbourhood might be an occasion of some divisions by the uncharitable and rash censuring of each other, as it commonly cometh to pass; they met again by their Delegates the next May following
in the Town of Posna, and made yet a more particular agree∣ment, for the better keeping of the former among themselves, as being most concerned in it. By the seventh Article of which last Agreement of Posna it is ordered, That the Mi∣nisters of each side should teach their Hearers, exhort and enjoyne them by their Pastoral Authority, that they should not dare to con∣demn or carp at, whether by word of mouth or by writing, the Churches of the other confession, in any point of Doctrine or Cere∣monies; but that they should both judge and speak well of them. 23.The Reformed Church of Eng∣land is of the same judgment. Now in this as in all good and reasonable things that are conducible to Peace and Unity among Christians, the Re∣formed Church of England is behind none of them all. She rather goes beyond them, expressing her self more fully then any on these matters. And her modesty and discretion are such, that although she holdeth Subordination of Ministers in the Christian Church to be of Apostolical, nay of Divine Institution, having, as she conceiveth, for grounds of this her Judgement, besides Scripture, the practise of the holy Apostles in their time, of the universal Church ever since, un∣til this later Age; and which is more, of Christ himself, who ordained the Apostles, and the Seventy Disciples in an Impa∣rity as two distinct Orders of Ministers in his Church; yet notwithstanding she doth but simply assert the lawfulness of her own Government, without medling with the Govern∣ment of other Churches which do not meddle with hers, lea∣ving them to fall or stand to their own Master, to whom they ought to give an account of their actions, and not to her. For this is all that she saith on this matter in the Ar∣ticles of her Faith,Article 36. that The Book of Consecration of Arch-Bishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests and Deacons set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed at the same time by the Authority of Parliament, doth contain all things necessary to such consecration and ordering; and hath not any thing, that of it self is superstitious and ungodly: So that all such as are consecrated or ordered according to the same Rites, are held by her to be rightly, or∣derly, and lawfully consecrated and ordered. True it is that she dis∣avoweth expresly the pretended power of the Bishop and
Church of Rome over all other Bishops and Churches; but it is because the said Bishop and Church by an usurp'd power pretend to Lord it over her and her Bishops, and the rest of the World; else she would have taken no more notice of him than of the Patriarch of Constantinople, or of that of Moschow. Touching Rites and Ceremonies she declareth plainly likewise, that,Article 34. it is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one or utterly like; because, at all times they have been divers, and may be changed according to the diversity of Countries, times and mens manners, so that nothing be ordained against Gods Word, &c. and that every particular or National Church hath Autho∣rity to ordain, change, and abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by mens authority, so that all things be done to edify∣ing.Of Ceremonies, why some be a∣bolished, and some retained. So again in that most excellent Preface of her Liturgy, which can never be read and considered enough, she profes∣seth, that, she doth not condemn any other Nation, that have not the same Rites, nor prescribe any thing but to her own people: judging it convenient, that every Country should use such Ceremo∣nies as they shall think best to the setting forth of Gods honour and glory, and to the reducing of the people to a most perfect and godly living, without error or superstition. Now that none may think what I reported here of the Church of Englands ascribing power to every National Church, to ordain Rites and Ce∣remonies, to be said out of my purpose; it is to be observed, that in this very point she hath the approbation of all other Reformed Churches; so that it is the same, as if they had said it in terminis. That it is so is manifest, not only by the inserting the 34. as well as the other Articles of her Faith, in the collection of their several Confessions, as part of that Agreement which is betwixt them; but chiefly by the express quoting of the same Article, in the Harmony of the said Confessions, which is immediately after the Apostles Creed. Article the eighth in the last Edition at Geneva, Anno 1654. 24. To quote here the Writings of private men, after the publick Records of whole Churches, will seem to some both unfit and useless; but because I am in hope it may both de∣lght and profit some others, I shall not think to trespass
much if in this place, I bring in a few passages out of the Authors of greatest note, in the Outlandish Reformed Churches, to be as it were so many Commentaries for the better understanding of what hath been produced out of the several Confessions of their Faith. I will begin with Calvin, who is very full and express to this purpose; Because he was thought by some to be so precise in his way, that he would not suffer others to depart from it in the least thing and fol∣low their own, though in things of their nature indifferent; to clear himself from that aspersion, by which he was re∣presented so peevish as to take away all Liberty in outward things. HeVerum nequis calumnietur, nos in rebus externis esse morosos, qui adeò praecisè tollamus omnem liber∣tatem; hic testatum velim piis le∣ctoribus, me non de ceremoniis li∣tigare quae decoro tantum, &c. Cal∣vin. de vera Eccles. Rform. Ratione Opuscul. 753. saith, That he would have it known of all pious persons that should read his Treatise Of the right way of Refor∣ming Churches, se de ceremoniis non li∣tigare, that he doth not quarrel about Cere∣monies, quae decoro tantum & ordini serviunt, that are such only as serve for De∣cency and Order; vel etiam symbola sunt & incitamenta ejus, quam Deo deferimus, reverentiae; or yet such as are badges and tokens, and helps of that reverence which we pay to God. And that he disputes only,Nobis enim de operibus disputatio est, quae per se Deo placere fin∣gunt, &c. Ibid. of those works which some men did falsly pretend to be of themselves pleasing to God, and meritorious, and to make part of his service. Now why he would have every Church use her liberty, in such outward things that are of themselves indifferent, he renders this rea∣son in his Institution, to wit, That God hath not been pleased to prescribe every particular thing that we ought to follow,Quia autem in externa Di∣sciplina & Ce∣remoniis non voluit sigilla∣tim praescribe∣re quid sequi debeamus (quod istud pendere à temporum conditione praevideret neque judicaret unam secul is omnibus formam convenire) confugere hîc oportet ad generales quas dedit regulas, ut ad eas exigantur quaecunque ad ordinem & decorum praecipi ne∣cessitas Ecclesiae postulabit. Postremò quia ideò nihil expressum tradidit, quia nec ad salutem haec necessaria sunt, & pro moribus unius cujusque gentis ac seculi variè accomodati debent ad Ecclesiae aedificationem, prout Ecclesiae utilitas requiret, tam usitatas mutare & abrogare, quam novas instituere conveniet. Fateor equidem non te∣merè, &c. Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 10. n. 30. as to ex∣ternal Discipline and Ceremonies; because he did foresee that those things depended on the conditions of times; and judged that the same form would not agree with all ages; wherefore we ought to consult
the general Rules which he gave us, whereby to examine, and to fit and settle those things that appertain to Order and Decency, accor∣ding as the exigencies of the Church require. Adding further, That God hath not expresly prescribed such things; because they are not necessary to Salvation, but must be diversely accommodated to the manners of each Nation and Age for the edification of the Church, which may change or abrogate the received customs, or in∣stitute new ones, as she shall see it behoveful. Though he adviseth, non temere, nec subindè, nec levibus de causis ad novationem esse decurrendum, That no Innovation be made either rashly, or often, or for light causes. In another place he is yet more ex∣press, wherefore I will translate it word for word, and set it down here as he hath written it. It is in that confession of Faith which was presented at Frankefort, Anno 1562. to the Emperor and other Princes of Germany there assembled, in the name of the Reformed Churches of France, and which was penn'd by Calvin, and is to be found in his Opuscula. After he hath spoken of the usurped power of the Pope and Church of Rome;Interea tamen Ecclesiae au∣ctoritatem, vel Pastorum & Superinten∣detium, qui∣bus Ecclesiae regendae Pro∣vincia mand∣ta est, subla∣tam nolumus. Fatemur ergo Episcopos sive Pastores reve∣renter esse au diendos, qua∣tenus pro suae Functionis ra∣tione verbum Dei docent. Fatemur praeterea tum omnes tum etiam singulas Eccle∣sias hoc jus habere, ut leges & Statuta sibi condant ad Politiam communem inter suos consttuendam, cm omnia in Domo Dei rite & ordine fieri oporteat. Ejusmodi porro Statutis obedientiam deferendam esse, modo ne conscientias astringant; nque superstitio illis adhibeatur. Qui hoc detrectant, cerebrosi & pervicaces apud nos habentur. Calvin. in Confess. Fidei nom. Eccles. Gallic. oblata Caesari, &c. intr Opuscula. In the mean while, saith he, our intention is not to take away the Authority of the Church, or of the Pastors and Superintendents to whom belonged the Office of Governing the Church: Wherefore we confess that Bishops or Pastors ought re∣verently to be listned unto, as far as they teach the Word of God ac∣cording as it belongeth to their Function. We confess further, that all and every Church have this Right to make Laws and Statutes for themselves, for the establishing of a common Polity among themselves, since all things ought to be done rightly and orderly in the house of God; and that obedience ought to be given to such Sta∣tutes, provided that they do not bind the Consciences, and that they be void of Superstition. Such as refuse so to do, are esteemed among us self-conceited, stubborn, and obstinate. Nay he sayes in the same Confession, that the said Churches, and he with them,
hold for Schismaticks those that bring in trou∣bles and confusions to the dissipation of the Church,Illos pro Schismaticis habemus qui turbas & confusiones invehunt ad dissipandam Ecclesiam, quae non aliter stare potes, quam ubi regi∣tur à suis Pastoribus, quando ita est voluntas Domini, atque extat ipsius mandatum ad singulos tam summos quam infimos ut sese cum sincera d missione ordinationi, cujus auctor est submittant atque conforment. Calvin. Ibid. which cannot stand but when go∣verned by her Pastors, since the will of God is such, and that he commandeth every one as well the greatest as meanest, that they sub∣mit and conform themselves with sincere hu∣mility to the Order (viz. of the Church) whereof he is the Author. 25. In the afore-quoted places I see Calvin may either not be understood at all by some, or misunderstood by them that are not pleas'd to see themselves condemned by this Authors words and authority. The words I suspect subject to an ill apprehension and interpretation contrary to Calvins meaning, are those where he saith, that the Laws and Statutes which every Church hath right to make for her self, must not bind the Consciences; and when he saith, that God is the Author of that Order in the Church, to which all and every one ought to submit and conform themselves with sin∣cere humility. The first may be mistaken thus, That Cal∣vin would not have such Laws and Statutes to be imposed, and the observation of them to be pressed by the Rulers of the Church, but that he would have them left free for every one to keep, or not to keep them as they list. The last may have this mis-interpretation, That Calvin doth hold such only for Schismaticks, as do not submit and conform to that which is immediately revealed and ordered of God in the express words of the holy Scripture. Wherefore to clear his meaning in these two particulars, it is to be observed, that ac∣cording to the common Doctrine of all the Reformed Chur∣ches of what confession soever,See the Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Sanderson's first Sermon Ad Clerum. Sect. 20. God only hath power to bind immediately the consciences of men by his Commandments, as having the sole immediate jurisdiction over it; so that mens consciences are then said to be bound by humane Laws and Constitutions in the sense Mr. Calvin blames, when they are thrust upon men as if they were Divine, and did bind their consciences immediately to the observation of them, not because they are commanded as good and profitable by
lawful Superiors, who are thereto authorised by God himself; but as if they were immediate parts of Gods Worship, or of absolute necessity unto Salvation, which was the Tyranny and Usurpation of the Pharisees in the time of Christs conver∣sation on earth; and is at this day, and hath been long since, that of the Church of Rome, over mens consciences equal∣ling, if not preferring her own Constitutions above the Law of God. This is the binding of conscience which Calvin, and and with him all other Protestant Writers both at home and abroad, will by no means allow to the Laws and Statutes of any Church. But they do not intend thereby to have it left to every private mans choice to observe, or neglect the con∣stitutions of the Church whereof he is a Member. For on the contrary bothJam ve ò Christiani po∣puli officum est, quae se∣cundum hunc canonem fu∣erint instituta, libera quidem conscientia, nullaque su∣prstitione, pia tamn & facili ad ob∣sequendum propensione servare, non contemptim habere, non supina negli∣gentia praete∣rire: tantum abst ut per fastum & contumaciam violare apertè debeat. Calv. Institut. l. 4. c. 10. n. 31. he and they all hold it to be the duty of every good Christian, to observe the established Laws and Customs of the Church, and that it is sinful for any that pro∣fesseth Religion, to trespass against the same. So the famous Andrew Rivet Divinity Reader in Holland saith,Quomodo etiam libertatem conscientiarum non mpediri agnoscimus, quia non ipsa, sed tantum opus externum ligatur, cum rerum mediarum usus coercetur per legem aliquam Politicam, vel constitutionem Ecclesiasticam: Deus enim, pro∣prie conscientiam ligat. Sed tamen Magistratus aliquando Reipublicae bono aliquid per se  potest jubere ut fiat, vel prohibere ne fiat; Et Ecclesia propter  aliquid in simili materia constituere, ita ut tamen in conscientias nullum sibi sumat imperium: quo casu excepto nemo rebellionis studio citra peccatum talibus constituti∣onibus resisteret aut jure refragaretur; qui potius dum conscientiam suam tueri vellet, eam in periculum adduceret, utpote quae ob rebellionem damnum pateretur. Andr. Riv. Thes. de Christian. Libert. That when the use of things indifferent is limited by any politick Law or Eccle∣siastical constitution, the liberty of conscience is not taken away by that limitation; And that although God alone doth bind the consci∣ences, the Church for the common good, and for Orders sake may either command or forbid that a thing of its nature indifferent be done or omitted, and that without assuming to her self any power over consciences: which only Case excepted, no man may resist such constitutions without sin, but rather whilest he pretends conscience, doth bring his own conscience in danger through his rebellion. So Fredericus Spanhemius likewise Divinity Reader first at Geneva
and afterwards at Leyden in Holland;Nec libertas Christiana obstat, quominu rerum mediarum usus co∣erceri possit, ut circumscribi legibus partim Ecclesiasticis, partim politi∣cis; quibus parendum nount filii Dei quando imperantur ab iis qui authoritatem habent, modo id fiat sine superstitione, fine sanctitatis, & cultui peculiaris, sine meriti & necessitatis absolutae & perpeuae, & aliis id genus appendicibus. Sic enim non conscientiae illorum ligan∣tur, sed loco-motiva tantum cohibe∣tur, &c. Fred. Spanhem. Thes. de Chri∣stian. Lib. Neither doth Christian liberty hinder, saith he, but that the use of things of a middle nature may be restrained and limitted by Laws as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, which the children of God know that they ought to obey, when they are commanded by those who have Authority; provided it be without supersti∣tion, and the adjunct opinion of Holiness, and peculiar Worship, or of Merit and prpetual and absolute necessity, and the like. For so their consciences are not bound, but only their loco-motive faculty is restrained, &c. I might quote many more to the same purpose, who main∣tain both that the constitutions of every Church ought to be obeyed by all the members thereof, and that they do not bind per se by themselves, and immediately the consciences of men, which is the property and priviledge only of the Laws of God; but I forbear, because I would not excurre too far, and because what I have produced out of these Au∣thors is sufficient to shew in what sense it is commonly af∣firmed, that Ecclesiastical Injunctions do not bind the con∣science, though every man is bound in conscience to obey them, and cannot deny submission to the same without sin. Only to make it manifest, that such is the judgement of Cal∣vin, and that I ascribe here nothing unto him but what is agreeable with his own meaning; I think it will not be a∣miss to hear him speak his mind thereupon himself. And this he doth at large in the same place of his Institution I last quoted in the Margin, where, after he hath said, that Chri∣stians ought to observe, libera quidem conscientia nullaque su∣perstitione, with a free conscience and without superstition, such outward things as are ordained according to the gene∣ral rules of Scripture for Decency and good Order, he an∣swers a Quaere that may be raised upon the premisses, viz. What liberty of conscience there can be in such a necessity of obeying, and that with so much caution? That liberty of conscience, saith he, will appear if we consider that those Laws to the observation
of which we are tied,Imo vero prae∣clae constabit ubi reputabi∣mus, non fixas esse & perpe∣tuas sanctins qubus asticti sumus, sed ex∣tertia humanae infirmitatis udimenta: quibus tamet∣si non ind ge∣mus omnes, tamen omnes utimu: quia alii aliis ad ovendam in∣ter no Chri∣tatem muto sumus obnoxii. Hoc in exm∣plis superius posits recog∣noscere licet. Quid? an in mulieris carbaso sita religi est? ut nudo capte egredi sit nefas? An sanctum de ejus silentio decretum quod violari sine summo scelere non possit? An aliquid in genuflexi∣one in humando cadavere mysterium quod praeteriri sine piaculo non possit? Minimè: Nam si tali festinatione opus sit mulieri in juvando proximo quae velare caput non si∣nat, nihil delinquit si aperto capite accurrat. Et est ubi loqui non minus opportunum sit quam alibi tacere. Stantem quoque orare qui morbo impeditus curvare genua nquit, ni vetat. Denique satius est matuè humare mortuum, quam ubi linteum deest, ubi non adsunt qui deducant, expectare dum inhumatus putrescat. Sed est nihil ominus in istis rebus quod agendum aut cavendum mos regionis, instituta, ipsa denique humanitas & modestiae regula dictet: ubi si imprudentia & oblivione quid erratum fuerit, nullum admissum crimen est: sin contemptu, improbanda est contumacia. Similiter dies ipsi qui sint, & horae, locorum structura, qui quo die canantur Psalmi, nihil interest. Verum & certos dies & statas esse horas convenit, & locum recipiendis omnibus ido∣neum, siqua servanda pacis ratio habetur. Nam quantarum rxarum semen futura sit eaum rerum confusio, si prout cuique libitum sit, mutare liceat quae ad communem statum pertinent? Quando numque futurum est ut omnibus idem placeat, si res velut in medio positae, singulorum arbtrio relictae fuerint. Quod si quis obstre∣pat ac plus supere hîc velit quam oportet, viderit ipse qua morositatem suam ratione Domino approbet. Nobis tamen istud Pauli satisfacere debet, nos con∣tendendi morem non habere, neque Ecclesias Dei. Calvin. Institut. Lib. 4. Cap. 10 Num. 31 are not fixed and perpetual, but only external Rudiments of humane infirmity; which although all of us do not need, yet we all use, being all bound mutually to maintain love a∣mongst our selves one towards another. This may appear in the instances above mentioned. What? is there any Religion in the Veil of a Woman, so that it should not be lawful for her to go forth with her head uncovered? Is the Decree of her being silent so sacred that it may not be violated without the highest crime? Is there any mystery in bending the Knee, or in the burying of a Corps, that may not be omitted, but one must bring himself under the greatest guilt? No: For if a Woman hath occasion to make such haste to help her neighbour, that she hath not the leisure to cover her head, she com∣mits no fault if she runs to him bare-headed. And it may be as fit for her to speak in some occasions, as in others to be silent. Nothing forbids likewise that he who cannot kneel by reason of some Dis∣ease, should pray standing. Lastly, it is better to bury speedily a dead Body, than to keep it till it be corrupted for want of a sheet to wrap it in, or company to go along with it to the grave. But never∣theless in the said things, there is somewhat which the custom of the Country, the Laws, and lastly, Humanity it self, and the rule of modesty, doth dictate that it ought to be done or omitted: wherein if
any thing be done amiss, imprudently, or through forgefulness, you have committed no crime: but if you have done so by contempt, it is a contumacy not to be approved of. It matters not likewise what days, what hours, what structure of places, be design'd for Gods wor∣ship, or what Psalms be sung upon such a day: yet it is meet that there be certain set days and hours, and a place fit to hold all the Congregation, if any care be had of the preservation of peace. For of how great jarres and wrangling will that confusion be the seed, if it be lawful for every one to change as he pleaseth those things which pertain to all in common? Since it will never come to pass that the same thing should please all men, if all things be left at random for every one to do what he listeth. If any doth here gainsay and seem to himself to be wiser then he should, let him take heed how he will justifie his peevishness before the Lord. As for us, this saying of Saint Paul, ought to be satisfactory, that we have not the custom of being contentious, neither the Churches of God. Where it is plain, that he doth not leave it to every ones liberty to ob∣serve or reject the publick Orders of the Church, but will have them obeyed as long as they stand in force, though with a free conscience, that is, without superstition, and with∣out the opinion of an absolute and perpetual necessity of their observation, as if they constituted any essential part of Gods Worship, whereas they are but circumstances of, and helps to it. This he saith yet more fully and perspicuously in an∣other place, where he taketh away all pretence of doubting of his meaning in this point, and giveth so seasonable a les∣son to many amongst us, that I will not save my self the la∣bour to translate it exactly; Now whereas ignorant men for the most part, when they hear that it is not without impiety that mens consciences are bound, and God worshipped in vain by humane Tra∣ditions, do blot out at one dash all Laws which constitute the Order of the Church; it is meet also to encounter here with their error. Here a man may be very easily deceived, because at first sight it doth not appear what difference there is betwixt these things, viz. Humane Traditions, & Ecclesiastical Constitutions for Order and Decency's sake. But I will set forth in brief the whole matter so clearly, that their resemblance shall not be able to deceive any man. Let us before all hold this, that if in every Society of men, we see a
certain Polity to be necessary,Quando vero imperiti pleri∣que, dum hu∣manis traditi∣onibus impiè ligari hominū concientias & frustra Deum coli audiunt, eadem liura leges omnes inducunt qui∣bus Ecclesiae odo consttui∣tur; illo ū quo∣que erori cō∣modū hîc oc∣currendum est. Falli sanè per∣quam est lubri∣cum: quia non prima statim facie apparet quantum inter illas & has in∣tersit. Sed ego ita dilucidè em totā pau∣cis expdiam, necui imponat simlituo. Hoc primum habeamus, si in omni hominum societate necessarium esse politiam aliquam videmus, quae ad alendā communem pacem & retinendam concord ā valeat: si in rebus agendis vigere semper aliquem ritum, quem non respui publcae honestatis interest, at{que} adeo humanitatis ip∣sius: id in Ecclesiis paesertim observandum esse, quae cum bene composita erum omnium constitutione optimè sustinentur, tum verò sine concordia nullae sunt prorsus. Quamo∣brem si Ecclesiae incolumitati bene prospectū volumus, diligenter omnino curandū est, quod Paulus jubet, ut decenter omnia & secundum ordinem fiant. At cum in hominum mribus tanta in sit diversitas, tanta in animis varietas, tanta in judiciis ingeniis{que} pu∣na; ne{que} Politia ulla satis firma est, nisi certis legibus constituta: nec sine stata quadā foma servari ritus quispiam potest: Huc ergo quae conducunt leges, tantum abest ut dam∣nemus, ut his ablatis, dissolvi suis nervis Ecclesias, totas{que} deformari ac dissipari conten∣damus. Ne{que} enim haberi potest quod Paulus exigit, ut decenter omnia & ordine fiant, n si additis observationibus, tanquā vinculis quibusdam, ordo ipse & decorum consistat. Id tantū semper in istis observationibus excipiendū, ne aut ad salutē credātur necessariae, at{que} ita conscientias religione obstringant, aut ad Dei cultū conferantur, at{que} ita in illis eponatur pietas. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 10. n. 27. for the nourishing of publick Peace, and for the maintaining of Concord; if we see that there is alwayes some Rite in force in all things that ought to be done; which Rite that it be not rejected, publick Decency, nay Humanity it self is concerned: Surely the same is chiefly to be observed in Churches, which as they are best preserved and upheld by a well-ordered consti∣tution of all things, so they vanish wholly and come to nought with∣out Concord. Wherefore if we desire rightly to procure the safety of the Church, we must with all diligence take care that, as Saint Paul biddeth, all things be done decently and in good order. But whereas there is such diversity in the manners of men, such variety of minds, such contrariety of judgements and dispositions, and no Polity can stand firmly enough, unless it be constituted by certain Laws; and it is impossible that any Rite be observed without some set Form; we are so far from condemning the Laws that are made for this purpose, that we maintain, that if they be taken away, the Churches have ther Bonds and Nerves loosened and broken, and are wholly deformed and brought to ruine and dissipation. For nei∣ther can that be effected which Saint Paul requireth, that all things be done decently and orderly, unless there be some Ordinances to be observed, by means whereof, as by so many Bonds, Decency and Order it self are constituted and made to stand. Now this only is alwayes to be excepted in such like Observations; that they be not thought necessary unto Salvation, and so bind the consciences by Re∣ligion, nor be intended and brought in as the worship of God, so that Piety be ascribed to them. Which Cautions, and those he
addeth in anotherErgone ni∣hil Ceremoni∣arum rudioi∣bus dabitur ad juvandum eo∣rum imperiti∣am? Id ego non dico. Om∣nino enim u∣tile illis sentio hoc genus ad∣miniculi. Tan∣tum hic con∣tendo ut is modus adhi∣beatur, qui Christum il∣lustret, non obscuret. Pro∣inde odus ut retineatur il∣lam in nume∣ro paucitatem in observatio∣ne facilitatem, in significatione dignitatem, quae etiam claritate con∣stat, retinere necesse est. Calv. nstit. l. 4. c. 10. n. 14. place, where he saith, they must not darken but set forth Christ; they must be few in number, of facile observation, and such as commend themselves by the clearness of their signification:) are the very same the Reformers of our ChurchIn the Preface of Ceremonies, why some be abelished and some retained. declare they have used in putting away and aboli∣shing some of the accustomed Ceremonies, and in retaining some others, which do serve to a decent Order and godly Disci∣pline, and such as be apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the re∣membrance of his duty to God, by some notable and special significa∣on, whereby he might be edified. Where by the way observe that Calvin is not against significant Ceremonies. But to put an end to this perhaps too long and tedious, though I hope, not altogether unprofitable nor impertinent excursion; Calvin holds that God himself is the Author not only of such Ordi∣nances and Constitutions as are expresly set down in holy Scripture, but likewise of them that are grounded thereupon, and may be reduced to the general Rules God hath been plea∣sed to set forth for his Church to govern her self by, in mat∣ters of this nature. So that he maintains kneeling at Prayers for example, to be both of Divine and Humane institution.Exemplum sit in geniculatione quae fit dum solennes habentur praecati∣ones. Quaeritur sit ne humana traditio quam repudiate vel negligere cuivis liceat. Dico sic esse humanam ut simul sit Divina. Dei est qutenus pars est Decoris illius cujus cura & observatio nobis per Apostolum commendatur: Homnum autem qua∣tenus speciali er designat quod in genere fuerat indicatum magis quam expositum. Calv. Instit l. 4. c. 10. n. 30. It is commanded of God, saith he, in as much as it is part of that Decency whereof the Apostle recommends the care and observation unto us. It is a humane Institution in as much as it specially de∣termines that which was rather generally intimated, then clearly set forth. 26.Rituum veò ipsius{que} adeo exercendae  divesicate quā ultrò agnocimus (uno quo{que} sus gregibus proprie expediat conside∣rante) minimè dixeris, opinor, Ecclesias dissociati in Doctrinae summâ consentientes. Beza Andreae Duditio. Beza sheweth himself altogether of the same mind with Calvin in this point, as may be seen in his Epistle to Andraeas Duditius the Polonian Bishop, where acknowledging that as for Rites and other things pertaining to Decency and
good Order in the Church, there is a variety of them in the several Reformed Churches throughout the World, for which they ought not to separate, as long as they agree in Doctrinals; he renders this reason of the said diversity, that the Rulers of every National hurch do consider what is most ex∣pedient for the peoples edification, and so order it to be obser∣ved. And in anotherRes alioqui per se mediae mutant quo∣dam modo na∣turam quam aliquo legiti∣mo mandato vel praecipiun∣tur vel prohi∣bentur; quia neque contra∣justum prae∣ceptum omitti p ssunt si prae∣cipiantur; ne{que} contra inter∣dictum sieri si prohibeantur, sicut ex lege ceremoniali apparet. Etsi jugum le∣gis ceremonia∣lis sustulit Christiana li∣bertas, &c. ∣rum mediaum usus legitime coercetur tum in genere, tum in specie. In genere per le∣gem charitatis, &c. In specie, ex constitutione vel Politica vel Ecclesiastica. Etsi enim conscientias propriè solus Deus ligat, tamen quatenus vel Magistratus, qui Minister Dei est, judicat interesse Resp. ut quippiā alioqui per se licit̄ non fiat: vel Ecclesia Ordinis & Decori adeo{que} aedificationis rationem habens, leges aliquas de rebus mediis ritē condit: ejusmodi lges piis omnino sunt observandae, & eatenus conscientias ligant, ut nemo sciens & pru∣dens rebellandi animo, possit abs{que} peccato vel facere quae ita prohibentur, vel omittere quae sic paecipiuntur. Bza Epist. 24. ad Peregrinar, in Anglia Ecclesiar. fratres. place he ascribeth power to the Church to restrain and regulate those things which are in themselves of a middle nature, that is good or bad in the good or ill use of them. And what he saith to this purpose in general, seems to me to have so much of truth and reason, that (though he starts sometimes from himself in the particular application of the same, as I shall have occasion to observe hereafter) I think it will be of some good use, and very proper to be set down at length. For he doth not only ascribe that regulating power to the Church, and say in what it consisteth, but sheweth likewise what obligation is put thereby upon the consciences of private persons to obey the Church in such things. Those things, sayes he, which otherwise are of a middle nature, do change it in a manner, when they are either comman∣ded or prohibited by a lawful command; because that neither can they be omitted contrary to a just command, if enjoyned; nor done contrary to the prohibition, if forbidden; as it appears by the Ce∣remonial Law. And having put off the objection, that the Ceremonial Law is abolished, he adds that notwithstanding, the use of things indifferent is lawfully restrained both gene∣rally and specially. Generally, by the Law of Charity, &c. Spe∣cially, by a Civil or Ecclesiastical constitution. For although God alone doth properly bind the consciences; yet in as much as the Ma∣gistrate, who is the Minister of God, judgeth that it is for the publick good that those things which otherwise of themselves are lawful, be not done, or the Church for Orders-sake or Decency,
and so for edification, doth rightly make Laws concerning things in∣different; such Laws ought wholly to be observed by the Godly, and they do bind the consciences thus far, that no man knowingly and wittingly with an intention of being rebellious, may without sin either do that which is so prohibited, or leave undone those things that are so commanded. And let it be observed, that though this be counted one of Beza's Letters, because it was penned by him, yet it is written in the name of the whole Church of Geneva, in com∣muni Fratrum ex Ʋrbe & Agro Collectorum coetu; in the ge∣neral Assembly of all the Ministers both of the Town and adjacent Country. The afore-cited passages set forth suffici∣ently the mind of the Reformed Churches when they leave to each other the liberty of making Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical for the outward Worship of God, as seemeth best to them. Wherefore I will forbear to bring here any more such long passages; and I will content my self to refer the Reader to the other Authors. He may consult therefore if he be not yet satisfied,Pro diversi∣tate locorum, temporum, populorum, variae etiam de his rebus constitutiones fiant, necesse est. Zanch. de lege Dei, p. 202. Zanchius in his Theses de Traditioni∣bus Ecclesiasticis, where that learned man saith, It is necessary that there be different constitutions for things of this nature, accor∣ding to the diversity of Places, Times, and Nations.Paraeus Ex∣plic. Catech. p. 3. q. 103. Explic. 4. Prae∣cept. Paraus, who maintaineth that the Church may and ought to institute some Ceremonies, potest & debet Ecclesia quasdam Ceremonias in∣stituere; quia sine determinatione circumstantiarum non po∣test observari genus, hoc est moralis cultus Dei; because without the determination of circumstances, the genus, that is, the moral worship of God cannot be observed.Authoritas Eclesiae No∣mohetica est, quo illa po∣test certas le∣ges condere ratione politiae Ecclesiasticae, quae spectatur in Ceremoniis Ecclesia∣sticis, haec politia valde est necessaria & tantum constitui potest in rebus externis & in∣differentibus. Alsted. compend. Theolog. p. 4. loc. 18. Nec tamen Ecclesiae omnis potestas leges ferendi abrogata, vel omnes omnino traditiones humanae proscribendae; distn∣gundae enim traditiones dogmaticae à ritualibus circa illas Ecclesia potestatē  non habet, habet tamen circa istas, &c. Spanhem. Th. de libert. Christian. Thes. 23. Alstedius, that saith, It is very necessary that the Church should use the Authority she hath to make Laws for regulating Ceremonies. Spanhemius in the above-cited Theses of Christian Liberty, Thes. 23. who main∣tains that the Church hath power to make Laws; and distin∣guishes very properly betwixt Ecclesiastical Traditions Dog∣matical and Ceremonial, allowing the Church a Legislative
power in the last kind, but denying utterly that she hath any in the first. And all other Authors of the Reformed Religi∣on that write of this Subject. The cnclusion of the Premise.27. Out of the premisses I conceive this conclusion may be drawn in without any the least violence, That the Refor∣med Churches beyond the Seas, setting up each of them what Go∣vernment, and establishing what Rites and Ceremonies they please among themselves; and declaring that every National Church may lawfully do the like; no doubt allow the Church of England to use the same liberty which they take to themselves. For what reason can be imagined why the Rulers of the Church, and Magi∣strates of the City of Geneva and her little Territory; or those of the Canton of Zurich, or Shafhousen in Switzerland, or of any other Church or Country; should have power to make Laws uniform for all the several Congregations within their respective Districts and Liberties; and that the Governors of the Church of England, and the Supreme Magistrate of this Kingdom, should be denied the same? Can any one shew me upon what ground those Churches, which use to excom∣municate all such of their Members as do dispute their Au∣thority in making Laws and Constitutions for their Govern∣ment, and for the outward worship of God, or do not sub∣mit and conform to them when they are made; may be said with any probability to condemn the Church of England, for asserting as much power to her self, and no more, and for exercising the same? And shall we have so little value of the judgement of the Reformed Churches, as to think they will give more Authority to Thirty Ministers for they are no more in number for the most in the National Synods of France) or Fourty, for they do not exceed that number in them of Hol∣land, as appears by the names of the Delegates to the Synod of Dort; or to abour Five and Twenty, (for they are hardly so many at Geneva;) or to Fifteen or Sixteen and less, as in some Cantons of the Switzers; then they will think fit to be allow∣ed to a Council, consisting (as our Convocations do) of above Six score Reverend, Grave, and Learned Divines, chosen out of many Thousands; whereof Six and Twenty are Arch-Bishops and Bishops; a greater number Deans and Prebends, and Arch-Deacons.
Surely we should wrong them very much if we should entertain such an opinion of them. 28.Thos f w R∣formed Cur∣ches that want Subordination of Ministers, approve the E∣piscopacy of the Church of En∣gland. Although what hath been said hitherto is sufficient to shew what opinion the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas have generally of this our Reformed Churches of England: yet because some Churches there are, as I have observed in the first Section, wherein the Ministers are e∣qual in power one to another, without Subordination: I con∣ceive it may be expected in this place I should bring some evidences to let such of this Nation, as are not well acquain∣ted with their judgement in point of Church-Government, know what they think of our Episcopacy; whereby it will appear whether they ever desired the abolition thereof, as hath been here reported by those who would have it so. The Reformed Churches abroad that want Subordination of Ministers are three only, and no more, viz. those of Holland, France and Geneva. For as for those few poor persecuted Chur∣ches of Piemont, I reckon them among the French, they ha∣ving most of their Ministers from France, and some of them meeting in the Synods of that Kingdom, which are held in the neighbouring Provinces. Let us therefore speak of those three several National Churches one after another. 29. As for them of Holland,The R formed Churches of Holland do not condemn E∣piscopacy. I need not bring any other Ar∣guments to shew their good liking of the Episcopacy of the Church of England, but only these: First, their Addresses to our learned King James of glorious memory, to have some f the Governours of our Church sent over to them to as∣sist at their National Assembly at Dort, Anno 1618, 1619. and to advise with them, together with the Divines of other Reformed Churches, sent thither by their respective Princes and Magistrates. Secondly, The honour done by them to George Lord Bishop of Landaf, who had always the precedence of all the foraign Divines in the said Assembly, whereof he had been made President, but that he was not properly a Member of, but only an Assistant to the same: and whom the President Bogermannus in all his compellations of him ho∣noured with the Titles of most Reverend Prelate, and Right Re∣rend Lord Bishop, which he would not have done, if the
Church whereof he was a Member, and for that time, and in that occasion the Mouth, and in a manner the Primate, had condemned the Office and Dignity of a Bishop; specially the said Church being there and then all present by her re∣presentatives.Se this related by Bishop Hall (who assisted at the said Assem∣bly of Dort) in his Episcopacy by Divine Right. Thirdly, That word spoken by the same President before the whole Assembly to the said Bishop, af∣ter the Bishop had represented how fit a remedy Episcopacy is for the suppression of Schisme and Heresie; Domine non su∣mus adeo felices. My Lord we are not so happy as to enjoy the benefit of having Bishops. I may add for a Fourth Argu∣ment of the reverence of the Reformed Churches of Holland have for the Bishops of the Church of England, the care they had presently after the Printing of the Acts of the Synod of Dort, to send a Copy of them, not only to King James, and Prince Charles, but likewise to the Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury his Grace, that then was, by Festus Hommius Divinity Reader in one of their Universities, and one of the Secreta∣ries of the said Synod. This that I say may be seen written with Festus Hommius his own hand upon that Copy of the Compilation he hath made of the Acts of the General Assem∣bly of the Belgick Churches, which was by him presented to the Library of the Dutch Church of London. Nor the Rfor∣med Churches of France.30. As for the French Reformed Churches enough hath been said already to convince the World, that they are no ene∣mies to Episcopacy, and those who have lived amongst them, know that they are so far from condemning that Church-Government as evil and unlawful, that they rather wish they were in a condition to enjoy the benefit thereof, most of them not sticking to say plainly, as was before observed, That if all the Kingdom of France should embrace the Re∣formed Doctrine, they must of necessity have Bishops, and they would most freely submit to them. Wherefore I do think it not improbably said by some (and amongst them by that learned and most worthy adopted Son of the Church of England, Doctor Peter du Moulin Prebend of Christs Church, Canterbury, and one of His Majesties Chaplains, in that Ingenious and Loyal Book of his which he set forth in French soon after the Martyrdom of the late King, for
the defence of the Right both of King and Church) that God having permitted the Work of Reformation to be carried on only by the inferiour Clergy of that Kingdom, they thought it meet to keep themselves within the bounds of the Order of Priesthood; that if ever it were God Almighties will that the Bishops themselves should reform and embrace the true Doctrine, there might be no contestation with them for Ju∣risdiction and Preeminence, but all manner of readiness on the Reformed Ministers part, to submit to the Bishops, and acknowledge them for their lawful Superiours and Prelates. For certainly it is an injury done to the Reformers of these Churches to think that they have Reformed both Church-Government, and every circumstance of outward Worship, in the same manner we see them established and used among them by choice, and because they judged them after mature deliberation to be simply the best, and of an absolute neces∣sity. As for me I nothing doubt, but those things were so ordered by them, according to the exigency of the times, because their condition did not permit them to do otherwise. I will instance only in two particulars, among many others, which might be brought to prove the same. The Church of Engl. and others have preserved Churches in their Reformation, and have been careful to keep them cleanly, and to have them decently adorned, for the more edifying performance of Gods solemn Service. Their Clergy-men likewise have always used decent apparel different from that of Lay-men. Neither of which things was to be expected in the Reformation of the French Churches. For alas, how could those poor Christi∣ans that embraced the Reformed Doctrine at first, have had stately and decently adorned Buildings for Gods Worship, that durst not assemble publickly in any place, for fear of hanging and burning: but met sometimes in Cellars, some∣times in Barns, sometimes in the open Fields? Or how could their Ministers have used decent Vestments, and appar∣rel differing from that of other men, who for their life durst not have appeared for what they were? And therefore were forced to wear coloured, and Tradesmens, and sometimes Souldiers clothes, to preserve themselves under that disguise.
The same judgement is to be made of other things of the like nature. And that it was the hardness and calamity of the times that constrained them so to do, and that they were not led thereto by their own choice, appears by their erecting of fair Churches as soon as they had that Liberty in every place according to their ability,See the Acts of the Ntional Assembly of the French R for∣med Churches, held at Lou∣dun, Anno 1658 & 1659. as may be seen at Charenton, Roan, Caen, Saumur, Mont Alban, and elsewhere; and by the exhortations of their National Synods, renewed in that which was held last at Loudun, to set apart every where (where conveniently they may) some publick place fit for Gods service. The like appears also by their Ministers now leaving their ordinary apparel when they perform Church-duties; and by their constant using of Gowns and Cassocks (as hath been observed before) where they may freely ap∣pear for what they are. Now that this may not seem an ex∣cursion from that subject I have in hand, I say, the same judgement must be made touching the equality of Ministers they introduced & maintained within themselves til this day. They could do no otherwise; though the Reason hinted at by Dr. Du Moulin, had not diverted them from attempting it. For who seeth not that the Popish Bishops would never have suffered any Minister to take their Titles, for example, those of Paris, Roan, Lyons, Orleans, Bordeaux, and the like. But that they did not introduce their equality out of an opinion of the unlawfulness of Episcopacy, is most clearly made evi∣dent by their readiness to submit to those Bishops, who ac∣knowledging their former errors, should profess the truth of the Gospel. Of this there is a famous example which hap∣pened a little after the Colloquie or Conference of Poissi, Joannes, Antonius, of the Illustrious Family of the Coracioli, Son of the most renowned Prince of Melfi, and a man of good lear∣ning, being Bishop of Troyes in the Province of Champagne, was convinced of the truth of the Doctrine professed in the Reformed Churches. But being desirous that his conversion might profit the people of his Diocese that were commit∣ted to his charge; which he thought would hardly be, un∣less such as had already embraced the Reformed Religion, did submit to his Government, and acknowledge him for
their Bishop and Pastor; he made his address unto them for that purpose, and was by them acknowledged, they wil∣lingly submitting to his Government. Which submission of theirs was generally approved by all their Brethren, and likewise by Peter Martyr,Ab omnibus unanimiter ut verus Episco∣pus agnitus est & receptus. Quare ipsius authoritas multum Ec∣clesiae Dei commodat; Deus laudetur qui ad hunc modum filii sui regnum gubernat & dirigit. Petru Martyr. Theod. Bzae. who passing by that Town as he was returning from Poissi into Switzerland, and being ac∣quainted with the whole business, gave his approbation un∣to the same; hoping that such an example might contribute much to the advancement of the Protestant Religion, as he intimates to Beza in one of his Epistles, where he imparteth the news of the Bishops conversion, and the Reformed Chur∣ches submission to his Pastoral care and authority. And no doubt but it had proved very advantagious to promote the work of Reformation in that Kingdom, but that the Popish Bishops could not endure to see a person of the same Chara∣cter and Dignity with them, keep his place and office, and exercise the Functions thereof in the Reformed Churches of France with their consent. Wherefore fearing the conse∣quences of such an example, they applied themselves to the King against the Bishop of Troyes, and at last prevailed; so that he was turned out of his place by the Kings Authority. This we see in Thuanus his History,In concioni∣bus qubus eo∣rum (Refor∣matorum) do∣ctrinam seque∣batur, haben∣dis assiduus, donec Praesu∣les exemplum veriti, apud Regem pervi∣cerunt, ut dig∣nitate move∣retur. Thuan. Tom. 2. ad An. 1561. where he is a little mi∣staken, in that he saith that the Bishop was Ordained anew by those of the Reformed Religion of Troyes; whereas he was only agnitus & receptus ut verus Episcopus, acknowledged and received as their true Bishop, as Martyr's Letter hath it. By this it is easie to judge who are the opposers of Protestant Bi∣shops in France; not the Protestants who submit to them, and acknowledge them for true Bishops, when they have the happiness to see any amongst them; but the Papists, who by no means will suffer any such Officer to be seen in the French Reformed Churches; Exemplum veriti, sayes Thuanus, fear∣ing lest such good examples should prejudice their own Church and Religion. And that I may not be thought to draw this conclusion out of this instance of my own head a∣lone; let an eminent man of the same Churches have a hea∣ring in this place, and you shall see that he doth make the very same use thereof. It is that most eloquent and famous
Preacher of the Reformed Church of Caen, of whom I have al∣ready spoken, Mr. du Bosc in a Letter of his to Dr. Brevint, written June 14. An. 1660. whereof I have the original, where he writes as followeth; the French is his, word for word; the Translation is Doctor Peter du Moulin Prebend of Canterbu∣ry's, who made it long since, intending to publish it with divers others written of late to the same purpose. NOus reconnoissons que cet Ordre (l'Episcopat) a d'insignes avantages, & je ne pense pas qu' aucun de mes freres me desavoüequand je dirai que l'Episcopat bien reglé ades utilites importantes & tres considerables qui ne se trouvent point dans la Disci∣pline Presbyterienne. Si nous avons suivi ceite derniere dans ns Eglises, ce n'est pas que nous avons aversion contre l'autre; ce n'est pas que nous estimions l'Episcopat contrai∣re a la nature de l'Evangele, que nous le croyons moins propre au bien de l'Eglise, moins digne de la condiion de vrais troupeaux du Seigneur. Mais c'est que la necessité nous y a obliges, parce que la Reformation ayant com∣mence dans ce Royaume par le peuple & par de simples Ecclesiastiques, les places des Evesques demeurerent rem∣plies par ceux d'une Religion contraire; Et par ce moyen nous fusmes contrains d'avoir
des Pasteurs & des Anciens, depeur d'opposer dans une mesme ville Evesque a E∣vesque, ce qui auroit causé des troubles furieux & des guer∣res implacables, & auroit ap∣portè un notable retardement au progres de l'Evangile. Si les Evesques avoyent d'abord embrassé la Reformation, je ne doute point que leur Or∣dre n'eust esté maintenu dans la Police Ecclesiastique, & j'en trouve une preuve con∣vainquante dans une Epistre de Martyr; C'est la cin∣quante septiesme qui s'ad∣dresse a Theodore de Beze. Il lui parle de l'Evesque de Troye en Champagne, ou Dieu avoit recueilli une belle & nombreuse Eglise. Il dit que le Prelat de cette ville ayant connu la verité, se mit a la prescher publiquement, & comme c'estoit un excellent homme, qu'ilavancoit puis∣samment le Regne de Christ. Mais que lui estant venu en l'Esprit un grand scrupule sur sa vocation, il assembla les Anciens de l'Eglise Re∣formée pour savoir d'eux s'ils le vouloyent reconnoi∣stre pour leur Evesque & les pria d'n deliberer meure∣ment; ce qu'ayans fait avec toute la prudence & la sagesse
requise, ils lui declarerent unanimement qu'ils le recon∣noissoient & qu'ils le rece∣voyent pour leur vrai & legitime Evesque. Qui doute que si les autres Prelats du Royaume avoyent suivi son exemple, & avoyent com∣me lui donné gloire a Dieu, ils ne fussent demeures dans leur station & que leur dig∣nité ne leur eust esté conser∣vée. Car Martyr dans cette Epistre approuve & l'action de l'Evesque & la resolution des Anciens, & il en escrit a Beze comme d'une chose dont il loüe le Seigneur, & dont il savoit bien que ce grand Serviteur de Dieu se resioüiroit avec lui. Il ne faut donc pas tirer conse∣quence de nos Eglises de France a celles d'Angle∣terre. Car en celles ci la Re∣formation ayant commencé par les Prelats il faudroit trouver estrange si l'Episco∣pat n'y avoit pas esté conser∣vé; Et s'il s'y rencontre au∣jourd hui d'asses rigides parti∣fans de l'egalité Presbyteri∣enne pour vouloir choquer cet ordre ancien & le renverser de fond en comble aux de∣spens de l'Estat & de l'E∣glise, il ne peuvent manquer d'en estre tresfort blasmes.
WE acknowledge that this Order hath signal advantages; And I think not that any of my brethren will contradict me, if I say that wel∣ordered Episcopacy hath most important and considerable u∣tilities which cannot be found in the Presbyterian Discipline. If we have followed the last in our Churches, it is not for any aversion that we have against the former: It is not because we hold Episcopacy to be con∣trary to the nature of the Go∣spel, or because we think it less convenient for the good of the Church, or less worthy of the condition of the true flocks of the Lord; but it is because necessity hath obliged us to it; because Reformation having been begun in this Kingdom by the people and by inferiour Church-men, the pla∣ces of Bishops remain'd filled with men of a contrary Reli∣gion, so that we were con∣strained to content our selves with Ministers and Elders as
well as we could, for fear of setting Bishop against Bi∣shop in the same Town, which would have caused furious troubles and implacable wars, and put a great stop to the progress of the Gospel. If Bishops had embraced the Re∣formation at the first, I make no doubt but that their order had been maintained in the Ecclesiastical Polity. And I find a convincing proof of that in an Epistle of Martyr; it is the 57. inscribed to The∣odorus Beza, where he speaks to him of the Bishop of Troyes in Champagne, where God had gathered a great and numerous Church. He saith that the Pre∣late of that Town having ac∣knowledged the Truth, begun to preach it publickly, and (being a man of great parts) advanced the Kingdom of Christ mightily; but that a great scruple being come into his mind about his calling, he assembled the Elders of the Re∣formed Church, to know of them whether they would ac∣knowledge him for their Bi∣shop, and he desired them ma∣turely to deliberate of it among themselves. Which when they had done with all the prudence and wisdom requisite, they de∣clared unto him unanimously,
that they acknowledged and received him for their true and lawful Bishop. Can any doubt but that if the other Bishops of the Kingdom had followed his example, and given glory to God as he did, they had continued in their station, and preserved their dignity? For Martyr in that Epistle ap∣proveth both the Bishops acti∣on and the resolution of the Elders. He writes of this to Beza, as of a thing for which he praiseth God, and for which he knew that Beza, that great Servant of God, would rejoyce with him. Wherefore the practise of the Churches of France ought to be no president for the Church of England. For in the Church of England Re∣formation having been be∣gun by the Bishops, there would be reason to think it strange, if Episcopacy had not been preserved therein. And if there be any in Eng∣land at this time that be so rigidly partial for Presbyteri∣an parity, as to justle against that ancient order of Episco∣pacy, and seek to root it quite out to the prejudice both of Church & State, they cannot but be very much blamed for it.
31. But in this there is more then I have need of; for, whereas I am to prove only that the Reformed Churches of France, though they have a Form of Government different from that of the Church of England, yet do not condemn the same as evil and unlawful; here you hear them alledging necessity, and saying they have been forced to that under which they live; and proving they would most willingly exchange the same with Episcopacy, if they could but have Protestant Bishops. Monsieur Gaches one of the Ministers of Charenton, in one of his Letters to the same Doctor Bre∣vint, doth say enough for my purpose, when he writes thus: THe name of BISHOP cannot be strange to any man that is acquainted with Scripture, since it is found in Scripture. The Office which that name doth intimate is lawful, since it was ac∣knowledged from the beginning of the Christian Church. Yea, I am of this opinion, that though Bishops had very much exceeded the Authority which they had in the two first Ages, and were not so religious as S. Cyprian, who would do nothing without his Presby∣tery; yet that difference in Government ought not to cause a divisi∣on in the Church. The best men in our Churches have honoured the Prelates of England. And he that was sent to the Synod of Dort, was respected according to his place. The name of Schisme may do more harm to the Church in one year, then all the excess of Epis∣copal Authority can do in an age. And again in another Letter to the same person: WOuld to God we had no other differences with the Bishops of France, but their Dignity: How chearfully should I sub∣mit my self to them? Although you know that their yoke is heavy, far heavier than that of the Bishops of England. How comes it to passe then, that those of your Presbyterians that are great, under∣standing and wise men, have such an aversion against moderate Episcopacy? And why do they refuse to have Communion with Ignatius, Polycarpus, Cyprian, Chrysostom, and all that holy company of the purest Antiquity? I am of that opinion, that if all
Ministers could be wise at all times, and keep themselves in good order, they would have no need of Overseers; as there would have been no need of Kings and Judges, if men had kept their primitive innocency. But sin hath brought in the necessity of Government, and the failings of Ministers make the Order of Bishops neces∣sary. 32. Here followeth the testimony upon this matter of an∣other Minister of great worth and fame in the Reformed Churches of France, who amongst other good parts, is known to be very well versed in the Oriental Tongues, and a great lover of Antiquity; It is Monsieur le Moyne, one of the ordinary Preachers to the Reformed Congregation of Roan. He gives his judgement touching Episcopacy and Pres∣bytery in a Letter he writ to Doctor Brvint above a year ago, whereof I have the Original. It is very long, but it seems to me so well Penn'd, that I think I should do both him and my Readers a great injury, if I should not set down here in both Languages, as much of it as fits my present design. It was written presently after His Majesties most happy re∣turn into his Kingdoms. Mons. & treshonoré frere, VOus avez eu bien de la joye de voir l'entrée du Roy dans Londres. Je pense que vous cryjez bien haut Io triumphe! Et je ne pense pas que de vostre vie vous ayez veu de plus belle journée. Assurement que vous n'avez plus d'enuie de voir un tri∣omphe des Romains; Et que si comme ce Pere de l'Eglise vous avez eu quelque tenta∣tion pour cela vous en estes bien revenu, & ne faites plus comme luy que des voeux
pour entendre l'Apost. S. Paul. En effect ce seroit un grand bonheur si l'Eglise d'Angle∣terre e l'estat ou elle est a cette heure jouissoit de cet avan∣tage; Et si ce grand homme qui fut autre fois de la Terre ravi dans le troisieme ciel re∣descendoit presentement sur la Terre, & nous venoit faire entendre de quelle façon l'E∣glise de Dieu est obligée de se conduire & comment les dif∣ferents sur le gouvernement de l'Eglise peuvent estre ter∣minez par un bon accommo∣dement. Veritablement je ne croy pas qu'il soit possible de garder la paix ou l'ordre en vostre E∣glise sans preserver la dignité Episcopale. Et je confesse que je ne comprens point de quel esprit peuvent estre meusceux qui s'opposent a ce gouverne∣ment, & qui le decrient d'une si cruelle maniere. Car je de∣fie qui que ce soit de m'en faire paroistre un plus convenable a la raison, plus conve∣nable mesme a l'Escriture sainte, & dont Dieu se soit servi plus utilement pour l'establissement de sa verité & pour l'amplification de son Regne. Je dis conforme a la rai∣son; car qui peut nier qu'il ne
soit raisonable qu'il y ait en toutes sortes de choses quelque ordre & quelque superiorité, & que l'egalité est la mere de la confusion? De cela nous n'avons que trop d'experien∣ces. C'est pour cela que sous le Vieil Testament Dieu voulut que son peuple fust conduit par des Sacrificateurs qui estoyent au dessus des Levites, & par des Archisacrificateurs, & des Souverains Sacrificateurs. Ce qu'il n'auroit pas fait as∣surement s'il avoit creu qu'∣une entiere egalité eust esté le gouvernement le plus raison∣able du Monde. Et puis n'est il pas vray que l'Eglise du temps des Apostres a tous∣jours esté conduite par un gouvernement bien eloigné de l'egalité des Presbyteriens? Certes il y avoit bien des E∣glises ou il y avoit des Paste∣urs establis, & ce pendant ces Pasteurs la ne laissoyent pas de ceder aux Apostres, & de les considerer tousjours com∣me un estage au dessus d'eux. Ce qui fait voir que l'ordre & la superiorité n'est pas une chose incompatible avec le gouvernement de l'Eglise. Mais non seulement la digni∣té d'Apostre donnoit de l'au∣thorité, mais je ne doute point non plus que ceux qui avoy∣ent
receu leur vocation imme∣diatement des Apostres, n'eus∣sent quelque superiorité par dess ceux qui ne possedoyent pas le mesme avantage. Et je ne doute point pour exemple, que Tite & que Ti∣mothée qui avoient cet avan∣tage la n'en fussent plus con∣siderez du peuple, & que ce∣la ne les rendist mesme ve∣nerables a leurs compagnons de service. Car comme la vo∣cation immediate des Evan∣gelistes & des Apostres par Nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ les elevoit au dessus des au∣tres; Ainsi la vocation con∣ferée par les mains des saints Apostres rendoit ceux a qui ils la conferoient plus estimez dans l'Eglise de Dieu, cette imposition des mains estant bien plus honorable que celle qui se faisoit par de simples Pasteurs, & ordinairement plus accompagnée de l'effusi∣on du S. Esprit. Et c'est en∣core une des choses qui don∣noit de la primauté dans l'Eglise primitive. Car il est constant que Dieu y distribu∣oit de son Esprit en abon∣dance, & que mesme il par∣loit bien haut par les miracles de ses serviteurs pour en attirer plusieurs a sa sainte connoissance. Or qui doute
que ceux qui possedoient une plus grande mesures de l'E∣sprit de Nostre Seigneur, & qui eclatioient par plus de miracles, ne fussent au dessus des autres, & que les Eglises ne les choisissent pour les conduire, & pour leur deferer, comme Dieu les avoit choisis pour en faire les principaux objects de ses liberalitez & les principaux instrumens pour l'establissement de sa gloire. Et cela dura, Monsieur, l'espae de tout le premier siecle, pendant quasi tout le∣quel temps vescut encore l'Apostre S. Jean, qui as∣surement donnoit ordre a tou∣tes les Eglises d'Asie. Ce qui fait voir que dans le premier siecle il y a tousjours eu quel∣que ordre dans l'Eglise, & que dans ce temps de son innocence elle s'est tousjours conduite par un gouverne∣ment equivalent a l'Episco∣pal. Depuis qu'elle n'a plus eu d'Apostres ni de personnes qui eussent receu leur esta∣blissement de ces saints per∣sonnages; & que le don de prophecie & de miracles fut un peu diminué, l'Eglise son∣geant a sa conduite & se ser∣vant de son election pour met∣ire quelques uns en la place
de ceux que la Providence a∣voit elevez immediatement au milieu de ses Eglises, choisit aussi tost des Evesques; Et voyant que Dieu ne mettoit quasi plus d'inegalité entre ses Pasteurs par la difference de ses dons miraculeux, se reso∣lut d'y en mettre par la plu∣ralité de ses suffrages, Dieu ne luy ayant pas osté la liber∣té d'en user de ceste maniere; Au contraire luy ayant bien fait esperer par exemples que ce seroit une chose utile & qu'il ne le desaprouveroit pas. En effect des le se∣cond siecle l'Eglise se pour∣veut d'Evesques, & com∣mençam justement au temps que la Providence l'aban∣donnoit a sa propre conduite, & qu'elle se trouvoit en estat de pouvoir marcher toute seule, elle eleut des Superieurs & des personnes qui fussent au dessus de l'ordinaire des Pa∣steurs, comme Dieu dans l premier siecle en avoit luy mesme establi, & avoit vou∣lu que son Eglise fust con∣duite en ce temps la par un gouvernement Hterarchique. Et Dieu n'a pas temoigné desapprouver que son Eglise en usast de ceste maniere & se conformast au patron que Dieu luy monstra sur Sion
d'ou est venue la Doctrine. Au contraire il a benit ce des∣sein & l'a fait reüssir d'une maniere la plus miraculeuse du monde. Car jamais personne ne fit plus de miracles & ne terrassa plus de monstres que firent autrefois les Evesques & les Prelats de l'Antiquité. Si Dieu donc les a tous benits, estce pas un horrible empor∣tement que d'entreprendre de les maudire? Si l'Eglise an∣cienne en a fait toute sa gloire, a t'on raison de les considerer comme la honte & l'opprobre d'Israel? Si ce gouvernement a fait triompher la gloire de Jesus Christ, est on suppor∣table de soustenir que c'est la colomne & le fondement de mensonge, & la base sur la∣quelle seule se repose la tyran∣ne de l'Antechrist? En verité c'est estre bien temeraire que d'en user de ceste façon, & je ne croy pas qu'il y ait d'ingra∣titude qui approche de celle la. Car c'est bien mal recon∣noistre l'obligation que nous avons a tant d'illustres E∣vesques lesquels avec tant d'illustres exemples de con∣stance & de fidelité au service de Dieu, nous ont transferé sa verité toute repurgée des er∣reurs dont une infinité d'He∣retiques avoyent tasché de
l'empoisonner. Mais s'il y en a quelques uns qui en cette oc∣casion signalent leur ingrati∣tude, assurement que ce sont les Anglois qui ne consi∣derent pas qu'ils doiuent leur reformation au soin & au zele de leurs Evesques qui repurgerent il y a cent ans si admirablement bien l'E∣glise d'Angleterre, & qui restablirent si heureusement la verité dans son lustre. Mais ils ne leur sont pas seu∣lement redevables de cela; ils leur doivent aussi le Chri∣stianisme tout entier. Car soit qu'il se soit porté en Angle∣trre par Joseph d'Arima∣thée, ou par Simon Can∣neus, ou par S. Paul, ou par S. Pierre, ou par Luc Dis∣ciple de Philippe ou par Phaganus & Perusia∣nus du temps du Roy Lu∣cius, il est constant que ce fut par le Ministere des E∣vesques, & que c'est a leur charité, a leur zele, & a leur suffisance qu'ils sont redeva∣bles de la connoissance qu'ils possedent presentement. Et comment donc s'emporter contre ce governement? Et quelle folie de croire qu'ils pourront utilement secoüer un gouvernement qui l'espace de tant de siecles a obtenu au
milieu de leur Eglise? Faut il pas estre bien broüillon pour se resoudre a ces extremitez, & n'avoir guere d'experience & ne scavoir pas que les changemens sont de dange∣reuse consequence? Mais Monsieur, outre que cela ne peut tomber dans le sens d'un homme raisonnable qu'un grand Royaume puisse s'accoustumer a ne voir plus ses Evesques qu'il a venerez depuis 1400. ans; Que faire de tous ces biens Ecclesia stiques? A quel usage les appliquer? Comment dechi∣rer & demembrer tant de choses que la pieté a conjoin∣tes? Et ne seroit-ce pas en∣core une question qui pourroit encore retroubler le pays, sça∣voir si ces biens destinez seu∣lement pour des oeuvres pies pourroyent legitimement estre possedes par des seculiers? Au moins je sçay bien qu'aujourd∣huy c'est une chose qui trou∣ble grandement la ville d'U∣trecht & qui pourroit bien y faire naistre d'estranges re∣volutions. Et n'est-il pas donc bien plus raisonnable de lais∣ser les choses comme elles sont & de n'empescher pas que des personnes de merue posse∣dent des avantages sas les∣quels bien souvent leur merite
ne s'eleveroit pas bien haut, & ne se trouveroient pas en estat d'exercer toutes les vertus que l'Apostre requiert en un Evesque? Qui plus est, Mon∣sieur, doit on pas estre sage pas ses prpres experiences? Qu'ont gagné je vous prie ces broüillons la qui en veulent tant aux Evesques depuis bien tost vinqt ans qu'ils ob∣tiennent? Ont ils avancé tant soit peu? Et l'Eglise s'est elle veüe plus en repos par leur Anarchie? Au contrai∣re, toutes choses ont elles pas empré? Les Heresies se sont elles pas enhardies de mar∣cher la teste levie? Et ja∣mais Satan a t'il plus fa de ravages qu'il en a fait depuis que ces gens se sont rendus maistres? En con∣science cela les deuroit faire trembler d'horreur, & apres une malediction si visible sur toutes leurs entreprises ils ne deuroyent pas les pour∣suiure plus avant; Ils deu∣royent donner gloire a Dieu & reconnoitre qu'assurement leur ouvrage n'est point l'oeuvre de Dieu, & qu'il est bien plus a propos de laisser faire ceux dont le Gouvernement est fame∣eux par mille benedicti∣ons dont Dieu la sou∣vent
couronné. Mais, Monsieur, il faut que je vous adjouste cette con∣sideration que je ne croy pas qu'il y ait de Nation au Monde qui ait plus besoin d'Evesques que la Nation Angloise. Car elle a quelque chose de fier & quelque chose de superstitieux. Et l'un & l'autre est capable de luy faire beaucoup enterpreendre, & de la jetter dans d'estran∣ges extremites, si elle n'est re∣primée par quelque puissance un peu Despotique. Et com∣me il n'y a point de Nation moins propre a se laisser gou∣verner par une administrati∣on populaire, parce que tous les Anglois ont trop de cou∣rage, sont trop inquiets & ja∣loux, & pensent estre tous nez pour regner: toutes cho∣ses qui comme vous scavez ont besoin de l'extreme puis∣sance afin d'estre retenues. De mesme dans l'Eglise un gou∣vernement ordinaire ne pour∣roit pas la contenir: Elle s'em∣porteroit au dela des bornes si l'authorité Episcopale qui est la plus souveraine que l'Eglise peut recognoistre, n'estoit establie pour y don∣ner ordre, & pour pourvoir a ses dereglements. En effect
Monsieur il n'y a qu'elle qui puisse remedier a une infinité dem aux qui peuvent naistre dans l'Eglise. Car, je vous prie, ne nous flattons point, en France ou nous avons le gou∣vernement Presbyterien som∣mes nous pas sujets a bien des divisions que l'egalité des Pa∣steurs n'est pas capable de terminer? Et qu'un Synode composé d'eganx, & d'Anci∣ens, & de Diacres qui bien souvent ne s'y connoissent pas ne peuvent pas arrester, parce que les Autheurs du mal se croyent aussi grands Seigne∣urs que ceux qui eclattent le plus, & meprisent une bonne partie de ceux qu'on employe ordinairement pour y apporter du remede? Qui ne sçait que dans les pais bas toutes les Academies ont quelques cho∣ses a demester ensemble que l'authorité des Evesques au∣roit deja bien termin és, & qui eclatteroient encore bien d'a∣vantage si l'authorité seculiere n'empeschoit le mal de gagner plus avant. Nos Adversai∣res en cela sont ils pas extre∣mement heureux? Car sans leur gouvernement Episcopal ils seroyent dechirez en mille factions & ce grand corps de l'Eglise Romaine se trouve∣roit bien tost demembré. Mais
ayant des Superieurs qui veil∣lent sur tout un Diocese, on sur toute une Province, on pre∣vient promptement le mal & les mutins sont obligez de ce∣der; Ils ont tousjours quel∣que deference & quelque re∣spect pour les Superieurs, & l'union quoy qu'il arrive estant tousjours conservée, le mal n'est pas si scandaleux ni de si dangereuse consequence. C'est ce qui entretient aussi les Egliglse Lutheriennes. Car en Danemark, en Nor∣vege, en Suede, en Alle∣magne elles sont extremement tranquilles sous la discipline Episcopale, & l'on ne les voit gueres se decrier & se dechi∣rer les unes les autres. Au lieu que les autres Gouvernemens ont bien de la peiue a s'en ga∣rentir. Et pourquoy donc estrc si deraisonnable de ne vouloir pas profiter de cela? Et s'ap∣pliquer ce que nousvoyons suc∣ceder si avantageusement au milieu de tout le Monde? Je ne sçaurois oublier icy qu'il faudroit manquer bien de Prudence & de Charité pour presser avec emportement la ruine des Evesques. Car qui ne sçait que c'est une des cho∣ses du Monde qui debauche le plus ceux de Rome de nos E∣glises que la nudité de nostre
gouvernement & que quand ils voyent que nous n'avons aucune conformité avec tout l'Eglise Ancienne touchant la Discipline Ecclesiastique, ils ne peuvent se persuader que nous soyons dans le bon che∣min; Puis qu'il leur semble en apparence tellement eloig∣né de celuy de l'Eglise Pri∣mitive. Pour moy je loûe Dieu de nostre Reformation en France. Mais je ne crain point de dire que si nous avions conservé des Evesques & autant de Cere∣monies qu'il en faut pour at∣tacher le peuple & n'estre pas superstitieux, on auroit assu∣rement vù la Reformation gagner beaucoup plus loin & venir a bout de la resistance d'une infinité de personnes que l'irregularité de nostre Gou∣vernement & la simplicité de nostre service effarouche de nostre Communion. Mais quand nous n'au∣rions pas dessein d'attirer Messieurs de Rome, que di∣ront ceux de la Confession d'Ausbourg que nous tas∣chons par toutes sortes de bon∣ner voyes d'engager dans no∣stre parti. Ceux qui travail∣lent a cette reunion n'auroyent ils pas sujet de desperer du succés de leur enterprise, si
lorsque nous leur tendons la main d'association nous la re∣tirions aussi tost & nous elong∣nions d'eux par la ruine du gouvernement Episcopal. Sans mentir cette seule circonstance devroit bien appaiser vos An∣glois, & s'ils avoyent un peu de charité, les porter a consen∣tir de bonne grace que ce Gou∣vernement se restablist quoy qu'il eust quelque chose qu'ils ne pussent pas tout affait ap∣prouver. Mais j'apprehende un peu leur humeur. Ils ne se soucient apparement guere des autres, & ils diroient fort li∣brement, Nous as tu baillé nos freres en garde? pour nous engager tant pour eux & pour nous en donner tant d'in∣quetude? Ils n'empescheront pourtant pas tant de gens de bien d'Angleterre d'en user d'une autre maniere. Et j'espere bien que le Roy si mi∣raculeusement conservé & re∣stabli sur son throne ne man∣quera pas de restablir l'Au∣thorité de l'Eglise Anglicane & apres l'avoir remise dans sa premiere splendeur, d'em∣ployer son Authorité pour une parfaite reunion de toutesles Eglifes Reformées. Mais pour y pouvoir parvenir il faut qu'il conserve ses Evesques. Et quand il n'en auroit pas en
son Royaume sa propre sages∣se lui suggereroit qu'il seroit necessaire d'y en establir.
Sir my much honoured Brother, HOw great was your joy to see the Kings entry into London! And how lowd did you shout Io triumphe! I can∣not believe that in all your life you have seen a more glo∣rious day. Sure you desire no more to see one of the Ro∣man Triumphs. Or if ever you were tempted with that desire, as that Father of the Church was once, you are now weaned from it, and on∣ly wish as he did, to hear the Apostle Saint Paul. Truly
could that great man who was once from the Earth rapt into the third Heaven come down again at present upon earth, to tell us how the Church of God ought to be ordered, and how the differences about Church-Government might be happily composed; it would be a happy advantage for the Anglican Church in her present condition. Truly I believe not that it is possible to keep either peace or order in your Church, without preserving the Epis∣copal Dignity. And I confesse that I conceive not by what spirit they are led that op∣pose that Government, and cry it down with such vio∣lence. For I defie any man whosoever he be to shew me if he can an other Order more suitable with reason, yea, or better agreeing with holy Scripture, and of which God hath made more use for the establishment of his Truth, and the amplification of his Kingdom. I say it is suitable with rea∣son; for who can deny that
reason requires that in all sorts of things there be some order and superiority; and that equality very often is the mother of Confusion? Of that we have but too many experiences. For that reason under the Old Testament God would have his people to be ruled by Priests who were above the Levites, and by Chief Priests, and High Priests. Which certainly he would not have done, had he judged a down-right equa∣lity the most reasonable Go∣vernment of the World. And as for the Church in the Apostles time, was it not al∣wayes conducted by a Go∣vernment far different from the equality of the Presby∣terians? Indeed Pastours were established in severall Churches, yet those Pastors yielded obedience unto the Apostles, looking upon them still as placed in a higher degree. Which sheweth that Subordination and Superiori∣ty are not incompatible with the Government of the Church. Neither did that Dignity of Apostle onely give Authori∣ty. But also I make no doubt but that they that had re∣ceived their calling immedi∣ately from the Apostles had
Superiority above those that had not the same advan∣tage. For example, I make no doubt but that Titus and Timothy who had that advan∣tage, were more honoured for it of the people, yea, and were made more venerable thereby to their fellow-la∣bourers. For as the imme∣diate calling of the Evan∣gelists and Apostles by our Lord Jesus Christ did raise them above others; So like∣wise the calling conferred by the hands of the Holy Apostles made them upon whom they conferred it more considerable in the Church of God; This impo∣sition of hands being far more honourable then that which was conferred by meer and common Pastours, and ordi∣narily more accompanied with the effusion of the Holy Ghost. Which also was one of the things that gave Pri∣macy in the Primitive Church. For it is certaine that in that Church God made a plenti∣full distribution of his Spi∣rit, yea, that he spake very lowd by the miracles of his servants to draw many per∣sons
to his holy knowledge. Now who can doubt but that such as possest a great measure of the Spirit of the Lord, and shined with more miracles were above others? And that the Churches would chuse them to be their leaders, and yield honour unto them, as to those whom God had chosen for the chief objects of his liberalities, and his chief instruments for the establishment of his glo∣ry. And this, Sir, lasted all the time of the first age, during almost all which time the A∣postle Saint John was still a∣live, who certainly did mo∣derate all the Churches of Asia. Which sheweth that in the first age there was always some Subordination in the Church, and that in the time of her innocency she was al∣wayes conducted by a govern∣ment equivalent to the Epis∣copal. And after she had no more Apostles nor persons that had received their esta∣blishment from those holy persons, and that the gift of prophecy and miracles was a little abated, the Church look∣ing to her own conduct, and making use of her own ele∣ction to fill the vacant pla∣ces of those whom Provi∣dence
had immediately rai∣sed in the midst of Gods Churches, did presently chuse Bishops: And seeing that God did then hardly put a∣ny inequality between her Pastours, by the difference of his miraculous gifts, she re∣solved to put some diffe∣rence between them by the plurality of her Votes; God having not taken from her the liberty of so doing, but rather given her reason, by examples, to hope that it would be an useful practise, and not displeasing unto him. In effect in the second age the Church chose Bishops for her selfe, and beginning just at the time when the Provi∣dence of God left her to her own conduct, and when she found her selfe in case to go alone, she chose Superiours, and such as might be above the ordinary degree of Pa∣stours, as God himselfe in the first age had instituted such an order, and would have his Church ruled in that golden time by an Hierar∣chical Government. Neither did God shew that he disap∣proved that his Church should so do, and conform her selfe to the patterne which God shewed her upon Zion, whence
the Doctrine is derived to us. Rather he hath blessed that design and made it prosper in the most miraculous man∣ner of the World. For ne∣ver did any work more mi∣racles, or cast down more Monsters then the ancient Bi∣shops and Prelates. If then God hath so blessed them, are not those men besides themselves in an horrible man∣ner that undertake to curse them? If the ancient Church did set them forth as her glory, have they any reason to con∣sider them as the shame and dishonour of Israel? If that Government hath made the glory of Christ to triumph, is it sufferable that any should maintain them to be the pillar and ground of untruth, and the Basis upon which alone the tyranny of Antichrist is setled? Certainly to make such an as∣sertion is a very rash part; and in my opinion it goes beyond all examples of ingratitude, so to reward the obligation we have to so many Bishops of great note, who with so many Illustrious Examples of con∣stancy and fidelity in Gods Service, have delivered down his Truth unto us, repurged from those errors wherewith a swarm of Hereticks had labou∣red
to poison it. But if ever any in this particular made their ungratefulness notorious, certainly they are the English opposers of Episcopacy, who will not consider that they owe their Reformation to the care and zeale of their Bi∣shops who did so wonderfully well repurge the Church of England a hundred years ago, and so happily set up the ho∣ly Truth againe in its genu∣ine lustre. But this is not all they owe unto them: they owe them also their whole Christianity. For whether it was brought over into England by Joseph of Arimathea, or by Simon Canneus, or by Saint Paul, or by Saint Petr, or by Luke Disciple of Philip, or by Pha∣ganus and Perusianus in the time of King Lucius, it is constant, that it was done by the Ministery of Bishops; and that they are indebted to their Charity, Zeal, and Abi∣lities for the holy knowledge they now enjoy. Why then should any be passionate a∣gainst that Government? And what want of Braines is it to believe that they can ad∣vantage themselves by shaking off a Government which hath continued in their Church for so many ages? Can any man
resolve upon such extremities but a lover of confusion, and a man that hath little experi∣ence, and one that knows not that changes are of dangerous consequence? But, Sir, (to omit that it cannot enter into a rational mans imagination, that a great Kingdome should come by custom to be content to see its Bishops no more, having honoured and reverenced them for the space of 1400. years;) what shall be done with all the Church Revenues? To what use shall they be ap∣plied? Must so many things which Devotion hath brought together be torne in pieces and dismembred? And might not this question trouble the Kingdom once more, whe∣ther those Lands and Reve∣nues which were appointed onely for pious uses, may lawfully be possest by secular persons? So much I know, that it is a point which great∣ly troubleth the City of Ʋtrecht, and may there bring forth strange revolutions. Is it not then more reasonable to leave things as they are, and not to hinder deserving persons from possessing those advantages without which their
merit would seldome rise high enough, nor would they find themselves in condition to exercise all the vertues which the Apostle requireth in a Bishop? Besides, Sir, ought we not to learne wisdome by our experience? I pray what good have these troublers of Israel, that are so contrary to Bishops, done for well nigh these twenty yeares that they have ruled? How far have they advanced their Work? Hath the Church enjoyed more rest by their Anarchy? Nay, on the contrary, have not all things grown still worse and worse? Have not Heresies grown bold, and lift up their head? And did ever Satan work more mischiefe then he did since the time that these men became ma∣sters? This indeed in point of Conscience ought to make them tremble with horrour, and after such a visible curse upon all their enterprises they should now at once give them over. They ought to give glory unto God, and acknow∣ledge that certainly their work is not the worke of God, and that it is a farre wiser course for them to let those Rule whose Government is famous by a thousand blessings where∣with
God hath often crown∣ed it. But, Sir, I must here adde this consideration, that I be∣lieve not that any Nation in the World hath more need of Bishops then the English. For they have a natural fierce∣ness, and withall a natural inclination to superstition. Both which are apt to set them upon great enterprises, and to cast them upon strange extremities, unless they be re∣pressed by some power some∣what despoticall. And as there is no Nation less fit to be governed by a popular ad∣ministration, because all the English have too much cou∣rage for that, are too unquiet and jealous, and all think themselves born to Reigne; all which things, as you know, have need of an extreme pow∣er to be kept in. So like∣wise in the Church an ordi∣nary Government could not keep it in order, but it would go beyond all bounds, were not Episcopal Authority (which is the most Soveraign that the Church can submit to) established to take care of it and to prevent disorders. In effect, Sir, there is no other power but the Episcopal can remedy an infinity of evils,
that may arise in the Church. For I beseech you let us not flatter our selves, in France where we have a Presbyte∣rian Government, are we not subject unto many divisions, which the equality of Pastors is not able to compose? And which a Synod consisting of equal persons, and of Elders and Deacons) who many times have little skill in Ecclesia∣stical Government) is not able to stop, because the Authors of the evil hold themselves to be of equal power with those that are of prime note, and despise most of them that are ordinarily imployed to heale those distempers? Who knows not that in the Low Countries all the Universities have some differences which the autho∣rity of Bishops might have ended long ago, and which would break out with more violence, did not the secular Authority keep the evil from growing further? Are not our Adversaries very happy in that point? For were it not for their Episcopal Govern∣ment they would be torn in∣to a thousand Factions; and that great body of the Roman Church would in a short time be dismembred. But having Superiours, who watch over
a whole Diocese, or over a whole Province, the evil is speedily prevented, and the Factious are constrained to yield. They have alwayes some deference and some re∣spect for the Superiours, and the Union being howsoever alwayes preserved, the evil is not so scandalous and of such dangerous consequence. It is that which upholds the Lu∣theran Churches. For in Den∣mark, Norway, Sweden, and Germany they are very quiet under the Episcopal Disci∣pline, and seldom are they seen to slander and tear one another. Whereas other Go∣vernments have much adoe to avoid that. Why then should we be so unreasonable as to refuse to make profit of that, and apply to our selves that which we see practised with such advantagious success in the eyes of all the World? I must not forget to say, that it is meerly out of want of Prudence and Charity if any seek the ruine of Bishops with a violent zeale. For who knows not that this is one of the things which makes the Romanist most averse from the Communion of our
Churches, even the nakedness of our Government? And that when they see that we have no conformity with the whole ancient Church in Ec∣clesiastical Discipline, they cannot perswade themselves that we are in the right way, our way appearing to them so remote from that of the Primitive Church? For my part, I praise God for our Reformation in France. But I fear not to say, that if we had kept Bishops, and as many Ceremonies as would serve to fix the attention of the people without supersti∣tion, we should have seen for certaine, farre greater pro∣gresses of Reformation, and the resistance of a great many persons overcome who are frighted from our Communi∣on by the irregularity of our Government, and the bareness of our Service. But though our end were not to win the Romanists, what will those of the Confession of Auspurg say, whom we endeavour by all good wayes to engage in our party? Would not Reconcilers have great reason to dispair of the suc∣cess of their enterprise, if when we present unto them the hand of fellowship, we draw it
back presently, and go farre from them by the ruine of the Episcopal Government? Truly that onely Circumstance ought to appease your English dissenters, and bring them, if they have any Charity, to consent to the re-establishment of that Government, though there were something in it which they could not alto∣gether approve of. But I am a little afraid that such is their disposition, that they take lit∣tle care for ought we see of others, and are ready to say to God, Hast thou made us our Brethrens keepers, that we should engage our selves so farre for them, and trouble our selves so much about them? But their inclination will not hin∣der so many godly English∣mens practise to the contra∣ry. And I trust that the King whom God hath so miracu∣lously preserved and settled again upon his Throne, will be sure to re-establish the Authority of the Anglican Church, and after he hath re∣stored unto the Church her former Dignity, use his pow∣er for a perfect re-union of all the Reformed Churches. Which that he may effect, His Majesty must preserve his Bishops. And though he had
none in his Kingdom, his own Wisdom would suggest unto him, that it were necessary to set up some. You see that the best Son of the Church of England could not speak better in behalf of Episcopacy. And let it not be objected that it is but one single Ministers private judgment; for though perhaps they do not all express themselves thus far because they have not all applied themselves so through∣ly to the consideration of Church-Government, as this lear∣ned and ingenious man hath; yet they all agree with him in this, that Episcopacy is lawful, and the fittest of all Govern∣ments for the Church of England. And they all complain of those that give out, that they oppose and blame it as evil, taking that report for a great injury done to them. This you may see in the following Epistle written about the same time with the former. It was Penn'd in Latine; the Transla∣tion is Doctor Peter du Moulin's Prebend of Canterbury. It is directed likewise to Doctor Brevint who hath put the Ori∣ginal into my hands. There is but the later part of it which makes properly for my purpose. But because the Author thereof, Reverend Monsieur de l'Angle, of whom I have spoken already so often, hath such fine and Christian-like expressions about his Majesties most happy Restauration, and that I am afraid that too many amongst us do not set their hearts to consider that wonderful Work of God as they ought; I think it very proper to be here set down from the beginning. Sir. IT is with great reason indeed that all pious persons a∣dore the good hand of God in the Restauration of your King unto the Throne of his Ancestors,A notable Letter of Monsi ur de l'Angle. of which he was deprived by an abominable Rabble of Traytors; and that he hath done that great work alone without any second cause intervening. We stand all amazed at this so gratious and so unexpected a turn of all things to the best in England,
which represents in some sort the face of that famous Tem∣ple of Solomon, that was in a manner brought forth by it self, and for the cementing of whose stones there was no use of the Hammer, nor no noise heard. This is the day which the Lord hath made. I will praise the Lord as long as I live, because he that is mighty hath done for us great things. He hath put down the mighty from their seat, and his servant whom he had brought low, he hath lift up on high, and hath made it manifest unto all, that there is a God in Heaven that judgeth the transactions and the doings of men, who disposeth of them according to his pleasure, and when they grow licentious, and break out of the path of righteousness and humanity, he keeps them within the channel of re∣verence and duty. But especially he taketh in hand the cause of his Anointed, when it seemed unto all to be most abandoned, and so desperate, that it seemed incapable of any remedy, unless it were ministred by God himself; adorning the Royal Head of your King with so many Rayes of Grace, and giving him such an amiable Authori∣ty, that the alienation of his subjects from him, which hi∣therto hath raised so many storms, is now turned into love. From that horrible ruine which had miserably defaced him, he now riseth glorious and lovely; and that Furnace of afflictions into which God whose wayes are unsearchable, had cast him, makes him appear a Son of God, and an An∣gel of Light. The affections of his people have not past in∣deed, but have equalled the swiftness of our Prayers, and the torrent of blessings wherewith God overfloweth his Royal Throne is risen far above his very hopes. Come then, Dear Sir, let us say of his most excellent Majesty that which the Psalmist saith of his King, His glory is great in thy salvation, O Lord, Honour and Majesty hast thou laid upon him. We trust that his piety and gratefulness towards God will enable us to apply to him likewise the words that follow a little after, For the King trusteth in the Lord, and through the mercy of the most High he shall not be mo∣ved. Now, Sir, I make no question but that your King to set∣tle
the affairs of his Church and Kingdom, will take a clean contrary course to that of the Tyrant who hath for so many years usurped and defiled his Throne; For the Prudence of Cromwell which was all earthly and devilish, took care of nothing else but his profit, and the setling of his inso∣lent Fortune, without any regard of the Kingdom of Christ trodden under in England. Neither did he ever repress the impiety of ungracious men, who had as many Gods as Houses; which indeed was a great shame to our Religion. But the Kings most Excellent Majesty following the exam∣ple of Solomon, and embracing holy Counsels, will begin at Gods house before he think of his own, and will seek before all things the Kingdom of God, and the righteous∣ness thereof. My heart did leap for joy when I was told that your Liturgy and ancient Discipline should be resto∣red again, and that already it did appear like a joyful mor∣ning at the rising of the King your Sun, promising a faire and bright day. I cannot but have good hope of that Dis∣cipline, by the use whereof the Church of England was en∣riched with so many blessings for so many years. And I cannot tell what those Haters of the peace of the Church mean that prattle up and down, and talk as if the French Churches were great adversaries to the Episcopal Order; and as if we held it quite contrary unto Christs Kingdom, and affirmed it to be a foul Relick of Antichristianisme. God forbid, Sir, that we should have such a perverse and rash opinion. I am sure that neither Monsieur Daillé, nor Monsieur Amiraut, nor Monsieur Bochart, nor any of my Collegues of Rouen ever approved of it; I that am the least of my Brethren am as far from it as any. Truly an Episcopacy distracted and carried about within and without the Walls of our Jerusalem to several abuses; An Episcopacy altogether independent and lawless, making of a mans will his Law, doing all the functions of such an important Ministery with its particular and dispotical pleasure, is an unlucky and horrible thing in the House of God, drawing near to Antichristianity if it be not rather a part of it. But an Episcopacy well tempered and well poised, an Episcopacy
framed after the model which was exercised with so much success by those Prelates of the Apostolick Churches which Christ calls Angels, such as Clemens, Polycarpus, Iraeneus, Cyprianus, Athanasius, Chrysostom, and Austin, and many o∣thers of the like kind, who have been in the Church the sweet savour of Christ: it is a most sacred and most ancient Order, and if the Apostles themselves were not the Au∣thors of it, certainly it was instituted by Apostolick men, who might say of their Ordinances of this nature, the same that the Apostle said sometimes after he had gravely resol∣ved some questions, about which he had no express com∣mand from God, I think also that I have the spirit of God. The following Extract out of a Letter which Monsieur Gayon one of the Ministers of the Reformed Church of Bor∣deaux, directed to my self not long after my coming over into England the last year, may very well be produced in this place to prove the same thing with the former, viz. That the Ministers of the Reformed Churches of France are no enemies to Episcopacy. And that the Presbyterians may not think themselves wronged in the discription by me made of them, unto which his Letter doth relate, I do here protest that what I said of them came only to this; 1. That they had no set Forms, nor indeed would admit of any, whether for Common Prayer, or for Administration of Sacraments, Ma∣trimony, &c. 2. That for a long time many of them had left off using that very Form our Lord hath taught us. 3. That most of them had likewise wholly neglected the use of the Lords Supper for many years. 4. That there was a great ir∣reverence at Prayer in their Congregations, very few kneeling, and many not so much as pulling off their Hats; but either not uncovering their Heads at all. or only a little their Pole, as if they were playing at Boe peep, or laying their Hat on one Ear like Fools and Fanfaroons, as I have observed already. Of this irreverente I am an eye-witness my self, as also of their omitting the Lords Prayer in their publick exercises. But I need no proofs for those things that are known to all the three Kingdoms as these are, and likewise their neglect of the Lords
suffer. And as for the rejecting of all set Forms of Prayer, and for the Administration of Sacraments, &c. I have these grounds; First, their abolishing the Book of Common Prayer, which they had engaged themselves to observe; and next their setting up no other in the place, but only a Directory,See the Dire∣ctory. whence the very Creeds, as well that of the Apostles as those of Nice and of Athanasius, were expunged, and the Lords Prayer only recommended, but not commanded to be said. For if they had been displeased only with some things in the Li∣turgy of the Church of England, why did they abolish it wholly? Or if indeed that Liturgy was by them disliked, and not all Liturgies whatsoever; why did they not take in∣stead thereof one of them that are used in other Reformed Churches, according to the pattern of which they engaged to reform this Church in their Solemn League and Covenant. They might have taken the Liturgy of the Belgick Churches, or of the Palatinate, or that of the Reformed Churches of France, and of Geneva, which was made by Calvin: Or if they were not well pleased with any of them all, why did they not make a new one, which had been as easily done as their Directory? I might adde for confirmation of the opinion I have of them touching set Forms, their new Directory, for so I call that which they lately published under the name of a Liturgy; There being only this difference betwixt the first Directory and this last, that in the first the things to be prayed for were set down obliquely, whereas in the last the Prayers are direct. But however it is still but a Dire∣ctory, since it is left to the Ministers liberty to pray thus or to that effect as he listeth; that is to say, not to pray thus at all. And therein doth lie the fallacy, which is easily discovered by any man of understanding. Where∣fore I think I do them no wrong, when giving a Character of them, I say among other things, that they are enemies of all manner of set Forms to be alwayes used. But this on∣ly upon the occasion offered; it is time to produce the above-mentioned Extract of Reverend Monsieur Gayon's Letter.
I Have received your Letter with an extreame satisfa∣ction, having been informed thereby both of your owne condition and of that of the Church of England. I must confesse that we have been strangely deceived in this Countrey by what hath been related unto us touching the English Presbyterians. I did alwayes imagine that they were a sort of people that fol∣lowed the same order that we have here in our Chur∣ches of France. But it seems they are very far from it. The description which you make of them, shewes that they are a strange Sect which is not to be tolerated. And I conceive that the best reme∣dy for such a disorder and confusion, will be to reduce them all under the Episcopal Government: For I hold it impossible that the Church of England can ever be quiet and flourish otherwise. The Convocation comes in a very fit time for this purpose. I nothing doubt but that As∣sembly will take order about the same, which will be a great satisfaction unto me. For otherwise you will be continually in trouble and the
Adversaries wil take advantage thereby, either to blemish and slander our Religion, or to con∣trive and foment Plots against the State. I beseech the Lord that he would be pleased to rule & govern that holy Assembly, and pour his blessings upon their resolutions, to the ad∣vancement of his Kingdom.
J'Ai receu avec une ex∣treme satisfaction la lettre qu'il vous a plûme faire l'hon∣neur de méscrire, ant parce que j'ai appris par elle vostre estat que pour la connoissance que vous me donnes par vostre relation de celui de l'Eglise d'Angleterre. Il faut avoûer que l'on nous a bien trompes en ce pays lorsqu'on nous a parlé des Presbyteriens An∣glois. Je m'estois tousjours imaginé que c'estoit un ordre de gens qui se conduisoit com∣me nos Eglises en France. Ce pendant ce n'est rien moins que cela. La description que vous m'en faites, fait voir que ce ne sont que des Sectes estranges & qui ne peuvent point estre tolerées. Et j'esti∣me que le meilleur remede que l'on puisse apporter a cette confusion & a ce desordre, c'est de reduire le tout sous le Regime de l'Episcopat, ne jugeant pas que l'Eglise d'Angleterre puisse jamais fleurir autrement ni estre en repos. Le Synode National vient bien a propos pour cela, lequel y pourvoyera sans doute; dequoy je serai ravi attendu qu'autrement l'on sera tousjours en peine & les adversaires en prendront de
l'avantage soit pour descrier nostre Religion, soit pour for∣mer des desseins contre l'E∣stat. Je prie le Seigneur qu'il conduise cette sainte Assem∣blée, & qu'il benisse ses reso∣lutions a l'avancement de son Regne. 33. There is extant in Print a Letter of Mr. Drelincourt, one of the Ministers of Paris, of whom I have had occa∣casion to speak already more then once, where he sayes plain∣ly, not only that it is reasonable England should have Episco∣pacy, but that if the whole Kingdom of France should em∣brace the Reformed Doctrine, there must of necessity be a Subordination in the Ministery of the Church. The Letter was directed to Dr. Brevint, and since hath been Printed at Gene∣va. There you may find these words in French, which are translated as followeth. COmme l'Alemagne & la Suisse ont leurs In∣specteurs, & leurs Surin∣tendans, & que le Dane∣mark & la Suede ont leurs Evesques, je ne voy pas pour∣quoy l'on se doive offenser que l'Angleterre ait aussi ses E∣vesques. Que si cela n'a point de lieu dans les Eglises Re∣formées de ce Royaume, c'est que nostre estat & nostre con∣dition ne le peut souffrir, & qu'il ne se peut rien concevoir de mieux que l'egalité qui est entre les Pasteurs. Mais si
Dieu qui peut toutes choses & quitient en sa main les coeurs des Roys & des peuples, faisoit la grace a nostre Monarque & a tous ses Suiets, ou a la plus part, d'embrasser la Re∣formation Evangelique, il se∣roit a mon avis, impossibile de conserver l'egalité entre un si grand nombre de Pasteurs; & il serout necessaire d'n esta∣blir qui eusseut quelque pre∣eminence sur les autres, & qui veillassent sur leur conduite, en assuietissant les uns & les autres aux Synodes Pro∣vinciaux & Nationaux. En ce Royaume en tous les autres Estats ou l'on ne voit point d'Evesque qui ne depende du Pape & qui ne se rende ar∣dent defenseur de la doctrine de Rome, le nom d'Evesque est odieux: Mais il n'en doit pas estre de mesme en Angleterre, ou l'on a vû des Evesques si Christiens, si Or∣thodox & si zeles & qui ont tant contribué a la Reforma∣tion de l'Eglise, jusques la que quelques uns d'entr'eux, ont scellé la pure verité de l'E∣vangile, de leur propre sang, & ont fait paroissre au milieu des feux une flamme An∣gelique & Divine quiles en∣levoit au ciel.
AS Germany and Switzer∣land have their Inspectors and Superintendents, and Den∣mark and Sweden their Bi∣shops, I see no reason why any one should be offended if England hath likewise her Bishops. If there be no Bi∣shops in the Reformed Chur∣ches of France, it is because our condition cannot bear it, and that nothing can be ima∣gined better and fitter as things stand at present a∣mong us, then the equality of Ministers. But if God
who is Almighty, and who hath in his hands the hearts of Kings and Nations, should graciously incline our Mo∣narch and all his Subjects, or most of them, to embrace the Reformed Religion, it would be to my judgement, altogether impossible to main∣tain an equality amongst such a multitude of Ministers; and it would be necessary to set up some above the others, and to give them the preemi∣nence, that they might be the Overseers of their carriage, subjecting all to Provinciall and Nationall Synods. In this Kingdom, and all others where we see no Bishops, but such as depend on the Pope, and are zealous promoters of his Do∣ctrine, the very name of Bi∣shop is odious. But it ought not to be so in England, where there have been Bishops so Christian, so Orthodox, and so Zealous; and who have contributed so much to the Re∣formation of the Church, that some of them have sealed the pure Truth of the Gospel e∣ven with their own blood, and have shewed in the midst of the fire an Angelical and Divine flame, by which they were carried up into Hea∣ven.
34. I might produce here to the same purpose many other testimonies of the Reformed Divines, out of several private Letters by them written of late, and directed to my self and to others. But I forbear for fear of wearying my Reader with them. Wherefore I will adde only these two of two persons of great Fame amongst them, Dr. Peter du Moulin, and Moses Amyraldus, the one late Divinity Reader in the University of Sedan, the other now flourishing in that of Saumur, where I do gratefully acknowledge that I have been a Student un∣der him for the space of two whole years. Monsieur Amy∣raut in his Treatise of the Protestants withdrawing from the Church of Rome, and the good correspondency which he conceives ought to be amongst them all, notwithstanding some things in which they differ; when he comes to the dif∣ference of Church-Government.Sunt Ecclesiae non nullae in quibus Pasto∣res non soum diversam po∣testatem obti∣nent, sed eti∣am ordine ip∣so differunt, ut quae Episcopis utuntur. Illi enim ce tè jam à multis retro seculis hoc sibi vin∣dicarunt, ut non aliqua au∣thoritate dun∣taxat, verum etiam ordine antecellent, & secunum ordinem singulari quadam dignitate decorarentur. Quando igitur Christus quidm & Apostoli hoc diserte constituerunt, debere particulares Ecclesias omnes gubernari a Pa∣storibus, & aliqua regiminis forn â temperari, quòd ipsa rei necessitas flagitat; quae verò regiminis is forma pot ssimum esse debeat, utum alii aliis authoritate precellnt, nec ne, ne{que} rei natura definivit, ne{que} à Christo aut Apostolis aequē deserrè constitum est; id primo in pacificatione statuendum esse videtur, ut quo jure hactenus fuerunt Eccle∣siarum Evangelicarum Pastores, eodem porrò esse pergant, ne{que} aliae aliarum statum convellere nitantur. Amyrald. de Seces. ab Eccles. Rom. & Pace inter Evangelicos, &c. p. 29. There are some other Chur∣ches, saith he, in which the Pastors have not only a different Pow∣er, but also differ in the very Order it self, as they who enjoy Bi∣shops. For it is certain that many ages since they have vindicated to themselves, not only to have some authority, but also to constitute an Order by themselves, and thereby to have their preeminence, and so to enjoy a peculiar Dignity according to their Order. Wherefore since Christ and his Apostles have expresly ordained this clearly, That all particular Churches be governed by their Pastors, and mo∣derated by some form of Government, which is the dictate of neces∣sity it self; And that the nature of the thing it self doth not deter∣mine which chiefly must be the form of Government; neither have Christ and his Apostles constituted that so clearly; The first ground of Concord that seemeth necessary to be laid, is this, That the Pastors of the Reformed Churches henceforth continue the same that they have been formerly, and that the Reformed Churches do not take upon them to shake and overthrow the State of each other. Where
it is manifest that he is no enemy to Eiscopacy; since he would have it retained in those Reformed Churches where it is, and where it hath the greatest authority, and is the most highly dignified. And though to his judgement he do not find so clearly set down in Scripture by Christ and his Apo∣stles what must be the form of Church-Government, as that there must be a Government in the Church; yet he dares not say, but that Hierarchical Subordination as well as any other may pretend to that advantage: wherefore he is so far from condemning it as evil and unlawful, as that he would not have by any means those Churches that enjoy it, to be trou∣bled upon that account. As for the famous Peter du Moulin, he hath declared himselfe an approver and a lover of Episco∣pal Government in sundry places of his Writings. His Letters to the learned Bishop of Winchester have been made publick a long time since, where he calleth the Bishop, Right Reve∣rend Father,Reverendissi∣mo Patri, Prae∣suli dignissi∣mo, Domino Episcopo Win∣toniensi. Petrus Molinaeus in E∣pistolis, Lon∣dini editis, An. 1629. Petrus Molinae∣us de notis ve∣rae Ecclesiae prte scunda, Tes. 33. Edit. Genev. most worthy Prelate, and Lord Bishop; and acknow∣ledgeth the lawfulness and antiquity of that Sacred Order. But I conceive that I can quote nothing more authentical out of his Writings upon this matter, then his Disputations had publickly in the University of Sedan in the Divinity School; where he hath this Thesis, Episcopos Angliae post con∣versionem ad fidem & ejuratum Papismum, asserimus fuisse fideles Dei servos; nec debuisse deserere munus vel titulum Episcopi. We maintain that the Bishops of England after their conversion to the true Faith, and the abjuration of Popery, were faithful servants of God; and that they were not bound to quit their office or title of Bishop. Truly it cannot but do every honest heart good, to see the lawfulness and just authority of the Bishops of the Church of England asserted in the publick Disputations of those very Churches which have no Bishops, and which some among us have the confidence to accuse of being enemies to Episcopacy: and it should shame the faces and stop the mouths of all such as have given such false reports of them. I am confident that it would not have a little surprised a Pres∣byterian Novice, that had gone over into France with his prin∣ciples, and his prejudicate opinion of the averseness of the Reformed Churches against Bishops, to have heard a man of
such worth and fame maintain publickly the lawfulness of the Bishops of the Church of England, against all opposers. Sure he would have thought himself in a dream, and he would have hastened from Sedan to Geneva, in hope to find there some better friend, to his Covenant. And there let us follow him, to see how that Church is enclined for, or a∣gainst Bishops. 35.Neither do the Church of Gneva con∣dmn Episcop∣cy. Geneva is thought commonly by many here amongst us to be the Mother and chief Patroness of Presbytery. She is also looked upon as one which hath given a most evil and scandalous pattern of Rebellion against both her Temporal and Spiritual Lord and Governour: Which things, if they were true, would not be any lawful excuse for any in these three Kingdoms, who of late have been guilty of such do∣ings as the Genevans are charged with; there being no reason why they should be thought so infallible, as to be an exam∣ple for all other Reformed Churches and Countries to imi∣tate: neither doth it appear that the Geevans themselves ever pretended any such thing. For my part I must confess, that for a long time I entertained the same opinion of them with others, before I enquired exactly into the truth of those reports, taking them only upon trust, as 'tis usual with most men in things of that nature when they are countenanced by publick fame. But I must acknowledge likewise that at present I am of another mind, and that after I had made as diligent a search as I could into these things, I was not con∣vinced that the Ref. Church & City of Geneva were guilty of them. As for her being the Mother of Presbyterian parity,Presbyte; a Foundling. I may very well say the same thing which that Right Reverend and most worthy Prelate, the late Bishop of Norwich saith against the common report that Fathers it upon Calvin,Bishop Hall in is Episcopacy by Divine Right. That he cannot find the Father of Presbytery: Neither am I able in good truth to tell who is the Mother of it. Presbytery is a founding, that Providence and the juncture of Affairs have brought to the doors of all those Churches wherein it hath been fostered, and is yet maintained at this day. Learned and judicious Mr. Hooker is of this mind about Geneva, That,In his Preface. the Bishop and Clergy being departed thence, to have chosen in his room any
other Bishop, had been a thing altogether impossible. However, it doth not at all appear that Farellus, Frumentius and Viret, who are the true Reformers of the Geneva Church, introduced Equality in the Ministry out of any dislike of Hierarchical Sub∣ordination. The truth is, that both at Geneva and other places, where the Magistrates and Bishops together did not Reform, but onely private persons and the inferiour Clergy, they were wholly bent to the bringing in of true Doctrine, and little thought of Church-Government. So that when they had perfected that part of Reformation which they chiefly intended as their main work, the Priests and Preachers that had been employed in it, finding themselves equal one to the other, they continued as they were. And thus, I conceive, came Presbytery into the World, both at Geneva and other places, to wit, either by meer chance, or out of necessity; not by choice, nor by a rebellious opposition to Episcopacy; whereof there never were any Christians guilty, that I know, besides our Scotch and English Presbyterians. True it is, that since where the Presbyterian Discipline was established, many able men that lived under it, have brought what they could in behalf thereof. But their Reasons were but Argumenta ex post facto, Reasons shewing, as they conceived, the lawfulness and conveniency of what was done amongst them; not Argu∣ments produced to demonstrate that there was any necessity of so doing in other Churches and Countries. The which may be said of the Reformed Genevans as well as of any others, as I shall undoubtedly make it appear out of the Writings of their chiefest Authors; when I have here reported what they say to vindicate themselves from the imputation of ha∣ving forced their Bishop out of their City and Church, where∣of it is said that he was the Temporal Lord as well as the Spi∣ritual Governour. Miram vetu∣statem habet. Munst l. 2. Cos∣mogr. ad Carol. 5. Vide Caesars Cmm nt.36. Geneva is a most ancient City: For to say nothing of K. Lemanus, who is said by some to be the founder thereof; it is out of question that it was a considerable Town in Caesar's time, who when he marched against the Helvetians made great use of it to oppose their enterprise against the Santones, whose Country they intended to invade. Since which time
they say that they were ever a free and noble City governed by their own Magistrates, chosen by the people, under the pro∣tection of the Roman Emperours, who from time to time have set upon them severall marks of very signal favours, as is to be seen in their publick Records. The Emperour Aurelian anno 264. after he had repaired this Town and raised it anew from the Ashes, into which she had been reduced by fire, en∣dowed her with notable privileges, & called her by his name. Whence it is, that at this day she is named in some Books Aurelia Allobrogum.Vide apud Gruterum Lip∣sium & alios in Inscriptionibu And from that time she took the title of Civitas & Colonia Equestris, as sundry Inscriptions and Mo∣numents do testifie; by which word Equestris, some are of opinion that nothing else is intimated but that it was a noble City, though others think that she was so called, because it was the chief quarter of the Roman Horsemen in those parts of the Gaules. It was also often called Colonia Allobrogum, because of the Roman Colony that was there settled for the se∣curing of the Roman Interest in those parts.Vide apud Thaunum Hist. Tom. 5. l. 125. ad An. 1600. For proof that Geneva was ever Libera, Equestris & Imperialis Civitas, a Free, Noble, and Imperial City; (as they maintained to the De∣legates of the Duke of Savoy, in a Conference they had with them soon after the peace of Vervins, about the Dukes pre∣tensions to the Soveraignty of that Town) they produce se∣veral evidences; as First, that from time out of memory they have had the Imperial Eagle engraven in sundry parts of the City,Le Citad. de Genv. p. 50. and that at this day there is yet one to be seen over the great Door of Saint Peters Church; Secondly, that they are obliged to make solemn Prayers for the well-fare of the Empire and Emperor (as an hommage unto them) three dayes together, every time the Emperor goeth thither in person, as they actually did Anno 1319. for Henry designed Emperor; Anno 1415. for Sigismond, and Anno 1442. for Frederick the third, who passed that way. And lastly, that the Emperor, have always acknowledged them for an Impe∣rial Town, and have styled them so in their Imperial Letters to them and other publick Instruments concerning their In∣terest:Le Citad. de Genev. p. 293 Insomuch that Charles the fifth at the birth of Philip his Son, who succeeded him in the Kingdom of Spaine, did
write to them to impart those good tidings, as well as to all other Imperial Towns, as being equally concerned there∣in. The superscription of the Imperial Letters was thus; Hono∣rabilibus nostris & Sacri Imperii fidelibus,Ibidem. p. 294 dilectis Nobilibus Syn∣dicis & Consiliariis Civitatis nostrae Imperialis Gebennensis. This was dated May 20. Anno 1527. And so in another Let∣ter of the same Emperour written in French from Strasburgh, Anno 1530. The Superscription runneth thus, A nos chers & bienaimes les Syndiques, Conscil & Communauté de nostre Cué Imperiale de Geneve. To our dear and well-beloved the Syn∣dicks, Council and commonalty of our IMPERIAL City of Geneva. So that although their Bishop was styled Prince of Geneva, and enjoyed many great priviledges, which partly the Emperours, partly the Genevans bestowed upon him yet their Soveraign Lord he was not. A Prince of the Empire he was, as are most, if not all the Bishops of Germa∣ny, who are entituled Princes of the Towns where they have their Episcopal Sees, though they are not Soveraign Lords thereof. For it is well known, that though the Arch-Bishop of Collen be a Prince and an Elector of the Empire, yet the Town it self is free and Imperial, and governed by her own Magistrates. So is Strasburgh, so is Basil, and so are many others. And this will seem strange to none, except such as are altogether unacquainted with the State of Germany, where the Soveraignty of Towns and Countries is so divided, that in the same Town, nay sometime in the same Street, you shall have several Lords; as in others several Lords en∣joy several parts of the Regalities, some having power to put to death, and not to coyn money; others to coyn mony, and not to put to death, &c. But though the Bishop of Geneva was not Soveraign over the Genevans, yet a Soveraignty he had, but it was over the County of Genevois,V de apud Thuanum Tom. . b. supra. l'Election & l'stablisse∣ment des E∣vesques se faisoit par le peuple en Conscil general, chacun y donnant fa voix d'appro∣bation ou rejection. Citad. de Genev p. 52. called in Latine, Gen∣nebesium, the Counts thereof doing hommage unto him for it, whoever they were; yea the very Dukes of Savoy themselves, when they enjoyed the said County, as they did sometimes. He had likewise a great interest & great power within the Town
it self, whence it is doubtless that he was chosen, not only by the Chapter, but also by the Suffrages of the Commonalty; and that before he entred the Town,Les Evesques a leuer enrée juroyent & prometroient par Sermnt so∣lennel de fideli∣té, entre les mains des Syndiques & par fois entre les mains de deux Notaires de garder & proteger les anciennes li∣berté, & fran∣chises de la Cl é Citadin de Gen ve, I∣bid. Pierre de la Baulme suc∣cedant en l'E∣vesché a Jean de Savoy 1523. avant que mettre le pied dans les Faux∣bourgs prest serment au pont d'Arve entre les mains de deux Syndiques. Ibid. p. 54. he was sworn without the Gates by the Syndicks (who are the chief Magistrates) to maintain the Liberty and Priviledges of the City. And otherwhiles there passed sealed instruments between them for that purpose, written by two publick Notaries. Now these priviledges and immunities were such, that no Subjects ever en∣joyed the like; and indeed they cannot be said Subjects pro∣perly who enjoy such priviledges:Que les Citoyers, Bourgeois, & jures de la dite Cité puissent un chacun an constituer, creer, faire ordonner qua∣tre Syndiques de la dite Cité, ausquels ils puissent conceder & donner toute & pleine puissance. La copie des Coustumes, Ordonnances, Franchises, & Libertes de la Noble & insigne Cité de Geneve. A Genve 1507. For they did chuse their own Magistrates, and amongst them four Chief, cal∣led Las Seigneurs Syndiques, the Lords Syndicks, to whom the people gave all manner of power.Iceux Syndiques par les anciens actes sont appelles Assesseurs des Evesques. Citad. de Genev. p. 55. These Syndicks were called the Bishops Assessores, as being equal in power with him.Urbis custodia jus erat consulate, non Episcopale. Genev. Restitut. p. 20. The guard of the Town belonged to the Syndicks, and not to the Bishop.Que nous ni autres en nostre nom ne doivent exercer aucune jurisdiction a celles heures (sc. depuis le soleil couché jusques au soleil levé) sinon lesdits citoyens lesquels ayent & ausquels appartient toute jurisdiction mere, & mxte Empire. Le Citadin de Geneve. p. 55. The Bishop could exer∣cise no manner of Jurisdiction or authority, nor any other in his name, from Sun-setting till Sun-rising, the Citizens having then all manner of power, merum & mixtum Imperi∣um, by the Confession of Ademarus a famous Bishop of Ge∣neva, Anno 1357. who made a collection of the Rites, Pri∣viledges and Immunities both of the Bishops, and Church, and City, and People of Geneva.Les Syndiques, Citoyen & Communaé de Geneve de temps en temps ont con∣tracté des alliances avec des Princes estrangers & Republiques au veu & seu de leurs E∣vesques; sans prendre neant moins d'iceux aucun aveu, permission in consentement: Le Citad. de Geneve, p. 61. The Syndicks, Citi∣zens, and Commonalty of Geneva had power to make Con∣federacies with forraign Princes and States, and did often use this power, the Bishop seeing, knowing and not oppo∣sing
such transactions, though they were sometimes against his will and interest; so that they made them without asking his counsel, and without making any mention of him, unless it were to secure themselves against him, in case he were not well pleased with these Leagues and Treaties. Of this they produce many instances, some of them very ancient, and some very late.Ibid. & p. 62. In the year 1285. a Confederacy was made betwixt Amedeus the fourth Count of Savoy of one part, and the Commonalty of the Town of Geneva on the other.En l'an. 1526. le 12. Mrs avant qu'ly ust sucun trouble pour le fait de la Religion dans Geneve; les Syndiques & Citoyens au veu & seu de l'Evesque Pierre de la Bulme, & sans neantmoins en prendre de lui aucun avis ou conseil contra∣cterent, ou plus tost renuvel∣lerent & jure∣rent solennel∣lement alli∣ance & Com∣bourgeoisie a∣vec les deux puissantes vil∣les & cantns de Berne & Friburg, Ibid. p. 63. In the year 1526. they made a Treaty of Combourgeoisie. as they called it, with the two Free States of Berne and Friburg, that is, such a Confederacy as by means thereof they all be∣came Citizens of each others State, the Genevans granting that priviledge to the others, and the others giving the same to them; and if any of the said Cities were assaulted, the others were bound to joyn with them in their defence.bid. p. 103, 104, 105. And in the years 1530. and 1531. at Saint Julien and Payerne, the Genevans treated twice with the Duke of Savoy by the intervention of their said Combourgeois, or fellow Ci∣tizens of Berne and Friburg.Mais quoy voules vous un plus signalé tesmoignage de cette non absolve puis∣sance des Evesques dans Geneve, que ce qu'aucuns d'eux ont instamment recher∣ché puis obte nula Bourgeoisie de la ville; Bourgeoisie qui ne se donnoit & conferoit que par les Syndiques & Conseil nommes par nom & surnom au commencement des actes de Bourgeoisie. Citad. de Genev. p. 63. & 64. But that which sheweth most evidently, that notwithstanding the interest and power the Bishops had in the City of Geneva, they were not sove∣raign Lords over it, is this, that some of the said Bishops have earnestly sued to become Citizens of the same, that they might upon that account enjoy the benefit of their Confe∣deracies with other States, whereof they could not be par∣takers otherwise, when the said Confederacies were made without them, as they were often. Of this there is a notable example in Peter de la Baulme their last Bishop, who being desirous to become a Citizen of Berne and Friburg, the bet∣ter to oppose the Duke of Savoy, went in person to the Ge∣neral Council of the Town, where all the Citizens were called together for affairs of publick concernment, and there petitioned them that he might be admitted a Citizen; A prié
les assistans qu'ils le voulussent en Bourgeois recevoir;Le Citad. de Ceev. p. 65. engaging upon his Faith, and promising by Oath duly taken by the lifting up of his right hand, and laying the same to his breast, according to the custom of Prelates, justly and faithfully to maintain, keep, and observe all that which is required in a Citizen; Promettant par sa foy & son serment par l'elevation de sa main dextre & apposition d'i celle a son pecte, comme est la ma∣niere des Prelats deüement fait, justement & loyalement se entretenir, maintenir garder & observer tout ce que en bourgeusie est besoin. Which things being heard by the Noble and Magnificent Lords Syndicks of the City, as likewise by the little, middle, and great Councel General, they of their own accord recei∣ved, accepted and retained the most Illustrious and Reverend Lord Peter de la Baulme for Fellow Citizen; who promised to procure with all his might the good, honour, and welfare of the said City, hinder all dammages that might befall the same; reveal all that he should know to be treated of against the said City, without ever giving his consent to the same; and to maintain the uses, customs, liberties and franchises of the said City; and ever to be true and faithful in all things to the said City, &c. Lesquelles choses estans par lesdus Nobles & Magnifiques Seigneurs Syndiques de la dite Cité, ensemble le pe∣tit, le moyen & le grand general Conseil oüyes, ont spontandement receu, accepté & retenu ledit Illustrissime & tres Reverend Seig∣neur, Pierre de la Baulme pour Combourgeois; & lequel a pro∣mis procurer de tout son pouvoir le bien, honneur, utilité & profit de ladite Cité, eviter le dommage d'i celle, reveler tout ce qu'il apper∣cevra estre contra ladite Cité, trauté, sans jamais y consentir, & icelle Cité, us & coustumes, libertes & franchises maintenir, & estre perpetuellement a ladite Cité feable en tout & par tout, &c. They are the very words of the instrument that was made for this transaction which happened July 15. Anno 1527.Quamv te∣naces librta∣tis aviae ani∣mae, strenue obluctarentur, (nempe Episco∣porum molitio∣nibus) & illud sibi salvum semper vellent, quod Reip. hu jus peculium, imo animam Ge∣neva nostra semper existimavit. Genev. Restaint. p. 19. But the Bishops, as I said before, having great power and means, both within and without the Town, there were often hot disputes betwixt them and the Syndicks for the liberty of the City and People thereof, which Liberty they ever en∣deavoured
to keep as their most precious Jewel against all enemies whosoever, but chiefly against the Duke of Savoy, the Bishop of Geneva and the Count of Genevois, who styling himself now and then Count of Geneva, would sometimes pretend to the Soveraignty of the City as well as the other two. The last dispute which they had about their Liberty and Priviledges, and which did put an end to the quarrel, begun soon after the admission of Peter de la Baulme their Bi∣shop, into the number of the Citizens and Free Burgers of the Town. Insomuch that in the year 1528. he left the City and made war against it, and did not return till the year 1533,Episcopus 15. Julii (Anni 1533.) ultiò & ultimum urbe excedit; plebis coitio∣nem in speci∣em veritus; reverâ moliti∣onum contra Remp inta∣rum conscien∣tia pressus. Ge∣nev. Restitut. p. 62. Son titre e∣stoit devolu a Mr. de Savoye, avec lequel il avoit taitté pour l'investir de se droits; & lui livrer sa Principanié, modeste Declaration pout les Eglises Reformées p. 235. in company of some of the Consuls & Senators of Fri∣burg, but soon after departed again in the month of July of the same year, and that of his own accord, fearing in shew, the seditions and assemblies of the people; but fearing in effect, lest his transactions with the Duke of Savoy against the City, should be known and discovered; he having made over to the Duke his true and real interest in the City, besides his pretended Soveraignty. Now that which I would chiefly have my Readers to observe, is this, that whatsoever were the Rights of the Bishop of Geneva (which in all likelihood never amounted to a Soveraign Lordship over the City, since she was alwayes Free and Imperial, and acknowledged to be such by the Emperors themselves (as hath been shewed) it cannot be said that he was ejected by those of the Reformed Religion; The whole Senate and Town being then all ad∣dicted to Popery and continuing so, forGeneve avoit esté sans E∣vesques plus de deux ans avant qu'elle eust pensé seulementa rien alteter en l'exercise de la Religion Romaine. Ibid. p. 236. Senatus consultum conditum, quo veteri Religioni cautum, & Doctrine Lutheranae professione & patrocinio omnibus interdictum Genev. Restitut. p. 37. Illis (Reformais) Senatus authoritate repressis, Cam (concionatore Evan∣gelico) urbe ejecto. Frumentio periculo & ignominiae subducto. Ibid. p. 64. Solenni Vi∣carii Episcopalis edicto, Kalendis Januariis Anni sequentis 1534. promulgato, quo in∣cerdictae coitiones Evangelicae, & verbi Divini, sine Episcopali indultu, praedicatio. Bi∣bla quin etiam sacra sive Vernacula, sive Germanica, flammis & interneconi devota. Ib d 64. two years after the Bishop had left the Town. Nay it was so far from their thoughts, that opposed the Bishop in behalf of the City, to favour Reformation, that the Senate during the first absence
of their Prelate, made a Decree for the preservation of the old Religion, as they called it, and prohibited to profess and counte∣nance the Lutheran Doctrine. And when the Bishop had withdrawn himself the last time, many that professed the Re∣formed Religion were ejected out of the Town, and among them two Preachers, Frumentius and another. And all man∣ner of preaching without the Bishops licence forbidden at the beginning of the year 1534. and the Bibles whether in French or Dutch condemned to be burned. So that the Re∣bellion against the temporal Lord of Geneva, if there was any in them who opposed the Bishop, was wholly from the Papists; and they who haue been truly guilty of that hor∣rible sinne in the highest degree here amongst us, cannot excuse themselves upon the pretended pattern of the Rebel∣lion of the Reformed City of Geneva. Nay, it is worthy observation to clear wholly the Reformed Church and City of Geneva from the crime of Rebellion, that in the year 1540. when the Genevans had all embraced the Reformed Religion, and that the controversie betwixt them and all such as pre∣tended the Soveraign Power over their Town, was very well known, the Emperor Charles the fifth in a Letter written from the Hague in Holland exhorteth them,Vide apud Thuanum Tom. 5. l. 125 p. 936. Edit. Genev. Ʋti pristinam ju∣risdictionem & libertates à decessoribus suis Genevae tanquam Civi∣tati Imperiali concessas tuerentur; that they should maintain their ancient Jurisdiction and the Immunities by his Prede∣cessors granted to Geneva as an Imperial City. And after he hath said that he cannot be perswaded, Eos eo delapsuros, ut in prejudicium suum & sacri Romani Imperii, cuiquam alteri fideli∣tatem praestare velint, that they will forget themselves so much as to swear Allegiance to any other, to the prejudice of his Majesty, and of the sacred Roman Empire;Vide le Citad. de Gen ve. p. 295. he requireth and commandeth them upon pain of his high displeasure, that they altogether abstain from taking such an Oath; but ra∣ther that they will continue to be faithful and obedient as their duty requireth, unto His Majesty and the sacred Em∣pire; Vos serio requirentes, & sub poena gravissimae indignationis nostrae mandantes ut à praestando dicto juramento fidelitatis omnino abstineatis, neque in diversam sententiam ullo modo eatis aut vos
adduci sinatis, qum potius in nostra ac sacri Imperii fide & obedientia debita perseveretis. And all that without so much as mention∣ing any right of the Bishops, which surely he would not have omitted to do, had the Bishop been their immediate Lord and Soveraign; which the Emperor well knew that he was not, his Soveraignty extending it selfe not to the Town of Geneva; but, as hath been observed before, only to the County of Genevois, where he makes his residence at this day in the Town of Aneci, enjoying so much of his Rights, Re∣venues and Priviledges as the Duke of Savoy is pleased to give him leave. 39. Neither can it be said that the Reformed Church and City of Geneva rebelled against the Bishop as their Pastor and Spiritual Governor. For he was fled away from his flock, as I have observed already, two years before Reformation, which was but in the year 1535. And two years after,Resposum, Senatui, popu∣loque Gene∣v nsi ratum esse, Do poti∣us obediendum quà homini∣bus, Episcopo reditum libe∣rum fore, mo∣ò sui nomi∣nis memor, E¦piscpam se∣cundm Dei verbum agee v lit. Sup∣slitinis veò instrumenta nc restitui posse, nec de∣bre, quamdiu Geneva se li∣beram & Deo soli sacram mminerit Ge∣neva R stituta. p. 86. viz. Anno 1537. the Duke of Savoy after a very long war, seeing that he could not prevaile against the City, sent an Embassador to the Genevans, promising them great matters if they would forsake the Reformed Religion, re∣store the Images, turn out the Ministers, and receive againe their Bishop; to whom they returned this answer, That for their Bishop he should be welcome, so that he would remember his name and place, and do the work of a Bishop according to the word of God; but as for the rest, they were to obey God rather then men, and that as long as Geneva should remember that she was free and consecrated to God alone, it must not be ex∣pected that they would set up again any thing tending to su∣perstition. Now if these things be so, I may say most con∣fidently, that when Geneva Reformed Religion, she did not think it a part of Reformation to abolish Episcopacy, and that if it had pleased God that the then Bishop of that Church and City had embraced the Reformed Doctrine, there had been preserved a succession of Bishops, as here in England and other Reformed Kingdoms. So that the fault was not in the Genevans, but in their Bishop. Nevertheless I confess that were it not for Mr. Hooker, who sayes it was impossible to set up another Bishop in his room, I could hardly be re∣conciled
to them for omitting of so necessary a duty. But is enough for my purpose, to shew that they were well in∣tended, and that if their Bishop had professed the Reformed Religion, they would not have dealt with him as our Pro∣testant Bishops have been dealt withall among us in England and Scotland, by the pretenders to conformity of opinions with Geneva, though they are very far from it, and they do the Genevans much wrong in saying they are of the same mind with them as to these matters. 40. But, it will be said, perhaps, that Geneva hath been since of another perswasion, after Calvin and Beza were among them, and taught them otherwise then they were by their first Reformers. For it is to be observed, that neither Calvin nor Beza were at Geneva during all this time. Wherefore let us enquire into the truth of this, and let us see first whether Cal∣vin, whom I will produce here speaking, as well for the Re∣formed Church of Geneva, as for his own self, will be found as right for Episcopacy as I promised he would, when I pas∣sed my word for him as to this point. 41.Calvin no ene∣my to Episco∣pacy. Here again I must confess that for a time hearing some men among us speak of Calvin, as if he were entirely theirs and as if he consented altogether with them about Church-Government; I was in the same error with those that take him to be the great Champion of Presbyterian parity against Hierarchical Subordination. But having perused most of his Works, specially it where those is most likely that he should treat of this point, I have been otherwise perswaded, not finding any where the least word against the Office of a Bishop. And for all that I have either read of, or in him, or seen produced out of his Writings, I am of this mind, that Episcopacy was the Government that he approved most, and that he took it to be, as it is undoubtedly, of Apostolical Institution; though his opinion was, That the Church ac∣cording to her exigencies, in relation to places, times, and other circumstances, may dispence with it. This pas∣sage of his in that Epistle he writ to Cardinal Sadolet, I conceive to be to that purpose. We deny not that we want a Discipline, such as the Ancient Church had. But can they in justice accuse us to have overthrown the Discipline of
the Church,Disciplinam qualem habuit vetus Ecclesia nobis de esse neque nos diffitemur sed cujus erit aequita∣tis, nos eversae Disciplinae ab iis accusati qui & eam soli penitus sustulerunt, & cum postliminio reducere conaremur, nobis ha∣ctenus obstiterunt, neque vero in Doctrina dubitamus ad veterem Ecclesiam povocare. Calvinus in Epistol. ad Cardin. Sadoletum. who are the only men that have al∣together abolished it, and who when we endea∣voured to restore the same, have hitherto oppo∣sed that work? But as for Doctrine we are wil∣ling to be tried by the ancient Church. In these words he grants that the Presbyterian Dis∣cipline is new, which the lovers of it a∣mongst us deny. And that whereas he and his Collegues were willing to restore the same Discipline that was in use in the Pri∣mitive Church (which can be no other then the Episcopal, if the Presbyterian be not it) the Church of Rome by her opposi∣tions and persecutions had put an obstacle to that good work.Veteri amico nunc Praesuli. Calvin writes another Epistile which is to be found in the volume of his Opuscula to an old Friend of his who was become a Bishop in the Church of Rome. In which Epistle, though it is very prolix, he doth not speak one word against the Office of a Bishop, but only against the sundry abuses thereof in the Romish Church. Nay he is so far from blaming it, that it appears, he did rather hold it not only lawful, but (as I said even now) of Apostolical and Divine Institution. He telleth him in one place,Epscopatus ipse à Deo profectus est Epscopi munus Dei au∣oritate constitutum est & legi∣bus definitum. Episcopus creatus es? Istat tibi x sua exhortatione Apostolus Paus, prospiciendum esse tibi, &c. Col. . Pstquam Episcopi & nomen & locum tene, Fidem Ecclesiae bligasti. Quidvis po∣tus esse te quam Episcopum re∣spndbo, in quo ne obscuissi∣mam quidem lineam extare con∣spcer quae verum Epscopum ali∣qad saltem ex parte figuret. At non propterea debere desinis, qud es Deo teste & hominibus, seu potiu Deo & homnibus, sacramento pollicitus. That Episçopa∣crit it self proceeded from God, that it was con∣stituted by the authority of God, and order∣ed by Gods Laws. Art thou, saith he, crea∣ted a Bishop? The Apostle Paul is presently upon thee with his exhortation; Take heed to thy self and to thy Ministry which thou hast re∣ceived in the Lord, that thou fulfil it. And a∣gain, since thou holdest both the name and the place of a Bishop, thou hast engaged thy faith to the Church. If thou askest me what opinion I have of thee and of thy place and Order? I will answer, that I take thee for any thing rather then for a Bishop, seeing upon thee not one of those colours which set forth at least in some part a true Bishop. But nevertheless, saith he, thou art not free from that promise which thou hast made before God and
men, or rather to God and men, upon thy Oath. He tells him again in another place, that as Paul did think himself a debtor to all those to whom he was sent an Apostle, he doth not see but that he was as much engaged unto them whose Bishop he was. And so all along.Tu cur aliquid minus tuis de∣beas, quibus Episcopus es praefectus? Omninò sanè aut tibi, quod ab Episcopo requiritur, praestandum est, aut sedes Episcopi dese∣renda. And after he hath represented un∣to him the Office of a Bishop, he concludes with these words, Wherefore thou oughtest either to do that which thou seest to be the duty of a Bishop, or thou must quit the place of a Bishop. Cer∣tainly if Calvin had been an enemy to Episcopacy, and that he had held it for an Office not to be suffered in the Church of Christ; the only good and Christian-like advice he would have given to his ancient Friend, should have been this, to leave forthwith his Bishoprick, and give over his Episcopal power, as unlawful and not compatible with true Piety. In his Institution of Christian Religion likewise, where according to his design, he was to speak against Episcopacy, if he had thought it unlawful, he hath not one word, out of which one may guess that he did so much as dislike it. And were it not very strange that Calvin writing against all the corrupti∣ons and abuses that he saw, and conceived to be crept into the Christian Church, should not so much as touch that of Epis∣copacy, if he had been of the same opinion with Smectym∣nuus, and other Presbyterians who declared, that they may not lawfully any longer be subject unto Bishops, nor obey their injunctions. In his Epistle to the King of Poland, he not ob∣scurely approves of all the degrees of the Hierarchy of the an∣cient Church, even to Patriarchs; and he giveth the King to understand, that he would be well satisfied, if his Majesty should establish the same Hierarchical Subordination in his Do∣minions. The ancient Church, saith he,Vetus Eccle∣sia Patriar∣chas institu∣it, & singulis etiam Provin∣ciis quosdam attribuit primatus, ut hoc concordiae vinculo melius inter se devincti manerent Episco∣pi. Quemadmodum si hodie Illustrissimo Polonia Regno unus praeesset Archiepisco∣pus, non qui dominaretur in reliquos, vel jus ab illis ereptum arrogaret; sed qui ordi∣nis causa in Synodis prmum tneret locum, & sanctam inter collegas suos & fratres uni∣tatem overet, Essent deinde vel Provinciales vel Urbani Episcopi, &c. Calvin. Sereniss. Reg. Polon; p. 190. did institute Patriarchs, and attributed also certain Primacies to each Province, to the end that Bishops might better preserve union among themselves by this bond of concord; as if now there were an Arch-Bishop over the
whole Illustrious Kingdom of Poland, not to Lord it over the other Bishops, or to take away their right from them, and assume it to himself, but who for orders sake, should hold the first place in Synods, and maintain an holy unity between his Collegues and Bre∣thren, And besides, if there were Bishops over the Provinces or Towns, &c. In one of his Epistles where he satisfieth them who propounded this question, what is to be done with a Bishop that shall joyn himself to the Reformed Churches; Si Episcopus vel curatus ad Ecclesiam se adjunxerit; his answer is not that he must give over his Authority and Episcopal Jurisdiction, and become as one of the meanest Priests and Persons of his Dio∣cese; But that such a Bishops part is to do his utmost,Istiusmo si Episcopi (qui ad Eccle siam se adjunxr i) partes erunt, dre operam quantum in se erit ut omnes Ecclesiae quae ad ipsius Episcopatum pertinent, ab om∣nibus erroribus & idolorum cul∣rbus repurgentur, dum ipse ex∣emplo praeibit omnibus Curatissuae Dioecesis atque ipsos inducet ad admittendam reformationem ad quam Dei verbo invitamur, & quae tum statui, tum usui primi∣tivae Ecclesiae omnino responde∣t. Calvin. Epist. l. p. 466. Si Episcopus vel Curatus ad Ecclesi∣am se adjunxerit. that all the Parishes that belong to his Bishoprick, be purged from all manner of er∣rors and idolatrous worship, shewing himself a pattern to all the Curates of his Diocese, and in∣ducing them to admit that Reformation to which we are invited by the word of God; and which altogether correspondeth to the state and pra∣ctise of the Primitive Church. That is, he must continue still to be a Bishop as formerly. In another of hisOmnia tentarunt Colonienses Canonici cum tota Clericorum faece, ut Archepiscopum dejice∣rent suo loco. Calv. Epist. l. p. 517. Epistles he speaks of the Pre∣bends and Clergy of Collen, as blaming them for their endeavouring to put their Arch-Bishop out of his place, who had declared for Reformation. And writing toJohannes Calvinus Illustri & Rverendo Domino Jacobo Ithavio Episcopo Uadslaviensi. Epistol. l. p. 287. Johannes Ithavius a Polonian Bishop, whom he cal∣leth Illustrious and Reverend Lord Bishop, he doth not advise him to leave his Episcopacy, but to consider what place he holdeth, and what burden is imposed upon him. Cogita quem locū occupes, & quod onus tibi sit impositum. Now I hope it will not be expected that Calvin who would have Bishops and Archbishops in Poland, in Germany and other Countries wheresoever any shall profess true Christianity, should be so unjust to those of the Church of England, as to wish them cut off root and branch, (as the saying was of some men not long since) to requite their pains and sufferings
for the work of Reformation amongst us. Calvin was a man of a better nature, and of a more Christian disposition, and he hath more kindness and respect for our Prelates, than to use them so hardly. There is extant in the collection of his Epistles a very long one directed to the Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector of England, in King Edward the sixth his minority. The Protector had consulted him about Reformation of Re∣ligion in this Church of ours. Had Calvin been an enemy to Episcopal Government; had his intention been to propa∣gate the Geneva Discipline in other Churches and Countries; had he been a zealot of Presbyterian parity; had he but judged it more conducible to true Piety and good Order in the Church; the occasion offered it self very fair for him to speak his mind, and to do the Church of Christ service. And we all know what a Scotch or English Covenanter would have done, having such an opportunity of propagating the Solemne League. But it seems that Calvin had never taken the Cove∣nant. For though he speaks very freely his mind according to his custom, on every thing that he is not satisfied with; he hath not one word against Bishops: But supposing that they ought to continue and to keep their place and degree (as well as other inferiour Ministers) in this Church, when thoroughly reformed; he saith onlyExpedit qui∣dem prospicere desulio ii in∣geniis qae sibi nimium licere volunt, &c. Ratio autem expedita ad eam rem una est, si extet nempè forma quaedam do∣ctrinae abomnibus recepta quam inter Praedicandum sequantur omnes; ad quam etiam observandam omnes Episcopi & parochi jurejuando adstringantur, ut nemo ad munus Ecclesiasticum admittatur, nisi spondeat, &c. Calv. in Epist. ad Angliae Protectorem. That they must all of them be sworn, the Bishops themselves as well as the Rectors of every Parish, to deliver no other Doctrine in their Sermons, but such as is contained in the Articles of Religion; and that none wheher Bi∣shops or Curates must be admitted to the Functions of their Ecclesi∣astical Office but such as take that Oath.Audio esse duo seditiosorum genera, quae adversus Regem & regni Statum caput ex∣tulerunt. Alii enim, cerebrsi quidam videlicet, sub Evangelii nomine , passim invectam vellent. Alii vero in superstitionibus Antichristi ita obduruerunt, ut earum revulsionem ferre non possint. Ac merentur quidem tum hi tum illi gladio ultore coe∣ceri. Galv. Ibid. And as for a certain sort of unruly men, (whom he doth not name, but only de∣scribes as seditious and heady, who did rise against the King and the established Orders of the Kingdom, endeavouring to bring a confusion into all things under the pretense of the Gospel; and
which are easily known who they were by this description) he saith, It is fit they should be kept under obedience with the re∣venging sword, as well as the Papists, who were their Confederates in sedition. Calvin's Epistles to Arch-Bishop Cranmer, and o∣ther Bishops of the Church of England are known, where he gives them their ordinary Titles. He calleth the Arch-Bishop,Reverende Dmin. Cla∣ssine Pae∣sal & m hi reverende. Calv. Epist. l. p. 134. Calv. Achie∣pis. Cnt. Epist. l. p. 135. Reverend Lord, most Illustrious Prelate, and a person by him to be reverenced. And he speaks to his Grace as to a per∣son whom God hath set in an high place, so that it is requi∣red that he should take a greater care of the Church then o∣thers; Tibi praesertim ornatissime Praesul, quo altiore in specula sedes, in hanc curam ut facis, incumbere necesse est. He telleth him in another place, that though all such as are to govern the Church, ought to endeavour speedily to settle Ecclesi∣astical Affairs, yet he must remember that his part is to be the chiefest; Oportet ut tamen praecipuae sint tuae partes, because he was the Primate. You see, saith he, what your place requireth of you, or rather what God doth justly require of you, by reason of the Office he hath put upon you. Vides quid locus iste postulet, vel magis quid pro muneris quod tibi injunxit ratione abs te suo jure exigat Deus, Summa est in te Authoritas, you have the greatest Authority. If this be not a full acknowledge∣ment of Episcopal preeminence, I know not what it is. But this one passage of his in the Treatise of the necessity of Church-Reformation, is more then sufficient to convince the world that he was no enemy to Episcopacy, against all those who either think or would have him to be so. Talem nobis Hie∣rarchiam si exhibeant,Clv. l. de Ne∣cssit Reform. Eccles. in qua sic emineant Episcopi, ut Christo sub∣esse non recusent; ut ab illo tanquam unico capite pendeant, & ad ipsum referantur; In qua sic inter se fraternam societatem colant, ut non asio modo quam ejus veritate sint colligati: tum vero nullo non Anathemate dignos fatear, siqui crunt qui non eam ravereantur, summaque obedientia observent. If they will give us, saith he, such an Hierarchy in which the Bishops have such a preemi∣nence, as that they do not refuse to be subject unto Christ, and depend on him, and be referred unto him, as their only head: In which they entertain such a brotherly fellowship, as that the bond of their Union be the Truth of Christ;
Then surely, if any be found who do not reverence that Hie∣rarchy, and subject themselvs unto the same with the lowest obedience, I will confess that there is no Anathema, whereof they are not worthy. Now judge impartially, and say whether Calvin be a Presbyterian; and whether the Reformed Church of Geneva that speaks by his mouth, is an enemy to Reformed Bishops, such as are the Bishps of Eng∣land. 42. But because I do not bring in Calvin only for himself,Beza no enemy to the B shops of the Church of England. and upon his own account, but chiefly to witness what is the mind of the Reformed Church of Geneva about Episcopacy, it is fit we should hear some other members of that Church, that in the mouths of two or three this truth may be confirm∣ed that she is no enemy to the Hierarchical Subordination of the Church of England. Let Beza be heard, a man of as great ability and fame as ever Geneva had, Calvin only excepted; who notwithstanding his Writings against Hadrianus Saravia about Episcopacy,Si qui sunt (quod sanè mihi non facile persualeris) qui ominem Episcoporum ordinem rejiciant, absit ut quisquam sanae mentis furoribus illorum assentiatur. Theod. Beza ad tractu. de Mi∣nist. Ev. gradibus ab Hadr. Sara∣via Blaga, editam. ac∣counts it no less then madness to reject all the Order of Bishops, and God forbid, saith he, that any man, who is not distracted, should be of that mind. Nay, he did not believe that there were any such men to be found; which shews what opinion he would have had of them, who of late years set up in Churches in stead of the Ten Commandements, publick Tables, upon which was written a Covenant for abolishing all the Hierarchy of the Church of England; with Texts of Scripture and remarkable passages and examples of Gods judgements against Covenant∣breakers: as if a conjuration against the Ministers of Christ were the Covenant of God, which the godly are bound to keep and maintain upon pain of the eternal damnation of their souls. In the same Treatise he hath these words.Quod si n Anglicanae Ecclesiae in∣stauratae suo∣rum Episcopo∣rum & Archiepiscoporum auctoritate suffultae perstant: quemadmodum hoc ilii nost a memoria contigit, ut ejus ordinis hmines non tantum insignes Dei Martyres, sed eti∣am praestantissimos Pastores ac Doctores habuerit, fruatur sanè ista singulari Dei bne fien ia, quae utinam sit illi perpetua. Ibid. c. 18. If the Church of England after her restauration, doth maintain it self, and is up∣held
by the authority of her Bishops and Arch-Bishops; as we re∣member that she hath had not only signal Martyrs of God, but like∣wise most excellent Pastors and Doctors amongst the persons of that Order, let her enjoy by all means, that singular benefit of God, and God grant that it be perpetual unto her. This was written by him after the death of Queen Mary. And in a Letter to Arch-Bishop Whitgift, as it is related in his Graces Life written by Sir George Paul, Comptroller of his Houshold, Printed by Thomas Snodham, London, Anno 1612. he speaks thus. In my writings touching the Church Government I ever impugned the Romish Hierarchy, but never intended to touch or impugne the Ec∣clesiastical Polity of the Church of England, nor to exact of you to frame your selves, or your Church to the pattern of our Presbyterian Discipline. As long as the substance of Doctrine is uniform in the Church of Christ, we may lawfully vary in other matters, as the cir∣cumstance of time, place and persons requireth, and as prescription of Antiquity may warrant. And to that end I wish and hope that the sacred and holy Colledge of your Bishops will for ever continue and maintain such their Right and Title in the Church-Government with all equity and christian moderation. This he writ from Ge∣neva, March 8. Anno 1591. A Caution for the reading of the Writings of the Divines of the Reformd Churces be∣yond the Seas.43. By the way I will give this Caution upon these words of Beza, to all them of this Church and Nation of what per∣swasion soever they be; that when they read any Book of Controversie written by the forraign Divines of the Refor∣med Churches against the Church of Rome, they do not suf∣fer themselves to be deceived by the fallacy, A dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter, by which an Author is thought simply and absolutely to approve or condemn, what he doth condemn or approve but in part, and only in relation to some abuse or other thing. For example, you will find in the Wri∣tings of some of them many things against Holy-days; unless you take heed of the fallacy, if you are an obedient son of the Church of England, you will be scandalized; and if you are one of the new Reformation, you will catch at that, as if they did altogether reject Holy-days as simply evil and un∣lawful in themselves; whereas they mean to impugne only the abuses of them, viz. the praying to Saints, the opinion of
meriting by keeping of their Holy days, &c. So of Episcopa∣cy, the point I treat of now, you will see most of them inveigh against Prelates; and here again you will be affected accor∣ding to the pre-occupation of your mind. But observe what Beza saith of himself, that he impugneth only the Romish Hie∣rarchy, but never intendeth to touch or impugne the Ecclesiastical Polity of the Church of England; and take it as if said by all others: or if you find any thing by them written, that may be thought to thwart our Church-Government, which you will never, or very seldom find, be sure it is either upon mis-information, or only out of some particular Caprice, in both which they deserve to be very much blamed, as in∣deed they are by all other moderate understanding men a∣mongst them. But to proceed in the hearing of the Wit∣nesses, who depose for Geneva in behalf of our Prelates;Jacobus Le∣ctius acknow¦ldgeth the Bi∣shops of Eng∣land to b Scri∣pture B shops. Ja∣cobus Lectius may very well be produced here. It is true that he was no Divine, but he was a Magistrate of the City, a grave Senator, a Doctor of the Laws, and Publick Reader in the Ʋniversity. If you please you may look upon him as a Lay-Elder. However a Geneva man he is, and writing at Geneva a Book dedicated to the Syndicks and Senate,Nota 2. advers. Codic. Fabita∣num. Asserimus pre¦veris legiti∣mis{que} Episco∣ps habendos illos demum quos Paulus in Epistolis ad Tim. & Tit. de pingit. Cujus∣modi olim in magno il∣lo regno Bri∣tanniatum ex∣titisse, atque etiamnum su∣peresse subin∣deque eligi E∣piscopos non diffitemut. after he hath spo∣ken of the abuses of Popish Prelacy; but, saith he, we main∣taine that those are true and lawful Bishops, whom Saint Paul describes in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus; and we do not deny but that there were such formerly in that great Kingdom of Great Britain, and that at this very day there are such Bishops there, and that such are chosen there from time to time. Behold a Senator of Geneva that acknowledges the Bishops of Eng∣land for true and lawful Bishops, Scripture Bishops, such as are described by Saint Paul in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus; so far is he from Unbishoping Timothy himself, asMr. Prynne. one of the same profession with him would have done lately. And it must not be objected that it is but Jacobus Lectius his private judgement. For do but hear what he saith further himselfe, in the same Book, Neither was there any of our Divines, I think, who ever denied it to be a most ancient custome in the Church from the very times of the Apostles, (to wit, that one should have the chief care of the Church, sitting, as it were, at
the Helm of the sacred Ship.Nec vero negavit Theologor. nostrorum quisquam, puto, anti∣quissimum istum & à temporibus usque Apostolicis in Ecclesia fu∣isse morem (nempe ut esser unus aliquis qui paecipua Ecclesiae cu∣a ugeretur, & quasi clavum te∣neat sacrae navis) & de finibus  regundis ex divini vebi norma sic egerunt, ut Or∣thedoxorum Episcoporum ordi∣nem aspernari,  instar esse professi sint publicis Scripti: quos etiam honore omni & stu∣dio colure; in his Calvinus, Bucerus, Beza, Sadeel, aliique. Ibid. l. 2, affirm. 11. p. 214.) And they did so treat of the limitation of that preeminence accor∣ding to the word of God, that they have professed by their publick writings, that it was mad-like to think meanly of the Order of Orthodox Bi∣shops, to whom therefore our men, and amongst them Calvin, Bucer, Beza, Sadeel, and others, have deferred all manner of honour and affecti∣on. Three witnesses are sufficient to prove any thing, but we have yet more to pro∣duce, and those very eminent, of these later times, to shew that Geneva hath changed neither her mind nor her language in behalf of the Protestant Prelacy of Great Britain. I mentioned at the beginning of this Secti∣on,Fridericus Spanhemius for the Bishops of the Church of England. an Epistle of Fridericus Spanhemus Preacher and Divinity Reader at Geneva, inscribed to Doctor Ʋsher, the late Lord Primate of Ireland to the Earl of Pembroke that now is, to the Earl of Angus, Son of the Marquess of Douglas, and to the Earle of Londerdale, at present His Majesties Secretary of State for the Kingdom of Scotland. Spanhemius gives Do∣ctor Ʋsher the titles of Most Reverend,Reverendissi∣mo, Amplissi∣moque Paesu∣li, Jacobo Us∣serio Archi∣episcopo Ar∣machan, to∣us Hiberniae Pimati. and Right honourable Prelate, Arch-Bishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland. He puts my Lord Arch-Bishop his Grace before all those Noble and great men, according to the place our Kings have been pleased to give to those chief Fathers of the Church. He sayes, It is God who hath preferred him to that sacred Office which he enjoyeth: he speaks of the great affection the Genevans bear to all the British Churches,Scrum sarè mnus illud, ad quod Te D v na boni∣tas evexit. Spanh m in E∣pist. dedicat. 3. Pa t. Dubior. Evang. Prolxi nostri erga Ecclesias omnes Britannicas affectus, quarum Praesules Amplissimos, &c. Suspicimus & amplexamur, & pro Regnorum vestrorum, & omnium qui in iis sive in Ecclesia, sive in Republica ad clavum sedent, incolumitate, prosperitateque divinam bonitatem precibus assiduis fatigamus, &c. quo Deo sua sem∣per apud vos conste Gloria, Serenissimo Regi vestro suum jus, Ecclesiarum vestrarum Praesulibus sua Authoritas. Ibidem. the great Prelates whereof they reverence and love. He adds, that they alwayes pray to God for the prosperity of these Kingdoms, and of all them that sit at the Helm, as well in the Church as in the Commonwealth, that God may ever have his due Glory, the King his Right, the Prelates of our Churches their Authority, &c. This was written in the year
1638. in the month of October, and publickly Printed at Ge∣neva. And this one testimony alone would be evidence e∣nough to convince the world that the Reformed Church of Geneva is no enemy to the Bishops of the Church of England. 44. But yet I must add one more of another eminent Di∣vine of that Church,Dr. John Di∣odati blameth them that rise up against the Pastors of the Church. where he was likewise both Preacher and Divinity Reader, and Collegue to Spanhemius before Span∣hemius went into Holland; I mean that pious and learned man, the famous John Diodati. He was known indeed for a great lover of our Church; but that must not be objected to annul or diminish the weight of his testimony. For in that very objection, there is as much as I intend & need to prove, to wit, that the Ministers of Geneva are no enemies to our Bishops. The testimony that I mean to produce, is to be found in that excellent Letter by him Penn'd in answer to that of the As∣sembly of Divines at Westminster, which Letter, it is repor∣ted, that the late King of ever blessed memory, approved so well of, that he commanded it to be translated out of Latine into English and printed. A Latine Copy of the same hath been given me by the worthy Son of that, great man Dr. Diodati, a learned and skilful Physician in the City of London, and who, though an Elder of the Italian Church, hath succeeded to the love his Father bore to our Church. In the said Letter, after he hath spoken of the miseries of the Bohemian Churches, of them of Germany, of them of other Countries, and of the then bleeding wounds of the Irish Protestants; you will find these words,Johan. Diodat. in Epist. ad Theol. West∣monast. Hoc unum nempe ad cumulum tantarum calamitatum de∣crat, ut florentissima Anglia ocellus ille Ecclesiarum, peculium Chri∣sti singulare, per fugium afflictorum, imbellium armamentarium, in∣opum promptuarium, spes melioris vexillum, tam inopinato casu, nullo hoste, vel ab exteris impressione suis ipsius manibus conficeretur, & pedibus protereretur; Et illae splendidae Domini caulae non à fe∣ris discerperentur, neque à praedonibus à riperentur, sed ipsis ovibus invicem asperatis & efferatis devastarentur, exemplo planè diro & inter Ecclesias Reformatas maudito, nempè Dei timore, & fide compari mansuefactae, & hostium communium metu constrictae, charitatem mutuam sanctè, & coluerant, & exercuerant, & inter se quietae & concordes à luporum rabie sese morum simplicitate,
vitae innocentia, religionis sanctimonia, & fidei robore tuebantur. Horrore toti concutimur ad versam hanc pulcherrimam Ecclesiae inter vos faciem dum concursus bellicos & ferales populi cum Rege suo, fratrum cum fratribus, Parentum cum filiis, ovium cum aliis ovibus, imò & cum pastoribus audimus referri. This one thing it seems was wanting to make up the measure of such great Calamities, that the most flourishing Kingdom of England, that fair eye of the Reformed Churches, which was as the proper inheritance of Christ, the Refuge of the Afflicted, the Armory of the Weak, the Store-house of the Needy, and as a Standard of better hopes, should be destroyed and trodden under by so unexpected a misfor∣tune, and that without any enemy or violence from stran∣gers, but with its own hands; and that those beautiful sheep-folds of the Lord should be not torne and plundered by the wild Beasts and Thieves, but quite destroyed by the Sheep themselves now grown cruel and savage, being a most damnable and unheard of example in the Reformed Churches; which being made gentle by the fear of God, and the same Faith, and keeping together for fear of their common enemies, had inviolably preserved and exercised a mutual love towards one another; and being quiet and at peace within, did defend themselves from the rage of Wolves by the simplicity of their manners, the inno∣cency of their Life, holiness of their Religion, and strength of their Faith. But now we are astonished at this change of the most beauteous Face of your Church, when we hear the reports of the war-like and mortal encounters of Subjects with their King, of Brethren with their Brethren, of Fa∣thers with their Children, of Sheep with other Sheep, nay, of Sheep with their Pastors. We see here this great and pious man astonished to see the sudden change of the beauteous face of our Church, whereof one of the fairest li∣neaments is doubtless the Subordination of her Clergy; and he found it horrible when it was related that the Sheep did rebel against their Pastors, by which Pastors he meaned the Right Reverend Bishops, for they were they against whom there was then a horrible Rebellion in this Church, as is known to all.
45. I have one thing further to adde of the Church of Ge∣neva, Geneva did acknowledge that the late Re∣b l has ne r Parliamntary nor Synod al Authority. to shew that notwithstanding she differs in Government from the Church of England, yet she is no enemy to our Episco∣pacy, and that she did not approve of the Presbyterian Parlia∣ment and Assembly of Divines sitting at Westminster, their ejecting the Bishops out of the Church, and their abolishing the 39. Articles, and framing another Confession of Faith to be obtruded upon this Church. And I make it appear thus: It is known to the Learned, that there was made long since a Collection of the several Confessions of Faith, received in all the Reformed Churches of Europe, under the title of Corpus & Syntagma Confessionū Fidei quae in diversis Regnis & Natonibus Ecclesiarum nomine fuerunt authentice editae: in celeberrimis con∣ventibus exhibitae, publicaque authoritate comprobatae. This Book being grown scarce, was Reprinted at Geneva, Anno 1654. In the first Edition were inserted the 39. Articles of the Church of England, as having publick Authority. In this later Edition, there were some factious men, who moved upon the Presbyterian account to have the 39. Articles left out, and the new Confession of Westminster put in stead thereof; which if it had been effected, I confess the Presbyterians might truly say that Geneva had declared for them against the Church of England. But the motion having been wholly rejected, and the 39. Articles (whereof the thirty sixth contains our Hie∣rarchical Subordination) Reprinted in their same place as formerly, together with Bishop Jewels Apology for the Church of England, without so much as mentioning the new Confession of Faith of the Assemblers at Westminster; I maintain that Geneva hath by this very act sufficiently declared to the World, that she disowned the Presbyterians both as to their opinions against Episcopacy, and their pretended Parliamen∣tary or Synodical Authority; For had they been of the same mind with them about Church-Government, as the Presby∣terians thought it necessary to abolish that ancient Confession of our first Reformers, so the Genevans would have expunged it out of their Book. And if they had been of opinion that the two Houses of Parliament, and the Divines assembled at Westminster had had sufficient authority to make a new Con∣fession
of Faith in the name of the Church of England, they were obliged to insert that of the Presbyterian, into that general Collection by the very Title thereof, in which it is said, That there are contained the Confessions which have been au∣thentically published in the name of the Reformed Churches, and approved by publick Authority. Now what can be objected against this Declaration of the Church of Geneva's approving the Church of England, and her dislike of the disturbers there∣of, I protest I see not, unless it were these two things, 1. That they Reprinted the Collection of Confessions as it was in the first Edition: But it is otherwise; For they have added to it the Confession of Cyrillus Patriarch of Constanti∣nople; as likewise that of the Reformed Churches of Poland and Lithuania, made by the general Assembly of Thoren, Anno 1645. and some others. 2. That it was out of policy, to which there needs no other answer but only this, that the said Collection of Confessions was set forth Anno 1654. in a time when the Usurpers of the Kings Authority were thought to be in a condition to say, We shall not be moved, we shall see no sorrow; and likewise the wounds of the Church of England, in the apprehension of most men (and it may be of the Genevans themselves) past all hopes of Cure. And yet in that very juncture, Geneva did us that right; which is a thing very worthy observation, to convince the Presbyteri∣ans of their mistake, when they take it for granted, that they had the Approbation of the Reformed Churches abroad, and specially of that of Geneva, in their doings here a∣mongst us. The name of Jesus ridged th I H S, and thus inserted in the Picture of the Sun, used by the Church of Geneva for her Seal.46. Before I leave the Church of Geneva, I must make one observation more. It was and is yet the custom to have the holy name of Jesus, according as it is abridged by the Gre∣cians in three Letters I H S, embrodered upon the Velvet cloath which uses to cover the Pulpit in our Churches. This innocent and harmless custom hath been railed against by some, as being superstitious and Jesuitical, because, forsooth, the Jesuites use the same. I do not intend to put my selfe to the trouble of proving that there is in that neither Superstiti∣on nor Jesuitisme; for it cannot be thought so, but only by
weak and silly men, to say no worse of them. I mean only to inform them who are of that mind, that this very name of Jesus so abridged, is the Seal of the Reformed Church of Geneva. That City, as I observed before, is very ancient: In the time of Paganism it was consecrated to Apollo, and therefore had the Picture of the Sun (by which Apollo was represented) in great ve∣neration.Non ustra Sacratissimum Sci∣vetuis nost mm JESU, pgisn Pflgat, & ge∣talitatis tnbtris ulse, fo  insertum, qi Republ. uju veus, bnisieu & salutatis Sl suo tempre esse debebat. G n. Restitl. p 29. But since she was enlightned by the Sun of Righteousness, and converted to the Faith of Christ, the name of Jesus was by them inserted into the picture of the Sun. And ever since Reformation they have used it for the Badge of their Church, with this in∣scription about it, Jesus Sol & scutum meum, and under it, Ec∣clesia Genevensis sigillum; as may be seen in all the Attestati∣ons of the Ministers of Geneva; or if you please, you may see the same handsomely cut in the great Atlas of Mercato, in the description of the Town and Signory of Geneva. So that if we are Jesuites for using thus the name of our Redee∣mer, the Genevans are of the same Society with us. 47.The Chur of Egland a∣med so usi g the same Cere∣monies h o∣ther Refo d Chuches  with u any ∣s nce. T Offi for the  read at th Com∣muni Tbe, in Hollan, Helveria, &c. La predicati∣on & pere ordinaire e∣stans achevées en la chai; le Formulaire de la cene & la priere servante a icelle sera lesse a la Table. l'Ordre La∣clesiost. que des Egl. Ref. du Pays bas tans de l'une que de l'autrelangue. Articl. 62. But it is a long time since I have observed that it is the fate of the Church of England to be branded with the name of Superstitious, and blamed by ignorant men for those very things for which other Reformed Churches are praised, or at least, not blamed; as this using of the name of Jesus for one; the setting up of Crosses upon Churches; the reading the Office for the Communion not in the Pulpit, but at the Com∣munion Table, according as it is enjoyned and used in Hol∣land, and in most other Countries; and the like. See the Quotation in the Margin for what I say of the custom of the Reformed Churches of Holland, to read the Office for the Communion at the Communion Table, after the Minister hath done his work in the Pulpit. For though this is not the proper place for this Observation (which should have been made in the first Section;) yet I thought it better to in∣sert it here, then to omit it quite; wherefore I hope my
Reader will give me leave to inform him further, that Oecolampadius tells us that the like is done at Basil.Joan. Oecolam∣pad. in Epist. ad Eras. Ritter. Eccls. Scaphus. quae bbetur in∣ter Eist. viror. Doct. de re Eu∣chiristicâ & Anabaptisticâ. Pro sug∣gestu legimus omia usque ad verba coemae, quae ante altarium vel mensam recitantur; mox facta oratione & Convocatione sequitur Communio. We read all in the Pulpit (saith he) till we come to the Office for the Communion, which is said be∣fore the Altar or Table: Then presently after the Prayer and the summoning of the people, followeth the Commu∣nion. The like is done in most of the other Reformed Churches, and is condemned no where, no not by those that do not use it, if there be any more that do it not, then the Reformed Churches of France, where the whole Office for the Communion is read from the Pulpit, by reason of the great numbers of their Congregations, which are such, that the Minister would not be heard by the fourth part of the peo∣ple from the Communion Table. By the way observe out of Oecolampadius his words now quoted, the proof of what I have said in my first Section, pag. 30. n. 31. that in the Re∣formed Churches of Germany they use to call the Communion Table by the name Altar. 48. But I remember I promised Calvin would give satis∣faction for the Word which Smectymnuus supposeth he hath spoken against the Liturgy of the Church of England, and which he conceives to be a great disparagement to it. The words are these, In Anglicana Liturgia, qualem describitis,  multas video fuisse tolerabiles ineptias, for which Smectymnuus hugs and blesses himself so much; though he saith but little upon them, because he thinks they speak enough of them∣selves, so that it is sufficient to have but pointed at them. The business is thus; During the reign of Queen Mary Anno 1555. many English Protestants to avoid the persecu∣tions that then were used in this Realm against all sorts of men of their Religion, fled to Frankefort in Germany. When they were there arrived, considering that their exile might be long, and that for want of the language of the Country, they could after the manner, of the place, but with little satisfaction perform Church-duties, and that they were e∣nough in number to make up a handsome Congregation;
they all agreed in the design of assembling together, and ha∣ving Prayers and Sermons in the English tongue. But they being of two different opinions about the Ceremonies and Liturgy to be used in their Congregation, some being of the mind to use the same that had been brought into the Church of England with the Reformation, and no other; and some being otherwise minded, as having a touch of Presbyterianisme (I say a touch only, for certain it is that they were not ene∣mies to all set Forms, as appears by their making one, and their using of the same) Calvin being then in very high esteem with both parties, as indeed with most Protestants all Eu∣rope over, the rigid Lutherans only excepted; these Presby∣terianising Brethren acquainted him with the debate they had with those who thought it their duty to own their Mo∣ther Church, and not to be ashamed of her in what part soe∣ver of the world they were dispersed, when they might do it conveniently. And in their Letter to him chiefly described the Ceremonies and Liturgie of our Church, and that doubt∣less with such colours and lineaments as they thought would prevail best with Calvin to disapprove and decry both, and applaud them in their dissenting. What doth Calvin say to them in his answer to their Letter?Calv. Epist. l. p. 213. Hoc vero me graviter ex∣cruciat, & valde absurdum est, inter fratres ob eamdem fidem à patria exules ac profugos dissidium oriri, & quidem hac de causa, quae vel sola debuerat in hac vestra dispersione, quasi sacrum vincu∣lum, vos simul devinctos tenere. I am grievously vexed, and it is very absurd, that there should arise any dissention a∣mongst brethren that are banished and driven from their Country for the same Faith; and that this dissention should arise from that very cause, which alone, as a sacred bond, should have held you bound up together in this your disper∣sion. Nunc vero de precandi forma & Ceremoniis quasi in otio & delitiis litem à quibusdam moveri, idque obstare quominus in unum Ecclesiae corpus, isthic coalescatis, nimis meo judicio intempesti∣vum est. But now that some should make a debate about the form of Prayer and Ceremonies, as if you were at ease, and had nothing to do but to take your pleasures; and that this debate should hinder you from becoming one Congre∣gation
and one body in the place where you are, is a thing to my apprehension, too much out of season. And after he hath said, In rebus mediis, quales sunt externi ritus, facilem se ac flexibilem praebere; That in things of a middle nature, such as are outward Ceremonies, he useth to shew himself tractable and complying; coming to the main point con∣cerning the Book of Common Prayer, (against which some opposed themselves, and raised needless quarrels about it, as intolerable) though they had represented it to him, as we have reason to believe, with all possible disadvantage, yet in his answer he doth not say that he found in it either impiety or superstition, or any thing that may not be borne withall: But only, In Anglicana Liturgia, saith he, qualem describitis, multas video fuisse tolerabiles ineptias: In the En∣glish Liturgy, as it is by you described, I see there were many unfit things, but yet such as may well be tolerated. This,Ubi supra. Smectymnuus saith, he thinks is no great applause to the Li∣turgy: and I think as much with him. But if he thinks, as his Trope doth intimate, that it is a great blemish put upon it, and that Calvin would have had these three Kingdoms imbrue themselves in a bloody, civil, unnatural Warre, what∣soever were the event of it, as to the very life and substance of Religion and godliness, rather then to bear with those improperties which he thought to be in the English Liturgy, ac∣cording to the portraicture that was sent him from the partial hand of an ill-intending Artificer, he is very much mistaken, and I am not at all of his mind. And why should I, since Calvin himself decides the Controversie, and declares for me against Smectymnuus, when he addes the Epithete of tolerabi∣les to the word ineptiae? But this is not yet all I have to say upon this Text. I must let neither Calvin nor Smectymnuus go away so; if I should, some would think that they are yet greater Friends than indeed they are. Observe therefore, First, that Calvin doth not say there are any impieties, supersti∣tions, or idolatries in the Liturgy of the Church of England, but only meptiae, not fooleries, as the sameIn the Vindi∣cation to the Answer. p. 14. Ineptus no∣men habere videtur, quod non fit aps. Ceceral. 2. de Ocatore. Smectymnuus is pleased to render it, but things unfit, and not so well be∣coming as others might seem to be; for such is the proper
signifi∣cation of the word Ineptiae, both according to its derivation, and to its use in Calvins own writings;Dabunt veni∣am lectores si offendiculis ire oviam volens, paululum in∣eptiam. Col. l. de Scandalis. unless Smectymnuus will have Calvin call himselfe is fool, and say that he playes the fool, when he calls himself Ineptum, and when he sayes, Se ineptire, as he doth often; which would not beseem very well Calvins gravity. Observe, Secondly, that Calvin doth not say that there are, Esse, but Fuisse, that there were, such unfit and improper things; referring to what they had described to him out of the English Liturgy, which in all likelihood they then set forth out of the First of King Edward the Sixth, according to the Translation of Alexander Alesius the Scot, there being then no other in Latine. I know that the History of the trou∣bles of Frankeford will here be objected against this conjecture of mine, and that it will be said, that it is plain the Descrip∣tion of the Liturgy therein related is of the Second Book of King Edward, and not of the First. But I answer, First, that the Author of the History is not to be too much credited, not onely because he is a Party in the business, and sheweth pas∣sion all along; but also because, as I shall observe it anon, he makes noVide infra Observ. 4. Conscience of expunging the most material words of Calvin's Answer. Secondly, I say, that in the very description of the Liturgy, which this Author gives out for that which was sent to Calvin by Knox and Whittingham, there are several things related, as they were in the First Book, according to Alesius his Translation; for example, the versi∣cles in the singular number, Lord open thou my Lips, and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise. O God be ready to be my help, &c. Thirdly, it appears, by Calvin's Letter to Doctor Cox, that Knox and Whittingham in their description of our Cere∣monies, sent to Calvin, had mentioned some which were not used after the Second Book of King Edward was set out, as namely, Lights, whereof there is no mention at all made in the Description related for that of Knox and Whittingham by the Author of the History:Vide Calvin. Epist. l. p. 213. Col. 2. So that both Knox and the Writer of his troubles are guilty of false reports; Knox a∣gainst the Ceremonies of our Church, and the Historiogra∣pher in relation to the description of Knox, though with an intent to dissemble Knox's fault; For he saith in another
place,Pag. 46. what he can to cover it, by making the World believe, that when Calvin speaks as if he had been informed by Knox, that in the English Book Lights were prescribed, there is a Figure in his words, whereas it is plain, that there is no likeness of any such thing. Now if Knox and Whittingham did describe the First Book of King Edward, what's that to our present Liturgy? Nay what's that to it if he did describe the Second? For,In the Vndi∣on to the An∣swr. p. 12. besides the false description, there is such a difference betwixt them, if Smectymnuus be to be credited, That the Act of Parliament by which that of the Fifth of King Edward was esta∣blished, doth not bind to the use of this. I know that the diffe∣rence is not such, and that his inference is not good, but I speak ad hominem. I know likewise that Smectymnuus holds the alterations made in the Liturgy, under the reign of Queen Elizabeth, specially the taking out of the Letany this one Suf∣frage, From the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, good Lord del ver us, (which was in the First and Second Book of King Edward) not for Ineptia tolerabilis, but for a great and intolerable trespass; and I nothing doubt but that they all take it for granted, that if Calvin had seen such a thing done in his time, he would have esteemed of it no otherwise. It matters not much what had been Calvin's judgement about this particular: For, though he was a great and learned man, yet an Apostle he was not. But nevertheless I am glad that I may upon this occasion clear the then Rulers of our Church, from having had an intention to gratifie the Church of Rome any further then in Christian Charity and Prudence they were to do, when they took that Suffrage out of the Letany; to the end doubtless that such as were yet addicted to Popery, and bore still some respect to the See of Rome, should not be thereby hindred from coming to Church, and from joy∣ning with us in our Prayers to God. And all rational not pre∣judicate Protestants, I conceive, will think them sufficiently vindicated from that imputation, when they are informed that the Liturgy used in the French Reformed Churches and at Geneva, was made as inoffensive as possible for the same rea∣sons. In so much that Monsieur Amyraut proposes it for an example of great wisdom and moderation to be imitated by
others. For, saith  r Forms of Prayers are so far from meaing with an Controversie,Atque hic commemorare libet ad exemplum, qanta sapientia, quantoque temperamento com∣posiae fuerint eae precationum formulae publcae, quibus Ecclesiae Gallicanae & Genv nsis utuntur. Amyrald. de Secess. ab Eccles. Rom. p. 225. Absunt enim usque adeò longè ab omni controversiarum tracta∣tione, ut Pontifiii ipsi eas usur∣pare non vereantur. Et quod vx credibile esset nisi publicè visere∣tur, eas inseruerunt in eos libros, in quos congesserunt varias pre∣cationum fomulas, quae verna∣culâ linguâ populo traderentur, Ibid. that the Papists themselves make no difficulty to use them. And that which would hardly deserve belief, if it were not seen publickly, they have in∣serted them into those Books into which they have collected dvers forms of Prayer for the people in the vulgar Language. And I have observed already more then once, that Calvin is the Author of that Liturgy, wherein there are many Prayers which fit the Papists so well, that they use them without any scruple. So that the Liturgy of Geneva, and of the French Ref. Churches, and Calvin himself are whip∣ped through the side of our Book of Com∣mon Prayer, when the taking the afore-men∣tioned Suffrage of the Letany out of it, is so much urged as an argument of a sinful complyance with the Church of Rome; and when Smectymnuus asketh,In te Vndi∣cation to the Answer, p 35. what credit it is to our Church to have such a form of publick Worship, as Papists may without of∣fence joyn with us. Observe, Thirdly, that whatsoever were the Ineptiae represented to Calvin by Knox, Whittingham, and their adherents, in the English Liturgy, he found them tolerable, as hath been said; so that it is no more then he would have said of the Helvetiam, nay, of his own Genevan Churches, using Wafers at the Communion, in his time, as it is known they did. For his judgement being against the use of that kind of Bread for the Sacrament, he esteemed it Ineptia, a foolery, if Smectymnuus must be the Translator, or rather a thing unfit, to use the same; but withall a tolerable one:Ex quo ad hanc Ecclesi∣am reversus sum, Discipli∣nae foma si non perfecta, & qualis op∣tanda foret, saltem tolera∣bilis viguit. Calv. Epist. l. p. 165. for though he did not approve of it, yet he never troubled nor divided the Church to remove away the use of Wafers, but always con∣formed to the publick order of the Church, because In rebus mediis facilem se & flexibilem praebebat, he shewed himself tra∣ctable and complying in things indifferent. And it is to be noted, that he did behave himself alike in other things, which he esteemed but tolerable in the Genevan Discipline: so far was he from judging it perfect, and from intending it should
be set up all the Christian world over. Observe, Fourthly, that Calvin had not seen our Liturgy, and that he delivers his judgement about the things contained in it, but upon the in∣formation he had received from the enemies thereof: where∣fore he doth not say (as it is falsly reported in the History of the troubles of Frankefort) that he seeth in the English Liturgy, simply and peremptorily,These words, qualem descri∣bitis, are ex∣punged out of Calvin's Let∣ter in the Hi∣story of the troubles of Frankfort, by which it may be seen what credit ought to be given to that discourse. many things unfit or improper, but in the Engl. Liturgy, qualē describitis, according to the description you make of it. Now what was that portraicture or description which they were pleased to make of it, we may easily guess by them we have seen made of late years by some of Knox his own Country-men, the true off-spring of those Franco-fordian Bre∣thren, but that, as I observed, they are gone a great way beyond them. And truly if they represented the English Liturgy of those times, as Mr. Bayly doth that of Scotland, and by the same means, that of England, Calvin must be thought very moderate, that he hath said no more. So I conceive that by this time the enemies of our Book of Common Prayer see that Calvin saith but little, or rather nothing, against the same; and yet that little or nothing only upon mis-informati∣on. And thus much Calvin would say to excuse himself, if he were now alive, and protest withall that he never intended to pass any publick censure upon the Book which he had ne∣ver seen, but only to answer to what was represented in a private Letter, and yet that he would never have done it nei∣ther if he had thought such ill use would have been made of it, as the Smectymnuans and their fore-fathers have been pleased to do since his time. And if those who would seem to yield much to Calvins Authority, would but have the same moderation as to those things which are not altogether fitted to their gust, which Calvin shewed about the use of Wafers at, and the rare receiving of, the Communion; nothing more would be demanded of them, till they were of a better judg∣ment. For he conformed notwithstanding his dislike of both those things, and I conceive it is not to be doubted, but he would have conformed likewise to such Ceremonies of our Liturgy, as he judged tolerable, though he had esteemed them not altogether so sit to be used. So let the Smectymnuans
do, and we are agreed, and wil live altogether in peace & unity. 49.The way of sin∣ging Psalms, used by the Presbyterians judged Inept by a National Synod of the R for. Church of France. But if they think the word Ineptiae to be such a foul dis∣grace to our Liturgy, because supposed, not proved to be said by Calvin of some things therein contained; I must shew them, that that very thing whereof they make almost all their Li∣turgy, is branded with the very same Epithet, not upon a hear-say, or a qualem describitis, nor by a single person, as Calvin was, but by a far greater Authority, and upon a cer∣tain knowledge of the matter. It is a custom generally used in most, if not in all Parish Churches of this Kingdom, as well among Presbyterians as others, that the Clerk alone reads aloud every verse one after another, of the Psalm that is sung before and after Sermon, and that all the people sing it after him. The same was attempted and begun in some few of the Reformed Congregations of France before the year 1579. But a National Synod being met at Figeac in the same year, it was declared by the whole Assembly to be foolish, if Ineptiae be fooleries. The words of the Canon run thus; The Congregations which, when they sing Psalms in their mee∣tings, cause the verses to be said aloud before they are sung, shall be warned to give over such their attempt, Comme estant inepte, saith the French, that is, as being unfit and improper; and a Censure shall be passed upon those Congregations which use tha cu∣stom. Now must therefore this custom be laid aside? And must all those who are of the same judgement disturb the peace both of Church and Kingdom, and make a War, un∣less they have their will, and be yielded to in this particu∣lar? No man, I hope, will be so much besides himself, as to think so. For, what confusions would there be in all the Churches of the World, if all such things as seem to some to be but Ineptiae, should by them be required to be omitted, and wholly laid aside by them that make another judgement of them? If so, the Ministers of France must leave wearing their Hats in the Pulpit when they Preach; Those of Basil must wear no longer their long Caps (which are just of the fi∣gure of a Sugar-loaf) when they go in the streets, but must wear Hats like other men; Those of Holland must not bap∣tise Children sprinkling them three times, but only once;
In Hessen they must leave their way of singing by course, the Singers one verse, and the Organs and People another; The Church of Geneva must take another Badge than that of the name of I H S, for her Seal and Arms; The Ministers of Charenton must wear Gowns of another fashion, that which they use now seeming to many, and to some of themselves, very unfit for a Pulpit; And Calvin himselfe, if he were alive, must leave his also, and his Cap besides, to please his and their pretended friends here among us, and other persons of better humour, and more compleasant, to whom all those things may seem Ineptiae, unfit and little becoming. And if Ineptiae in Calvin's Letter be fooleries, most men must be fools each to other in some things. What opinion the Reformed and Papists a∣broad, have of the Liturgy of the Church of England.50. Calvin, as appears by his qualem describitis, and by his audio isthic recitari, &c. in his Epistle to the Duke of Somerset, never saw the Liturgy of the Church of England, and so speaks of it, as I have shewed, but upon trust and mis-information: so that little regard is to be had to whatsoever he may say for, or against the same. And indeed 'tis great pity the Book is so little known abroad; for the more it is known, the better it is liked. The late Edition I made of it in French by His Majesties express command, having made it something more common then formerly, it was generally so well recei∣ved, that a new Edition of it was soon after undertaken at the charges of the Book-sellers of the Reformed Church of Paris. But the Papists having notice given them thereof, they stopped the work, seised upon the whole Impression, as much as was done of it, and fined the Book-seller. By which it is plain who are the Friends or Foes of our Book of Common Prayer beyond the Seas. For let foolish or malicious cunning people say what they please of the pretended com∣pliance of our Church with the Church of Rome, there is no Reformed Church in the World, which the Pope, and with him all the wise Popish Politicians, fear and hate so much as the Reformed Church of England, because (amongst other ad∣vantages) of her Government by Bishops, and the form of her Liturgy. For, as for the last, whereof I am to speak more specially in this place, what reason can there be imagined, why the Magistrate of Paris should rather stop the printing,
and prohibit the publishing of the English Liturgy, then of that of Geneva, (which is daily printed and sold there pub∣lickly, as well as in other parts of France,) but that they are afraid that it would be better liked by most Christians that have either judgement, learning, or true piety, and are void of superstition, peevishness, extravagant zeal, and prophane∣ness, be they of what perswasion soever? They are possibly afraid, lest those of the Reformed Religion should like it so well, that they would be desirous to use it publickly in their Churches; and that if such a thing should happen, the num∣ber of Protestants would shortly encrease. But whatever be the reason of it, our Liturgy hath no other enemies abroad, where it is well known, but only Papists. And as for Pro∣testants, as many as have seen it, do either value it very much, or at least esteem it such, that they would be willing to embrace the use thereof, where it is established, judging it a madness both in the Ministers and in the people to refuse to follow the order of Prayer therein prescribed. The Reader may remember what judgement that most Illustrious and ac∣complished person the noble Princess of Turenne makes of it, in that Letter of her Highness, which I have inserted in the aforegoing Pages; where she calls it an excellent Book, and sayes, That every body is desirous to have it,Vde Sect. 1. p 78. and that she useth it for a help to her private devotions, there being no Congregati∣on in France wherein it is used publickly. Wherefore I will insist no longer upon it in this place, referring the Reader to the Letter it selfe. But I must produce that of another eminent Person of the same Sex, and of such worth, as well for sound judgement and true godliness, as for all other ex∣cellent endowments becoming her Sex and Quality, that wheresoever she is known, her Vote in any thing she speaks of, will alwayes be of the same weight with them of the greatest and most admired men. This excellent person is the Dutchess of la Force, the Princess of Turennes own Mother, who in a Letter to her Daughter, whom I would call Incom∣parable, if she had not such a Mother, writes thus, after she had seen and perused carefully our Book of Common Prayer; Je lis la Liturgie Angloise avec grand plaisir & beaucoup d'edifica∣tion;
Et je donnerois de mon sang pour la faire recevoir en Guien∣ne, m'assurant qu'elle y donneroit grande instruction. Les temps sont en la main de Dieu, pour nous donner en ceux qu'il a Ordon∣nes, l'abondance de sa grace & de sa sainte connoissance. That is, I read the English Liturgy with great satisfaction and much edification; and I would give of my hearts Blood, to have it received in Aquitain, being sure that it would give great instruction to the people of this Country. The times and seasons are in the hand of God, for him to give us, in those which he hath appointed, the abundance of his grace & holy knowledge. Aquitain is the Country where the Dutchy of la Force is seated, from whence she writ, where most of the common people are of the Reformed Religion. So her Grace conceives, and that with great reason, that the Liturgy of the Church of England being so full of instru∣ction for the meanest capacities, would prove very useful amongst them, and so it would undoubtedly. We have seen heretofore that Reverend Monsieur Chabret writing from Ge∣neva, and speaking not onely as from himself, but reporting the opinion that Church hath of the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England saith, "Vide supra p 8. That they see nothing in it resembling either Idolatry or Superstition. And Reverend Mon∣sieur de l'Angle,Vid. p. 143. That his heart did leap for joy when he was told our Liturgy and ancient Discipline should be restored. And the famous Monsieur Bochart of Caën,Vid. p. 64. That there never were any of the Reformed men of France, after they attained the under∣standing of the English Tongue, but dia assist willingly at Gods ser∣vice, in our Churches and received the holy Communion of the Episcopal Ministers or the Bishops themselves, they being not so superstitiously timorous, as to be afraid of a Surplice, or of Lawn sleeves. And those other worthy Ministers of Paris, Roan, Caëa, Bordeaux, saying, Monsieur GachesVid. p. 66. That he read our Liturgy a long time since, and that he was wonderfully edified with it, and that he was often present at it in the Kings and the Lord Embassadors Chappel, when it was said there. Monsieur de l'Angle the Son,Vid. p. 91. That he approved very well that it should be used in the French Congregation of the Savoy, to shew that the French Reformed Churches are desirous to keep Communion with
the Church of England. And Monsieur du Bosc,Vid. p. 90. That he likes as well a Minister performing Divine Service after the way of the Church of England, as after the way of the French Reformed Churches. And Monsieur Gayon,Vid. p. 88. That there is not one Mi∣nister in all the Province of Aquitaine that thinketh the Conscience wounded by using the English Liturgy, and that those are in a Dream and dote that have such an opinion. We have seen like∣wise Spanhemius the then Geneva Professor in his Epistle to the Right Honourable the Earl of Lauderdale,Vid. p. 66. highly ex∣tolling and admiring the publick Worship of God and publick Piety of the Church of England, whereof the like is not easily to be found elsewhere. But to these I must adde some others, and those men of great note and worth, as well as those afore∣quoted. When I had made the new Edition of our Liturgy in French, I sent several Copies of it to them, with whom I was acquainted in France during my exile, and with it like∣wise some Copies of a Sermon which I delivered before the French Congregation of the Savoy (the first time the English Liturgy was there used) and afterwards set forth in Print to instruct them about the forms of Prayers and Ceremonies pre∣scribed therein. Amongst them, (for it would be too tedi∣ous to produce them all) were the most learned and famous Monsieur Daillé, and his Son (who is also his Collegue in the Reformed Church of Paris, Et soboles tanto non inficianda parenti.) Monsieur Gaches, Monsieur de l'Angle, Monsieur Bo∣chart of Caen, Monsieur Bochart of Alançon (who is famous for his great knowledge in Antiquity, and his learned Writings against the abuse of Relicks, the Invocation of the departed Saints, the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, and other Errors and Superstitions of the Church of Rome.) Monsieur Vanquelin, one of the Ministers of Deep, a learned man, & one whom the enemies of the Church of England courted much during the late troubles, Monsieur du Bosc, Monsieur de la Fresnaye, one of the Ministers of the Reformed Church of St. Lo in Nor∣mandy, known for a very wise judicious man, Monsieur Mo∣rin another Minister of Normandy, most learned in all the Oriental Tongues. All these have written Letters to me in approbation of the Book of Common Prayer, and the De∣fence
I made thereof in my Sermon. I refer the Reader to the English translation of the said Sermon, where he shall finde the Extracts of the Letters of the two Daillés, the Father and the Son, of Monsieur de l'Angle, of Monsieur Gaches, of Monsieur Bochart of Caen, and of some others: only of Monsieur Daillé the Son, this I think proper to be said here, that in a Letter to me written May 16. Anno 1661. before he had perused our Liturgy all over, he hath these words; Je suppose qu'il n'y a rien dans la Liturgie Angloise qui choque les fondements de la verité; Je dis que je le suppose, par ce que je n'ai jamais leû ce livre tout entier pour en pouvoir parler affirmative∣ment. Ainsi je ne suis nullement de l'avis de ceux qui en ont fait une pomme de discorde & qui ont fait la guerre pour s'empescher de le recevoir; au contraire je tiens que l'Ʋniformité a cet esgard la entre les Eglises d'un mesme Royaume, peut contribuer a une plus grande edification; Et si vos Presbyteriens ne sont pas dans un sen∣timent aussi moderé que celui là, vous aves raison de dire qu'ils ne nous resemblent pas. I suppose that in the Liturgy of the Church of England, there is nothing found against the grounds of Truth. I say, I suppose it, because I never read the whole Book all over, to be able to speak of it affirma∣tively. So I am not at all of their mind who have made it an Apple of dissention, and who have made a War to keep themselves from submitting to it. On the contrary, I hold that Uniformity in this particular, in the Congregations of the same Kingdom, may contribute to a greater edifi∣cation; and if your Presbyterians be not of the same mo∣derate judgement, you have good reason to say, they do not resemble us. This he said before he was well acquain∣ted with the whole Book, but after he had considered all the Contents thereof, Je n'y trouve point de venim: saith he, in an∣other Letter, Je n'y voi rien de mauvois ni de dangereux dans leur usage; mais au contraire je tiens qu'elles peuvent aider a l'edificati∣on des Eglises ches qui elles sont passées en coustume. That is to say, Isee no venom therein, I see nothing ill or dangerous in the use of them; but rather on the contrary, I hold that they may help forward the edification of those Churches, where they are by custom established. Monsieur Bochart
of Alançon hath these words, J'ai leu vostre Sermon avec grande satisfaction & approbation. Je suis de vostre avis, que ceux qui renoncent a vostre communion pour vos ceremonies, sont des Schis∣matiques; Je trouve vostre Liturgie tres belle & tres bien faite I have read your Sermon with great satisfaction and approbation. I am of your mind, that those who refuse to communicate with you, because of your Ceremonies, are Schsmaticks. I find your Liturgy very good and very well ordered. Monsieur Morin writes thus, J'ai esté ravi de voir que les ce∣remonies de vostre Eglise ne sont pas contraires aux maximes des nostres; Et si vous aves touché les principales, comme je me le persuade fortement, ce seroit estre scrupuleux au dernier point que de s'en scandaliser. I was ravished to see that the Ceremonies of your Church are not contrary to the principles of ours; and if you have touched the chiefest, as I am strongly per∣swaded you have; it would be an extreme peevishness to be scandalized at them. This he saith of the Surplice, Sign of the Cross in Baptisme, kneeling at the Communion, and of all the Contents of the Book of Common Prayer, which I set forth and defend in that Sermon to which his words relate. These are the words of Monsieur Vauqueline's Letter, Je souhaiterois quant a moy, puisque la Religion demeure en son entier, & que la Liturgie telle que je l'ai veüe dans cet exemplaire qu'il vous a plu de m'envoyer, est elongnée de toute Idolatrie & qu'elle ne contient aucune superstition formelle, Messieurs les Presbyteri∣ens ne se monstrassent pas si animes, mais moderassent cette grande chaleur, &c. As for me, since so it is, that Religion re∣maineth in its integrity; and the Book of Common-Prayer, as I have seen in that Copy which you were plea∣sed to send me, is very far from any Idolatry, and that there is not in it any formall Superstition, I could wish that the Presbyterians would not shew so much animosity, but would moderate that great heat. Monsieur de la Fresnaye expresses himself in a word, saying, Le Surplis ne causera ja∣mais de Schisme entre nous; The Surplice shall never cause any Schisme between you and us; meaning by the Surplice, the publick Worship and Ceremonies of the Church of Eng∣land. Monsieur Martel Master of the Chaire in the Univer∣sity
of Montalban, in that Letter which I quoted in the first Section, delivers his judgement thus of our Book of Com∣mon Prayer, Legi Liturgiam quae Anglicanae Ecclesiae fuerat in, usu communi; quaedam ibi putem concorditer esse corrigenda; plura sunt quae maximè laudem. I have red the Liturgy which was commonly used in the Church of England, wherein I would think some amendments should be made peaceably, and by common consent; but the most part of it I commend ve∣ry much. Monsieur Drelincourt in a Paper directed to Do∣ctor Brevint, wherein he hath some Observations upon the Liturgy of the Church of England, saith, Qu'estant Reformée, ce sera avec la benediction du ciel un clair flambeau qui non seule∣ment esclairera nos trois Royaumes, mais qui respandra sa lumiere celeste par toute la Chrestinté. That being amended, it will be by Gods blessing, a bright light, which will enlighten with its heavenly beams, not only our three Kingdoms, but all the Christian World. And though he points at some things in the said Paper, which he only propounds and of∣fers to be considered, whether it will be thought fit by the Divines appointed by his Majesty, that they should be amen∣ded; yet after some Papers past between him and me, where∣in I gave him an account of most of those passages that he had observed, he seems satisfied in all, one only excepted, in the form of Baptisme, about the Questions made, not to the In∣fants, as he supposed, but to the God-fathers. And I doubt not but that he would have been satisfied therein as well as in the rest, had I represented to him what I might have said as to that particular; but the truth is, that I forgot it, and since I had other things to do. His first Papers, and those since passed betwixt us, would be too long to be inserted here. But in short, those things wherein he conceived some amendments might be made not out of any necessity, but for the satisfaction of weak Consciences, were only about the reading of some of the Apochrypha, not of all; about some of the Holy dayes observed in our Church, not of all neither; and yet he saith withal, Tout ce qui se dit ces jours la slon vostre Liturgie est fort devot & fort Chrestien. That all that which is said upon those daves according to our Book
of Common Prayer, is very devout and Christian-like. He would have had likewise some amendment in the form of Marriage, but he doth not say what; yet saith nothng a∣gainst the Ring: So about Confirmation. But in all these par∣ticulars, and some few others, his Letters to me, wherein he replies nothing to what I had said for his satisfaction, shew that he was satisfied. And it is very observable that he hath not one word against the Surplice, the Cross in Baptisme, kneeling at the Communion, or other things which are most disliked by some among us. Nay, about the Office for the Communion and celebration thereof, he hath expressions which shew that he is very much taken with it. En la celebra∣tion de la cene du Seigneur, je trouve quantité d'excellentes choses, & qui sont de grande edification, & particulierement les paroles que le Pasteur prononce en distribuant le pain & le vin, me semblent fort significatives & fort touchantes. Je trouve aussi fort grave la maniere de reciter les commandements de Dieu, comme cela se fait d'abord. In the celebration of the Lords Supper, I finde many excellent things, and of great edification; and speci∣ally the words which the Pastor pronounceth in the deli∣vering of the Bread and Wine, seem to me very significant and moving. I find likewise much gravity in the manner of rehearsing the Ten Commandments at the beginning. So about the Burial of the Dead, he sayes, that he is very much satisfi∣ed and edified therewith, J'en suis tres satisfait & tres edifie; and he bewailes the sad condition of the Reformed Churches of France,Vid. Sct 1. p. 49. which are not afforded the liberty to bury their dead with like decency, so becoming Christians that live and die in hope of a glorious Resurrection. Of the Letany he hath this, which I forgot to put in its right place. Je sai que graces a Dieu, vos Litanies n'ont rien de common avec celles de Rome, & au contraire qu'elles sont fort pieuses & fort Chrestiennes. I know that, thanks be to God, your Letany hath nothing common with that of the Church of Rome, and that on the contrary, it is very pious and Christian-like. 51. I will end this matter with the testimony of Ludovicus Capellus the Divinity-Reader of Saumur, of whom I spake in the first Section, where I quoted him to prove that all the
Reformed Churches of Europe have and use set Forms of Prayer in their publick Worship. In the body of Divinity which was set forth by him and his two Collegues, Moses Amyraldus and Josue Placaeus, and is commonly known by the name of Theses Salmurienses,Ludovicus Ca∣p llue d Litur∣g â pars 3 inter Theses Salm. he hath a Treatise wherein he sheweth the lawfulness, the use and necessity of a set Form of Liturgy against the new invention of a Directory, which the Presbyterians endeavoured to introduce into the Church of England. In that Book are handled most of the Controversies of Religion, and having proved in the two first Parts of his Treatise concernig the Liturgy, that it is to be used in the vulgar Language of every Country, that all the people may understand it;Th s. 1. he saith, Unum superest examinandum, num illius certam & prascriptam formulam esse operteat, quae cer∣tis & conceptis verbis fieri debeat; an vero Pastoris arbitrio & li∣berae voluntati permitti eam oporteat, ut quibus illi visum fuerit ver∣bis & formula utatur. There remains one question, whe∣ther there must be a certain set Form of Liturgy, which ought to consist of certain conceived words; or whether it must be left to the liberty and free will of the Pastor, to use what words or form he pleaseth. Idque propter novum quoddam hominum genus, nuper exortum, qui nullam certam & praescriptam illius in publicis Ecclesiae conventibus, adeoqur nec pri∣vatarum & domesticarum in singulis familiis precum formulam esse volunt, sed omnia arbitrio tum Pastoris, tum Patris-familias in domesticis pietatis exercitiis permitti debere censent. And that because of a certain new generation of men lately risen, which will have no certain and prescribed form of Liturgy, neither for the publick Assemblies of the Church, nor for the private devotions of every Family; but maintain that all that ought to be left to the pleasure both of the Minister, and of the head of the Family. So that were it not for these new up-starts never herd of before in the Reformed Chur∣ches, there had been no need he should have put himselfe to that trouble of debating that question. And it is worthy observation, that you shall never see it so much as mention∣ed in the Writings of foraign Protestant Divines before the unhappy divisions of our Church. But these new Reformers
having made it necessary, he useth this method; first he sheweth what hath been the practise of the Church; and next what reasons she hath had for it, and hath yet at this day to continue the same. What he saith both of the Jewish and primitive Christian Church I need not report, my scope be∣ing only to shew what is the practise and judgement of the Reformed Christians of this later age. Now of these he saith, as I have observed before upon another occasion, not only that Passim variae à variis Reformationis Authoribus conditae & praescriptae sunt Sacrae Liturgiae formulae;Thes. 6. Every where were framed and prescribed several set Forms of holy Liturgies by the several Authors of the Reformation that then was; and that Iis hactenus Reformati quique in sua gente & districtu fe∣liciter & cum fructu usi sunt, The Reformed Churches have used those set Forms hitherto with happiness and profit, each of them in their several Nations and Districts; Donec tan∣dem nuperrime exorti sunt in Anglia Morosi, Scrupulosi, & Deli∣catuli nimium, (ne Superstitiosos planè dicat) homines, quibus Ec∣clesiae suae hactenus usurpata Liturgia visa est non improbanda so∣lum, verum etiam planè abroganda & penitus abolenda & oblite∣randa, in cujus locum Directorium suum, quod vocant substitu∣erunt: Till at last of very late there did arise in England a froward, scrupulous, and over-nice (that I say not altoge∣ther superstitious) generation of men, unto whom it hath seemed good not only to blame, but to cashier and abolish wholly the Liturgy used hitherto in their Church, instead whereof they have brought in their Directory, as they call it; judging them who have blamed, opposed and aboli∣shed our Book of Common Prayer, to be froward, peevish and superstitious. But he saith further, that those many causes which they pretended for the abolishing of that holy Liturgy were levissimae nulliusque penè momenti,Quibus Eccle∣siae suae hacte∣nus usurpata Liturgia visa est mulis, sed levissimis, nul∣liusqu pnè momenti, de causis, non improbanda solum, verum etiam planè abrognda & penitus unè cum toto Episcoporum Hierarchico regimine abolnda & obliteranda. Ibid. very light and almost of no moment at all. (And so were likewise to his judgement the causes of abolishing our Hierarchical Go∣vernment, for so he sayes plainly in the same place; the which I observe the rather (though out of my present pur∣pose,
because it is a Retractation of what he had written three years before upon mis-information.) He acknow∣ledgeth also that our Liturgy, Repurgata ab omni superstitione & idololatria papistica, purged of all Popish Superstition and Idolatry; And that, Ea omnia sublata sum quae nimium onerosa & operosa erant, vel parum aut nihil omnino ad edificationem Ec∣clesiae faciebant: All such things as were over-burthensome, or which did contribute but little or nothing towards the e∣dification of the Church have been put out of it, as well as out of the Liturgies of the Reformed Churches of Germany, France, Scotland, and the Low-Countries, and so was made simple and pure.Ib Variae à variis Reformationis Authoribus conditae & praescriptae sunt S. Liturgiae formulae simplices & purae, in Germania, Gallia, Anglia, Scotia, Belgio, putting no diffe∣rence between the Liturgy of the Church of England and those of other Churches, for the simplicity and purity thereof; but accounting England as happy for the enjoying of her Li∣turgy as those other Countries for enjoying each of their own. For, he saith of all the Reformed Churches general∣ly, Liturgiis hactenus feliciter usae sunt quaeque in sua gente & di∣strictu, donec exorti sunt in Anglia; They have all been happy in the use of their Liturgies, each of them in their own Country, till there did arise of very late years in England a froward, peevish, scrupulous, superstitious generation of men, that is to say, the Presbyterians and other Directorians, who inter∣rupted that happiness by the abolishing both of Episcopacy and the Book of Common Prayer, and setting up their Di∣rectory in lieu thereof. In the rest of his Treatise he confutes the Directory, and all that which the Directorians have brought either for it, or against the use of a set Form of Liturgy, all which I omit as not belonging properly to this place. Only this I think my self bound to observe here, that whereas there are some Liturgies wherein some Offices and set Forms be wanting, as in that of the Reformed Churches of France, Ludovicus Capellus, that none should think he approves set Forms only for those things for which the Church wherein he lived had and used them, declareth himself thus upon this subject;Ibid. Thes. 22. Praeterea sunt & alii nonnulli ritus qui pro varietate
locorum, personarum & temporum, multis in Ecclesiis usurpantur, in quibus necessariae pariter sunt certae quadam & praescriptae for∣mulae; ut cum exempli gratia puerperae mox post puerperum Deo se in Ecclesia sistunt, ut illae de gratia ab Deo accepta gratias agant: quum fidelium corpora humo mandantur vel eorum liberi adulti priusque ad S. Coenam admittantur, cathechisantur, examinantur, & in professione fidei Christianae certo ritus confirmantur, ac precibus Divinae gratiae commendantur. In his aliisque ejusmodi, si qui sunt, qui utiliter usurpari possint, longè convenientior est certâ quâdam verborum formula ad aedificationem composità uti, quam istà Pasto∣ris velignari, vel audacis & temerarii, arbitrio permittere: More∣over, saith he, there are some other Rites which according to the variety of places, persons, and times are used in ma∣ny Churches, in which likewise it is necessary that there be some certain set and prescribed forms. As for example, when the Women that are brought to bed, a while after their lying in, do present themselves before the Lord, to him give thanks for the favour received from his hands; when the bodies of Christians are buried, or their Children after they are grown in years, are Catechised, Examined and Confirmed by a certain Rite in the profession of the Christian Faith, and commended to God by Prayer, be∣fore they are admitted to the holy Communion. In these and the like customs, if there be any that may be profitably used, it is far more convenient to use a certain set Form framed for edification, than to leave it to the liberty of an ignorant, or bold, or rash Minister. Ibid. Th s. 10. In another place he sheweth the lawfulness and the necessity at sometimes of using certain Printed Homilies allowed by publick Authori∣ty; and produceth the example of the Church of England, saying, Id factum esse olim in Anglia, quum Reformatio illic est primum introductia; una enim cum Liturgiae S. formula, confe∣ctum esse Homiliarum crassum volumen, quae singulis Dominicis & diebus Festis populo praelegebantur ab illis Pastoribus qui de suo pro∣prias habere non poterant: That it was done so of old in Eng∣land at the beginning of Reformation; a great thick vo∣lume of Homilies, having been framed together with the set Form of the holy Litvrgy, to be read before the people
upon Sundays and Holy-dayes, by those of the Ministry who were not able to preach Sermons of their own making. And again in another place, he maintaineth that is lawful to read the Apocrypha in the Church;Ibid. Thes. 38. Ad scripta seu libros Apocryphos quod spectat, neque etiam simpliciter & in se llicitum est eos vel publicè vel privatim legi, modo legantur non ut Divina, sed ut humana scripta, ex quorum lectione utilitas aliqua potest ad Ecclesiam redire. Et sic qu dem olim fuerunt in primitiva Ecclesia lect lbri, non ad divinam astruendam illi: authoritatem, aut fidei dogmata comprobanda, decidendasque de fide controversias, sed ad mores informandos, & utilia vitae praecepta inde haurienda: Con∣cerning the Apocrypha, it is not simply and in it self un∣lawful that they should be read either publickly or in pri∣vate, so they be read not as holy Scripture, but as humane Writings, the reading whereof may be profitable to the Church. And so were those Books read of old in the pri∣mitive Church, not to ascribe any Divine Authority unto them; or to prove thereby any Doctrine, or decide any Controversie of Faith; but for the instruction of man∣ners, and for the Precepts useful to good living, which may be drawn out of them, just as it is in the 39. Articles. All this is in approbation and commendation, namely, of our Book of Common Prayer, and things therein contained. But I cannot forbear digressing a little from my subject, to let my reader understand what was Capellus his judgment of those that have been the opposers of set forms here amongst us; Certe nihil aliud videtur homines illos incitasse,Ibid. Thes. 28. ut sic studiosè omnes S. Li∣turgiae formulas praecisas damnarent, quam tum novandi & cor∣rumpendi amor & studium, ut sub specioso libertatis orandi & prophetandi velo atque obtentu omne genus Sectae in Ecclesiam in∣troducantur; tum vana & falsa atque prejudicata opinio nos in id tempus jam devenisse, quo non secus atque Apostolorum tempore, Spiritus prophetiae, precum, supplicationum, miraculose in hodiernam Ecclesiam effundendus sit, juxta Joëlis & Zachariae prophetiam, Joel 11.28. Zach. 12.10. qui est Phanaticorum omnium com∣munis & pestilentissimus de Paracleto à Christo mittendo error, &c. Truly nothing else it seems hath incited those men to re∣ject so passionately all kind of set forms of Prayer, but part∣ly
the love of novelties, and the intention to corrupt; that under the specious pretext of praying and prophecying th might introduce all manner of Sects into the Church; and partly their vain and false and prejudicate conceit, that we are now come to the time in which as in that of the Apostles, the Spirit of prophecy, of prayer and supplica∣tions is to be poured upon the present Church, according to that of Joel 11.28. and Zach. 12.10. which is the common and most pestilent error of all the Phanaticks touching the Paraclet, &c. And drawing up all his disser∣tation into five heads or conclusions, the last of them is thus,Ibid. Thes. 49. Earum (precum formularum) usus jure damnari aut impro∣bari non potest, nec debet, cum semper & ubique utilis & conve∣nientissimus esse possit, & in universa Ecclesia Christiana, totoque terrarum orbe, jam à plusquam 1300. annis perpetuo obtinuerit, etiamnum{que} hodie ubi{que} obtineat, nisi apud novitios istos Independen∣tes: The use of set forms of Prayer cannot, nor ought to be condemned or blamed; since it may be alwayes and every where profitable and most convenient; and that set forms have been and are yet used in the Universal Christian Church above 1300. years all the world over, except a∣mongst these new fangled Independents: So he calleth all them that reject the use of set forms of Prayer. And going on,Ibid. Thes 50. Ʋt planè vaecors & prodigiosa sit hominum istorum sive morositas & scrupulositas, aut superstitio, sive potius procax & pervicax , qui quod in se est longè innocentissimum, cujus usus est utilis∣simus & praxis convenientissima, quod tamdiu in Ecclesia universali obtinuit, quod à nulla hactenus Ecclesia improbatum unquam fuit, quod omnes Ecclesiae Dei ubique cum fructu longè maximo usur∣pant, ex mera cerebrositate, vel pessimo effraenis licentiae & intole∣randae  in Ecclesiam introducendae studio, superstitiose dam∣nant, & Idolo quarto Decalogi praecepto vetito, comparant, & ab omnibus refugi ineptissimè volunt. So that the untowardness, peevishness and superstition, or rather the prating and ob∣stinate wilfulness of those men is quite senseless, mad and monstrous, who out of meer fancy or a desire of lawless libertinage, or out of a design to introduce a confusion in∣to the Church, do superstitiously condemn and compare to
an Idol, forbidden by the Law of God in the fourth Com∣mandment, that thing which in it self is most innocent, the use whereof is most profitable, and practice most con∣venient, which hath been so long in the universal Church, which was never yet condemned by any Church, and which all the Churches of God do enjoy with the greatest benefit that can be; and yet these men most foolishly would have every body abhor and forbear the use of it. Lastly, know∣ing that in this, as in other distempers of mind, there are di∣vers degrees, some being less, some more besides themselves, he addes, Atque inter eos maxime detestandi sunt, qui tum Oratio∣nem Dominicam vel omnino non,Ibid. Thes. 51. vel non nisi solam, & ab omnibus aliis tum publicis tum privatis precibus sejunctā, recitari & ad Deum fundi volunt; tum nefas esse censent cuilibet pio & fideli interesse tum publicis in Ecclesiae coetu, tum privatis domi in singulis familiis, pie∣tatis exercitiis, in quibus est aliquis precum certâ verborum formu∣la conceptarum usus, justamque esse ea propter ab illo abstimendi & se∣cedendi causam censent ac definiunt, ne scilicet eorum peccato, qui for∣mulis istis utuntur communicent, co{que} sese contamment at{que} polluant, homines haud illis absimiles de quibus Propheta Esaias, Cap. 65.5. Qui aliis dicunt, mane isthic, ne ad me accedas, tibi enim comparatus sanctus sum. Hi sunt (inquit Dominus) quasi fu∣mus in naribus meis; hoc est vehementem iram meam in se ex∣citant. Faxit Deus ut ad sauiorem mentem redeant. Amen. That is, And amongst the rest those are most to be detested who will not allow the Lords Prayer to be said at all, or will have it said alone by it self, and not with any other Pray∣ers, whether publick or private; and who think it to be a great sin for any godly man to be present either in the Church at Common Prayer, or in any Family at private devotions and exercise of Piety, when any set form is there used: and hold it a just cause of separation from the Church, lest they should be partakers of the sins of those who use set forms, and defile themselves therewith; such men being not unlike unto them, of whom the Prophet Isaiah Chap. 65. vers. 5. Which say, stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou; these are a smoak in my nose, saith the Lord, that is, They kindle my wrath against them.
The Lord grant that they may come again to a better mind. Amen. And so say I, Amen, Amen, the Lord grant it. I must not forget to let the world know, that this Dispu∣tation for set forms in general, and namely, for those of our Book of Common Prayer against the Directory, was had in the publick Schools of Saumur and put forth in Print to the year 1650. when the opposers of set forms were at the highest in these Kingdoms, and that it was commonly believed that the Liturgy of the Church of England should never be used any more. For certainly it is very observable, that at such a time, and in such a juncture of affairs our Book of Common Prayer was publickly asserted in a famous University of the Reformed Churches of France, by one of their most eminent and learnedst Divines and Professors; who doubtless would never then have attempted such a thing, if he had not had a very high esteem of that Sacred Liturgy, as he calleth it, and if he had not known that it was generally approved in the Church wherein he lived, and the Directory disliked of all men of understanding that were well acquainted with both those Books, and throughly knew what they were. 52. By what hath been said hitherto,What would be in all likelihood the judgement of a Council of the Del ges of all oth r Refo∣med Churchs, if called to de∣cide the present Contour ses of the church of England. I am confident that the unpartial Readers are convinced of the Truth of the Title I give to this second Section of my present Treatise, viz. That the Reformed Church of England is not condemned by other Refor∣med Churches, in those few things in which some of them dif∣fer from her, and she from some of them. Nay, I may tru∣ly say that I have done more than by that Title was by me promised, having shewed not only that the other Reformed Churches do not condemn the Church of England in those things which are not in use among them; but further, that they approve of them, and wish they had the happiness to en∣joy the same. And here let me have leave to put the case that, as it was wished by some, our Brethren of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas were called to advise with the Divines of our Church, and to lend their helping hand to put an end to our unhappy differences. I know that it is not necessary, and that thanks be to God, we do not want lear∣ned and moderate wise men, and in all manner most capable
to help forward that so much desired settlement of our Church: But I say, put case some Divines were called from other Reformed Churches to joyn with them in that good work; put case that those Worthies, whom God was pleased to make use of in and since the first time of Reformation, to set forth the true Doctrine of the Gospel, and to maintain the same in several parts of the Christian world, were now all alive. Thereupon put case that the said Churches should be desired by the Kings most Excellent Majestie to send over their Delegates; put case that the United Provinces send Bogermannus the Praeses of the Synod of Dort, the learned Lu∣dovicus de Dieu, Andreas Rivetus and Fridericus Spanhemius, both which died Ministers in the Belgick Churches, and Di∣vinity Readers in their Universities; Put case the Reformed Churches of Franee send their beloved Peter du Moulin, Mon∣sieur de l'Angle the Father, Monsieur Drelincourt, Monsieur Gayon, Monsieur Daillé, Monsieur Amyrant, Monsieur Ca∣pel, Monsieur Bochart of Caën, Monsieur Bochart of Alençon, Monsieur Vanquelin, Monsieur Martel, Monsieur Gaches, Mon∣sieur du Bosc, Monsieur de l'Angle the Son, Monsieur le Moine, Monsieur Morin, Monsieur Daillé the Son, Monsieur Ron∣delet, all great and famous men, most of which have been often Delegates to their National Assemblies; Put case Ge∣neva sends Calvin, Beza, Sadeel, Danaeus, Diodati, Monsieur Chabret; The Palatinate the Reverend and most Learned Hiero∣mus Zanchius sometimes Professor at Hidelberg. Hessen, Mr. Fisher Chaplain in ordinary to the Landgrave; The other Reformed Churches of Gmany, Martin Bucer, who was so highly esteemed of them; The Switzers, Oecolampadius, Bu∣linger, Peter Martyr, who was Divinity Reader at Zurich, whence he was called to the Colloquie or Conference of Poissi and Gualterus; The Fratres Bohemi, Joannes Amos Commenius; The Lithuanian and Polonian Churches, Iohannes de Kraino Krainski, who is now the Delegate of Lithuania to the Kings Majesty in behalf of the Reformed Churches of that Coun∣try; The Hungarians and Transylvanians, Doctor Isaac Basire (who not long since was by them intrusted with the Divinity Chair;) and that with this strict injunction, to speak nothing
in their name, but what is extant in their publick Records, that no exceptions may be taken against him for his being a Mem∣ber of the Church of England. And that the Presbyterians may have all manner of satisfaction,Ecclesiam & Scholam Ge∣nevensm ha∣buisse Calvi∣nos, Bezas, &c. Lectios & Ca∣saubonos. Gen. restitut. p. 94. put case the King desires the said Churches to send likewise Lay Elders, among their other Delegates; and that Geneva sends Iacobus Lectius, and the fa∣mous Casaubon whom she reckons amongst her Worthies; Holland the great Salmasius; and France the honest and lear∣ned Doctor Paraeus, now one of the Elders of the Reformed Church of Roan. Put case the Church of England for peace∣sake condescends so much, as to refer to all those grave and learned men, the judgement of those Controversies she is troubled with at present by some of her own Children, though there is all the reason of the world she alone should be their Judge; or at least that she should be joyned in Com∣mission with the forraign Divines, as the Belgick Church was at Dort in the business of the Remonstrants. Put case all this be done in the manner aforesaid, and that all those De∣legates having that power given them, with an unanimous consent, do chuse Mr. Calvin for their Praeses. And because I have reckoned those who follow the Confession of Augsburg among the Reformed Churches, as I think I was to do with good reason; Put case they send also some Delegates of their own to this Council.In the Vindi∣cation of the Answer. p. 24. But that there should be no excep∣tion taken against this by the Presbyterians, who it seems by what Smectymnuus sayes of the Lutherans, have but a very mean opinion of their Reformation, and will hardly allow them the title of Reformed, (though, as I said before, Mr. Duraeus hath endeavoured sundry times to perswade them otherwise) let them send but as few Delegates as possible, and these known for very pious and moderate wise men. A couple is the least they can send, and I conceive that on all sides none will be thought fitter and most acceptable than Philip Melancthon, and George Prince of Anhalt, who was a learned and pious Divine, and a great lover of the peace of the Church. 53. The Council thus assembled, let the questions that have been in debate amongst us for above these twenty years
last past, be propounded unto the Fathers thereof. Those Questions I conceive may be reduced to these four; 1. Whe∣ther Episcopacy be a lawful Government in the Christian Church. 2. Whether set Forms of Prayer may lawfully be used and imposed. 3. Whether every National Church hath power to make Laws and Injunctions for regulating the out∣ward things and circumstances belonging to the worship of God, and whether all private persons are bound in consci∣ence to obey such Laws and Injunctions. 4. Whether there must be Ʋniformity in all the particular Congregations of e∣very National Church. Besides these general Questions, we may ask their judgement about divers uses and customs most peculiar to this Church, which are most excepted a∣gainst by some of our Brethren; as the Surplice, the sign of the Cross upon the Childrens foreheads after they are bapti∣sed, kneeling at the receiving of the Communion, the rea∣dng of the Apocrypha, the keeping of Holy-dayes, bowing at the nming the name of Jesus, the Lenten Fast before Easter, and other set Fasts, loud and instrumental musick in the Church, &c. 54. Now let the Reverend Joannes Amos Commenius, who is the only Bishop alive of the Bohemian Churches, (the first that Reformed Religion in these later times) and who, according to the Tradition of his Church, is thought to have Aposto∣lical Succession, have that honour done to him which was yielded to the Bishop of Landaff in the Synod of Dort, where he had always the first place in speaking as well as in other things;In Annotatis ad Rationem O dia. & Dis∣cipl. Fatr. Bo∣m. p. 75. and you'l hear him speak thus: Imo tot etiam sapien∣tum virorum extant Ordinis elogia, ut mirum sit tam paucos mor∣talium quid rei sit, & quam salutare, quod Ordo dicitur, attende∣re nedum intelligere. Quin & divinarum querelarum plena est Sceiptura, omnes homines ab aeterni ordinis legibus aberra∣re, ac in confusiones infinitas adeo prolabi, ut perversa ne∣queant corrigi, ut defectuum non sit numerus, Eccl. 1.14, 15. O quam vere dixit, qui dixit, ordo rerum anima est. Ʋt enim corpus vivum per animam vivit, movetur, sentit, actionesque suas edit, animâ sublatà corruit & fit cadaver: Ita quicquid usquam rerumbene constitutarum viget, ordinis beneficio viget, &c.
Et haec quidem sic de Ordine generatim. De Ordine Ecclesiae in specie aliquid apponendum est,Ibid. p. 76. quam a Deo & sanctis viris usque commendatus sit, quanta ejus agnita & celebrata utilitas. Videte Originem Hom. 2. super. 2. cap. numer. Chrysost. Hom. 37. ad Corinth. 1. Et quid plures allegare opus? Nemo anti∣quorum est qui non Ordinis laudes celebret: resque ipsa loquitur, Ecclesiam quamque perticularum quanto plus intra se Ordinis habet, tanto magis esse indissipabilem, etiamsi caetera satis vacilient; quem∣admodum in Ecclesia Graeca & Romana videre est. Ʋt mirum sit quosaam nostro aevo ob Ordinis illius abusum, in ipsius Ordinis odi∣um prolabi, ipsaque Ordinis vincula sublata velle, ac in Ecclesiis suis tentare. Non meliore profecto ratione, atque siquis fulcra & columnas amplae domus auferre velit ideo, ut ne sibi prae aliis trabi∣bus, aut parietum partibus, plus aliquid tribuant. Aut ideo vellet corpus hamanum non tot dissimillimae formae & muniorum habere membra, ut ne se alia adversus alia efferendi occasionem habeant. An verò hoc secundum Deum sapere est? Ideone corpus Ecclesiae lumbrici alicujus corpori, ex merè similaribus constanti partibus, simile esse mavolemus quam corpori humano, distinctissimis undique membris decorato? Quis ita desipiat? Nam quia Deus non tan∣tum in opere Creationis ad numeros, mensuras, ponderaque dis∣posuit omnia: sed etiam de Arcâ diluvii, Noae construenda, Arcâ foederis (cum Alteri, Candelabro, caeteraque Tabernaculi sacra su∣pellectile) Mosi condenda, & glorioso Templo Solomoni exaedifi∣cando, Ezechieli autem delineando, mandata dans, omnia numeris, mensuris, ponderibusque implevit: tandem DEUS ORDI∣NIS dici honori sibi ducit, (1 Cor. 14.33.) Quid quaeso ex omnibus his, nisi omnia quae Dei sunt (est autem Ecclesia imprimis) Ordinis esse debere plena, concludemus? Ipsam veterem Ecclesiam, populum Israël intucamur. Cur hunc Deus in XII. Tribus di∣visum, militarique ordine Aegypto exire voluit? Exod. 13. vers. 18. Cur, quo ordine Castra circumcirca Tabernaculum locanda, rursumque movenda aut ponenda essent, praecise terminavit? Cur populum in Decurias, Centurias, Millena∣riosque divisit; Et singulis suos Decuriones, Centuriones, Chi∣liarchas, Duces, praefici mandavit? Cur Ecclesiasticis Mini∣steriis Tribum unam separans, eos in Levitarum summique Pontificis gradus, distinxit? Ipsos rursum Levitas per tri∣num
ordinem, Sacerdotes vero (per Davidem) in certas tribus dividens? Cur & divini cultûs administrandi ritus omnes, ad minimas usque minutias, praescripsit? Cur, inquam, nisi quia Deus Ordinis, latentia ubique Ordinis mysteria, attentioni nostrae sicubique commendata voluit. Novam Ecclesiam quod concernit, annon ipse Dei filius in terra nobiscum versanis, Ecclesiam∣que fundans, Ordinem simul fundavit? Dum de toto fideli∣um populo LXX. Discipulos, & ex his rursum XII. Apostolos, elegit: inter hos duodecim tres iterum solos ad secretiora adhibens, qui postea totius aedificii, Ecclesiae, columnae () dicti fuerunt (Gal. 2.9.) Annon hos solos, à se vocatos & ita praeparatos, ad ministerium confirmavit? (Luk. 22.30. Joh. 20.21.) aliis non vocatis, sed se ultro in∣gerentibus, non admissis, (Mat. 8.19, 20.) Annon Paulus totam Christi Ecclesiam, ex Apostolis, Prophetis, Evange∣listis, Pastoribusque & Doctoribus, ac Fidelium populo co∣agmentatum, esse dicit corpus unum, compactum & con∣nexum per omnem juncturam administrationi, ex vi intus agente pro mensura unius cujusque membri, &c. (Ephes. 4.11, 16.) Hinc idem Apostolus ordinem tam crebro Eccle∣siis commendat, adversusque irrepentes  adeo Zelat. Ʋt cum ad Coloss. scribit, ego corpore absens, spiritu presens, gaudeo videns Ordinem vestrum, & soliditatem fidei vestrae in Christo (Col. 2.5.) Ad Thessal. autem, Denunciamus vo∣bis in nomine Domini nostri Jesu Christi, ut vos subducatis ab omni fratre inordinatè ambulante, &c. (2 Thes. 3.6.) Ex quibus omnibus patet, quisquis Ordinem ulla in re (maxi∣mè autem in re maxima, Regno Dei, quod Ecclesia est) laudat, commendat, suadet, eum non aliud, quam quod Deus, om∣nesque sancti ac sapientes viri faciunt, facere. Et vicissimi quisquis ulla in re (maxime autem in maximâ, Regno Dei, quod Ecclesia est) Ordinem turbatum aut dissuasum it, eum rem Deo & omnibus sanctis contrariam agere; eôque aut im∣pietatem aut stultitiam admittere, gravem Deo redditurus ratio∣nem.Ibid. p. 77. —Verum est Ecclesiam appellari GREGEM, Ministros Ecclesiae PASTORES: non tamen vago sensu, ut quae pecus praecedat aut sequatur nihil intersit, promiscua quae sint omnia. Sed tantum ut pii Deo suo se curae esse, de{que} pascuis
vitae prospici sibi, & salutis Duces atque custodes divinitus dari, sciant & gaudeant. Ordinis alioquin in Ecclesia, ma∣jorem quam in Grege rationem esse habendam, inde constare voluit Deus, quod eamdem Ecclesiam suam, Populum suum, Do∣mum suam, Civitatem suam, Regnumque suum, & castro∣rum suorum aciem ordinatam appellatam voluit. In his autem omnibus politica Societas est, personarum gradibus distincta. Hinc Gregorius Nazianzenus; Ordo in Ecclesiis constituit, ut alii oves sint, alii Pastores, alii praesint, alii subsint; alius ve∣lut caput sit, alius pes, alius manus, alius oculus, alius aliud quoddam corporis membrum, ad totius Ecclesiae communi∣tatem, vel utilitatem, superius vel inferius. Hunc Ordi∣nem revereamur ô fratres, hunc tueamur & conservemus! &c. Observanda hic insuper sunt duo; 1. Omnem Ordinem esse à Deo tametsi Ordinis determinatio non semper immediatè à Deo, sed a prudentiâ humana. 2. Etiam illa quae humanae sunt institutionis obligate conscientias; si divinae institutioni non repugnant, sed illi subordinantur. Primi veritas patescit exemplis divinae approbationis, in rebus tum politicis tum Ecclesia∣sticis. Ut quòd consilium à Jethrone Mosi datum, de subordi∣nandis sibi judicibus, ratum habuit Deus. Et quod toties populi Israelitici, Judicem sibi (propter aliquod heroicum factum) eligen∣ti, assensit & benedictione sua firmavit. Et quod cùm David Le∣vitas & Sacerdotes in classes certas (melioris ordinis causa) distri∣buisset, non aliter id atque si à Deo ipso profectum esset acceptum, constanterque (utroque durante Templo) observatum fuit. Et quic∣quid praeterea è Scripturis adduci posset; possent autem innumera. Quòd autem haec conscientias obligent, unicum Petri Apo∣stoli effatum abundè ostendit, dicentis. Subjecti estote omni HƲMANAE ORDINATIONI PROPTER DOMINƲM, sive Regi, ut supereminenti, sive Prae∣sidibus, &c. (1 Pet. 2.13.) Consonat Paulus, Magistratibus Politicis (etiam fidelibus) subjici oportere fideles docens, non solùm propter iram, sed etiam propter conscientiam, (Rom. 13.5.) Quae duorum Apostolorum authoritas temeritati humanae (ut ne cuiquam Deum & conscientiam reverenti, quidquam rati∣one rectâsemel constitutum turbare libeat) obices ponit.Ibid. p. 84. De Mi∣nisteriiapud Fratres Gradibus, Lasitius c. 3. docet, quod non
sine exemplo Christi, Apostolorum, Primitivaeque Ecclesiae, adhibeantur. Quibus addi potest quod supra posui. Pul∣crum{que} illud Gregorii Nazianzeni, ex Oratione funebri Basilii Magni; quem dilaudans, quod per Ecclesiasticos gradus legitimè semper ascenderit, haec addidit, Nauticam legem laudo, quae Gubernatori futuro primum remos tradit, deindè ad pro∣ram eum collocat, demùm{que} post diuturnam remigationem, ac ventorum observationem, ad gubernacula constituit. Ea∣dem rei militaris est ratio: Miles primum, deindè Centurio, tandem Imperator. Quod autem iidem Gradus non per saltum conferantur, sed ordine, ad naturae leges fit, quas & in artificiosis observamus libenter, praecipitia & confusionem vitaturi. De quo ita Chrysostomus Homil. 5. ad Coloss. In scalis primus gradus transmittit ad secundum, secundus ad tertium: neque à pri∣mo venire licet ad quartum, sicuti fieri non potest ut ad se∣cundum veniatur ante primum: alter ad alterum via est, &c. Nempè senex non sit, qui non ante vir; neque vir, priusquam ju∣venis fuit, ne{que} puer, qui non prius infans. Gradata enim Deus esse voluit omnia: ubi{que} gradatim ire est, sapienter ire. Qui ergo graduum diversitatem à Ministerio sublatam volunt, non intelligere videntur quid agant: quia Ministrorum Paritas nec ad Ecclesiae decus facit, nec ad stabilimentum. Non ad decus; quia varieta ubi{que} delectat, identitas ubi{que} satietatis, tandem{que} fa∣stidii, mater est: Non ad stabilimentum, quia res quae{que} tum de∣mum firma est, cum partibus minoribus ad majores sese referenti∣bus, majoribus{que} ad totum, per propria undi{que} vincula sibimet co∣haerent omnias. Ideò Deus inter coeli varietatem posuit: ut alius decor sit Solis, alius Lunae, alius Stellarum; quin & Stella Stellae praestat decore. (1 Cor. 15.41.) Eccur igitur spiritu∣ale Coelum, Ecclesiam, ab hac idea vellemus abire? In Aedificio verò num omnia lignamenta trabes? aut columnae? aut culmina? Num in corpore nostro omnia membra unum membrum? Tolle dif∣ferentiam capitis à corpore, oculorum ab auribus, linguae à corde, manuum à pedibus, quid erit? Nonne monstrum? Quam pul∣crum est non sapere supra Deum? —Episcoporū nomen ex Apo∣stolicis scriptis notissimum est;Ib. p. 86. vis autem ejus ex ipso Graeco Ser∣mone, Speculatorem, seu Inspectorem notans rectè, si vèritas non desit, studium sc. Fidem, Vitam, Mores, commissorum sibi fide∣liter
speculari, inspectare, attendere. Hinc Episcopum Hie∣ronymus supra attendentem vertit ad Euagrium. Inutilis igitur est quorumdam superstitio, Episcopale nomen propter abusum in Papatu abominantium. Nam & nomen Ecclesiae, Evangelii, Ministerii, Clavium, Sacramenti, & quid non? abusit b pro∣fanatum est. Si propterea omnia ex antiquitate rejicimus, ne no∣mina quidem retinentes, quid tandem remanebit? Nomenclatura sacra impositionis divinae, suppellex sacra Domus Dei est: non abjicienda si polluta, sed emundanda, Jes. 52.11. & 66.20. Annon vasa sacra Templi De. Balsasar turpissimè profanaverat? (Dan 5.3, 4, 23.) num tamen propterea in Templum Dei rec p, usibus{que} pristinis restitui, indigna habita? (Esdr. 1.7, 8) Ater∣ usus regulam nobis nobis aeterna Dei sapientia Christus traddit,Vide Od. Disci i.  ∣nem S de Ord n M ni∣strorum & ibi ann à Commeno. p 15. Re-origine bonas, abusu tantum malas, non abjiciendi sed ad principia revocandi, (Matth. 19.8.) Ideo Fratres à Sa∣cerdotum appellatione, quatenus ea vox sacris dicatam personam, denotat non Sacrificum. Fateor equidem ubi Reformatis inter Pa∣pstas (quibus Episcopalis dignitas opes, honores, munda∣namque pompam sonat) vivendum est, potius nomine illo Graeco abstinere, Latinumque illius loco, aut vernaculum adhiberi; modo res ipsa interim (vigilantia super gregem Domini) tanto dili∣gentius urgeatur. At ubi extra periculorum septa sumus, cur Ec∣clesiam Ornamentis firmamentisque suis exuamus. Siquis dicat; Apostolis idem est Episcopus qui Ecclesiae Pastor; Respondeo esto. Su quisque Pastor Episcopus Ecclesiae suae, hoc est Inspector ac Superintendens gregis sui: an ideò ipse Inspectore quoque suo non egelt? Vidit Apostolica Ecclesia egere omninò: idoque ut plu∣rium Ecclesiarum Inspectores, suam rursus Inspectorem ( Episcopum dictum) haberent instituit. Cur pia haec amiqui∣tatis prudentia contemnitur? An Grex Pastorum non etiam Grex est! Grex autem sine pastore quid est? Omnia videns oculus noster, seipsum non videt; sed videtur ab alio oculo. Ergo & Ecclesiae Inspector alios inspectans seipsū non videre potest: alio igitur Inspectore, qui illi hoc idem quod ille aliis prae∣stat praestet, ne aspernetur. —Quae vero Apostolicis Eccleis necessitas fuit plurium Ecclesiarum Pastoribus Inspectorem praefici∣endi, Episcopum;C  A . eadem fuit (post Ecclesias muliplicatas) plu∣ribus Episcopis praeficiendi Inspectorem, Archiepiscopum; metus
nempè Schismatis, & Ecclesias in unitate continendi desiderium. Truly the commendations given to Order by wise men, are so many, that it is a wonder that so few are found who will do but so much as to mind, so far are they from un∣derstanding what that thing is, and how wholsome, which is called Order; nay, the holy Scriptures are full of com∣plaints, that all men do go astray, and wander from the Laws of that Order which is eternal; and that they run themselves in∣to such confusion, that those things which are crooked cannot be made strait, and that such as be wanting cannot be numbred. (Eccles. 1.14, 15.) O how truly hath he said, who said, that Order is the Soul of things. For as a body that is alive, liveth, moveth, hath sense, and performeth all its actions by means of the Soul; so that when the Soul is gone, it fal∣leth and becometh a carrion, whatsoever is of any esteem and power in things well constituted, i is by the only means of Order, &c. — And so much of Order generally. Something I must adde particularly about Order Ecclesiastical, to shew you how much it hath been alwayes commended both of God himself and of all godly men, and how much the be∣nefit thereof hath been acknowledged and cryed up. See Origen. Hom. 2. upon Num. Ch. 2. Chrysost. Hom. 37. up∣on 1 Cor. And what need is there of quoting any more? There is none of the Ancients but doth set forth the praises of Order: And the thing speaks of it self, that every par∣ticular Church by so much more she enjoyeth of good Or∣der, by so much farther is she from being dissipated, although in the rest she be something tottering; as may be seen in the Greek and Roman Churches. So that it is a wonder that some are found in our time, who because of some abuse that hath been made of Order, have fallen into the hatred of Order it self, and would have the bonds of Order taken away, which they endeavour to do in their Churches. But really they have no more reason for at∣tempting that, than if one should be of a mind to take a∣way all the props and pillars of a great house, lest those props and pillars should have too high an esteem of them∣selves, to the undervaluing of the beams & the other pieces
of timber, or parts of the walls. Or if one should dislike that there be so many members of several most different forms and functions, and should desire it were otherwise, lest they might have thereupon occasion of rising one above the o∣ther. Now judge if this be a wisdom approved of God? And must we wish therefore that the body of the Church be rather like unto that of a worm, which consists of parts altogether semblable; tan u the body of a man, which is beautified with m m of most  stinct shapes? who can be so much besides hmelfe? For because that God hath not only disposed all things according to their num∣bers, measures and weights in the work of Creation; But likewise hath filled all things therewith, when he gave order to Noah to build the Arch of the Flood; unto Moses to build the Ark of the Covenant, together with the Al∣tar, Candlestick, &c. And unto Salomon for the building up of the glorious Temple; and to Ezekiel the Prophet for the delineation thereof; at last he was pleased to be called the GOD of ORDER, as by an honourable name, (1 Cor. 14.33.) Now I pray what conclusion shall we draw out of all this, but that all such things as belong un∣to God, and so the Church above all other, since it is Gods in a most special manner, must be wholly replenished with Order within themselves? Let us consider the ancient Church it self, the people of Israel; Why was God pleased to divide it into twelve Tribes, and to have him march out of Egypt in a military order, (Exod. 13.18.) Why did he pre∣scribe so precisely in what order they were to encamp about the Taberacle, and then to march, and again to pitch their Tents? Why did he command the people to be divided into bands of ten, into hundreds, and thousands, and that they should have over them each their respective Officers, Decurions, Centurions and Chiliarcks to be their Leaders and Governors? Why when he put a part one Tribe for the performance of Offices Ecclesiastical, did he divide them into the degrees of High Priests and Levites? And again the same Levites into three Orders, and the Priests by Da∣vids means, into certain Tribes? Why did he prescribe all and every the Rites of Divine worship to the least of them? Why all
this, I say, but because the God of Order, was pleased to recommend unto our consideration the mysteries of Order that are hidden every where? Concerning the new Church, did not the Son of God conversing with us upon Earth, when he laid the foundation of the Church, lay the foun∣dation of Order therein at the same time? when of the whole multitude of the faithful he chose Seventy Disciples, and again out of them Twelve Apostles; of which twelve he admted but three only to his most secret affairs, who afterwards were called by way of excellency, the Pillars, Gal. 2.9. Now when he had thus called and prepared them, did not he confirm them alone, and none other for the Mini∣stery? (Luk. 22.30. Joh. 20.21.) without calling the o∣thers, nay, rejecting them, when they would have intru∣ded themselves, Matth. 8.19, 20. Doth not Paul say, that the whole Church of Christ consisting of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Doctors, and the mul∣titude of the Faithful, is one body fitly joyned together and compacted by that which every joynt supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, &c. Eph. 4.11. & 16. Hence it is, that the same Apostle doth so often give commendations of Order unto the Churches, and is so zealous against the confusions that were creeping in. As when he writeth to the Colossians, Though I be absent in the Flesh, yet I am present in the Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, and the stedfastness of your Faith in Christ, c. 2. 5. And to the Thessalonians, We command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walketh disorderly, &c. 2 Thes. 3.6. Out of which it is manifest, that whosoever doth praise and commend Order, and perswade unto it in any thing, (and specially in the greatest, viz. the Kingdom of God which is the Church) that man doth nothing else, but what God himself and all godly men do. And likewise, whosoever doth go about to disturb good Order, or to disswade from it in any thing (and specially in the greatest, viz. the Kingdom of God, which is the Church) doth do a thing contrary to God and all godly men: and by so doing commits an act of impiety or folly; for
which he shall be called to an exact account before God.— It is true the Church is called a Flock, and the Ministers of the Church Pastors: but not to import that it is a disor∣derly one that goes so at random, and in such a general confusion, that it matters not what sheep is to go first or last. It is called a Flock, to the end that the godly may know that God hath a care of them, that he propa∣sture for them, and that he doth send them Leaders and Kee∣pers to lead them into Salvation, and that they may rejoyce thereby. For that there must be a greater consideration of Order in the Church than in a Flock, God hath made it manifest in that he was pleased that the same Church of his should be called also, his People, his House, his City, his Kingdom, and his Army marching in battel. Now in all these there is a civil society, which hath several degrees whereby it is distinguished. Whence Gregory Nazianze∣nus, Order doth enjoyn and effect in the Churches, that some be Sheep, and some Pastors; that some preside, and some be subject; that one is as it were the head, another the foot, another the hand, another the eye, another some other member of the body, either superior or inferior, for the comliness and advantage of the Church. Let us reverence this Order, brethren, let us keep and maintain it. Moreover there are here two things to be no∣ted; First, That all Order is from God, although every deter∣mination of Order be not alwayes immediately from God, but from humane prudence. Secondly, That even those things which are of humane institution do bind the conscience, if they be not contra∣ry but subordinate to Divine institution. The truth of the first proposition doth appear by the examples of Gods ap∣probation in things Civil and Ecclesiastical: As that the advice given by Jethro unto Moses, to establish Judges under him, had Gods confirmation: and that God did approve and confirm those elections which the people of Israel made of some to be Judges over them, after some heroical act of theirs: and that when David had distributed the Levites and Priests into certain ranks for orders-sake, it was re∣ceived no otherwise, than if God himselfe had been the Author thereof, and was constantly observed as long as
either Temple stood; and what ever else of like nature may be brought out of Scripture: and such are without number. Now that such things do bind the conscience, this one Text of the Apostle Peter doth abundantly testifie, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or to Governours, &c. 1 Pet. 2.13. Paul hath the like; saying, that the Faithful ought to be subject to the civil Magistrate (though they were Hea∣thens) not only for wrath, but for conscience sake, Rom. 13.5. Which Authority of two Apostles is a sufficient barre a∣gainst the rashness of men, to hinder all those that fear God and tender the peace of their conscience, from ma∣king any disturbance in those things which are once right∣ly established.— Concerning the several degrees of the Mi∣nistry among the Fratres Bohemi, Lasitius teacheth, c. 3. that it is not without the example of Christ, of the Apo∣stles, and the Primitive Church, that such distinct degrees are maintained in the Church. To which may be added what I said before, and that fine passage of Gregory Nazi∣anzen, in the Funeral Sermon of Basil the Great, whom having commended for that he had alwayes been regularly advanced through the several degrees of the Church, he addes these words, I commend the Law of Seamen, by which he that intends to become a Pilot, must first be∣take himself to rowing, next he must sit at the fore part of the ship, and after he hath rowed and observed the winds a long time, he is at last ordered to sit at the Helm. The same order is observed in military offices. First, a Souldier afterwards a Captain, and at last a General. Now that these degrees are given by order one after another, not all at once, is according to the Laws of Nature, which we are willing to keep also in those things which are wrought by Art, that we may avoid rashness and confusion. Con∣cerning this thus speaks S. Chrysostom, Homil. 5. ad Coloss. In a pair of Stairs the first step makes way to the second, the se∣cond to the third; neither is there any way to go from the first to the fourth, no more then it is possible to go to the second before you have passed the first. The one is the way to the other, &c. As a
man is not old before he hath passed the middle age; nei∣ther is he of the middle age but after he hath passed his youth, and before he comes to that, he must first be a child: for God was pleased, all things should go by de∣grees. It is wisdom to go by degrees in every thing. Wherefore those that would take away Degrees out of the Church, seem not to understand what they do, the equality of Ministrs being conducible neither to the glory nor to the stability of the Church. Not to the glory thereof, because variety is every where delightsome, whereas Identity will breed Satiety of every thing, and satiety disdain and loathing. Nor to the stability of the same, because every thing is then firm, when the lesser parts being referred to the greater, and the greater to the whole, they all hold and stick together by their pro∣per bonds. Hence it is that God hath put variety among the stars, So that there is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars: nay, one Star differeth from another star in glory, 1 Cor. 15.41. Whence should it be therefore that we would have the spiritual Heaven, that is, the Church, to differ from that Idea. And also in a buil∣ding are all the pieces of Timber, Beams, or Pillars, or the Top-piece? Are all the Members of our Body one and the same member? Take away the difference of the Head from the Body, of the Eyes from the Ears, of the Tongue from the Heart, of the Hands from the Feet, what will it be? surely a Monster. O what a fine thing it is, not to be wiser then God? — The name of BISHOPS is very well known out of the Writings of the Apostles, and the im∣portance thereof, out of the Greek language it self, signi∣fying one who hath the over-sight or inspection of others, an INSPECTOR; And it is well enough translated, if the truth be not wanting: that is, if those that are called to that Office do faithfully consider, oversee and attend, the care, faith, life, manner of such as are committed to their charge. Hence it is that Hierosme translates the word Episcopus, Supraattendens, ad Evagr. Therefore it is a need∣less superstition in those that abhor the very name of Bi∣shop, because it is abused in the Papacy: For the names of
Church, Gospel, Ministry, Keyes, Sacrament, and what not? is there abused and prophaned. Now if that be a reason for the rejecting of all the thngs used by Antiquity, with∣out retaining the very names, what will be left at last? The sacred names that have been imposed of God, are as it were the sacred furniture of Gods house; which must not be cast away if polluted, but made clean, Esa. 52.11. & 66.20. Had not Belshazzar basely profaned the sacred vessels of Gods Temple, Dan. 5.4, 23. And were they there∣fore judged unfit to be received anew into the house of God, and restored to their former uses? Esdras 1.7.8. Christ who is the everlasting wise∣dom of God, hath given us a Rule of everlasting use, viz. That the things which were good at first, and are evil only by abuse, must not be cast away, but brought again to their first original, Matth. 19.8. I confess that where those of the Re∣formed Religion are forced to live among Papists, with whom the Episcopal dignity signifies nothing but wealth, honours and worldly pomp, they abstain from the Greek word, and use rather the Latine, or some other of their own Lan∣guage instead thereof; pressing in the mean while so much more the thing it self, that is, a watchful over-sight of Gods flock. But where we are out of danger, why should we offer to be∣reave the Church of her Ornaments and Pillars? If any one sayes, that with the Apostles a Bishop and a Pastor of a Church is the same; I answer, be it so: Let every Pastor be the Bishop of his Church, that is, the Inspector and Superin∣tendent of his particular Congregation; doth he therefore stand in no need of an Inspector over himself? The Aposto∣lick Church thought that he altogether needed one; where∣fore she ordered that the Inspectors of many several Congre∣gations should have an Inspector over them all, who was by way of excellency called BISHOP. Why is this godly wisdom of Antiquty despised? Is not a flock of Pastors also a true flock? And what is a flock without a Shepherd? Our Eye that seeth all things, doth not see it self; but it is seen by another Eye. Therefore he that is the Inspector of a particu∣lar Congregation having the over-sight of others, cannot
see and watch over himself; and so let him not despise an∣other Inspector over him, who doth the like to him that he doth to others.— Again the same necessity for which the Apostolical Churches did set a Bishop over the Pastors of many Churches to be their Inspector, I say, the same necessity there was likewise after the multiplying of Churches, to set an Arch-Bshop over many Bishops to be their Overseer; to wit, the fear of Schism, and the desire of keeping the Churches in unity. 55. He who I conceive may be suffered to speak next,Bucer. is one very well known in England, and England likewise was very well known to him; one whomDe uae btu hil . tigeram, n vulus meum scindem. Dm enim mecum reputo quantm in unius mte, jucturam e∣ceit Dei Ec∣clesia: fieri non oest, qui novo subndè moe∣rore excucier. Anlae mul∣tm pousset. Cav. Frello. Epist l. p. 27. Calvn judged capable of doing great service to this Church & whom therefore he wil gladly hear upon the question propounded: and that is Martin Bucer the German, a person of much learning, of exemplary piety, and of great wisdom and moderation:Bcerus de Discipl. Cler. in tractatu de vi & Uu S. Ministerii, Dsciplinae clericulis, inquit, pars est subjectio pecularis, qua clerici gra∣dus & Ministerii inferioris se subjiciunt illis, qui sunt in ordi∣ne & Ministerio superiore. Hanc Disciplinae partem docuit Dominus nos & exemplo suo, qui Discipulos futuros Doctores electorum Dei, per universum Orbem, peculiari ad hoc munus Magisterio, & quadam domestica Disciplina instituit; quem imitan Apostoli, suos quoque Discipulos unusquisque habuit, quos ad sacrum Ministerium rite obeundum formaret. Omnis enim difficilior vitae functio, peculiarem quoque ac perpetuam re∣quirit doctrinam, institutionem ac custodiam: uti videre est in Phi∣losophiae studis & institutione militari. Quod perpendens Licurgus Rempublicam Lacedaemoniorum sic insttui uti Xenophon testatur) Ne ullus in Republica ordo sine suo proprio esset Magisterio. Item & Plato in legibus & Republica requirit, ne quid omnino sit in ci∣vibus  (incustoditum.) Hinc & Dominus noster, cum vult suos sic committi invicem & cohaerere, ut membra in corpore commissa sunt atque cohaerent: subjicit sane unumquemque suorum aliis, à quibus tanquam a membris amplioris ac latius patentis vir∣tutis & efficaciae custodiatur, moveatur & regatur. Idem praecipit Spiritus Sanctus, subjicimini invicem in timore Domini, Ephes. 5. Ista itaque considerantes Sancti olim Patres eum in clero ordinem, descripserunt, ut caeteri omnes Clerici à Presbyterio singu∣lari
cura custodirentur & gubernarentur. Inter Presbyteros verò Episcopus ut Consul inter Senatores Reipublicae, ita hic primam, cum totius Ecclesiae, tum singulariter ordinis Clericalis universi cu∣ram gereret, atque custodiam. Episcopos verò ordinaverunt in sin∣gulis frequentioribus Ecclesiis. Atque cuique talium Ecclesiarum viciniores, quae in minoribus essent oppidulis vel pagis, Ecclesias commendaverunt, eoque voluerunt Presbyteros atque Curatores istarum, quos vocaverunt Chorepiscopos, quosque viciniori sibi Epis∣copo & Presbyterio auscultare. Quos Episcopi illi primores sub∣inde cum omni suo Clero convocabant, & in scientia atque diligentia muneris sui instaurabant— Voluerunt praeterea Synodis & convo∣candis & moderandis praeesse Metropolitas, Episcopos cujusque Metropolis, ac proinde his Metropolitanis Episcopis injunxerunt curam quandam & solicitudinem omnium Ecclesiarum per suam provinciam; ut si quid minus rectè, vel à Ministris Ecclesiarum vel a plebibus instuutum, factumve intellexissent, monerent de eo in tempore: sique id suis admonitionibus non possent emendare, ut ad corrigendum illud Episcoperum convocarent Synodum. Nam nihil judicii illis concessum erat, quod sua propria authoritate exercerent in Ecclesiis, quae ipsae suos haberent Episcopos. Omne enim & in plebem quamlibit & clerum, judicium erat penes suum cujusque Ecclesiae Episcopum & Presbyterium, Episcopos autem judicabat Synodus. Eoque cum Ecclesiis essent ordinandi Episcopi, constitutum erat, ut ad eandem Ecclesiam conuenirent Metropolitanus cum cunctis, (si id fieri Ecclesiarum commodo posset) sin cum aliquibus, non minus tamen duobus aut tribus Provinciae suae Episcopis, qui electionem Episcopi (si facienda adhuc esset) gubernarent, factumque exami∣narent, & in electum inquirerent quam severissimè, & tum demum ad Episcopalem functionem initiarent. Porrò ubi orbis Ecclesiis re∣pleus fuit, ac ipsi quoque Metropolitani sua singulari curâ opus ha∣berent; nec enim prout coeperant esse plurimi, ita omnes pro suo loco satis vel sapiebant vel vigilabant (pauci enim semper, & in om∣nibus hominum ordinibus praestantes.) Episcopis quibusdam prima∣rum Ecclesiarum aliquot provinciarum cura demandata est, ut Ro∣mano, Constantinopolitano, Antiochono, Alexandrino, deinde Cae∣sariensi Capadociae, & aliis quibusdam, prout fidelium Christi Ec∣clesiis multiplicatis necessitas videbatur requirere.— Tandem Romanus sub Phoca obtinuit titulum Universalis Episcopi, quo
sensim abuti magis, magisque hujus sedis Episcopi coeperunt, donec data occasione, primum, divisione Imperii sub Carolo Magno, po∣stea dissidiis Principum & Nationum, quibus fregerunt potentiam Imperatorum occidentis, atque Regum aliorum, se in illam, in qua nunc se jactant, Antichristianam potentiam extulerunt: oppressa primum Episcoporum, deindè omnium etiam Regum & Imperato∣rum potestate. Sic itaque evertit Satan omnem salutarem ordinis Clericalis obedientiam & Gubernationem.Ibid. — At quia omnino necesse est, ut singuli Clerici suos habeant proprios Custodes & Curatores; instauranda est, ut Episcoporum, ita & Archidiaconorum, ali∣orumque omnium, quibuscumque censeantur nominibus, quibus por∣tio aliqua commissa est Custodiendi gubernandique cleri, authoritas, potestas, sed & vigilantia & animadversio, nequis omnino sit in hoc ordine . A part of clerical Discipline is the speci∣all all Subjection of Clergy-men, by which those that are of an inferiour degree and Ministry, do submit themselves to them who are of an higher Order and place. This part of Disci∣pline our Lord hath taught us, and that by his own example; who intending to make his Disciples the Doctors of the Elect of God throughout all the world, gave them a pecu∣liar power for the execution of that Office, having first fit∣ted them for it, as it were, by a domestical Discipline. The Apostles likewise, in imitation of their Master, had each of them their own Disciples which they did teach and pre∣pare for the right performing of the sacred Ministry. For every profession or peculiar manner of living with more strictness than others, doth require likewise a peculiar Doctrine, Institution and Over-sight, as may be seen in the very study of Philosophy and Military Discipline: which Licurgus considering, he so ordered the Common∣wealth of Sparta, as Xenophon witnesseth, that there was no rank or order in it, but had its proper and peculiar Ma∣gistracy. Plato likewise requireth in his Book De legibus & Republicà, that by no means Citizens be suffered with∣out some power over them to keep them in order. Hence it is also that our Lord requiring his Disciples to joyn to∣gether, and adhere each to other, in the same manner that the members of the Body are joyned and knit together, doth
subject every one of his to some other, to be by them kept, moved, and governed as by members of ampler and greater power and efficacy. The Holy Ghost giveth the same rule, Submit your selves one to anothr in the fear of God, Eph. 5. Wherefore the holy Fathers taking all these things into consideration, did institue of old such an Order among the Clergy, that by means thereof all other Clerks were to be under the special tuition and government of the Pres∣bytery. And among the Priests, as the Consul among the Senators of the ommonwealth, so the Bishop had the chiefest cre of, and power over, not only that whole Church, but more specially all the Clergy of what order or degree soever: And Bshops they set up in all those Churches that were numerous. And they committed to the charge of every one of such Churches the neighbour Congregati∣ons that were in lesse Towns and Villages, ordering the Priests and Curates thereof, whom they called Chorepiscopi, to obey all and every of them, the Bishop and Presbytery, that were nearest unto them. And those chiefest Bishops did use to call them together from time to time, with their whole Clergy, giving them instruction, and exhorting them to be careful in performing the duty of their place and calling.—Moreover they ordered that Metropolitans (these were the Bishops of the chief City in every Province) should call Synods and be the Presidents of them, wherefore they committed to these Metropolitan Bishops in a man∣ner the charge of all the Churches of their Provinces; to the end that if they knew any thing to be done or order∣ed amiss, either by the Ministers of the Churches, or the people, they might admonish them thereof in due time: and if they could not prevail to have those things mended by their admonitions, that then they should call a Synod of Bishops to see them corrected. For they had no authori∣ty to exercise any jurisdiction of themselves in those Churches which had their own Bishops. For the Bishop and Presbytery of every Church had all manner of jurisdiction over the people and Clergy; and as for the Bishops them∣selves they were judged by the Synod. Wherefore when
any were to be ordained Bishops of Churches, it was ap∣pointed that the Metropolitan, together with all the Bi∣shops of his Province, (if that could be done with the con∣veniency of the Churches) or with some of them, at least two or three, should resort to the Church where the new Bishop was to be ordained; there to order and direct the election of the Bishop, (if it were yet to be done) or to confirm the same, if it were made before; and to enquire with all possible exactness into the life and doctrine of the Bishop Elect; and then, lastly, after all that to consecrate him to the office of a Bishop. —Further, when the world was filled with Christian Churches, and even the Metropolitans themselves stood in need that some should take the charge of them; for when they became many in number, they had not all of them that wisdom and vigilancie which belonged to their place (there being alwayes but few that are choice and excellent in every Order of men.) The charge of a certain number of Provinces was committed to some Bishops, viz. to those of the chiefest Churches, as to the Bishop of Rome, and to those of Constantinople, An∣tioch, Alexandria, and after to the Bishop of Neocaesarea, and some others, as the exigencies of the Churches did seem to require it, according as they did grow in number and were multiplied. —At last the Bishop of Rome obtai∣ned the title of Ʋniversal Bishop under the Empire of Pho∣cas, which title the Bishops of that See did by little and little begin to abuse daily more and more, till finding an opportunity (first by the division of the Empire under Charlemaine, and afterwards by the dissentions of Princes and Nations, through which they broke the power of the Emperors of the West and other Kings) they raised them∣selves to that height of Antichristian power, wherein they so much pride themselves at this day; having depressed the lawful power first of other Bishops, and afterwards of all Kings and Emperors themselves. Thus therefore was it that the Devil overthrew all wholsome Subjection and Government in the Clergy. —But being it is altogether necessary that every one of the Clergy, have their Keepers
and Governors; the Authority, power, and also the vigi∣lancy and discipline, not only of Bishops, but likewise of Arch-deacons, and also of all others by what name soever they be called, who have any part in the over-sight and government of the Clergy, is to be restored; that so there may be none whatsoever in that Order without some Supe∣riour to have an eye over him, & to keep him in obedience. Buce l. 1. de Regno Christi. c. 30.26. Thus much Bucer of Church-Government. Do but give him audience, and you will hear him speak as much to the purpose in all the rest, and he will hardly leave un∣touched any of the questions in debate Nunc videamus, inquit, quomodo sit restituenda in Ecclesus & Disciplina ceremoniarum. Sunt verò hae necessariae & omnium Christianorum cammunes cere∣moniae: Sanctificatio locorum, in quibus Christi religiones publicè administrentur: Sanctificatio temporum, quibus populus in Domi∣no coeat, religionibusque vacet: certa administratio verbi, Sacra∣mentorum, disciplinae modificatio; sacrae oblationes & horum distri∣butio in pauperes. Primum enim certa oportet habere Christianos loca; sacris coetibus & traditis à Christo Domino Religionibus de∣putata, quae nullis aliis usibus, nisi summa cogat necessitas, debent patêre.Ibid. cap. 11. —Altera communis Christianorum ceremonia est, ut sicuti certa loca, ita etiam definita tempora sacris Christi Religionibus sanctificent. Est quidem Dominus celebrandus à nobis & invocan∣dus omni tempore, sicut etiam in omni loco Dominationis ejus: sed quoniam hoc; fidelium coacto coetu, & majore subinde religione fa∣ciendum est, visum est Domino, ut ad hanc rem haberent fideles ejus quadam singulariter consecrata, sicut loca, ita & tempora —Atque utinam populus adduci possit,Censura M. Buceri de ad∣montione in fine libri ad∣jcta qua ra∣tio redditur cur ex ceremo∣niis, &c cap. 26 Bucerus de Reg∣no Christi. cap. 13. ut cum Dominicis diebus vel ea tantum festa Christo & propriae saluti non profligandae, sed in∣staurandae, verè sanctificaret, quibus celebratur Domini Incarnatio, Natalis, Circumcisio, Epiphania, Supplicium, Resurrectio, Ascen∣sus in coelum, & Spiritus Sancti missio. Item quibus visitatio Ma∣riae Matris Domini, Natalis Johannis, & divi Petri atque Pauli, Martyrum, Angelorumque peragitur memoria. —Tertia com∣munis Christianorum Ceremonia est, Sacrarum Sanctis Christi coe∣tibus actonum, ut administrationis verbi, Sacramentorum, & dis∣ciplinae Christi, precum & Psalmorum, ejusmodi ratio & modera∣tio, ut illae enique populo religiosè, decenter & ordine, ad veramque
fidei aedificationem exhibeanter, & administrentur. Qua in re Ec∣clesiis Christi sua est permittenda libertas, quò unaquaeque eum prae∣finiat modum & rationem sacrarum lectionum, interpretationum Scripturarum, Catechismi, administrationis Sacramentorum, Pre∣cum & Psalmorum: Item publicae peccantium reprehensionis, ad agendam poenitentiam ligationis, atque eorum qui agendo poeniten∣tiam Ecclesiis satisfecerunt, reconciliationis, quam possit quaelibet Ecclesia confidere suis populis maximè eò conducturum, ut ex his actionibus ad veram vivam{que} poenitentiam commoveantur, & in fide Christi confirmentur, atque provehantur. Quae tamen in eadem gente vel regno Ecclesiae sunt, cum ibi hominum ingenia non tan∣toperè varient, non pulcrum modò, verum ad augendam sacrorum Christi existimationem, plerisque admodum commodum est, ut quantam possint, in his rebus observent Conformitatem. That is, Now let us see how the Discipline of Ceremonies must be restored to the Churches. These are necessary Ceremo∣nies to all Christians: the hallowing of Places for the publick administration of Christian duties: the hallowing of Times for the people to come together in the Lord for the perfor∣ming of holy Duties; and a certain set way of administring the word and Sacraments; an Order of Discipline; holy offerings and distribution thereof unto the poor. For, first of all, it is requisite for Christians to have certain places set apart for holy Assemblies, and for the performing of such holy duties as have been enjoyned by Christ our Lord; which places ought not to be put to any other uses, unless it be upon the greatest and most urgent necessity. —An∣other Ceremony common to all Christians, is the Consecra∣tion as of certain places, so of certain times for Divine Service, It's true that God is to be celebrated and called upon by us, as at all times, so in every place of his Dominion: but be∣cause that duty of ours ought to be performed in the Con∣gregation of the faithful, and sometimes with greater so∣lemnity, it hath seemed good to the Lord that his faithful people should have as certain places, so certain set times set apart and consecrated in a special manner for that pur∣pose. —And would to God that the people could but be brought to the true hallowing to Christ our Lord, and to
the furthering, not destroying of their own salvation, of so much as those holy dayes, besides the Lords day, in which the Incarnation of our Lord, his Nativity, Circumcisi∣on, Epiphany, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension into Hea∣ven, and the sending of the Holy Ghost, are celebrated: And those likewise in which the Annuntiation of Mary the Mother of our Lord; the Nativity of John the Baptist; and in which Peter and Paul, and the Martyrs and Angels are commemorated. —The third Ceremony common to all Christians is that which compriseth generally all holy actions of the publick Assemblies of Christians; that is, such a manner and order for the administration of the Word, Sacraments, Discipline of Christ, Prayers, and Psalms, as that they be set forth and ministred to every people Religiously, Decently, and in good Order, and to true edification. In which thing every Church is to be left to her own liberty, to PRESCRIBE the manner and way of holy Lessons, expounding of Scriptures, Catechisme, administration of Sacraments, Prayers and Psalms: Also of publick reprehension of sinners, of binding them to do penance, and for the Reconciliation of such as by their do∣ing penance shall be found to have satisfied the Church. All which must be done in such a way as every Church may trust to be most likely to move & lead her people by means of those actions unto a true and lively penitence, and con∣firm and advance them in the Faith of Christ. In the mean while those Churches that are of the same Nation or King∣dom, since there is not such diversity of inclinations a∣mongst them, it is not only comely, but also to most of them very conducible for the breeding a greater and more reverent esteem of the publick Worship of Christians, to have as much Conformity as possible in those things. Mrtnus Ba∣crus in censu∣r super libro sacrorum, &c. in praefat.57. Now to other particulars he goeth on thus, and first of the Book of Common Prayer in general. Equidem cum primū in hoc Regnum (Angliae) venissem, quae publicè dogmata quique Ritus in Ecclesia essent recepti: videremque eò, num meum possem Mi∣nisterium his solido consensu adjungere, librum istum Sacrorum per interpretem, quantum potui, cognovi diligenter. Quo facto egi gra∣tias
Deo, qui dd sset vos has ceremonias eo puritatis reformare. Nec enim quicquam in illis deprehendi, quod non sit ex verbo Dei desumptum, aut saltem ei non adversetur, commodè acceptum. —In Descriptione Communionis & quotidianarum precum nihil video in libro esse descriptum quod non sit ex Dei literis desumptum,Ibid. cap. 1. si non ad verbum ut Psalmi & Lectones, tamen sensu ut sunt Col∣lectae. Modus quoque harum lectionum ac precum, & tempora sunt admodum congruenter & cum verbo Dei, & observatione priscarum Ecclesiarum constituta. Religione igitur summa retinenda erit & vindicanda haec Ceremonia. —Signum hoc (crucis) (non,Ibid. cap. 12. de signo crucis. tam quod est usus in Ecclesia antiquissimi, quam quòd est admodum simplex & praesentis admonitionis crucis Christi) adhiberi nec inde∣cens nec inutile existimo, si adhibeatur, modò purè intellectum, & religiosè excipiatur, nulla nec superstitione adjuncta, nec elementi servitute, aut vulgari consuetudine.Ibid. cap. 15. —In constitutione de Baptis∣mate aegris infantibus privatim conferendo, sunt omnia sanctè pro∣prosita, utinam ita serventur; & maximè illud, ne baptisma in∣fantium dfferatur. Nam eò patefit Diabolo ostium introducendi contemptum Ecclesiae, ac ita totius redemptionis & communionis Christi; quod per Sectam Anabaptistarum nmis optatè obtinuit opinionem apud quamplurimos. — Ritus, ut Annulum, & si quod aliud signum desponsationis sponsus velit dare sponsae, sive aurum,Ibid. cap. 20. sive argentum: ut ista sponsus prius ponat in librum sacrorum, & inde Minister sponso illa reddat, quo ipse ea sponsae tradat, prae∣scriptis in libro verbis; Et hic (inquam) admodum commodus ritus esse videtur, si modo quid ista omnia significent, populo subinde explicetur. Ʋt, quod Annulus & caetera dona, quibus sponsus spon∣sam ornare vult prius in librum sacrorum deponuntur, & à Mini∣stro sponso rursus traduntur tribuenda sponsae, significare; oportere nos nostra omnia, priusquam illis utamur, offerre Deo, cujus sunt, & consecrare, & illa tanquam ex ipsius manu accipere ad illius glo∣riam usurpanda Ita annuli insertionem in proximum minimo digi∣tum manus sinistrae; in quo digito aiunt nervum quemdam prodeun∣tem de corde finiri: caeterisque nervis ejus digiti implicari, signifi∣care, cor sponsae debere semper sponso esse devinctum vinculo amoris perpetuo, ut annuli nullus finis est. Ac his omnibus ideò illa verba adjungi; In nomine Patris, & Filii, & Spiritus Sanct, ut cogitent, nihil inter ipsos vel ratum fore, vel revera bonum & salutare, nisi
ex singulari favore & benignitate Dei. Est & illud admodum piè ordinatum, ut novi conjuges unà quoque de mensa Domini commu∣nicent. Nam non nisi in Christo Domino debebant Christiani inter se Matrimonio jungi.Ibid. c. 22. D communione Dom. xhben∣da aegoi. Buceri Ex∣plicatio de vi & usu S. Mi∣nsterii in Scri∣ptis Anglica∣nis. p. 570. Bucerius de re vstaria in Sa∣cris, ad prae∣scriptas aliquot quaestiones à R D. Tho. Ach. Cantu∣ar. Bucero pro∣positas. 1 Cor. 4. Act. 20. —De communione Domini exhibenda aegro∣tis, & quae hic praecipiuntur, sunt divinis Scripturis satis consenta∣nea. Communionem enim sumere Domini, & de mensa ejus, ad consolandum perturbatas conscientias non parum valet; Si ea ut Dominus instituit, sumatur. Optarim ut communicare mensa Do∣mini omnes velint omni die Dominico. —Signum Impositionis ma∣nuum, etiam Episcopi soli praebebant, & non absque ratione. Sie enim sit foedus Domini baptizatis confirmandum: sive reconcilian∣di ii, qui gravius peccaverunt: sive Ecclesiis ministri ordinandi: haec omnia ministeria maximè decent eos, quibus summa Ecclesiarum cura demandata est. —Ad quaestiones propositas (de re vestiaria) pro meo officio. Eae sic habent. An sine offensa Dei liceat Mini∣stris Ecclesiae Anglicanae illis uti vestibus, quibus hodie utun∣tur, atque à Magistratu praescriptae sunt? Item, An is, qui affirmarit nefas esse, aut recusaverit his vestibus uti, peccet in Deum, quia immundum esse dicit, quod Deus sanctifica∣vit: Et in Magistratus, quod violet ordinem politicum? De priore quaestione est haec, quam me credo ex divinis didicisse li∣teris, mea sententia. Primum, nolo de ullis Ecclesiarum Anglica∣rum Ministris mea responsa intelligi: nisi qui veri, fidique sunt omnium mysteriorum Dei dispensatores: totumque Evangelium Christi, cunctaque ejus & Doctrinam & Disciplinam, populis suis summa fide tradere, & eorum instillare, infigereque animis student. Qui jam Ecclesiarum Anglicarum Ministri hujusmodi sunt, eos sentio posse vestibus illis, quorum hodie usus est, uti cum gratia Dei. Hoc verò tum demum censeo facturos, si cum clarissime & Christi Servatoris praedicatione, & Antichristi totius tum Romani, tum cujuscunque detectione atque detestatione, populum probè doce∣unt: se his vestibus utendo, nihil omnino velle constabilire impiorum commentorum, quae Antichristi Romani obtruse∣runt populis: nec quod Sacerdotes caeteris Christianis per se sint S nctiores, & ad placandum Deum efficaciores; nec, quod Chri∣stum in sacra communione patrisistant, ut nunc loquuntur, ejusque mertum suo opere & arbitratu cuiquam applicent, supra quam cuisquam, propria fide, ex verbis & Sacramenti Dei percipit:
Nec quod Ahoronica sint nobis revocanda. Sed praestare tantum eo obedientiam Regiae Majestati & iis penes quos Dominus vult esse de externis Ecclesiarum ritibus (consentienter tamen verbo Dei) sta∣tuere: ac defugere offendiculum turbati ordinis, consensusque pub∣lici: tum testari piis hominibus omnem Dei creaturam bonam esse, etiam Significando: posseque proindè omnes Christo verè creden∣tes, piè iis rebus uti, quibus quamtumvis abusi alii sint impiè. Sed nec Regiam Majestatem nec Magnum Regni concilium, puto quicquam Superstitionis harum usu vestium velle retinere, aut fo∣vere: sed cum ejusmodi vestium usus ante Papam Romanum An∣tichristum, fuerit piè à sanctissimis patribus usurpatus, possitque hodiè ad aliquam sacri Ministerii, totiusque Christianismi, erga juniores ac rudiores homines deservire commendationem, si earum significatio pia instituatur, atque probè etiam doceatur, noluisse re∣motione harum vestium dare occasionem infirmioribus fide homini∣bus, verum Christi Ministerium fastidiendi, aut contemnendi: vel etiam suspicionem illis ingerere de se, quasi irreligiosa quadam levi∣tate gauderent cuncta usurpata antea in religionibus, etiam quorum possit bonus usus esse, invertere, & abolere. Populum igitur debere ex harum vestium conspectu de nulla alia re cogitare, quam de coe∣lesti puritate atque candore, omniumque virtutum ornatu, qui per sacrum Ecclesiae Ministerium credentium omnibus commendatur, atque etiam exhibetur: ut eum candorem & ornatum orent, cum sibi ipsis tum Ministris ipsorum, & ad comparandum eum, omni studio enitantur: quo omnes eniteant tandem vestibus justitiae & sa∣lutis. Oportere Ministros tamen aliquibus vestibus uti, & quae non tantum eorum tegant atque foveant corpora, sed etiam aliquid Significent, & alicujus admoneant. Cum itaque visum nunc sit Regiae Majestati, atque primo Regni concilio, ut harum adhuc usus vestium hactenus retineatur, debere ipsos ad Gloriam Dei, & ho∣norem Regiae Majestatis, impium Papistarum abusum, & in his bonis per se Dei creaturis, pio usu commutare, atque reipsa decla∣rare, sanctis & puris hominibus omnia sancta esse & pura vere∣que sanctificari per verbum & orationem: nec ullos vel daemones, vel homines, posse ullam Dei creaturam sic contammare, ut eam pii homines non valeant piè & ad gloriam Dei usurpare, etiam usu significationis, non tantum fruitione effectuum naturalium. Debent enim omnes creaturae, praeter exhibitionem divinae benignitatis,
per effecta naturalia, nos etiam ipsius creatoris sui & nostri nostrae∣que in eum gratitudinis multis modis admonere. Ad quas etiam admonitiones possunt ac debent publicè adhiberi. Scripturae, ex qui∣bus me credo hanc sententiam didicisse, sunt ferè jam indicatae, hae sc. quae docent omnem Dei Creaturam bonis bonam esse, etiam sig∣nificando & admonendo: nec posse in ulla Dei creatura ullum hae∣rere piis hominibus abusum impiorum: Christum Dominum suis liberum harum rerum reliquisse usum: quos assumpsit Dominus, eos suscipiendos esse, & non ad dijudicationem cogitationum: ita tamen nos usum semper ejusmodi rerum debere temperare, ut ad decorem aliquem, ordinem & fidei aedificationem faciant, Rom. 14. 1 Cor. 8.9, 10. 1 Tim. 4. Item quem describunt exempla A∣postolorum, qui tam diu Ceremoniis Mosaicis, nec impiè usi sunt. De altera Quaestione, mea est sententia hausta, ut credo ex Divinis literis, Eos qui dicunt, vestibus de quibus agitur quovis mo∣do uti, etiam eo, quem descripsi, nefas esse, ad minimum errare; & hoc eo, quod negant sanctificatis esse sancta om∣nia. Idem affirmo de iis, qui ex eadem causa vestibus illis nolunt ui; cum publico Regni Decreto, & Ecclesiarum consensu, usus earum, & non superstitiosus nec levis, sit praescriptus. Possit enim usus harum vestium ea superstitione, aut in gratiam Romani aut alicujus alterius Antichristi, sicut nunc in Germania fit, ob∣trudi, ut piis Christi Ministris admitti ille piè nequeat. Fateor etiam,Bucerus de re vestiaria ad Dom. Joan. Hopperum. eos Magistratibus piis suum honorem imminuere, qui eorum negant in his rebus judicio esse deferendum. —Porro dicere, has vestes, per Antichristi abusum sic esse contaminatas, ut nulii Ecclesiae quamtumvis aliqua Christum suum, & rerum omnium libertatem nosset & coleret, sint permittendae, religio sanè mihi est, nec ullam video scripturam, qua possim istam bonae Dei creaturae condemnationem tueri.Ibid. —Ritum aliquem Aaronicum esse, vel Antichristianum, in nullis haeret Dei creaturis, in nulla veste, in nulla figura, in nullo colore, aut ullo Dei opere: sed in animo & professione bonis Dei creaturis, ad impias significationes abutenti∣um. Quae Scriptura docet, diabolo, vel malis hominibus eam esse factam potestatem, ut abusu suo ullam queant Dei creaturam & bonam etiam significando & admonendo per se malam facere & im∣piam? Quo-circa nihil potest verè dici, esse sacerdotii Aaronici, quatenus abolitum illud est (nec enim sanctum Ecclesiae Ministerium
quod & praeceptis de sacerdotio Aaronico docetur abolitum, adhuc illud est) nisi quod ea superstitione usurpetur, tamquam sit etiam re∣velato Christo ad salutem necessarium, aut per se utile, aut quo oc∣casio detur aliqua sibi hanc superstitionem sumendi, vel retinendi, vel concordiam fratrum turbandi. Ita nec Antichristianus ritus dici potest, nisi quo aliqua Antichristi exhibeatur professio, & com∣municatio, vel tali professioni, & communicationi deserviatur. Jam autem quis neget Dominum multis electorum suorum, ut cun∣ctis ex rebus significationes & admonitiones praeter usus naturales, sibi tantum sumant, & Dei beneficiorum, & suorum officiorum, nec ullius rei malae; sicque detestentur ex animo, omnia quae à Chri∣sto sunt aliena, ut nulla omnino eis dari possit occasio ulla ex re, in quantocunque abusu illa fuerit aliis, ullius superstitionis, aut cum tenebris communicationis, aut perturbationis fraternae benevolentiae? Si jam tales veri Christiani, quorum facile multi passim extarent, si cum purâ Christi Doctrina, vigeret etiam tota ejus communio & disciplina, in suis Ecclesiis judicarent facturum aliquid ad sancti Ministerii commendationem apud simplices homines & pueros, Mi∣nistros singulari aliqua veste uti in ministrando, & ea etiam, qua Papistae sunt abusi, cur non deberem hujusmodi Christianos suo re∣linquere judicio? Equidem nullam video Scripturam docere. Cur de∣berem autem, non dubito clarè doceri, Rom. 14. 1 Cor. 8. & 9. tum multis aliis in locis, quibuscunque, sc. de libertate, & bono usu creaturarum, non ciborum tantum verum omnium rerum docemur. Constat etiam Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum substantiam tan∣tum Ministerii, cùm verbi, tum Sacramentorum, suis verbis nobis praescripsisse, & caetera omnia quae ad decentem & utilem admini∣strationem mysteriorum ejus pertinent, ordinanda permisisse Eccle∣siae. Ʋnde sacram coenam nos non vesperi, nec in domo privata, nec discumbendo, nec cum viris tantum celebramus. Quis jam impîe∣tatis damnaret Ecclesiam, siquo puro & sancto suorum consensu, eum morem haberet, ut singuli etiam ad coenam sacram, sicut olim recens baptizati faciebant, veste albâ uterentur! Non-nulli adnu∣merant his rebus, liberae ordinationi Ecclesiarum relictis, etiam coe∣nam Domini, in anno semel tantum ter aut quater, vel pluries cele∣brare, & coenae adstare, nec Sacramenta participare. Sed constat verè Papisticum esse utrumque. Apostolos enim, & Apostolicat Ecclesias constat ex Domini instituto, singulis diebus dominicis, &
quoties frequentiores fratrum coetus habuerunt, & sacram coenam celebrasse, & praesentes omnes ea participasse, &c. Ista itaque duo, Domini coenam tam rarò celebrare, & ea tam paucos communica∣re, per se Papistica judico: pugnant enim cum verbo Dei. Illa autem de loco, de tempore, de habitu corporis, ad sacram coe∣nam vel celebrandam, vel sumendam, de admittendis & mulier∣culis ad sacrae coenae communionem, de modo precum atque hymno∣rum ad Deum, ita etiam de vestitu, & aliis rebus, ad externum de∣corum pertinentibus, non dubito Dominum Ecclesiae suae liberam fe∣cisse potestatem, statuendi de his rebus, & ordinandi, quae judicave∣rit quaelibet Ecclesia apud suum populum maximè collatura ad susti∣nendam, & augendam reverentiam erga omnia Domini sacra. Si itaque aliquae Ecclesiae ex hac libertate Christi, & ad hunc finem aedificandae plebis Christi, Ministros suos vellent in sacris Ministe∣riis aliquibus singularibus vestibus uti, remota omni superstitione, omni levitate, omnique etiam inter fratres dissentione, id est, abusu. Tales certè Ecelesias non video quis possit jure ob hanc rem condem∣nare ullius peccati, nedum communionis cum Antichristo. Eam enim libertatem, siquis contendat nulli Ecclesiae Christi esse permit∣tentendam, oportebit sanè fateri, unum ex his, aut nihil omnino circa caenam Domini ordinandum Ecclesiis esse concessum, de quo non habeant expressum Christi mandatum: quo pacto condemna∣buntur cunctae Ecclesiae impiae audaciae. Nam omnes & tempus, & locum, & habitum corporum, in sacrae coenae celebratione obser∣vant, admittuntque ad sacrae coenae communionem mulieres: de qui∣bus omnibus rebus, non solum nullum habent Domini mandatum, sed etiam contrarium exemplum: Dominus enim suam coenam ce∣lebravit vesperi, non mane; in domo privata, non publicâ; dis∣cumbens cum suis, & sumpta coena Paschali, non stans; & hanc solam sui communionem exhibens: Denique exclusis mulieribus, quas habuit tamen inter Discipulas suas sanctissimas. Aut fieri non posse, ut sint Ecclesiae, quas Dominus eo usque omni liberet su∣perstitione, & abusu bonarum creaturarum suarum, ut puris per veram fidem in nomen ejus, sint omnes Dei bonae creaturae, & usu significationis purae; quod qui dicat, is certè negabit co ipso Chri∣stum Dominum esse omnibus hominibus eum, quem se promisit fu∣turum omnibus liberatorem ab omni immunditia. Aut posse im∣pios abusu suo bonas Dei creaturas per se ita vitiare, ut nemini
pio ad pium usum queant deservire, quod apertè adversatur te∣stimonio Spiritus Sancti, Rom. 14. 1 Cor. 8. & 9. 1 Tim. 4. Aut certè non licere Christianis res quaslibet disponere, & ad ad∣monendum creatoris sui, & nostri, ejusque in nos beneficiorum, atque nostrorum, erga eum officiorum; id quod pugnat cum eo quod Spiritus Sanctus passim docet, de agnoscendo & colendo Deo, in omnibus operibus suis, & faciendo omnia in nomine Do∣mini nostri Jesu Christi, ad gloriam Patris. Haec omnia absur∣da piis animis defugienda sunt, nec mali illud metuendum est, quod objici solet: Si tanta Ecclesiis libertas conceditur, ut res quasli∣bet adhibeant etiam ad pias significationes, & admonitiones: fore, qui cunctos vel Aaronis, vel Antichristi Romani, vel Gentilium ritus in nostra sacra inferant. Nam Ecclesiae quas ego descripsi, quibusque eam de qua ago, libertatem existimo negari non posse; ita quicquid vel rituum, vel vestium in usum suum desumant, temperabunt, ut serviant Evangelio Domini nostri Jesu Christi illustrando, non obscurando, uti apud verè Christianos omnium externorum rituum à Domino non praeceptorum expressis mandatis. Proximus finis (rituum) est, commendatio, & exor∣natio ministerii Evangelici, per quod cuncta profligatur supersti∣tio, omnes{que} rerum quarumlibet abusus. Velimus, nolimus, fa∣teri nos oportet, discrimina cultuum in gerentibus munera civilia, apud homines rectè institutos, causam dare singularis erga Ma∣gistratus reverentiae? Quid jam obstet, quo minus idem fiat, in Ministerio Religionis? venit quidem a Spiritu Sancto necessa∣rio omnis pius animi motus, & verbo Dei sustentari eum neces∣se est; Attamen huic spiritui, & huic verbo Dei apud pios ni∣hil creaturarum (adversatur) & eo minus si res publico instituto ad piam aliquam deputetur significationem, at{que} admonitionem. Omnia nam{que} opera sua Deus bonis in bonū, & hunc multiplicem usum suis hominibus condidit, conservat, at{que} si in ipso his utuntur, exibet. Pensitemus quae de significatione muliebris veli, & detecto capite viri Spiritus Sanctus doceat? 1 Cor. 10. Cur enim de An∣gelorum lucidis vestibus meminerit nominatim? Nihil nam{que} facit temere, et cunctis rebus salutē fuorū quae fide constat Evangelii pro∣curat. I confess that when I came first into this Kingdom (of England) being desirous to know what were both the Do∣ctrine and Rites and Ceremonies publickly received, that
so I might see whether I might joyn thereto my Ministry with full consent; I used all the diligence I could, by means of an Interpreter, to be acquainted with the Ser∣vice Book; which having done, I thanked God who had granted you to reform these Ceremonies to such an height of purity; nor did I find any thing in them which was not taken out of the Word of God, or at least which was contrary to it, being well understood. In the description of the Communion and Common Prayer,Ibid. cap. 7. I see nothing set down in the Book which is not taken out of holy Scripture, if not word by word, as are the Psalms & Lessons, yet in sub∣stance, as the Collects. The manner likewise and times of those Lessons and Prayers are agreeably constituted both to the word of God, and the practise of the ancient Church. This Ceremony therefore ought to be very religiously retai∣ned and vindicated.Ibid. cap. 12. de signo crucis. The use of the Sign of the Cross, I think neither indecent nor improfitable, not so much be∣cause it is of ancient use in the Church, as that it is very in∣nocent, and a present admonition of the Cross of Christ, if clearly understood, and religiously received, without superstition, or serving to the element or vulgar custom. —In the constitution concerning the administration of private Baptisme to sick Infants,Ibid. cap. 15. all things are devoutly proposed, I wish they may be so observed: and that espe∣cially, that the Baptisme of Infants be not delayed: For from thence a door is opened to the Devil for bringing in contempt upon the Church, and so upon the whole Re∣demption and Communion of Christ; which too much ac∣cording to his wish hath already obtained credit with many through the Sect of the Anabaptists.Ibid. cap. 20. —The Rite of giving a Ring, or if there be any other Wedding-token which the Bridegroom would give to the Bride, either Gold or Silver; that the Bridegroom should put those things first on the Book, and from thence the Minister should restore them to the Bridegroom, that he may deliver them to the Bride, using the words prescribed in the Book: even this Ceremony, I say, seems to be very fitting, if only what all those things signifie be now and then explained to the peo∣ple.
As that the Ring and the other gifts wherewith the Bridegroom will adorn the Bride, be first put upon the Book, and again delivered by the Minister to the Bride∣groom to be given to the Bride, do signifie, that, before we use any thing that is ours, we ought to offer and con∣secrate it to God whose it is, and receive it, as it were, from his hand, to employ it to his glory. So the putting of the Ring upon the Finger next the little Finger of the left Hand; in which Finger, they say, a certain Nerve com∣ming from the Heart does end, and is implicated amongst the rest of the Sinews of that Finger, signifies that the Heart of the Bride ought alwayes to be bound to the Bride∣groom by a perpetual bond of love, as a Ring has no end. And to all these, those words are therefore added; In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that they may think that nothing is either established betwixt themselves, or in effect good or saving, but through the singular favour and bounty of God. That likewise is very piously ordered, that the new married persons should re∣ceive the holy Sacrament together: for Christians ought not to be joyned in marriage, but in Christ the Lord. —Concerning the administration of the Sacrament to sick persons, and those things which are here commanded, they are agreeable enough to holy Scriptures; for to take the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and to eat at his Table is of no small force to comfort troubled consciences, if it be taken as the Lord did institute it. I could wish that all would communicate at the Table of the Lord every Lords day. —The Bishops only gave the Imposition of Hands, and not without reason; for whether the Covenant of the Lord is to be confirmed to those who have been baptized, or whether they are to be reconciled who have sinned more scandalously, or Ministers are to be ordained; all those Offices best become those to whom the chief care of the Church is committed. —To the Quaeres proposed concer∣ning Vestments; according to my duty I answer. The Quaeres are these, If the Ministers of the Church of England without offending God may use those habits which they use at ths
day, and which are prescribed by the Magistrate. Likewise, whether he who affirmeth it unlawful, or refuses to use those ha∣bits, does sin against God, because he calleth that unclean which God hath sanctified; and against the Magistrate, because he vio∣lates politick Order. Concerning the first Question: This is my judgement which I believe I have learned from holy Scripture, First, I would not have any answers of mine to be understood as belonging to any Ministers of the Church of England, but such who are true and faithful dispensers of all the mysteries of God, and who study with exceeding faithfulness to deliver the whole Gospel of Christ, and all his Doctrine and Discipline to their people, and instil and imprint it in their Souls. Those now who are such Ministers of the Church of England may use those Habits which are in use at this day, without offending God: Now this I think that they will then do, if when by the manifest preaching of our Saviour Christ, and by the discovery and detestation of the whole Antichrist, both Roman and all other, they truly teach the people, that by using those Habits, they would not at all confirm any of those impious impostures whom the Roman Antichrists have obtruded upon the people; nor that Priests are holier of themselves then other Christians; nor have more vertue to appease God; and that they do not offer (as they speak now) Christ to the Father in the Communion, and by their own work and pleasure apply his merits to any, be∣yond what every one receives by his own proper Faith, from the Word and Sacraments of God: nor that Judaical Ceremonies are to be recalled; but only by it to give obe∣dience to the Kings Majesty, and those in whose power the Lord will have it to be, to appoint outward Ceremo∣nies, yet such as are agreeable to the word of God; and to shun the offence of troubling publick Order and Unifor∣mity. Besides, to testifie to good men that every Creature of God is good, even by signifying; and that therefore all who truly believe in Christ may piously use these things, albeit they may be impiously abused by others. But nei∣ther do I think that either the Kings Majesty or the Parlia∣ment
would by the use of these Vestments, retain or cherish any thing of Superstition; but since such Habits, before the time of the Roman Antichrist, were piously used by the most holy Fathers, and that the use thereof may still serve to render the sacred Ministry and Christianity it self commendable to the younger and more ignorant sort of men, if a pious signification of them be instituted and faithfully taught; they would not by taking away those Vestments, give occasion to men of weaker faith to loath or contemne the true Ministry of Christ, or give them any suspicion, as if by a kind of irreligious levity they had delighted in overturning and abolishing all things for∣merly used in Religion, even them of which there may remain a good use. That the people therefore ought from the sight of those Vestments to think of nothing else but heavenly purity and candor, and the ornament of all ver∣tues, which by the sacred Ministry of the Church is com∣mended, and likewise exhibited to all believers; that they should pray for that candor and ornament, both to them∣selves and their Ministers, and that they should most care∣fully endeavour to acquire it, whereby they may all at length shine with the Vestments of righteousness and sal∣vation. That yet it behoveth Ministers to use some Habits, and such as may not only cover and cherish their Bodies, but likewise signifie and admonish something. Since there∣fore it hath seemed good to the Kings Majesty and the Par∣liament, that the use of those Vestments be still retained, they ought for Gods glory and the Kings honour, to turn the impious abuse of the Papists into a pious use of those Creatures of God which are good in themselves, and to declare in effect, that to holy and pure men all things are holy and pure, and truly sanctified by the Word and Prayer, and that neither Devils nor Men can so contami∣nate any Creature of God, that pious men may not use it piously and to Gods glory, even in the use of signifying, and not only in the fruition of natural effects; for all Creatures, besides the exhibition of divine bounty through natural effects, ought like∣wise many ways to admonish us of the Creator of them & us, and of
our gratitude towards him; to which admonitions likewise they may and ought to be publickly used. The Scriptures from which I believe I learn this opinion are now almost hinted at, to wit, those which teach that every Creature of God is good, to good men, even in signifying and admonishing: and that in no Creature of God, no abuse of wicked men can stick to the godly; that Christ the Lord hath left the free use of those things to his people; that such as the Lord hath accepted, ought to be received, and that with∣out condemning their thoughts: Yet that we ought so to moderate the use of such like things, that they may con∣duce to some comeliness, order, and edification of faith, Rom. 14. 1 Cor. 8.9, 10. 1 Tim. 4. Moreover that the use of them must be such as the examples of the Apostles describe, who so long used the Mosaical Ceremonies, and that with∣out impiety. Concerning the other question, my opini∣on is drawn, as I believe, from sacred Scriptures, That those do at least erre, who say it is unlawful o use those Vestments now treated of, after any manner, even after that which I have described; and they erre in that, they deny all things to be holy to those that are sanctified. The same I affirm of those who for the like cause will not use those Vestments, since their use and that not superstitious nor light, is enjoined by a publick Act of Parliament, and the consent of the Churches. For the use of those Vestments might be ob∣truded, as now it is in Germany, with that superstition, or so in favour of the Roman or any other Antichrist, as that they could not piously be admitted by the godly Mini∣sters of Christ. I confess likewise that they lessen the Ma∣gistrates due honour, who deny that in those things, we ought to defer to their judgement. Moreover I cannot say in conscience that those Vestments are so defiled by the abuse of Antichrist, as that they ought not to be permitted to any Church, although that Church should know and maintain Christ, and the liberty of all things. —It is not in any Creature of God, in any Vestment, or Figure, or Colour, or any of Gods works to make a Rite Jewish or An∣tichristian, but in the mind and profession of those who a∣buse
the good Creatures of God to impious significations. What Scripture teacheth that such Power is given to the Devil or wicked men, that by their abuse they may be able to make any Creature of God even good by signify∣ing and admonishing, ill and wicked in it self? Wherefore nothing can be truly said to be of Aarons Priesthood, as far as it is abolished. For neither is the holy Ministry of the Church, (which the precepts concerning the Priesthood of Aaron teach to be abolished) the same still, unless it may be used with that superstition, as if it were (even Christ be∣ing revealed) necessary to salvation, or profitable in it self; or that some occasion thereby be given of assuming this superstition, or of retaining it, or troubling the peace of the Brethren. So neither can a Rite be called Antichri∣stian, unless such a one by which you profess Antichrist and his Communion; or as it may be subservient to make such a profession and communion. Now who can deny but that God hath given to many of his chosen to make a good use of all things, not only as to their natural properties, but likewise to the significati∣ons and admonitions of Gods benefits and their own duty, and not of any evil thing; And so to detest with all their soule, all whatsoever is alienate from Christ, as that no occasion at all can be given them of any superstition, or communication with darkness, or troubling that good cor∣respondence which ought to be betwixt Brethren, from any thing how much soever abused by other men. If now there were many such good Christians in the world, (as there would easily be a great number of them every where, if with the pure Doctrine of Christ, his whole communion and discipline did likewise flourish) who should think that in their Churches it might conduce somewhat to the com∣mendation of the sacred Ministry amongst the simpler sort of men and Novices, if Ministers in their Service should use some particular Habit, and even that which the Pa∣pists have abused, why ought I not to leave such Christians to their own Judgement? Truly I see no Scripture against it; but why I ought so to do, I have manifest Scripture
for it; Rom. 14. 1 Cor. 8. & 9. and in many other places, to wit, in all those in which we are taught concerning li∣berty and good use of Creatures, not of meats only, but likewise of all things. It is likewise evident that our Lord Jesus Christ did prescribe to us by his own words, the substance only of the Ministry, both of the Word and Sacraments; and left to the Churches disposal all other things which pertain to the decent and profitable admini∣stration of his Mysteries. Whence it is, that we celebrate the Lords Supper not in the evening, not in a private house, nor sitting, nor with men only. Who would now con∣demn the Church of impiety, if by a pure and holy consent among themselves, they had that custome that every one should use a white Vestment even at the Lords Supper, as those who were newly baptized did of old? Some reckon among those things which are left to the free Ordination of the Church, likewise the administration of the Lords Sup∣per only once a year, or three or four times, or oftner, and to be present at the Sacrament, and not to receive. But it's clear, that both these are Papistical; for it is manifest, that the Apostles and Apostolick Churches by the institu∣tion of the Lord, upon every Lords day, and as often as they had frequent meetings of the Brethren, did cele∣brate the Lords Supper, and that all who were present did receive, &c. Those two things therefore, to celebrate the Lords Supper so seldom, and so few to communicate, I judge Papistical in themselves; for they are repugnant to the word of God. But those circumstances of place, time, of the gesture of the body, pertaining to the celebration or receiving of the holy Supper, of the admitting women to the Communion of the Lords Supper, of the form of Prayers and Hymns to God, as likewise of habits and o∣ther things pertaining to external comliness, I doubt not but that the Lord hath left a free power to his Church of appointing and ordering those things, which every Church should judge chiefly to conduce amongst their own people to the upholding and encreasing of reverence towards all the holy things of God. If therefore some Churches out
this liberty of Christ, and to this end of edifying Christs people, will have their Ministers use some particular Vest∣ments, all superstition being removed, all levity, and all dissention among the Brethren, that is, all abuse: truly I see not who can for this matter justly condemn such Chur∣ches of any sin, much less of communion with Anti∣christ. For, if any one should maintain that this liberty ought not to be permitted to any Church of Christ, truly he must acknowledge one of these; Either that no power is given to the Church to order any thing concerning the Supper of the Lord, that is not expresly commanded of Christ; by which means all Churches shal be condemned of impious boldness. For, all of them observe both time, and place, and gesture of body in the celebration of the holy Supper, (as seems best to them) and admit Women to the Communion: of all which things they have not only no command of the Lord, but likewise a contrary example. For, he did celebrate his Supper in the evening, not in the morning; in a private house, not in a publick; sitting with his Disciples, and having taken the Paschal Supper, not standing; and exhibit∣ing this only Communion of himselfe: and, lastly, without any Women being present, who notwithstanding were amongst the most holy of his Disciples. Or, that it is not possible that there be such Churches which the Lord hath so farre delivered from all superstition, and abuse of his good creatures, as that to no men who are pure through true Faith in his name, all the creatures of God should be good, and pure even in the use of signification; the which, who∣soever doth affirm, that man truly even in that, denies that Christ the Lord is to all men that which he hath promi∣sed to be unto all, to wit, the deliverer from all uncleanness. Or that the wicked by their abusing of things can so defile the creatures of God which are good of themselvs, that they can serve no pious man to a pious use; which is apparently contrary to the testimony of the Holy Ghost, Rom. 14. 1 Cor. 8. & 9. 1 Tim. 4. Or truly that it is not lawful for Christians to make use of all things, both to admonish us of their and our Creator, and of his benefits towards us,
and our duties towards him; which is repugnant to that which the Holy Ghost teacheth in divers places, where he speaks of acknowledging and worshipping of God in all his works, and doing all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the glory of the Father. All these things which are absurd to pious minds, ought to be shun'd; nor is that evil to be feared which usually is objected: If so great a libertie be granted to Churches, that they may use all things whatsoever, even to pious significations and admo∣nitions: there will be some who may bring into our pub∣lick worship of God, all the Rites of Aaron or the Roman Antichrist, or the Heathen: for the Churches which I have described, & to whom I think that libertie of which I treat cannot be denied; will so moderate any thing of Rites or Vestments which they shall take for their use, that they may serve to set forth, not obscure the Gospel of Christ; as is observed among all true Christians, in all such exter∣nal Rites as are not expresly commanded of the Lord. The chiefest end of Rites is the commending and adorning of the Ministry of the Gospel, by which all superstition and abuses of every thing are driven away. Whether we will or not, we must confess, that differences of Vest∣ments in those who bare Civil Offices among well-ordered men, do beget singular reverence towards the Magistrates. What should now let, but the same may be in the Mini∣strie of Religion? 'Tis true, every pious motion of the mind does necessarily come from the holy Spirit, and it must needs be upheld by the Word of God: but yet no∣thing of the Creatures amongst pious men is repugnant to this Spirit, and this Word of God; and so much the less if the thing by publick Institution be designed to some pious signification and admonition: for God hath fram'd all his works, and doth preserve this manifold use of them for the good of the godly, and he affords them that bles∣sing to make use of them for his glory. Let us consider what the Holy Ghost teacheth concerning the signification of the Womans Vaile, and of the uncovering of mans head, 1 Cor. 10. For why did he expresly make mention
of the bright garments of the Angels? for he doth nothing rashly, and by all things he procures the salvation of his own, which consists in the Faith of the Gospel. 58. Peter MartyrPeter Maty. may have his turn to speak next after Bucer, they having been in England both at the same time. And Martyr had such a value of Bucer,Vide Epist. U∣niversis Eccs. Lucensis Fide lib. apud Mar∣tyrem. and deferred so much to his judgement, that he may be thought with good reason, to be of the same mind with him in all things concerning the Church of England. Of this I say of him take for a proof what he writes to Bishop Hooper about the use of the Surplice, and other Vestments of Church-men. It is known that good and pious man, who suffered death for the testimony of Christs Truth, together with many other godly Bishops of the Church of England, had a strange weakness about those things, of which he could not be cured by any of his friends, who all unanimously blamed him for his being contentious in a thing which they judged of its nature altogether indif∣ferent. He writ to Bucer upon this matter, who returned him the answer we now have seen. He writ likewise to Calvin,Vide Calv. . l. p. 131. B∣ling. who also endeavoured to perswade him not to be so hot and obstinate upon that matter. And having made a Treatise thereupon, he sent it to Peter Martyr to peruse it, and to have his judgement of the same. The good Bishop thought it a sin, such was his weakness, to use the Corner Cap, the Surplice, or any other Vestment or thing that had been abused by Superstitious men. Martyr after his com∣plements, telleth him he is of another mind, holding the use of such things, omnino , altogether indifferent; and that if it had been his judgement, he would not have com∣municated with the Church of England, wherein such Vest∣ments are used. Certè si persuasum id haberem,Peru Martyr in Epist. ad R V. J. Hoppe∣rum Episcop, Glocestr. numquam cum Ecclesia hic in Anglia communicassem, in qua discrimen hujusmodi adhuc est conservatum. But his reasons by which he confutes Doctor Hoopers Paper deserve to be transcribed here at length. Let us suppose therefore, that he speaks upon this matter in the Council, in answer to the Objections of one of our Brethren of tender Conscience, who scruples to wear a Surplice for fear of Judaisme or Popery,Ibid. Si pergamus haec
indifferentia quasi perniciosa & impia dissuadere, permultas Ec∣clesias non ab Evangelio alienas damnamus, & innumeras quae antiquitus vel laudatissimae celebrantur, nimis acerbè taxamus. Non me latet Ecclesiarum authoritatem sive praesentium sive praete∣ritarum non eo debere valere, ut illis Verbi Dei veritas prematur; nam ca & si fractus orbis illabatur, inconcusta & immota perma∣nere debet. Sed propter  id minime faciendum esse contendo, vel ut dānentur, vel ut de iis minus honestè loquamur. Et quia te anim∣adverto arbitrari, haec nequaquā esse indifferentia, jam rationes quibus hoc tibi persuades fortè utile fuerit expendere. Ideo eas ut compendio agam, quemadmodum tu facis, ad duo capita praecipue redigam. Primum dicis Aaronis Sacerdotium non esse revocandum, ad quod ista discrimina vestium pertinere videntur. Nam cum habeamus Christum Sacerdotem, Ceremoniae Aaronis abrogatae sunt, neque salva pietate rursus accersiri debent. Alterum fundamentum est tuarum rationum; Haec Antichristi esse inventa, cumque non tantum à Papa, sed ab omnibus ejus commentis nos alienos esse o∣porteat, ejus etiam differentias & ornatus ministrorum abjiciendos. Cum hi sint duo tui praecipui arietes, primo loco de illis videbimus: Deinde quoque addendum erit siquid aliud praeter haec memoria sug∣geret pro tua opinione confirmanda, esse abs to allata. In lege seu Aaronico Sacerdotio, fuerunt Sacramenta quibus Deo placuit ob∣signare promissiones Christi venturi, quae omnia novi fuisse abrogata, & Christum jam datum, non dandum credendum esse, cumque alia promissionum divinarum  ab ipso Domino sub Evange∣lio traditae sint, panis inquam, vinum & aqua, nos antiquas notas minimè debemus repetere. Fuerunt nihilominus ibi aliquae actiones ita comparatae, ut Sacramenta propriè dici non possint, faciebant enim ad decorum, ad ordinem & aliquam commoditatem, quae ut lumini naturae congrua & ad nostram aliquam utilitatem conducentia ego & revocari & retineri posse judico.Act. 15. Quis non videt Apostolos pro pace & convictu credentium faciliori mandasse gentibus, ut à sanguine & praefocato abstinerent? Erant haec citra controversiam Aaronica, si generaliter omnia quae in lege fuerunt, complecti volu∣eris. Decimas quoque hodie in infinitis locis institutas esse ad alendos Ministros Ecclesiae, nemo nostrum ignorat. Psalmos & Hym∣nos cam in sacris coetibus non facile monstrabis ex literis novi Testa∣menti, quod in vetere fuisse factum manifestissimè constat. Mitto
quod Ambrosius dum interpretatur Epistolam ad Corinthios prio∣orem capite decimo quarto, apertissimè dicit morem à Paulo ibi tra∣ditum prophetandi, a Synagogis desumptum, in nostras Ecclesias, fuisse transfusum. Ad haec si diligentius inspicerem atque conside∣rarem, quod tempus minime patitur, non pauca possem invenire, quae nostra Ecclesia ex Mosaicis decretis mutuata sit, idque jam inde à primis usque temporibus. Utque hoc non omittam, dies ha∣bemus festos in memoriam Dominicae Resurrectionis, Nativitatis, Pentecostes & Mortis Christi; num omnia ista erunt abolenda, quia sunt vestigia legis antiquae? Ex his omnibus jam arbitror te vidre non ita omnia Sacerdotii Aaronici sic esse abolita, ut nihil corum vel retineri vel usurpari possit. Neque mihi statim dixeris, aperietur jam fenestra omnibus abusibus, aquae lustrali, suffitui, atque aliis infinitis id genus, quia respondebunt adversarii, modum in his quae revocant & retinent, esse constituendum, ut non oneretur coetus fi∣delium hoc rerum genere, neque ibi cultus aut vis religionis colloce∣tur, ut in aqua lustrali & suffitu factum vidimus. Denique Chri∣stiana libertas cavendum ne periclitetur, ut & siqua restituta fue∣rint, non ita reponantur, quasi necessaria sint ad salutem consequen∣dam. Sed ita oportet quae sunt hujusmodi tolerare, ut quando visa fuerint, minus utilia seponantur, ut jam sum testatus mihi videri de hoc vestium discrimine hodie agendum. Illud enim revera sepositum voluissem, verum quando non successit, quoad meliora dentur, ferre statui. Utinam Ecclesiae quae sunt in Germania, hoc uno dispen∣dio suam pristinam libertatem redimere possent, licet omnibus modis optem ut nihil superfluum illis obtrudatur. Sed jam aliud argu∣mentum expendamus, quo videbatur non licere harum vestium usum, quod à Papae tyrannide fuerint inventae. Hic ego non video quomo∣do firmiter statuatur, nihil nos usurpare posse quod in Papatu sit consuetum fieri. Cavendum profecto est, ne Christi Ecclesiam ni∣mia servitute premamus, ut nihil usurpare valeat, quod Papae fuerit. Certè majores nostri receperunt Idolorum Templa, & con∣verterunt in sacras domos, in quibus Christus coleretur, atque re∣ditus consecratos Diis gentium, ludis theatri, & virginibus vesta∣libus, tulerunt ad alendos Ministros Ecclesiae, cum haec prius non modò Antichristo, sed Diabolo inservierint. Quin & carmina Poëtarum quae dicata fuerant Musis atque diversis Diis, vel fa∣bulis agendis, in Theatro ad Deos placandos, quando commoda &
pulcra veraque fuerint, Ecclesiastici Scriptores usurpant, atque ex∣emplo id Apostoli qui Menandrum, Aratum, Epimenidem, citare non est dedignatus. Atque id in ipsa divina Scriptura, quam trade∣bat, & ea verba, quae alioqum prophana erant, divino cultui a∣daptavit. Nisi fortasse dicere velis minus ad cultum Dei facere verba illius descripta in sacris literis, quam verba visibilia quae in sacramentis versantur. Quis praeterea non intelligit, vinum conse∣cratum fuisse Baccho, panem Cereri, aquam Neptuno, oleam Mi∣nervae, literas Mercurio, cantum Musis & Apollini, & alia per∣multa hujus generis invenire poteris apud Tertullianum De Corona militis, ubi versatur ferè in hoc eodem argumento, quibus tamen omnibus nos uti liberè non veremur, tam in sacris quam in pro∣phanis usibus, tametsi vel daemonibus vel idolis dedicata fuerint? Neque statim concedo has indumentorum diversitates à Papa suum ortum habuisse, quandoquidem legimus in historia Ecclesiastica Jo∣hannem Apostolum Ephesi gestasse Petalum seu laminam Pontifi∣calem. Et de Cypriano Martyre testatur Pontius Diaconus, quod cum esset mox capite plectendus, Birrum dederit carnificibus, Dal∣maticam vestem Diaconis, & steterit in lineis: Praeterea vestis cand dae Ministrorum Ecclesiae Chrysostomus facit mentionem. Atque Christianos cum ad Christum accessissent, veteres testantur mutasse vestem & pro toga induisse pallium. De quo cum irrideren∣tur ab Ethnicis Tertullianus libellum cruditissimum scripsit De Pal∣lio. Neque te latere puto illis qui baptismo initiabantur traditam albam vestem. Apparet itaque priusquam esset Papae Tyrannis discrimina nonnulla vestium fuisse in Ecclesia. Verum esto, fac ista esse à Papa inventa, non mihi persuadeo Papatus impietatem esse tantam, ut quicquid attingit omnino reddat contaminatum & pollu∣tum, quo bonis & piis usui sancto non possit concedi Jam existimo te intelligere quid ego vel de Mosaicis ritibus vel de Papisticis sen∣tiam, aut revocandis aut retinendis. Quare his ita breviter annota∣tis de duobus praecipuis capitibus tuarum rationum, nunc ad id ve∣nio, quod ipse quoque fateris, omnia humana inventa non illico damnanda esse, alioquin humanum inventum est, ut manè potius quam à prandio communicemus. Et humanum inventum fuit, ut pretia rerum divenditarum in primitiva Ecclesia ponerentur ad pe∣des Apostolorum.Acts 4.37. Fatebor una tecum vestes illas humanum inven∣tum esse, & persese non aedificare, sed â nonnullis putabitur condu∣cere
ut ad tempus ferantur. Nam id fortassis efficiet ut evitentur istae contentiones quibus majores fructus ac uberiores commoditates periculum est ne impediantur, ac ne ut fieri videmus statim ab E∣vangelio animi hominum avertantur. Mitto quod illi qui haec de∣fendunt, praetexere poterunt aliquam honestam justamque significa∣tionem à Scripturis non alienam. Ministri Eccclesiae sunt Angeli & nuntii Dei ut Malachias testatur: Et Angeli semper ferè albis apparuerunt vestibus induti. Quomodo privabimus Ecclesiam hac libertate ut non possit suis actionibus & ritibus aliquid significare, modò id fiat ibi non statuendo cultum Dei modeste atque paucis, ut populus Christi Ceremoniis non oneretur & ne meliora impediantur? Dicas, praestent se Angelos, non id significent. Audio. At idem potuisset Paulo responderi, quando statuebat ad Corinthios ut mulier esset operto capite, & vir aperto, rationem quippe significationis tan∣tummodo urget, nam quispiam illi ex Ecclesia Corinthia respondere potuisset, praestet se vir caput mulieris & mulier subjectam vire se factis & vita demonstret, non id signis delarare contendant. At vidit Apostolus & hoc utiliter fieri, ut non tantum rectè vivamus, sed etiam verbis & signis de officio admoneamur. Quod si datur hinc infirmis occasio errandi, moneantur ut haec indifferentia credant, concionibus doceantur ut cultum Dei in hoc situm non judicent. An autem oculi astantium propter vestium discrimen avertantur à rebus seriis cogitandis, non ab omnibus fortè judicabitur verum. Primum enim respondere poterunt adversarii id non eventurum si absque luxu & admodum simplices, atque in sacris hactenus usitatae, fuerint illae vestes, quas adhibebunt. Nam usus & utilitas admirationem auferunt. Quin & fortasse respondebunt verisimile esse, ut illa per∣moti admiratione quae seria sunt, magis attentè cogitent, ad quem finem sacramentorum symbola videntur esse reperta, ut vel ex ipso aspectu ac sensu ad cogitandum de divinis rapiamur. Neque illic o tyrannidem induci arbitror, si quid in Ecclesia indifferens suscipiatur agendum, & à multis coustanter servetur. Hodiè sic administra∣mus Eucharistiam tempore matutino, ut à prandio nolimus in sacro coetu synaxim habere, at quis dicet hoc esse tyrannicum, quod vo∣luntate atque consensu pari omnes facimus? Mihi sanè, ut saepius jam commemoravi, magis placeret, ut solum quae Chri∣stus gessit & Apostolis tradidit, ageremus. Verum si aliqua in∣differentia sunt adjecta, non hac de causa, nunc velim acrius con∣tendere,
praesertim cum videamus eos per quos Evangelii lux mul∣tum promota est, in Anglia, & adhuc magis promoveri potest, se nobis opponere. Agnosco quidem tecum omne quod non est ex side, pccatum esse, verum ut in actionibus tanquillam consci∣entiam habe mus, id potissimum facere vidtur, quod in Apo∣stolo scriptum est ad itum: Omnia munda mundis, & ad Timoth. omnis creatura Dei bona est, non autem requiritur ne∣cessario, ut in sacris literis expressam mentionem exhibeamus singularum rerum quas usurpamus, id satis est in universum fide cognoscere, indifferentia non posse illos qui pura sinceraque agunt mente atque conscientia contaminare. If we go on to dis∣swade these indifferent things as pernicious and impious, then shall we condemn very many Churches that are no enemies to the truth of the Gospel, and rebuke too sharp∣ly an infinite number of those which anciently were reck∣oned amongst the most famous. I am not ignorant that the authority of the Church of either present or passed times, is not to be of such force, as to endamage the truth of Gods word; For that truth is to remain stable and unmo∣ved if the world it self should be overthrown. But I ear∣nestly affirm that we must not condemn the Church, or speak of her unbeseemingly meerly for indifferent things. And because I see you think that these things are in no wise in∣different, it may be useful to weigh now the Reasons by which you are so perswaded. Wherefore to abridge, as you do, I will reduce them chiefly to two heads. First, you say that Aaron's Priesthood is not to be called back, unto which this difference of Habits seems to belong. For having Christ for our Priest, Aaron's Ceremonies are a∣brogated, neithet can they with good Conscience be re∣called or revived. The other ground of your Reasons is, That they are invented by Antichrist, and since we ought not only to be alienated from the Pope, but also from all his devices, you would have us also to cast away the diffe∣rences and ornaments of his Ministers. Since these be your two chiefest Batteries, let us first take them into considera∣tion: then will I add the other things if my memorie can suggest me any, that have been said by you for the confir∣mation
of your opinion. There were in the Law or Aaron's Priesthood, Sacraments, by which God was pleased to confirm the promises of Christs coming, all which, I know, are abrogated; and we must believe a Christ that is come already, and not one who is to come. And since we have other seals of Gods promises given us under the Gospel by our Lord himself, I mean Bread, Wine and Water, we ought not to call back the ancient tokens. There were notwithstanding some actions in the old Law, of such a nature, that they could not be called properly Sacra∣ments; for they were for Decency, for Order, and some conveniencie, the which agreeing to the light of nature and bringing us some advantage, I am of opinion that they may be both restored and observed. Who seeth not that the Apostles bid the Gentiles, for peace-sake, and the easier living together of the faithful, that they should abstain from blood and things strangled. These things, question∣less, were Jewish, if you will generally comprehend all the things that were in the Law. None of us is ignorant that at this day the Tithes also are appointed in innumera∣ble places, for the maintenance of the Ministers of the Church. You cannot easily shew out of the New Testa∣ment the use of singing of Psalmes and Hymnes in the Church, which clearly appears to have been done under the Old Testament. Not to speak of what Ambrosius plainly saies, interpreting the first Epistle to the Corinthi∣ans, at the fourteenth Chapter, that the custom of Pro∣phecying, whereof Paul speaketh there, was taken from the Syngogue, and transferred to our Churches. More∣over, if I would look and consider with more diligence, which my leasure does not give me leave to do, I could find not a few things that our Church hath borrowed from Moses, and that even from the very beginning. And not to omit it, we have Holy daies in remembrance of Christs Resurrection, Nativitie, Pentecost, and Christs death; must we abolish them all, because they are marks of the Old Law? From all these things I believe you now see that all belonging to Aarons Priesthood are not so abo∣lished,
that nothing of it may be retained or commonly used. Neither do I think it a sufficient answer for you to say, that so the door will be open to all abuses. Holy water, Incense, and a number infinite of that kind. For, your adversaries will answer, that there a certain measure of those things which they re-establish and keep, must be fixed, so that the Church be not burdened with those kind of things; neither must they be accounted of as being the Worship of God, or the power of Religion; which we see done of Holy Water and Incense. Lastly, we must take heed lest Christian libertie be endangered, so that if some be restored, it must not be upon the account of their being necessary to salvation, But things of this kind must be so tolerated, as that they be put aside when they appear to be of less use, as I said even now, it seemed fit to me it should be done at this time about the different Habits. For I would have had them laid aside, but since it did not succeed, I have resolved to bear with them until we may have something better. Would to God the Churches of Germany could redeem their former libertie with this one damage, though I wish by any means nothing superfluous may be obtruded upon them. But let us now weigh the other Argument, by which the use of these Vestments seems not to be lawful, viz. Because they have been invented by the Popes tyranny. I do not see here upon what ground it can be said, that we cannot do any of those things which use to be done amongst the Papists. Truly we must take heed lest we should keep the Church of Christ under too great a slavery, so that she may use nothing that did belong to the Pope. Certainly our Ancestors have received the Temples of the Idols, and converted them into holy Churches, therein to have Christ worshipped; and took the Reve∣nue consecrated to the Gods of the Gentiles, Stage-playes, and the Vestal Nuns, for the maintenance of the Ministers of the Church, whereas these things did not belong only to Antichrist, but to the Devil himself. And also Verses of Poets which were dedicated to the Muses and divers of the Gods; or used at Playes upon the Stage to appease the
Gods, the Ecclesiastical Writers have made use of when they were fit and true, and to the purpose; and that after the ex∣ample of the Apostle, who did not scorn to cite Menander, Aratus, and Epimenides. And that in holy Scripture it self, which he delivered, and hath fitted those words, which otherwaies were prophane, to the worship of God. Ex∣cept, it may be, you would say, that those his words set out in holy Scripture do not so much belong to the worship of God, as the visible words which pertain to the Sacra∣ments. Moreover, who knows not that Wine was conse∣crated to Bacchus, Bread to Ceres, Water to Neptune, the Olive-tree to Minerva, Learning to Mercury, Singing to the Muses and Apollo, and many other of the same kinde may you find in Tertullian De Corona militis, wherein he handles almost the same Argument; which notwithstan∣ding we fear not to employ freely as well in sacred as pro∣phane uses, though they have been dedicated either to Devils or Idols? Neither do I so easily grant that this di∣versitie of Vestments have had their beginning from the Pope, since we read in the Ecclesiastical History, that John the Apostle wore a thin Plate or Bishops Mitre. And Pontius Diaconus witnesseth of Cyprian the Martyr, that be∣ing to be put to death, he gave his upper thick coat to the Executioner, his Priests habit called Dalmatica, which was a kind of white garment, to the Deacons, and remained in his under linnen cloaths. Besides, Chrysostome makes men∣tion of the white Garment of the Ministers of the Church. And the Ancients witness, that after Christians had made profession of Christ, they did change their Garments, and instead of a Gown took a Cloak. For which Christians be∣ing laught at by the Pagans, Tertullian did write a most learned Book De Pallio. And I believe you know how they gave a white Garment to them that were initiated by Baptisme. It appears then, that there was some diffe∣rence of Vestments in the Church before the Popes tyran∣ny. But be it so, suppose them to have been invented by the Pope, I cannot perswade my self the impiety of Po∣pery to be such, as that it should defile and pollute every
thing it comes near to; so that it cannot be turned to a good use by good and pious men. I believe you now un∣derstand my meaning concerning either Jewish or Papisti∣cl Ceremonies, whether to be established or continued. Wherfore having observed briefly in this manner what was to be answered to the two chiefest heads of your Reasons, I come now to that which your self confess, that all hu∣mane inventions are not to be condemned; For, it is an humane invention to receive the holy Communion in the mor∣ning rather then after dinner. And it was an humane in∣vention that the price of things sold in the Primitive Church, should be laid at the Apostles feet. I will ac∣knowledge with you those Vestments to be an invention of men, and that in themselves they do not edifie. But some will think fit, that they be tolerated for a time; For, they may be the cause to avoid those contentions by which greater and more considerable Conveniences could be hin∣dred, and so hinder mens minds from being suddenly averse from the Gospel as we see it every day. I omit that those who defend them may pretend some good and reasonable signification, not unknown to Scripture. The Ministers of the Church are Gods Angels and Messengers, witness Malachy; and Angels have almost alwayes ap∣peared in white Garments. How can we deprive the Church of that freedom, that it should not be lawful for her t signifie something by her Actions and Rites, pro∣vided she does not make the Worship of God to consist in such things that she uses moderation, and have but few; that Christs people be not burthened with Ceremonies, and bet∣ter things hindred? If you say that Ministers should be Angels, and not represent them: I hear it. But the same might have been answered to Paul, when he prescribed to the Corinthians, that the Woman should be covered, and the man uncovered, for he doth urge nothing besides the signification. For, some of the Church of Corinth might have answered him, Let the Man behave himself as the head of the Woman, and the Woman shew her self subject to man by their deeds and life, and let them not endeavour
to declare it by signs. But the Apostle saw it was useful not only to live uprightly, but also that we should be put in mind of our duty by words and signs. If from hence occasion of erring is given to the weak, they must be ad∣monished to believe these things indifferent, they must be taught in Sermons not to put Gods worship in them. Whether the eyes of the beholders will be averted by the difference of Vestments, from serious things, is a thing which perhaps all will not think true; For, first, your ad∣versaries may answer that it will not happen if the Vest∣ments they use be without superfluity, and very plain, and such as hitherto have been used in the time of Divine Ser∣vice: for custom and usefulness take away admiration. But it may be they will answer also, that it is likely that they being affected with that admiration, they will have a greater attention to things that are serious, to which end the outward signs in the Sacraments seem to have been de∣vised, that by the very sight and feeling of them we might be led to the meditation of heavenly things. Nei∣ther do I think when any thing which of it selfe is indiffe∣rent, is taken in to be used in the Church, and is constant∣ly observed by many, that by the same means a tyranny is brought into the Church. We now so administer the Lords Supper in the morning, that we would not have a Com∣munion in the Church in the afternoon. But who will say, that that thing is tyrannical which we all do alike with one consent? As for me, as I have often said already, I would like it better that we should do nothing but what Christ hath done and commanded the Apostles. But if any things indifferent have been added, I would not now too hotly dispute thereupon, specially since we see them, by whose means the light of the Gospel hath been much, and may yet be more promoted in England, to be our op∣posites. I do acknowledge with you that whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin; but that which is written by the Apostle to Titus, All things are clean to them that are clean, is that which makes chiefly for the quieting of our consciences in those things we do: and so that to Timothy, Every crea∣ture
of God is good. For it is not required of necessity that every one of those things we do, be expresly mentioned in holy Scripture; It is enough to know by Faith generally, that things indifferent cannot defile those that are sincerely minded and have a good conscience. 59. Thus Martyr in general about the outward Cir∣cumstances of the publick worship of God; where though he was not for the use of the Surplice nor of the square Cap, perhaps because he found it too Mathematical (for I cannot conceive that he could have any other reason for disproving the use thereof) yet he is so ingenuous as to maintain both the authority of the Church to prescribe and impose even those very things, and the lawful use of them for all those that have a good conscience. In another place he acknow∣ledgeth the same thing.Petrus Martyr. loc. Com. Clas. 3. Cap. 5. Sect. 11. Ecclesiam facultatem habere condendi leges non inficior, quando quidem sumus homines, & opus est ut in operibus etiam quae ad cultum Dei pertinent, habeatur , propter quam alia decreta in Ecclesia statui posse concedimus. Sed con∣ditiones quaedam omnino retinende sunt, cum primis ut instituta ejus∣modi, cum verbo Dei minimè pugnent. Deinde providendum, ne cul∣tus Dei, justificatio & remissio peccatorum in his collocetur. Adhaec non debent esse haec multa, ne premant & obruant Ecclesiam: neq ita sunt statuenda, quasi necessaria sint, & mutari nullo modo possint, cùm visum fuerit expedire saluti credentium. Ne{que} ita ferenda sunt, ut si∣quis ea dempto scandalo et contemptu non servaverit, lethaliter peccet, I do not deny, saith he, but that the Church hath power to make Laws, since we are men, and that it is requisite that in those very works which pertain to the worship of God, there be a good order, for the preservation of which we grant that other Decrees may be made in the Church. But therein some conditions ought by all means to be ob∣served; First of all, and chiefly, that such Ordinances be not contrary to the word of God. Next, care must be taken, that the service of God, justification, and remissi∣on of Sins be not made to consist in those things. More∣over, there must not be a great number of them, lest they oppress and overwhelme the Church: neither ought they to be established as being necessary, so that they may not
be changed by any means, when it shall seem expedient so to do for the salvation of Believers. Neither ought they so to be enacted, as that those be accounted guilty of dead∣ly sins, who should omit to observe those Laws, so it be without scandal or contempt. And where Laws are made with these qualifications by the Church, he will have all Christians to receive, and reverently to obey the same; adding that they cannot be contemned or neglected with∣out a grievous sin. His inquam conditionibus,Petrus Martyr. loc. Com. Clas. 2. in exposit. Articul. sidei Sect. 43. Ibid. Class. 2. c. 5. sect. 20. leges ab Ec∣clesia constitutas, Christiani excipiant, iis pareant & reverenter obsequantur. Leges hac ratione constitutae, non sine gravi delicto sperni aut contemni possunt. About the use of the Cross for meer signification, he hath this; Citra superstitionem Signum Crucis à principibus in coronis gestatur, quoniam eo signo tantummodò pro∣fitentur ac testantur, se christianam religionem colere ac tueri. Porrò si licet, insignia propriae familiae gestare, licet etiam signo crucis, Christianam religionem profiteri. The Sign of the Cross is worn by Princes upon their Crowns without superstition; because they only profess and declare by that sign, that they reverence and maintain the Christian Religion. Now if it be lawful for every one to bear the coat of Arms of his own house, it is lawful also to profess our selves to be Christians by the sign of the Cross. Which words how appliable they are to the use of the Sign of the Cross in Baptisme, after the manner it is used in the Church of Eng∣land, every one may see. About the receiving of the Lords Supper kneeling, thus; Multi piè genu flectunt & adorant,Petrus Martyr. loc. Com. Class. 4. c. 10 sect. 50. illis verbis Evangelii auditis, & verbum caro factum est: nec tamen ip∣sa verba dicenda sunt adorari, verùm significata. Quod idem hic, (cum percipimus Eucharistium) fieri quid prohibet, modò non adorentur symbola, sed quod per illa significatur? Many there be who piously kneel and worship, when these words of the Gospel are hear'd, And the Word was made Flesh, and yet it must not be said that the words themselves are wor∣shipped, but that which is by them signified. Now what hinders why the same may not be done here when we receive the Lords Supper, so that the outward signs be not adored, but only that which is by them signified? As for
his judgement touching the lawfulness of Episcopacy, he hath manifested it many wayes; First, by what I related here∣tofore of the submission of those of the Reformed Churches in the Diocese of Troyes,See the second Sction n. 30. Reverendo in Christo Patriac Do∣mino, D. Joan. Pakhursto, Dei Gratia Epis∣copo Nordo∣vicensi, Domi∣no suo pluri∣mum obser∣vando. Petr. Martyr, in Ep. Theol. Amplissime Praesul & Do∣mine. Pet. Mar∣tyr. Episc. Sa∣risburiensi Ep. Theol. ultima. unto Joannes Antonius Caracioli the Bi∣shop thereof, who had embraced the Protestant Religion, which action of theirs he approved and gave God praise for it. Secondly, by the titles he gave to the Bishops of the Church of England in his letters to them, calling them Re∣verend Fathers in Christ, and Lords, by divne providence, Bi∣shops of such Secs as they were promoted to, and his very good Lords; which titles you shall never see him give to Mr. Cal∣vin nor Beza, nor any other that was not a Prelate. Thirdly, by his submitting to them whilest he lived in this Church and Country. And, lastly, by the high commendation he gave to the Apology for the Church of England, written by Bi∣shop Jewel, whom he calleth, Right Honourable Prelate and Lord; whereby he doth not onely approve the Episcopacy of the Church of England, but likewise all the Rites and Ce∣remonies thereof, which are maintained in the said Apo∣logy, as being pious, rational, agreeable to the Word of God and the practise of the Primitive Church, and proper for edification. 60. If Hieronymus ZanchiusHieronymus Zanchius. has leave to speak next, as he was a very learned, wise and pious man, he will say many things very pertinent to our present business. And first about the lawfulness of a Subordination in the Ministry, by Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, according to the use of the primitive Church;Zanch. de Relig. Christ. Fides c. 25. Aphor. 11. Novimus Deum nostrum Deum esse or∣dinis, non confusionis: Et Ecclesiam servari ordine, perdi autem . Quâ de causâ multos etiam & diversos non solum olim in Israele, verum etiam post in Ecclesia, ex Judaeis & Gentibus collecta, Ministrorum ordines instituit: & eandem etiam ob causam liberum reliquit Ecclesiis, ut plures adderent vel non adde∣rent,Zanch. in Obser: ad suam ipsius Confessionem, in cap. 25. ad Aphor. 10. & 11. modo id ad aedificationem fieret. — Fides autem mea, nititur cum primis & simpliciter verbo Dei: Deinde non nihil etiam com∣muni totius veteris Catholicae Ecclesiae consensu, si ille cum sacris li∣teris non pugnet, credo enim quae à piis Patribus, in nomine Domini congregatis, communi omnium consensu, citra ullam sacrarum
literarum contradictionem, definita & recepta fuerunt: ea etiam (quamquam hand ejusdem cum sacris literis authoritatis) à Spiritu Sancto esse. Hinc fit ut quae sunt hujusmodi; Ea ego improbare, nec velim, nec audeam bona conscientia. Quid autem certius ex Historiis, ex Conciliis, & ex omnum Patrum Scriptis, quam illos Mini∣strorum ordines, de quibus diximus, communi totius Reipublicae Christianae consensu, in Ecclesia constitutos receptosque fuisse? Quis autem ego sim, qui quod tota Ecclesia approbava, improbem? We know that our God is a God of Order, not of Confu∣sion: and that the Church is preserved by good order, but lost through disorder. For which cause he hath instituted many, and those different Orders of Ministers, not onely of old in Israel, but afterwards likewise in the Church which he hath gathered both of Jews and Gentiles; and for the same reason he hath left free to the Church to add or not to add more, so that it be for edification. —Now this belief of mine hath for its ground chiefly and simply the word of God. Next, it is also in some degree built upon the common consent of the whole ancient Catholick Church, if it be not contrary to the holy Scripture. For, I believe that such things as have been decreed and recei∣ved by the holy Fathers assembled in the name of the Lord, with a general consent of all, without any contra∣diction of holy Writ; I say, I believe that such things, (although they be not of the same authority with holy Scripture) are also of the holy Ghost. Hence it is that I neither can nor dare disapprove with a good conscience, things of that nature. Now what is more certain out of Histories, Councils, and all the Writings of the Fathers, than those Orders of Ministers of which we have said, that they were established and received in the Church by the common consent of the whole Christian Commonwealth? And who am I that should disapprove what the whole Church hath approved? And because men that have mo∣desty and judgement do not say over again (specially in a Council) what hath been said by others before them, he re∣fers himself for proof and confirmation of this his judgment about Subordination of Ministers in the Church, to what hath
been already truly and faithfully spoken on the same Subject,Hujus rei confirmandae causa placuit hic inserere, quae de iis rebus scripta reliquit, Martin. Bucer. p. m. vir, singulari & pie∣tate & eruditione Clariss. In Ep. ad Eph. Item de Disciplina cle∣ricali. Zanch. in observ. in suam ip∣sius Conses. in cap. 25. ad Aphor. 10. & 11. Hactenus Bucerus, non solum fi∣deliter recitans, verum etiam lau∣dans veteris Ecclesiae, in variis Ecclesiasticarum functionum or∣dinibus constituendis, de quibus nos supra diximus, consuetudi∣nem. Zanch. ibid. by Martin Bucer, being fully of the same judgement with that fa∣mous man as well for Learning as for Piety, as he calleth him. Onely he will add this,Zanch. ibid. p. 583. Esse Ecclesias Evangelium amplexas, quae suos & re & nomine Episcopos atque Archiepis∣copos retinuerunt. Atque in Ecclesiis etiam (ali∣orum) Protestantium non deesse reipsa Episcopos & Archiepiscopos; quos mutatis bonis Gracis nominibus, in malè Latina, vocant Superinten∣dentes, & Generales Superintendentes. That there are some Reformed Churches which have kept their Bishops and Arch-Bishops both name and thing. And that other Protestant Chur∣ches there do not want Bishops and Arch-Bishops, as to the true function of the Office it self, whom they call Superin∣tendents and Superintendents-General, changing good Greek names into bad Latine. As for his judgement of the Epis∣copacy and Bishops of the Church of England in particular as they are by Law established, he will refer himself to his Dedicatory Epistle to Doctor Grindal Arch-Bishop of York, to whom he presents his Book, De uno vero Deo, &c. where he gives his Grace the title of Arch-Bishop and Pri∣mate of England, often calling him Reverendissimum Antisti∣tem & Praesulem, Most Reverend Praelate; saying, that he is most Illustrious by his Dignity in the Church of God, Dignitate in Ecclesia Dei illustrissimum; having the care and Government of many Churches committed to him; Cui Ecclesiarum multa∣rum cura, ac gubernatio commissa est. And rendring the reasons why he dedicates his Book to his Grace, he tells him that it is chiefly for his Piety, Learning and great Worth, whereof his preferments in the Church are most manifest ar∣guments. Neque enim ita temerè post Ecclesiarum in isto Regno reformationem, ut alias nunc eliguntur Episcopi, sed ad canonem Apostolicum, prius examinantur, siquis sit , & quae apud Apostolum sequuntur. Oportuit ergo te etiam ante∣quam
ad Episcopale munus vocareris, ab iis virtutibus, quas exigit Apostolus, haud prorsus fuisse vacuum: multo vero ornatiorem te fuisse necesse est, quum ex Episcopo Archiepiscopus creatus es, & An∣gliae Primas. Nisi enim in priore illo officio te verū praestitisses Epis∣copum; qus nesciat ad illum alterum, longè gravius & amplius te mi∣nime evehendum fuisse? Istud ergo totum illustri argumento omnibus esse debet: talem esse virum, cui consecrari non debeant de Religione libri, nisi qui Christo digni suit. Ita solum tuum nomen, non nisi magnam libris hisce meis conciliare authoritatem potest. That is to say, because that in the Kingdom of England since Reformation, Bishops are not chosen so rashly, as they be now elswere, but are first examined according to the Apostles prescript, if a man be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach, and the rest as followeth in the Apostle; That therefore when he was called to the Office of a Bishop, it must be thought that he was not destitute of those vertues, which the Apostle requires in a Bishop, and withal, that he was esteemed much more adorned with the same vertues, when of a Bishop he was created an Arch-Bishop and Pri∣mate of England. For if he had not behaved himself like a true Bishop in that first Office, every one knows that he would never have been promoted to that other which is far weightier and greater. All which ought to be a manifest Argument, that he is such a person, as that no Books must be presented to his Grace, but only those that are worthy of Christ; And so his Graces very name may give much credit to his Books. I do not see what he could say more, to shew the good opinion he had of the Church of England and her Government by Bishops. And I cannot but observe, that whereas not long since some have endeavoured to abo∣lish wholly the Office and Name of Bishops in the Church of England, under colour of doing a thing wished by the other Reformed Churches abroad, the most learned amongst them, such as Hieronymus Zanchius, thought that the very name of an English Arch-Bishop being prefixed to their Books, was able to beget a good opinion of them, and make them commend∣able to pious men.
61. But let us hear Learned Zanchius in other things, and he will speak very pertinently to most of the questions pro∣pounded to the Council.Zanch. Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 16. de cultu Dei exter∣no. p. 4. 20. Numquam Ecclesia Dei in terris ca∣ruit ceremoniis, neque carere potest; cum sine ceremoniis ne{que} fideles in unum convenire & coalescere possint, ne{que} Deo publicè servire. Ita{que} à condito Orbe, etiam ante Mosen, Ecclesia sua semper ha∣buit sacramenta, sacrificia, publicos conventus, publicas Preces, cantus sacros, sicut ex sacris literis constat. —Et etiamnum ha∣bet & us{que} ad finem mundi habitura est suas ceremonias quibus ex∣ternè & publicè coleret & colat Deum. The Church of God on Earth was never without Ceremonies, and can never be without the same; since that the Faithful cannot assemble and joyn together, and publickly worship God without Ceremonies. Wherefore the Church from the Creation of the World, even before Moses, hath ever had her Sacra∣ments, Sacrifices, publick Assemblies, Common Prayer, sacred Hymns, as appears out of Holy Writ. —And she hath still and shall have to the Worlds end her Ceremonies, wherewith she publickly celebrates and solemnizeth the outward Worship of God. In another place where he handleth fully the question about Traditions for Gods Worship,Tom. 7. in Com. praecipuor. cap. Doctrinae Christ. loc. 15. & 16. Ibid. loc. 16. after he hath divided them into Humane and Eccle∣siastical, rejecting wholly those which he calleth Humane, that is, such as are contrived by men, repugnant to the Word of God; or such as are by them obtruded upon mens con∣sciences as essential parts of Gods Worship, and so of abso∣lute necessity; Quoniam inperiti pleri{que} dum humanis traditi∣onibus, impiè ligari hominum conscientias & frustra Deum coli audiunt, eadem litura omnes leges Ecclesiasticas inducunt, quibus Ecclesiae ordo constituitur, ideo illorum quo{que} errori occurrendum. Because unskilful men for the most part when they hear that it is not without impiety that mens consciences are bound up to humane Traditions, and that by them God is worshipped in vain, do blot out at one dash all Ecclesi∣astical Laws which constitute the Order of the Church; he adds this proposition, to encounter that error of theirs, Quod necessariae sint in Eeclesia Dei traditiones,Id. loc. 16. praeter legem Dei, tum propter Dcorum, tum propter Ordinem in Ecclesia servandū.
That Traditions besides the Law of God, are necessary in the Church of God, as well for Decency as for preservati∣on of Order in the Church. For proof whereof he bringeth many reasons, Quia si in omni hominum societate necessaria est aliqua Politia, quae ad alendam communem pacem & retinendam concordiam valeat: Et in omnibus rebus agendis aliquis ritus qui ad publicam pertineat honestatem, atque adeò humanitatem ipsam, necessarius est. Ergo in Ecclesia, quae est Fidelium societas, & in quâ multae res aguntur, eaequi Divinae & celestes, haec duo necessa∣ria sunt, nempe politia & ritus propter concordiam & honestatem alendam & retinendam. Quia Ecclesiae & sine concordia nullae sunt prorsus: Et bene composita rerum omnium constitutione optimè sustinentur. Concordia autem & honestas sive ordo in Ecclesia ser∣vari non potest, nec decenter omnia & secundum ordinem fieri pos∣sunt, ut jubet Paulus, nisi addantur leges & traditiones sive obser∣vationes, quibus tamquam vinculis quibusdam ordo ipse & decorum consistat. Quod ex eo patet, quod cum in hominum moribus tanta insit diversitas, tanta in animis varietas, tanta in judiciis ingeniis∣que pugna; neque politia ulla satis, firma est nisi certis legibus con∣stituta, nec sine stata quadam forma servari ritus quispiam potest. Because, saith he, that if in every society of men some Po∣lity is necessary for the preserving of publick Peace, and maintaining of Concord; and if in all things that are done, some Rite also belonging to publick Decency and so to Humanity it self, is likewise necessary: It follows that these two things, Polity and Rites, are necessary in the Church, which is the Society of the Faithful, and in which there are many things done, and those Divine and heavenly, for the preserving and maintaining of Concord and Decency. For they are not Churches at all wherein there is no Concord; and all Churches are best preserved and upheld by a well ordered constitution of all things. Now Concord and Decency, or Order cannot be preser∣ved in the Church, nor all things be done decently and in order, as Paul biddeth, without the addition of some Laws and Traditions or Observations, whereof, as it were, by so many bonds, Order it self and Decency are constituted and made to stand. Which appears by this, that there be∣ing
such diversity in the manners of men, such variety of minds, such contrariety of judgements and dispositions, no Polity can stand firmly enough, unless it be constituted by certain Laws; neither is it possible that any Rite be observed without some certain set form. After all which he addes the Reasons why the ordering of such outward cir∣cumstances is left to the Rulers of the Church in every age and Nation,Ibid. Quia in externa Disciplina & Ceremoniis Do∣minus non voluit sigillatina praescribere, quid sequi debeamus; id{que} quia istud pendere à temporum conditione praevideret, neque unam seculis omnibus formam convenire; Quia ideò nihil expressum tradidit Deus circa has traditiones, quoniam nec ad salutem necessaria haec sunt, & pro moribus uniuscujusque gentis ac seculi variè accommodari debent ad Ecclesiae aedificatio∣nem prout Ecclesiae utilitas requiret. Ideo confugere hic oportet ad regulas quas dedit generales, ut ad eas exigantur quae∣cunque ad ordinem & decorum praecipi Ecclesiae necessitas postulabit. Because, saith he, God was not pleased to prescribe every particular thing that we ought to follow, as to external Discipline and Ceremonies; and that because he foresaw that such things must depend on the various condition of times, and that the same form would not agree with all ages. Seeing therefore God hath not expresly prescribed any thing concerning those Traditions, partly because they are not things necessary unto Salvation, and partly because they are to be diversly fitted and accommodated to the guise of every Nation and Age, for the edification of the Church, according as it shall be requisite for the Chur∣ches best advantage: we ought therefore to consult the general rules which he hath given, that all things which the exigencies of the Church shal require to be enjoyned, be ordered agreeably to the same. Whence he concludes, Quod convenit tam usitatas mutare traditiones & abrogare quam novas instituere, that it is sometimes expedient, as well to change and abolish those that are accustomed, as to institute new ones. But giving withal the same caution which Cal∣vin (whom he follows here almost word for word in every thing) did give before,Pag. 106. non temere, nec subinde, nec levibus de
causis, ad novationem esse decurrendum; that no innovations be made either rashly, or often, or for light causes. All this concerning the things which may be imposed by the Church; and as for the obedience that must be yielded thereunto, brief∣ly thus, Jam verò Christiani populi officium est,Ibid. quae secundum hunc canonem fuerint instituta, libera quidem conscientia, nullaque superstitione; pia tamen & facili ad obsequendum propensione, ser∣vare, non contemptim habere, non supina negligentia praeterire; tan∣tum abest ut per fastum & contumeliam viclare apertè debeat. Now the duty of a Christian people is this, that they ob∣serve such things as are ordained according to the rule set down before (that is for order and decency, and not as be∣ing part of Gods worship, and so necessary to salvation) with a free conscience, and without any superstition; but yet with a godly disposition which easily complyes and yields obedience; and not scornfully or negligently to omit the same; much less to violate them openly by pride or rebellious stubbornness. And because Zanchius suppo∣ses some things prescribed and imposed which will not be liked of every body, and which may have something of evil in them; he makes these two Quares. First, supposing that those that are in the Ministry, would have such things taken away; Quid si Magistratus,Zanch. Expli∣cat. c. 1. Epist. ad Ephes. ad v. 17. & Ecclesia probat quidem pastorum sententiam, sed propter politicas causas praesentem Ec∣clesiae statum nolint mutari: num Ministro deserenda erit statio sua, aut intempestivis clamoribus turbanda Ecclesia, vel cum Magi∣stratu committenda? What if the Magistrate and the Church do approve the Pastors opinion, but yet are not willing to have the present state of the Church altered upon some po∣litick account; must the Minister leave his place and trou∣ble the Church by unseasonable clamouring, or make a di∣spute betwixt the Magistrate and the Church? Nequaquam, by no means, saith he, and why? Quid ita? Quia hoc ad eversionem Ecclesiae spectat non ad aedificationem: & pugnat cum ea charitate, quam debet Christo, & Ecclesiae & ex qua concionari & fungi suo Ministerio, &c. Because such doings would tend to the destruction, not edification of the Church; and are contrary to that charity which he owes to Christ and the
Church, according to which charity he is to preach and exercise his Ministry. The other Quaere is this, Quid si & Pastores & Major pars Ecclesiae velint tolli paleas, sed Magistra∣tus nolit? What if the Pastors and the major part of the Church would have the chaff laid aside? Ne{que} hic faciendū est schisma: sed post debitas admonitiones, & fusas ad Deum pre∣ces, aequo animo ferenda est Magistratus vel ignorantia vel per∣tinacia, & rogandus est pro eo Dominus. Neither must you make a Schisme in this case; but after due admonitions to the Magistrate, and your Prayers to God, you must bear with the Magistrates ignorance or obstinacy, and pray for him. Zanch. in 4. praeceptum.62. But let us hear him about particulars. Of Holy dayes thus, Quamquam Ecclesia Christi liberum est, quos velit, prae∣ter Dominicum, dies sibi sanctificandos deligere: honestius tamen est, laudabilius atque utilius, eos sanctificare, quos etiam vetus atque Apostolica purior{que} Ecclesia sanctificare solita fuit. Al∣though it be free for the Church of Christ, to chuse such other dayes as seems good to her besides the Lords day, to keep as Holy dayes: nevertheless it is better and more decent, more commendable and profitable, to keep those as Holy dayes, which the Apostolick and purer Church did use to keep as such. And after he hath reckoned all those Holy dayes which relate to the chiefest mysteries of our Redemption through Christ, viz. the Nativty, Passion, Re∣surrection, &c. He gives his Reasons why he judges it not onely lawful but commendable and profitable to have them still kept in the Christian Church. Those reasons are three, the first is taken from the chief ends of the institution of Fe∣stivals among the Jews,Ibid. to wit, Ʋt beneficiorum Dei quae tali∣bus temporibus acceperant, recordarentur, Deo{que} pro illis gratias agerent: Et in testimonium animi grati, largiora etiam dona af∣ferrent in usum Sacerdotum & pauperum. That they might re∣member the benefits which they received at such times, and give God thanks for the same; giving more largely towards the maintenance of the Priests and Poor, in token of their thankful mind. For, saith he, Si igitur propter com∣memorationem istorum beneficiorum faciendam, instituta erant fest
apud Judaeos: cur non etiam rectè Ecclesia Christi festa, quae com∣memoravimus, instituit? ut illis diebus solennīs celebraretur memo∣ria beneficiorum, quae à Christo accepimus, operumque illustrium, quae pro nobis praestitit, & de quibus certas habemus in Evangelisto∣rum libris historias? Proinde in hujuscemodi etiam festis diebus, cum instituti sint, ut commemoratio fiat beneficiorum Christi, atque eorum quae gessit vel passus nobis; deberent historiae harum rerum recitari & explicari populo: Id quod semper solita fuit vetus Ecclesia facere. Quare non possum eos probare Ministros, qui ita mordicus suos or∣dinarios textus persequuntur, ut si in die Paschatis occurrat locus de Passione illū explicent, & qui sunt de Resurrectione negligunt omnes. If Festivals were instituted among the Jewes for the com∣memoration of those benefits they had received: why hath not the Christian Church likewise rightly instituted the Holy dayes by us mentioned? to the intent that upon those dayes there might be a solemn celebration of the benefits we have received of Christ; and of those illustrious at∣chievements which he hath performed for us; of which we have the true and certain Histories in the Evangelists? Wherefore upon these Holy dayes also, since they are in∣stituted for commemoration of Christs benefits, and of such things as he hath done or suffered in our behalf; the Hi∣story of those things should be read and expounded to the people, which thing the ancient Church was alwayes wont to do: wherefore I cannot approve of those Ministers, who go on so stifly in their ordinary course, that if upon Easter day a Text concerning the Passion fall into their hands, they will expound it, and pass by all those which concern the Resurrection. His second Reason is, Quia laudabile est sequi antiquitatem in rebus non per se malis; sed adiaphoris: an∣t quitas enim non sine causa ea egsse judicanda est, quae egit, preser∣tim in diebus festis constituendis. Because it is praise-worthy to follow Antiquity in things that are not evil of them∣selves, but indifferent; because Antiquity must not be thought to have done without good reason what it hath done, specially in ordaining Holy dayes. The third Rea∣son is grounded upon the usefulness of Festivals, Dici non potest, quam utile sit plebi, tales celebrare dies festos, in quibus
historiae de rebus à Christo gestis pro salute nostra recitantur & ex∣plicantur. Quot enim sunt, qui nihil unquam aut per se legunt, aut alios audiunt sacras literas explicantes, nisi cum ad templum accedunt? Accedit alia utilitas, quod infirmiores in fide non ita offenduntur à nobis, quam si omnino tales dies prorsus contemna∣mus, quasi non curemus, quae Christus pro nobis gessit. It can∣not be expressed how useful it is for the common people, to observe such Festivals in which the History of those things which Christ hath done for us is read and expoun∣ded. For, how many are there, who never read them∣selves, or hear others expound the holy Scripture, but when they go to Church? This also is profitable another way, in that such as are weak in the Faith are no way so much offended at us, as when we wholly contemn such Holy dayes, as if we regarded not what Christ hath done for us. All this touching those Festivals which relate to our Saviour Christ. As for those of the Apostles and Martyrs, after he hath said when they began to be, and how, and to what end they were observed; to wit, to propose their good examples for the imitation of the Faithful, and to praise God for their good life and constancy in bearing the Cross. He adds, Hoc sanè modo ne{que} haec Martyrum festa improbari possunt: ne{que} enim sanctificabantur sanctis ipsis illi dies, sed Deo, quamquam in memoriam Martyrum. That neither can these Holy dayes observed in that manner, be disapproved; because, though they were kept Holy in commemoration of the Saints, yet they were not kept Holy to the Saints themselves, but to God. Of the Lenten Fast, after he hath reported what was the original thereof, the reasons of its in∣stitution, and the manner of the keeping of it, he writes thus,Zanch. in quarū praecep∣tum de Qua∣dragesima. Quadragesima est tempus quadraginta dierū, us{que} ad sanctum Pascha, ex pia veteris Ecclesia ordinatione continuatū in quo fideles diligentius quam ullo alio tempore, tum jejuniis, tum pracibus, tum auditione verbi, tum aliis piis exercitiis ad poenitentiam excitantur, eò{que} ad Coenam Domini in Paschate dignius sumendā praeparantur. Lent is the space of forty dayes, continued according to the pious custom of the ancient Church till the holy Feast of Easter, in which the Faithful by fasting, prayers, hearing
of the Word, and other holy exercises, are more diligent∣ly stirred up to penitence than in other times, and so pre∣pared for the more worthy receiving of the Lords Supper at Easter. After which he adds, Quadragesimam si sic defi∣nias quis eam queat merito improbare. If Lent be thus defined, who can disapprove of it with any reason? He gives also his judgement about the habits of Ministers.Zanch. Tom. 4. de cultu exter∣no. p. 486. De re etiam vestiaria, magna hoc tempore exorta est controversia, debeat ne mi∣nister, cum ad Sacramentorum administrationem accedit, uti solitis suis Vestimentis, an vero peculiaribus, puta linea veste, quam vocant superpelliceam vestem? Certè neque Christum, neque Apostolos legimus quippiam hac de re statuisse: imo neque vestem ipsos mutasse, cum vel baptizabant vel coenam admi∣nistrabant: sed neque vetuerunt, ne quispiam alia sumat: li∣berum igitur est per se uti vel non uti aliis vestibus. Certè vetusta fuit consuetudo in Ecclesia, ut Sacramenta administraturi veste linea induerentur. Ʋnde Hieronym. contra Pelag. Lib. 1. ita scribit: Quae sunt, rogo, inimicitiae contra Deum, si E∣piscopus, Presbyter, Diaconus, & reliquus ordo Ecclesiasticus in administratione sacrificiorum, candida veste processerint. —Et si verò res libera est, & inter adiaphora connumeratur: tamen propter significationem magis deceret vestis linea quam lanea ministrū in Sacramentorum administratione: quod ea sit symbolum innocentiae & sanctitatis. Unde & in Apocalyps. sanctis dantur stolae albae. About the business of Vestments likewise there hath been at this time a great controversie, to know whether the Mi∣nister when he Ministers the Sacraments, ought to wear his accustomed habit, or a peculiar one, to wit, of white Linnen, which they call a Surplice? It's true we do not read that either Christ or the Apostles did ordain any thing about this matter: nor that they changed themselves their habits when they ministred Baptisme or the Lords Supper. But neither did they forbid that any should take other Vest∣ments: wherefore it is a thing free and indifferent to use or not to use other Vestments. Surely it hath been an old custom in the Church, that those that were to minister the Sacraments, did put on a white Linnen habit. Whence Hierom writes thus against Pelagius, Lib. 1. I beseech you what
enmity is it against God, if the Bishop, Priest, Deacon and other Church-men, do go in white Vestments when they are to officiate? — Although it is a thing left to the Churches liberty, viz. for Ministers to wear peculiar Vestments when they offi∣ciate, and that it is reckoned amongst things indifferent; Nevertheless a white Linnen habit, would become better a Minister then his ordinary woollen cloaths, when he mi∣nisters Sacraments, because it is the badge of innocency and holiness. Whence it is that in the Revelation white Robes are given to the Saints. And a little lower where he resolves this question most learnedly,Zanch. ibid. p. 487, 488, 489. An Christianis aliis ritibus liceat colere Deum, quàm praecepit, whether it be lawful for Christians to serve God with other Rites then such as he hath commanded? After he hath wisely distin∣guished betwixt things essential and accidental to Gods wor∣ship; betwixt them which are added as being of the sub∣stance of the worship of God, and them which are prescribed only as circumstances of the same; and betwixt them which are imposed as necessary, and them which are enjoyned on∣ly as things indifferent, for decency and order and greater edification; he produces for an example of these last, the changing of Vestments for the ministring of the Sacraments, as being a thing left to liberty. Adde etiam, quod veteres Epis∣copi, coenam administraturi aliam induerint vestem; ad mutatio∣nem coenae nihil pertinet; non enim Christus jussit, ut communibus vestibus induti coenam administraremus, sicut & ipse indutus erat, sed tantum ut faceremus quod & ipse fecit. Idem multis aliis de rebus dici potest tam in baptismo quam in coena Dominica. Add also that the ancient Bishops, when they were to admini∣ster the Lords Supper, did put on their Vestments, the which does not make any alteration in the Lords Supper. For Christ hath not commanded that we should administer the Lords Supper, having upon us our ordinary apparel, as he had his, but only that we should do that which he did. The like may be said of many other things, as well in Baptisme as in the Lords Supper. By this it appears, that this learned man puts the white Surplice among things in∣different, and that he judged it the most decent habit for
Ministers to wear when they officiate, because of its signifi∣cation. But the present juncture of affairs in this Kingdom will oblige him to say something more upon this matter, being called, as we suppose, to deliver his judgement in a Council, about the Controversies debated amongst us. But the Reader must be told first,Vide Epistolam Zanchii ad Dom. Juellum Episcop. Saris∣burins. Epist. l. 2. p. 181. that in the raign of Queen Elizabeth before the making of the Act for Ʋniformity, those that did not love white, made a great noise within and with∣out this Land, and bestirred themselves on all sides, that they might be dispensed with for wearing the Surplice. Among other means by them used to come to their ends, they applyed themselves to some in the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, and knowing that the said Churches were very tender of the peace and unity of the Church of England, they perswaded them that if the Surplice was imposed, huge numbers of Ministers, nay many of the Bishops themselves, would leave their Ministry. Whereupon the Prince Elector Palatine that then was, commanded Zanchius to write to the Queen, to disswade Her Majesty from imposing the use of such Vestments; which he did accordingly. But the busi∣ness not succeeding according to their desires, and the Non-conformists giving out still, that there would be a great dis∣sipation in this Church, by the desertion of so many Bishops and Ministers, who, they said, were resolved to leave their Calling and live privately, in hope that another address would be made in their behalfe: What did Zanchius there∣upon? He by the advice of his Brethren,Verum quid factura sit (Regina) ig∣noramus & fieri poterit ut in sua per∣sistat senten∣tia: interim vero si etiam ipsi Episcopi nolint mutare sententiam, periclitabitur Ecclesia. Idcirco judica∣runt Fratres scribendum quoque esse ad aliquot paecipuos & prudentiores Episco∣pos, & rogandos ut reliquis sint authores, ne, si Regina amoveri nullo modo pos∣sit à sententia, ipsi propterea suas deserere malint stationes, quam edicto Regio obtemperare, Zanch. Ibid. the other Divines of the Palatinate, did write a Lettet to Bishop Jewel, that in case the Queen did not change her resolution, he and other wise Bishops should by all means perswade them who scruple to conform, by any means not to leave their places, rather then obey the Queens Royal Edict. For which he gives his Reasons; Non enim videri, cur liceat Pastori suum deserere gre∣gem,
quoties ei licet libere docere, & Sacramenta ex verbo Dei ad∣ministrare; tametsi aliquid agere cogatur, quod usquequaque non probetur, modo non sit ex tali rerum genere, quae per se & sua na∣tura malae sint. Si enim talia mandentur, dicendum esse cum Apo∣stolis, obedire oportet Deo magis quam hominibus: Et in∣terim in sua pergendum esse vocatione, suum quae sibi curandum esse gregem. Si verò res sua naura adiaphorae lege mandatoque Regio praecipiantur, quando alterutrum necesse sit, ut aut cedatur loco, aut tali mandato obtemperetur, obtemperandum potius esse, sed cum legitima protestatione, & docendum esse populum, cur & qua lege tali sit à se obtemperatū mandato; quam expectandum dum Pa∣stor exauteretur, & gregem alteri cedere cogatur. Esse verò hanc sententiam ita certam, & perspicuam, tum in sacris literis, tum apud Patres, & in historiis Ecclesiasticis, ut supervacaneum omnino sit, ullam adferre probationem apud illos, qui vel me∣diocriter in Scripturis sint exercitati. Numquam enim propter res sua natura adiaphoras, deserenda est vocatio legitima & necessaria. That it appears not why it should be lawful for a Pastor to forsake his flock, as long as he hath the liberty to teach, and administer the Sacraments according to the word of God; although he be constrained to do somewhat, which is not in every regard approved, provided it be not of that kind of things which are in themselves evil, and of their own nature. For if such things be commanded, we must say with the Apostles, that we ought to obey God rather than men, and in the mean while, keep every one his place, and tend every one on his own flock. But if things of their na∣ture indifferent, be commanded by Law & the Edict of the Prince, when one of these two must of necessity be, either to leave ones place, or obey such an Edict, it is better to obey (but that with a lawful protestation, and the peo∣ple is to be taught why obedience hath been yielded to such a command) than to stay till a Pastor be discharged, and forced to give over his flock to another: and that this opinion is so certain and clear, as well in the holy Scrip∣ture, as in the Fathers, and in Ecclesiastical Histories, that it would be superfluous to offer any proof thereof to such as are but meanly versed in the Scriptures: Because a law∣ful
and necessary Calling must never be forsaken for things of their nature indifferent. Concerning the custom of bowing and uncovering the Head at the naming the name of Jesus, according as it is used in our Church, and many other Refor∣med Churches, and namely in that of the Palatinate wherein he lived, as hath been observed before, Zanchius hath this,In Epist. ad Philip. cap. 2. v. 10. Haec est catastrophe hujus nominis Jesu, quod cum antea ab omnibus fere Judaeis blasphemaretur, post mortem patefacta ejus Deitate, ab omnibus adoratur: ita ut ad solam mentionem nominis Jesu om∣nes ei genua flectant. At{que} hinc non dubito, quin profecta sit illa antiquissima consuetudo in Ecclesiis, ut cùm nominatur Jesus, om∣nes aperiant caput, in testimonium reverentiae & adorationis. This is that change of this name Jesus, that whereas be∣fore it was blasphemed by almost all the Jewes, after his death his Divinity being made manifest, he is adored of all men: so that even at the mentioning the name of Jesu, they all bow their knees to him. And I doubt not, but that the most ancient custom used in the Churches, that all should uncover their heads when Jesus is named, in sign of reverence and adoration came from hence. Of Ʋnifor∣mity after he hath said that the Unity of the Church con∣sists chiefly in the Holy Spirit, Word of God, Faith, Chari∣ty and due obedience to Gods holy Commandments, he de∣livers his judgement thus, Interim non negamus,Zanchii de Re∣ligione Christi∣ana Fides, cap. 24. de Eccles. Militant. Art. 15. quin unitas in ipsis etiam Ceremoniis & ritibus cujusque Ecclesiae quoad ejus fieri per conscientiam potest, retinenda sit, atque colenda. Duo enim rerum genera sunt, in quibus unitas Ecclesiae esse potest: quae in ver∣bo Dei traditae sunt. Et quae verbo non sunt expressae, quales sunt externi ritus, & Ceremoniae Ecclesiasticae. In illis unitatem ubique & semper necessariam esse, credimus: in his autem, & si non est per se necessaria, sed pro diversitate locorum, & pro diversa temporis ratione, utile est, diversos habere ritus: ubi tamen cer∣ti aliquid de his rebus ad aedificationem Ecclesiae institutum est atque receptum, ibi unitatem quoque in hujusmodi ritibus, cuique retinen∣dam esse & ordines Ecclesiasticos non esse turbandos, sentimus: juxta regulam Apostoli, omnia in Ecclesia ordine, decenter & ad aedificationem fieri debere, 1 Cor. 14. quibus de rebut duas etiam Augustini Epistolas ad Januarium scriptas, vehe∣menter
probamus, atque amplectimur, Epist. 118. & 19. In the mean while we deny not, but that Unity in the very Ceremonies and Rites themselves of every Church, ought to be retained and reverently observed as far as in good conscience they may. For there are two kinds of things, in which the Unity of the Church may be; viz. those that are set forth in the Word of God, and those which are not therein expressed, such as are outward Rites and Ecclesia∣stical Ceremonies. We believe that in the first, it is ne∣cessary that there be Unity alwayes, and every where; and although in the last such Unity be not of it self necessary, but that according to the varietie of places and times, it is useful to have divers Rites; Nevertheless where there is something certain set and received in things of this nature, for the edification of the Church, our judgement is, that there likewise every one is to maintain Unity in those kinds of Rites, and that the orders of the Church must not be disturbed; according to the rule of the Apostle, that all things in the Church ought to be done in order, decent∣ly, and for edification, 1 Cor. 14. concerning which things we likewise approve very much the two Epistles of Augustine written to Januarius, viz. the 118. & 19. being wholly to the same purpose. 63. I must in this place ease my Reader of the fear he may be in, that all the Fathers of the Cnuncil should speak every one so long as these have done, though I hope they have all spoken to his satisfaction. It is not the custom in Councils, when the chief matters in debate have been throughly opened and examined by some of the ablest, who are best acquainted with such things as are to be decided, that the rest of the Company speak their mind in few words, either expresly declaring their assent to what hath been said before by others, or tacitly not gain-saying the same, and ad∣ding here and there as seems best to them. This method there∣fore is that which shall be followed in this occasion. Boger∣mannusBogermannus. needs but to refer himself to those honourable titles of Reverend Prelate & Lord Bishop, with which he ever bespake the Bishop of Landaff in the Synod of Dort, that being enough
to testifie his liking of the Episcopal Government and whole Reformation of the Church of England. The titles of Arch-Bishop of Armagh, Primate of Ireland, Reve∣rend Father in Christ, and venerable Lord, whichLudovicus de Dieu Clariss. &c. D. Jacob. Usserio Archiepi coo Armachno, Hibern. Primati, Pa∣tri in Christo reverendo ac Domi∣no venerando. Ludovicus de Di u in Epistol. dedic. ante Animad. ad Acta Apost. Ludovicus de Dieu gives to Doctor Ʋsher late Lord Primate of Ireland, in his Epistle Dedicatory before his Notes upon the Acts of the Apostles; and the profession which he makes to reverence his Archiepisco∣pal Dignity, subscribing himself thus at the end, Archiepis∣copalis tuae Dignitatis observantissimum, is enough for the same purpose.Andreas Rvetus. Caeterum so∣cii ejus ex Anglia redeuntes, ipsi nrrare potuerunt, quod Episco∣pos, nullo jramento Papae ad∣strictos, ibi videint. Andr. Rivet. Catholic. O thod. Tract. 2. Quest 22. Andreas Rivetus his glorying in the Bishops of the Church of England, when he sayes to Baily the Jesuite, that his Com∣rades who came from England, might have told him, that there they had seen Bishops that were not the sworn vassals of the Pope, is a very full declaration of his approving of them, and his look∣ing upon them as the greatest honour and ornament of the Clergy in the Reformed Churches.Fidricus Spanhem us. We have seen Spanho∣mius writing from Geneva, that heVde pg. 170 reverences and loves the great Prelates of the British Churches, praying to God, that they may ever enjoy their Authority; andVd p g. 66. speaking even with admiration of the beauteous face of our Church, and of the publick worship of God therein used; and we must do him that right, as to suppose he was still of the same mind after his removal from Geneva to Leyden.Dr. Peter d Moui. Doctor Peter du Moulin hath declared his mind sufficiently for the Church of England by his subscribing the 39. Articles, the Book of Common Prayer, &c. when he was made Prebend of Canterbury; and in his publick disputations in the Divinity Schoole at Sedan, where he maintained, as hath been said before,Pt. Molin. de Notis vrae Ec∣cles. part. 2. Edit. Gn. Episcopos An∣gliae post conversionem & ejuratum papismum, fuisse sideles Dei servos, nec debuisse deserere munus, veltitulum Episcopi; That the Bishops of England after their conversion and abjuration of Popery, were faithful servants of God,Mos. de l' An∣g the Father, V de his Let∣trs, p. 143. & 70. and that they were not bound to quit their Office or title of Bishop. Monsieur de l'Angle the Father saith, That his heart did leap for joy when
he was told that our Liturgy and ancient Discipline should be resto∣red again; that he cannot but have good hopes of that Government under which the Church of England was enriched with so many blessings for so many years; that the Order of Bishops is a most sa∣cred and most ancient Order, &c. and declares that he holds them for Schismaticks that will not conform to the Church of England. And Monsieur Drelincourt, That as Germany, and Switzer∣land,Monsieur Dre∣lncourt, Vide hs Letter Printed at Geneva, pag. 147. have their Inspectors and Superintendents, and Dane∣mark and Sweden their Bishops, he sees no reason why any should be offended if England hath likewise her Bishops. He hath told us likewise how much he likes our Liturgy, and we do not hear him speak a word against the Surplice, Cross in Baptism, or kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament. Monsieur Goyon is of opinion,Monsieur Goy∣on, Vide his Letter, p. 87. That no man that hath not lost his under∣standing, or is not quite ignorant of the rule of true Piety can think the conscience wounded by living under the Government of Bishops, or under the English Liturgy, and that those are in a dream and dote that have such an opinion.Vide p. 146. And as for our English Presby∣terians, he finds them a strange Sect which is not to be tolerated; and he conceives that the best remedy for such a disorder and con∣fusion, is to reduce them all under the Episcopal Government, holding it impossible that the Church of England can ever be quiet and flou∣rish otherwse. Monsieur Daillé the FatherMonsieur Dail∣lé the Father. declares that he holds those of our Ceremonies and other things which are most disliked by Non-conformists, as the sign of the Cross in Baptisme, kneeling at the Communion, the Surplice, &c. for things in their nature indifferent. This he writes to me in that Letter whereof there is an extract before the Sermon which follows this Treatise; in which Letter, to shew that he judges the Episcopal Government lawful, after he hath presented his most humble respects to my Lord Bishop of Duresme, he prayes to God that the Church of England may have many Bishops like unto that most Reverend and most worthy Prelate, whose high Vertue and exemplary Piety is known to him,Mr. Amyraut. Vide l. de. Seces. ab Eccl. Rom. p 29. Vde etiam hic p. 149. and who sayes, Rebus ipsis diu multumque probatam. 64. Monsieur Amyraut, though he lives in a Church where the Ministers are equal in power, yet he dares not say, but that Subordination of Pastors hath as much ground
in the Gospel and other Writings of the New Testament. And upon that it is that he will not have by any means those Churches that have Bishops to be troubled upon that account. He hath likewise shewed of very late how he re∣verences our Prelates, by dedicating a Book not three months since to my Lord of Duresme,Moses Amral∣dus in Orat. Dominicam. whom he often calls Reverent Prelate. For, though I know he had ever a great value for his Lordships personal worth, ever since they were first acquainted together in France; yet it is plain by that Epistle of his, he respects likewise in a special manner his Dignity. And for set forms of Prayer and Liturgies, he is so much for them, that he wishes all the Reformed Churches in the world would consult and agree together to have but one and the same Book of Common Prayer,Nihil proclivius quam ut omnes quisque suam veluti Symbolam conferentes, conveniant de com∣muni formula precum concipien∣darum. Amyrald. de Secess. ab Ec∣cles. Rom. p. 224. for the greater Unity betwixt them. He like∣wise acknowledges that God out of his wis∣dom and goodness hath granted unto every Church the power to make Laws and Con∣stitutions for things pertaining to Discipline and Order. Voluit sapientissimus indulgentissimusque Deus,Ibid. p. 35. cuique Ecclesiae jus esse sibi leges eas ferendi quae ad disciplinam spectant & ad ordinem conservandum. And that they have no other Law whereby to be directed in such things, but only that general one of the Apostle, let all things be done decently and in order; which they ought to observe with respect to the different circumstances of times, places, and States wherein the Church abideth. Hoc unum in eo genere absolutè necesse est,Ibid. ut habita ratione variarum circumstantiarum, temporis, locorum, imperio∣rum, in quorum finibus Ecclesiae habitant, & aliarum istiusmodi rerum, omnia fiant inter Christianos, ex Apostoli praescripto, de∣center atque ordine. He is so far from condemning those among the Reformed who love to have their Churches decently ador∣ned, that he esteems themSiqui sunt quos in ea re superstitio ali∣qua, aut ni∣mia austeritas tenet, &c. Ibid. p. 212. superstitious who are against it; and excuses them whose Churches are naked, and altogether without Ornaments, alledging their poverty or want of li∣berty, by which they are forced to use such poor places as they can have, or are allowed to build for Gods Worship. Evange∣lici
quorum Templa omnibus ornamentis destituta sunt, non modo ferendi sunt, sed etiam quacunque ratione sublevandi. Non enim adducuntur judicio atque ratione ut ornamentis carere velint, sed necessitate aliqua, quia vel sub cruce vivunt, vel inopia praemuntur. As for Ceremonies, after he hath said, that the unskilful are mightily trou∣bled at the first sight of those to which they are not accustomed,Alii adhibent impositionem manuum, &c. Signum Crucis in fronte & in pectore in∣fantis baptizati designatum. Quae discre∣pantia ut spectantium oculos vehementer ferit, sic mentes imperitorum solet magno∣pere conturbare. At eorum quibus sensus anmi paulo sunt exercitatiores & mentes confirmatiores cognitione veri, aliud debet esse judicium. Nempe in istiusmodi rebus considerari debet primum Ritus ipse; de∣inde Institutio; ac denique Doctrina quae ad Ritum pertinet. Et Ritus ipse quidem si per se spectetur, res est natura sua indif∣feters, hoc est neque bona neque mala moraliter. Siquid mali habet, illud om∣ne situm est, in incommoditate aliqua, quam vel multitudo rerum, vel celebrandi difficultas, vel sumptus aut aliquid isti∣usmodi parit. Institutio magnum habet m mentum. Nam si Deum auctorem ha∣bet, necessitatem injcit: Si pendet ex consuerudine Apostoorum, est in exem∣plo magna vis: Si Ritus est ab Ecclesia post Apostolos instiutus, multo laxior est ejus obligatio. Ibid. p. 229. and that those that have more knowledge ought to be of ano∣ther judgement, he considers three things in them, 1. The Rite it self; 2. The Author and Institutor of the Rite; and 3. The Doctrine thereunto belonging. For the Rite, he takes it for a thing indifferent in it self, neither good nor evil morally. If it hath any thing of evil, that comes either from the troublesomness of it, or from the great number of things whereof it consists, or from the difficulty or charges in the observation of the same. For the Author of the Rite, he conceives it to be of great moment. If God be he, the Rite must of necessity be observed; If it hath been used by the Apostles, their example is of great force; If it hath been introduced by the authority of the Church, since the Apostles time, the obligation to it is not so great. But yet, though there were now some absurdity to use such Rites, because they are not fitted for these times; he would not by any means that those who are accustomed to them, should be forced to leave them against their will, because they are things of their nature indifferent, and that the peace of the Church must never be troubled for such things, though they had been instituted without any necessity, and were not without some inconveniencie. Ob res indifferentes,
quamvis nulla necessitate institutas, atquè adeò cum aliqua incom∣moditate conjunctas, turbae in Ecclesiâ temerè excitandae non sunt. And as for the Doctrine, it is that, sayes he, which gives the dye to the Rites. For if the Doctrine be wholsome, so are likewise the Rites, or at least they are tolerable. Dogma verò suis, ut ita dicam, qualitatibus Ritus ipsos imbuit. Nam si bo∣num est, Ritus etiam vel boni sunt, vel saltem tolerabiles. All this he sayes about the Exorcismes, the sign of the Cross and other Ceremonies used at Infants Baptism, in some of the Lutheran Churches; with whom he would not have the other Refor∣med Churches to pick a quarrel upon that account. Nay he is so ingenuous as to say plainly, that if nothing else had been offensive in the Church of Rome besides the needless Ceremonies which she uses in Baptism and other things, though she hath exceeded far beyond that which agreeth with the nature of Christian Religion, nevertheless those of the Reformed Churches had born with her.Ibid. p. 232. Si nihil aliud fuisset in Ecclesia Romana quod animos nostros offendisset, prae∣ter inutiles Ceremonias quibus & in Baptismo & in aliis rebus ultra modum & genium Christianae Religionis utuntur, ejus communio∣nem pertulissemus: And he is so far from allowing that the members of any Church should refuse to submit to any such Rites accustomed and commonly received, that who∣soever goes from one National Church to another, whe∣ther as a Traveller, or a Marchant, or to settle himselfe there, he will have him conform without scruple of con∣science to the usual Ceremonies thereof, that he may not trouble the Church or give scandal to the weaker, alledging to that purpose Saint Paul the Apostle. Qui ex una Ecclesia in aliam vel peregrinandi, vel negotiandi,Ibid. p. 234. vel etiam commorandi causa migraverit, eum nulla religio incessat quin sese consuetis in ea ritibus accommodet, ne pacem Ecclesiae turbet, aut infirmis prae∣beat materiam offendiculi. Atque in ea re Paulum Apostolum & praeceptorem & exemplum habemus. Apply all this to our pre∣sent case. About the Rites used at the Communion, he is of the same judgement. Ex Evangelicis alii eam suscipiunt ge∣nibus flexis, alii stantes communicant,Ibidem. alii denique ad mensam
assident sacrum mysterium celebraturi. Qui ad mensam assi∣dent, in animo habent Christum imitari, qui in coenae instituti∣one eo corporis situ fuit, quo solebant esse qui cibum unà capiebant, & Apostolorum tempore idem factitatum esse videtur. Qui stantes communicant, praeter alquam Ecclesiarum suarum com∣moditatem, in eo instituto hanc rationem secuti sunt, quod status ille habet aliquam reverentiae significationem, quae sanctae isti acti∣oni maximopere convenit. Qui denique genua summittunt, pro∣fitentur se non cogitare de adorando Sacramento, & siquis id illis imputaret, mirum in modum indignarentur. —Cum igitur genua flectunt Evangelici,Ibid. p. 236. ea sola ratione ducuntur, quod quum cultus di∣vinus tum agatur singulariratione, animus verò humanus piis cogi∣tationibus & ferventissimis votis ad Deum evehatur, ideò gestus ille quo solemus summam reverentiam testificari, omnium isti rei convenientissimus esse putandus est. Atque omnibus sanè eo libe∣rius esse debet frui quemque suo ritu suaque consuetudine, quod neque Christus neque Apostoli quicquam de eo disertè praecepe∣runt. Jussit enim quidem servator ut panem & vinum ad eam rem adhiberemus, & ut ederemus & biberemus in sui comme∣morationem. Reliqua quae ad Sacramenti circumstantias perti∣nent, permisit ei Sapientiae quam Spiritus propediem è coelo mit∣tendus Ecclesiae Christianae suppeditaturus erat. Of those who profess the Gospel, some receive the Communion kneeling, others standing, and lastly, others there are who sit together at Table when they go to celebrate that mystery. Those that sit at Table intend to imitate Christ, who when he in∣stituted the holy Supper used that gesture of the Body, which at that time was used by them that did eat their meat together; and the same seems to have been done in the Apostles time. Those that communicate standing, besides that they find in it some conveniency for their Congregati∣ons, they have proposed to themselves this reason in that institution of theirs, that there is in that gesture some signi∣fication of reverence, which exceedingly well beco∣meth that holy action. Lastly, those that kneel, declare that they do not think of adoring the Sacrament; and if any one should impute to them that they did, they would be strangely moved to indignation thereat.
Wherefore when the professors of the Gospel kneel, the on∣ly reason they have of so doing is this, that Gods Worship being then celebrated in a very special manner, and the minds of men lifted up to God by pious cogitations and most fervent prayers and vows; that gesture whereby we use to testifie our greatest reverence, must be thought the most convenient of all upon that occasion. And surely it must be by so much more at the liberty of every Church to enjoy her own rite and custom, that neither Christ nor the Apostles have commanded any thing expresly about the same. True it is that our Saviour hath commanded we should use Bread and Wine at his Supper, and that we should eat and drink in remembrance of him. But for the rest that belongs to the circumstances of the Sacrament, he left it to that wisdom which the Spirit, which he was with∣in a short while, to send from Heaven to the Christian Church, should suggest. Wherefore he concludes, Nulli Ecclesiae necesse esse suos ritus hac in parte immutare,Ibid. p. 238. neve licere cuiquam qui ex una Ecclesia in aliam migraverit, subterfugere quominus iis ritibus utatur, qui sunt instituto & consuetudine loco∣rum consecrati. That it is not necessary in this case that anyChurch should change her Rites, and that it is not lawful for them who go from one Church to another, to avoid the using of such Rites as have been made sacred by the in∣stitution and custom of places. This apply again and judge whether he is for Ʋniformity in every National Church, One thing more must be added, for those who granting that in the Church of England, as it is now by Law establish∣ed, as well for Government and publick Worship, there is nothing impious or inconsistent with true Christianity; yet because they have fears and jealousies lest the Government should degenerate into Tyranny, and the publick Worship into Superstition, they chuse rather to make a Schisme, then to submit to the one and conform to the other; to which men he speaks as followeth. At neque prudentia neque charitas pa∣titur, ut ob metum in certae rei in futurum tempus, opus pacis & concordiae tam ardentibus votis expetitum in praesentia interturbe∣mus.
Si quid mali ex ea consuetudine olim exoriatur, tum adhi∣benda erit medicina idonea & opportuna. At ideò quia metuimus ne fortasse post aliquot saecula causam habeamus communionis divi∣dendae, nunc aut Schisma facere, aut jam factum fovere atque continuare, videtur alienum esse à prudentia, & charitati contra∣rium. But neither doth Prudence or Charity suffer that for fear of a thing uncertain for time to come, we now inter∣rupt the work of peace and agreement which is longed after with such fervent desires. If hereafter there ariseth any evil from that custom, then must be applied thereunto a fit and proper remedy. But because we fear lest perhaps after some Ages we may have cause of breaking commu∣nion; to make now a Schisme, or foment it if already made, is a thing which seems far from prudence and con∣trary to charity. 65. As for Ludovicus Capellus,Ludovicus Ca∣pellus. who may be expected to speak next after Monsieur Amyraut his Collegue, it is known to all that have been at Saumur, that they were both of the same judgement; so that he may with good reason be sup∣posed to give his full consent to what his learned Partner hath now delivered: besides, that he hath declared his mind sufficiently by calling the Presbyterians a froward,Vide p. 193. scrupulous, over-nice, and superstitious generation of men; and (if they reject wholly all imposed set forms, as to me it seems they do) furious and mad; by saying that they abolished the Book of Common Prayer and Episcopacy, levissimis nulliusque penè momenti de causis, for very light causes and almost of no mo∣ment at all; by maintaining the reading of the Apocrypha in the Church, to be lawful, &c. as hath been observed before more then once. 66. The most famous Monsieur Bochart of CaēnMonsieur Bo∣chart of Caēn. having his turn next, will declare that he is still of the same mind he was of when he writ his Latine Epistle to Doctor Morley, the now Right Reverend Lord Bishop of Winchester; where, after he hath said that there be many complaints in the anci∣ent Fathers Writings, against those Bishops that abused their Authority, he adds, Tamen nemo repertus est qui de abo∣lendo
Episcopatu cogitaverit;Samuelis Bo∣charti Ep st. p. 8. edit. Pa∣ris. yet there was none found that did so much as think of abolishing Episcopacy. Nay, sayes he, Aërius was held by some for a Schismatick, and by others that took for Hereticks all Schismaticks, for an Heretick, for that he did violently rise against an Order which is in its nature sacred. Quin Aërius ab aliis pro Schismatico, ab aliis etiam, qui Schismaticos omnes Haereticis ac∣censebant, pro Haeretico habitus est, eo quod in ordinem natura sacrum violentius insurrexerit. Wherefore he would have us to beware of falling from one excess into another, lest through too great rigidness and extravagant hatred against Bishops, we should be so far transported unawares, as to sue, implead, or accuse the ancient Church, and to separate our selves of our own accord from communion with her. Cavendum igitur ne Scyllae fugâ in hanc Carybdim incidamus. Neve rigor nimius, & plusquam vatinianum in Episcopos odium, eò imprudentes adigat, ut veteri Ecclesiae dicam scribamus, & ab ejus communione ipsi nos arceamus. A quibus extremis Gallicanas Ecclesias semper abhor∣ruisse libri à Gallis scripti palam indicant, & nostrorum perpetua praxis. Ne{que} enim horum in Britanniâ quisquam fuit, qui non li∣benter interesset sacris vestris, postquam aliquem Anglici Sermonis sibi comparaverat usum, & ab Episcopalibus Presbyteris, aut eti∣am ab Episcopis ipsis, fires ferret, sacram reciperet communionem. From which extremities the French Reformed Churches have ever kept themselves very far, as the Books written by French Protestants do publickly testifie, and likewise their constant practise; all of them who ever were in Eng∣land, having alwayes willingly assisted at Divine Service, after they had attained some skill in the English Language; and received the holy Communion of the Priests of the Church of England, or the Bishops themselves, upon oc∣casion offered: Which he sayes he hath done himself when he was a Student in Divinity at London and Oxford.Monsieur Bo∣chart of Alen∣con. Vide 189. This he writ Anno 1650. when the Independents were Masters in Eng∣land, and the Presbyterians in Scotland. Monsieur Bochart of Alençon declares, That he holds those who refuse to have communion with us because of our Ceremonies, to be Schismaticks; and that he finds our Book of Common
Prayer very good, and very well ordered. Monsieur Vauquelin,Monsieur Vau∣quelin. Vde ibid. That since so it is, that Religion remaineth in its integrity, and the Book of Common Prayer is very far from Idolatry and Superstition, he wishes the Presbyterians would shew themselves more moderate. Monsieur Martel,Monsieur Mar∣tl. Vide p. 18. & 190. That he wonders to hear that some are found in England, who are altogether averse from any set form of Liturgy to be observed one and the same generally in the same Kingdom; that in France it is no where permitted to reject the use of that which was made by Galvin. That for the most part he approves very much that which was formerly used in the Church of England, and that he would have nothing amended in it, but peaceably and with a common consent.Monsieur Ga∣ches. Vide p. 125. Monsieur Gaches, That the Office of a Bishop is lawful, that the best men in the Reformed Churches abroad have honoured the English Prelates; That if the Reformed Churches had no other differences with the Bishops of France, but their dignities, he would gladly submit to them; That they that have aversion a∣gainst such moderate Episcopacy as that of the Church of England, refuse to have communion with Ignatius, Poly∣carpus, and the whole company of the purest Antiquity; That he was wonderfully edifyed with our Liturgy. Monsieur du Bosc,Vide p. 66. Monsieur du Bosc. Vide p. 122. That he thinks none of his Brethren will contradict him if he sayes that well ordered Episcopacy hath most important and considerable utilities which can∣not be found in the Presbyterian Discipline; That if the French Reformed Churches have no Bishops, it is not because they hold Episcopacy to be contrary to the nature of the Gospel, or because they think it less convenient for the good of the Church, but because necessity hath obli∣ged them to it; and if there be any in England at this time that be so rigidly partial for Presbyterian parity, as to justle against that most ancient order of Episcopacy, and seek to root it quite out, to the prejudice both of Church and State,This in ano∣thr Letter which I hd from hm they cannot but be very much blamed for it. —And, that, as he loves and uses the Robe in France, so he would love and use the Surplice in England, that is, he
would conform to such things belonging to the outward worship of God, as are imposed, or by custom received. Monsieur de l'Angle the Son,Monsiu de l' Angle the Son. Vide p. 91. That notwithstanding the Government and Ceremonies of the Church of England are different from those of the French Reformed Churches, yet the said Churches ought ever to have communion with the Church of England. Monsieur Morin,Monsiur Mo∣rin. Vide p. 189. That the Ce∣remonies of the Church of England are not contrary to the Principles of the French Reformed Churches, and that to be scandalized at the Surplice, sign of the Cross, kneeling at the Communion, and other things as they are prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, is an extreme peevishness. Monsieur Daillé the Son, Monsiur Dail∣lé the son. Vide p. 188. That he seeth nothing ill or dan∣gerous in the use of our Ceremonies, but rather on the con∣trary, that he holds they may help forward the edification of those Churches where they are by custom established; that Uniformity in those things, in the Congregations of the same Kingdom, may contribute to a greater edification, and if our Presbyterians be not of the same judgement, they are disowned by the French Reformed Churches.Monsiur Ron∣dlet. Vide p. 90. Mon∣sieur Rondelet, That he reverences in a very special manner the Government of the Church of England; That he e∣steems it very holy and very lawful; and which is more, the fittest of all to keep men in good order and due respect, to suppress Scandals, and to extirpate Heresies. Monsieur le Moine,Monsieur le Moine. Vide p. 16. That he does not believe it possible to preserve either Peace or Order in the Church of England without Episcopacy; and that he conceives not by what Spirit they are led that oppose that Government, and cry it down with such violence; defying any man whosoever he be to shew him another Order more suitable to reason, yea, or better agreeing with holy Scripture, and whereof God hath made more use for the establishment of his Truth, and cncrease of his Kingdom; That God having blessed Episcopal Government, and made it prosper in a most miraculous manner, they are besides themselves that under take to curse the same; But if ever any in this particular made their ungratefulness notorious, certainly they are the
English opposers of Episcopacy, who do not consider that they owe both their Reformation, nay and their first Christianity to the Care and Zeal of Bishops: That we ought to have learned wisdom by our experience; That those troublers of the peace of Israel who are so contrary to Bishops, have seen things grow worse and worse, for well nigh these twenty years last past that they have ruled, which thing in point of conscience ought to make them tremble with horror; and after such a visible curse upon all their enterprises, now at once to give them over, gi∣ving God glory, and acknowledging that their work was not the work of God, to let those rule whose Government is famous by a thousand blessings wherewith God hath of∣ten crowned it. Theodorus Beza. Vide p. 167.67. If after all these you give Beza audience, notwith∣standing what we know of him, he will speak thus; If the Church of England after her restauration, doth main∣tain it self, and is upheld by the Authority of her Bishops and Arch-Bishops, let her enjoy by all means that special benefit of God, and God grant that it may be perpetual unto her. For though in my Writings touching Church-Government I ever impugned the Romish Hierarchy, I never intended to touch or impugne the Ecclesiastical Po∣lity of the Church of England, nor to exact of you to frame your selves or your Churches after the pattern of our Pres∣byterian Discipline. I wish and hope that the sacred and holy Colledge of your Bishops will for ever continue and maintain such their Right and Title in the Government of the Church with all equity and Christian moderation. — As for those things which are of a middle nature,Vide p. 114. they do change it in a manner, when they are either comman∣ded or prohibited by a lawful Authority; because neither can they be omitted contrary to a just command, if enjoy∣ned; nor done contrary to the prohibition, if forbidden. For although God alone doth properly bind the conscience, yet in as much as the Magistrate, who is the Minister of God, judgeth that it is for the publick good, that those things which otherwise of themselves are lawful, be not
done; or the Church for order-sake or decency, and so for edification, doth rightly make Laws concerning things indifferent; such Laws ought by all means to be observed by the godly, and they do bind the consciences thus far that no man knowingly and wittingly, with an intention of being rebellious, may without sin, either do that which is so prohibited, or leave undone those things that are so commanded. The Superscription of that Letter which was written from Geneva, Anno 1589.Sadeel. to the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury that then was, in the name of the Church of that City, and subscribed by Beza and Sadeel, is a farther proof of Beza's judgement about our Episcopacy, and a full one of Sadeels, nay, of the whole Church of Geneva, in whose name they then writ, and now speak. The Superscription runneth thus, Reverendissimo viro & in Christo Patri D. Archiep. Cant. Serenissimae Reginae Consiliario; & totius Angliae Primati: To the most Reverend man & Father in Christ, the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; one of Her Majesties most honourable Privy Council, and Primate of all England. The Letter subscribed, Beza & Sadeel, nomine totius nostri coetus, nec non totius Ecclesiae Genevensis, In the name of the whole Consi∣story, and of the whole Church of Geneva; which would never have given his Grace the Titles of Arch-Bishop and Primate of all England, or Privy Counsellor, if she had been against those Offices and Dignities, and if they had judged them incompatible with the Ministry of the Gospel; as you shall never see them style the Bishop of Rome Head of the whole Catholick Church, and Christs Vice-gerent over her. Danaeus his address to the same Lord Arch-Bishop,Danaeus Vide. Danaei. Epist. ante re∣sponsum ad Bellarmin ed. Genev. 1596. whom he calleth Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem, Amplissimumque Dominum, Dominum Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem; Most Reverend Father in Christ, and Right Honourable Lord, the Lord Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, is as much as can be wished to testifie his good liking of the Church of England as it is by Law established.Diodati. Vide p. 171. Doctor John Diodati hath expres∣sed more in behalf of the Pastors of this Church, and also of the Church it self, in his Letter to the Assembly at Westmin∣ster, they were then or are now, (some of them) willing to
hear: And to that he may refer himselfe at present, and to the open profession he ever made of love to our Church and the Governors thereof.Monsieur Cha∣bret. Vide p. 82. Monsieur Chabret professes, That the Book of Common Prayer for Morning and Evening doth not at all thwart the form of Service used in France and at Geneva; that he sees nothing in the Liturgie of the Church of England, brought in with Reformation, which resembles either Idolatry or Su∣perstition, no more than in the Liturgies of other Reformed Churches; and that when those of Geneva are here in England, they partake the Sacraments with us without any scruple of conscience. 68. OecolampadiusOecolampadius. surely will not speak against Bishops, who himself did execute all the Functions of a Bishop in the Church of Basil, as long as he lived there, after the Reforma∣tion;Vide p. 7. & 8 and who when he was dead, had the very title of BISHOP engraven upon his Tomb; which sheweth that whilest he lived he was no more against the name then a∣gainst the office of a Bishop, though he took not that title for the reasons I have given. Wherefore it is not necessary he should say any thing about the lawfulness of Episcopal Go∣vernment,Dilct in ch. Fratribus n. n. inter Epist. vi∣ror. Doct. de e Euch. & Ana∣bapt. p. 2. yet in few words, thus; Sint qui praesint, & qui ministrent: sint visitatores, qui alias Episcopi: sint Ecclesiastae, qui alias praedicatores & ministri verbi. Among the Clergy, let there be some that govern, and some that minister: let there be some to visit, who otherwise are called Bi∣shops: some to speak in the Assembly, who otherwise are called Preachers and Ministers of the Word. But upon our other controversies he may speak to the purpose. He is so far from condemning set forms of Prayer and Ceremo∣nies of themselves indifferent; or from intending to inno∣vate in those that were of old time used in the Church, that he doth not think it necessary to change any thing in the Canon of the Mass, although he altogether rejects the doctrine of the Church of Rome about the Sacrament. Nihil vel ex pristinis ritibus vel verbis Canonis omitto.Joan tes Oeco∣lmpadius Hdioni inter Epist. vror. Doct. de re Eu∣carist. & Anabapt. p. 17. Ego non adeo temerari∣us ut immutem quae bona conscientia servare possū: Et mihi nequaquā periculosus est Canon. Ne{que} enim ob nomina quaedam sacrificii, obla∣tionis & munerum, atque alia similia, abhorreo: Neque propterea Chr stum, qui nostram scit infantilitatem, & ipse infantiliter no∣biscum
loqui in Scripturis non dedignatur, mihi malè propitium ti∣meo, quod pacis gratia hisce vocabulis non abstineo, modò piè at{que} Christianè sentiam. Non est tam morosa interpres charitas, non ita addictos litterae amat Spiritus, non ita plagosus Christus. Doleo tamen, quòd multi seipsos illis nominibus miserè circumveniunt: imò non solum se, sed & alios. Et ego olim ita docebar, ut my∣sterio huic aliud, quam erat, tribuerem. I omit nothing, saith he, of the old ceremonies, or the words of the Ca∣non. I am not so rash, as to change those things which I may keep with a good conscience. And as for me I see no danger in the Canon: neither do I reject it because of some words, as Sacrifice, Oblation, and Gifts, and such like. Neither do I fear that Christ who knowes our in∣fancy, and who sometimes doth not scorn to use Infants language with us in Scripture, will therefore be displea∣sed at me, that for peace-sake I do not abstain from those words, so that I have a pious and Christian apprehension of the things themselves. Charity is not such a morose in∣terpreter; the Spirit does not like them that are so much addicted to the Letter, neither is Christ so ready to strike. 69.Many things observed by the Ministers of the Refor∣med Churches in the Masse-Book against Popery. By the way let me have leave to make here an Obser∣vation upon the judgement of this wise moderate man. It is a common objection against the Liturgy of the Church of England, that it is taken out of the Mass. Whether it be so or not, I am not now to enquire: however it be, we see that Oecolampadius a Reformed Christian, nay one of the prime Re∣formers of Christian Religion from Popery, does not stick to use the very Canon of the Mass it self. And I adde, that whereas some there are who are pleased to accuse the Church of England of Popery, or at least of complying with Pa∣pists, because she hath kept in her publick Liturgy some forms of prayer which were used in the ancient Church, and are yet used by the Papists at this day; the Ministers of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, on the contrary,Vide Petr. du Moulin. Bo∣chart. du Sa∣crific. de la Messe, &c. bring those very forms against the now Church of Rome, to confute her false Doctrines of Transubstantiation, of the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, and many others; and to shew that
when the said forms of Prayer were first made, those errors of the Papists were not then received in the Christian Church. Peter du Moulin the famous writer of Controversies in the French Reformed Church hath these words upon this Sub∣ject;Anatomie de la Messe, 2. partic. l. 5. c. 1. p. 240. J'ose dire qu'apres l' Escriture sainte, il n'y à point de piece plus forte contre l' Eglise Romaine que la Messe mesme; laquelle quiconque aura bien comprise. aura une puissante arme en main pour confondre le papisme. Et tiens pour chose assurée que si le Pape osoit corriger la Messe, il y feroit de grands changements. I dare say that after holy Scripture there is nothing stronger against the Church of Rome, than the Mass it self; which if any man does but once well understand, he shall have a mighty weapon in hand to confound Popery. And I hold for certain, that if the Pope durst correct the Mass, he would make great alterations in it. And again in another place,Ibid. c. 25. p. 196. La verité est qu'apres l' Escriture sainte, nous n'avons rien plus fort contre le Papisme que le Canon de la Messe, lequel semble planté expres pour battre en ruine l' Eglise Romaine. Le Purgatoire, les Merites, la Transubstantiation, la langue non entendue & les Messes Privées y sont clairement condamnées. The truth is, that after holy Scripture we have nothing stronger against Popery, than the Canon of the Mass, which seems to be set up purposely to batter in pieces the Church of Rome Purgatory, Merits, Transubstantiation, the unknown Tongue, and Masses without Communicants are therein clearly condemned. Whereby it may be seen how passion is able to blind men, and carry them besides themselves; so that they see those things which are not, and those that are before their eyes they see not. Oecolampad. Erasm. Ritter. Eccles. Scaph. inter Epist. vi∣ror. Doct. de re Euch. & Ana∣bapt. fol. 12.70. But I crave pardon for this my interrupting Oecolam∣padius, who goes on thus. Optarem quidem si Ecclesiis omnibus integrum foret, ceremoniis iisdem cunctos uti. Sed nemo hoc per∣suaserit hâc tèmpestate. —Idem. Fratrib. In agro Solotu∣ro Evangelium raedicantibus. Ibid. fol. 126. Nos ubi Ecclesias reformare inceepi∣mus, spectavimus, quid nam magis utile plebi infirmae, citra ve∣ritatis jacturam, quid ferre possint teneriores. At illud nobis cura fuit, licet non conveniremus cum Tigurinis vel Argentinensibus, ut salva cum exteris charitate, nos qui ejusdem civitatis ac Domina∣tioni uni subditi, etiam eodem ritunteremur. —Non patiuntur
res vestrae ut in ritibus diversi nunc sitis, quando quidem & aliae se∣ctae inter vos esse audiuntur. —Nihil consultius esse potest, quàm ut in unam quandam formulam concedatis. —Nolumus vos in nostram omnino trahere ceremoniarum observantiam: Neque ad Tigurinos neque Bernates mittere: sed vobis nihil utilius conformi∣tate quadam. —Numquid pietas est in aureo vel in ligneo poculo; Et ex Argentea vel vitreâ patenâ mystca symbola recipi aut porrigi? Nunquid Christus magis sedentes, vel stantes, vel genu flectentes respicit? Nunquid minus habet qui sua, vel aliena manu recipit sacramenta? O nostram miseriam, si in tam calamitosis temporibus, postquam tam clarè lux Evangelii prodiit, adeò ele∣mentis servimus, & libertatis nostrae obliviscimur, quomodo illa utenda in proximorum utilitatem. Profectò ubi vel per ostentationem singularis ritus quaeritur, & receditur a fratrum communi ratione, utilius foret interim coenâ destitui. Itaque si dederit Dominus vobis convenire, & de ritu sumendi coenam mentio inciderit; quia sub iisdem agitur Dominis, quasi unam diocesim constituitis, Date oro operam, ne sit in vobis Varietas. Secundo cavebitis omnino, ne in contemptum veniant Sacramenta: quod etiam ipsum gravissimum periculum est. Numquam unitas constabit, ubi unitatis parvipen∣duntur Symbola: —Quod si inter vos concordiam neglexeritis, non video qualem erga nos servaturisitis. As for me, I could wish, if it could be brought about in all Churches, that all would use the same Ceremonies. But at such a time as this, no man will be able to perswade them to it. When we began the Reformation of Churches, we considered what things were most profitable to the weak people, and what the tenderer sort were best able to bear without loss of the truth. But this we had a special care of, that although we did not agree with those of Zurich or Strasburgh, yet living in charity with strangers, we that are of the same City, and Subjects to the same Government, might use but one and the same Rite. Your condition does not per∣mit you now to differ in Rites, since it is reported that there are other Sects amongst you. Nothing can be more convenient, than to agree all in one certain set form. We do not intend to draw you to observe wholly our Ceremonies; neither will we send you to those of Zurich or Berne. But
there is nothing more useful for you than Ʋniformity. Doth Religion consist in a golden or wooden Cup? Or in this that the mystical signs be given or taken out of a paten of silver or glass? Hath Christ more regard to them that sit, or stand, or kneel? Hath he the less, who receives the Sa∣crament with his own, or with anothers hand? O our mi∣sery, if we live in such calamitous times, after the light of the Gospel hath shined so brightly, we so much tye our selves to rudiments, and forget our liberty, how to use the same for the advantage of our neighbours. Surely when out of ostentation a singular Rite is sought after, and the common way of Brethren is forsaken, it were better mean while to be without the Communion. Wherefore if the Lord giveth you to agree, and that if there be mention made of the Rite of receiving the Communion, because you live under the same Lords, and make, as it were, one Dio∣cese, I beseech you to do what you can, that there be no variety amongst you. Secondly, you must alwayes take heed that the Sacraments do not come to be slighted; which is a very dangerous thing. There will never be Unity where the Sacraments of Unity are little valued. If you neglect to agree amongst your selves, lo I do not see what agreement you will be able to keep with us. Thus Oecolampadius to the Ministers of the Canton of Soleurre, that were upon setling of Religion among themselves, and whose condition resembled altogether that of England at this time, being much troubled with Anabaptists and other Sects. So that their case and ours being alike, do but change the names, and you see what is to be done amongst us ac∣cording to his advice, for the peace of this Church in the present juncture. Bullinger De∣cad. 5. Serm. 3.71. Bullinger speaks thus about Church-Government, Seculis jam multis, & mox à fundato Christi regno in terris desi∣erunt Apostoli, Evangelistae & Prophetae; subierunt autem in lo∣cum eorum Episcopi, Pastores, Doctores atque Presbyteri: quo∣rum ordo in Ecclesiâ constantissimè perduravit. Ʋt jam nihil dubi∣tare possimus plenum Ecclesiae ordinem, & absolutam fore guber∣nationem, si hodie quoque maneant in Ecclesia Dei Episcopi sive
Pastores; Doctores item sive Presbyteri. Many ages since, and soon after the foundation of Christs Kingdom on Earth, there ceased to be upon Earth Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets; but Bishops, Pastors, Doctors and Priests have succeeded in their place; whose order hath most con∣stantly endured in the Church. So that now we cannot doubt but that the order of the Church will be full, and the Government compleat, if at this day there remain like∣wise in the Church of God, Bishops or Pastors; and also Doctors or Priests. About Ecclesiastical constitutions thus; Ecclesiasticae leges sunt,Bullinger. De∣cad. 2. Serm. 1. quae ex verbo Dei quidem peritae ac pro ra∣tione hominum, temporum, locorum{que} accommodatae in Ecclesia à popullo Dei agnoscuntur & usurpantur. Has Ecclesiasticas leges non traditiones humanas appello quod ex Scripturis divinis petitae non hominum ingenio inventae & proditae, ab eâ usurpantur, quae solius Pastoris vocem audit, alienorum non agnoscit. Coit Ecclesia ad audiendum verbum Dei & ad preces publicas matutinis ac ve∣spertinis ad eoque statis horis, prout cuique loco & populo commo∣dum est, idque legis vice est. Habet Ecclesia supplicationes, ferias, & jejunia sub legibus certis. Celebrat Ecclesia certis temporibus, certo loco & modo praescripto Sacramenta idque secundum leges & ritum Ecclesiae receptum. Baptizat Ecclesia Infantes. A coenâ Dominica non removet mulieres: idque pro lege habet. Judicat Ecclesia per Deputatos Judices in causis matrimonii & habet in his leges certas. Atqui has omnes & his similes alias deducit ex Scrip∣turis, & applicat pro aedificatione locis temporibus & hominibus, ut aliquam quidem in variis Ecclesiis diversitatem, nullam discor∣diam videre liceat. Caeterum habent leges Ecclesiasticae modum cer∣tam & metas certas, nimirum nequid fiat aut recipiatur contra verbum Dei aut alienum à verbo Dei, contra charitatem & deco∣rum, nequid nimis aut nequid minus. Denique ut per omnia valeat haec D. Apostoli regula, omnia decenter, secundum ordinem & ad aedificationem Ecclesiae fiant. Ecclesiastical Laws are those which being drawn out of Gods word, and accommoda∣ted to the condition of persons, times, and places, are ac∣knowledged and used in the Church by Gods people. I do not call these Ecclesiastical Laws, humane Traditions; because that being drawn out of holy Scripture, and not
invented or set forth by the wit of men, they are used by that Church, which harkens to the voice of the Shepherd only, and doth not acknowledge the voice of strangers. The Church assembles to hear the word of God, and for Common Prayer morning and evening, and so at set hours, according as it is convenient to every place and people, the which is in stead of a Law. The Church hath her solemn Supplications, Feasts, and Fasts under some certain Laws. The Church doth celebrate the Sacraments upon certain set times, in a certain place, and after a prescribed way, and that according to the received Laws and Rite of the Church. The Church baptizeth Infants; she doth not re∣ject women from the Lords Supper: and she hath that for a Law. The Church judgeth of Matrimonial causes by Judges delegate, and in these she hath certain set Laws. And all these and such like she draws out of Scripture, and applieth them for edification to places, times, & persons; so that although you may see some diversity in several Chur∣ches, yet you shall see no disagreement. Nevertheless Laws Ecclesiastical have a certain rule and certain bounds, to wit, that nothing be done or received contrary to the word of God, or not agreeable to the same; against cha∣rity and decency; nothing either too much or too little. Finally, that in all things this rule of the Apostle be of force, Let all things be done decently according to order, and for the edification of the Church. About the Rites used at the ministring of the Communion, after he hath said, hunc Ritum Coenae Domini & simplicissimum & optimum esse, quem Apostolia Domino Christo acceptum, omnibus nationibus custodi∣endum tradiderunt, That the simplest and best Rite of the Lords Supper, is that which the Apostles having received from the Lord Christ have delivered unto all Nations to be by them observed; he adds that it is certain, that Rite was observed in the Church for many Ages after the Apostles death; and relating the manner of it, he describes it thus:Bullinger. de Coea Dmini  cad. 5. Serm. 20. The Minister being at the Communion Table blessed the people, saying, Dominus vobiscum, the Lord be with you; to which the people answered, Et cum Spiritu tuo, and
with thy Spirit. The Minister added, Sursum corda, admonens Ecclesiam mystica sacra fore jam celebranda,Bullinger. de coena Dom. De∣cad. 5. Serm. 20. ideoque mentes à vi∣sibilibus elevandas ad invisibilia; Lift up your hearts, admonish∣ing the congregation that the sacred Mysteries were now to be celebrated, and therefore they were to lift up their minds from things visible to the invisible. The people answered, Habemus ad Dominum, We lift them up unto the Lord. Inde vero ad gratiarum actionem invitans totam Ecclesiam, clamabat, Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro. Then inviting the whole Congregation to thanksgiving, he cryed aloud, Let us give thanks unto the Lord our God; The Church answered, Dignum & justum est, It is meet and right so to do. Pastor iterum subjungebat, verè dignum & justum est, aequum & sulutare (& conversus ad Dominum) nos tibi semper & ubique gratias age∣re Domine sancte Pater omnipotens aeterne Deus, per Christum Dominum nostrum qui pridie quam pateretur, &c. The Pastor said anew, It is very meet and right, just and wholesome (and turning to the Lord) that we should at all times, and in all places give thanks unto thee O Lord, holy Father, Almighty, Everlasting God, through Christ our Lord; who the night before he suffered, &c. This Bullinger saith is that simplest and best Rite for ministring the Communion, which the Apostles delivered to be observed by the Church in all Nations. About the Lords Prayer after he hath quo∣ted those words of Saint Cyprian in Orationem Dominicam, which begin, Qui fecit vivere, idem docuit & orare, &c.Bullinger. de Orat. Decad. 5. Serm. 5. he who made us to live, the same taught us likewise to pray, &c. he sayes, Consultissimè ergo faciunt, qui omnes suas orationes ad orationem referunt Dominicam, cui & primas tribuunt. Where∣fore those do most advisedly who refer all their Prayers to the Lords Prayer; and who make it the chiefest of their Prayers. About Churches he hath this, Locus quidem per se sanctus non est: sed quoniam haec sancta (preces,Idem Decad. 5. Serm. 10. Sacramentorum administratio, verbi praedicatio) in eo loco fiunt, quatenus fiunt & ipse locus appellatur sanctus. Merito ergo abest à Dei Tem∣plo sancto omnis prophanatio & res turpis atque foeda. —Ʋt in Templis superstitionem odimus, ita prophanationem ipsorum non amamus, imò minimè ferimus. 'Tis true, the place of it self
is not holy; but because these holy things (viz. Prayers, ministring of Sacraments, and preaching of the Word) are done in it, insomuch as they are done, the place it self is called holy. Wherefore it is with good reason that all prophaneness, and filthiness, and pollution is removed from the Church of God. As we hate superstition in Churches, so we do not love to have them prophaned, nay we will not endure it.Idm. Decad. 10. Serm. 10. About the solemn Burial of the Dead, Jam & mortuorum corpora non abjicit Christi Ecclesia, instar mortui canis. Agnoscit enim corpora Templa fuisse ejus qui inhabitavit sancti Spiritus. —Colligit ergo corpora honestissimè. —Caeterum dum deponitur funus & telluri mandatur corpus fiunt preces publicae ab his qui deduxere funus, &c. Neither doth the Christian Church cast away the dead Corps of Christians, as if they were dead Dogs: For she acknowledges that the Body was the Temple of the Holy Ghost, who inhabited in it. Wherefore she composeth and prepareth the Corps decent∣ly, and whilest the Herse is set down, and the Corps com∣mitted to the Earth, Common Prayers are said by those who accompanied the Funeral, &c. About worshipping towards the East, he sayes, Disputatum video apud veteres ad quam orbis plagam adorantes oporteat converti.Ibid. I see that there hath been a dispute among the Ancients, to what part of the world men must turn themselves when they go to wor∣ship. And after he hath reported out of Socrates l. 5. c. 22. how the Church of Antioch the most ancient of all Aposto∣lick Churches, had her Altar seated West-ward against the common custom of other Churches, which worshipped with faces turned East-ward; he saith, In his si absit superstitio, al∣tercatio, licentia, & offensio, valet libertas, That in such things if there be no superstition, wrangling, licentiousness, nor offence, every one is at liberty. 72. It is not necessary GualterusGualterus. should make a long dis∣course to shew his good liking of Episcopacy in general, and the special value be ever had of the Church and Bishops of England. The titles he gives to one of our Arch-Bishops and five of our Bishops to whom he dedicates his Homilies upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, comprehend all that
can be said on that Subject. Those titles run thus, Reveren∣dissimis & observandis in Christo Patribus & Dominis,Vide Gualteri Epist. Dedicat. ante Homil. in 1 Epist. ad Cor D. Edmundo Gryndallo Eboracensi Archiepiscopo, D. Edvino Sando, Londinensi, D. Roberto Horno, Vintoniensi, D. Richardo Coxo, Eliensi, D. Joanni Purkhursto, Nordovicensi, & D. Jacobo Pilk∣intono Dunelmensi Episcopis & Pastoribus vigilantissimis; To the most Reverend and Honourable Fathers in Christ and Lords, Edmund Gryndal Lord Arch-Bishop of York, Ed. Sand, Lord Bishop of London; Robert Horn, Lord Bishop of Winchester; Richard Cox, Lord Bishop of Ely; John Park∣hurst, Lord Bishop of Norwich; and James Pinlkinton Lord Bishop of Duresme, and most vigilant Pastors. But it is worthy observation, that Gualterus having been in England in the Reign of King Edward, where he was acquainted with our Church-Government and publick worship of God,Sunt qui de ministrorum habitu lites non necessa∣rias movent, & eo us{que} pro∣grediuntur ut propter illum viros graves & de Ecclesia at∣que communi Religionis causâ optimè meritos dam∣nare audeant. and knowing that there were some in this land who would have framed both after another model which they had fancied, he purposely enlarges upon that subject in his Epistle, calling those men morose and ignorant, who for things indifferent, such as are Rites and peculiar Vestments of Ministers, trou∣ble the peace of the Church, and separate from her Commu∣nion; Quorum morositatem nemo qui sanae mentis & pacis amans est, probare poterit, qui dum nihil ferre volunt, quod à vulgari alicujus gentis habitu vel modicum differt, litibus minimè necessariis omniae turbant, & Ecclesias non sine periculosissimo scandalo in par∣tes distrahunt. Hi dum nihil timent, interim seipsos & Ecclesias in discrimen omnium maximum nocentissimumque adducunt, & fit plerum{que} (quod Socrates de Novatianis, Eunomianis & aliis simi∣libus scribit) ut qui semel ab Ecclesia secessionem fecerunt, postea ipsi quoque inter se scindantur, neque ullus sectarum & dissidiorum finis est. Whose frowardness no man that is not besides himself, and is a lover of peace, can approve; who being resolved to bear with nothing in matter of Ministers Vestments, that differs never so little from the vulgar ha∣bits of any Nation, trouble all things with disputes that are not necessary, and make factions in the Church not without most dangerous scandal. Whilest these men fear nothing, they run both themselves and the Church into the
greatest and most ruinous danger; and it happens for the most part what Socrates writes of the Novatians, Eunomians and such like (that those who have once separated from the Church, are afterwards divided among themselves; neither is there any end of Sects and divisions. And that we may know properly what men he speaks of, he adds, Haec autem vobiscum commentari libut, Patres in Christo Reve∣rendissimi, partim quod meam de hac re sententiam vobis non inju∣cundam cognitu fore putarem, quibus aliquando cum ejusmodi ho∣minibus res fuit, qui dum nimio rigore atque zelo Ecclesias An∣gliae ad eam, quam ipsi animo conceperant ideam sive formam, ad∣ducere conati sunt, earum pacem aliquantisper turbarunt, quam vobis ex Dei beneficio restitutam esse, ex animo gaudemus, &c. I have been willing to discourse of these things with you, most Reverend Fathers in Christ, partly because I thought it would not displease you to know my opinion upon this matter, you that have had sometimes to do with that kind of men, who whilest they with too much rigour and Zeal en∣deavoured to reduce the Church of England to that model and form which they had fancied, they for that time disturbed her peace, which we heartily rejoyce to see restored among you through Gods favour. 73. Mr. John de Kraino KrainskiMr. John de Kraino Krain∣ski. refers himself to what hath been reported in the first Section of this Treatise (accor∣ding to the information I have of him in writing under his own hand) of the Government and publick worship of the Polenian and Lithuanian Churches, whereby it appears that they have amongst their Clergy a Subordination of several orders, viz. Superintendents, Conseniores, Priests, Deacons, Le∣ctores, Acolythi, all which are advanced from one order to an∣other by a new Ordination and Consecration with Imposi∣tion of Hands. And for the usefulness and necessity of set forms of Prayer and Uniformity in all the Congregations of every National Church, he refers himself likewise to the Preface of theAt the end of this Trea∣tise. Dr. Basire. Vide Sect. 1. n. 9, 10. Agenda of the said Churches. 74. Reverend Doctor Basire sheweth out of the very Ca∣nons of the Hungarian Churches that they have Bishops both name and thing for their Governors and Pastors; that they
think themselves bound to have those several Orders and De∣grees in the Ministry which are mentioned in Scripture, as being of Apostolical Institution; and that all inferiour Mi∣nisters swear Canonical obedience unto the said Bishops.Mr. Fisher. These things I have repor∣ted in the first Section, upon the informa∣tion I had of him. Vide his Let∣ter, p. 39. Melancthon. Mr. Fisher, besides what hath been said of the Church-Govern∣ment of Hessen by Superintendents, and of the publick worship of that Church, adds, that their Musick vocal and instrumen∣tal, with Organs, Violons and other Instruments is such, that some men here amongst us in England, if they were there, would take them for Papists. 75. Now hear Melancthon and the Prince of Anhalt for the Churches which follow the confession of Augsburgh. Me∣lancthon is known to be the Author of that confession; there he professes that the Churches which had sub∣scribed to it, did not desire that the Bishops should lose their Dignity for peace-sake:Cap. de Pote∣state Ecclesia∣stica quod est ultimum. Non petunt Ecclesiae ut Episcopi Honoris sui jacturà sarciant concordiam. And again, Nunc non id agitur, ut dominatio eripiatur Episcopis, sed hoc unum petitur, ut patiantur Evangelium purè doceri & relaxent paucas quasdam observationes quae sine paccato servari non possunt. The busi∣ness in agitation now is not that the Authority be taken from the Bishops, but only this one thing is demanded, that they suffer the Gospel to be purely taught, and that they dispense with some observations which cannot be kept without sin. But let no man catch at these words, as if it were the only thing now demanded here by some. For hear him speak his mind and tell us what those things are, Facile possent Episcopi legitimam obedientiam retinere, si non ur∣gerent servare traditiones, quae bona conscientia servari non possunt. Nam imperant coelibatum, nullos recipiunt nisi jurent se puram Evangelii doctrinam nolle docere. Bishops, saith he, might well retain the lawful obedience due to them, if they did not urge the keeping of traditions, which cannot be observed with a good conscience. For they impose single life, and admit none but such as swear they will not teach the pure Doctrine of the Gospel. There is no such thing here among us, where on the contrary none is admitted to the Ministry but those who renounce Popery, and swear to
teach the true Doctrine of the Gospel, according to the 39. Articles, which have the Approbation of all the Refor∣med Churches in the world. And it is known that Melan∣cthon observed all those very things which here are scrupled at, and many more of that kind. So that it must be said that he reckoned them not amongst things which could not then digest well with Protestants. He also declares, Quod liceat Episcopis seu Pastoribus facere ordinationes,Ibidem. ut res ordine gerentur in Ecclesia, non ut per illas mereamur remissionem peccatorum, aut satisfaciamus pro peccatis, &c. That it is lawful for Bishops or Pastors to make Ordinances, to the end that things be done in the Church orderly, not to merit thereby remis∣sion of sins, or satisfie for sins, &c. And of such Ordi∣nances, (amongst which he reckons the keeping of the Lords day, Easter, Pentecost, and other festivals,) and of Rites, he saith, Quod eas convenit Ecclesias propter charitatem & tranquil∣litatem servare eatenus, ne alius alium offendat, ut ordine & sine tumultu omnia fiant in Ecclesiis. That it behoveth the Church for love and peace-sake to keep the same so far, as to give no scandal one to another; that so all things be done in the Church orderly and without tumult. What he saith to Camerarius and to Lucher about restoring Bishops in those Churches where they had been outed, and what a confusion he feared if that should not be done, hath been observed by many others and is commonly known. George Prince of Anhalt in the name of Protestants,George Prince of Anhalt. Georg. Princip. opera Praefat. de Ordin. fol. 6. speaks of the Bishops of the Church of Rome, as followeth, Ac utinam ipsi, sicut no∣mina gerunt & Titulos, itase reipsâ praestarent Episcopos Ecclesiae: Ʋtinam sicut in ipsorum ordinatione Evangeliorum liber traditus & humeris impositus est, ita huic docerent consona, ipsoque fideliter Ecclesias regerent: O quam libenter quantaque cum cordis laetitiâ, pro Episcopis ipsos habere, revereri, morem gerere, debitam juris∣dictionem & ordinationem eis favere, eaque sine ulla recusatione, frui vellemus. And would to God that as they bear the names and titles, so they would shew themselves indeed Bishops of the Church. Would to God that as in their Ordination the Book of the Gospel is delivered unto them, and put upon their shoulders, so they would teach accor∣ding
to the Contents thereof, and by that means govern their Churches faithfully. O how willingly and with what gladness of heart should we acknowledge them for Bishops, reverence and obey them, maintain them in their Juris∣diction and Ordination, and in the possession and enjoy∣ment of the same. And a little after he shews how sollici∣tous he was to be ordained by a true orthodox Bishop.Ibi. fol. 62. Ego certe pium Episcopum Brandeburgensem Reverendum Dominum Matthiam de Jagau, qui puram tum doctrinam, Dei beneficio, norat & profitebatur, & verum Sacramentorum usum jam rece∣perat & manifestos in Ordinatione abusus aboleverat, per Sacella∣num meum D. Jacobum Styrium, ad ordinandum me rogavi; ac praestitisset is mihi officium, sicut summâ cum voluntate jam ante promiserat, nisi misericors Deus ante tempus eum ex hâc evocasset vita. Nec enim erat tum in his terris, qui hoc praestaret Episcopus alius. As for me I intreated (by my Chaplain Mr. James Styrius) the pious Bishop of Brandenburgh, the Reverend Lord Matthias de Jagau (who then knew and professed through Gods favour, the pure Doctrine, and had embra∣ced the true use of the Sacraments, and had abolished the manifest abuses of Ordination,) that he would ordain me; and he would have done that office for me, as he promised before most willingly, if the merciful God had not called him out of this life before the time. For there was then never another Bishop in this Country to do that Of∣fice. 76. There remaines of the whole Assembly but the Lay Elders to speak their minds before Calvin pronounces the con∣clusion of all. Jacobus Lectius who is the first,Jacobus Lecti∣us. Vide p. 169. & 14. does protest that none of the Divines of the Reformed Churches ever denied it to be a most ancient custom in the Church from the very times of the Apostles, that one should have the chief care of the Church, sitting as it were at the Helm; but have by their publick writings professed it was a mad∣ness to think meanly of the Order of Orthodox Bishops, such as were Timothy and Titus, and such as are at this day those Bishops which from time to time are chosen in that great Kingdom of Britain; to whom therefore Calvin,
Bucer, Beza, Sadeel, and others have yielded all manner of honour and affection. Casaubon. in Epist. Dedicat. praefixa Exer∣citat. ad Baron.77. The famous Casaubon declares his judgement concer∣ning the Church England in these words, directing his speech to the King, Ecclesiam habes in tuis regnis partim jam olim ita institutam, partim magnis tuis laboribus ita instauratam, ut ad florentis quondam Ecclesiae formam nulla hodic propius acce∣dat, quam tua, inter, vel excessu, vel defectu peccantes mediam viam secuta. Qua moderatione hoc primum assecuta est Ecclesia Anglicana, ut illi ipsi, qui suam ei felicitatem invident, saepè ta∣men, ex aliarum comparatione, illam cogantur laudare: deinde, ut etiam in remotissimis terris positae Ecclesiae, Communione jungi cum tua vehementissimè cupiant. Quod nuper magni benesicii loco vidimus enixè petiisse unum è Patriarchis orientis, cujus literas itemque unius Episcoporum Asiae, ad illustrissimum Praesulem Do∣minum Cantuariensem, prudentissimè scriptas, & antiquam pie∣tatem redolentes, magna cum voluptate ante paucos dies legebamus. You have a Church in your Kingdomes, partly so ordered of old, partly so repaired by your great pains, that at this day there is none that come so near the form of the flourish∣ing Christian Church of old, than yours which hath taken a middle way betwixt those Churches which are amiss ei∣ther through excess or defect. By which moderation the Church of England hath gained this: first, that those very men who envy this happiness of her, nevertheless are often forced to commend her when they compare her with other Churches: And likewise, that those Churches which are in the remotest countries, do most earnestly desire to be joined in communion with this your Church: which thing of late we have seen asked as a great favour by one of the Patriarchs of the East; whose Letters, as also those of one of the Bishops of to Asia to the most Illustrious Prelate, my Lord of Canterbury, written very prudently, and having in them very much of the ancient Piety, we read not many dayes since with great delight. But because, as men are now apt to judge of others after so much dissimulation and complying with the times and all powers in being, some may be ready to say that Casaubon speaks thus to please the
King; hear him opening his mind to a private Friend, Quod si me conjectura non fallit,Isaac. Casau∣bon. Epist. Claudio Salmasio quaest. 709. totius Reformationis pars integer∣rima est in Anglia. Ʋbi cum studio Veritatis viget studium Anti∣quitatis: quam certi homines dum spernunt, in laqueos se induunt, unde nisi mendacio postea exuere se nequeunt. Ita hostibus veritatis non solum risus praebetur, sed etiam partes illorum mirificè confir∣mantur. Nemo serio versatus in Antiquitate hoc verum esse nega∣verit. Sed multos amor partium cogit mentiri. If my judge∣ment does not deceive me, the most sound part of the whole Reformation is in England, where together with the love of Truth, flourisheth the love of Antiquity: which whilest certain men do slight, they run themselves into snares, out of which they cannot get without lying. By which means not only matter of laughter is afforded to the enemies of truth, but their party is likewise wonder∣fully strengthned. No man who is seriously versed in An∣tiquity will deny this to be true. But Faction forces many to speak lyes. 78. Salmasius confesses ingeniously,Salmasius in responsione ad Miltonum. that though he was once no friend to Bishops, yet considering, Quòd ab Epis∣copatus abolitione, consecuta est horrenda confusio & perturbatio religionis, sectis innumerabilibus, quae antea orco damnatae, in te∣nebris delitescebant, derepente, qua data porta, undequaque in lu∣cem erumpentibus, metu videlicet Episcoporum sublato, à quibus antea reprimebantur; quod nunquam fuisset, si Episcopi Ecclesias regerent ut olim rexerunt; hac experientia edoctum, ut dies se∣quens magister est prioris, sententiam mutasse, & Episcopos in Anglia praesertim retinendos pronunciasse, cum tot mala subsecuta esse eorum eversionem viderit. That the abolition of Episco∣pacy (in England) was followed by an horrible confusion and disturbance of Religion, Sects without number, which before were confined to Hell and covered with darkness, suddenly breaking forth on all sides by the gate which was then opened, to wit, by taking away the fear of Bishops, by whom they were formerly suppressed; the which would never have hapned, if Bishops had governed the Churches as they governed them formerly; And that be∣ing taught by that experience, as the last day is the Master
of the former, he changed his opinion and pronounced, that Bishops were to be preserved, specially in England, seeing so many evils followed after they were overthrown. And as for the Book of Common Prayer, he maintains that the late King of most blessed memory had many great rea∣sons for the preservation thereof; and this for one, because, Liturgiarum formula probata jam olim fuit plerisque Reformato∣rum Pastoribus,Salmasius De∣fens. Reg c. 8. & quidem corum tam in Gallia quam alibi praeci∣puis, ut quae nihil continere videretur pietati & doctrinae Evange∣licae non congruum; the set form of Liturgy was of old appro∣ved by most of the Reformed Ministers, and those of chiefest note, as well in France as elsewhere; as not see∣ming to contain any thing that is not agreeable with Piety and evangelical Doctrine. 79. Except Mr. Calvin, who is to pronounce in the name of all,Dr. Poraeus. Doctor Porrée the honest and learned Physician of Roan (who in this very business, as well as in his own pro∣fession is ) is the last that speaks in the Council we here suppose to be assembled for the decision of our present Controversies of Religion. But that no body may wonder to see him speak so home to our purpose, I must inform those to whom he may be a stranger, that he hath lived in England; that it is he who made that ex∣cellent translation of His late Majesties incomparable Book, called, as it is indeed, his ROYAL PORTRAICTURE, out of English into French, which was Printed over and over again so many times; whereby he came perfectly acquain∣ted with our affairs; and that he is and ever hath been a great lover of our Church ever since he hath known her. But that all this may not make him to be suspected to the Presbyterian Brethren, I must likewise put them in remem∣brance, that he hath been for these many years, and is at this day an Elder of the Reformed Church of Roan, which never yet past any censure upon him for his ancient and great friendship to us, which is publickly known of every one. Ter quaterque beatus ille,Johan. Baptist. Porraeus in p. ad Brevintiam. Edit. in Anglia. qui regnum Dei quaerit imprimis, atque justitiam ejus; caetera enim superaddentur ipsi in hac vita, & post excessum, accipiet ab ipso Judice, gloriae coronam. Talis est
atque erit Rex vester pientissimus, qui bonis avibus regnum auspicatus à profliganda tot haereseωn & Sectarum teterrima peste, Ecclesiam Anglicanam post regii solis eclipsin, devastante, non sa∣tis existimavit  hac sua felici supra horisontem elevati∣one, cimmerias illas umbras, atque adeò omne malum, adspectu suo dissipasse, nisi post therapeian institutam, caveret in posterum arte prophylactica, ne lues illa contagiosa, male jam dispositos Na∣tionis animos, & in lubrico suaptè natura positos inficeret: Quid autem in hoc regiae prudentiae magisterio absolvendo magis necessari∣um, quid efficacius, quid denique expeditum magis, quam sanctum illud & antiquum Ecclesiae regimen sub Episcopis? Quo florente floruit in Anglia Religio; mansit illbata Regiae Majestatis Au∣thoritas: Quo sublato (heu! tristes nimium experti sumus) una cum Religione periit Regum optimus; atque simul interciderat spes omnis Regiae mansuetudinis unquam experiundae, ni dextera Do∣mini fecisset virtutem, & radiantem illum, sed reprobatum, à contaminatissimus nebulonibus, lapidem exaltasset, in caput An∣guli: Quod omnino mirabile suit in oculis nostris. Desinant igitur hi omnes quos tenellae conscientiae vocent homines, magnū Dei consilium remorari, & religiosis obstrepere viris, qui sic jubente Rege & coeptis vestris adspirante, incumbunt totis viribus tam san∣cto huic operi perficiendo: Cessent & veri Presbyteriam adeò ordi∣nis in Ecclesia & in Republica amantes, currentem benedictione di∣vina rotam impedire, ut tandem exeat pretiosus ille urceus, in do∣mo Dei ut alias honori futurus. Quod si eorum judicio Episcopa∣tum Divini juris esse ista non convincunt, Apostolos cum essent veri Episcopi, alios  suffecisse novis Christianis Episcopos, quales fuisse imprimis Titus, atque Timotheus, nec non septem illi totidem Ecclesiarum Angeli, quos Spiritus Sanctus, Apoca∣lypseos initio tam  alloquitur; Si fidem Divo Ignatio derogant, (qui vixit Apostolorum novissimis temporibus, qui dili∣ctum Domini Discipulum vidt suis oculis, proindeque certus esse potut Apostolicae dispositionis) cum ait, Honora Fili Deum, ut authorem universorum, & Dominum; Episcopum verò ut Sacerdotum Principem, imaginem Dei ferentem, Dei qui∣dem per principatum, Christi autem per Sacerdotium; Et rursus, Omnia in vobis decenti ordine in Christo perfician∣tur; Laici, Diaconis subditi sint, Diaconi Presbyteris, Pres∣byteri
Episcopo, Episcopus Christo, sicut & ipse Patri. Si audire sanctos alios Patres & Episcopos, primis seculis de sancta illa & amca subalternatione disserentes, Cyprianum, Irenaeum in Ecclesia rerum potitos, à quibus indesinenti & haud inficianda serie per Athanasium, Cyrillum, Basilium, Ambrosium, Chry∣sostomum, Augustinum & alios, pervenit Episcopalis dignitas ad nostra usque tempora (quamvis sanioris doctrinae continuatio non responderit successioni personarum, & acciderit magna illa Apo∣stasia de qua Vaticinatus est Apostolus, pessimis erroribus tam in fide quam in regimine introductis, quos licitum erat imò perneces∣sarium corrigere, intactis ut in ipsa doctrina sic in Disciplina, fun∣damentalibus.) Si denique parum apud eos valeat Canonum Apo∣stolorum, & primorum quatuor Oecumenicarum Synodorum au∣thoritas; saltem audiant hac de re loquentem Hieronymum ipsis , & dignitatis Episcopalis iniquissimum aestimatorem, Antequam Diaboli instinctu studia fierent in Ecclesia (inquit) & diceretur in populis, ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego au∣tem Cephae; communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gu∣bernabantur: postquum verò unusquisque eos quos baptiza∣verat, suos esse putabat, non Christi, in toto Orbe Decre∣tum est, ut unus ex Presbyteris electus superponeretur caete∣ris, ad quam omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret, & schismatum semina tollerentur. Ergo si sub Apostolis (Hieronymo teste) nata est illa consuetudo, sacer ille ordo institutus, vitandi Schisma∣tis causâ, viventibus adhuc ipsis Apostolis exorti; nobis per Deum immortalem indulgeant  osores Apostolica institutione, gaudere, in remedia schismatum, his corruptis praesertim tempo∣ribus, & longè à priorum puritate recedentibus, etenim Damnosa quid non imminuit dies? Aetas parentum pejor avis, tulit Nos nequiores, mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem. Qatae fuit autem necessitas regiminis Episcopalis retinendi, impedien∣do schismati & averruncandis haeresibus atque impuris sectis per universam Angliam pullulantibus, docebunt Annales ab initio principatus Edoardi sexti ad Caroli primi Martyrium; Et
vix capet posteritas Dei  in ferendis tam diu monstro∣sis in relgione opinionibus, & omnium illa rerum confusione tole∣randa, quae cadentibus cum regio illo capite Presulibus, trium reg∣norum faciem deturpaverant. His cum legitimo Principe resur∣gentibus, coelum vobis meliora pollicetur ô Angli. Ecclesia Angli∣canae reddentur Episcopi; sed ô vos , viri fratres, ad omnia quae Catharismum non satis redolent nauseabundi, estote bono animo, destinantur vobis Episcopi Patres, non Tyranni, non , neque (quod vetat in Evangelio sapientia increata) Re∣gum terrae instar, civile & saepè violentum in vos imperium exercen∣tes, . At vero si Christianorum solo nomine haud contenti, quod nobis Antiochiâ venit, alio gaudetis appellari, quod a magno Cal∣vino mutuatum velitis, & nihil antiquius vobis sit tanti viri suffra∣gus, Quales Angliae optamus Episcopos, tales amplectur amba∣bus ulnis vir ille eximius; Et post illum Beza, Bucerus, Melan∣cthon, Bullingerus, atque alii non pauci transmarinarum Eccle∣siarum Pastores, non minus verae & reformatae pietatis zelo ac∣censi, quam eruditione insignes, Molinaeus uterque, Rivetus, Amyraldus, Dallaeus, Bochartus, Heraldus, & nuperrimè Langlaeus noster , qui Anglicanum Episcopatum scriptis suis doctissimis ab Antichristianismo vindicarunt, cujus ei notas inusserant novi Aëriani; quique varios ejusdum Ecclesiae ritus, ceremonias, & verbi ministrorum diversos amictus minimè impro∣barunt, utpote qui maximum discrimen esse debere noverint inter Ecclesiam sub cruce lititantem, ac diversae religionis Principi ob∣noxiam, & aliam quae sub Rege Orthodoxo triumphat; in qua nisi admittatur subalternatio Presbyterorum, & in rebus  populus obedientem se praestet, non levis metus est ne tandem obrepat ab Ecclesia in Statum Anarchia, & Superiorum contemp∣tus. —Ʋtinam Dei voluntate talis oblata fuisset in Gallia nostra olim reformandi occasio. Jamdudum Protestantium Choro permix∣ta fuisset Ecclesia Romana per istam in rebus mediis & externis indulgentiam. Homines enim cum simus, non Angeli, ut ad res divinas mentes nostrae erigantur, sensuum indigemus ministerio. Sic numquam Religionis obtentu, proh dolor! crudeles lanienas, immania bella, totque florentissimarum Civitatum direptiones, passa fuisset charissima patria nostra, quae vix à tants malis etiam∣num
respirat. Thrice, and four times happy is he that seek∣eth first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, for the other things shall be added unto him, in this life; and after death, he shall receive the Crown of Glory from the righteous Judge. Such a one is and will be your most Pious King, who so happily beginning his Reign with the utrer destruction of that most wicked plague of numberless Heresies and Sects, which after the Eclipse of the Royal Sun, utterly spoiled the Church of England, would not think himself to be a sufficient Preserver of his people, although by his hap∣py rising above your Horizon, he hath expell'd that Cim∣merian darkness, and dissipated all evil by his presence; if after the cure undertaken he had not been careful, for the time to come, by way of prevention, to keep that spreading contagious disease from infecting the already ill dispos'd minds of the Nation, of their own nature given to change. Now what is more necessary in that Kingdom to perfect that Magistery of Royal Prudence, what more efficacious, what in a word more convenient then that Holy and ancient Government of the Church under Bishops? The which flourishing in England, Religion did flourish, and the Royal Majesties Authority remained untoucht; But being taken away (as by most sad experience it hath been found) they have lost, together with Religion, the best of Kings; and all hopes was lost for them also at the same time of ever feeling the effects of the graciousness of their Kings, had not the right hand of the Lord done won∣derful things, and set up for the head stone of the corner, that shi∣ning (though by some most filthy wretches, reproved stone,) which thing hath been wonderful in our eyes. Let those therefore, whom they call tender Consciences stop no longer the great counsel of God, and be no more injurious to those godly men, who are about with all their might, by the Kings command and favour to put an end to so holy a work. Let those Presbyterians that are so great lovers of order, both in Church and Commonwealth, hinder no further the running wheele, that at length, through Gods bles∣sing, we may get that precious vessel to be honourable in
Gods house as it hath been formerly. If these Arguments to their judgement, do not convince Episcopacy to be of Divine Right, viz. That the Apostles being Bishops them∣selves, have by the laying on of their hands, established Bishops in their room over the the primitive Christians, such as were specially Titus and Timotheus, as also those seven Angels of the like number of Churches, to whom the Holy Ghost speaks so emphatically in the beginning of the Revelation; if they refuse to believe Saint Ignatius (that lived towards the later times of the Apostles, and saw with his own eyes the Lords beloved Disciple, and by those means might certaily know what was the Apostolical Constitution,) saying, My Son, honour God as the Author and maker of all things, and the Bishop as the Prince of Priests, that beareth the Image of God; of God, I say, by his Princely Dignity, and of Christ by his Priesthood. And again, Let every thing be done amongst you with decent order in Christ; that Lay-men be subject to Deacons, Deacons to Presbyters, Presbyters to the Bishop, the Bishop to Christ, as Christ is to the Father. If they refuse to hearken to the rest of the Holy Fathers and Bishops, speaking of that holy and ami∣able subalternation which was in the first Ages, as Cyprian and Irenaeus, who were chief Governors in the Church; and from whom by a continual and not to be contradicted Series of succession by Athanasius, Cyril, Basil, Ambrosius, Chrysostome, Augustine, and the rest, the Episcopal Digni∣ty hath reached unto our times (though the continuation of a wholesome Doctrine hath not been answerable to the succession of men, and though the great Revolt whereof the Apostle did forewarn us is come to pass, most perni∣cious errors both in belief and government having crept in, the which it was lawful, nay very necessary to correct, without medling with Fundamentals, either in Doctrine or Discipline. If lastly, the Authority of the Canons of the Apostles, and the four first Oecumenical Councils be little valued amongst them; let them at least hearken to Hierome a man of their own Principles, and who most unjustly did set Episcopal Dignity at a low rate, Before
that by the Devls instinct there were divers Factions in the Church (saith he) and that it was said among the people, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, and I of Cephas; the Churches were governed by the Common Counsel of Presbyters: But after that every one thought those whom he had baptized to be his own not Christs, It was Decreed in the whole world, that one chosen from a∣mong the Presbyters should be set over the rest, to whom the whole care of the Church should belong, and the seeds of Schisme should be taken away. Therefore if (by the very testimony of Saint Hierosme) that custom hath had its beginning under the Apostles, that holy Order hath been instituted, to avoid Schisme sprung up whilest the Apostles themselves were yet living; Let the haters of Hierarchy grant us in Gods name the enjoying of this Apostolical constitution, as a re∣medy against Schisme, specially in these corrupt times, so far degenerating from the former; For,— What doth not evil dayes impaire? Worse is the Age of our Fathers than that of their Predecessors, yet hath this pre∣sent Age made us worse than they, and we shall beget an Off∣spring more wicked than our selves. Now will the Chronicles from the beginning of Edward the Sixth's Reign, until the Martyrdom of Charles the First shew the necessity of retaining the Episcopal Government for the avoiding of Schisme, and rooting out of Heresies and filthy Sects that multiply through the whole Kingdom of England; And posterity will hardly be able to understand Gods long patience and forbearance, that hath born so long with those monstrous opinions in Religion, and suf∣fered that confusion of all things, the which, the Prelates falling off with that Royal Head, had so basely defaced the three Kingdoms. But those Prelates, O English peo∣ple, rising up again with their lawful Prince, you may hope for better things from Heaven; Bishops will be re∣stored to the Church of England: But O ye Brethren of little Faith, that be ready to cast out any thing which hath not a perfect smack of Puritanisme, be of a good courage, those Bishops you are to have are to be Fathers, not
Tyrants, not men that are not bound to Rules nor Laws, nor (which is forbidden in the Gospel by the uncreated wis∣dom) like the Kings of the Earth, bearing a civil and often violent hand over you; Nor as domineering over the Clergy, but being an example to the flock: And if you are not content with the bare name of Christians, which we have from Antioch, but would fain be called by another borrowed from the great Calvin, so that you will prefer nothing to his advice, that excellent man embraces with all his soul such Bishops as we wish them to England; so does after him Beza, Bucer, Melancthon, Bullinger, and not a few other Ministers of the Churches beyond the Seas no less kindled with the zeal of true and reformed Piety, than renowned for learning, as are Mr. du Moulin both Fa∣ther and Son, Mr R vet, Mr. Amyraut, Mr. Daillé, Mr. Bochart, Mr. Heraut, and lately our Mr. de l'Angle (of whom no man can speak with expressions of too much va∣lue) who by their learned writings have cleared the Bi∣shops of England from the Antichristianity the new Aëri∣ans had stampt on them; who also have approved the divers Rites and Ceremonies of that Church, and the va∣riety of Vestments of the Ministers of Gods word; as knowing the great difference which ought to be betwixt a Church hidden under the Cross, and Subject to a Prince of different Religion, and another that triumphs under a Protestant King; in the which, except subalternation of Presbyters be admitted, and the people be obedient in things indifferent, there is no small fear that confusion will pass from the Church into the Commonwealth, toge∣ther with the contempt of Superiours. —Would to God that our France had formerly had an occasion offered of such a Reformation! The Church of Rome would have been joyn'd a long time since with the Protestants, by means of that indulgence in things of a middle nature and circumstantial: For since we are men, not Angels, we need the help of sense to lift up our minds to the things of God. By that means our most dear Country had not suffered, alas! under the pretence of Religion,
cruel massacres, unnatural wars, and the plundering of so many flourishing Cities, which so great mischiefs do scarce suffer her to live and breath at this very day. 80. There remains but Mr. CalvinMr. Calvin. to deliver his own judg∣ment, and to pronounce in the name of all, the Sense of the whole Council, upon every one of the four Questions pro∣pounded to their consideration and debate. To the first, viz. Whether Episcopacy be a lawful Government in the Christian Church?Calv. l. de ne∣cessit. rfm. Eccl. vide supra p. 166. He answereth thus; Talem nobis Hierarchiam si ex∣hibeant, &c. If they will give us, saith he, such an Hierar∣chy in which the Bishops have such a Preeminence, as that they do not refuse to be subject unto Christ, and depend on him, and be referred unto him as their only Head; in which they entertain such a brotherly fellowship, as that the bond of their Union be the Truth of Christ; Then surely, if any be found who do not reverence that Hierar∣chy, and subject themselves unto the same with the lowest obedience, I will confess that there is no ANATHEMA, whereof they re not worthy. Calv. in ep. ad Protector. Angl. vide supra p. 18. To the second, viz. Whe∣ther set forms of Prayer may lawfully be used and imposed? Thus, Statam esse OPORTET Sacramentorum administrationem, pub∣licam item precum Formulam. There MUST be a cer∣tain fixt way of ministring the Sacraments, also for the form of Common Prayer. And again, for fear his meaning should be mis-apprehended,Calv. ibid. vide supra ibid. Quod ad formam precum & Rituum Ec∣clesiasticorum, VALDE PROBO, ut certa illa sit, &c. As touching the Form of Prayer and Ceremonies of the Church, I APPROVE VERY MUCH that it be set, and that it be not lawful for the Ministers to recede from it in their Function, as well to help the simplicity and unskilfulness of some, as that the Agreement of all the several Congregations may better appear; and finally, that the desultory and capricious lightness of such as affect no∣velies may be encountred and stopped. To the third, viz. Whether every National Church hath power to make Laws and Injunctions, for regulating the outward things and circumstances belonging to the Worship of God, and whether all private persons are bound in conscience to obey such Laws and Injunctions? Thus,
Substantiam Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae exprimit disertis verbis Scriptura: Forma autem ejus exercendae,Calv. Neoco∣mens. ep. l. p. 63. quoniam à Domino praescripta non est, à Ministris constitui debet pro aedificatione. —Verum ne quis calumnietur nos in rebus externis esse morosos,Calv. de verâ Eccl. Reformat. qui adeò praecise tollamus omnem libertatem, hic testatum ve∣lim me non de Ceremoniis litigare, quae decoro tantum & ordini serviant: vel etiam Symbola sunt & incitamenta ejus quam Deo deferimus reverentiae. —Fatemur praeterea tum omnes, tum etiam singulas Ecclesias hoc jus habere,Calv. in confess. fid. nom. Eccl. Gallic. oblata Caesari, &c. ut leges & Statuta sibi con∣dant ad politiam communem inter suos constituendam, cum om∣nia in Domo Dei rite & ordine fieri oporteat. Ejusmodi porro statutis obedieniam deferendam esse, modò ne conscientias adstrin∣gant, neque superstitio illis adh beatur. Qui hoc detrectent, cerebrosi & pervicaces apud nos habentu. The Scripture doth express in plain words the substance of Ecclesiastical Dis∣cipline; but as for the form of the exercise thereof, since it is not prescribed by God, it ought to be ordered by the Ministers as edification does require. And that no man may cast aspersions upon us, as if we were so peevish about outward things, as utterly to take away all manner of liberty, I would have it known, that I do not quarrel about Ceremonies, that are such only as serve for Decency and Order; or yet such as are badges, and tokens, and helps of that reverence which we pay to God. We confess fur∣ther, that all and every Church hath this right to make Laws and Statutes for themselves, for the setling of a common polity among themselves, since all things ought to be done rightly and orderly in the house of God; and that obedience ought to be yielded to such Statutes, provided that they do not bind the consciences,See Calvins meaning, p. 107. and that they be void of superstition. And as for such as refuse so to do, they are esteemed among us, heady, self-conceited, stubborne and obstinate. To the fourth and last Question, viz. Whe∣ther there must be Ʋniformity of outward Rites and Ceremonies of Gods worship in all the particular congregations of every National Church? He answereth thus,Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 10. n. 31. Quantarum rixarum semen fu∣tura est istarum rerum confusio, si prout cuique libitum sit mutare liceat quae ad communem statum pertinent? Quando numquam
futurum est ut omnibus idem placet, si res veluti in medio positae, singulorum arbitrio relictae fuerint!Calv. Hallero. Ep. l. —Varietas in Ecclesia bene constituta tolerabilis non est; apud exteros etiam suspicionem gignit non benè civibus inter se convenire.Calv. Farello Ep. l. p. 122. —Denuncient sibi non esse loco fratris, qui communem Disciplinam contumacia sua perturbat. Semper hoc in Ecclesia valuit quod veteribus Sy∣nodis fuit decretum, ut qui subjici communis Disciplinae legibus noluerit, munere abdicetur. Neque hic quaerenda est hominum Authoritas, cum Spiritus Sanctus de talibus pronunciaverit, Ecclesiam non habere morem contendendi, valere ergo eum jube∣ant, qui communis societatis jua respuit. Of how great jarres and wranglings will the confusion of those things be the seed, if it be lawful for every one to change, as he pleaseth, those things which belong unto all in common! since it will never come to pass that the same thing should please all men, if all things be left at random for every one to do what he listeth. In a well setled Church, diversity (of cu∣stoms) is a thing not to be suffered. And it breeds this opinion amongst strangers, that there is no agreement be∣tween those that are fellow-Citizens. Therefore let it be declared unto him that overthroweth the common Disci∣pline by his contumacy, that he is no longer holden for a Brother. This hath been alwayes of force in the Church, as being decreed by the ancient Councils, that he who will not subject himself to the Laws of Common Discipline, should be deposed from his Office. And there is no need here to seek for humane Authority, since the Holy Ghost hath pronounced of such, that the Church hath not accu∣stomed to be contentious. Wherefore let them cast him off who despiseth the Rites of Common Discipline. Besides this full answer of Mr. Calvin to the four general Quaeres, under which I conceive all our present Controversies of Religion to be comprehended, many other passages might easily be produced out of his Writings to shew his approbation of se∣veral of those particular uses and customs of the Church of England, now so much opposed by some men. Such is that in one of his Epistles, where he declares, That he had no hand in the abolishing of Holy dayes at Geneva,Calvinus Hl∣o. protesting it was
done without his privity and against his desire: Ego sanctè testari possum, me inscio, ac nec optante quidem hanc rem fuisse transactam. And that if he had had the choice given him (to keep or abolish Holy dayes) he would not have approved them that passed that Decree by which they were abrogated.Ibid. Hoc testa∣tum esse volo, si mihi delata optio fuisset, quod nunc con∣stitutum est, non fuisse pro sententiâ dicturum.Vide Sect. 1. p. 45. Such again is that for a general Communion, if not every Lords day, at least once every month in every Congregation.Vide Sect. 2. p. 113. Such is that for Ce∣remonies significant, which he judgeth so much the bet∣ter because of their significancy. But what he saith of Martin Bucer (who wholly approved our Church-Government and Liturgy both for matter and form, as it was amended af∣ter his Censure past upon the first Book of King Edward the Sixth) that Angliae multum profuisset, he would have done much good to England, is sufficient to prove, that if Calvin had lived here amongst us, he would have conformed to the orders of the Church, as being good and lawful, just as Bucer did. The Conclusion. ANd now I have made good (as I conceive it will be be granted on all hands) that the Reformed Church of England is not condemned by the other Reformed Churches,The Conclu∣sion. whether for her Government or Publick Worship, which is that I engaged to prove in my second Section; it is time I should draw to a conclusion, and end this Treatise. I said in the beginning, I chiefly intended thereby to undeceive all those of what perswasion soever, who thought the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas were great Strangers, and as great Enemies to all such things as are here disliked by some in the Nation. And I made two branches of those mis-informed persons, viz. Those that are true and obedient Sons of the Church of England; and those that for these many years last past have vilified, and, I may say, renounced her (though their own tender Mother, in whose womb they were begot∣ten
to Christ) because they were not pleased with the manner of her dress and tune of her voice, and such like things. For the first I have little or nothing to say to them, nothing doubting but that they are glad of the information they have had in the foregoing pages. They see their friends abroad are not only in greater numbers, but likewise far more kind, then some would have made them to believe they were; for which, all that is required of them, is onely this, that they be thankful to God for it, and that they requite the kindness of those our Brethren with a reciprocal love on their part. As for the o∣ther branch, they are not all of one sort; some having been deceived by others, some having deceived themselves, some having been deceivers both of others and of themselves, and some (though I will charitably suppose these are but few in number) meer Deceivers of others. For this last kind of men, I shall say nothing to them, because I have here brought in nothing but what they knew a long time since as well as my self. Only I beseech Almighty God, who is the onely searcher of hearts, and who alone consequently knows who they are, that he would be pleased to turn their hearts, and take away from them their deceitfulness. But as for you the rest of my deceived Brethren, whether by others, or by your selves, give me leave to direct my speech to you, and to present unto all of you a Petition for Peace, instead of that (so named) by some of you presented to some of the Right Reverend Bishops and other Reverend Divines. If you are Christians, as you profess your selves to be, and charity bindeth to believe you are, such a motion cannot but be very welcome to you. God is the God of Peace; Christ is the Prince of Peace; and Peace is the legacy he left his Disciples when he was departing out of this World. It was your opinion, that there was no other means of Peace in this Church, but by leaving every Minister to follow his own way in the publick worship of God, as to the manner and circumstances thereof. The Parliament full and free, after a long debate, hath been of another mind, and hath solemnly declared by a Publick Act, that the so much desired Peace and Unity of the Church cannot be attained by any other
means but Ʋniformity, which is therefore commanded unto all, with Penalties decreed against every one that shall not submit and conform to the prescribed Orders of the Church. My earnest request to you is, that for Peace, for Gods sake, you subject your selves to this Ordinance of man,1 Pet. 2.13. as you are comman∣ded to do by the Apostle. I know the same Apostle sayes, that we ought rather to obey God then men.Act. 5.29. And God forbid I or any should advise you to disobey God that you might please men. But take heed you do not ascribe to God such things as he never acknowledged for his, taking your own private opi∣ons for his Laws, which is the greatest usurpation of Gods Authority, and in a manner to make your selves your own Gods. To me and to the most part of this Nation you seem so to do. Yu are of a contrary opinion; and you have given out that the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas were of the same judgement with you,Petition for Peace. p. 13. and that the Pastors of the most of them, as well as other Divines at home, have taken the Conformity now required of you, to be a sin; alledging that for a main Reason, why it was meet you should be left to follow your own wayes. But this hath been confuted by those many witnes∣ses I have produced on the contrary, by which witnesses all your other Arguments for Non-conformity to things imposed, have been likewise disproved. It is a matter of fact, for which more evidences have been brought than the Law requires in any case whatsoever. You see all of them have either Epis∣copacy both name and thing, or what is equivalent to it under other names; or alledge necessity for their want of it, and de∣clare their readiness to submit to it, if they were so happy as to enjoy that wholsome Government under Protestant Bi∣shops; and highly honour and reverence the Prelates of the Church of England, wishing that they may ever maintain such their Title and Dignity. You see them requiring the Oth of Canonical Obedience to their Bishops and other Su∣periours, and subscription of Articles. You see them impo∣sing set Forms of Prayer, and for the administration of Sacra∣ments, celebration of Marriage, burial of the Dead, chur∣ching of Women, dedicating of Churches, &c. decreeing Pe∣nalties against all contentious persons, whether Ministers or
others, that shall cause any troubles in their Churches about their Government and set Forms of Liturgy. You see them all requiring Ʋniformity. You see a great number of them have all and every one the same Ceremonies, Rites and Cu∣stoms commanded to be kept in the Church of England, bowing at the naming of the name of Jesus, kneeling at the Com∣munion, Cross in Baptisme, and other significant Ceremonies, Holy dayes, set Fasts, Organs, with other Instruments of Mu∣sick, and many more of the same kind. And you see the o∣ther Reformed Churches that want them, declare by the publick Acts of their National Assemblies,Synode Natio∣nal de Charen∣ton, 1631. that in all such things there is neither Idolatry nor Superstition. You see their Ministers joyn with us in all the parts of our publick Wor∣ship, speak of it with the greatest commendation, and de∣clare that those dote and are in a dream, that think the con∣science wounded to submit to our Church-Government and use our Liturgy.See the Hi∣story of the troubles of Frankfort. You see that your very Brethren of Frank∣fort had a set Order of Common Prayer to be alwayes used in the Church by Mr. Knox himself, as well as other Mini∣sters, howsoever gifted. Finally, you see that Mr. Calvin himselfe (who I conceive may be supposed to have had as much knowledge, as good a conscience, and as much zeal for the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and true godliness in the Reformed Churches, as any of you) though he never had but a very disadvantagious representation of our Book of Common Prayer; yet declares that he hath found nothing in it but what is tolerable, and that he is wholly for a set Form of Liturgy to be alwayes used, from which the Ministers may not recede in their Functions; and for Ʋnifor∣mity. Which things, if they be so, as you see they be, you ought first of all to be convinced, and ingenuously to ac∣knowledge you were deceived, when you thought the Re∣formed Churches abroad, and the learned men therein had the same aversion with you, against the Government and publick Worship of God by Law established in the Church of England. And you must grant in the next place, that of all those that profess the Reformed Religion, you are a Sect by your selves, having not your like any where under Heaven
and will be accounted for such by all other Protestants that shall know your principles and opinions as long as you'l stand to them. To which you must add this other Conces∣sion, that if you were in any other of the Reformed Chur∣ches, you would and must (upon your Principles) be Non-conformists as well as here; and either bring in troubles and confusions amongst them, and overthrow all good order, there already set and establshed, to set up your own way, if you had power to do that; or cry out against them as Ty∣rannical, Superstitious and Formalists for their impositi∣ons. Of this I say, because it may seem strange to some of you, though never so true, I will give you an instance, which is a convincing proof thereof. In the raign of King James, one Mr. Welch a Scotch Presbyterian Minister,Vide Spots∣woods History of the Church of Scotland. Ad Anno 1604 p. 487. very well known both in Scotland and France, being banished his Country for his disobedience to the King, and opposition to Episcopacy, went over into France, frequented the Prote∣stant Congregations there, and having learned French enough to preach in that Language, was admitted (not without King James's good will, who was good and gracious) to be one of the Ministers of the Reformed Congregation of St. Jean d'Angeli in the Province of Saintonge. But although before his admittance he had subscribed and engaged to observe the order of the Reformed Churches of France in all the functi∣ons of his Ministry, yet it could not better digest with him, than that of England, or the Articles of Perth. He would not administer the Communion to the people standing, but would needs have them sit: neither would he use their set forms, but would improve his gift. Of all which complaints being made, he was called first before the Colloquie, or Classical Assembly; thence to the Provincial Synod. And cen∣sure being past upon him in both Assemblies, at last he was cited before the National Assembly held at Saint Maixent,Synode de St. Maixent. 1609 Articl. 36. des Appel. Il est enjoint au Sieur Welch de se conformer a l'ordre accoustumé es Eglises de ce Royaume. where he was enjoyned to conform to the accustomed Orders of the Reformed Churches of that King∣dome. At last he left them and died in England.
One thing more, and that of very high concern to the Reformed interest, must be granted by you, viz. That in case you obstinately refuse to obey the Act for Ʋniformity, and conform to the publick order of the Church, chusing ra∣ther to separate and mke a Schisme, you renounce for ever the Communion of the Reformed Churches according to the Confession of Augsburgh, which as hath often been observed, have all the very same Rites and Customs, and many more of the same kind, for which you forsake your Mother-Church. And this you do in a time, when all the other Reformed Churches (more commonly so called) are most earnest not∣withstanding the said things, and without so much as que∣stioning the lawfulness of them) to have a good correspon∣dence and brotherly Communion with the said Churches: which proceeding of yours would infallibly be an absolute and insuperable obstacle to that good work, if by others imi∣tated according to the invitation they had from you some years since.In the La∣tine Epi∣stle of the As∣smblers at Westminster. I confess it is publickly reported by some of the promoters of the intended Reconciliation, that the London Ministers are very desirous to be comprised in it, and fur∣ther the same; And this upon the word of your friend Mr. Duraeus. Which if it be so, what will the whole world judge of you,Vide Johan. Mlet de medo concordiae. Frankofurti. 1661. to see you approve and condemn the very same thngs? Will it not be thought that it is upon some other account than that of conscience, that you are so stiff at home, at the same time you are so facile and complying abroad? But be the report Mr. Duraeus gives of you true or false, if the principles whereupon you refuse to conform to this our Church be good and sound, it is manifest that there can be no Reconciliation and brotherly Communion between the Lutheran and other Reformed Churches that have not the same Ceremonies, Rites and Customes with them. All which great inconveniencies of being condemned by all other Reformed Churches, and the learnedest and godliest men therein; of making a Sect by your selves; of being Non-conformists all the world over, even at Geneva, nay, at Frankefort as well as Canterbury, or Saint Pauls, Lon∣don; of making the differences betwixt the Protestants
irreconcileable, &c. will be avoided by your Conformity to the prescribed Order of this our Church, and your obey∣ing the Laws of the Land; And, which must be of nearest and greatest concern to you and us all, our unhappy brea∣ches and divisions at home will by that means be happily made up, to the unspeakable joy and advantage, not only of this Church and Nation, but of all other Protestant Churches and States, which having so great an interest in us, can hardly think themselves safe and united, so long as they see us thus unsetled and exposed to danger by our own domestick broyles; The common enemy of us all, who lies in wait along time since to finde opportunities and gain advantages, will be wholly disappointed of his expectation; And being thus with one accord, and of one heart and one soul, in the same National Church; the God of Peace and Order will pour down his Spirit from Heaven abundantly upon us all; we shall be all filled with the Holy Ghost; we shall speak hence∣forth not of less things (which are as of old the tithing of Mint and Cummin among the Jewes,) though they ought not to be omitted, but of the wonderful works of the Lord, and that not according to our private phansies, but as the true Spirit of God gives utterance. And so at last, instead of that great offence we have given to all, both within and without, by our late scandalous debates, and more than civil and unnaturall Wars, we shall be by this our blessed Unity the sweet smell of Christ unto all the future Ages, in all the Churches of Jesus the great Peace-maker. Amen, Amen. 1 Cor. 1. vers. 10. Now I bseech you, Brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no Schismes among you: but that you be perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgement.
Tertul. in Apolog. Adversus Gent. Quid iniquius quàm ut oderint homines quod ignorant? Vacante meriti noritia, unde odii justitia defenditur? Omnes qui retro ode∣rant, quia ignorabant quale esset quod oderant, simul ut desinunt ig∣norare, cessant & odisse. Hic tantum humana curiositas torpescit: amant ignorare, cum alii gaudeant cognovsse. Malunt nescire, quia jam oderunt. Adeò quod nesciunt, praejudicant id esse, quod si sciant, odisse non poterunt. What is more unjust than that men should hate what they do not know? when it is not known what a thing deserves, upon what ground is the hatred against it justified? All men that formerly hated, because they knew not what was the nature of that which they hated, so soon as they cease to be ignorant thereof, so soon they cease also to hate. In this occasion only it is, that the curio∣sity of men is dull: they love to be ignorant, when others are glad to know. They chuse rather to be ignorant of the thing, because they hate it already. So, true it is, that they foresee the thing which they do not know is such, that if they were acquainted therewith, they could not hate it. August. ad Januar. Epist. 118. Neque Disciplina ulla est in his melior gravi prudenti{que} Christia∣no, quam ut co modo agat, quo agere viderit Ecclesiam ad quamcun∣que fortè devenerit. Quod enim ne{que} contra fidem, ne{que} bonos mores injungitur, indifferenter est habendum, & pro corum inter quos vivi∣tur societate servandum est. Neither is there (in things indif∣ferent) any better Discipline for a grave and wise Christi∣an, than to do as he sees that Church whatsoever doth whi∣ther he shall happen to come. For what is neither against Faith nor good manners, and is commanded, ought to be held indifferent, and to be conformed unto, according to the society of those among whom we live. Calv. Inst. l. 4 c. 10. n. 17. Cum in hominum moribus tanta insit diversitas, tanta in animis
varietas, tanta in judicus ingeniis{que} pugna; ne{que} Politia ulla satis firma est, nisi certis legibus constituta: nec sine statâ quadam for∣má servari ritus quispiam potest: Huc ergo quae conducunt leges, tantum abest ut damnemus, ut his ablatis, dissolvi suis nervis Eccle∣sias totas{que} de formari ac dissipari contendamus. Whereas there is such diversity in the manners of men, such variety of minds, such contrariety of judgements and dispositions; and no Polity can stand firmly enough, unless it be consti∣tuted by certain Laws; and that it is impossible that any Rite be observed without some set Form; we are so far from condemning the Laws that are made for this purpose, that we maintain, if they be taken away, the Churches have their Bonds and Nerves loosened and broken, and are wholly deformed and brought to ruine. Idem ibid. n. 30. Quia autem in externa disciplina & Ceremoniis non voluit (De∣us) sigillatim praescribere quid sequi debeamus (quod istud pendere a temporum conditione praevideret, ne{que} judicaret unam seculis omni∣bus formam convenire) confugere hic oportet ad generales quas tra∣didit regulas, ut ad eas exigantur quaecunque ad Ordinem & Deco∣rum praecipi necessitas Ecclesiae postulabit. Because God hath not been pleased to prescribe every particular thing that we ought to follow, as to external Discipline and Ceremo∣nies, by reason he did foresee that such things depended on the conditions of times, and judged that the same form would not agree with all Ages, therefore we ought to con∣sult the general Rules which he gave us, whereby to exa∣mine and to fit and settle all such things as belong to Or∣der and Decency, according as the exigencies of the Church shall require. Idem in Confess. Fidei nomine Eccles. Gallic. Oblat. Caesari, &c. Illos pro Schismaticis habemus qui turbas & confusiones invehunt ad dissipandam Ecclesiam, quae non aliter stare potest quam si regi∣tur
suis ast rius. We hold them for Schismaticks that bring in troubes and conusions to the dissipation of the Church, which cannot stand but when ruled by her Pastors. Idem l. de vitandis superstitionibus, Opusc. p. 609. Nequis putet me adeò austerum esse aut praecisi rigoris ut velim in totum, interdicere homini Christiano, sine ulla exceptione, ne se papistis ulla ceremonia aut observatione accommodet. Neque enim mihi quicquam damnare propositum nisi planè malum, & palam vi∣tiosum. Let no man think I am so rigid and precise, as that I would forbid Christians to comply with the Papists in any Ceremony or Custom whatsoever without exception. For I do not intend to condemn any thing but what is utterly evil and manifestly corrupt. Idem ad Protect. Angliae. Phrenetici illi qui mundum in supinam quandam licentiam trans∣versum cuperent, excitantur à Satanâ nominatim, ut per illos E∣vangelium malè audiat, quasi Evangelium causam praeberet rebelli∣om adversus principatus. Those Freneticks, who wish the world were altogether out of order, and brought into a supine licentiousness, are set on, namely, by the Devil, that by their means the Gospel may have an ill repute, as if it were the Gospel that causeth Rebellions against the higher Powers.
TO THE READER. THE following Discourse is the Preface of the Agenda, or Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of Sa∣craments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Reformed Churches of the Kingdom of Po∣land, and Great Dukedom of Lithuania; faithfully translated out of the Polonian Lan∣guage into Latine, by Mr. Samuel Warten∣sius a Polonian born, now living at Hackney; which Translation hath been perused and compared with the Original by Mr. John de Kraino Krainski Delegate of the Reformed Churches of Lithuania, at present in England. By which Discourse it appears, that the said Churches have been troubled with Non-conformists, and Extemporary Prayers as well as the Church of England; That the pretenses of such men there against set Forms, were the same with them that have been here objected; That Uni∣formity in every part of the Publick Worship of God is the means used by them to preserve
the Peace of the Church against the said Inno∣vators; And I heartily wish that whatever be the pretenses of those that have been the Distur∣bers of our Church upon the same account, may not be found (some of them) to have the same In∣tentions with them in Polonia.
APPENDIX. Praefatio. 2 Tim. 1.13, 14. Expressam formam teneto sanorum verborum quae à me audisti, cum fide & charitate quae est in Christo Jesu. Praeclarum illud deposi∣tum custodi per Spiri∣tum Sanctum qui habi∣tat in nobis. Ad pios Christi Servos & Dispensatores mysterio∣rum Divinorum, quos Spiritus Sanctus in Reg∣no Poloniae, & Magno Ducatu Lithuaniae Eccle∣siae fidelium hoc seculo praefecit. Gratia Domini nostri Jesu Christi, & charitas Dei & communicatio Spiri∣tus Sancti sit cum omni∣bus vobis, Amen. AD aedificationem & pro∣pagationem gloriae divi∣nae, multum in eo momenti
est, Fratres in Domino Je∣su dilecti, ut non solum unâ fide & confessione, una do∣ctrina & intelligentia, uno charitatis & vitae sanctimo∣niae vinculo, verùm etiam mutua in cultu divino con∣cordiâ & unitate tanquam membra unius corporis com∣paginati simus. Ad hoc ipsum Deus in ver∣bo suo nos manuducere vide∣tur quando in veteri Testa∣mento observationem institu∣tarum Ceremoniarum injun∣git, & de novo Testamento hoc promissū facit. Indam inqui∣ens, illis cor unū & viam unā ad reverendū me om∣nibus diebus, ad bonum ip∣sorum & filiorum ipsorum post ipsos. Quod ipsū Apo∣stolus requirit a nobis illis ver∣bis: Deus auctor tolerātiae et consolationis det vobis ut itidem alii in alios affecti sitis secundū Christū Jesū; ut concorditer uno ore glo∣rificetis Deum ac Patrem Domini nostri Jesu Christi. Exemplum insuper ipsius Ducis & consummatoris fidei, Principis{que} vitae Domini no∣stri Jesu Christi (cujus omnis actio nostra est institutio) idip∣sum nobis demonstrat. Ac∣cesserunt enim aliquando (te∣stante Evangelista) Discipuli
ad Christam unusque eorum dixit, Domine doce nos orare prout & Johannes do∣cuit Discipulos suos: Dixit autem eis: Quum oratis, dicite Pater Noster, &c. Nonne poterat Christus Do∣minus docuisse eos modum precandi aliis verbis, quam∣vis non tradidisset eis verba∣tim hanc formulam sic dici∣te: Pater noster, &c. nisi ipsi placuisset Uniformitas cultus Divini, & unitas in laudando Deo? Ex ipsa quo∣que institutione Baptismi & Coenae Dominicae idem col∣ligere licet, quae sub eadem verborum formula observan∣da tradidit. Baptizate in nomine Patris & filii & Spiritus Sancti. Item Hoc facite. Hinc videre est, quod non solum precum, verum etiam administrationis Sacra∣mentorum eandem voluerit habere formulam, quae om∣nia Apostoli post Ascensio∣nem Dominicam ritè observa∣runt. In Ecclesia quoque ve∣tere, quod uniformiter cultus divinus in toto fuerit admi∣nistratus, ex omnibus fere circumstantiis cuilibet obvi∣um esse potest. Erant enim loca peculiaria cultui divino dedicata, non solum Taber∣naculum illud, & postea
Templum à Solomone ex∣structum sed & Synagogae si∣ve Scholae Judaicae, vicatim & oppidatim propter unifor∣mem & conjunctum cultum erectae. Fagius magni nomi∣nis & doctrinae Theologus idem{que} peritissimus Linguae & veterum Scriptorum Judai∣corum meminit, quod praeter Templū Solomonis, in ipsa Ʋrbe Hierosolyma, propter amplitudinem Ʋrbis fuerint quingentae Synagogae, in qui∣bus Judaei legem Dei legebant & exponebant, Deum{que} cum Sacerdotibus suis unanimiter in Congregatione laudabant. Eum verò cultum à Confessi∣one peccatorū auspicabantur, praeeuntes Sacerdotes in hunc modum in lingua vernacula sequebantur. O Domine pec∣caverunt, iniquè egerunt & praevaricati sunt contra te populus tuus, domus Israël: obsecro D. remitte nunc peccata & iniquitates ac praevaricationes, quibus praevaricati iniquè egerunt & praevaricati sunt coram te populus tuus, domus Is∣raël, sicut scriptum est in lege Mosis servi tui. Hanc confessionem subsequebatur cantatio Psalmorum Davidi∣corum & aliorum Hymnorū Propheticorum & aliorum
Dei Servorum. Deinde cer∣tae quaedam partes legis Divi∣nae (quas ipsi Sedarim appel∣labant) legebantur, adnexis concionibus sive explicationi∣bus Sacrarum Scripturarum: quod etiam liquet ex testimo∣nio Lucae de S. Paulo & Bar∣naba, Qui ingressi Synago∣gam die Sabbathi, consede∣runt. Post lectionem au∣tem legis & Prophetarum, miserunt praefecti Synago∣gae ad eos dicentes, viri fra∣tres, si quis est in vobis ser∣mo exhortationis ad popu∣lum, dicite. Tandem omnes necessitates publicas una pre∣catione Sacerdos complecteba∣tur pro se & pro populo orans. Ne{que} verò inter solos Judaeos, qui erant illuminati, sed eti∣am inter Ethnicos ignaros glo∣riae veri Dei. Solo{que} instinctu naturae ductos talis cultus di∣vini modus observabatur. Omnes enim, & ubi{que} unifor∣miter Deos suos colebant, ad eum modum quem fictum eo∣rum numen ab ipsis require∣bat. Ipsa etiam ratio docet stultum & ridiculum, imò iniquum esse unitatem Religi∣onis prae se ferre, non tamen u∣nitatem cultus adhibere. Quo observato Concilium Mile∣vitanum, hunc ea de re Ca∣nonem condidit. Placuit eti∣am
& illud, ut preces vel Orationes seu Missae quae probatae fuerint â Conci∣lio, sive Praefationes, sive cōmendationes, seu manus impositiones ab omnibus celebrentur, nec aliae om∣nino dicantur in Ecclesia, nisi quae à prudentibus tra∣ctatae vel comprobatae in Synodo fuerint, ne for∣te aliquid contra fidem vel per ignorantiam vel per minus studium sit com∣positum. Omnibus hisce rectè consi∣deratis omnem curam adhi∣bebat Christi per omnes Chri∣stiani Orbis partes Ecclesia, ut uniformitatem Religionis ser∣varet. Quod quidem uti per totum terrarum Orbem, prop∣ter praegnantes aliquas causas, fieri non potest, siquidem iste perfectionis apex soli Coelo reservatur; ita quo minus hoc in uno ad minimum Regno vel Ditione fiat, cum tamen fieri possit, & indecorum, & unitati charitati, fidei & Re∣ligioni Christianae damno∣sum esse judicatur. Qua∣propter, ut consuleretur uni∣tati totius Eeclesiae, placuit eidem in duabus Synodis Ge∣neralibus Ecclesiarum Regni Poloniae, & Magni Duca∣tus Lithuaniae, hoc est
Orlensi, Anno 1633. & Wlodaviensi Anno 1634. habitis, unanimi consensu san∣cire, ut ex omnibus tribus Provinciis, puta ex Majore & Minore Polonia, & mag∣no Ducatu Lithuaniae, om∣nium generum Libellis Ritu∣alibus conquisitis unus conscri∣beretur qui in omnibus Eccle∣siis, in Ditionibus ad. S. Regi∣am Majestatem pertinenti∣bus, constanter in usu esset. Quod quidem jam per Dei gratiam, ad umbilicum per∣ducitur, pro piis omnium fi∣delium in hoc regno desideriis. Si enim diligenter inspician∣tur, Libelli praedicti Rituales, & invicem conferantur, certo comperietur, quòd tantummo∣do verbis & ordine nonnihil differant, reipsâ autem & in fundamento fidei sint consoni. Hinc emendatio eorum nihil aliud est quàm in nonnullis lo∣cis prolixitatis contractio, in aliis brevitatis amplificatio: precumsacrarum coordinatio, & omnium in ordinem reda∣ctio. In nonnullis locis id quod cum majori aedificatione, evi∣dentia & devotione dici potuit emendavimus; quae verò de∣siderabantur (ut ad ritus Ca∣suales, de Disciplina Ecclesi∣astica, de Divortiis, &c.) ea mutuo consensu, juxta usita∣tā
Ecclesiae praxin addidimu, ut omnibus in omnibus satis∣fieret, id quamvis impossibile sit. (quis enim est adeo felix?) Tamen quoniam propositi no∣stri fuit, & est, Deo prae om∣nibus placere, & gloriae ip∣sius ac mutuae aedificatiom servire; hoc minus durio∣rem hominum censuram re∣spicimus: probè conscii, quod nihil praeter ordinationem divinam, & duarum supra dictarum Synodorum facere voluerimus. Secuti praeterea sumus quoad sensum & Or∣dinem (nam in nullius verba juravimus) quàm diligentis∣simè potuimus, Libellos pri∣ores Rituales Ecclesiarum Majoris & Minoris Po∣loniae & Magni Ducatus Lithuaniae; praecipuè vero, à piae memoriae viro Dei, D. Christophoro Krain∣ski olim Seniore Districtus Belsensis, & Superinten∣dente Ecclesiarum Dei in Minore Polonia fidelissi∣mo vigilantissimoque, editū: qui per longam annorum seriem hucusque, ut pluri∣mum in Ecclesiis Regni fuit in usu. Quod etiam consen∣su & voluntate praedictarum Synodorum factum est. Quia verò a multis retro seculis Rituales Libri Agenda,
sive Formae vocabantur, eos∣demque titulos hactenus in Ecclesiis Evangelicis pro ra∣tione Provinciarum gere∣bant, nos quoque ita eosdem retinuimus, ut passim ac pro∣miscuè iis utamur. Pro ra∣tione ergo pii desiderii Ecclesiae Dei, & vestrorum votorum; fratres in D. Jesu dilecti, quo∣niam hic libellus Agendo∣rum Deo benè favente pro∣dit in publicam, ostendens quae Agenda sint in externo & uniformi cultu Dei; vos obnixè rogamus & obsecra∣mus, ut unanimiter, & uno ore Deum in omnibus Ec∣clesiis colatis. Quae enim gratior Harmonia potest da∣ri, quàm cùm variae Nati∣ones, & unusquisque in suo vernaculo sermone, uno cor∣dis affectu Deum laudant? Vestro quoque exemplo prae∣catis auditoribus vestris, ac stimulos addatis ut iisdem Psalmis Hymnis & Ora∣tionibus assuefiant, quod maximè necessarium est ru∣dioribus ad quos etiam Regnum Dei pertinet. Ante omnia exhortamur, ut jam admoniti, eos maxi∣mè fugiatis, qui sub velo libertatis, licentiam in domum Dei astutia sua introducere
conantur: idque faciunt, frae∣na boni, recepti, & unifor∣mis ordinis praemordendo, & in locum Precationum usitatarum, alias nescio qua∣les privatas Ecclesiae obtru∣dendo: quod tamen ratiun∣culis suis defensum volunt: Dicunt enim, Potest Mi∣nister Verbum Dei promp∣ta memoria praedicare; cur ergo praeter usitatas, & scripto consignatas praeca∣tiones, ipse alias animo & mente concipere, & pro lu∣bitu sibi formare ac deinde proferre non debet? Secun∣do, Precationes magis sunt devotae, quae ex corde profi∣ciscuntur quàm quâ ex char∣ta leguntur. Cur ergo Mi∣nister non debet precari jux∣ta conceptum & opinionem suam? Responsio ad priorem rati∣unculam est in promptu. Non de eo res agitur, utrum Mini∣ster possit vel non possit mente conceptam Orationem in con∣gregatione proferre: Scimus enim quod Deus effuderit Spiritum Gratiae & Oratio∣nis super veros servos suos: Verùm in eo cardo rei verti∣tur utrum permittendum sit cuilibet Ministrorum, loco
precationum à Servis Christi gravi cum deliberatione con∣ceptarum, à Senioribus Ec∣clesi relectarum, & à Sy∣nodo approbatarum, suas proprias, a se conceptas, nul∣li cognitas, & inusitatas Ec∣clesie Dei obtrudere? quam libertatem cur non conce∣damus, his ducimur ratio∣nibus. Primum, vult Chri∣stus ut fideles congregati isdem verbis orent, ut su∣pra dictum ex illis verbis Vos autem sic orate; Pater noster, &c. ubi & for∣mam & exemplum com∣munium precum palam de∣monstrat, Deumque invoca∣ri & coli debere iisdem ver∣bis docet. Proinde hisce ad∣versari extra dubium cen∣sendus est Pastor ille, qui ut vanam gloriam captet, nullâ religione ductus, aliis verbis quam quibus popu∣lus Dei orare solet, preces peragit. Secundo, Christus monet, ut omnes precantes consentiant de iis quae roga∣re volunt, illis verbis, Di∣co vobis, si duo ex vo∣bis consenserint in ter∣ra de omni re quam pe∣tierint, fiet eis a Patre meo qui est in coelis. Ta∣lis autem Pastor non concor∣dat cum fidelibus in eadem,
dum aliud quidpiam rogat, quam illi putabant eum pe∣titurum, & loco usitatarum precum, alias, & modo & ordine ab illis diversas in∣troducit. Hinc fit ut audito∣res ipsi, audientes preces in∣usitatas, devotionem animum∣que suum interturbent, dum eo tempore potius novitati precum attendunt, quam Pastorem imitantur: Et quamvis sapenumerò sequi vellent, tamen vel non au∣diunt, vel non intelligunt, vel propter novtatem ver∣borum in sua devotione ces∣sant. Tertio, Preces toti∣us Ecclesiae, sunt sacrifici∣um Deo gratum in Novo Testamento sacrificiis Lega∣libus subrogatae. Et quem∣admodum sacrificia aequa∣liter, uniformiter ab omni∣bus offerebantur, in iisque iidem Ruus ac Ceremoniae à Sacerdotibus observabantur. Pari exemplo nostra sub Novo Testamento sacrifi∣cia uno ore ac animo abs∣que ulla difficultate, ab om∣nibus offerri debent dum (ad∣monente Apostolo) ratio∣nalem nostrum cultum Deo praestamus. Hinc consequen∣ter colligere licet, quòd alia sit ratio praedicandi verbi alia verò orandi: quia enim
Minister verbi divini prae∣dicare Evangelium debet, habita ratione temporis & personarum, quas nomine Christi vel admonere vel corrigere oportet, non potest alligari ad certas loquendi formulas, quia legatione fun∣gitur a Deo ad populum: quando autem legatione fun∣gitur à populo ad Deum (quod fit in precatione) tunc alli∣gatur ad verba, res, imò easdem cogitationes; juxta illud Lucae, Hi omnes per∣durabant concorditer in precibus & supplicationi∣bus. Nec mirum, fuit enim horum Dei culto∣rum cor & anima una. Altera ratio nullius est momenti: Precatio (inqui∣unt isti Novatores) quae ex corde procedit magis ad de∣votionem est composita, quam quae ex Charta legitur: Non animadvertunt miseri isti consolatores, quod precatio & devotio à Deo, à quo omnis donatio bona & omne integrum donum est supernè descendens à Pa∣tre luminum, procedant: quod ipse Deus in promissi∣one illa testatum facit, in∣quiens, Effundam super do∣mum Davidis spiritum gratiae & deprecationum.
Dum vero effundit Spiritum precationis, procul dubio eti∣am legendo, devotè oratur. Deinde, Integrum tibi est ô Minister, facere quicquid volueris cum tua privata pre∣catione; quae vero totius populi sunt, non tantum ha∣bes in ea juris, ut mutare possis. Haec enim publici sint juris, ab Ecclesiâ cum consensu omnium deliberatè traditae. Nullus quoque fi∣delium sibi metuit, ut aber∣ret in sensu, sciens publicas precationes sub trutina mul∣torum fuisse, easque jam manibus & ore omnium teri: secus, quum unus omnium nomine Deum alloquitur, ver∣bis inusitatis, quaeque ad ple∣risque intelligi non pos∣sunt. Verum enimvero, est ali∣ud Fratres charissimi quod istius farinae homines prae∣tendunt, aliud quod inten∣dunt, ex fructibus cognosce∣re eos poteritis. Fructus au∣tem hujus Novatorum Do∣ctrinae, quos pro Christi pro∣fessis hostibus habemus, iste inter primos meritò reputa∣tur: Dicunt enim, Nullibi in Scriptura injuncta est invocatio Christi; licet igi∣tur eum invocare vel non
invocare. Alter est iste: Christus non est adaequatum objectum Orationis nostrae sive terminus ad quem diri∣gatur Oratio, sed solus Pa∣ter, quem Patrem invoca∣mus. Tertius est: Spiritus Sanctus non est invocandus, siquidem est donum Dei, re∣liquos praetereo. Ʋt igitur tutius latere possint, nec in∣vocent Christum vel Spiri∣tum Sanctum, ideò prascri∣ptas formulas contemnunt, suasque fictas memoriter re∣citando supponunt. Quae in∣juria Sacrosanctae Trinitati illata, ab omnibus fidelibus meritò est vindicanda: Et si alicubi inter nos id genus homines reperiantur, pro sus∣pectis omninò in fide ha∣bendi sunt, utpote qui per∣sistere nobiscum in unitate & charitate nolunt, imme∣mores illius gravissimae ex∣hortationis Apostoli dicentis, Precor autem vos fratres per nomen Domini nostri Jesu Christi, ut idem la∣quamini omnes, & non sint inter vos dissidia, sed sitis impacti eadem men∣te & eadem sententia. Quapropter dilecti ne cui∣vis Spiritui credite, sed probate Spiritus an ex Deo sint: nam multi Pseudo∣prophetae
venerunt in mun∣dum. Ex hoc cognoscite Dei Spiritum: quicunque Spiritus profitetur Jesum Christum in carnem venis∣se, ex Deo est. Imò nullo mo∣do ipsis placere studete, vel eorum cultum ac opera imita∣ri, certò persuasi, eos esse ho∣stes crucis Christi, qui Filium Dei non amant, satius repu∣tantes horrendū illud Maran∣atha in semetipsos derivare, quàm eum osculari, eique in timore servire. Jam igitur in nomine Do∣mini Fratres Charissimi, (quamvis nullum sit nobis ea de re dubium) rogamus ta∣men, ut cultum sacrum, & omnia publica officia in Ec∣clesiis nostris Evangelicis usi∣tata, hoc consignato ac edito ordine, peragatis, nihil ad∣dendo vel demendo, ut ob∣viam eatis offensae, memores verborum Apostoli dicentis: Nempe igitur quae ad pa∣cem faciunt sectemur, & quae ad mutuam aedificati∣onem. Deus autem om∣nis miserationis qui est sum∣mus Architectus Ecclesiae suae, ducat nos regatque Spi∣ritu suo Sancto, ut retinea∣mus unitatem Spiritus in vinculo pacis; in concordia unanimitate & charitate Ec∣clesiam
ejus aedificemus eam∣que uno ore semper glori∣ficemus. Cui soli sapienti Deo, sit gloria per Jesum Christum in secula. Dat. Thorunii die San∣ctis Apostolis Simoni & Judae festo. Anno Domini, 1636. Psal. 68. v. 29. Corrobora ò Deus, quod operatus es in nobis. 2 Joh. v. 8. Respicite vos ipsos, ne per∣damus quae egimus, sed ut mercedem plenam re∣cipiamus. The Preface. 2 Tim. 1.13, 14. Hold fast the Form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in Faith and Love which is in Christ Je∣sus. That good thing which was com∣mitted unto thee, keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us. To the pious Servants of Christ and Dispensers of Divine Mysteries, whom the Holy Ghost hath in this Age set o∣ver the Church of the faithful in the Kingdom of Poland, and Great Dukedom of Li∣thuania. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God,2 Cor. 13.13. and the fellowship of the Ho∣ly Ghost be with you all, A∣men. BEloved Brethren in the Lord Jesus, it is much con∣ducing to edification, and to
the propagation of Gods glo∣ry, that we should be joyned together as members of one bo∣dy, not only by one Faith and Confession, by one doctrine and knowledge, by one bond of Charity and Holiness of life; but likewise mutually amongst our selves, by Concord and U∣nity in the worship of God. To this very thing God seems to lead us by the hand in his word, when in the Old Testa∣ment he enjoyns the observati∣on of the instituted Ceremonies; And of the New he maketh promise:Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them. Which very thing the A∣postle requireth of us in these words:Rom. 15 5, 6. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be like minded one towards another, ac∣cording to Christ Jesus: that ye may with one mind, and one mouth glorifie God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Moreover the example of the Captain himself,Heb. 12.2. the Perfecter of Faith, and Prince of Life, our Lord Jesus Christ (every action of whom is our instru∣ction) does clearly demonstrate the same unto us.Act. 13.15. For there came to Christ on a time (as
the Evangelist witnesseth) his Disciples, and one of them said,Luc. 11.1. Lord teach us to pray, as John also taught his Disciples to pray: and he said unto them, when ye pray, say, Our Father, &c. Could not the Lord Christ have taught them how to pray in other words, albeit he had not given them that form verbatim, Say so, Our Father, &c. but that he lo∣ved Ʋniformity of Divine Wor∣ship and Ʋnity in praising God? The same may likewise be ga∣thered from the institution of Baptisme and the Lords Sup∣per which he ordained to be observed in the same form of words,Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. Baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Also, Do this From thence it may appear, that he would not only have the same form of Prayers, but likewise of the administration of the Sacraments; all which the Apostles after the Ascensi∣on of our Lord,Act. 1. v. 12, & 13.14. &c. did duly ob∣serve. It may also be obvious to every one, almost by all Circumstances, that the whole divine worship was uniformly administred in the Ancient Church. For then were pecu∣liar places dedicated to Divine Service, not only that Taber∣nacle, and afterwards the Tem∣ple built by Solomon, but like∣wise
Synagogues, or Judaick Schools erected in every Town and Village for an Uniform and joynt Worship.Fagius in Pa∣raph. Chald. Praefat. in Le∣vitic. Fagius a Divine of great fame and lear∣ning, and most skilful in the Language and Writings of the ancient Jewes, observes, that, besides the Temple of Solomon, there were in Jerusalem, because of the greatness of the City, five hundred Synagogues, wherein the Jewes did read and interpret the Law of God,Luk. 4 16. Act 13 14. Item. 15.21. and praise him with their Priests unanimously in the Congrega∣tion. And they begun the Ser∣vice with a confession of their sins, following the Priests who went before them in their vul∣gar Language after this man∣ner. O Lord, thy people, the house of Israel have sinned,Fag. in Paraph. Chal. in cap. 16. Lvit. they have dealt wickedly and treache∣rously against thee; I beseech thee now O Lord, forgive the sinnes, iniquities, and treache∣rous dealings, wherewith thy peo∣ple the house of Israel being led astray, have done wickedly and rebelliously in thy sight, as it is wrtten in the Law of thy Ser∣vant Moses. Singing of Da∣v ds Psalmes and other Hymns of the Prophets, and other Servants of God, did imme∣diately follow this Confession: and thereafter some certaine
parts of the divine Law (which they themselves called Seda∣rim) were read, joyning there∣with Sermons or Explicati∣ons of the sacred Scriptures: which likewise is clear from Luke his testimony of Saint Paul and Barnabas;Act. 3.14, 15. Who being entred into the Synagogue upon the Sabbath day, sate down; and af∣ter the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, ye men and Brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on. Finally, the Priest in one Prayer compre∣hended all publick necessities, praying both for himselfe and for the people. Nor was such a form of Divine worship ob∣served only amongst the Jewes who had knowledge,Cic. lib. de Nat. Deor. but even also amongst the Heathens who were ignorant of the glory of the true God, and led by the only instinct of Nature; for all of them did every where worship their Gods uniformly, after that manner which their feined Deity required at their hands. Nay, Reason it selfe teacheth that it is foolish and ridiculous, yea unjust, special∣ly to pretend Ʋnity of Religion, and yet not admit Ʋnity of Wor∣ship. Which having considered, the Council of Milvis made
this Canon concerning that matter.Can. 12. And this likewise is thought good that Prayers or Orations, or Masses which be approved of by the Council, whe∣ther Prefaces, or Commendations, or Impositions of Hands, should be celebrated by all, and that no other at all be said in the Church, but such as shall be handled by prudent persons, or approved in the Synod, lest perchance through ignorance or less carefulness, some thing might be composed con∣trary to the Faith. All these things duly consi∣dered, the Church of Christ through all parts of the Chri∣stian World took all care to preserve Uniformity of Religi∣on. Which indeed as it cannot be through the whole World for some pregnant Reasons; and truly that height of per∣fection is reserved for Heaven alone; so that it should not be, at least in one Kingdom or Do∣minion, when yet it may be there, is judged to be both un∣comely and hurtful to Ʋnity, Charity, Faith and Christianity. Wherefore that special care might be taken of the Unity of the whole Church, it was thought good by her in the two General Synods of the Churches of the Kingdom of Poland, and the Great Dukedom
of Lithuania held at Orlen, Anno 1633. and at Wlodavia, Anno 1634. to ordain with an una∣nimous consent, that out of all the three Provinces, to wit, out of the Greater and Lesse Polonia, and the Great Dukedom of Li∣thuania, Ritual Books of all kindes being diligently sear∣ched, one should be composed, which should be constantly u∣sed in all Churches which are in the Dominions belonging to the Kings sacred Majesty. Which truly is now perfected according to the pious desires of all the Faithful in this King∣dom. For if those said Ritual Books be diligently looked in∣to and compared one with an∣other, it wil be certainly found, that they differ only somewhat in words and order, but in ef∣fect and in fundamentals, they are consonant to Faith. Hence the amendments are nothing else but in some places a con∣traction of prolixity, in other, an amplification of brevity, a co-ordination of holy Prayers, and a reducing of all into order. In some places we have men∣ded that which might be said with greater edification, evi∣dence and devotion; and what was wanting (as to occasional Rites, concerning Ecclesiastical Discipline, Divorces, &c.) we
have added by mutual consent, according to the practise of the Church, that in every thing all persons might be satisfi'd, al∣though it is a thing impossible. (for who is so happy?) Yet be∣cause our intention hath been & is, chiefly to please God above all, and to serve to his glory and our mutual edification; we do the less regard the hard censures of men, being consci∣ous that we have desired to do nothing beyond the Ordinance of God, and injunctions of the two said Synods. Moreover, we have followed as to the sense and order (for we have sworn in no bodies words) as carefully as we could, the for∣mer Ritual Books of the Grea∣ter and Lesse Polonia, and Great Dukedom of Lithuania, specially that which was pub∣lished by that man of God, Mr. Christopher Krainski of pious memory, sometimes Senior of the District of Belsen, and most faithful and vigilant Superinten∣dent of the Churches of God in the Less Bohemia, and who for a long series of years hath hi∣therto for the most art been in use in the Churches of the Kingdom; which likewise was done with the consent and will of the two aforesaid Synods. And because for many Ages
past the Ritual Books were calledThat is, things that ought to be done in the Church. Agenda, or set Forms, and hitherto, according to the custom of the Provinces, have had the same titles in the Evan∣gelick Churches; we likewise have so retained them as we use them here and there promiscu∣ously. Wherefore, beloved Bre∣thren in the Lord Jesus, since according to the desire of the Church of God & your wishes, this Book of Agenda comes forth, shewing what ought to be performed in the external and Uniform Worship of God; we pray and beseech you ear∣nestly, that you would worship God in all Churches Unani∣mously and with one voice. For what more acceptable harmo∣ny can be given, then when se∣veral Nations, and every one in his Mothers tongue do praise God with one affection of heart? And by your example likewise go before your hearers and en∣courage them to accustome themselves to the same Psalmes,1 Cor. 2.27. Hymns, and Prayers which is most necessary for the younger and weaker sort, to whom also pertains the Kingdom of God. Before all things we exhort you, that being now warned, you would above al things shun all those who under the vail of liberty, do endeavour by their
subtilely to introduce a licenti∣ousness into the house of God: and they do this, by biting the good, received, and uniforme Order; and by obtruding upon the Church, instead of the Com∣mon Prayer, I know not what private ones, which yet they will needs defend by their pet∣ty inconsiderable Arguments. For they say, First, the Mini∣ster can preach the word of God with a ready memory; wherefore then ought he not, besides the common and set Prayers, conceive others in his hart and mind, and according to his pleasure frame them to himself and utter them? Se∣condly, Prayers which proceed from the heart are more devout than those which are read out of a Book; why then ought not the Minister to pray according to his own conception and opi∣nion? The Answer to the first is rea∣dy at hand; For the question is not, whether the Minister can or cannot utter in the Congre∣gation a Prayer conceived in his heart: for, we know that God hath poured out the Spirit of Grace and Prayer upon his faithful servants.Zach. 12.10. Act. 2.17. But here the main question is, whether every Minister should be suffered to obtrude his own Prayers con∣ceived
by himself, known to no body, and unaccustomed to the Church, instead of those which are conceived with ma∣ture deliberation by the servants of Christ, perused by the Seni∣ors of the Church, and approv'd of by the Synod? Which liber∣ty why we do not grant, we have these Reasons. First, it is the will of Christ, that the faith∣ful being gathered together, should pray in the same words, as is observed before, out of these words, But you pray after this manner, Our Father,Mat. 6.9. &c. where he openly shews both the Form and Example of Com∣mon Prayers: and teaches that God ought to be called upon and worshipped in the same words. Wherefore there is no doubt but that Minister ought to be judged an opposer of this, who that he may get a little vain-glory, not led thereunto by any ground of Religion, prayes in other words then the people of God use to pray. Se∣condly, Christ admonisheth, that all who pray should agree about those things they desire to ask in these words,Mat. 18.9. If two of you should agree on earth of one thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven. But such a Prea∣cher does not agree with the
Faithful in the same thing, whilest he asketh another thing than what they thought he would ask, and instead of the usual Prayers, introduceth o∣thers, different from those both in manner and order. Thence it comes, that the auditors them∣selves, hearing unaccustomed Prayers do confound their own mind and devotion, whilest they rather give ear to the no∣velty of the Prayers, than they do imitate the Pastor: And al∣beit they often desire to follow, yet they do not hear, or do not understand; or for the novelty of the words they linger in their devotion. Thirdly, the Prayers of the whole Church are a sa∣crifice acceptable to God, in the New Testament substitu∣ted in the room of the legal sa∣crifices.Act. 1.14. Psal. 51.17. And as the sacrifices were offered by all equally and uniformly, and in them the same Rites and Ceremonies were observed by the Priests: In like manner ought our sacri∣fices under the New Testament to be offered by all with one voice and one heart, without any difficulty, when (as the A∣postle admonisheth) we offer unto God our reasonable ser∣vice.Hebr. 13.15. From hence it may con∣sequently be gathered, that the nature of preaching and prayer
is different: for because the Mi∣nister of Gods word ought to preach the Gospel, considera∣tion being had of time and per∣sons whom it behoveth him to exhort and reprove in the name of Christ, he cannot be tied to certain forms of speaking, be∣cause he performs an Embas∣sage from God to the people; but when he does that Office from the people to God (as he doth in prayer) then he is tied to words and things, yea, to thoughts themselves according to that of Luke,Act. 1.14. all of them did continue with one mind in prayers and supplications: and no wonder, for those worshippers of God had one heart and one mind. The other Argument is of no force; a Prayer (say those In∣novators) proceeding from the heart, is more fitted for de∣votion, than that which is read out of a Book: Those mise∣rable Comforters take no no∣tice, that prayer and devotion which is of God,James 1.17. proceedeeh from the Father of Lights, from whom every good and perfect gift commeth down from above: which God himselfe witnesseth in that promise, saying, I will pour upon the house of David the spirit of grace and prayer.Zach. 12.10. Now whilest he poureth out the spi∣rit of prayer, without doubt
Prayers are with Devoti∣on. Besides, O you Minister, it is left at your liberty to do what you please with your own private Prayer; but for those which belong to all the people, you have not so much power as that you may alter them. For these are of publick right, de∣liberately delivered by the Church with the consent of all. And none of the Faithful is a∣fraid of missing the sense, know∣ing that Common Prayers have been under the examination of many, and that they are now frequent in the hands and mouths of all: It is otherwise, when one speaks to God in the name of all, in unusual words, and which cannot be under∣stood by the most part. But most beloved Brethren, that sort of men do pretend one thing and intend another,Mat. 7.20. you may know them by their fruit. but this is deservedly reckoned amongst the chiefest fruits of this Doctrine of the Innovators, (whom we hold for professed enemies to Christ.) For they say, the invocation of Christ is no where enjoyned in the Scri∣pture; wherefore it is lawful to pray or not to pray to him. The other is this, Christ is not
the adequate object of our prayer, or the Terminus to which prayer is directed, but the Fa∣ther only, to whom we pray through Christ. The third is, the Holy Ghost ought not to be prayed unto, because it is the gift of God. We pass by the rest. That then these men may lurk the more securely, and call neither upon Christ nor the Holy Ghost, they do therefore contemn set Forms, and in their place put those of their own framing, which they say by heart. Which being an injury offered to the holy Trinity, it deservedly ought to be vindi∣cated by all the Faithful: and if such kind of men be any where found amongst us, they are certainly to be suspected in matter of Faith, being indeed such as will not persist with us in unity and charity, not remembring that most weighty exhortation of the Apostle, saying,1 Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you Bre∣thren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgement. Wherefore, Beloved,1 Joh. 4.12. believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false Prophets are
gone out into the world. Hereby know you the spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God. Yea, study not to please them by any means, neither do you imitate their worship or works, being certainly perswaded, that they are enemies to the Cross of Christ, who love not the Son of God, esteeming it better to draw upon them that horrible Maranatha,1 Cor. 16.2. Psal. 2.12. than to kiss him and serve him in fear. Now therefore most beloved Brethren (although we have no doubt concerning this matter) yet we do beseech you in the name of the Lord, that you would perform Divine Service, and all the publick Offices ac∣customed in our Evangelical Churches, according to this prescribed Order now publish∣ed, without adding to, or ta∣king any thing from it, that you may prevent offences, being mindful of the words of the Apostle, Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace,Rom. 14.19. and things wherewith one may edifie another. Now the God of all mercy who is the chief Builder of his own Church, lead and govern us by his holy Spirit,Phil. 1.27. Eph. 4.3. that we may keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of Peace; edifie his Church in concord, in same∣ness of mind and love, and ever glorifie him with one mouth. To which only wise God be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Given at Thoren upon the Festival of the holy Apo∣stles Simon and Jude, Anno Dom. 1636. Psal. 68. v. 29. Strengthen, O God, that which thou hast wrought in us. 2 Joh. v. 8. Look to your selves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward. In the first Section, Pag. 8. I mentioned an Epistle written Anno 1614. by David Paraeus, then Divinity Reader at Heidelburg, to the Reformed Churches of that part of Hun∣gary which belongs to the Prince of Transylvania. Of which Epistle I have a perfect Copy, which was given me by the learned and pious, Reverend Dr. Basire Arch-Deacon of Northumberland, who brought it out of Transylvania. It was written upon occasion of the troubles which one Emericus Vifalvi an Aërian was like to cause by his opposition against Episcopacy. The following passage is faithfully extracted out of the said Epistle. NEscit miser ille quid Ordo, quid Tyrannis differat. Sine Ordine, qui
est partium omnium, vel, su∣periorum & inferiorum se∣cundum prius & posterius apta dspositio, Ecclesia nun∣quam fuit, nec esse potest; sicut nulla Societas alia Or∣dine carere potest. Ordinis fuit quod in Ecclesiâ Apo∣stolica alius erat Episco∣pus, (quae vox quid etiam est nisi Superattendens? In Palatinatu Inspectorem, vocamus, qualem singulae habent Praefecturae,) alius Presbyter laborans vel non laborans in Verbo, alius Di∣aconus, &c. Et varios Mi∣nisterii Ordines recenset A∣postolus, Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephes. 4. Et si au∣tem alicubi etiam Presby∣teris Episcoporum nomen tribuit Scriptura, tamen quare & quomodo distincti∣onem fecerit Ecclesia ut unus Episcopus multis Pres∣byteris praeesset, non quidem Imperii sed Directionis po∣testate, Hieronymus Com∣ment. ad Tit. 1. perspicue exposuit. Quem Ordinem rectè & utiliter diu serva∣vit Ecclesia; Et hodie pas∣sim Ecclesiae Reformatae pro diversitate locorum, Pro∣vinciarum, & hominum sa∣lubriter observant. At in∣quis, Papa hunc Ordinem in
Tyrannidem convertit? Quid tum? An ut vitetur Ty∣rannis Cyclopica,  invehenda, & extremum u∣num cum altero commutan∣dum erat? Primatus in∣quis damnatur verbo Dei, Matth. 16. Luk. 22. Joh. 9. Imò non Primatus, sed Ambitio & Tyrannis. THat wretched man doth not know what is the dif∣ference betwixt Order and Ty∣ranny.
The Church never was nor can ever be without Order, which is a fit disposition of all the parts, or of things superiour and inferiour, one after another, according to their rank and place; neither can any other So∣ciety be without it. It was an effect of Order, that in the A∣postolical Church, one was a Bishop; (which word, what is it but a Superintendent? In the Palatinate we say an Inspector, such as be in every Govern∣ment,) another a Presbyter la∣bouring or not labouring in the Word; another a Deacon, &c. And the Apostle mentions se∣veral Orders of the Ministry, Rom. 12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephes. 4. And although the Scripture in some places giveth the name of Bishops to Priests, yet why and how the Church made the distinction, that one Bishop should be over many Priests, not with an absolute command, but with a power of direction, Hierome hath clearly shewed in his Comment upon Ttus Ch. 1. Which Order the Church hath rightly and profitably kept a long time, and most of the Re∣formed Churches at this day do advantagiously keep the same according to the diversity of Places, Countries, and Men. But the Pope, sayest thou, hath
changed this Order into Ty∣ranny? What then? Must con∣fusion be brought in to shun a Cyclopical Tyranny? and was it necessary to run from one extremity into another? Thou sayest that Superiority is con∣demned by the word of God, Mat. 16. Luc. 22. Joh. 9. it is not Superiority, but Ambition and Tyranny. A Letter of Dr. Peter du Moulin the Son, Pre∣bendary of Christ-Church, Canterbury, one of His MAjESTIES Chaplains, touching a passage for Episcopacy, written by Mr. Da∣vid Blondel in his Apologia pro Hierony∣mi Sententiâ, but left out at the entreaty of the Presbyterians. My Reverend Brother, TO cast my Mite into that rich Treasury which you are now furnishing, I must inform you of a remark∣able passage very pertinent to your purpose. In the year 1651. that great and good man, My Lord Primate Ʋsher told me that the learned Mr. David Blondel had concluded his Apologia pro Hieronymo with words to this purpose. By all that we have said to assert the Rights of the Presbytery, we do not intend to invalid the ancient and Apostolical Constitution of Episcopal Preheminence. But we believe that wheresoever it is established conformably to the ancient Canons it must be carefully preserved, and wheresoever by some heat of contention or other∣wise it hath been put down or violated, it ought to be reverently restored. The good Primate told me besides, that whereas
the Book had been written at the earnest request of the As∣sembly of Westminster, of the Scots especially, who had their Agents and Leagers in Paris to strengthen their party by mis-informing the Protestants of France, and winning them to their side. When these Agents saw this conclusion of Mr. Blondels Manuscript they expostulated with him very lowd for marring all the good he had done in his Book, disappointing the expectation of the Assembly, and shew∣ing himself an enemy instead of a friend to their holy Covenant. This they urged upon him with such vehemen∣cy and unwearied importunity, that they prevailed with him to put out that conclusion. Having received that in∣formation from a person of so much knowledge and inte∣grity, as that famous Prelate, yet for a further Confirma∣tion I told it to Mr. John Blondel (Davids Brother) then living in London, who denied that there was any truth in that Report, and defended his Brother as much wronged by it. If you think (said I) that I wrong your Brother, complain to him of me in your next Letter, and remem∣ber my kind service to him. Mr. John Blondel did not fail to write to his Brother about this. And three or four weeks after shewed me a letter from him, wherein he remembred his love to me, and acknowledged that the Relation was true. This Advice I thought my selfe obliged to give you, knowing that no man can make a better use of it than your self, to whose holy labours about this point, the Church is so much indebted, and none more your debtor in the Church in that regard then, (SIR) Your most affectionate Brother and Servant, Peter du Moulin.
When Doctor Basire was at Constantinople, the Geneva men that use to trade in that City, knowing that he had the use of the French Language, being a French man born, desired him that by his means they might at some times assemble together to worship God, in the house of the Lord Em∣bassador of England. The Reverend and pious Doctor ha∣ving the Lord Embassadors consent, yielded them their re∣quest; and because he had no Book of Common Prayer in French, he translated out of it as much as needed for those Offices which he was to perform with them, viz. Morning and Evening Prayer, and the Offices for Infants Baptisme, and for the Communion, which he ministred to them accor∣ding to the Order of the Church of England. Which when the Ministers of Geneva had heard they exhorted their men, that by all means they would improve that favourable means of performing Church Duties, which the good Pro∣vidence of God so unexpectedly had afforded them; and gave Doctor Basire many thanks. This is the Extract of one of the Geneva Minister's Letters, which the Reverend Do∣ctor hath imparted and consented to have published, though with much reluctancy; the others are to the same purpose. It was Penn'd by Monsieur Leger in the name of his Brethren as well as his own. Monsieur & tres honoré Frere, ENtendant, par les Let∣tres de Monsieur Gues, qu'avies pris la peine de me rescrire, combien que je n'aye point receu vostre response, je ne veux pourtant negliger la presente occasion de vous eon∣tinuer l'asseurance de mon tres humble service, & vous tesmoigner le singulier con∣tentement que je prens avec toute nostre Compagnie, qui
vous salue affectueusement, en nostre Seignieur, des bonnes nouvelles que nous entendons de vostre sainct Zele, à advan∣cer le Regne de Dieu en ces quartiers la parmi les no∣stres, & parmi les Grecs, y employant heureusement, le don de diverses Langues, que vous possedes en grande me∣sure, & proposant les choses Magnifiques de Dieu, à cha∣cun seion son Langage, com∣me faisoent les Apostres. Et a cela vous prions nous devous accourager de plus en plus, au Seigneur, lequel en son temps vous fera voir le fruit de vostre travail, qui ne scra point vain, quoi que par fois on rencontre de la mes∣connoissance & Rebellion du cesté, des hommes. Mon∣sieur Girard nostre tres hono∣ré Frere, & moi, avons ex∣horte & exhortons au nom de Dieu, & de nostre Com∣pagnie, ceux qui sont par de lá originaires de ceste Eglise, de profiter du grand benefice, que le Seigneur leur presente par vostre Ministere, en la maison & sous la Pro∣ection de Monsieur l'Am∣bassadeur de la Grande Bre∣tagne, dont eux & nous demeurons obligez à la Pi∣etè de S. E. & a la vostre,
comme aussi de ce que vous maintenez puissamment la ve∣rité de nostre Religion contre les Adversaires. Sir, Reverend Bother, HEaring by Master Gues his Letters, that you had taken the paines to write unto me, though I have not received your An∣swer, I do not intend to let pass this present opportunity of continuing to assure you of my most humble service, and testifie unto you the singular satisfaction I receive, together with our whole Company
(which doth salute you affecti∣onately in our Lord) of the good news we hear of your ho∣ly zeal for the advancement of the Kingdom of God in those parts, among those of our Re∣ligion, and among the Greeks, thereto happily improving the gift of several Languages which you have attained to in a great measure; and propoun∣ding the wonderful works of God, to every one in his own Language, as the Apostles did. To that good work it is that we intreat you to excite your selfe more and more in the Lord; who in his season will let you see the fruits of your la∣bour, which will not be in vain, although sometimes one will meet with ungratefulness and Rebellion amongst men. Mr. Girard our most honou∣red Brother, and my self, have exhorted, and do exhort in the name of God and of our Company, those that are in those parts with you, and are originally members of this Church, to improve the great benefit which the Lord offers unto them through your Mini∣strie, in the house, and under the Protection of my Lord Embassador of Great Britain, for which both they and we remaine obliged to the Pietie
of his Excellencie & your own; as likewise for that you main∣tain powerfully the truth of our Religion against the Adversa∣ries thereof. Geneva Octob. 3. An. 1654. The following Letter was written to me by Doctor Basire, when he sent the Copy of that of the Ministers of Geneva; and I conceive it very proper to make the close of all. He writ it in French, wherefore I will give it in both Languages, that it may be understood of more men. Monsieur & trescher Frere. POur satisfaire a vostre desir je vous envoye la seconde partie de ma pro∣messe, les Lettres qu'il pleút a Messieurs de Geneve de m'addresser estant a Con∣stantinople. Le but est de faire paroistre leur modera∣tion au suiet de la Liturgie d'Angleterre, suivant la∣quelie ils savoyent bien que je celebrois le service de Dieu pour la consolation de leurs concitoyens residans pour lors au Levant, & repassans de temps en temps de Con∣stantinople a Geneve: Qui jamais n'ont fait de difficul∣té des Ceremonies ni du Bap∣tesme ni de la Sainte Cene. J'ai peur que leur bon exem∣ple ne soit produit en juge∣ment contre les factieux de
cette Eglise. Il pourra servir de conviction suivant le dessein de votre Traitté. De Stanhop le 12. Juin, 1662. Sir my dearest Brother, TO satisfie your desire, I send you the second part of my promise, viz. the Letter which the Ministers of Geneva were pleased to direct unto me being at Con∣stantinople. The thing aimed at is to shew how moderate they are about the Liturgy of England, according to which they knew I celebrated the Service of God for the com∣fort of their fellow-Citizens residing at that time in the East, and going back now and then from Constantinople to Geneva, who never scru∣pled at the Ceremonies ei∣ther of Baptisme or the Lords Supper. I feare their good example will be brought in judgement against those that are factious in this Church.
However it may serve for a conviction, according to the de∣sign of your Treatise. Stanhop the 12. of June, Anno 1662. Matth. 5. v. 5. Blessed are the Peace-makers, for they shall be cal∣led the Children of God. ERRATA. PAg. 24. n. 22. l. 8. after Lithuania put out the Period. l. 10. after used put a Period. p. 31. l. 1. for trifles read things. p. 34. in the first Quo∣tation for Londun read London. p. 47. l. 18. after Cracovia put out two lines till you come to the word For. p. 207. l. 16. after appellatione adde non abhorrent. p. 207. l. 35. for who sayes read is, as he sayes. p. 328. l. 31. for and who read and which. THE END.
