E1090A 99834506 39007
Anno Regni CAROLI II. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae, DECIMO SEXTO. At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Eighth day of May, Anno Dom. 1661. In the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of our most Gra∣cious Soveraign Lord CHARLES, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, &c. And there continued till the 19th of May, in the 14th year of His Majesties said Reign: And thence Prorogued to the 18th of February then next following. And there continued to the 27th of July, in the 15th year of His Ma∣jesties Reign: And thence Prorogued to the 16th of March then next following. And on the 5th of April 1664. in the 16th year of His Ma∣jesties Reign, two Bills passed the Royal Assent. DIEVET MON DROIT LONDON: Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the KINGS most Excellent Majesty. 1664. CUM PRIVILEGIO.
Anno XVI. Caroli II. Regis. An Act for the Assembling and Hold∣ing of Parliaments once in Three years at the least; And for the Re∣peal of an Act, Entituled, An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences happening by the long Intermission of Parliaments. WHereas the Act made in the Parliament be∣gun at Westminster the Third day of Novem∣ber in the Sixteenth year of the Reign of our late Soveraign Lord King Charles of blessed memory, Entituled, An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences happening by the
long Intermission of Parliaments, is in dero∣gation of His Majesties just Rights, and Prerogative inherent to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, for the Calling and Assembling of Parliaments; And may be an occasion of manifold mischiefs and inconveniences, and much endanger the Peace and Safety of His Maje∣sty, and all His Leige people of this Realm. Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiri∣tual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said Act, Entituled, An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences happening by the long Intermission of Parliaments, And all and every the Articles, Clauses and Things therein contained, is, shall be, and are hereby wholly Repealed, An∣nulled, and utterly made Void, And are hereby declared to be Null and Void to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as if the said Act had never been had, or made; Any thing in the said Act contain∣ed to the contrary in any wise notwith∣standing. And because by the Ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made in the Reign of King Edward the third, Par∣liaments are to be held very often, Your Majesties humble and loyal Subjects
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, most humbly do beseech Your most Excellent Majesty, That it may be Declared and Enacted, And be it Decla∣red and Enacted by the Authority afore∣said, That hereafter the sitting and hold∣ing of Parliaments shall not be intermit∣ted or discontinued above three years at the most; but that within three years from and after the determination of this present Parliament, & so from time to time with∣in three years after the determination of any other Parliament or Parliaments, or if there be occasion, more often, Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors do issue out Your Writs for calling, assem∣bling and holding of another Parlia∣ment, to the end there may be a frequent calling, assembling, and holding of Par∣liaments once in Three years at the least.
