E3036 R2702 12498397 62591
ENGLAND'S Remembrancer. Setting forth The beginning of Papal Tyrannies, bloody Persecutions, Plots, and inhu∣man Butcheries, exercised on the Pro∣fessors of the Gospel in England dis¦senting from the Church of Rome. WITH An account of all, or most of the Mar∣tyrs that were put to death by the cruel Pa∣pists in this Kingdom, until the Reformation in the Reign of King Edw. 6. and Queen Elizabeth. ALSO The first rise of the Writ de Heretico comburendo. For Burning of Hereticks. Well worth all Protestants perusal, that they may unite as one Man against the Hierarchy of the bloodthirsty See of ROME. Religio & timor Dei solus est, qui custodit hominum inter se societatem. Lactant. LONDON, Printed, for E. Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill. 1682.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Protestant Reader, FOR such I suppose thee to be, who will take the pains to read over these Collections, or take a view of this little Tract, called Eng∣lands Remembrancer, wherein we have set forth, without any partiality, the bloody Persecutions of that Antichristian Church of Rome, so we may well call her, since Persecution is a certain Mark of the Beast; and whatever particular Church takes up that Weapon, so far deviates from the true Catholick Church of Christ, as it makes use of it being absolutely contradictory to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. The Protestants of the Church of England laid the Foundation of their Reformation with the blood of many Martyrs, suffering Death and torments for their Opinions. They were all Dissenters from the Church of Rome, and they have suffici∣ently blamed, as they justly ought, their horrid Persecution for Conscience sake, seeking by com∣pulsion
to put their heavy yoaks on the necks of others, and yet they had Law on their side, and their Religion was then established by the Laws of the Land; however, I think there is no Protestant, but doth justly call the putting to death, tormenting, imprisoning, and ruining so many Men and Women for their Opinions, Persecution; and tho the Church of England hath not law to put any to Death, yet no question there may be many, so blind∣ly Zealous, as would do as much as the Pa∣pists have done before them, and therefore let them not be angry, if that Spirit which some have of late shewed against Dissenters, be called Persecution, tho they have Laws of their side. But this is nothing; our dread and fear proceed from a farther prospect of the great hopes the Papists have, of once more Establishing their Idolatrous Religion; and truly, though we believe that God in his mercy may deliver this poor Nation from so great a Scourge, yet we cannot say, that the Hopes of the Papists are in vain, since we our selves do not slackly endeavour, to bring ruine on our selves, and to be helpful in pro∣moting their designs, being ready to set Pro∣testants together by the Ears, reviling, perse∣cuting, and troubling one another, insomuch that many have shewn, that they had rather join with the Papists, than admit of any other Protestant Dissenter, to live unmolested, and to enjoy their peace, opinions, and Conscience. This Spirit of late blown up by secret bout∣sers,
raging as it does, makes the subtle Popish Clergy laugh in their Sleeves, and begin to believe they need not the help of any damna∣ble and murthering Plot, since they perceive we are framing Plots and Designs against our selves, and if they let us alone, shall readily, by our animosities, make way for the setting up their Church in this King∣dom, which they with all their hellish Ar∣tifices could never do. Divide & impe∣ra, divide & reign, is a known Maxim, and we are doing that our selves as fast as we can for them. At this time there∣fore, I thought there could be nothing more necessary to all sorts of Protestants, of what denomination soever, than the beholding, as in a little mirror, the hor∣rid and bloody Persecutions of those of the Romish Church in England, when they had power in this Nation, and by this Pocket Remembrancer, you may be able to perceive to what horrid Tyranny all Professors of the true Gospel of Christ must submit themselves, giving their Bodies to be burnt, imprisoned, tormented, and abu∣sed, or else against their Consciences be∣come Idolaters, and damn their Souls. Alas! there are no Arguments to be used against these men, when armed with the Sword of Power: what they have done they still do, where they reign, and will most certainly do the same again, if not in a greater and more bloody manner,
as soon as they should have established their Dominion, by the help of a Popish King. You therefore who are negligent and care∣less, and act as if you were asleep, or are in∣different, what Religion is uppermost, and you also who are so hot and zealous, for persecuting all those who dissent from you, and you likewise (for such there be) who are ready to shake hands with the Pa∣pists, pleading for them, and account them harmless and loyal, or at least better than Protestant Dissenters; all of you I say, read this little Book of their Tyrannies, and as sure as Truth, you shall feel the Scourge and Scorpionian sting of these men, and must draw in their iron Yoak, unless you will act against your Consciences; the very same Tragedies that were acted before, under Popish and bigotted Kings, upon o∣thers, shall be then acted over again upon you, your Wives, and Children, upon your Goods, Lives, Friends, Kindred, and Estates. Fires will again be inkindled in all quarters of this Land, the Tyranny and Cruelty of the Inquisition shall sit upon you, the Priest shall Lord it over you, and of Freemen, you shall become slaves; ignorance and superstition shall put down knowledge and Religion by Authority. On the other side, you who are true professors of the Gospel of Christ, may make use of this Remembrancer, in which you will behold the great patience & meekness of such, whom God honoured with Martyrdom,
and suffering in his Cause, that if ever the like persecution be permitted by the Judg∣ment of Heaven, in this Nation, for our manifold sins and debaucheries, which flow thorow the Land, and for the Spirit of Rage and Persecution of one another, that hath lately gone forth in some measure; I say, you may be prepared by these examples of holy dying men, how to behave your selves, and to believe, that God will give to such as rely upon him, extraordinary Comforts and sup∣ports in their Afflictions. It may also serve to stir up those lukewarm Protestants, who run with the stream, or have not heard of, or else soon forget the Persecutions and Tyrannies of the Romish Church, to have an aversion and horrour to such men, and such a Religion, as will cut their throats if ever established by Law among us. You have here an Epitomy of all Mr. Fox's 3 great Volumes, which few can purchase, and fewer have time to read; therefore I have collected for the Pro∣testant Reader, briefly the most material stories of the whole, which are faithfully and truly set down, and I hope God will give a bles∣sing to these my true endeavours, and this very useful Book at this time; that all Protestants of whatsoever denomination, may joyn together in the bond of unity, to oppose this Bloody, Cruel, and Com∣mon Enemy, of all that profess the Truth of the Gospel, and to endeavour, that the Hierarchy of Rome may never get
Power, and Dominion in this Land: Which I pray God avert, and protect us from. And to which Prayer, let all good People say, Amen.
The Introduction. THe Corruptions and great abominati∣ons, together with the Heretical, I∣dolatrous, Impious, and Blasphemous Doct∣rines and practices of the Church of Rome, as also its bloody Persecutions abroad, have been shewn in several volumes, and by se∣veral Authors: but since, what hath been transacted by that Church in our own King∣dom, more nearly▪ concerns us; I have here given you a true view of the Persecutions of the Papists, from the beginning, against all such as dissented from them, and would not bow down to their Images, or Worship God after their way; by which you may see, what Spirit they are of, quite contrary to that of Christ and his Apostles, and to what slavery we should be brought, if God should permit once more the Papal Authori∣ty to get footing in these reformed King∣doms; which for so many years, at the ex∣pence of blood, and the lives of many holy Men and Martyrs, have shaken off that Ty∣rannical Yoak of the See of Rome. It is my design, not to transcur the Bounds
of our own Country, for where ever the Papists have set up themselves, they have continully exercised the like bloody power of the Sword, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and the practice of his Successors for some Centuries, when the purity of the Gos∣pel was professed, in times near the first ligh∣ting up of the bright Candle of Christianity. But I shall shew, and expose to the World, in this little Tract, the bloody Cruelties, and Persecutions of that Idolatrous Church, exercised in this Kingdom, only against such as dissented from them, or that op∣posed the evil of their Doctrine, and practi∣ses. After that Errors were crept into the Church, and that the Romish Church had sought and obtained by many impious pra∣ctises, the supremacy over other Churches, she endeavoured to maintain this her usurpt Authority, by Tyranny and bloody Persecu∣tion, as she doth to this Day, where ever her rule is permitted. That is a most ridicu∣lous Question of some of the Papists to ma∣ny ignorant Protestants▪ Where was your Religion before Luther? All your Fore∣fathers in England were Papists; why should you then change your old Religion, for many hundred years establish'd in England,
for one of a new date, and but of the other days standing? This has taken with some, but they are such as are very ignorant, or else they may reply to such Querors, that though the Name of Protestants be new, and came from Germany in Luthers time, from protesting against the Romish decrees, that were to have been imposed upon them, yet the Doctrine and Discipline of the Protestant Churches, are as ancient as Christianity itself, and nearest to that of Christ, and his holy Apostles and Successors in the primitive times, before Rome came to challenge a supremacy over other Chur∣ches, or to pretend to be the Spiritual Head of the World. In all Ages, and thorow the most Corrupt of times, the purity of the Gospel has been preserved, & like a shining light, has mani∣fested itself, in its dissent, from the evil & sinful practises, & from the false and here∣tical Doctrines of the Church of Rome; and has been still persecuted by it, long before the times of Luther, as is manifested by the Albingenses, and the Waldenses in France, as also in Germany, and Italy itself, where many professing the purity of the Gospel, and testifying against the errors and corrup∣tions of the Romish Church, fell under the
bloody Sword of its Persecution. But designing (as I have said) to speak only of our own Country, we shall begin with the earliest Persecutions of the Romanists in this Land, who always hated Dissenters from them, or such as would not own their unjust Supremacy over their Brethren. Christianity began very early in England, and a Christian Church was planted here al∣most as soon as at Rome, and continued without any acknowledgment of her Au∣thority all the time of the British Reign; for the Brittish Churches never owned any forreign Church supream, or above them, or suffered any to exercise Dominion or Au∣thority over them, but submitted themselves to their Kings, and their Metropolitan, as their head. Austine the Monk was the first who endeavoured to bring into this Land the Authority of Rome; and because the Brittish Bishops would not own it, he stir∣red up the Heathen Saxon Kings, then Con∣querors of this Land, to persecute them, and others Converted to Christianity, and of the Papistical Principles, of setting up the Church of Rome above others to kill and destroy the Brittish Christians, as dissen∣ters from them. But yet, till about the year 980, the purity of the Christian Doctrine
preserved itself against Popish errors; a∣bout which time, Popery, that is, the Su∣premacy of that Church, or the owning it to the head over others, getting ground in England, as well as in other places, and with it, all the filthinesses and abominati∣ons, which dissenting Protestants disown, and speak against; all that any ways oppo∣sed this supremacy, and erroneous Doctrines, were persecuted, and troubled by them, tho they were not as yet come to fire and faggot, wanting not will but power to do it. I shall but mention only that good Bishop of Lin∣coln, Robert Grosthead, who wrote against the wickedness of the Popish Clergy, in the time of King Henry the 3d. which vext them so much, that Pope Innocent would have had the Bishops bones, after his death, to have been dug up, and flung out of the Church, where he was buried, and intend∣ing to have wrote to the King of England for that purpose, he was strucken by the said Bishop (appearing to him in his sleep) with his Crosiers staff, reproving him of his wicked intention, which prohibited him from proceeding therein. After which time, the Papal wickednesses increasing in this Nation, Sathan was let loose, and grea∣ter Persecutions began to arise, against
those who made a profession of the Gospel, and opposed the Romish Superstition, or dissented from it. I shall therefore here end this introduction, and begin the History of Popish persecutions here in England, about the Reign of King Edward the 3d, about which time they began more eminently to appear, and so God willing, I shall briefly prosecute them to our own times, thorow that flood of Martyrs blood shed in Queen Maries days.
A TRUE VIEW OF ALL THE Popish Persecutions AND CRUELTIES IN ENGLAND. The First Part. LOng before the nam of Protestants gave a distinction, of such as dissented from the Corruptions of the Church of Rome, and made them subject to the Persecutions of Papal Authority, there were several, who by the purer Light of the Gospel, had discovered the great errours, and many Abominations of that Church increasing in England, that durst withstand the wickedness of the Priests, Monks, and Fryers, and by writing and preaching oppose their wicked Acti∣ons, and horrible doings, and shew them to the World, for which they were sure to run the risque of cruel and barbarous usage, from their Hands, & suffer for a good Conscience, adhering to the Doctrine of the Apostles and their Successors, in the Primitive
Times, before the many Corruptions, that now o∣verwhelm the Romish Church, were crept in amon them. These may be called dissenters from the erronious Doctrines, vicious Lives, and evil prac∣ces. Among these in the time of King Edward th third, may be accounted the Author of the Plomans Complaint, though he was not known, whi little Treatise put the Monks and Fryers ino a Rage, it so plainly laying open all their wickednes and evil practices; The Persecutions of Armachan, and the abominable errours and abuses of their D¦ctrines. This did but whet the Rage of these el men, and though they could not shew it to the Au∣thor of that wholsom Treatise, they expresse i against his writing, what they could, and ad he been known, his Life had been in danger. The next that publickly owned the Pure light of the Gospel, in those dark daies of blind Superstiton and error, was Richard Fitzrafe, known by the name of Armichanus being by King Edward the 3d made Archdeacon of Litchfeild, and then Commis to the University of Oxford, where he was bred ¦der Bakenthorp, and lastly Arch-Bishop of Arm in Ireland. He preached in London openly aganst the Fryers, for which he was cited to appear before Pope Innocent the 6th, which he did, and there to the death most valiantly opposed the Cor∣ruptions Crept into the Church, both by preach∣ing and writing, being several ways persecu∣ted by them: He dyed in Avignion, after 7 years banishment from his Native Coun∣try. About this time, in King Edw. the 3d's Reign and about the year 1367. That plotting and state co∣founding Order of the Jesuites began to be know in the world, in the 5th year of Pope Ʋrban the 5 and the Papal Clergy in England being grown o odious to the laity, through their vicious Lives, a evil Manners, the Lords in Parliament desired the King that the great Offices of the Crown, which were usually executed by the Clergy might be t¦ken
from them, which accordingly were removed, and put into the Hands of the Temporal Lords. This K. also by Parliament, holden in the 27th and 38th years of his Reign, by statutes made, the Popes Supremacy in England was much abated, his Juris∣diction in this Realm much lessened, and his Papal power restrained, causing all Controversies in Law either Spiritual or Temporal, to be determined in the Kings Courts, and that if any one should ap∣peal, or Consent to an appellation made to the Court of Rome, should incur the writ of Premunire, being put out of the K's Protection, Loss of Lands & goods & imprisonment during the Kings pleasure. This be∣got, or rather increased, the Hatred of the Roma∣nists, against the Kings of England studying their ruin and overthrow, for the setting up their arbi∣trary Papal Jurisdiction in this Land. And about this time, a certain Hermit; disputed in St. Pauls, a∣gainst the Doctrine of the Sacrament, for which they imprisoned him, and kept him in hold till he dyed. It is also to be observ'd, that in the 5th year of the said King Ed. the 3d, at a Parliament holden at Westminster, the 24th April, 1376. a Bill was preferred against the Usurpations of the Pope in England, attributing thereunto, all the Plagues, Murrains, Famines, and Poverty, that had invaded the Land, and required a redress of many Grie∣vances and incroachments of his usurpations, re∣hearsing many particulars, so that the Tyranny and usurpation of Rome, was grown in those days into∣lerable, and would now be much more so, since they after this, shewed an implacabl Rage against their opposers, and all such who professed the purer Light of the Gospel, or found fault with their erronious Do∣ctrines, and wicked Lives. But the most eminent Light, by God raised up in those daies and appearing bright and shining above the rest, detecting the foul errors of the Romish Church, was the famous John Wickliff, from whom his followers, dissenting from the Church of Rome, were called Wickliffians whose story I shall give you
in Brief. In the reign of King Edir. the 3d, and much about the year of our Lord 1371. this Wickliff flow∣rished: He was a Publick Reader of Divinity in the University of Oxford, and reputed among them all for a great Clerk, and man of learning, and parts, a deep Schoolman and well studied in the points of Divinity, and also of Philosphy of all kinds; And with his strong Arguments and sound reasoning, he confounded his opposers, and made his very enemies acknowledge his abilities. He was a man in great esteem of that valiant and prudent Princeing Ed∣ward, being by him sent with Commission, joyned with other Lords and Ambassadors into Ialy, to treat with he Popes Legats, concerning affairs be∣twixt the King and the Ppe. The Chief business was, that the Bishop of Rome should no more intermeddle in the Distribution of Benefices within his Kingdom, but that all Bshps that were under his Dominion, should enjoy their former and ancient Liberty, and be confirmed of their Metropolitans, as had been in the Ancient times. This set the Pope and Ppish Clergy a raging, and Wickliff being in this Matter n small obstacle to them, Confounding them with hs learned Arguments, so that they term'd him He∣ick, as they still do all that stick fast to the rules of the holy Scriptures, & to the purer Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; they set themselves against him, and endeavoured their utmost to ruine him. Those days wherein he lived were daies of thick Ep∣ Darkness and gross Ignorance, and the people only retained the name of Christians, having nothing of the nature of Christ in them, or following his Ex∣ample in any thing. They were Idlatrous, and taught by their Piests to worship nothing but what they saw, Images and Cracifixes, and indeed there was scarce any thing they saw, that they did not worship, as Reliques of Saints, Consecrated Beads, Aus Dei's, and such trumpery. The Doctrine and Office of Christ was utterly unknown to the people, no the use of the Law, and benefit of the Scrip∣tures, the power and efficacy of the Holy Ghost, Free
Grace, Justification by Faith, Remission of Sins, and the like were never treated of. Learing and Divinity was utterly unknown to the Priests and preaching fryers, and those among them who seem∣ed learned, were meer Sophisters, studying Aqui∣nas, and Scotus instead of St. Peter and Paul, and led the blind and ignorant people into superstition; Ceremonies, and human Traditions, which they taught istead of the Scripture, in which the whose scope of Christian perfection depends; And ths being wholly degenerated from the true Catolick institution, they fell into all manner of exrem tyranny and persecution, changing the poverty and simplicity of Christ, into Cruelty and wickedness of Life and manners. Thus, in these times of horri∣ble Darkness and Ignorance, and when there seem∣ed o be no manner of spark of Christs pure doctrine left, Wickliff, by the providence of God, sprung up, and as a bright and shining light, let the world see the errors and impieties of the Church of Rome. After he had for a long time professed Divinity at Oxford, and perceiving the true Doctrine of the Gospel to be defiled and adulerated, with ma∣ny filthy rentions, and after long debating with himself, concerning the danger he should run into, by going about to detect these errors, so fast em∣braced by the Rmsh Church, and in medling with them, who had power to crush him; yet his mind be∣ing inspired of God, he could not rest, till he had set his study and bent, to endeavour a Regulation, by his preaching and teaching, of these gross errours that were every where taught and maintained. But fi st he began warily, attempting his Adversaries with Logical and Metaphysicial Qestions, of the Form of things, and of the intelligible sbtance of the Creatures, and such like, which bega attention to other matters, which he soon began with great Art and learning to dispute of. This stir'd up one Kinghum a Carmelite to dispute against him, by which men; Wickliff fell upon the matter of the
Sacrament, their errors therein, and other abuses in the Church. But this bit so sore, that it was not to be enured, and a whoe glut of Monks and Fry∣ers, fell into a Rage and madness against him, fight∣ing for their Gods, their Altars, their paunches, and Bellies. Then the Arch-Bishop Simon Sudberry, deprived him of his Benefice, which he had in Ox∣ford; However being befriended by many noble∣men, and in favour of the King he bare up against the Monks and Fryers his implacabe Enemies, and the Arch-Bishop himself, till about the year 1377. He had for his special maintainors the great John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the Kings Son; and the noble Lord Henry Peircy, both which were his great Friends, embracing the Truth of His Doctrine, and perceiving the impurity of that professed by the Roman Clergy, together with their most abomi∣nable and vicious Life. But for the appearing of this noble Duke, for the Truth and siding with Wickliff, the Romish Clergy perfectly hated him, and the Bishop of Winchester most horridly asperses him of Bastardy, making the Queen upon her Death bed to Confess it to him, that he was not the Kings Son, nor hers, for lying in at Gaunt, the child she had was Smother'd, and fearing the Kings displeasure, she caused this John of Gaunt, being a poor womans Son then newly brought to bed, sup∣posititiously to be brought up instead of the dead Prince. Thus, for his owning Wickliff, he had this wicked abuse put upon him, by that proud Pre∣late. But the Duke, not induring the affront, caused him to be condemned by Parliament, and his temporalities confiscated, and the said Bishop was prohibited to come within 20 miles of the Court, But not long after by the means of Alice Pierce the Kings Minion, being well brib'd, and by the intercession of the whole Company of the Bishops, he was again restored. But now Wickliff as I said, about the year 1377. was forbid to preach any more, and cited to appear before the Bishops, which was on the 19th of February: The
Duke of Lancaster and the Lord Henry Peircy, both accompanied him, and caused out of every order of the Fryers, a Batchelour of Divinity to be chosen, which were 4 to joyn with Wickliff, and to Assist him. But so great was the disorder and variance be∣tween the Bishop of London, Courtney, and the Duke of Lancaster, and the Lord Henry Peircy, in the behalf of Wickliff, that nothing was done, and the Assembly was broke up, being held in St. Pauls Church, the Duke and the Bishop threatning one another. Thus he escaped at this time, and Con∣tinued unmolested all the time of King Edward the 3d, but afterwards in the Reign of King Richard the Second, though he was a favourer of Wickliffs Doctrines, yet the Duke and Lord Peircy not inter∣medling in the Affairs of state as before, but living privatly, the Bishops took their time to trouble him, again, and exhibited several Articles against him, to Pope Gregory the 11th, who presently sends his bull to Oxford for the Apprehending of Wickliff, and for the silencing him, and rooting out his Do∣ctrines, and writes also to the King against him. The Bishops now hoping to ruine this holy man, cite him a Second time, who appeared, but there came a Command to them from the King not to give any definitive sentence against him, so that he by that means escaped them a 2d time. Not long after the Rebellion of Jack-straw break∣ing forth, and the Kingdom in a Combustion, the Bishops perceiving the Doctrine of Wickliff dayly to increase, and that he had many followers, they procured the Vicechancellour of Oxford, William Barton,, in the year 1380 to put forth an Edict a∣gainst Wickliff and his followers, which again brought him into trouble, not having his former supports to help him, and his Articles which he had maintained, so stoutly against the force of his Ad∣versaries, were condemned as Heretical in 1382. About the same time one Hereford with Rippington and Ashton all Batchelours of Divinity were cited
before the Bishops, & persecuted for holding the te∣nents of Wickliff, and Hereford and Rippington were excommunicated. Also one Thomas Hillman a Bat∣chellor of Divinity, was at the same time trou∣bled by them for the same cause. Hitherto there was no Law to burn any man for Religion, and had they been contented with the power of excommunication, it had been well, and had not stirred up the Civil Magistrate to be their bloody and Cruel executioners, so that we may account these first Persecutions but light. But now their ma∣lice & rage being increased, the K. being but young, and overawed by the Pope and the proud and impe∣rious clergy of the Land, who bore great sway, they circumvented the King, & got surreptitiously a statute made without notice of the Commons, cal∣led an Act of the Parliament holden at Westminster An. 5. Rich. 3. l. in which power was given to Sheriffs, and other Civil Magistrates, to imprison any for Religion, upon the Certificates of the Bi∣shop: which caused great Persecutions but this Act was shortly after repealed at the intreaty of the Commons: However, the Bshops supres∣sed the knwldge of this Repealing, and unjustly under colour of the former Act, wrought horrible troubles, against all such as opposed them, or were fvouers of Wickiff: and they also so wrought up∣on the King, that he sent forth his Letters against Wic f, and for the suppression of his Doctrine, both to the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and to the Vicchncellor of Oxford Robert Riggs, who was himself a fvourer of Wickliff, and for which he was afterwards displaced. As to Wickliff himself, he was fin to sly, and hide himself from the persecuti∣on of the Popish Prelats, but God preserved him from their Malice, and at last, repairing to his parish of Luttrworth, where he was Parson, he quietly and in Peace departed this Life, about the beginning of the year 1384. But though they could not fully reak their malice on him whilst he lived, yet when dead, they shewed all the spite imaginable against
his Books and Bones: for at Oxford they caused all his Books they could light on to be publickly burnt. They say he had wrote 200 volumes, being a most painful & sedulous writer, as well as preach∣er, of whom, and of whose holy and godly life and Conversation, the whole University of Oxford gave a publick Testimony under their hands and Seal, in the Year 1406. Whose Doctrines also were pub∣lickly defended by John Hus of Bohemia, who was martyred for the same. But for all this the Popish Clergies inveterate malice against Wickliff, appear∣ed 41 years after he was buried; for, by a Decree of the Synod of Constance, they caused this holy mans Bones to be dug out of his Grave, and burnt, and the Ashes to be flung into the River. The Doctrine of Wickliff notwithstanding daily increased, to the no small grief of the Popish Clergy; and his Followers, or those professing his Do∣ctrines (which were contrary to those of the cor∣rupt Romish Church, and many of them, or most of them, such as the Protestants now hold) began then to be called Lollards, for they had then Nick-names, as well as now, for such as profest the purer Light of the Gospel. After Wickliff was gone, they set themselves to suppress these Lollards, as they called them, the Pope interpreting the Word from Loll∣um Cocle or Darnel, and one William Swinderly, a Priest, in 1389. was brought into great trou∣ble by these men, for holding and preaching some of Wickliff's Doctrines; and was condemned by the Bishop of Hereford for an Heretick; but Swin∣derly appealed to the King, and to the Parliament, and during King Richard's Reign he was protected from their Violence; but it is thought he suffered Martyrdom afterwards in the days of King Hen. 4. when the Popish Clergy had got more power. About the same time also they persecuted Walter Brute a Lay-Man, but bred up in the Ʋniversity at Ox∣ford, and a graduate there: accusing him of Here∣sie, and for saying that the Sacrament of the Altar was not the very Body of Christ, but a sign and me∣morial
of him, and that he had avouched the Pope to be Antichrist, and that the Sentence given against Swinderly was unjust. For these things he is brought before the Bishop of Hereford, where he learnedly maintained his Assertions against them; but being put to horrible Trouble and Vexation, was forced at last to make a Submission, which was, that he submitted to the Censure of the Gospel, the Church, and General Councils, and to St. Augustine, Jerom, Ambrose, and Gregory, and to his Bishop as his Sub∣ject. And so he escaped at that time, but whether he suffered afterwards is uncertain. About this time Pope Boniface the 9th made a Bull against the Lollards, and sent it to King Richard 2d. who, by the Instigation of Courtney, then Archbishop of Can∣terbury, and the Bishop of Hereford, the Popes Le∣gat, issued out his Letters against the Lollards, as Hereticks, so that by this means many were forced to do Pennance, and to abjure, many were impri∣soned and evilly intreated; but during his Reign none were burnt. The manner of doing Pennance. The Town of Leicester was interdicted, and ma∣ny of them forced to do Pennance, which was after this manner: They went about the Cross bare-footed, and bare-headed, and nothing on their Bo∣dies, both Men and Women, but their Shifts, in one Hand a Crucifix, in the other a large Wax Taper lighted, and from thence marched to the Cathe∣dral, where they stood (after they had made a pro∣cession about the Church) all the time of Mass: this also to be done three times, during the Market. After this manner they sought to punish such as made profession of the Gospel. And about the same time the Londoners favouring one Peter Pateshull, an Austin-Friar, who having embraced the Doctrines of Wickliff, preached against the corruptions of his Order, many of them were converted by him; and the Doctrines of Wickliff spread very much in the
City: For which they were malic'd by the Bishops, and complained o to the King, who was so incensed against the Mayor and Sheriffs, that he removed them from their Office, and made Sir Edward Dar∣lington Warden of the City, and then removed his Court, and the Terms to York, thinking thereby to dispight the Londoners. But this so alienated their Hearts, that by losing their Love, he also not long after lost his Crown and Life to Henry Duke of Lan∣caster, called Henry the 4th. The first Act for burning of Hereticks, William Saw∣try the first that was burnt. Henry the 4th being but an Usurper and Tyrant, was fain to comply with the Prelatical Clergy, who had a great stroke in deposing their lawful Prince, that he might the better assure himself of the Crown, which he had unjustly taken. Till now the Suffer∣ings and Persecutions of the Lollards, or such as made a profession of the purer Light of the Gospel, was but slight, in comparison of what they now be∣gan to suffer, for there was as yet no Law for to put an Heretick to Death, though they had made use of the afore-mentioned Statute in the 5th Year of King R 2d. to molest, trouble, and imprison good and pious men, but now in the 2d Year of this King Henry the 4th, they obtained a Law or Statute for the burning alive such as were convict of Heresie, made especially against the Lollards; and the first that so suffered upon this Statute was William Saw∣try, the Parish Priest of St. Scithes in London, who had preached against worshipping the Cross, and the Images of Saints, against Pilgrimages, and Transubstantiation, and other Popish Heresies, for which he was cited before the Bishops, and convict∣ed of (as they called it) Heresie, and then publick∣ly degraded of all his Sacerdotal Ornaments, ad made a Lay-man, and then delivered over to the secular Power to be put to death, according to the new made Law which they had with great joy ob∣tained,
for the extirpating the Lollards. Thus the King, who had deposed his lawful Prince, and u∣surpt the Crown, was the first that put men to death for Religion in England, by the unmerciful burning of their Bodies, at the Instigation of the cruel Po∣pish Prelates. And this William Sawtry was the first that so suffered for the Gospel by the Papists in Eng∣land, who was burnt Anno 1400. The burning of John Badby Taylor. After this unusual Exeution of Sawtry, a great fear and dread fell upon all the People, but yet God would not leave his People without Testimony, for notwithstanding this cruel Act, many maintained the Trch, and among the rest one John Badby, an Artificer, and Lay-man, who w  he next tht suffer∣ed in the Year 1409. He was convicted before Tho. Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbuy, with other Bi∣shops his Assistants, of certain Articles, in which he is said to affirm, that the consecrated Wafer was not the real Body of Christ, which he averred to be true, to the face of all the Bishops, and gave his Reasons for the same, upon which they pronounced Sentence against him as an Heretick, he remaining constant to the Death, and could not be wrought upon by any persuasions, to give his Conscience the Lye, upon which he was delivered over to the se∣cular Power, who had got the Kings Writ ad comb∣rendum Haereticum, by force of which he was brought to Smithfield, and there put into an empty Barrel, and bound with Chains to a stake, with Fagots a bout him, and being in this posture, they brought the Sacrament to him in great Pomp, asking him how he believed it, and whether he would yet re∣cant and save his Life; but he told them he believ∣ed it to be hallowed Bread, and not Gods Body, upon which they set Fire to the Fagots; upon the seeling of which he cried Mercy, and the Prince being present, caused the sire to be withdrawn, en∣deavouring to save him, and promising him a Pen∣sion;
but he refused all, remaining constant, infla∣med with the Love of God, and calling on the name of Jesus, the Fire was renewed, and he was burnt to Ashes. The Statute Ex Officio. The Cruelties of the Popish Bishops with their power more and more encreasing, by their influ∣ence on the said King, in the same Parliament, they procured the Statute Ex Officio; in which it was en∣acted, that no man within the Realm should preach privily or openly, without Licence obtained of the Ordinary, nor that any should presume to teach, preach, or write any thing contrary to the Catho∣lick Faith, or determination of the holy Church, (as they then called that of Rome,) nor keep or fre∣quent any Conventicles, or any manner of Schools touching the Sect of the Wickliffians: And that any person having any heretical Books, Writings, or Schrols, containing the Wicked Doctrines of Wick∣liff, should within 40 days after Proclamation of this Statute, bring them to the Ordinary of the place: And if any shall do contrary to any of these Commands, the Ordinary by vertue of this Statute, within the precincts of his Diccess, may imprison them at his pleasure in his own prisons; or any o∣thers vehemently suspected to be infected with, or a favourer of such Doctrines, and heretical Opini∣ons, until he or they shall by order of Law purge themselves of such Opinions, or else openly recant the same: And that also the said Ordinary have power to fine such person or persons for the King, and to return such Fines into the Exchequer; and further such person or persons convict by the Ordi∣nary and his Commissaries, he may keep him or them in their own prisons at his Discretion; and further, if the said persons so convicted, remain ob∣stinate, and will not abjure or recant their Opinions, that then they shall be delivered over to the secular power, and the Mayor, Sheriffs, and other Officers
of the County, City, or Burrough, being present, after Sentence pronounced against them, shall take the persons so offending, and sentenced, and cause them to be openly burnt in the sight of the people. The Arch-Bishops Constitutions. This cruel Statute being obtained, the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, Thomas Arundel, put forth cer∣tain Constitutions to be observed. That no man should undertake to preach without a Licence from the Ordinary, and they to be limited what to say. That none should suffer any to preach in their Churches, unless they produce such Authority. That whosoever should preach contrary to order should be severely punished by his Ordinary. That no School-Masters shall teach Children any thing of Religion, nor suffer their Scholars to expound the Scriptures, nor permit them to dispute concerning the Catholick Faith, the Sacraments, &c: That none of Wickliffs Books be kept in any School, house, or place, nor Sold by any Bookseller. That no man dare to undertake to translate the Scriptures, or any part of them into English. That no publick disputes be made concerning the Sacrament, or any other points of the Catholick Faith: None to speak against Images, processions, Tapers Crucifixes, &c. under penalty of being proceeded against as Here∣ticks. With several others of the like kind, which I here omit; But by this the Reader may judge, what Tyranny, oppression, and cruelty, goes along with the Popish Religion, and what we must expect to have here again, if ever it comes to be set up in this Realm, which God forbid. Notwithstanding all this severity, many thorow∣out the Land professed the Gospel, some Publickly, and others privately, some stoutly induring Perse∣cution, and others through fear forced against their Consciences to Recant. Among the rest, one Wil∣liam Thorp was very much persecuted by the Arch-Bishop Arundel, who in a very learned manner de∣fended
himself, & wrote a certain book called his Te∣stament, in which he fully laid open the corruptions and vices of the Popish clergy: What became of this man is uncertain, but 'tis most likely that he died in their Prisons, for they kept many in perpetual durance, and obscure, that none could tell what be∣came of them. So one John Ashton another profes∣sor was kept in Prison till he dyed, in the year 1382. Poor men doing Pennance. John Purvey also had great trouble about the same time, by the said Arch-Bishop, who at last was forced to Recant, to get out of their cruel clutches. This proud and imperious Prelat Arundel, caused se∣veral poor men for neglect of bringing straw to his Stables, as they were ordered, to undergo penance, bare footed and bare headed, with each a great burthen of straw at his back, going before the pro∣cession on which some one wrote these verses, These Baggs full of straw we bear on our backs Because my Lords Horse his Litter did Lack: If ye be not good to my Lord Graces horse, Ye are like to go barefoot before the Cross. After the Death of King Henry the 4 in the year of the Reign of his Son King H. 5th, the Prelats pro∣cured another statute de Comburendo Heretico, in which it was ordained, that all such who would not abjure these opinions of the Lollards, contrary to the received Catholick Faith, should after con∣viction forfeit all their goods and chattels, and their bodies openly burnt alive. And upon this, and the former statute Sr. Roger Acton Knight, John Brown, John Beverly, and others, to the number of 36 persons were burnt in St. Gyles's fields in January 1413.
The cruel Persecution of the Lord Cobham. The next noted man who was persecuted by these Tyrannical bloodsuckers, was Sr. John Oldcastle Ld. Cobham, who was a favourer & Principal maintainer of good men, called by the Popish Priests Lollards, who could not bring their consciences to submit to their wicked impieties, and gross Idolatries. A∣rundel had caused certain Inquisitors, who brought in Articles against the Lord Cobham, for being a mighty maintainer of suspected preachers in the Diocess of London, Rochester, and other places, and that he assisted & relieved them, and that he himself had not a true belief of the Sacrament, penance, pil∣grimages, worshiping of Images, and of Eccle∣siastical power and Jurisdiction: Which process was awarded against him as a most pernicious here∣tick. The Lord Cobham being a great man, and in fa∣vour also with the King, these blood thirsty Prelats first make their complaints against him to the King, who having heard them, spake himself in the be∣half of the Lord Cobham, desiring them to deal gently with him, and to seek to reduce him to the Unity of the Church by fair means, promising them his assistance therein. And accordingly he sent for that worthy Lord, and privately admonished him to submit himself to the Church. To whom the Lord Cobham answered, that next to God he owed his Obedience to the King, as his soveraign, and that he should ever obey him as his faithful leige man, and all his Laws, and ready to fulfil his will in all things, but as to this touching the Pope, and his Spirituality, he did not owe any suit or service, for that the Scriptures had taught him that he was the great Antichrist, the son of Perdition, and open ene∣mie of God. which the King hearing, and take∣ing ill from him, forsook him, and left him a prey to his bloody Adversaries, who much desired his Death. He was thereupon cited before the Arch-Bishops,
and not appearing was Excommunicated, and then cited again. This good Lord finding him∣self involved in troubles, wrote a rehearsal of his Be∣lief, and sent it to the King, But the King would not receive it, but ordered him to be taken into Cu∣stody, and delivered to his Adversaries his Judges. The good Lord beholding himself forsaken, offered to bring 100 Knights and Esquires, to come in for his purgation, to clear him of Heresie, and also of∣fered himself, to fight for his Life, according to the Law of Arms, with any man living, in the quarrel of his Faith, the King and the Lords of his Council only excepted. Notwithstanding all this, the King suffered him to be summoned in his own privy Chamber, upon which he appealed from the Arch-Bishop to the Pope, wherewith the King was more highly displeased than before, and he was thereup∣on arrested and carried to the Tower. After that he was brought before the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, The Bishops of London, Winchester, and o∣thers, where he strenuously and with great judg∣ment argued his case, but at last they pronounced a definitive sentence against him for an Heretick. Which done the good Lord fell on his knees and prayed for his enemies, and so was carried back to the Tower. After that, sentence of Death was given against him, but by what means is not known, he escaped from Sr. ob. Morley, Lieutenant of the Tower, and got into Wales, where he continued 4 years. Not long after, the Arch-Bishop had pro∣nounced his sentence upon this Lord, he dyed with his tongue swelled in his mouth, that he was not able to speak  and it was looked upon as a judgment of God, upon him, being a great per∣secuter of good men. The King vext at the escape of the Lord Cobham, offered a sum of Money to any that could take him dead or alive, and at last, after 4 years concealment, the Lord Powis, whether for gain, or his hatred against such profes∣sors of the Gospel is uncertain, he caught the Lord Cobham, and brought him bound to London in the
year 1417. the Parliament then sitting, the said Lord Cobham being outlawed, and excommunicated by the Bishop was brought before his Peers in Parlia∣ment, and at the Instigation of the Prelats, he had sentence passed upon him, to be drawn thorow London to the Gallows in St. Giles's and there to be hanged, and burnt hanging. Tho Treason was pre∣tended against him, yet it was for the matter of Re∣ligion that he was put to death, as Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments sufficiently proves, which brought him into the hatred of the Bishops, and they brought him into the hatred of the King, which oc∣casioned his Death and Martyrdom. Much about the time, or a little before the Exe∣cution of this worthy Lord, one John Claydon of Lon∣don Coriar, suffered for the sake of the Gospel, being arrested by the Archbishops order upon suspition of heresie which he denyed not, but owned his Do∣ctrines, for which he was imprisoned by Braybrook Bishop of London, and at last sentenced for an He∣retick, and delivered to the secular power, and not long after, he was had to Smithfield and there burnt for his Religion. 1415. Some say one Richard Turming a Baker was burnt with him. Henry Chichley succeeded to Arundel, and he fol∣lowing his steps, made more new & severe Constitu∣tions against the Lollards, thinking thereby to suppress them, fearing the downfall of their Papal Authority, which they sought to maintain with cruelty and Tyranny: whereupon a strict Inquisition was made in all parts against those professors of the Gospel, and many forced to abjure to save their Lives: A∣mong the rest Ralph Munyen being more obstinate, was condemned to perpetual imprisonment. And in Kent, whole families were forced to fly, and leave their Habitations, the Persecution was so great: 16 of them named in the Register of Canter∣bury. The burning of William Taylor Priest. King Henry the 5th dying, his Son Henry the 6.
succeeded, of but a year old, and in the first year of his reign, Wm. Taylor a Priest was burnt for his Reli∣gion in Smithfield, Anno 1422. being first degraded by the Popish Prelates: And on the first of March he suffered with much Christian Constancy. In the year 1424. John Florence a Turner, in the Diocess of Norwich, was disciplin'd Publickly in the Cathe∣dral of Norwich, by sentence of the Bishop 3 Sun∣days one after another, and likewise 3 Sundays af∣terwards in his own parish Church of Shelton, for holding several of Wickliff's opinions. About the same time several other persons of the same Diocess, were persecuted for Lollards, and many forced to purge themselves, and to swear against their Con∣sciences, or run the danger of suffering Death for being Hereticks: Many were imprisoned and cruelly handled, and some of them burned, as Father Abraham of Colchester, William White, and John Whaddon Priests. And about fourscore men and Women in Suffolk and Northfolk, forced to abjure, contrary to their minds and consciences. Others of them were injoyned pennance and publickly dis∣ciplined, and among the rest one John Beverly was Whipt, from the Bishops palace in Norwich, and round the Market place, cruelly tearing and tor∣menting his body, by order of that persecuing Pre∣late. Also John Skilly of Flixon miller, for re∣ceiving into his house White and Whaddon, who were Martyr'd, and for holding several of Wickliffs opinions, was Condemned to be imprisoned for 7 years, and to eat nothing but bread and water e∣very Fryday, during that time, and also in the be∣ginning of every Lent, and Maunday Thursday to do open pennance. Several others were forced to ab∣ure and to do open pennance. None can imagine he grievous sufferings that the people of God in∣dured in those days, and it would be too tedious to numerate, some of them, being accused for having a ible in their house. And in the year 1430. one ohn Hovedon a wool winder and Citizen of London as burnt near the Tower, as Fabian writes. A∣bout
the same time Nicholas Canon in Northfolk was forced to abjure, and had 3 publick disciplines about the Cloysters of the Cathedral of Norwich and imprisoned besides. In the year 1431. Tho∣mas Bagley Priest an adherent to Wickliffs Doctrine, was burnt in Smithfield, about the midst of Lent, af∣ter he had been degraded: And also Paul Craw was burnt the same year. Anno 1439. one Richard Wich, was burnt, who, being a priest, was first de∣graded, and then burnt on Tower-Hill for an He∣retick. He was esteemed a very holy man, in so much that after his Death, the people went to the place where he was burnt, and there prayed, and reared an heap of stones, and set up a cross in his Me∣mory; which troubled the clergy, and made them get a prohibition from the King, to hinder and punish such as should resort thither as to Pilgri∣mage. And not long after, by reason of the malice of the Cardinal of Winchester, and other Prelates, the good Duke of Gloucester was arrested, & in few days after found dead in his Bed. About the year 1456. when Thomas Burrscheer was Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury, Reynold Peacock Bishop of Chichester, a good man, was brought into trouble and persecuted by his fellow Prelates, for holding several opinions con∣trary to their Romish Doctrines, and for his faith and profession of the Gospel. After he had been cited before the Arch-Bishop. and other prelates, and much pains and endeavours used to bring him from his opinions, they at last drew up a form of Recantation, which they forced him to declare to the people, by many menaces and hard usage, for all which he was detained in pri∣son, and what became of him was not known. The Burning of John Goose, and others. We have briefly gone thorow the reigns of those Princes since the Clergy obtained the Writ de Com∣burendo, for the burning of Hereticks, and none has scaped that cruel punishment, more or less, in any of their reigns since King Rich. 2d. and for ought
we can see, is rather likely to increase, than de∣crease, for in the Reign of King Ed. 4th of the Line of York, who succeeded King Hen. 6th whom he caused to be murdered, we find Anno 1473 one Jehn Goose a godly servant of Jesus Christ, was condemned to the fire, and burnt on Tower Hill in the month of August: Being delivered o∣ver to the secular power, into the hands of Sheriff Belisdon, he endeavoured all he could to cause him to renounce his opinions to save his Life, but this con∣stant Martyr would not hearken to the Temptation, but desiring the Sheriff to let him have some vic∣tuals to refresh him, the Sheriff commanded the same, and he eating a very hearty Dinnet, as if he were unconcerned and giving God thanks for his meal and refreshment, he said, that he should pass a sharp showr e're he should go to supper; after which being led to the place of Execution, he dyed with great Constancy and praysing the Lord, yeild∣ed up his Spirit to God. Ex polychron. The Burning of several others. In the reigns of King Ed. 5th and his Bloody Uncle and Usurper King Rich. 3d we do not find any Martyr'd, their Reigns being but short, and full of Trouble, but in the Reign of King Hen. 7th about the year 1494, there was a very ancient Lady about 80 years of Age, named Joan Boughten, burnt in Smithfield, for holding the opinions of Wickliff. She dyed on the 28 of April, being very constant, and re∣turned to the menaces of Bishops, that she knew her self beloved of God, and his holy Angels, and that she feared not the Fire, and in the midst thereof she cryed to God to receive her Soul. She was much beloved, and her Ashes were carried away by such as secretly professed the Gospel, and kept as a Relick. In the year 1497 several were forced to do pen∣nance bare footed and bare headed, with faggots on their shoulders before St. Paul's Cross, during the
procession and Sermon there. And in the follow∣ing year 1498 in the beginning of May, a priest was burnt. And the same year in Northfolk was burnt a very Godly man named Brabram, and another in July, that year burnt in Smithfield. In the year 1499. above 60 persons in Buckingham∣shire, in the Diocess of Lincoln, William Smith being then Bishop, were forced, to pennance with faggots on their shoulders, for the Gospels sake. And at Amersham in the same County, was burnt one Wi∣liam Tylsworth, a godly Martyr; in a Close called Stanly, Anno 1506. He was about 60 years of Age, who being bound to the Stake, and the Faggots a∣bout him, ready to suffer, the barbarous Papists caused his only daughter, being a Marryed woman, to set fire to her own Father, her Husband John Clark doing pennance at the same time, with a Fag∣got before the fire, with many others. And the next day after one Father Roberts was Martyr'd at Buckingham: At whose burning there were 9 Persons forced to bear Faggots for pennance. And two or three years after, at the same Town of A∣mersham, were burnt Thomas Bernard an Husband∣man, and James Morden a labouring man, both in one fire. And at the same time there were thirty more, who bare Faggots and were burned in the right cheek: The manner thus: Their necks were tyed fast with Towels to a Post, and their hands bound, that they could not stir, and so the Iron being hot, was clapt to their cheeks being stig∣matized for the Gospels sake. And this we must look for again, whenever Popery comes to have Domi∣nion in this Kingdom. At the same time one Father Rogers was kept in the Bishops Prison, for 14 weeks, night and day, and so cruelly handled with cold, hunger, and Irons, that when he was let forth of prison he could never go upright as long as he liv'd. The Cruel handling and Murder of Thomas Chase. In the same year 1506, at Amersham also, one
Thomas Chase, of that town, was cruelly handled in the Bishops prison, being a man of a very Godly and Sober behaviour, speaking against the idolatry and superstition of the Papists, for which he was con∣demned to the Bishops prison at Wooborn, called little ease, where he lay bound and manacled, with Gyves, Fetters, Chains, and Irons, pinched with hunger and thirst, having nothing given him but by Chaplains, who mingled with their Alms, bitter tants, scoffs and jeers, threatnings and flowtings, all which this good man patiently endured: Saying Blessed are they who suffer persecution for righteousness sake, Mat. 5th. For theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. And blessed are you when men revile and persecute you, &c. When the Bishop and his creatures, seeing they could not prevail upon this most constant Martyr, with all their Cruelties, they at last privately strang∣led him in prison, and then wickedly bruted a∣broad, that he had hanged himself in prison: So that we see it is no new thing, for this viperous brood, first to kill and murder a man, and then to defame him, and make himself the Murtherer: But this lye was easily detected; for none could stand upright in the place, and he had so many Irons and Manacles on his hands and feet, that he could not stir to ease himself, and they had bruised and maim∣ed his body after a most shameful manner; and that it might not be seen, and their cruelties and Murther detected, they caused him to be privately buried in a Wood in the high way betwixt Wooburn and Ma∣low. But it was brought to light by means of a wo∣man, that looked after him in the prison. In the year 1507 one Thomas Norris was burnt in Norwich. on the last of March. Also in the same Kings Reign Lawrence Ghest, having been two years kept prisoner in Salisbury, was at last brought to the stake, to be burnt, and thinking to move him to recant, they brought before him his Wife and 7 Children. Yet Religion and constancy overcame natue, and not hearkening to them, desired they might be removd, for that they were but blocks in his way, and that
they would be but an hindrance of his good course, which he was running towards the Mark of his Sal∣vation: And so fire being put to him, he finished his Life, renouncing not only Wife and Children, but also himself to follow Christ. Divers persecuted at Coventry. In the Reign also of King Henry the 7th at Cheping Sadbury, a Godly and Religious woman was Con∣demned to be burnt for an Heretick, by one Doctor Whittington the Bishops Chancellour, who himself went to the fire to see the Sacrifice of this good Woman, Condemned by him, who suffered with great constancy; but it is very remarkable, that at the returning of the people into the Town, after the burning of this faithful Martyr, and among the rest this Doctor Wittington, that a Bull breaking loose out of a Butchers Staul meeting them, and having received a blow with an ax, which had made him furious and raging mad, he ran among the throng of the people, who giving way and shunning him, he hurt none, till he came where this Doctor was, who also sought to run from him; But the Bull as if directed from above, and by the vengeance of God, he ran with all his force, upon the Chancellour and goring him in the belly till his Guts came forth, he immediarely dyed; a miserable spectacle of Gods wrath, against such Violent persecutors of his people. William Sweeting and John Brewster Martyrs. These were the chief Martyrs that suffered hi∣therto for the sake of the Gospel, to the end of the Reign of King Hen. 7th, though we read of divers o∣thers, especially in the Diccess of Coventry and Leitck∣field, who suffered imprisonment, and great trou∣bles, by the Papistical Bishops▪ for Speaking against the real presence, Images Purgatory, Pilgrimages, the Popes Supremacy, cating Flesh in Lent, Merits,
and such like Popish Tenents; with which we will end this first Part, being indeed but a small gleaning, of a more plentiful Harvest of Martyrs, under the Reign of K. Hen. 8. who though he took away the Popes Supremacy, and for lucres sake, overthrew the Abbies, and wicked Nests of Monkeries, in this Land, yet burned the Lollards (as they called them) and such as professed the more pure light of the Gospel, as you will perceive in this following se∣cond part, which, I shall as briefly, as I may, touch upon. The Second part. In which are noted such Martyrs as suffered under the Reign of King Henry the 8th, before the Refor∣mation. Persecution by Fitz-James Bishop of London. VVE are now come to the Reign of King Henry the 8th, in whose time many Godly men, who professed the Gospel and the Doc∣trine of Wickliff (who began, the first reformation in this Kingdom long before Luther) suffered perse∣cution for their consciences sake, under the tittle of Lollards, as they then nicknamed them. In the years, between 1509 and 1517. in the Diocess of London, several were made to abjure, before Ri∣chard Fitz-James the then Bishop, who was in his time a most cruel persecutor of Christ's Church. A∣mong the rest on Joan Baker, Thomas Walker, Wil∣liam Potter, John Forge, Thomas Godard, and more to the number of 41 who were brought into trouble, because some of them did not shew suffici∣ent reverence to the Crucifix, others for speaking a∣gainst Pilgrimages, and saying some that were burnt for their Religion, by the Popish power, were true Martyrs: And others again for Speaking against
the Corporal presence in the Sacrament, against ho∣ly daies, and Fasting, against invocation of dead I∣mages, and against the pride and immoderate rich∣es of the clergy, and some again only for keeping company with such as were suspected of Heresie, and for reading of English Books, with such like, for which many of them were used like slaves, by the Instruments of Fitz-James, who dying, Cut∣bert Tunstal succeeded him, who following his pre∣decessors steps, violently persecuted all such as professed the Gospel, and caused many thorow fear of his cruelties to abjure, bear Faggots o their shoulders, in publick procession before the Cross, and to wear after a disgraceful manner, a Faggot painted upon their sleeves, or some other part of their outward garments, during their lives, or so long as it pleased the Ordinary, to terrifie o∣thers. But among these, two poor men, who had abjured, and had worn the infamous badg, injoyn∣ed them, the one named William Sweeting, the other John Brewster, being poor-labouring men, were fain to fly out of the Diocess of London, by reason of the persecution, their Consciences accusing them for what they had done; the former getting to Colchester, became the holy water Clerk to the Par∣son of the Parish of Mary Magdalen, for which cause he had his infamous Badg taken away, the o∣ther John Brewster, being hired for a labourer in the service of the Earl of Oxford, by his controler, had his Badg taken off, but such was the intolera∣ble pride and cruelty of the Popish Clergy at that time, that notice being given, that these poor men had relapsed to their former errors, after they had abjured, they were both layd hold on, and brought up to London, were excommunicated, and on the 8th of October in the year 1511 were both burnt in Smithfield, though 'tis said, that thorow fear of death, they would have submitted.
The Martyrdom and cruel handling of John Brown. About the 4th year of the Reign of King Henry, one John Brown, going home in the Gravesend Barge, chanced into the company of a Priest in the same Barge, and sitting too near the proud and surly Priest, the Priest asked him, if he knew him not, that he sat upon his cloaths: John Brown told him, he did not know him, nor what he was. I tell thee then said the other, that I am a Priest. What Sir said John Brown are you a Parson, or Vicar, or a La∣dies Chaplain? No quoth he again, I am a Soul Priest: I sing for a Soul. Do you so Sir? said the other, that is well done: But I pray Sir said he where do you find the soul when you say Mass? I cannot tell, reply'd the Priest. Then said the other where do you leave it when mass is done? I can∣not tell thee, said the Priest. If you can tell neither where you find it, nor where you leave it, when your Mass is done, said John Brown, how do you know how you save it? Go thy waies said the Priest, thou art an Heretick, and I will be even with thee. As he was; for nor long after John Brown, not thinking any thing, was surprised in his own house, set on horse back, and his feet tyed like a Felon under the horses Belly, and so carried to Canterbury, and there was kept from Low Sunday till the Fryday before Easter, his wife and family not knowing what was become of him. There he was most cruelly handled by the Bishops Warham and Fisher, as he related himself to his own Wife before his Death, and the Soles of his feet being set upon hot coals, till they were burned to the bones, so that he could not set them to the Ground, to make him (as he said) to deny his Lord, which he resolved not to do, and so indured their torments, and being condemned to be burnt, at his own Town of Ashford, whither he was carried, and the night before he was burnt, set all night in the stocks, where his Wife came to him, whom he ex∣horted
to continue, as she had began, in the fear of God, and to bring up her children vertuously in the fear of God. And the next day, being Whit-Sun∣day even, this godly Martyr was burnt, and standing at the stake, with his hands lifted up, he prayed thus: O Lord I yield me to thy grace. Grant me mercy for my trespass. Let never the Fiend my Soul chace: Lord I will bow and thou shalt beat Let never my Soul come in hell's heat. Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, thou hast redeemed me O Lord of Truth. One Chilton the Bayliff seeing his Children at the fire, bid them fling them in too, for they would spring up Hereticks from his Ashes. This was the end of this Martyr burnt 1517. The Horrid Murther of Mr. Hun in the Lollards To∣wer. The next we shall briefly treat of is one Richard Hun, Merchant Tailor of London, esteemed a very worthy man. This man had a child at nurse in Mid∣dlesex, in the Parish of St. Mary Matsilon, which dyed, on occasion of which there fellout a quarrel between the said Rich. Hun and Thomas Dryfield, the Parson of the Parish about a Mortuary, which he claimed very unjustly, and sued Mr. Hun in the Spiritual Court, but Mr. Hun by advice of Councel took out a writ of Premunire, against Tho. Dryfield; this enraging the whole horners nest of Priests, hanging together, thought it not to be endured, that a Lay man, should thus be able to withstand the power of Priest-hood, though in his own just defence, and fearing if they should suffer this Priest to be condemned at Hunt Suit, there would be a way opened for the rest of the Laity to follow the example. Therefore to put a stop to this, and to be revenged on him, they
contrive, to exhibite certain Articles against him, and accuse him of Heresie, before the Bishop, who thereupon apprehended him, and committed him to the Lollards Tower at Paul's. So that none of his Friends were suffer'd to come at him. And from thence, by the instigation of Dr. Horsey a cruel per∣secuter, and the Bishops Chancellour, he was had be∣fore the Bishop at his manour House at Fulham, where he was examined, and certain Articles laid to his charge. That he had taught and published, that Tythes were not ordained as due by God, but by the Covetousness of Priests: That the Bishops and Priests were the Scribes and Pharises that crucified Christ: That they were only preachers and pra∣ters, but no doers of Gods word: That he should say, he would defend the opinions of Joan Barker, that was forced to abjure: That he should say, the Bishop and his Officers deserved punishment, rather than the aforesaid Joan Barker. Lastly that he kept Heretical Books, damned by the Law, such as the Apccalips in English: The Epistles and Gospels in English, Wickliffs damnable works, and the like. To which he gave in his Answers, and was after his examination sent back to the Lollards Tower under the charge of Charles Joseph the Sumner, and John Spalding the Bell ringer; by the means of these two wicked fellows, the bloody Papists brought about their design of Murthering this Man; for about two nights after, his last commitment, he was found hanged on a Beam in the aforesaid Tower. Spalding after the Murther got himself our of the way and left the Keys of the Prison with one of his companions, to deliver to the Sumners Boy, who usually carried Mr. Hun his Meat. The Boy going into the Pri∣son, about 10 of the Clock in the Morning, on the 4th of December, with two others found Mr. Hun hanging with his face to the wall, who being astonished, went and informed the Chancellor be∣ing then at Church, after his Contrivance, who went with certain of his Colleagues to the Pri∣son, and finding him hanged, after their usual
manner, he caused it to be blazed abroad, that he had hanged himself. But for all that the People suspected more truly the contrary, and that they had murthered him. Whereupon a Contention a∣rose between the Bishop, who took his Clergys part, and averr'd he had murthered himself, and the Citi∣zens, who lay'd his Death to the charge of the Bi∣shops Officers; And causing the Coroner to sit upon view of his body, and according to Law, to chuse an Inquest, and to give their Verdict, vex∣ed the Bishop and Papists so much, that the Bishop proceeded ex Officio as in case of Heresie against the dead person supposing that if he were condemn'd of Heresie, that they durst not find it but that he had murthered himself; whereupon they objected se∣veral new matters against him, too long to relate, whether true or false it matters not, for they were such as a good man might not be ashamed to own. These Articles they cause to be proclaimed at Pauls Cross the Sunday following, and according to certain rules and prescripts of the Bishop, a Solemn process was framed against the dead, for whom none dare∣ing to appear, sentence was pronounced against the dead carcase, for Heresie, and the same delivered over to the secular power to be burned, which de∣cree was performed in Smithfield, on the 20th day of the same month, being 16 days after they had Murthered him, to the great grief and disdain of the people. Norwithstanding, after all this tragical and cru∣el handling of the dead Body, and their fair and co∣lourable shew of Justice, yet the Inquest staid not their diligence, in searching out the truth, and the cause and means of Mr. Hun's death, insomuch that they were called before the Lords Chief-Ju∣stices, and also before the King himself, and his Privy Council, about this matter, and the determination at last was left to them, and after great search and deliberation, they found by good proof, and suffi∣cient Evidence, that Doctor Horsey the Bishop of London's Chancellor, Charles Joseph the Sumner, and
John Spalding the Bell-Ringer, had privily and ma∣iciously committed this Murther, and therefore in∣dicted them all three as willful Murtherers. Not∣withstanding, by the power of the Bishop of Lon∣don, with Cardinal Woolsey, then in great favour, the next Sessions, the King's Attorney General pro∣nounced the Indictment against Dr. Horsey to be false, and untrue, and that he was no way guilty of the Murther. Being thus freed he went away to Exeter, and for shame durst never after appear in London. The aforesaid Inquest found, by most evi∣dent signs, that the said Mr. Hun could not have hang'd himself, and that his Wrists had-been hard bound with Cords, and they found that bis Neck had been broken below the silken Girdle, they had anged him in, and that there were two streams of Blood on his Jacote, a great clodder in the lappet of his Coat, hich could not happen to him after e was hanged: Besides there was no place for im to get up to do the deed. But besides these roofs, Charies Joseph freely confessed of himself, hat  those Heresies laid to Mr. Hunn's charge, were wrote and invented by the Chancellor, and also, that he, and John the Bell-Ringer, together with Dr. Horsey himself, who assisted them, mur∣thered the said Mr. Hun, who was lying on bis Bed, and at the bidding of the aforesaid Chancellour, who said, lay hold on the Thief, they fell upon him, and broke his Neck, and that he the said Charles Joseph put the Girdle about Mr. Hunn's Neck, and that John the Bell Ringer, helping him to lift the dead Body, the Chancellour put the Girdle about the Staple, and so left him hanging. Thus you may see Godfreying is no new thing among them, Mur∣ther is their Trade: and this was the cruel end of this man, only for opposing the Power of the Lord∣ly Priests, and which good People, you must look for again, if ever the Popish Tyranny get footing in this Kingdom. Lay it to heart.
The Martyrdom of John Stillman. It would be endless to relate all the troubles the people of God then suffered, in the Reign of this King, or to enumerate the persons who were forced against their Consciences to abjure, in the year 1517. in and about London, about 35 persons were compelled to abjure, among whom was one George Laud, the Prior of St. Sithe. Some of them after∣wards being troubled in Conscience recanted, and suffered death, among the rest, one John Stillman who about the 24 day of September 1518. was ap∣prehended, and brought before Richard Fitz-James then Bishop of London, at Fulham, and charged for speaking against the worshipping of Images, and for that he had commended Wickliff, and said he wa a Saint in Heaven; and that his Book called Wick∣liff's Wicket, was a good and holy Book: From thence he was had to the Lollard Tower, and or the 22 day of Octob. brought before the Consistory a Paul's. and there examined by Thomas Hed, the Bi∣shops Vicar General, upon several Articles object∣ed against him, and he the said John Stillman own∣ing the truth, and persevering in the same, he was condemned of Heresie, and delivered over to the Sheriffs of London, on the 25th of the same Month, and publickly burnt in Smithfield. Thomas Man and Robert Cosin Martyrs. The next in order was Thomas Man, who, the 29. of March 1518. was likewise burned in Smithfield: He had for divers years been persecuted and impri∣soned, forced to abjure, and to do Pennance; af∣ter which they kept him in a Monastery as their ser∣vant, from whence he escaped, his Conscience troubling him for denying the Truth; but being re∣taken, he was proceeded against as a relapsed He∣retick, by the aforesaid Thomas Hed, Vicar General, who produced false Witnesses against him, who
swore several Articles that they said were Heresie, and though he charged the Witnesses of Adultery and Theft, he could not be heard, and those they had assigned him for Advocates being Papists be∣trayed his Cause, and wrested his Words to his de∣struction; upon which he was condemned as a re∣lapsed Heretick, with these gloseing words Roga∣mus attentè in Ʋisceribus Jesu Christi ut, &c. In Eng∣lish thus. We desire in the Bowells of the Lord Jesus Christ, that the punishment and execution of due severity of thee and against thee in this part may be so Moderated, that there be no rigorous Rigour, nor yet nodissolute man∣suetude but to the health and wealth of thy soul &c. This Sentence Thomas Man said was like that of Cajaphas against Christ, when he said to Pilate. It is not lawfull for us to put any man to death, But if thou letst him go thou art not Caesars Friend. So they said it was not lawfull for them to take away Thomas Mans life, but they delivered him up to the Sheriffs of London, who caused him to be burnt without any warrant for the same. About the same time one Robert Cosin, who had been instructed by Thomas Man in his flight, was martyred at Buckingham. The chief articles against him were, that he had perswaded one Joan Norman after she had bowed a piece of silver to be offered to a Saint, for the health of her child, not to carry it, and told her she needed only to pray to Heaven; And that she needed not to confess her self to the Priest, but to God, and that she might drink as well before she went to Mss on the Sunday, as on any o∣ther day. For these Perillous Doctrines this poor man was sacrificed, to the Lusts of the Popish Priests. Much about the same time Christopher Shoemaker was burnt at Newberry, for professing the Gospel, and Speaking against worshipping of Saints, and going on Pilgrimages. And in the years 1520 and 1521 many received the Light of the Gospel, in and about Newberry, Buckingham, Henly, Amer∣m, in the Diocess of London, in Essex, at Colchster,  Suffolk, and Northfolk, and many other places,
so that it spread very much before Luther appeared. Cruel perccution by the Bishop of Lincoln, Chil∣dren Compelled to set fire to their parent. About the same year a most Cruel persecution was made against these Gospellers, or such as profes∣sed according to the Gospel, by John Longland Bi∣shop of Lincoln, who brought into trouble above 450 persons, most of them poor ignorant men many of them only for having in their houses, and reading some English Books. And having gotten the Kings Letters to the Sheriffs and others, to assist him in the Suppression of Hereticks, he layd about him like a bloody Tyrant, Causing all that he sus∣pected to abjure, doe pennance, or be burnt, So that he forced above 50 persons to abjure their opinions, against their consciences for fear of Death. But many of them recanting were laid hold on, and Suffered Martyrdom, among whom were Thomas Bernard, James Mordent, Robert Rave, John Nor∣man, Thomas Holms, and John Scrivener, at the bur∣ning of this last, his own children were Compelled to set fire to their Father, a Barbarity heardly to be parallell'd among the Heathen. Seven Martyrs at Coventry. Much about the same time 7 godly martyrs suf∣er'd at Coventry, viz. Mrs. Smith a Widdow, Rober Hatcher a Shoemaker, Archer a Shoemaker, Hawk∣ins and Thomas Bond both Shoemakers, Wrigsham Glover, and Landsdale an Hosier; one of the chi crimes objected against these persons was, the tea∣ching their Family the Lords Prayer, and the te Commandments in English, all which were burned in a little Park near the city Anno 1519. This thing being noysed abroad, and the people grumbling be∣cause of their hard usage the Bishop and his Priest gave it out, that they were not burned for havin the Lords Prayer, Creed, and ten Commandment in English, but for eating Flesh on Fridays: so th you see they mended the matter much. About years after one Robert Silkby, was burned at the same place, for the same crims. About the sam
time Mr. Patrick Hamtiton, and Henry Forest of St. Andrews were both Martyred in Scotland. Thomas Harding Martyr. Under the aforesaid John Longland Bishop of Lincoln, suffered Thomas Harding of Chesham in the County of Buckingham, being force with his wife to abjure by the said Bishop, with many more be∣ing injoyned penance n wearing Badges of Fag∣gots which he did till the year 1532. Being also ordered to live in a certain place, and no where else, to fast every Corpus Christi Even, and to goe on Pilgrimage during his life every year to Ashrige, and there make his offerings both him and his Wife. But Thomas Harding neglecting, and being troubled in his mind, retired into the Woods in privat on the Easter Holydays, whilst others went to church to bow down to the Idols, he was espied at his prayers, which he read out of an English Book. And the Officers of the Bishop being made acquainted with it, they went immediatly to his house, and searching narrowly, found Certain English Books hid under the boards of the flower, most of them parts of the Holy Scripture. Upon which he was had before the Bishop then at Woburn, where being examined, he was sent to the Bishops prison called Little ease; Where he endured much hardship both of hunger and pain, but they seeing him to remain constant, the Bishop soon after condemned him as a relapsed Heretick to the fire. committing the charge of his execution to Rowland Messenger, Vi∣car of great Wickham, who accordingly had the aforesaid Martyr to Chesham, where he dwelt, where he made a sermon in the behalf of the Popish Clergys Jurisdiction, making Thomas Harding to stand before him all the time: And after sermon was done he caused him to be brought before the High Altar, where he asked Tho. Harding if that he elieved, that the Substance of the Bread after Conse∣cration was any other than the Body of Christ orn of the Virgin Mary. To which he repyled he belie∣ed what the Articles of the Creed had taught him,
That our Saviour Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, and that on the Third day he arose again from the Dead, and sitteth now in Glory at the right hand of God the Father. After this he was had to a mans house, where he remained all night in prayer, and about 10 of the clock the next morning, the aforesaid Vicar Row∣land, with many Billmen to guard him, hurried him away, many men and women following him lamen∣ting, and others Rejoycing thereat. When he was bound to the stake he desired the people to pray for him, and as soon as they had set fire to him, he prayed God to forgive his enemies, and with great patience lifting up his hands towards Heaven, he said Jesus receive my spirit, when one of the wick∣ed Crew, tking up a Billet flung it at him, and dash∣ed out his Brains. And proclamation was made a the same time that whosoever should bring a Fa∣got towards the burning of an Heretick should hav 40 days pardon. At the same time there was gene∣rally a great persecution of all good men, and w∣men, dissenting any way from the Romish Idolatrie thorow out the whole Diocess of Lincoln. In the year 1530. about the time of the fall of Cardinal Wolsey▪ one Thomas Hitten a Preacher Maidston, being much persecuted by the Archbisho of Canterbury, Warham, and Fisher Bishop of R¦chester and after they had tormented him, and ke him in prison, they at last caused him to be burnt  Maidstone, for his Constant profession and testimon of Jesus Christ, and of his free grace and salvatio which he still maintained to the death. The story of Thomas Bilney Martyr. Thomas Bilney was brought up in the University-Cambridge even from a child, profiting in all ki of Sciences, d in the Profession of both Laws, b at last being Converted to Christ, he studied the G∣pel, being much inflamed with the Love of the  Religion and Godliness, an by his pious life a great learning, he Converted many of his fellows  the true knowledg of the Gospel viz. Mr Th
Arthur, Mr Hugh Latimer, and others; at last he left the University and went about preaching the Gos∣pel, which begot him many Enemies and among the rest Card. Wolsey, the Bish. of Norwich, The Fryers of Ipswich, D. Stokes, Sir Th. More, & others, for he much inveighed against the pride of the Popish Clergy, and the authority of the Bishop of Rome. This enraged Wolsey, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Rochester, Ely, Bath and Wells, with many others who Combined against him, and caused him and Mr. Arthur who had accompanied him to be brought before them at the Chapiter house in Westminster; where they examined Mr Bilney, whether he had privately or publickly preached or taught the Opinions of Luther, or any other Contrary to the Catholick Church; and that whether he had not made Oath, that he would not preach or defend the Opinions of Luther. To which Mr B lney made answer, that he had made such an Oath, but not Law∣fully. After which they caused them both to take an Oath to Answer such Questions as they should ask them. Then certain Witnesses were called to prove the Articles Exhibited against them, but the Cardinal having other great matters of State to fol∣low, the business was referred to Tonstal Bishop of London. And on the 20th of Nov. 1527, they were again had before the Bish & several Witnesses sworn to Articles against them. The chief of which were: That he said the Pope nor other could let any man to preach the Gospel: That none ought to so: bear preaching the Gospel for fear of persecution: That he should say every Christian man is a Priest. That there was no Mediator but Jesus Christ, and that they ought not to pray to saints. That the curses of the Bishops, against those who preached the Gospel, should not harm them, but return upon themselves with several others of the like nature, which were for the most part confessed. Mr. Arthur being fear∣ful submitted himself But Bilney standing out, they interrogated him upon 34 Articles which he answer∣ed with great prudence and moderation, not sparing
to lay out their Idolatrous Worship before them, and for which his sincerity he was twice pulled out of the Pulpit at Ipswich, by the Fryers there, who were his great persecutors. But among other things, this prophetical man told them, that the time would shortly come, that others besides him should shew and preach the same Faith and Doctrine, that he did, which was the true Gospel of our Saviour Jesus Christ, and the mind of the holy Fathers, and whereby they should be brought from their errors in which they had been long seduced and led aside. On the 4th of Decem. Mr Bilney is again brought before the Bishop of London, in the Chapiter house in Westmin▪ where he is by the Bishop advised to sub∣mit, and to recant his errors, and desired to go aside and to consider of it with himself, but Mr. Bilney would return no other Answer than this: Fiat Justi∣tia & Judicium in nomine Dmina, Let Justice and Judgment be done in Gods Name, &c. and he being still urged to abjure, he would answer no otherwise only adding: Haec est dies quam fecit Dominus, exul∣temus & laetemur in ea This is the Lords day, and we will rejoyce in it. Then the Bishop puting off his Cap, after a little deliberation stood up, and said: In nomine Patris, & filii, & Spiritus sancti Amen. Exurgat Deus & dissipentur inimici ejus. In the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, let God arise, and his Enemies be scattered. Then Crossing his for∣head and Breast, he gave sentence thus. I by the Con∣sent and Council of my Brethren here present do pronounce Th. B ln  who has here been accused of divers Aricles, to be Convict of Haeresie. And for the rest of the sntence, we take deliberation till to morrow, Thus for 3 times Mr. Bilney with great Courage, withstood both their flatteries and threats, when at last for his further tryal, that it pleased God weakness should appear, being tyred with their importunities horow Infirmity, rather than Con∣viction submitted himself, and openly read his Ab∣juration and subscibed it: after which the Bishop absolved him, & enjoyned him penance, which was,
That he should abide in prison appointed by the Cardinal, till he was released by him, and also, that the next day he should go before the Procession in the Cathedral of St Paul, bare headed, with a fag∣got on his shoulder, and should stand so before the Preacher at Pauls Cross all the Sermon time. But after this, Mr. Bilney took such repentance and sorrow, for what he had done, that he almost fell into despair, so that some were fain to be with him day and night to comfort him. And about a year after, coming to Cambridg, he was in such An∣guish of mind, and Agonies, that nothing could do him good, not being able to eat, drink, or sleep, imagining the whole Scriptures to condemn him, and to be against him. And not being able to rest, he again openly confessed his Faith in the Gospel of our Saviour Jesus Christ, being thus for two years troubled in mind, from the year 1529 to 1531, have∣ing a bitter sting and remorse for his Abjuration; but then coming to have some peace and quiet of Conscience, he resolved to give over his Life for the Confession of that truth he had renounced. Upon which he left the University, telling his friend he would go to Jerusalem, meaning he intended to go to suffer, and immediately departed to North∣folk, where he first preached privatly in houses, to confirm the Brethren, and an Anchoress whom he had converted, who being in Norwich, he conver∣sed with and gave her a new Testament of Tindal's translation: and then he preached publickly in the Fields, confessing his heinous fact, owned the Do∣ctrine he had abjured to be true, willing all men to take warning by him, and never to trust to their fleshly friends, in causes of Religion. Upon this he was apprehended and put into Prison by Nix the Bishop of Norwich. Upon which several of their Do∣ctors went to see to reclaim him who so strenuous∣ly handled matters that Dr. Cull was himself con∣verted to the Doctrines he maintained. But the Bi∣shop proceeded against him, and after examination he was condemned to the fire for an Heretick by
Dr. Pells Doctor of Law and the Bishops chancellor then he was degraded by the Suffragan Ʋnderwood by the Assistance of the fryers according to their Popish manner, which done he was immediately committed to the Lay power to the Sheriffs of Nor∣wich of whom Tho. Necton was one, and Mr. Bilneys good friend and very sorry for him; but such was the dread he had of the Popish Tyranny of those times that he durst not refue doing his office but he could not bear to be present at his death and did him all the friendly kindness he could in his Confinement. On the Fryday night being St. Magnus Eve; the day before he suffered, divers of his Friends resor∣ted to him in the Prison of the Guildhall, where he was kept, and finding him eating some Alebrew very chearfully, he told them that he endeavoured to keep up his ruined Tenement of his Body as long as he could. Then exhorting them with godly dis∣course some of them told him, that altho the fire which he should suffer the next day should be of great heat to his Body, yet the comfort of God's Spirit should cool it to his everlasting refreshment. At which word Mr. Biney putting his finger into the flame of the Candle burning before him, and feeling the heat thereof, he said, I feel by experi∣ence, and have known it long by Philosophy, that Fire by Gods Ordination is naturally hot, but yet I am perswaded by Gods holy Word, that many who have experimented the same, have felt no heat, and in the fire no Consumption; and I constantly believe, however the Stubble of my Body may burn and be wasted by the outward fire, yet my soul and Spirit shall without pain be purified thereby, with Joy unspeakable. Then he recited these Scriptures. Fear not for I have redeemed thee, and called thee by my Name, thou art mine own. When thou goest tho∣row the water I will be with thee, and the strong floods shall not overthrow thee. When thou walkest in the fire it shall not burn thee, and the flame shall not kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God the holy one of Israel.
The next day being Saturday, with a great Guard of Glaves and Bilmen, they fetch'd this constant Martyr out of prison, carrying him to a place called the Lollards Pit which was encompassed about with hills; as he passed the streets, he distributed Alms to the poor, by the hands of one Dr. Warner, Parson of Winterton, his Friend, and one he had chosen to give him ghostly comfort at the Stake: he was clad in a Lay habit with his sleeves hanging down, & his hair cut and mangled at his degradation, however he seemed of an upright and chearful countenance, being but little in Stature. Being at the Stake while they were preparing the materials for, his burn∣ing, he desired to speak a few words to the people. In which he told them he was born, and so of necessity must dye, he had Life with that condition, 'twas na∣tural, but he was there to testifie that he dyed a good Christian, and in a right belief towards al∣mighty God. Upon which he rehearsed the Arti∣cles of the Creed, with the Elevation of his Eyes and hands towards heaven, and at the Article of Christs Incarnation, having a little meditation with himself and coming to the word Crucified, he bow∣ed himself with great reverence, and then proceed∣ed to the rest. This done he put off his Gown, and kneeled down upon a little ledg, at the foot of the stake, for him to stand on, that he might be more Conspicuous to the people, where he prayed privat∣ly, with great fervency, his Eyes and hands lifted up towards Heaven ending at last with the 143 Psalm which he repeated aloud: Hear my prayer O Lord, and consider my desire, which he repeated in Latin thrice, with deep meditation, and then again; Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Having put off his Jacot and Doublet he stood in his Breeches and shirt, and so was chained to the stke, bidding his friends chearfully farewell, and when Dr Warner could not speak to him for weeping, be said to him pasce gregem tuum &c. Feed your flock, feed the flock, that when the Lord cometh he may find you so doing.
Then many of the priests and Fryers his enemies, finding the people to murmur much for their put∣ing him to death, some of them spake to Mr. Bilney to satisfie the people concerning them, lest they should withdraw their charitable Arms: upon which Mr. Bilney said with a loud voyce, I pray you good people, be never the worse to these men for my sake, and tho they should have been the Authors of my death, it was not they. Then the officers set∣ting fire to the reeds made a very great flame, which he feeling held up his hands, and then Knocking his Breast he often cryed on the name of Jesus, and sometimes said Credo, Credo: I believe, I believe: but the wind being very high, it blew the flame from him with its violence so, that he suffered much ere the wood took fire, and had strength enough to burn him: at last he bowed over the chain and gave up the Ghost, which one of the officers seeing, thrust the staple out of the stake with his halbert & so let the body drop into the fire, & flinging faggots upon him, he was so Consumed to Ashes: and this was the end of this good man, Martyr and Saint, as Mr. Latimer calls him, Mr. Bilney, who dyed at Norwich, 1531. Mr. Bayfeild Martyr. The next in order that suffered the torment of the flames, by the bloody persecuting Papists, was Mr. Richard Bayfeild in the year 1532, in the month of Novem in Smithfieild. He was sometimes a Monk of Bury converted by Doctor Barnes, and two others of London the said Doctor giving him a Testament of Tindals Translation, and other godly books in Eng∣lish, which so wrought upon this Monk, that he made them his dayly study, till at last he was found out by some of the Fryers of the Covent, & was by them gaged and cruelly whipped▪ and imprisoned in the House, and put in the Stocks for 3 quarters of a year, ere Doctor Barnes could get him out, which he at last effected by means of one Dr. Ruffam his friend one of the same House. Dr. Barnes had him with him to Cambridge, where he studied, and profited
so well that he never more returned to his Covent, but went to Lond. where he hid himself for a while, till he got beyond sea, where he was very usefull and assisted Tindal and Frith, but coming over again to London, and lodging in Bucklersbury, he was betray'd; being dogg'd thence to his Bookbinders in Mark lan, was there taken and carryed to the Lollards Tower, where finding one Parson Patmore imprisoned for the same Doctrine, he wonderfully strengthen'd him, & confirm'd him by his discourse; which being perceived, they caused Mr. Bayfeild to be removed to the Bishops Colehouse. As for the Parson he was afterwards, adjudged by the Bi∣shop to perpetual Imprisonment, from which he was at last delivered by the Kings Pardon. But as for Mr. Bayfeld, he being now in the Colehouse, was more Cruelly handled than before, for they tied him to the Wall by the neck, middle, and legs, to force him to accuse others, but he would not. Several Arti∣cles were put in against him, and among the rest this, viz. that he should say all laud & praise should be given to God alone, and not to Saints or Crea∣tures. He very learnedly answered all the Articles put in against him, and offered to dispute with the most learned of them, the points which he asser∣ted, but they had other more powerfull Weapons to fight with than words, the Papal Jurisdiction by which they condemned him, first for a relapsed Heretick, and then sentenced him to be degraded, upon which Mr. Bayfeild being moved more than Ordinary, said to the Bishop who had pronounced the sentence against him. The Life of you of the spiri∣tuality is so evil, that ye be hereticks, for ye do not only live evilly, but ye maintain evil living con∣trary to the Gospel of Christ, and the true belief of Christs Church. Upon which they proceeded act∣ually to degrade him; which done they delivered him over to the Secular power, who received him into their Jurisdiction, without any Writ, but only by virtue of the Bish. Letters, according to a Stature made, Hen. 4. when they had degraded Mr. Bayfeild,
the Bishop being present, struck him with his Crosier Staff that he had in his hand, on the brest, with such violence, that he overturned Mr. Bayfeild, who was on his knees before him, and falling back on the pavement broke his head, so that he lay a while stun'd and in a swone, ere they could bring him to himself. When he said I rejoyce that I am deliver∣ed from the Church of Antichrist, and that I now am of the true Church of Christ militant on Earth, and trust that ere long I shall be in Heaven with Jesus Christ, and the Church triumphant for ever. From the Quire they had him to Newgate, and thence after an hours time which he spent in prayer, they led him to Smithfield, who went very chearfully, and there for want of a speedy fire, he was half an hour alive after they had enkindled the fewel, and when that his left arm was burning and on a flame, he rub'd it with his right, till it fell off into the fire from his body, and then he continued in prayer, to the end without moving. This was the end of this godly stout Martyr on the 20 of Nov. 1532. John Tewksberry Martyr. The next that dyed by the hands of the persecu∣ting Papists for his Religion, was one Tewksbury a Leather seller of London, being converted by read∣ing the Testament of Mr. Tyndel in English, and was so well verst in all points of his Religion, that he disputed it before Bishop Tonstall and his Priests for 7 days together, to their great wonder and amaze∣ment; they being not a little troubled and asham∣ed, that a Lay ignorant man (as they accounted him) should be able, by the power of the Scriptures, to resist and overthrow all their Arguments. The Bi∣shop often urged him to recant his heresies which he so well defended, but he answered them that he no way erred from the true doctrine of the ancient mother Church. After which many Articles were objected against him, to which he gave his particu∣lar Answers, but at last, being thorow many impor∣tunities and threats perswaded, the flesh being weak, he recanted and submitted himself to pe∣nance
which was, That he should keep his abjura∣tion under pain of suffering for his relapse, That the next Sunday he should openly bear a faggot at Pauls Cross, and the Wednesday following another in New∣gate Market and Cheapside: and on the Fryday in Cornhill and Leadenhall; that he should on either sleeve wear an Embroidered faggot as a badg all his Life time. That he should enter the Monastery of St. Bartholomew in Smithfield on the Whiteson Eve fol∣lowing, and there abide, and not come out unless released by the Bishop of London. And that he should never go out of the Diocess of London without the special leave of the Bishop, or his successors. But nothwithstanding this, about two years after, the said John Tewksbury being strengthned in his faith, by the Constancy and example of Mr. Bayfeild before mentioned, he made an open profession of his Faith, upon which he was apprehended and carried before the Bishop of London, and St. Tho. Moor, where di∣vers Articles were preferred against him, one of which was that he confessed, that his Abjuration made before Cuthbert Bishop of London was done by Compulsion, and against his Conscience: and that he had taken off the Badges of faggots on his sleeves without order and many others such like, most of which the said Tewksbury confessed; upon which the Bishop pronounced sentence against him, and delivered him to the Sheriffs of London: who caused him to be burnt in Smithfield upon St. Thomas Eve, being 20th of Decem. 1532. hav∣ing no writ of the Kings but the Bishops War∣rant. The Cruel handling of Edward Freese. Edward Freese a Painter by profession, who being at Colchester, and painting certain cloaths for an Inn there, wrote several places of Scripture by which they perceived him to be one of them they termed Hereticks, upon which they seised him, and carryed him away forcibly to London, to the Bishop, and so to Fulham where the Bishop then was, where he was imprisoned and handled cruelly with some others
of Essex, who had professed alo te Gospel; most of their bread being made of Sawdust: then friends and wives being denyed to come to see them, and the wife of this Freese pressing in at the Gate, desirous to see her husband, the Porter gave her such a Kick on the Belly, she being then big with child, that the child was immediatly destroyed, and she not long after dyed of the same. The Painter would ever and anon be writing things on the wall of the prison, and among the rest, one day, he wrote, Doctor Dodipal would make me beleive the Moon is made of green cheese; upon which they put manacles upon his wrists, so that he could not use his hands, so much as to comb his Head, which they forced him to wear, till they eat into his flesh, and that the flesh of his wrists stood up higher than the Irons. After a long suit of some of his friends, he was brought out of prison to answer at the Consisto∣ry, having been kept 3 days before without either meat or drink, so that when he came forth he was so much amazed, and out of his senses, with their cruel handling him in prison, that he Stared like a wild man, and could answer nothing to any Question was asked him, but that my Lord Bishop is a good Man. They perceiving him distracted they sent him to an Abby, but he never came again to his perfect mind. Not long after, the Brother of this man named Va∣lentine Freese, and his Wife; were both burned at York. The same year, this Bishop of London, caused all the Bibles he could get of Tindals translation, to be publickly burnt. Mr. Baynham a Lawyer, Martyr. The next we shall mention, is one Mr. James Baynham a Lawyer and son to a Knight of Glocester∣shire well skill'd both in the Latine & Greek tongues, and bred up in the Study of the Laws, of a most vertuous disposition, affable Conversation, and ex∣treamly addicted to prayer and meditation, and reading the holy Scriptures, visiting poor prisoners and relieving them, just to his Clients, giving good Council to the poor and widdows without fees,
and was a singular pattern for all Lawyers, but notwithstanding his good and holy Life, he was ac∣cused before Sr. Tho. Moor then Chancellor, arrested, and carryed out of the Middle Temple to the Chan∣cellours House at Chelsey, where he remained in free prison for a time, but when Sr. Tho. Moor saw he could not pervert him, he handled him cruelly, and caused him to be whipt at a Tree in his Garden cal∣led the Tree of Truth, and after that sent him to The Tower to be rack'd, Sr. Tho. Moor himself be∣ing present, till they had lamed him, all to have him accuse others, which he would not. And his wife because she would not discover where his Books were they sent to the Fleet, and confiscated his Goods. After this, they had him before the Bishop of London, and interrogated him upon several Ar∣ticles, to which he answered with great prudence: The Bishop told him now was the time for him to save his Life or to lose it, and Sr. Tho Moor useing many flattering speeches, they at last brought him to submit, tho he could not yield to many of the Articles which he had spoken against, upon which he was sent to the Counter, and from thence was several times carryed before the Bishop and Con∣sistory, being Exceeding unwilling to abjure, but at last for fear seeing the Bishop ready to give a de∣finitive sentence against him, he read and signed his abjuration; which done, he was fined 20 l. to the King, and penance enjoyned him: which was, the next Sunday to go in the Procession with a faggot on his shouldier at Pauls Cross, & so to stand before the Preacher during the Sermon, and after that to remain in Prison during the Bishops pleasure. This done Anno 1532, not long after he was released, but he had scearce been a month at home but he continually bewailing his fact of Abjuration, could have no peace in his mind, till he had declared his o∣ffence, to all his Acquaintance, asking God forgive∣ness, and the World, before a private Congregation, held in a Warehouse in Bowlane. And the next Sunday after, he went to saint Austins Church open∣ly,
with a Bible in his hand, and there before them all; with weeping, declared he had denyed God, an prayed him to forgive his weakness, and all goo people to take warning by him and not to do as h had done; for the Hell he had felt in his Conscienc was greater far than the torment of Burning: up∣on this he was apprehended and sent to the Tower and a Process was drawn up against him, as a re∣lapsed Heretick: They first caused him to be whipt and after several appearances, and sending him t several prisons where they most curelly handled him, they at last pronounced the sentence agains him, and delivered him to Sr. Richard Gresham Sheriff, who sent him to Newgate, from whence on the la of April 1533. he was had to Smithfield, and there burned. It was observed, that being at the Stake in the midst of the Flames, when his Arms and Leggs were half consumed▪ he spake these Words O ye Papists, behold ye look for miracles, and here now you may see a miracle, for in this fire feel no more pain, than if I were on a Bed of down, but 'tis to me as a bed of Roses: After which he gave up the Ghost. Bent and Trapnel Martyrs. About the same time John Bent a Taylor living at the Devises in Wiltsheir, was there burnt, for deny∣ing the Real presence in the Sacrament of the Altar. And also in the same county one Trapnell was burnt, for professing the Gospel, at a Town called Broadford. Three men hang'd for taking down the Rood of Dovercourt. The same year, many Images were thrown down in the night, by several persons, who were troubled at the gross Idolatry committed before them, by the sottish and ignorant Papists; as the the Images and Crosses in Stoke park. The Image of the Crucifix in the highway by Cogshall. the Image of St. Petronel in the Church of great Harseleigh. The Image of St. Christopher by Sudbury. and the Image of St. Petronil in a Chappel by Ipswich. But above all the rest, the loss of the Image or Rood of
Dovercourt vext them most, being a noted and fa∣mous Image, and to which many ignorant devotees resorted, the Church door standing open night and day, for they had caused it to be reported, and 'twas also believed by the superstitious People, that none was able to shut the Church door being kept open by this Image, upon which one Rbert King of Ded∣ham, Robert Debnam of Eastergolt, Nicholas Marsh of Dodham, and Robert Gardner of the same place, a∣greed together one night to see if this feigned miracle were true or false, their consciences troub∣ling them to see the Honour of God to be blasphem∣ed by the jugling Priests, imposeing upon the silly People. The roodstood about 10 miles from the place where they dwelt, which they travelled on foot, and found the Church door standing open, which they found they were able to shut, and that the dead Image was not able to hinder them, nor to defend it self, for they made bold to take it down out of its shrine, with the Tapers burning before it, and carried it about a quarter of a mile from the place, and then set it on fire, which being dry, burn∣ed very easily. But great inquiry being made after these persons, they were at last found, and appre∣hended, all but Robert Gardner who fled and esca∣ped, the other three before mentioned were hang'd n chaines about half a year after. Robert King was hang'd at Dednam, Robert Debnam at Cattwaycause, and Nicholas Marsh at Dovercourt. The Martyrdom of John Frith and Andrew Hewer. The next whose history we shall briefly recite, s Mr. John Frith who was a young man of godly ife and singular learning, being bred in Cambridge, Skilful in the Latine and Greek tongues, and well ead in Philosophy and Divinity, of a pregnant wit nd excellent Conversation, This man falling into he Acquaintance of Mr. Tindal, was by his means Converted, and owned the Gospel of Jesus Christ in incerity of heart. He being Batchelour of Arts a∣ong other noted and learned men who were pickt
out to furnish Cardinal Woolsies new erected Col∣ledg, called Christ Colledg in Oxford, was chosen for one: among whom many had received the light of the Gospel, and often conferred together pri∣vately of the same, which coming to the Cardinals ear, he caused them, and among the rest this John Frith to be cast into Prison, in a stinking Cave with∣in the Colledge, where their Salt-fish was laid, so that thorow the Stink thereof many of them were infected and dyed: 3 of them dyed within one week one of another, having nothing given them to ear, but Salt-fish from February to the midst of Agst. John Frith escaping Death was at last re∣lased out of Prison and Confined only not to go 10 miles out of Oxford, but he not daring to trust himself among those wolves, that sought to devour him, e made his escape, and got away beyond sea. But after that coming back again into his native Country, and being at Reading in poor cloaths, he was taken for a Vagabond, and put into the Stocks, where he sat till he was almost pined with hunger & cold, because he would not declare who he was, for Sr Tho Moor the Chancellor, & great persecutor, being a bigotted Papist, had offer'd great rewards to any that could take this John Frith and had sent to the Sea Ports and other places to discover him. At last, not knowing what to do he sent for Mr. Cox who was Schoolmaster of that place, whom he accosted in Latine, and afterward in Greek reciting several verses out of Homer, Complaining of his hard Condition. His Eloquence so much wrought upon this ingenious Schoolmaster, that he went to the Magistrates and got him released, taking him home and relieving him, being much taken with his learn∣ing and wit. After this, often disguising himself, and changing his cloaths, staying but a small time with his friends, for fear of discovery, he wandred about; but at last being betray'd, he was taken and sent to the Tower, where he wrote an excellen tract concerning the Sacrament, which Sr. Tho M thought worthy of answer by himself. But Frith treatise coming into several hands, did much good,
and was some means of Converting Archbishop Cranmer. He maintained his Arguments so strenu∣ously, and with so much learning against all the Bishops, that they knew not what to say to him, But in the end, after many appearances before these wolfish Prelates, on the 20th of June 1533. he re∣ceived his sentence from the Bishop of London, to be burnt, thereupon directing his Letter to Sr. Sce∣phen Peacock the Mayor of London, and to the Sheriffs, to receive him, he was delivered over to the secu∣lar power, who on the 4th of July following, cau∣sed him to be burnt in Smithfield, together with An∣drew Hewet, where he suffered Death with great courage and constancy. For when the faggots and fire were put unto him, he embraced them declaring with what quiet of mind he suffered for Christs Sake, and the true Doctrine, of which he that day gave a cheerful testimony with his Blood. The wind bare away the flame from him to his fellow, who was tyed to his back, so that he was Longer in dying, yet God giving him strength he bore it with such patience, as if he felt no pain or torment, but rather seemed to be joyful for his fellow, than careful for himself. As to the other Martyr who suffered with Mr.  Frith, his name was Andrew Hewet born in Fever∣am, in the County of Kent, he was but a young man, and had been at Apprentise to a Taylor in War∣ing, Street, but being suspected, he was betray'd, nd had to Prison in the Lollards Tower where one rocuring him a file, he filed off his Irons and made is escape, but was not long after retaken, and u∣ed much worse, till at last, after much hard usage, nd long imprisonment, he was condemned to be urnt, and suffered in the same fire with the afore∣aid Mr. Frith; when they were at the Stake, and desired the Prayers of the People; one Doctor Cook a Parson in London, openly admonished he People not to pray for those Martyrs, no more than for a Dog. Mr. Frith desired God to for∣give him, and the People were much displeased.
The Martyrdom of Thomas Bennet The next that we read of was on Thomas Bennet who received his Martyrdom at Exeter. He was born at Cambridge, and there Commenced Master of Arts, one well learned, & a familiar acquaintance of Mr. Bilney, the glorious Martyr we have spoken of before. Finding the great Corruption of the Clergy to be a great trouble to him, and fearing to fall into trouble in his own Country, that he might have the more freedom he went into Devonshire in the year 1524. dwelling at a Town called Tor∣rington, where he was utterly unknown. Here he kept a School, being Married, but his expectation being not there answered he went to exeter, about a year after, where he also taught School, and so maintained his Family. He was a man of a quiet behaviour, of a godly Conversa∣tion, of a very courteous nature, humble to all Men, and offensive to none: and a diligent and atten∣tive hearer of Sermons. All his spare time he gav to the study of the Scriptures. But when he hear of one Wil. Stroud, of Newnham of that County Es was put into the Bishops prison for the sake of the Gospel, he wrote to him many Comfortable Let∣ters, discloseing to him who he was, and for wha he came into that Country; among other Expressi∣ons he had this: That because he would not be  whoremaster, or an unclean person he had marrie a Wife, with whom he had lived out of th Tyranny of his Antichristian persecutors, for Six years▪ he having been a Priest and taken Orders. Thi man being full of zeal for Christ and his Gospel beholding dayly the gross Idol-tries committed t dumb Idols, and hearing the blasphemies of the Po∣pish teachers, he could not be quiet in his mind, til he had given his testimony against them, and th he knew the danger that he incurr'd thereby yet he though he should do more good, an be more profitable to the Church of God, by h death, than by his Life. Therefore desiring h friends, that God would strengthen and support his in his Intentions, he set upon the door of the Cathe∣dral:
That the Ppe was Antichrist and the Saints were not to be Woshipped, but God alone. This did not a little inrage the Bishop, and all the Priests, and they caused the Mayor to mke a diligent search thorow the City for the Heretick, who durst put up this Blasphemous Bill as they caled it, and the most Learned among them were caled upon to preach against it; but not being able to find out who did it, they proceed however to curse the par∣y with Bell, Book, and Candle, which they per∣ormed with great Fopperie and Ceremony. The Priests being apparelled in White, and the Monks anding round about, the Cross and holy Candles eing holden up, one of them ascending the Pulpit egan his Sermon, with this Text, Est blasphemia in asis. There is Blasphemy in the Army, &c. Spo∣en by Joshua; Concluding that the damnable Here∣ick who had put up that Blasphemous Bill, was amnably accursed, and so besought God, our La∣y, St. Peter Patron of the Church, with all the Ho∣ Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, &c. that it might e known, what wicked and accursed Heretick had ut up that Blasphemous Bill, that Gods People might voyd the Vengeance. Then the Bishop stood up nd said, by the Authority of God, the Father Al∣ighty, and by the blessed Virgin Mary, of St. Peter nd St. Paul, and of the holy Saints, we, Excom∣unicate, we utterly Curse and Ban, Commit and eliver to the Devil of Hell, him or her, whatso∣ver he or she be, that have in Spite of God and St. eter, whose Church this is, in Spite of all holy Saints,  in Spite of our most holy Father the Pope, and in pite of the reverend Father in God John Diocesan, nd the Worshipful Canons, Masters, and Priests,  Clarks which serve God dayly in this Cathedral hurch, fixed up with wax, a cursed and heretical ill full of Blasphemy, upon the door of this holy hurch, Excommunicate plainly be he or she, and elivered over to the Devil, as perpetual malefa∣ors and Schismaticks. Accursed may they be and iven Body and Soul to the Devil. Cursed be they, e, or she, in Citys and Towns, in Fields and in
Ways, in Paths, in Houses, out of Houses, in all o∣ther places, standing, lying, or riseing walking or running waking or sleeping, eating or drinking, or whatsoever thing they do besides. We separate them, him, or her, from the Threshold, and from all the prayers of the Church, from the participation of the Holy Mass, from all Sacraments, Chappels, and Altars, from Holy Bread, and Holy Water, from all the merits of Gods Priests, and religious men; and from all their Cloysters, from all their pardons, priviledges, grants, and immunities, which all the Holy Fathers Popes of Rome have granted to them: And we give over utterly to the power of the Fiend, them, he or she, and let us quench their souls, if they be dead, this night in the pains of hell fire, as this Candle is now quenched and put out (then he put out one of the Candles) and let us pray to God, if they be alive that their Eyes ma be put out, as this light Candle is (with that he pu out another Candle) & let us pray to God and to ou Lady, to St. Peter and Paul and all holy Saints that all the senses of their Bodys may fail them, and tha they may have no feeling, as now the light of thi Candle is gone out (and so he put out the 3d Candle, except they, he, or she, come openly now and con∣fess their Blasphemy, and make satisfaction to God, our Lady, St. Peter and the worshipful company of this Cathed. Chu. & as this Holy Cross staff that now falleth down, so may they, except they repent and shew themselves. Then the Cross staff falling down, the people gave a great shout, and so the Ceremony ended. Thomas Bennet was there in presence, and could not choose but laugh at their foppery, upo which he was laid hold on, but not suspected for the Heretick, they had cursed, contrary to the Do∣ctrine of Christ, they let him go again. But n long after, his Boy setting up more Bills on the Churc door, he was taken in the Action and then M Bennet was seized and cast into prison, he freely ac∣knowledging the Action, and that he would main∣tain the doing of it; upon this they put him into the Stocks with heavy Irons and Bolts, many dispute
the Priests and Fryers had with him, whom he an∣swered with much sobriety, and maintained his As∣sertions with so much learning, that they knew not what to say to him: But to handle him more Cruelly, as also his wife who was a partaker with her husband in his sufferings. About a weeks time they endeavoured all they could to cause him to recant, but in vains upon which they pronounced him an obstinate Heretick, and so Condemned him to be burnt. And the writ de Comburendo, &c. being procured, and sent from London, they delivered him over to Sir Tho. Denis Sheriff of Devonshire to be burnt, and being brought to his Execution, in a place called Liverydole without Exeter, where he behaved himself with so much moderation and Christian patience, making to the people such pithy and godly exhortations at his Death, that many of his very enemies could not but say and Confess that he was a good man, and a servant of God. Yet one of them when he was at the Stake, endeavour∣ing to perswade him to pray to the Virgin Mary, and the Saints, he denyed, and told them he had but one Advocate Jesus Christ, who dyed for us, and now sitteth at the right hand of the Father, and to him they ought only to pray; which this zealous man hearing, his name being Barnhouse, he was so inra∣ged, that taking a furze bush on the end of a pike, he set it on fire, and thrust it into the Holy Martyrs face: At which the Holy man holding up his hands said, Sir, trouble me not now, and presently prayed, Pater ignosce illis, &c. Father forgive them, &c. upon which fire was put to the Furzes and Wood, when Mr. Bennet lifting up his hands and eyes towards heaven; He cryed out, O Lord receive my Spirit, and so Continuing in his prayers, never stir'd or mov'd but most patiently abode the Cruelty of the Fire, till his Life was ended. Great persecution in London. About the same time, a very great persecution was maintained by Bishp Stoksly, in his Diocess of London, causeing about 138 several persons to ab∣jure: and the Body of one Mr. Tracy to be taken up
and burnt for an Heretick, because he had spoken against the mass and praying to Saints in his Testa∣ment. About the same time, ten Anabaptists were also put to Death for their Religion: But now, after that King Henry had marryed Ann of Bullein, there was a Cessation of their bloody persecution for a time, and the Church had some rest from these Tyrants, she favouring those of the Religion, this being the Mo∣ther of our glorious Queen Elizabeth, who was not long after born, and now the Popes Supremacy was utterly abolished out of England: And many of the High and ranting Popelings now turned their coats, and preached publickly against the Supremacy of the Pope, for which they before had burnt divers for maintaining it: But Sir Tho. More, and Bi∣shop Fisher, two great persecutors were beheaded. Mr. Tyndal Martyred in Flanders. In the year 1536 Willam Tyndal who may be cal∣led the Apostle of this Nation, was Martyr'd in Flan∣ders. He was born on the borders of Wales and brought up in the University of Oxford where he was first Converted to the Gospel, and after that he removed to Cambridg where he also studied and ri∣pened in the study of Gods Word. From thence he went into Glocester Shire and lived with one Welch a Knight of that County as a Tutor to his children where he translated the Enchiridion of Erasmus into English, but being there persecuted by the Priests of that Country he was fain to fly to London, and thence went into Germany where he Translated the Bible into English, being assisted in it by Mr. Coverdale. This translation enraged the Popish Priests so that they procured an order to have it burnt, de∣siring to keep the people in Ignorance Afterwards Mr. Tyndal being at Antwerp, where he lay, was betrayed by one Phillips his own Country man, to whom he had been very kind and familiar▪ and took him to be his friend, but he was deceived in him, & carried prisoner to Filford Castle by the Emperors officers, where he continued till he was Mar∣tyr'd, at the procuration of his most Cruel enemies
the Priests, for no other crime than translating the Bible. He was first strangled at a Stake, and then burnt to Ashes by the Emperors decree, Mr. Tyndal crying at his death O Lord open the King of Eng∣lands Eyes. The very same year Queen Ann was beheaded. Mr. Lambert Martyr. The next we shall take notice of is John Lambert Alias Nicholson, born and brought up in Northfolk, but studied at Cambridg, where he was Converted by Mr. Bilney, and profited very much both in the Latine and Greek tongues: But perceiving the vio∣lence of the times, to avoyde persecution went o∣ver into Germany to Mr. Tyndal, where he remain∣ed sometime Preacher and Chaplain to an English House in Antwerp. till he was disturbed by Sir Tho. Moor, and taken and brought thence to London, where there was 45 Articles laid to his charge, all which he answered in writing. He was kept in pri∣son till the death of Archbishop Warham, when he was released and kept a privat School in London, but not long after, he began to dispute about the Sa∣crament and real presence, which brought him into farther trouble: For by the Advice of Gard∣ner Bishop of Winchester, because the King had Con∣tracted great hatred from the people, for his de∣molishing the Abbies and Monkeries, saying he fa∣voured Hereticks and heresie, he was resolved to shew the Contrary by his Actings against this John Lambert, and therefore after several disputings be∣fore the Bishops, the King resolves by Gardners ad∣vice to hear the matter himself, where this Holy man maintained his Arguments with great learn∣ing and modesty, for 5 hours against 10 Prelates, who disputed against him, and notwithstanding the Kings fowns and taunts, being upholden by the Spirit of God, the main thing being the business of the real presence in the Sacrament which he deny∣ed. At last it being night and the King willing to be gone, asked Mr. Lambert whether he would live or dye, for it way yet in his free choyce; to which Lambert Answered, that he submitted himself whol∣ly
unto the will of his Majesty. Then said the King, commit your self into the hands of God, and not into mine. my Soul replyed he I Commend into the hands of God, but my Body wholly to your Cle∣mency. Then said the King if you commit your self to my Judgment, you must dye, for I will not be a Patron to Hereticks. After which he com∣manded Cromwell to read the sentence of Death up∣on him, which was done to his grief, for he was a great favourer of the Gospellers, but feared if he should refuse he should incur the Kings displeasure, and do him no good. But it is said, that Cromwel asked him forgiveness before he dyed for reading the sentence against him. Lambert having notice of his death prepared for it very cheerfully, and it is to be noted, that among all these who had suffered at Smithfield there was none that was so cruelly handled as this man, for after his Leggs were burn∣ed to the stumps, withdrawing the fire from him t put him to more torment, two that stood one eac side of him, pitching their piked halberts into his body, lifted him up as high as the chain would per∣mit them: when he lifting up his hands all of a fla cryed aloud to the people, none but Christ, none b Christ. and being let down again into the fire he ended his Life, in year 1538. The Murther of Mr. Packington. We cannot here pass over the murther of Mr. Robert Packington, who was a Burgess in Parliamen for the City of London, where it seems he was too free in speaking against the Covetousness and pride of the Clergy, for which they Stomached him, and knowing him to be a stout resolute man, such ano∣ther as Sir. Edmondbury Godfrey, and might do them a prejudice, they resolved to take him out of the way. They had observed that every morning he went to prayers, at 5 of the Clock winter & Summer to the Church called St. Thomas of Acres, now Mercers Chappel, being not far from his house, dwel∣ling in Cheapside; upon which, one morning, as the said Mr. Packington was Crossing the street, to go
over to the Chappel, being a very misty morning, and fit for their black purpose; he was shot with a Gun, several Neighbours hearing it go off, and the Labourers who stood at Soper-lane end, saw him fall upon the shot, but the Murtherer could not be heard of, having dexterously made his escape. The blow heard, they had not the opportunity of putting, or (according to our new phrase) of shamming the Murther upon himself. But God that reveals the close designs of the wicked, and brings such horrid Contrivances to Light, for his Glory and our In∣struction, at last brought this Murther to Light, for Dr. Incent Dean of St. Pauls, being on his Death Bed, had such horrors of Conscience, that he could not die, till he had confessed that he had hired an Italian to murther the said Mr. Packington; no doubt as he thought for the good of the Church; and thus it came to be known, and the horrid malice of the Clergy, to all that speak or any way Act against them, to be taken notice of. Two Mad Men burnt for Hereticks. We shall not omit the burning of Mr. Collens a Lawyer, who by occasion of the lightness of his Wife, whom he passionately lov'd, fell mad, and besides his senses, this man one Sunday going into a Church, and seeing the Priest holding the Host up between his hands over his head, he took up his Dog, and did the like, which they taking it done in derision, tho he was mad, had him Condemned and burned for an Heretick: both he and his Dog being burnt in Smithfield, the same year 1538. In the same, or the next following year, one Cow∣bridg was burnt at Oxford, being also mad, and out of his right senses, and had more need of Physick to restore him to his right mind, than punishment, and to be sent to Bethlem than to the fire; but such was the merciless Cruelty of these persecutors, that they would spare none. However it was observed, that this Martyr being in the midst of the Flames, lift up his head towards Heaven, and called upon the name of Jesus till he dyed.
Also the same year was one Puttedew burnt in Suffolk, for jesting only with the Priest, saying, that after he had drunk up all the Wine himself, he blessed the people with the hungry Chalice, for this he was Condemned and burned for an Heretick. And about the same time one William Leiton was burnt at Norwich, for speaking against an Idol that they were wont to carry about in Procession, and for saying the Lords Supper ought to be admini∣ster'd to the Laity in both kinds. N. Peke burnt at Ipswich. About the same time, one N. Peke was burnt at Ipswich, who being at the Stake, and the Furze and Faggots being set on fire, when he was as black as a Coal, Dr. Reading being by with a white Wand which he held in his hand, he stroke Peke on the shoulder, and bid him recant, and acknowledge that the Sacrament of the Altar was the very Body of Christ, Flesh, Blood, and Bones, and he would absolve him; to which he answered, I defie both it and thee, and with great violence spat blood out of his Body, his Veins being broke within him. Upon which this Popish Doctor in the Name of the Bish∣op proclaimed that whosoever cast a stick into the fire towards the burning of that obstinate Heretick, should have 40 days pardon; upon which, many ran and flung sticks into the fire, to obtain this pardon; such was their blindness and Ignorance. Not long after by the cunning devices of Gard∣ner Bishop of Winchester, and other Popish Prelates, the six Articles were obtained in Parliament. The first of which was concerning transubstantiation de∣claring the Sacrament of the Altar after the Priest∣ly consecration to be the very Body of our Lord, with a penalty that those who should deny this Article, either by word of mouth, or writing, should be burnt alive, without Abjuration, and all their goods forfeited to the King, and as to the o∣ther five it was made death and felony by the Law, to deny them, without benefit of Clergy or Sanctu∣ary. The second being concerning the Sacrament
of both kinds, that it ought not to be given to the Laity. The 3d that Priests may not marry. 4. That Vows of chastity ought to be observ'd. 5. That private Mosses are agreeable to God's Law. 6. That auricular Confession is expedient and necessary to be received, &c. and upon these Articles was gran∣ted by the same Parliament, a bloody and Cruel In∣quisition, directed to certain persons in every shire and County, to enquire into all such Heresies, Felo∣nies, Contempts, &c. committed or done by any, that they might suffer according to the Law. These Articles were opposed openly in Parliament by Cran∣me Archbishop of Canterbury: who afterwards suffred Martyrdom in the days of Queen Mary, as shall be declared. And among these▪ we might nominate the Lord Cromwell who lost his Life in the cause of God, by the craft and policy of his Po∣pish Adversaies, but since it had some other shew than that of Religion only, we shall let it pass and proceed to others. Dr. Barnes Martyr. After the Death of the Lord Cromwell, Gardner raged against all that opposed the Papal power at his pleasure, having now got an Act of Parliament to their bloody minds: and now 3 noted Divines suffered together in Smithfield, which I shall briefly mention. The first was Doctor Robert Barnes, who having been bred abroad at Lovain, and also at the University of Cambridg, was made Prior and Master of the House of the Augustines, where much to his praise he advanced the knowledg of good Letters, and caused the Epistles of St. Paul to be read, causing disputations of the same publickly, which seemed strange to the blind and Ignorant Scholars. His first Sermon that he made in defence of the truth was at St. Edward's Church belonging to Trinity Hall in Cambridge, the Sunday before Christmass day, for which he was accused of Heresie, by two Fel∣lows of Kings Hall, and Articles drawn up against him, and not long after he was publickly arrested by a Serjeant at Arms from London, and the Univer∣sity
was searched for Luthers Books: Dr. Barnes was immediately had away to London, and brought before Cardinal Woolsie, who was then in power. After a long discourse with him, the Cardinal be∣ing highly offended with him, for his preaching a∣gainst his Pomp, Power, and Dignity, seeing he could not cause him to recant, but stood in the justificati∣on of what he had publickly delivered according to his Conscience & the Scriptures, he sent him to the Fleet, from whence he was had again before the Cardinal, and by the importunity of Gardner, Fox, and others, he was perswaded at last to abjure, and with some of the men of the Stillyard, accused also for Lollardy, he publickely bore a faggot. After which he was remanded to the Fleet, and thence was removed to Austins Fryer's in London, where being Complained against to the Cardinal, by those who sought his Life he was removed again to Au∣stin Fryer's in Northampton, with intent to have him burnt: But he escaped thence, leaving a Letter, as if thorow despair hehad gone to drown himself, that they might not pursue him, so that whilst they were searching the River for his Body, he made his es∣cape to London, and thence beyond the seas, where he wrote a Book intituled Acta Romanorum Pontifi∣cum, with a supplication to King Henry. There he grew Familiar with Luther, Melancthon Pomeran, the Duke of Saxony and others, and was not long after sent over by the King of Denmark, as his Am∣bassador into England, where Sir Tho. Moor sought his Life but, Cromwell stood his friend: After that, in the time of Queen Ann, he returned into England, and was sent by the King as his Embassador to the Duke of Cleve. But Gardner getting into the favour of the King, never left till he had undermined Dr. Barne who was at last sent to the Tower, together with Thomas Garrat, and Mr. Hierom, from whence they never came till they were carried to their Mar∣tyrdom. Thomas Garrat and William Hierom Martyrs. Thomas Garrat was Curate in Honylane in London,
and having received the knowledge of the truth, endeavoured all he could to promote it, and have∣ing a parcel of Tyndols translation of the new Testa∣ment, and other books treating of the Scriptures, he went privately to Oxf rd to sell them there, to those he knew well affcted to the Gospel. But his Adversares having their spies in every Corner had notice of , nd immda, some were sent to apprehend both him and his books at Oxford, that they might be both burnt together, and after great search he was taken, but made his escape, in∣tending to fly into the west, but was pursued and ta∣ken again and imprisoned, and after much trouble was forced aginst his Conscience to abjure: After which he fled again from place to place, for fear of his persecutors, but was tk  by the diligence of his Adversaries, and snt to the Tower, from whence he was cred to the Stake and burnt with his Companions, Dr. Barnes and Mr. Hie∣rome. The Death of Barnes Garet and Hierom. The 3d Companion in this glorious suffering was Mr; William Hier, who was vicar of Stepney and a diligent preacher of God's word, for the comfort and edification of the People, and had preached di∣vers sermons with intent to implant in the Consci∣ences of men the sincere Truth of Christian Religi∣on, and to weed out of mens minds traditions, dreams, and Popish fansies, in the doing of which he had contracted the Hatred of the Papists, who were utter enemies of the Gospel of Christ: and for this they sought this good man's Life: The occa∣sion they took from a Sermon which he preached at Paul's Cross the fourth Sunday in Lent, in which, speaking of Sarah and Hagar, he said those who were born of the free Woman were freely Justifi∣ed, and the one would think nothing of false doct∣rine or Heresie could be gathered from these words, yet he was charged therewith, and convented be∣fore the King at Westminster, for that he had erro∣neously taught the people, that all that were born
of Sarah were freely justified, absolutely without Condition either of Baptism or Penance, &c. Several other things were objected against him, and he was at last sent to the Tower in order to his Execution. we have spoken of these 3 Martyrs severally, we shall now joyn them together as fellow sufferers and Martyrs. About two days after the Death of the Lord Cromwell, a process was issued out against these three men, by means of See. Gardner, to which they were never brought to Answer, but on the 30th of July being Condemned, without their knowing the cause, and without any hearing, were carried toge∣ther forth of the Tower to Smithfield to be burnt. Then Dr. Barnes made his protestation against seve∣ral false things laid to his charge, reciting his Faith and Belief in God, and the Holy Trinity, and freely declared his Opinion of many things, praying pub∣lickly for the health and prosperity of the King, making 4 requests to him which he desired might be made known to him; the first was, that he might Continue the head of the Church, and make himself fully and wholly obeyed and to hearken to the true preaching of such as they were who were about to dye for speaking the Truth; The 2d was, That his Grace would see that Matrimony might be ob∣served with more Reverence and esteem, as an Or∣dinance of God; 3d That swearers might be puni∣shed; 4th was That he would proceed to finish the work he had begun, and clear Gods word from the traditions of Men. After him Mr. Hierom and Gar∣rat spake severally to the people, protesting against Heresie, making their several Confessions, and ex∣horting the people to Love, unity, & amity, and not to be afraid of bearing the Cross of Jesus Christ, for∣giving their Enemies and persecuters, after the example and doctrine of our blessed Saviour. Af∣ter they had all prayed fervently at the Stake, they embraced and kissed one another, and with very much cheerfulness rendred themselves to the ex∣ecutioner, taking their death with much Christi∣an
patience and Constancy, which restified to all the world the goodness of their Cause, and the peace and quiet of their Consciences. Three men Executed for Popery. And here we cannot but take notice of a very strange thing, that at the same place, and in the same day and hour, that the aforementioned Martyrs suffer'd, there were 3 men whose names were Powe, Fetherston, and Abel suffered for Popery: that is to say, were executed as traytors, by being hang'd drawn & quarter'd for denying the Kings Su∣premacy, & on their part were also esteemed Saints & Martyrs, by the Romish Church: so that a stranger standing by Cry'd out, Deus bone, &c. Good God what Religion is in this Nation! here the Papists are hang'd and there the Antipapists or Protestants are burnt. And now the terrible persecutor and tyrant a∣gainst Gods flock, Bloody Bonnr Bishop of London began to rage, and dip his hands in Blood: one Mekin's a poor silly ignorant lad, for some rash words was brought to the Stake and burnt in Smith∣field, for which many cryed out shame of him. About the same time 3 were burnt at Salisbury, whose names were Spenser, Ramsey and Hewer, one of them which was Spenser having been a Priest and was married, and had spoken against the Sacrament of the Altar. And now upon the six Articles much trouble and persecution arose in London by means of the aforesaid Bonner, there being no less than 130 odd persons troubled, presented, and imprisoned for their Religion. The Murther of John Porter in prison. Among the rest, one John Porter, a young man, who had an audible voyce, and read well, used to read aloud in the Bible, publickly set up in Pauls, by Bonner himself, by means of the Lord Cromwell, and was there chained: but now things altering for the worse, and this young man reading often in it, for his own edification, and others who came to hear him read, it came to the Bishops ears, who thereupon sent for him, & severely reprehended him for it, but the young man told him that he had done
nothing against the Law, and that he supposed that the Bible was set up there for that end. But Bonner being gall'd at his prudent Answer, lay'd to his charge that he had made Comments on the text, and gathered great multitudes about him to make tumults; and in the end, under this pretext and false charge sent this young man to Newgate, where he was miserably fetter'd and manacl'd with Irons, both leggs, arms and neck, fastened to the wall in the Dungeon: Being thus cruelly handled, a Kins∣mn of his with mony and friendship for a while bought off his Irons, and he was removed into the Common Goal, where the Felons were, whose wicked lives, Cursings and Swearing, was much more intolerable to this good young man than his former Irons, upon which he sought to admonish them, and exhorted them to amendment of Life giving them many Instructions out of the Scriptures, for which he was complaned of, and again carried down into the lower Dungeon, and so oppressed with bolts and Irons, that in 8 days time he was found dead. It was reported by some, who lived near, that they could hear his cryes and grones af∣ter a most lamentable manner, that it peirced their souls, some nights before he dyed, and 'twas thought that they had put on him an Engine, which they call The Devil on the Neck which straining the neck of a man and his leggs together in such sort, the more they stir or strive for ease, the straiter it presseth them, so that within a few hours, it crushes a mans back and body to pieces. Much about the same time one James Morton and Thomas Bernard were both burnt at Lincoln by the Bishop there, he one for reaching the Lords Prayer in Eng∣lish and the other for having in his house the Epistle of St. James in English. Persecution in Windsor. In the year 1544 great Persecution of several Gospellers, and good men, fell out in Windsor, by the means of Doctor London then one of the Pre∣bends there, and a fierce Papist, and among the rest
Persons, Marbeck, Filmer, and Testwood, were Con∣demned to dye, Marbeck had the Kings Pardon but the other 3 were burnt without the Town. Mar∣beck had begun to translate the Concordance of the Bible out of Latine into English which stomached them, but they Indicted him for saying that the Elevation of the Sacrament was the similitude of setting up the Images of Jeroboam's Calves in the Temple, with other like things. Testwood was a great musitian, and for his Skill in musick and sing∣ing, was preferred to be of the Chanters of Windsor, but being a great Gospeller and no good dissembler, he was taken notice of and fell into several great troubles, but by reason of his Skill and Art, he found friends; but at last he was Indicted by his Adver∣saries, for laughing and deriding the Elevation of the Host. Henry Filmer was also of Windsor and had been Church Warden there, and in his office, had noted some exorbitances in some of the Priests and among the rest of the Vicar of the Town, for which he was maligned, but he was Indicted for saying, that the Sacrament of the Altar was no∣thing but a similtude, and if God be in it, he had ea∣ten 20 Gods in his life time. Anthony Persons was an honest Priest living near Windsor, who by his excellent preaching and sound Doctrine, drew many after him, and was much followed, for which the Popelins envied him and bore him much malice, so that they set privy Spies to intrap him, and have∣ing got matter against him, he was Indicted for preaching in a place called Wingfield, where he should say: That like as Christ was hanged between two Thieves, even so when the Priest is at mass, and hath lifted the Host over his Head, he there hangeth between two Thieves except he be one that preaches the Word of God truly. That he had said to the people that they should not eat and tear the flesh of Christ with their teeth, &c. For Christ said, This is my Body, which was the Word of God which was to be broken to the peo∣ple, with such like, to which he gave his particu∣lar
Answers: But a Commission was sent down for the tryal of these persons, according to the Act of the six Articles, and the aforesaid persons clapt into the Jayle: Testwood being sick and in bed, was haled thence, and forced into prison, going upon Crutches. The chief Judges who sat on these men were Doctor Capon Bishop of Salisbury, Sr. William Essex Knight, Sr. Tho Bridges, Sr. Humphry Foster, Mr. Franklin Dean of Windsor, and Mr. Fachell of Reading. After very unjust doings, packing of the Jury, being strangers, and not of the neighbourhood, and all of them farmers belonging to the Colledg of Windsor, and some of them Contrary to the Statute had but one witness appearing against them, yet they were all of them found guilty by the Jurie, and condemned to dye the next day by the Court; Fatchell giving the Sentence. There came a pardon for Marbeck; & the rest seeing their hard lot comfor∣ted one another, knowing that they dyed in a good Cause. All night they spent in fervent prayer to God to strengthen them, that they might be stedfast in their torments, praying also for their persecutors, that God would forgive them, since they did what they did through blind Ignorance and zeal. The next day being Fryday, their execution was respi∣red, but on the Saturday, when they were to dye, desiring to receive the Sacrament, it was denyed them, for they said it was not to be granted to Here∣ticks, but they might be Confessed if they would. As they passed thorow the Streets, they prayed all good people to pray for them, and Filmer who was Condemned from the testimony of his own Brother, only, as he past by his door, called several times on him that he mought see him, but he would not appear, however Filmer most Christian like desired God to forgive him, for he had restified wrongfully against Him. When they were come to the Stake, Mr. Persons with a chearful Counte∣nance, embracing the Stake in his Arms, and Kissing it, said; Now welcom my own sweet Wife,
for this day shall thou and I be married together in the Love and peace of God. Being all bound to the post, a certain young man of Filmers acquaintance, brought him a pot of drink, which he drnk of to his Com∣panions, who pledged him, at when drinking their Adversaries made a jesting, reporting afterwards that they were all drunk, and knew not what they said. After they had drank, Mr. Filmer said, my Bre∣thren, let us be merry in the Lord, for I trust in. God that after this sharp Breafast, we shall have a good dinner in the Kingdom of Christ our Lord and Redeemer. At which words the Fire being set to the straw Test∣wood lifting up his Hands and eyes to Heaven, desired God to receive his spirit, And Mr. Persons pulling the straw to him, put a good handful on his Head, saying This is Gods Hat: now am I dressed like a true Soulders of Christ, by whse merits ony I trust this day to enter into his Joy. And so they yeild∣ed up their souls to God, like meek Lambs, with so much patience and tranquillity, and so great stedfastness, that amazed the people, & many wished that they had been so happy as to have dyed with them. The Persecutors disgraced. Not long after the whole Conspiracy of the Bi∣shop of Winchester, Dr. London Simone and Okeham came to be revealed by Gods Providence and how unjustly they had dealt with these poor men, have∣ing also lay'd a design against several of the Kings Privie Council, and many Knights and Gentlemen, as favourers of Heresie, which being made known to the King, he withdrew his Favour from Gard∣ner; and London, Simmons, and Okeham, Perjurie being proved against them, rode thorow Windsor with their faces to the Horses tails, and papers of their Crimes pinned on their breasts, and Okeham the like at Newberry, where he stood in the pil∣lory. Thus God by his secret Judgment brought the wickedness of these malicious Papists to light, and their persons to disgrace, being ever hated of all men.
About the same time, great persecution was made at Calice, where one Adam Damlip, Dod, and several others were Martyred. And likewise in Scotland suffered many Martyrs, in the latter end of the reign of King Henry the 8th of England, as Mr. Wisehart, Walace, Sr. John Borthwick, and di∣vers others, so that many there as well as in England sealed to the truth of the Gospel with their Blood. But we shall omit forreigners, and speak only of those of our own nation, as we have at first propo∣sed, having enough and too many executed, and tor∣mented, by the bloody Papists. Kerby and Clark Martyr'd in Suffolk. In the year 1546, Mr. Kerby and Clark were burned for their religion in Suffolk: passing over one Henrie and his servant burnt at Colchester, and also one Sary a Priest who was hang'd privatly in the Bishop of Winchesters Porters lodg, and that not without the privity of the Bishop himself, as it was thought, for indeed it would be too long to enume∣rate all the publick and private Murthers of these bloody Papists. But as to the Story of Kerby and Clark, in brief it was this. Kerby and Clark of Mendelsham in the County of Suffolk, were apprehended for Gospellers, and thrown into the Goal, and a Commission was sent down to try them, the chief of the Commissioners was the Lord Wentworth. Being brought before them having in Secret prayed to themselves a while with hands & eyes lifted up, they hearkned to their charge, which were certain Articles put in against them, concerning the Sacrament, and being there publickly demanded, if that after the words of Consecration spoken by the Priests, the breed did not then become the very flesh, blood and bones of Jesus Christ, as he was born of the Virgin they answered No: That they did not believe it, but that it was a sign to put us in mind of Christs Death, for the remission of our sins: Upon his, after they had used  gment, perswasions,
and threats to thes poor men, to make them alter thir minds, in vain; sentence was given against them, Kerby to be burnt in Ipswich the next Satur∣day following, and Roger Clark at Bury before Gang Munday ensuing. Kirby having received his sen∣tence, holding up his hands, with humble reverence bowing himself, he said, Praysed be Almightie God; and then stod still saying no more. And Clark at prting from the Judgment seat said, with some Vehemency: Fight for your God, for he hath not long to cotinue. which was a Prophesie of the Refor∣mation which happened not long after. The next day, which was Saturday, Kerby was brought forth to the marker place about ten of the Clock, where was a Stake ready, wood, broom and straw for his burning. Having put off his clothes to his shirt, with his night cap on his head, he was fastened to the Stake with Irons. The Lord Wentworth and others sitting in▪ Gallery to see the execution; a very great Concourse of people being present: One Doctor Righam made an oration or sermon, after which he examined Kerby concerning his belief of the Sa∣crament to which he answered as before, and that he would dye in that Opinion. After which the Sheriff asking him if he had any more to say, he took off his night Cap, and Casting it away, he lift∣ed up his hands and said the e Deum, the Belief, and other prayers in the English tongue. And it was observed, that the Lord Wentworth and divers others could not refrain from weeping at the hum∣ble Carriage of this holy Martyr. After he had done, he bid the Sheriff do his office, and fire being set to him, he called upon God, Knocking his Breast, as long as he had any remembrance left. The people being much affected at the Carriage and Constancy of this illiterate man, praysed God with great ad∣miration. On the Gang Monday about ten of the Clock, Anno 1546, Roger Clark was brought out of prison, going on foot to be burnt in Bury: By the way the procession met him, but he would take no other
notice, but kept on his way, only reproving the people for their Idolatry and Superstition, at which the officers were much offended: When he came to the place of execution, all things being ready, he kneeled down at the Stake, and said aloud, the Magnificat in English, making a kind of par∣raphrase thereof: After he had done, he was fastned to the Stake, and fire was set to him, but the wood being green he was almost suffocated with smoke, and part of him being only scorched, he suffered unmerciful torments, and his feet being put into a pitch'd barrell, he was so pained, that he got them out with Violence. At length, one beating off the Iron ring that fastened his neck to the Stake, let him fill down into the fire, and so he was at last Con∣sumed to Ashes. About the same time one Rogers was burnt in Northfolk, by means of that Bishop, and the Duke, upon the 6 Articles. But I shall now conclude this second part with the Martyrdom of Ann Askew a Vertuous and Con∣stant woman in the Cause of Christ, with whom also was burnt in Smithfield, John Lacells a Gentle∣man of the Court and houshold to the King, Nicho∣las Belenian a Priest, and John Adams a Tayler. The Martyrdom and Cruel usage of Mrs. Ann Askew and 3 Gentlemen in Smithfield. Mrs. Ann Askew had been in great troble for a year before 1546, having been in several prisons, had before the Lord Mayor, the Bishop, and Coun∣cell, for her religion, chiefly for not owning the real presence in the Sacrament being also most falsly accused of several other Articles, by the malice and Instigation of the Popish Priests her inveterate Enemies; but by her prudent Answers to all their intrapping questions, and by the solicitation of her Friends, she came cut upon bail; but the year 1546. by means of her aforesaid Enemies, and especially by the power and malice of Bishop Bon∣ner then Bishop of London, and the Chancellor Writhsley she was brought again into trouble, and put into prison, being several times examined, they
hoping by her means to detect several Ladys and great persons of her acquaintance, for Here∣ticks; but all they could doe could not make her Confess any to do them injury; which so enraged them, that they took her from Newgate where she had been imprisoned, and sent her to the Tower, where they resolved to torment this Innocent Gentlewomen, but most Constant servant of Jesus Christ. Therefore to make her Confess, they cau∣sed her to be put upon the Rack, where they kept her till she swouned, and when the Lieutenant of the Tower pittying her weak Condition, refused to rack her any Longer, The Chancellor himself and oe Mr. Rich who was with him, threatned the Lieutenant of the Tower to Complain of him to the King, for favouring Hereticks; this was Sr. Anthony Knevet; but when they saw they could not prevail with him to torment the languishing Gentlewoman any farther, the Chancellor and Rich throwing off their gowns, would needs play the Tormentors themselves, and asking her first if she were with child, she told them they should not spare her for that, but do their wills upon her, upon which they lay'd her again upon the Rack, where they most Cruelly and barbarously tormented her, till all her bones and joynts were pulled out of their places, she enduring it with most admirable patience, all the time praying to God, and when they had tyred themselves to no purpose, not being able with all their torments to make her Confess any thing, or accuse any body▪ they left her to be carried away in a chair to her lodging, not being able to stir hand or foot. She was therefore at last Condemned to be burnt, upon that Article, for denying the real pre∣fence after the words of Consecration, which she denyed, saying, that then their Creed was false, which says, he sitteth at the Right hand of God the Father Almighty, &c. This Gentlewoman was born of a good stock, and might have liv'd well and plentifully and in great prosperity, would she have gone against her Conscience, and have denied
Christ: But she gloried in her sufferings, which God enbled her to endure, and at last sealed ne testimony with her blood, after she had been seve∣ral ways tormented, and leaving behind her an example of Christian fortitude for all men to follow, and by her example and exhortations, the three a∣foresd men, Mr. Lacess, Belenian, and Adams, were encouraged, and received from her great comfort at their Death, being burnt with nor in Smithfield. Mrs Askew being not able to goe by reason of her racking, she was brought to the Stake in a chair, where she was fastned by the middle, with a chain, and so were the rest of the Martyrs, and all things being prepared, there being a great Concourse of people, and the Chancellor, the Duke of Northfolk, the Earl of Bedford, the Lord Mayer and others of quality being present, sitting on a Scaffold, Dr. Snaxton made a Sermon, after which the fire being ready to be put to them, the Chancel∣lor sent to Mrs. Askew the Ks. pardon, if she woul recant her opinion, which she utterly refused: Then the same was offer'd to the rest, but they also followed her example, being strengthened by her exhortations, upon which the Lord Mayor cryed, fiat Jstitia. and so caused fire to be put to them, which these Martyrs constantly and without shrinking, or shewing any change endured, till their bodies were consumed. This execution was about the month of June. 1546. Th Reformation begun by King Ed. 6th. The next year being 1547, King Henry dyed, and the Church of God had a respite, by the reign of the most pious King Edward the 6th, who begun the Reformation, and fully extirpated Popery out of his Land, all whose daies the Gospel flourished, and the Church of Christ was established, and he with singular constancy maintained Religion, but his reign being but short, continuing but six years and eight Months, and Queen Mary his sister a strong Papist succeeding, the blessed Reformation was thrown down, Popery again set up, and fire and
flame enkindled, in all places thorow this Kingdom, by the means of the Popish Clergy, who most cruelly handled all those who professed the Gospel of Christ; being a far greater and smarter persecution, than any that went before, which shall be, God willing, the subject of our Third, and last part of the Popish Cruelties, exercised upon the Bodys of Protestants, dissenters from them, or such as professed the true Gospel of Christ, or any ways opposed their Idolatry and Superstition. Queen Mary Comes to the Crown. The third Part. In which you have a brief of all, or most of the Mar∣tyrs, who suffered for the Gospel, by the bloody tyrannie, Rage, and persecution of the Church of Rome, in this Kingdom, under the Reign of Queen Mary. IT is not our part to give you the History of Queen Marys coming to the Crown, which was by blood, nor of her falsifying all her Oathes, promises, and declarations, before she obtained it, that she would not alter the Religion begun by her Father, and established by her brother, being reformed according to the Gospel rules, nor how soon she broke them, and reestablished the Papal Tyranny in this kingdom, after it had been abolished by the Kings aforesaid; but as we began, we shall as briefly as we can, and with all truth and sincerity, with plainness, and without flourishes of ste give you an account of the Martyrs, and bloody r∣secutions, which fell upon all those who made ∣fession of the Gospel, or dissented from the sh superstition, in the Reign of this papist  influenced by the Popes chief bloody  Gardner and Bonner, Bishops of  and
London. Queen Mary began her reign 1553. & in th first year and begining of her Reign, she released  the Popish Bishops out of prison, and all those w professed the Reformation were put into prison,  a very great number, among whom was Archbisho Cranmer, Mr. Bradford Ridley, Rogers, Coverdal, Bisho of Exceter, Hooper, Bishop of Worcester, Mr. Ver Mr. Beacon, Mr. Latimer, and several other emint preachers, were all imprisoned for the Gospel: th Statutes of Premnire repealed; Altars and Mass set up, all people dissenting from the Romsh Religi without distinction persecuted, for Judg Hales  upright Honest man, who, tho of a contrary Relig∣on, had opposed the disinheriting Queen Mary f being a Popish successor to the endangering his Life was cast into the Mashalsea, where with ill usage t grew desperat, and lost his senses, and when he wa released thorow melancholly made himself away by drowning. The Lady Jane Grey and her H∣band were beheaded, in the second year of  Reign, for tho they suffer'd as civil Criminals, be∣ing Protestants we only mention them, and it is ob∣served that Judg Morgn, who gave sentence o this Lady, fell suddenly after mad, still crying out o the Lady Jane till he dyed: The Bishop of Winch∣ster had likewise at the same time, a design of take∣ing away the life of the Lady Elizabeth, but God preserv'd her for his Glory, and the comfort of his Church, frustrating all the wicked designs of he Popish Enemies. Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer Condemned. In the year 1554, the Archbishop Cranmer, D. R dly Bishop of London, and the learned Mr. Huge Latimer, were taken out of the Tower, and sent to Oford, to dispure the poynts of their Religion there, which they did for several days with great learning and proof, but however they were on the 20th of April Condemned for Hereticks, and no members of the Church, for maintaining Heretical opinions. Af∣ter sentence thus pronounced upon them, by the Commissioners, who sat at St. Mary's, the Archbi∣shop
said; From this your Judgment and sentence, I peal to the just Jugment of God Almighty, trusting  be present with him in Heaven, for whose presence in e Altar I am thus Condemned. Then said Dr. Ridley: ltho I be not of your company, yet doubt I not, but my ame is written in another place, whither this sentence ill send us sooner than we should by the Course of Na∣ure have come. Then Mr. Latimer said: I thank God st heartily, that he hath prolonged my Life to this end, hat I may in this case glorifie God by that kind of Death. Then Dr. Weston said to them, If you goe to Heaven n this faith, then I will never come thither. After heir sentence these good men were separated one rom another, and sent to several prisons. Tho these men were thus condemned, yet there were others who got the start of Martyrdom before them, and therefore we shall treat of them in their order, s they dyed, and first of all we shall briefly relate the Martyrdom of Mr. John Rogers vicar of St. Pul∣thers, and Reader of St. Pauls in London. The Martyrdom of Mr. Rogers. Mr. John Rgers a Martyr and servant of God, was brought up in the Universitie of Cambridge, where he profited much in humane Learning from which place he was called and chosen, by the Mer∣chants Adventurers, to be their Chaplain to their Fa∣ctory at Antwerp in Brabant, where he lived in great content, and with singular piety for many years, in which time he assisted Mr. Tindale and Mr. Cover∣dale in the translation of the Bible into English, and by the Conversation of these men he came to great knowledge of the Gospel; and perceiving the abo∣minable errours, superstition and Idolatry of the Church of Rome, he utterly forsook it, and shook off the yoak of Popery. Therefore Marrying a Wife, by whom he had ten Children, he removed to Witten∣berg in Saxony, where he increased in godly Learn∣ing and got the knowledge of the Dutch Tongue so perfectly, that a Congregation was committed to his charge, in which Ministry he diligently and faithfully served for many years, until such time that it pleased God, King Edward the 6th came to
the Crown, and made the Reformation in England, banishing popery thence; he then desiring to se his native Country, returned into England, & was by Bishop Ridley, Bishop of London, made one of the Prebends of St. Pauls, and was by the Dean and Chapter chosen Reader of the Divinity lesion there; in which capacity he continued till Quee Mary came to the Crown, banishing the Gospel and the true Religion, brought again the Popish Idolatry into the Land. After this Queen was come to Lon∣don, this Mr. Rogers being appointed to preach a Pauls Cross, he there openly maintained the Do∣ctrine of Christ, as it was here stablished under K. Edward, exhorting the People to remain constant to the same: For which sermon he was immediat∣ly called to account, and tho he was at that time ac∣quitted by the Council, yet the Bishops thirsting af∣ter his blood, as soon as the Queen had put forth her Proclamation to prohibit preaching, he was ∣gain called before the Council, and his Doctri found fault with, and he confined to his House: But it was not long ere he was taken thence, and sent to Newgate, by the procurement of Bishop Ben∣ner: And on the 21 of Jan. 1555. he was examined upon certain Articles before the chancellor, which was Gardner Bishop of Winchester. Where he main∣tained, that the Church of Rome was not the Ca∣tholick Church, and that Christ, not the Pope, was the Head of the Church. On the 28th and 29 day following of the same month, he was again examined, concerning the real presence in the Sa∣crament, which he would nor own. Then they ask∣ed him if he would come over to the Church of Rome, and submit himself, and receive the Queens mercy as others had done; but he refused to deny his opinions, or to embrace that which he knew was antichristian. After they had thus bait∣ed this holy man for two daies, they condemned him upon these Articles: That he had said that the Catholick Church of Rome was the Church of Anti∣christ, and that in the Sacrament of the Altar there was no Substantial, Real or Natural body of Christ.
After his condemnation was read they caused him to be degraded and then delivered him to the Sheriffs to be punished Mr. Hooper being at the same time condemned with him, they were both led by the Sheriff from St. Mary Overies in Southwark, where they were condemned to Newgate. Here he ay till the 4th of February being Monday, early in the Morning the Keepers wife of Nwgate, came to him and finding him fast asleep could hardly wake him with Jogging, to tell him he must prepare him∣self that day to be burnt. Which Messge he re∣ceived cheerfuly, and going to put on his cloaths I need not stnd (said he) to fastn my points. He sent to Bish p Bonner, that he might see and speak with his wif; which was denyed h m; Then they searched his chamber for his writings, but he had hid them in such an abscure place under the stairs, that they could not find them, but was after found y his wife, and one of his children, by Gods provi∣dence, where was his tryal, confession and answer to all his Articles, as they are set down at large by Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, one of the Sheriffs named Woodroof, coming to have him out of Newgate to his execution in Smithfield, asked him f he would recant his abominable Doctrine, and il opinion of the Sacrament of the Altar. But Mr. Rogers answered him and say'd. That which I hve preached I will seal with my Blood. Then the Seriff called him Heretick. That will be known says Mr. Rogers at the day of Judgment. But says the Sheriff, I will never pray for you: Then I will pray for you said the holy Martyr: Then he was led a∣way on foot by the said sheriffs men towards Smith∣field, he saying the Psalm Miserere by the way, all the people wonderfully rejoycing at his constancy, with great praise and thanks to God for the same. As he was going, his Wife met him in the way with 10 Children that could go, and one sucking at her Breast, but this sorrowful sight of his own flesh and blood could nothing move him, but he constantly and chearful proceeded to his death. A little before
he came to the stake a pardon was brought him if he would recant, but he utterly refused it: When he came to the stake, he found there the Queens Controller, and Sr. Richard Southwell, both the Sheriffs and an infinite number of People to see him burnt, He used not many words, for indeed they would not permit him, only he exhorted the People to remain in that faith and true Doctrine which he before had taught, and they had learned, and for the confirmation whereof, he was not only content patiently to suffer and bear all such bitter∣ness, and cruelty, as had been shewed him, but also most gladly to resign up his Life, and to give his flesh to the consuming fire, for the Testimony of the same. Thus he took his death with great meekness and wonderful patience, in the defence and quar∣rel of Christ's Gospel. When fire was put to him, as it were, washing and rubbing his hands in the midst of the flame, he cry'd out, Lord receive my Spirit, till he was consumed to Ashes. He was the first Pro¦tomartyr in Queen Maries daies of all that blessed company of sufferers, and gave the first adventure upon the fire. The Martyrdom of Mr Saunders at Coventry. The next that we shall mention, who much about the same time suffered by fire, for the Gospel; was Mr. Lawrence Saunders, who was burnt at Coventry, on the 8th of february 1555. This man was born of good parents, his mother being a Gent∣lewoman of good Quality, he was first educated at Eaton Colledg, & from thence sent to Kings Colledg in Cambridge, where he continued for some time, and profited very much in his Studies, but his mo∣ther intending him for a Merchant, took him from thence, and bound him Prentise to Sr William Chester who was afterwards Sheriff of London, the same year that Mr. Saunders was burnt. But God so wrought on the spirit of this young man, that he still continued his Studies, finding an aversion in himself to the way he was in, which made him pensive and melanchollick, which being perceived
by his Master, he desired to know what might be the reason of it, upon which he freely declared his mind, and how he was bent on his Studies, and did not at all relish that kind of Life; upon which his Master wrote to his friends, and freely gave him up his Indentures, and set him at liberty; to his no smal rejoycing. He was then once more sent to the University, where he increased his knowledg; and became a great proficient in the Greek and La∣une tongues, and also of the Hebrew, giving himself wholy to the study of the Scripture, that he might be a Minister of Gods word, which he ardently de∣sired. He lived a very strict and Godly life, much exercised in prayer, and thus continued till he was Master of Arts, and a long time after. In the be∣ginning of King Edwards Reign, when the Gospel was restored, he beg in to preach; and was so well lked of, that he was appoynted to read the Divinity Lecture at the Colledg of Fothringha. He married a wife about that time, and after the Colledg was dissolved he was placed to be Reader in the Minster of Litchfed, from thence he was beneficed in Lei∣cester shire, at a place called Church Laungon, where he resided, kept a liberal House, and taught Gods word diligently. From thence he was called to ke a Benefice in London, being Allhallows Bread-eet, which he accepted, and being minded to ve over that in the Country, he went thither much about the time that Queen Mary came to the Crown: At which time, preaching at Northampton, reat exceptions were taken at his sermon by the Papists, for that he inveighed against the Popish Religion as Antichristian. After this they had a malicious eye against him, and sought for his blood, which he perceived; but seeing he could not now esign his Benefice but into the Hands of a Papist, e kept both, constantly preaching, sometimes at ondon and sometimes in the Country, till the pro∣bition came forth which we before mentioned. et his Conscience not giving him leave to desist, tho e foresaw the danger he should incurr, he continu∣d to preach the Gospel, and would not fly the
Realm, tho advised to it by his friends. And it was not long after, that preaching at his cure in London, he was aprehended by the order of Bishop Bonner, and carried out of the Church, and brought before him, where the Bishop accused him of Trea∣son and Hersie; to which Mr. Saunders answered with much sobriety, endeavouring to prove he had done nothing against the Laws, or spoke contrary to the Dctrine of Christ and his Apostles. After much talk, the Bishop bid him to write down his mind concerning Transubstantiation, or the Real presence in the Sacrament. Mr. Sauders perceived that Bonner fought his Life, my Lord said he, you seek Blood, and you shall have it: I pray God, that you may be baptized in it, that you may hereafter loath blood sucking, and become a better man. And upon this he wrote his mind boldly, not fearing what they could doe, being willing to seal to the Testi∣mony of the Gospel with his Death. From him he was sent to the Chancellor Gardner, who after Examination before him (being secretly nipped by Mr. Saunders answers, for that he had in the days of King Henry the 8th written a book treating of true obedience, in which he openly declared the Princess Mary to be illegitimate) sent him to prison, from whence he was had before the Council, and after several examinations he was condemned; after which Mr. Saunders at his goeing away said, that he did preach sincerely the word in its purity, and th he now was forbidden by them to do it, with his mouth, yet he doubted not, but that his blood would do the same. He was sent to prison, where he continued a year and 3 months, in which time one that was his Bedfellow declared, that he had often heard Mr. Saunders say, that he felt the power of God upon him wonderfully comforting him insomuch, that not only his Spirit, but his Body also received a tast of the Communion of Saints, whilst he felt  sweet and pleasant refreshing, flow thorow every part and member thereof, from the heart, ebbing and flowing like a tide of sweet and Spiritual flame thorow his whole body. But such was their cruelty
that in all this time, by the Bishops order, they would not suffer his Wife to come to see him; she several times attempted it; but one day intreat∣ing the Keeper with her young Child in her Arms, the Keeper took the Child and carried him (being a Boy) to his father, which rejoyced the Heart of Mr. Saunders, who said, what man would not lay his Life down before he would make such a fine Child a Bastard, and its Mother a Whore, as I must if I embrace the Religion of Rome? At last Bonner came to the prison where he was, and degraded him, and then delivered him over to the Secular Power, (after he was Excommunicated) to be burnt for an Heretick. The Sheriff of London took him, and carried him to the Counter in Bread-street, his own Parish, but he stayed not long there, because an order was signed for his burning in Coventry, to which place he was carried, and put into the Common Goal where he spent the night in prayers, and the next day being the 8th of February, he was led to execution in the Park without the City, going in an old Gown, and a shirt, bare foot∣ed, falling often flat on his face, and praying to himself. When he came to the Stake, a pardon was ffer'd him, if he would recant, but he refused it saying, it is not I, nor my fellow Preachers, that hurt he Queen, or the Realm, but such as you (speaking to  officers) who resist Gods holy word, and I shall never woke the Truth of what I have taught, and openly intained. Upon that they cryed our, away with im to the fire; to which he went with a chearfull Countenance, nothing daunted, and coming to the take Kissed it, Crying, Welcome Life: Welcome the ross of Christ. After they had chained him fast, they t fire to the fewell, which being green smothered nd would not burn clearly, so that they put this oly Martyr to intollerable pain, which he yet tained with admirable patience, till he fell a∣eep in the Lord, at last, in the midst of the fire. The Martyrdom of Bishop Hooper. The next most godly Martyr, who suffered for
the Gospel of Christ, by the cruel and bloody Papists, was that most Reverend and Holy Bishop both o Gocester and Worcester, and who was burnt at Gcster Feb. 9th 1555. This man was bred a Stu∣dent in the University of Oxford, where he led a pious and sober Life, and was a good Scholar, but in the time of persecution in King Hen. 8th days, he was forced to leave the University and to become Steward to Sr. Thmas Arundel, but S. Thomas be∣ing a Papist, tho he loved Mr. Hooper yet looking on him as an Heretick he would not keep him, bu sent him privately to the Bishop of Winchester that he might Convert him: but the Bishop not being able to answer Mr. Hoopers solid Arguments se him back to his Master, but intending to do him  mischief, he being a Constant persecutor of all good People: but Mr. Hooper having notice of it, left Sr. Tho. Arundels House and service and got overseas to Paris, where he stayed not long, before he re∣turned for England and was retained by one Mr St. Lowe, but he was not long there before noti was given of him, and he was fain to disguise him∣self and fly over to Ireland, from whence he we to France, and thorow France into Germany wher he remained, both at Basil and at Zurick in th company of several Protestant Ministers, who we great friends to him, and where he Married a wi who was a Burgundian. Here he stayed till th Reign of the pious King Ed. 6th, when desirous t see his native Country, he took leave of his friend and among the rest the famous Mr. Bullinger wh at parting desired him not to forger them when  prosperity in his own Land, tho he should be mad a Bishop; to whom Mr. Hooper prophetically r∣plyed that he would constantly write to them,  that he should not be able to write them the la news of his death, for that, where he should ta most pains he should be burned to Ashes; b that you will hear of me (said he) tho I shall  be able to write it to you. After he was return to England, he preached constantly, once and m
times twice a day, being much beloved and follow∣ed: He had a grave and austere look, eloquent of tongue, Constnt in his teaching, not altered by any promotion, nothing could corrupt him, pure of life, and unspotted of reputation, of unblemish'd man∣ners, of great patience, sparing in diet, yet liberal in his house keeping. At last he was called to preach before the King, who liked him so well, that he made him Bishop of Glocester, and afterwards of Worcester, both which Bishopricks he held at one time. It is observed that when he was made a Bishop, he took for his Arms, or else it was prophetically given him by the Heralds, A Lamb in a fiery Bush, and the sun beams deseending from heaven upon the Lamb, which was an Hierogliphic of his suffering by fire, which afterwards came to pass. He continu∣ed in his Diocess of Gloucester till ater the Death of King Edward, and that Q Mary came to the Crown, when being sent for up to London by the Queens order, his friends Counselled him to fly, but he refused it saying, tho he formerly did so, when he bad no charge, yet now being called to be a shepherd of souls, it became not a Bishop to fly from his flock, and tho he knew the danger of staying, yet he would willingly seal to that Doctrin he had taught, with his Blood. Being come to London he was had into examination by the Council, where his Marriage was urged against him, which he maintained to be Lawful by the Law of God. Then they examined him upon the 6 Articles, especially that of the real presence in the Sacrament, which he denyed, and shewed his Arguments for his opinion, according to the holy Writ: alledging this Text, Quem portet coelum, &c. Whom the Heavens shall con∣tain until the Restauration of all things. But this did ot satisfie, he had several disputes with the Bishops and Doctors upon this point, and was several times examined before them, keeping him in prison almost 18 months. He was kept in the Fleet so strictly, that none of his friends were suffered to come to him, and the more to torment him Babington the
then Warden, put him into a room over the Com∣mon shore, which stunk like Carion, gave him the Sciatica, and other diseases, where he had nothing to lye on but a pad of Straw, and an old Coverlet to throw over him, and when the Warden was told by some of the Warders, that they thought he would dye, he groaned so much; let him dye (said he) if he will, there will be a good rid dance of him, and so Commanded the doors to be kept fast lock'd upon him. At last after many Conferences and Ex∣aminations, seeing they could not bring him over to them, Articles being exhibited against him, he was at last Condemned, and delivered over to the Sheriffs, he being first deprived of his Bishopricks, and af∣ter he had been some time in Newgate, Bishop Bon∣ner with his Assistants came and formally degraded him. After which an order was granted for the writ de Comburendo, &c. and that he should be burnt at Gloucester, which did not a little rejoyce this good man, that he should die in his own Diocess, and there confirm the Doctrine he had taught, with his blood. On the 5th of Febuary early in the morning, he was delivered to some of the Queens Guards, who conducted him on horseback to Glou∣cester, and delivered him to the Sheriffs there, in order to his Execution the next Day; the Lord Chandois and several others, being made Commis∣sioners for that purpose. That night before his death, he went to bed early, and having had his first sleep, which was sound, he spent the rest in prayer, having desired of the Sheriffs that he might not be disturbed by any, till they came to have him away, which was granted, and about 8 of the Clock the next morning, with a great Guard they fetched this good man to carry him to his burning, to which he walked on foot, in a borrowed Gown, multi∣tudes of people bewailing him, crying, and wring∣ing their hands. But he exhorted them to patience, and told them he came not to dye as a Traytor, but because he would not account that Heresie and false Doctrine, which he preached to them when
he was their Pastor. He look'd very chearfully, as he went, and more ruddy than usually, but he was Commanded not to speak to the people; so they stop'd his mouth, which he was fain to submit to, tho it grieved him to see the people weep so bitter∣ly, but lifting his eyes to heaven, he prayed to him∣self when he came to the Stake, and the preparation was made for him, near unto the great Elme, near the Colledg of Priests, where he used to preach to the people, he kneeled down, beckning to several that he knew, to hearken to his prayers, but the Officers did all they could to keep the people at a di∣stance, that they might not hear him. In the midst of his prayer, a Box was brought and lay'd before him, in which they said was his pardon, if he would re∣cant, at which he cryed out, if you Love my soul away with it, if you love my soul away with it: defiring them not to interrupt his prayers. Then said the L. Chandois seeing there is no remedy, dis∣patch him quickly. At which the good man speak∣ing to the Sheriffs, told them, all the favour he desired of them was, that he might make an end of his pra∣yers, and that he might have a quick fire. His pra∣yers being finished he pulled off his Gown, and gave it to the Sheriffs to be delivered to him that lent it, and stripping himself to his doublet & breeches, he thought to be burned in them, but the Sheriffs made him strip all off to his shirt, which he submitted to, and taking a poynt from his Hose he trussed up his Shirt between his leggs where they caused about a pound of Gunpowder in a bagg to be placed, and as much under either Arm: then they brought Iron hoops to put about his leggs, neck, and middle, but he refused them, saying that he knew God would give him strength to indure the torment of the fire without them; yet at last he was perswaded to suf∣fer one about his middle, & his belly being swell'd and big by lying in prison, it pinch'd him much. After he was placed, he look'd about and saw the people round him bitterly weeping, but not being suffered to speak to them, he lifted up his eyes to∣wards
Heaven and prayed to himself. After he had done, the executioner came to ask him forgiveness, to whom he said he knew not that he had ever of∣fended him; to whom he replyed: I am appoynted to set fire to you to burn you; In that said Mr. Hooper thou dost nothing offend me, God forgive thee thy sins and do thy office. Then the reeds being put about him, he took them in his Arms and Kissed them, giving order how they should be placed: presently fire was ordered to be put to him, but by reason the faggots were green and also very few, they put this holy man to intollerable torments, and the wind being also strong, blew the flame from him so that he was only scorched by the fire. Then they fetch'd some dry faggots and made a new fire, but all the reeds being gone, they burnt his neither parts, and never reach'd his upper parts, only scorch'd and Shriffled his Skin, and burnt his hair. All which time this holy Martyr was heard to pray as one without pain, O Jesus the son of David have mercy upon me, and receive my soul: After this second fire was spent, he wiped his eyes with his hands, and beholding the People he said with an indifferent loud voyce. For God's Love good People let me have more fire, and all the while his neither paris were burning. Then they made a 3d fire more extream than the other, & then the bladders of Gunpowder broke, which did not much good, by reason the wind was so Violent; then he prayed with a loud voyce, Lord Jesus have mercy upon me, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: these were the last words he was heard to speak; but when his lipps and mouth were black as a Coal, and his tongue swelled, they were perceived to move till his lips were quire burnt away. Then he knocked his breast with his hands till one of his Arms fell off, and then he knocked it still with the other whilst water, fat and blood fryed out at his fingers ends: at last they renewed the fire when bending his body over the hoop of Iron he yeilded up his Spirit. On the same day that this last mentioned holy
Martyr suffered at Gloucester, Dr. Rowland Taylor the Constant Martyr of Jesus Christ in the behalf of his Gospel was burnt at Hadley in suffolk, where he had been the Parson all the Reign of King Edward the 6th and upon the bringing in of Popery under Queen Mary he was disturbed at his own Church, thrust out, and Popish Mass Celebrated before his Face; but he endeavouring all he could to hinder it, com∣plaint being made to Gardner Chancellor and Bishop of Winchester, he sent for Dr. Taylor by his Letters missive to come before him at London, which he readily obey'd: But his friends knowing the Cruel∣ty of that persecutor, advised him to fly and save his Life but he utterly refused it saying: Tho he knew they had neither Justice or Equity on their side, and that he looked for nothing at his Popish Adversaries hands but Imprisonment or Cruel dearn, yet since he knew his cause to be good, and Righteous, and Truth upon his side, he would not flinch, but appear, and be willing to dye in so good a cause, for that he was satisfi∣ed in his Conscience, that the Doctrine of the Church of Rome led them to Idolatry, Superstition, Errors, Hypocrisy, and Lies. After he came to Lon∣don, He was examined before the cruel Chancellor, who called him Knave, Villain, Fool, and such like unchristian expressions (for which the Doctor humbly reproved him) and seeing he could not make him turn to his Idolatry, he sent him prisoner to the Kings Bench, where he lay almost two years. At his going away from the Bishop, he kneeled down on the floor, and lifting up both his hands with a loud voyce he say'd: From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable errors, Idolatries, and abominations, Good Lord deliver us. When in prison, he so preached to the rest of the prisoners there, and used such godly exhorta∣tions and discourses, leading also so strict and holy a life, that he wrought upon many and converted them from their Superstitious errors. He was also
very Charitable while he had it, relieving others, tho he had a Wife and 9 Children: but they soon deprived him of his benefice, so that he had nothing to support him, but the charity of good people, which with Gods providence he found sufficient. Several examinations he had before the Bishops, where he strenuously maintained his positions, for the Clergies Marriage, and against the Corporeal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but at last, they overcame him, with their Temporal Weapon, persecuting power, backt by Statute Law, and by it they Con∣demned him, with Mr. Bradford and others to death, as Hereticks to be burnt alive. After this sentence he was degraded, by Bishop Bonner in prison, and they were compelled by main force to put on their Popish Trinkets upon his back, he re∣fuseing to do it himself, and after they had notch'd his Hair and pair'd orscrap'd his fingers ends, and with all their foppish Ceremonies stript him of his Popish habiliments, when the Bishop should have struck him on the Breast with his staff, seeing the sturdiness of the Doctor, who was a portly bigg man, Bonner was afraid, and omitted that last Ceremony, lest the Dr. should have struck him a∣gain. The next day after this his degradation, which is like the last unction for the burial, at two of the Clock in the morning the Sheriffs took him and delivered him to his Guards, who were to Con∣duct him to Hadley to be burnt there, at which he rejoyced being willing to seal the Doctrine he had there preached with his blood. His Wife fearing they would have him away by night (for they fear∣ed daylight and the people) she watched all night with two Children in the Porch of St. Buttolphs Church near Algate, which way she knew he must pass, and about 3 of the Clock it being very dark she heard the noise of the guard, at which she ran out to her husband, where was such a moaning and pathetick greeting, or rather separation, that the Sheriffs wept, but forced her to depart and led him
to the sign of the Woolsack, where he was put on horseback with a hood over his face, a place made for his Eyes to look out at, and a slit for his Mouth that he might breath; After this manner they car∣ried him along that he might not be known; all which he patiently suffered. When he was come to Suffolk many of the Gentry and Justices of the peace met him, of his friends and acquaintance, all en∣deavouring to perswade him to save his Life, by Recantation, offering him not only pardon for his Life, but great promotions, even a Bishoprick. But this good and constant professor of the Gospel, strengthned by Gods holy Spirit, refused all those Temptations; coming to Hadley he rode thorow the Town, where the poor people were assem∣bled with grievous Moans and Tears, Kneeling down and with lifted up hands, prayed to God to strengthen him, to whom he sayd (That he had preached to them Gods Word & the Truth, and that he was now come to seal it with his blood. But the Officers reproved the people and kept them off; when that they came against the Alms houses, what mony he had left, he put it into a glove and flung it to them, having no more need of money now, for they led him straight to the place of his execution without the Town on a Common. The Council and Bishops had threatned to cut off his Tongue unless he would promise not to say any thing to the people, of which promise the Sheriffs now put him in mind, telling him, it was not per∣mitted him to talk, so afraid were they to hear the Truth. When he alighted from his Horse, he tore his hood from his head, and said, I thank God I am now even at home. And when the people beheld his notched crown, and his reverend white beard dis∣figured, they fell into a grievous weeping and la∣mentation crying out, God save thee good Dr. Taylor. Jesus Christ strengthen thee and help thee, the Holy Ghost Comfort thee, with such like godly wishes. He would fain have spoken to the people, but the Yeo∣men of the Guard would not permit him, for astoon
as he, opened his mouth, one of them ran a tipstaff into it; when he was come to the place he sat him down and caused one to pull off his Boots, then he stript himself of his Cloths to his shirt, which done, he stood up and with a loud voyce said, Good People, I have taught you nothing but God's holy word, and what I have taken out of the blessed and sacred Scriptures the Bible, and I am come hither this day to seal it with my Blood. With that one of the Guard Struck him over the Head with a stick, and cry'd, is this the keeping your word you Heretick? Then seeing he could not be suffered to speak, he kneeled down and prayed, they Keeping off the people that they might not hear him, threatning such who pressed near, to trample them under their horses feet, when he had done he went to the Stake and Kissed it, and placed himself in a pitch'd barrel they had prepared for him, they then bound him with chains, and several of the people being commanded to put up the fagots about him refused, tho threatned with Imprison∣ment, and they could scarcely find any to do it, he was so beloved; but one took a fggot and flung at him, which broke his head, so that the blood ran down his face; O friend, said the Doctor, I have harm enough, what needed that? After that he said the Psalm miserere in English, upon which the Sheriff struck him o're the mouth with a stick, say∣ing, you knave speak Latin or I will make thee. At last they set fire to him, and the Dr. holding up both his hands called upon God and said, merciful Father of Heaven, for Jesus Christ my Saviours sake re∣ceive my soul into thy hands, and so he stood still without either crying or moving in the midst of the flame with his hands folded together till one with an halbert struck him on the head and beat out his Brains, and then his Body fell into the fire. This was the end of this most blessed Martyr. The Cruel Handing of Tho. Tomkins. On the 8th of February, 155, there were no less than 6 persons condemned to be burnt at one time their names were Pigot, Knight, Haukes, Lawrence,
Hunter, & Tomkins; this last was burnt in Smithfield on the 16th day of March following. He was a Wea∣ver by trade, and dwelt in Shoreditch, of a godly and upright life, just in his dealings, very Charitable to the poor, Constant in prayer, without which he never would begin his work. This man was accused among others for an Heretick, & had before Bishop Bonner at Fulham, where he kept him half a year in prison, during which time, they often had him to examination, and seeing be was but an ignorant man, yet so conversant in the holy Scriptures, and so well able to maintain his opinions, the Bishops grew imaged against him, and when he could not over∣come him by arguments, he buffeted him on the face, and pluck'd off part of his beard and then, as he said, that he might look more Catholick, he caused his Buber to shave him, and made him work every day to make his Hay: but one day above the rest seve∣ral tyrannical Priests like himself, being together they sent for this Tomkins to hear him dispute, and ser a while, to try his constancy, Bonner took him by the hand, and holding it over a wax taper which stood burning upon the Table, held it so long, till the sinews shrunk, and the water and blood spirted out of the flesh into their faces; he all the while shewing no sign of pain or hurt, for as he pro∣fessed afterwards that he was so rapt and carri∣ed forth in his Spirit, that he felt no pain. But this did not serve his turn, for this bloody Butcher of Gods Sts. not content with this punishment, caused him to be wholly consumed to Ashes in Smithfield on the day aforesaid, where he sealed his Faith with a Cruel death, which he bore with admirable con∣stancy, to the glory of Gods holy name, and the con∣firmation of the Weak. William Hunter Martyr'd at Burntwood. On the 26th of the same month, was burnt at Burntwood in Essex William Hunter, who was a youth of not above 19 years of Age, and was an Appren∣tise in London, to a Silkweaver, & being commanded to goe to mass and to receive the Sacrament, his
Conscience not permitting him, he refused, for which he was threatned to be lay'd hold on, and his Mr. fearing he should bring him into trouble, sent him away to his Father, who dwelt, at Burntwood in Essex, where he continued about six weeks, when one day reading in the English Bible, which he found in the Church, the Vicar and one more, called him heretick but he disputed with them after such a manner, that they could say nothing against him but they went and complained to the Justice of Peace, who sent for Will. but he having some notice of it fled, and hid himself, upon which the Justice sent for his Father, and threatned to send him to prison, unless he would find out his son; at which the old man was much troubled, yet promised to look about as he did, tho not with any intent to discover him if he had known where he had been: but the good son hearing that his Father was like to be brought into trouble for him, came from the place where he was hid to his Father; and tho he would have perswaded him to the Contrary, he would not leave him but went home with him; where he was no sooner come, but he was taken by the Constable and carried before one Justice Brown, who would needs dispute with this youth concerning the real presence in the Sacrament; but Will. Hunter being too hard for him, he flung away the Bible in a Rage, and sent him up to Bishop Bonner, who also argued the case with him but finding that he could not prevail upon him, he put him into the Stocks in his Gate-house, where he continued 2 days and 2 nights without any thing but a Crust of Bread and a Cup of water, which he would not touch. After this the Bishop sent for him again, and finding him still in the same mind, refuseing to deny his Faith, he sent him to the prison where the Convict were kept, and caused him to be loaden with as many irons as he could bear. There he lay near three quarters of a year, having only a halfpeny a day, of the Bishop, for bread and drink. In which time he had been 4 or 5 times before the Bishop, sometimes threatning him
with burning, at other times flattering him and of∣fering him perferment, as to make him a Freeman, and to give him 40 l. to set up his trade, or else he would make him his Steward, finding him a witty young man; But he answered that unless he could convince his Conscience by the Scriptures, he could not turn from his Faith and from God, for the Love of the World, for that be accounted all world∣ly things but loss and dung in respect of the Love of Christ. After this he was Condemned and sent to Newgate, and thence to Burntwood to be Martyred. Thither he was carried, and received by the Sheriffs, he shewing an Admirable Constancy. His father and mother being of the same faith, tho tender of him, rejoyced to see his undaunted Constancy, he being so young a man his mother saying, she was heattily glad that she was so happy, as to bear such a child who could find in his heart to lose his life so willingly for Christs name sake. Ah mother (said William) for the little pain I am like to suffer, Christ hath promised me a Crown of Joy. You may be glad of that; then his mother kneeling on her knees said, I pray God to strengthen thee to the End, for I think thee as well bestow'd as any child that I ever bare. The night before he was burnt, he saw every thing in his dream that hapned the next day and related it when he awaked, to his fellow prisoner, who was also burnt not long after in another place, which we shall mention, and every Circumstance of it was fulfilled: when he came to the place of execution according to his dream, the Queens pardon was offer'd if he would recant, but he refused it, but goeing to the Stake stood upright against it, to which they bound him; and whilst they were placing the faggots about him, he desired the People to pray from him so long as they saw he was alive, and desired they would quickly dispatch him. Then the Justice said that he would pray no more for him than for a Dog. Then said William I pray God, Mr. Brown, this my death be not laid to your charge, in the last day: however I forgive you.
I ask no forgiveness of you reply'd the Justice,  God do not forgive you (said William) my blood will be required at your hands. Then being ready to put fire to him he cryed, O son of God sinne upon me; and it was observed upon those words, it being a dark and cloudy morning, the sun immediately shined forth, and so full on his face that he was forced to turn his head another way; at which the people mused. Then taking up a faggot of broom in his Arms, a Priest who he had seen in his dream came to him, with a Popish book to perswade him to recant, to whom he used the same wods as he had done in his dream, Away thou false Prophet, be∣ware of them good people, and come from their wicked Abominations, lest you be partakers of their plagues. Then quoth the Priest, look how tho burnest here, so shalt tho burn in Hell. Thu hest thou false Prophet, (said William) away thou false Prophet, away; fire be∣ing then put to him he lifted up his hands toward Heaven and said, Lord, Lord, Lord, receive my Spir then casting down his head into the flame, Smother and Smoke, he yeilded up his life, for the Truth, sealing it with his Blood, to the praise of God. Two Gentlemen of Essex Martyr'd. The very same day, that this last holy Martyr suffered, Mr. Higbad and Mr. Caston, both Gen∣tlemen of good repute in Essex, suffered likewise in several places. They were both of them true servants of God, and professors of the Gospel, for which they had been clapt up into Colchester Gol, and Bishop Bonner coming thither, had them to examination, but seeing he could not reclaim them he caused them to be carried to London, where he kept them in strait prison, till they were brought to their publick examination at the Consistory of St. Pauls, where several Articles were exhibited a∣gainst them: and to which they severally put in their Answers, but in fine, not Truth but power prevailed, for when the Bishops saw they could not bend them to their minds, they made use of the Temporal Sword, or rather fire to cut them off▪
For they condemned them to death, and deliver∣ed them to the Sheriffs of London, who carried them to Newgate, and after they had been there 14 days they were carried without Algate, and delivered to the Sheriffs of the County of Essex, Who caused them to be bound & carried away in a Cart, to the places of their habitations, where they were to suf∣fer, the one to Hornden on the Hill, the other to Rayly, where on the said 26 day of March, they did most constantly seal their Faith, by shedding of their blood, by most cruel fire, to the Glory of God, and to the great strengthning of the godly. Because we intend this Book for a Manual or small pocket book and of easy price, that every one may be able without great hurt to themselves to purchase it, we are forced to be very brief in the se∣quel, & as it were just to name them to you, for in∣deed there was let forth such a glut of Innocent blood being above 300 Martyrs besides such as dyed privately in Prisons, not made known or re∣marqu'd, that we are not able to give you the full relation of them all, in this narrow compass, which we have allotted to our selves: But what is most moving and worthy observation, shall not be o∣mitted; so that you have magnum in parvo, a great Volume in a little Book. Three more burnt in Essex, and B. Farrar in Wales. William Pigot, Stephen Knight, and John Laurence, had been condemned as we told you before, and now upon the 28th day of March Pigot was burnt at Braintree, & Knight at Maldon in Essex. Lawrence ha∣ving been a Priest, was first degraded by Bonner, and then sent to Colchester, where on the 29th of the afore∣said Month, not being able to go or stand, by reason his leggs had been so worn with heavy Irons in pri∣son, and his body weakned he was carried to the fire in a chair, & so sitting shewing great constancy, was consumed to Ashes. When he was in the flames a great many young Children, that could but just speak and run about, came near and cryed, Lord, strengthen thy servant, and Keep thy promise: Lord strengthen thy
servant, and Keep thy promise; Which being rare, was no small Manifestation of the Glory of God. For out of the Mouths of Babes and sucklings will he be glorified. On the 30th of the same Month, Robert Farrar Bi∣shop of St. Davids in Wales, that worthy and constant Martyr, suffered at Caermarthen, in the place, on the South side of the Market Cross: Where he most con∣stantly, in the behalf of the Gospel, sustained the tor∣ments of the Fire. He had been cited to London by Gardner, had before the Council, and after several examinations and disputes, not being by any means to be wrought upon to deny the doctrine of the Gospel, which he had taught, he was sent down into Wales, where by certain Commissioners constituted for that purpose he was condemned and then de∣graded, and lastly as we have said; executed. Be∣fore he went to suffer, one of his friends much be∣wailing him, in that he must suffer so painful a death as that of Fire seems to be, this constant Martyr and Bishop said to him, That if he saw him once to stir in the pains of his burning, be should then give no cre∣dit to his Doctrine. And as he said, so he performed, for he stood so patiently in the midst of the Flame, never crying or stirring, but holding up his hands till burned to stumps, and till one with a Staff stroke him on the head, and beat him down into the fire where he was consumed to ashes. Rawlins White burnt at Cardiff. In the same month one Rawlins white was burned at Cardiff, the chief Town of Glarmorgan Shire in Wales. Thi Rawlins was by profession a Fisherman belonging to Car∣diff, a very good and pious man, tho ignorant in Letters, but breeding his son at School, he caused him every night to read to him out of the Scriptures in English, to his great comfort and instruction, which continued all the time of King Edward. But when Idolatry and the Remish Super∣stition came in, for this (he still continuing the same) he was threatned, and at last sent for by the Bishop of L∣daff, upon which some of his Friends knowing the Danger, advised him to fly, but he told them he had learnt a better
Lesson, for should he presume to deny his Master Christ, Christ would at the last day deny and Condemn him, and therefore said he I will by his Grace, bear witness of him before Men, that I may find him in everlasting Life. The Bishop having examined him and finding him resolute in his opinions, sent him to prison where he was kept an whole year, but at first not so strictly but he mought have got away if he would. Af∣ter which the Bishop sending for him asked him if he had changed his mind? To whom he stoutly replyed; Rawlins you left me Sir, and Rawlins you find me, and by God's Grace Rawlins I will Continue. After this he was put in a very vile, loathsom, dark prison or dungeon, in the Tows called Cockmarell: where however he most chearfully pas∣sed away his time in prayer and singing of Psalms. Being Condemned by the Bishop and the writ de Comburendo, &c. being procured, he had notice given him over night, to prepare himself for Death the next day: upon which he sent to his wife for his Wedding Garment, which it seems was a large white shirt he had kept to be shrouded in, and now was resolved to be burnt in it: with great grief and many tears his wife obey'd him, and not being permitted to come at him, she and her children met him the next day, as he was going to the Stake, which sight moved the old man seeing their bitter weeping, insomuch that Stopping a while, his tears gushed forth and ran down his cheeks and white beard, for he was above threescore years of age. At last as it were coming to himself and striking his Breast he Cry'd out: Ah, flesh, stayest thou me? wouldst thou fain prevail? But do thou what thou canst by Gods Grace thou shalt not have the Victory. When he came near the Stake he sell flat on his face to the ground, Kissing it, and after he arose, finding some of the Earth Sticking to his nose he said, Earth unto earth and dust unto dust, thou art my Mother and to thee I must return. It was observed that his very nature eemed to be changed, for whereas before he used to go tooping through labour and age, & had a dull & melanchol∣ck Countenance, that now he went bolt upright, and look∣d brik and chearful, to the great amazement of the be∣olders. After he had set himself against the Stake in his irt, as the Smith was Knocking in the staples of the chain  the Stake, Friend (said he) Knock it fast, for perhaps the
flesh may be weak and may strive for it self: but God of his great mercy give me patience to abide the extremity. After that, when they placed the reeds and faggots about him, he was as busie as the rest, and seem'd less concerned, putting and ordering them about him for his best advantage of being soon dispatch'd. They had a Priest there, who undertook to preach or speak to the People, but when he came to speak of Christs bodily presence in the Sacrament Rawlins opposed him, and put him to silence, upon which some cryed out, put fire to him, put fire to him, which being done, there was a great and sudden flame, in which he stood rub∣bing and bathing his hands, till, his sinews crackt without any shew of pain, and then wiping his face with his flame∣ing hands, at last he cryed out, Lord receive my soul, O Lord receive my Spirit; which he continued, till his mouth was burnt, and that his Body falling over the Chain, he was wholly consumed to Ashes. And this was the end of this godly old man, for the Testimony of Christ, and his Gos∣pel, and for which, according to his Faith, without any doubt, he is rewarded with a Crown of everlasting Life. George Marsh burnt at Chester. The next that we shall mention is the Martyrdom of George Marsh, who was burnt at Chester, by the Bishop there, Dr. Coates. He was a Lancashire man bred a Farmer, married and had children, yet afterwards he went to Cambridg, fell to his Studies, and at last took orders, and was a Curate in the time of King Edward the 6th, but in Queen Maries days being detected, he was sent for by the Bishop, and being in some perplexity in his mind, whether he should fly or no, some of his friends sent him word, that he should stay and boldly Confess Jesus Christ, upon which having hid himself, he went and delivered himself up to those who sought him, who carried him to the Bishop, where he so wise∣ly answered to all their objections, that they could not find matter to take away his Life: yet the Bishop sent him to prison in his own house, where he kept him 4 Months, not suffering any of his friends to come near him, or to give him any relief, and where he suffer'd great hard∣ships; the Porter was commanded to take notice of any that came but to enquire after him, and to give thei names to the Bishop, so that many were afraid of being
brought into trouble for asking after him. From the Bishop he was had before the Earl of Darby who examined him, after which perceiving he was not able to bring him to his bent, he committed him to another prison, being a cold windy stone house, without bed to lye on, only a few Can∣vas lent Cloathes, where he contined in this manner for some time, seeing no man but the keeper, who brought him meat and drink. After this he was again examin'd before the said Earl, yet Mr. Marsh very prudently and warily an∣swered their intrapping questions concerning the Sacra∣ment; saying, he believed Christ present in the Sacrament, which so inraged them seeing he would give no other an∣swer, that they sent him to Lancaster Goal, where he was put among the Felons, and 3 times caused to hold up his hand at the bar, with bolts upon his Leggs tho they had nothing to object against him. He used to preach and ex∣hort the prisoners, for which he was threatned and re∣proved, and the Bishop coming to Lancaster caused him to be more straitly kept and cruelly handled; several times was he had before the Bishop and examined, and Articles were put in against him, one of which was, that among other most damnable and Schismatical Heresies, he had said, that the Church and Doctrine taught and set forth in King Edwards time, was the true Church, and that the Church of Rome was not the true and Catholick Church. At last the Bishop read the sentence of Condemnation a∣gainst him, and after he had done, now said he I will pray for thee no more than for a dog. But I will pray for you said the holy Martyr. He was then delivered to the Sheriffs, who put him into an hole or dark dungeon, where none were suffered to come at him or speak to him. When the time came of his execution, he was led forth to the place, being without the City of Westchester, and being come to the Stake a black Box was shewed him, in which they said there was the Queens pardon, if he would recant: He told them that he had no desire to dye, and would accept of her Graces mercy, being her true Leige man, but if he could not have it without such Conditions, which tended to pluck him from God, he would not receive it. After that he began to speak to the people, but the Sheriffs told him, there must be no Sermoning there, so afraid were
they of hearing the Truth, upon which Mr. Marsh Kneeling down sell to prayer, which done he stript himself to his shirt, and so was chained to the post, and the faggots put a∣bout him. Over his head they had placed a firkin, with pitch, and Tar, and by reason the wind blew hard, and the fire did not dispatch him, but melting the pitch, it fell up∣on him, and put him to intollerable torment, notwithstand∣ing he bore it patiently, standing a long time without move∣ing, haveing all his flesh so broyled and puffed up, that they thought he had been dead, when on a sudden, spreading his hands abroad, he cryed out aloud, Father of Heaven have mercy upon me, and so yielded up his Spirit into the hands of the Lord; All the people saying he dyed with admirable pa∣tience and was a Martyr. He was burnt in April, 1555. The story of William Flower Martyr at Westminster. On the 24th day of April the same year, one William Flo∣wer was Martyred in the Church yard of St. Margarets Westminster, where it seems, in his zeal, he had struck a Priest, that had been saying mass, and had wounded him, for which he himself was afterwards troubled, but said he had such an impulse then upon him, that he could not forbear, tho he confessed it was not according to the Doctrine of Christ, to smite any man. He knew the fact would bring his Life into jeopardy, and he was prepared for it, being resolved not to deny the Gospel he had professed. This William Flower lived then at Lambeth, haveing a Wife and children, tho he was bred first a Monk of Ely, till his eyes being en∣lightned by the Gospel, he left that life and became a Secu∣lar Priest, preaching in divers places; at last marrying, he studyed physick and taught School in several places, when at last living at Lambeth, his zeal against Idolatry carryed him forth too furiously, for which he was had before Bi∣shop Bonner, who sent him prisoner to the Gate house, where after some time he was again brought before the Bishop, who sought all ways to make him recant his opinions, but in vain; for he resolutely told him: That the Heavens should assoon fall as he recant his opinions, but for his as∣sault of the Priest, he was sorry, and submitted himself to his Lordship, and the punishment he would inflict. But this would not serve the Bishop turn, for after several Ar∣ticles exhibited against him, and witnesses produced, he
was condemned, degraded and delivered over to the secu∣lar power to be burnt. On the 24th of April aforesaid, he was brought to the place of his execution, in St. Margarets Church-yard, where after he had prayed audibly and servently, he desired all People to forgive him, and all that he had any ways offended, for he forgave all the World. This done, his right hand was first fastned to the Stake and Cut off, at which they could not perceive that he so much s shrunk, only a little moved his shoulders. Then being fastned to the Stake, fire was set to him, which burning a∣bout him, he cryed with a loud voyce O son of God have mercy upon me. O Son of God receive my soul, three times; till his Speech was taken from him, then lifting up his stump, and his other Arm, he stood, his lips moving, till he was stricken down to the ground, where he lay with the nei∣ther parts of his body burnt, and the upper only scorched, for want of fire, his lips still being seen to move, till they dispatched him. Mr. Cardmaker and Mr. Warren burnt in Smithfeild. you see scarce a day passes, without burning and destroy∣ing Gods people in one place or other, for on the 30th of May following, one Mr. Cardmaker, who had been an obser∣vant Fryer before the dissolution of the Abbies, and after∣wards a Prehend in the Church of Wells, and after that in the time of King Edwards he married and was a Minister, being made Reader at St. Pauls, which very much incensed the Papists against him, and one Mr. John Warren an Up∣holster in London were both burnt in one fire in Smithfeild. Assoon as the tyde turned, Mr. Cardmaker was clapt into Newgate, and assoon as popery was setled and they had got the Act for their purpose, in putting the fiery Laws, in Execution against these protestant dissenters, he was brought before the Bishop and examined, and several articles ex∣hibited against him concerning the bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which he would in no wise deny, but offered to maintain his opinions as truth by the H. Scrip∣tures: and when they saw that they could by no means make him recant, he was condemned to be burnt, and at the same time with John Warren. This John Warren was for∣merly condemned to be burnt in the days of King Henry the 8th with Ann Askew, but then pardoned by the King,
but they now finding him professing the Gospel which he always Constantly did, Bonner the cruel persecutor of God's people laid hold of him, and had several Articles brought against him, which he plainly confessed, being only the Truths he had owned and declared, and willingly yeilded himself to be put to death for a Testimony of them. On the 30th of May they were both brought to the Stake in Smithfield, & whilst Mr. Cardmaker was in privat conference with the Sheriffs, who were perswade∣ing him to recant, and which discourse lasted a long time, Mr. Warren was stripp'd & fastned to the Stake, it was rumour'd by some of the Papists, that Card∣maker would turn to save his life, and by the long discourse he had with the Sheriffs, the People began to Suspect it would prove true, but when at last they saw him depart from them, and strip himself to his shirt, & kneel down at the Stake, shouting aloud they cryed out, God be praysed: the Lord strengthen thee Cardmaker, The Lord Jesus receive thy Spirits; and this continued till the Executioner put fire to them, & that they both with great constancy & alacrity of Spirit, passed thorow the flame, to everlasting rest and peace, among God's holy Martyrs, to enjoy the Crown of Victory prepared for them. Two more burnt in Essex. On the 29th of the same month was also Con∣demned John Simson, and John Ardley, both husband∣men of Essex, and in Bonners Diocess, who soon dis∣patch'd them, for their Conscience sake: tho they offered, to save their lives, all their estates, or what ever they had, so their Consciences might be free, but nothing but their blood would serve their turns, and therefore they were sent into Essex, where about the 10th of June they both suffered the fire in several places. Simson at Rochford, and Ardley on the same day at Railey, in which places both finished their Martyrdom most quietly in the quarrel of Christ's Gospel. Mr. Hawks burnt in Essex. On the same day was burned Mr. Tho. Hawks,
whom we have formerly mentioned to have been Condemned with 5 other Martyrs, whose storys we have given you; but this Gentleman, for he was one and bred a Courtier, haveing served the Earl of Ox∣ford all the time of King Edward, was respited till this time, in hopes to prevail with him to recant, tho in vain, for he was most constant and resolute not to deny his Faith, for he boldly told the Bishop, that if he had an hundred lives and an hundred bodys, he would give them all to be torn to pieces reather than abjure and recant. He was first taken, because he had kept his child 3 weeks without Christning it, because it was against his Conscience to yeild to their Popish Ceremonies, as their Oyl, Salt, Cream, Spittle, Candle, and conjuring Water, which he decalred, was not of divine Institution, but mens foolish Inventions. For this he was had before the Bishop, and he being a man of parts, and a gentleman, much pains was taken with him, and he was much pittied, for that he was a very handsom man, of a fine make, and sweet Countenance, and of an excellent sweet nature. But all this was nothing to the Love he bore to God, for whose sake he for∣sook all the offers and pleasures of the world, to undergo a rigorous Death. After his Condemnation aforesaid, he was sent into Essex, and delivered over to the Lord Rich to see him burnt, who brought him guarded to the place of execution, which was at Coxhall in Essex. A little before the time, he used much exhortation to his Friends, to be stedfast in the Faith, some of which were greatly confirmed by him, both by his talk and example, but much more by his death, for some of them, who feared the sharpness of the punishment, and thought it was in∣tollerable to the flesh, desired of him, if he were able, to give them a privat sign when he was burn∣ing, if it were to be born, which he promised to do, and if that the pain were tollerable and might be quietly born, he would lift up his hands over his head before he gave up the Ghost. After he came to the place, with fervent prayers made to God
he with great patience and meekness addressed himself for the Fire, being bound to the Stake with a chain, an innumerable company of people en∣compassing him and lamenting him. After he had spoken many things to the Lord Rich, concerning their shedding thus the innocent blood of Gods Saints, and that his prayers were ended, they set fire to him, in which he continued long and when that his speech was taken away, with the violence of the fire, and his skin shrivled and drawn together, and his fingers ends consumed in the flame, and the rest of his Arms and body burning, so that all men thought he had been certainly dead, suddenly and contrary to all expectation, being mindful of his pro∣mise to his friends he reached up his hands over his head, burning of a light fire, and, as it were rejoyce∣ing, clapt them together 3 times, to the amazement of all the people; upon which arose such an out∣cry or shout, especially by those who understood the sign, that the like had not been heard. After which this blessed Martyr sinking down into the fire gave up the Ghost, being a most Constant and faithful wit∣ness of the Gospel. Thomas Wats Martyr'd as Chelmsford. with 3 others in Essex. Thomas Wats also of Essex, having been sent up to the bloody Bishop Bonner, after many examina∣tions and appearances, he was condemned to the fire and sent down to Chelmsford in Essex, to be Martyr'd the Lord Rich being ordered to see him executed, where his wife and 6 Children came to him, to whom he said: My dear Wife and children, I must now depart from you and hence forth know you no more, but as the Lord hath given you to me, so I give you again unto the Lord, whom I charge you to obey and fear, and beware you turn not to this abominable Papistry, against which by God's Grace I shall anon give testimony with my blood. Let not the Murthering of God's saints cause you to relent, but take an occasion thereby to grow stron∣ger in the Lords quarrel, and I doubt not but he
will be a merciful Father to you. Two of his weeping Children offer'd themselves to be burnt with him, but he kissing and Hesting them, bad them farewel, and so was carried to the fire. When he came to the stake, he kissed it, and then spake to the Lord Rich these words. My Lord beware be∣ware, for you do against your own Conscience, and without you repent, the Lord will revenge it, for you are the cause of my death. After which he suffered the fire as the rest, and no doubt received his Reward in Heaven. On the 14th of June the same year, Nicholas Cham∣berlin was burnt at Colchester, and on the 15th Thomas Osmond was burnt at Maintree, and William Bamford alias Butler the same day at Harwich, all which▪ seal∣ed to the Testimony of the Gospel with their blood. I shall now proceed to give you briefly, the Hi∣story of the noted Mr. Bradfood, a godly Preacher and holy Martyr for the Gospel of Christ. Mr. John Bradford was born at Manchester in Lancastershire, being brought up in Learning by his parents, attain∣ing to great perfection in the Latin tongue, in ready writing, and in Accounts, which preferred him to the service of Sr. John Harrington Knight, who was Treasurer of the Kings Camp and buildings, by him Mr. Bradford was imployed, both at home and abroad beyond seas, and he was in a thriving way, and ready for great preferment; But God having otherwaies designed this then young Man, called him, to the Gospel, and to the study of the H. Scriptures. Finding a call in himself, he imme∣diatly embraced it, looking upon it as the Spirit of God, that prompted him to forsake worldly Riches, preferment, and Honour, in the way he was follow∣ing, and to retire to Cambridge, for the benefit of his studies, and to sit him for the Ministry. He had not been in the University above a year, but he obtained the Degree of Mr. of Arts, and not long after he had a fellowship given him in Pembroke Hall; Where the learned Bucer being acquainted with him, stir∣red him up to the Ministry And Dr. Ridley Bishop of
London, made him a Deacon, giving him licence to preach, and made him also a Prebendary in his Cathedral Church of St. Pauls. In this office con∣stantly preaching he continued 3 years, sharply re∣proving sin, declaring Christ crucified, oppugning He∣resies and Papistical Errours, & earnestly perswaded all to a godly Life But after Queen Mary came to the Crown, and had introduced the abolished Pope∣ry, Idolatry, & Superstition, he flinched not, neither would he fly as many did, but continued his diligent preaching until deprived of that Liberty by the Queen and Council on the 13th of August, in the first year of Queen Mary, Dr. Bourn Bishop of B preaching at Pauls Cross in the behalf of Popery, the people were all in an uprore at his sermon, and one among the rest flung a dagger at him as he stood in the Pulpit, and narrowly mist him; He seeing his life in danger, desired Mr. Bradford, who was ner him, to pacifie the people, which he readily did, step∣ping forth, spake to them in such sort, and sheltrin the Bishop, that he saved his Life, for it was veri∣ly thought, that if it had not been for Mr. Bradford, the people had torn the Bishop to peices, they were so much incensed by his sermon. At which time o called to him, and said, Mr. Bradford, Mr. Bradford, you now save him, who will shortly help to bu you, which proved true enough; for from this very Act of Charity, finding how much he was beloved by the people, and fearing his Doctrine and abilities they called this sedition and a Commotion, and he was sent for before the Queen and Council, where his preaching was objected against him, and was a last committed to the Tower, and then into other pri∣sons, as the Kings Bench, the Counter and Newgate into all which he was cast for his conscience sake & because he would not embrace the Romish supersti∣tion. All the time he was in prison, he preached al∣most continually, and when in Newgate, would g once a week among the Felons & Thieves, preachin to them and exhorting them, doing a great deal  good amongst them. Preaching, reading, and pray∣ing
seem'd to be his whole Life. He eat but one meal a day, and that but little. He was almost con∣tinually on his Knees: Often museing and bitterly weeping to himself. He was somewhat tall of per∣son, of a sanguine complexion, with an awbourn hair and beard. He seldom slept above 4 hours in a night, and alwaies read in his bed till sleep came. He counted that hour ill spent in which he did not some good. He was very Charitable and Liberal to his fellow prisoners. He was much beloved through his winning carriage, even of his Keepers, who gave him such liberty, that he might have got away if he would; nay, they often let him go forth on his word, which they were sure of, he being alwaies most pun∣ctual. He was several times brought before the Chan∣cellor and before Bonner, and other Bishops, and much pains was taken by several of the most learned among them, to bring him over to them, but in vain; for he so confounded them with the Scriptures, and manifested the Truth to them concerning the pre∣sence of Christ in his Sacrament, that they knew not what to say to him, but having the power in their hands, they condemned him as an Heretick, to be burnt, and reading the sentence to him, when the Chancellor came to the word Johannes Bradford Laicus, ha! (Said he) is he no Priest? to which Mr. Bradford replyed, no, he never was Priest, nor beneficed, nor Married, nor a Preacher, till publick Authority had Established Religion. After which he fell down on his Knees, and heartily thanked God, that he counted him worthy to suffer for his name sake. They had kept him near 2 years in pri∣son, and he was now condemned on the last of Janu∣ary, from which time, to the 1st of July, they kept him in prison, where they had several conferences with him, but he still kept constant and unshaken in his faith. Not long before his burning he dreamed all the order of it as it afterward happened. They had an intent to have sent him to Manchester to have been burnt there, but their minds altering they or∣der'd it to be done in Smithfield. One afternoon as he was walking in his Chamber, the Keepers wife
came runing to him almost out of Breath, & amazed and crying, O Mr. Bradford I come to bring you hea∣vy news. What is that said he? That you must be bur∣ned, & your chain is now buying. Mr. Bradford pulling off his Gap, and lifting up his eyes towards heaven, said I thank God for it: I have looked for it a long time, it is no unexpected thing, the Lord make me worthy of it. The rumor of Mr. Bradfords burn∣ing soon spread thorow the City, and by 4 a clock in the morning people began to gather together in the streets: As he was passing between Nowgate and Smithfield, his Brother in Law came and took him by the hand, to take his last leave of him, for which Woodriff the dogged Sheriff struck him over the head till the blood ran down his face, which grieving Mr. Bradford, he desired him to remember him to his Mother, and others of his friends, and so dismist him. This sheriff was a great persecutor of Gods Saints, rejoycing much at their sufferings, whereas his brother never saw their Martyrdoms with dry eyes, much pitty and Commiseration. But God met with him, for not long after Mr. Bradfords burning he was suddenly struck with a dead palsie, so that for 8 years till he dyed, he could not turn in his Bed, but as he was helped. When Mr. Brad∣ford came to the place, he fell flat on his face and prayed to himself a good space. At the same time, there was to suffer with him, for the same cause one John Leaf a London Apprentice to a Tallow-Chand∣ler, a mere stripling of 18 or nineteen years of Age, at the most, who had most stoutly and resolutely confessed his Faith touching the Sacrament be∣fore Bishop Bonner, touching auricular confession, & other points to which he argued very orthodoxi∣cally, having been well grounded therein, by the Holy Martyr Mr, Rogers whose Schollar he was. Af∣ter he had been condemned, whilst in prison, the Bi∣shop sent to him a Recantation in writing, and also his confession, bidding him to choose, which he would sign, the one was for his Life, the other his Death. The young man could not write nor read, therefore caused the writings to be read to him,
and when he had heard the recantation, he disliked it, and said he would not sign it, but hearing his own confession read he said, he approved that, and there∣upon pricked his finger with a needle, he took of his blood, and made a mark on the paper, and bid them tell the Bishop, that he had al∣ready signed that with his Blood. This young Man having undauntedly signed this Bill, was the same day brought with Mr. Bradford to the stake, where he also lay flat on his face on the ground praying, on the other side of the stake, till the Sheriff bid them dispatch, for that the press of the people was great. At which words they both stood up, when Mr. Bradford taking a faggot in his hands, he Kissed it, as likewise the stake, then stripping himself, he went & stood by the stake and said, O England, England, repent thee of thy sins, repent thee of thy Sins. Beware of Idolatry, beware of false Antichrists, take beed they do not deceive you. Upon this the Sheriff bid them bind him and tye his hands if he would not be quiet. O Mr. Sheriff, I am quiet said Mr. Bradford, God forgive you. To which one of his Officers reply'd, you had best hold your peace, if this be your learning, you are a Fool. Mr. Bradford saw how it was; that he might not be permitted to speak, he answered not, but saying as he forgave all the world, so he asked forgiveness of all men, and desired the people to pray for him. Then turning his head to the young man who suffer∣ed with him he said be of good comfort Brother: for we shall have a merry supper with the Lord this night, then embracing the Reeds, he said, Strait is the way, and narrow is the Gate that leadeth to eter∣nal Salvation and few there be that find it. Then fire being put to them they both with great patience and constancy ended their lives in the Fire, with∣out any alteration in their countinances, being voyd of all fear hoping to obtain (as no doubt they did) the heavenly reward for all their sufferings. The next day after Mr. Bradford suffered in Smith∣field, one William Minge a Priest, should have suffer∣ed at Maidstone, but that he dyed in prison. On the
3d of July one James Trevisam in Lothbury paris dyed a prisoner, being lame and ill used, and whe he was dead, because he was an Heretick (as they termed him) they would not let his wife bury him in the Church-yard, nor have so much as a Coffin to put him in, but was forced to carry him on a Ta∣ble into the fields, and bury him there without Moorgate. On the 12th day of July 4 men, viz. John Bland Minister of the parish of Adisham in Kent, John Fran∣kish Vicar of Rolvindon, Nicholas Shetterden and Hum∣phry Middleton, all of the same County, were long imprisoned at Canterbury, and after several exami∣nations and Articles exhibited against them, they all standing firm to the Truth, for the Gospels sake suffered all in one fire, at two several Stakes, in the City of Canterbury. In the same month of July, Nicholas Hall a Brick∣layer, was Condemned by the Bishop of Rochester, for maintaining that under the forms of Bread and wine, was not the very Body and Blood of Jesus Christ after Consecration, but that the Body of Christ was in Heaven only; with some other things concerning the Superstition of the Mass, for which he was burnt at Rochester about the 19 of July. Christopher Waid was of Dartford in the County of Kent a Linnen weaver, Condemned also upon the like Articles, by the aforesaid Bishop of Rochester, and burnt at Dartford, in the same month of July, at a place called the Brimth without the town, the Common place of Execution of Felons. As he was goeing to his Martyrdom one Margery Pooly of the Town of Tunbridg a widdow, who was afterwards Martyr'd, said to him, you may rejoyce Waid to see such a company gathered to celebrate your Marriage this day. Being come to the place, he stript himself & put on a fair white shirt delivered to him by his wife, when coming to the Stake, he took it in his arms and embraced it, and Kissing it, he set his back to it and was fastned to it with an Iron hoop, standing in a Pitch'd Barrel: being thus setled he spake with a clear and chearful voyce the last verse
of the 86 Psal. Shew some good token upon me O Lord, that they who hate me may see it and be ashamed, because thou Lord hast helped me and Comforted me. Near to the Stake was a little Hill where stood a Fryar with a Book in his hand, ready to speak to the People, but Wade cryed out so eagerly to the People, to be∣ware of the Doctrine of Antichrist, that the Friar went away amated and said nothing. The Sheriff bid him to be quiet and dye patiently, then puting the reeds before his mouth, he made a hole with his hands, that his voyce might be heard, but some flung faggots at the hole and hurt his face: when at last fire being put to him he cryed out often, Lord Jesus receive my Soul, without any sign of Im∣patience; at last holding up his hands above his head, he continued in that posture without moving them, even after he was dead, as if they had been propped up with Stakes; being a token to his Ene∣mies, according to his prayer, of his Constancy, to their shame and Confusion. Margery Pooly and Dirick Carver Martyrs. Margery Pooly a widdow, was also Condemned by the aforesaid Bishop of Rochester, and suffered at Maidstown in Kent in the same month. And on the 22d of the same month at Lewis in Sussex, was burn∣ed Dirick Carver, who was a man of small learning, yet blessed by God with temporal Riches, which yet was no hindrance to him in professing the Gos∣pel, tho after he was imprisoned the Ravenous Har∣pies left little for his wife and children. After he had been several times before the Bishop, and his confession read to him, he owned it, and being asked if he would recant, or stand to the same, he replyed That he would stand to his confessions, for your doctrine is Poyson and Sorcery, and if Christ were here (said he) you would put him to a worse Death, than he was put to before. You say you can make a god, you can make a Pudding as well. Your Ceremonies in the Church are full of poyson, and beggerly rudiments, & auricular confession is con∣trary to Gods Word, with divers others the like,
which made the Bishop hasten his condemnation. When he came to the Town of Lewis in order to his burning, the people called upon him, beseech∣ing God to strengthen him in the Faith of Jsus Christ: He thanked them and prayed unto God, that he of his mercy would strengthen them in the like Faith. When he came to the stake he kneeled down, and made his prayers: After he had done, they took his book and threw it into the pitch'd barrel; And assoon as he had stript himself, he went into the barrel prepared for him himself, and taking up his book, he flung it among the people, but the Sheriff commanded them in the Queens name, on pain of Death, to throw it in again, that it might be burnt. Then the blessed Martyr lifting up his voice said, Brethren and Sisters, witness all of you that I am come here this day to seal with my blood Christ's Gospel, because I know it is truth. It has been here truly preached, but now is not. Because I will not deny God's Gospel and be obedient to Man's Laws, I am Condemned to dye. As many of you as believe upon the Father, Son and holy Spirit unto everlasting Life, see you do the works appertaining to the same: And as many of you as believe on the Pope of Rome, you believe to your utter Cond mnation except the great mercy of God help you. Immediately the Sheriff said; If thou dost not believe on the Pope thou art damn∣ed both body and Soul. Speak to thy God (said he) that e may deliver thee now, or else strike me down to the exam∣ple of the People. But the Martyr reply'd the Lord for∣give you your sayings. Then with a loud voyce he said to the people. Dear Brethren, I ask you all to for∣give me, if I have offended any of you, in word or in deed. Then he prayed and said: O Lord my God, thou hast written, He that will not forsake Wife, Chil∣dren, House, and all that ever he hath, and take up thy Cross and follow thee, is not worthy of thee. But Lord thou knowest I have forsaken all to come unto thee. Lord have mercy upon me, for to thee I commend my Spirit, and my Soul rejoyceth in thee. When the fire was put to him, he gave a spring up into the flame, and cryed, O Lord have mercy upon me, and so ended his Life.
Stening and Iveson Martyrs. On the 23d of the same month, was also burnt at Stening, another named John Launder of God-Stone in the County of Surry: one of the same Town a Carpenter, named Thomas Iveson was burnt in the same month at Chichester. And on the 2d of August one James Abbies a young man being by, the Bishop of Norwich wrought upon him to recant, and gave him mony which so burthened his Conscience that he could have no rest till he had carried the Bishop his mony, and owned his opinions, for which on the day aforesaid he was burnt at Bury. Greater and hotter the persecution grew dayly, and they began now to be flesh'd in blood, tho no∣thing satiated, but still greedy of more. On the 8th day of August the same year, one Mr. Denly, a Gen∣tleman, was Martyred at Ʋxbridge, having been Condemned by the bloody Butcher, Bonner. When fire was put to him he fell a singing a psalm, which Doctor Story a Popish persecutor hearing, he bid one of the Sheriffs Officers fling a fagot in his face, to stop his mouth, which the fellow did, and hit him so full in the face, that the blood ran down; upon which Mr. Denly was silent, clapping both his Hands upon his face: Then said the Popish Doctor to the fellow: Thou hast marr'd a good old song. At last the holy Mar∣tyr spreading his hands abroad in the midst of the flames, sung again, and so yeilded up his spirit into the Hands of God, rejoycing. On the 28th of the same month in the same place, one Patrick Packington, condemned by Bonner, was burnt; being urged to recant, he told them no: their Church was the Church of Satan, and he would never turn to it. At the same time, one John Newman was Con∣demned by Bonner, and burnt at Saffron Walden, for that he argued against the bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament; they told him, tho he could not see it with his bodily eyes, yet it was there under the forms of Bread and wine, and that the Bread and Wine was only a Quality or Accident; to whom the Martyr reply'd that if they could shew him a
Quality or Accident without a Subsnce, h would believe them, not else; Besides, he used this Argu∣ment so them: That if the Body of Christ were real∣ly and Bodily in the Sacrament, then whosoever re∣ceived the Sacrament received also the Body: But the wicked receiving the Sacrament, receive not the Body of Christ: Therefore, the Body of Christ is not really in the Sacrament. Tho they knew not how to answer this, they knew how to burn him for his opinion, which they did, endeavouring to con∣vince him with Fire and faggot This man was a Pewterer by trade. Much about the same time one Richard Hook was burnt at Chichester in Sassex for the same cause. About the latter end of August Six more whose names were, William Coker, Wiiam Hopper, Henry Lawrence, Richard Collier, Richard Wright and Wil∣liam Steer were all burnt together in one fire at Can∣terbury for the Gospels sake by the Papists unmerci∣full Tyranny. Elizabeth Warren Widdow, and others Martyred. Towards the latter end of A gust, also Elizabeth Warren, the widdow of John Warren the Upholster, who was Martyr'd before, was burnt at Stratford Bow, being persecuted by her Kinsman Dr. Story; who was so Zealous as not to spare his own kindred, for the cause of the Popish Church. The chief Arti∣cle against her was, that of the real presence, which she Constantly deny'd; for being urged to recant, she told them she never would, do what they could, for (said she) If Christ be in an error then I am in an error; upon hch she was Condemned and suffered as above said. George Tankerfeild and Robert Smith Martyrs. On the 26th of August one George Tankerfeild a Cook, suffered at St. Albans, in a Green called Rome∣land, neer to the Abby there. All the days of King Edward he had been a strict Papist, but when he per∣ceived their bloody Cruelties in the days of Queen Mary, it made him begin to doubt of their Religion,
as not agreeing with the Doctrin of Christ; upon this he began to read the Testament, and prayed earnestly to God to open to him the Truth, that he might be thorowly perswaded, whether it was of God or no; and if it was not, that he might utterly abhor it in his Heart. God heard his prayer, and he found dayy a working in him more and more, which made him to detest and abhor the Religion he had so long mbraced, and the Lord inlightning his mind, he went no more to mass: after which being sik and lme, he could not but openly pro∣fess his Religion, and declare his mind, for which he was had before the bloody Bishop Bonner, and several times examined, and as usual, when before Condemnation he was urged to Recant, he boldly told the Bishop, that he would never forsake his opinions, unless he could refell them by Scripture, for (said he) you Condemn all men, and prove no∣thing against them. Upon which sentence was read against him, and he was delivered over to the secu∣lar power. When he was brought to the Town of St. Aloans from London, being kept at an Inn there, he caused a fire to be made in his Chamber, and putting his bare foot to it, he was forced to withdraw it thorow the Smart; upon which he said, The flesh would perswade him one way, and the Spirit ano∣ther. The flesh said, O fool wilt thou burn when thou needest not? But the Spirit said, be not afraid, for it was nothing in respect of fire Eternal. The flesh said, leave not thy Friends who love thee: But the Spirit said, The company of Jesus Christ exceeds all flesh∣ly Friends, with the like discourse more at large on this subject; but at last the Spirit got the Victory, and he went joyfully and with great Resolution to his Death, and when he was at the stake, and the Faggots placed about him, a Priest would have perswaded him to believe in the Sacrament of the Altar, upon whiah he vehemently cryed out, I defie the
Whore of Babylon, that most abominable Idol. Then the Mayor bid them to set fire to him, saying if he had but one load of Faggots in the World, he would give it to burn the Here∣tick, Fire being put to him, he desired the people to pray for him, and so embra∣cing the fire he bathed his Arms in it cal∣ling on the name of Jesus till he was out of his pain. In the same Month, at Ʋxbridge, suffered Mr. Robert Smith, who had been a servant belonging to Sr. Thomas Smith, and a Clerk at Windsor, but was in the second year of the Queen im∣prisoned for his Opinions, and with several other kept long in durance. At last he was several times had before Bonner, who finding he could not prevert him, condemned him to the Fire. When he came to the stake, he spake to the Peo∣ple, endeavouring to comfort the People who bewailed him, willing them to think well of his cause, and not to doubt, but that his body dying in that quarrel, should rise again to Life. And, said He, I doubt not but God will shew you some sign thereof. And it hapned to the great Confirmation of the people, that after he was almost half burnt, and that his Body was as black as a Coal, and drawn together in a lump, all men thinking that, he had been dead, suddenly he rose upright before the peo∣ple, and lifting up the burning Stumps of his Arms, and Clapping them together, did as it were declare to them the rejoycing of his Heart, then bending down again, and hanging over the flames, he slept in the Lord, and so ended his Mortal Life. Much about the same time, two more were Mar∣tyrd, being Condemned with the above mentioned Martyr, by the bloody Butcher of Gods people Bon∣ner, the one was named Stephen Harwood, who suf∣fer'd at Stratford, the other Thomas Fust who was burnt at Ware. In the same month also suffered another of their Companions, named William Hale who was burnt at Barnet, where he Constantly seal∣ed
his Faith with his Blood. There were at the same time 3 more Condemned to be burnt, viz: George King, Thomas Leys, and Joon Wade, but these were so Cruelly handled in the prison of the Lollards Tower, belonging to the Bshop, that they dyed before they could be executed, and were buried by night in the field. The like was done to one William Andrew a Carpenter, who dying in Newgate was cast out in the fields like a dog, till some Charitable People buried him. Mr. Samuel, a Minister, Martyr. The next whom we shall mention in this brief Martyrology, is one Mr. Robert Samuel, a godly and zealous Preacher, and Minister of Gods word at Barfold in suffolk, where he faithfully taught his flock all the days of King Edward, but upon the set∣ting up of Popery, he was put out of his Benefice, as many more godly Ministers were, and that be∣cause he would not put away his wife, and conform to the Romish Superstition; however not giving over his care of his flock, he preach'd to them, and taught them privately and by stealth, till he was laid hold on, and clapt into Ipswich Jail, but he did not long Continue there, before he was removed to Norwich, under the power of the most cruel and persecuting Bishop of that See, who had no mercy. Thinking by Cruelty to prevail upon this good man, they used him when in their Clurches most inhumanely and Barbarously, for they chained him bolt upright against a post, so that he could not lye down, and so that his toes could but just touch the ground, and in this manner they kept him a long time, allowing him but one bit of Bread and 3 Spoonfulls of water to maintain his Life, for further torment, so that his Stomach was clung together for lack of food, and he could have eat his own flesh. Being thus tormen∣ted, and still continuing constant, to the admiration of his Tormentors, he endured with great patience extream pains, and almost intollerable torments. O worthy Constancy of the Martyr! and O pittiless
hearts of the Papists, whose hearts were made of Adamant and would not be moved to relen! When he had been thus tormented several days, he fell in∣to a slumber, and he beheld one standing by him, clad all in white, who said to him; Samuel, Samel, be of good cheer, take heart, for after this day thou shalt never be either hung.  thirsty. Which proved true, for from that time as he declared himself, he never felt the least hunger or thirst, which continued till he was Martyr'd which was not long after; and it was said by divers that beheld him burnt, that his Body, when in the flames, did shine as bright as new tryed Silver, to the great amazement of the beholders. He suffered on the 31th day of August Anno 1555. About the beginning of September following, one William Allyn a labouring man, but very upright and honest, & of an unblemish'd reputation, was Martyr'd at Walsingham, for denying to fall down before the Cross, and to follow in procession when he went to the Fire. By reason of his former upright coversa∣tion, he was suffer'd to go untyed, and when he came to suffer, and the chain was fastned about him, he shewed such constancy that he stood quietly without the lest noise or shrinking till he dyed. Roger Coo and Thomas Cob Martyrs. In the same Month of September, Roger Coo of Milford in Suffolk Sheerman, was brought into trouble, and brought before the Bishop, who had a long dispute with this poor man, among other his discourses, he asked him if he would not obey the Kings and Queens Laws? To which he replyed, as far as they were agreeable to the word of God he would. Whether they agree with the word of God, or not (said the Bishop) we are bound to obey them, if the King were an Infidel. Mark the large Conscience of this Popish Bishop. To which this honest Martyr repy'd If Shadrac Mesac and Abednego had so done, Nebchadnezzar had never confessed the living God. But in the end, after ma∣ny troubles and afflictions, he was Condemned, and
suffered at Yexford in Suffolk where being very aged, this blessed Martyr ended his days. The same month, was burnt in the Town of Thetford, one Tho∣mas Cob, a Butcher, being condemned to the fire by the Bishop of Norwich, his bloody Chancellor Dunnings. In the same Month also at Canterbury about the 6th day five persons were burnt in one fire, their names were, George Catmir, Robert Streater, Anthony Bur∣ward, George Brodbridge and James Tutt, Condemned by the Bishop of Dover upon the Aricles of the Sacrament. It will be too tedious to give you the relation of all that suffered, for now bonfires were made of mans flesh, by these Tyrannous Papists almost tho∣row out England, but fell more or less in those places, where the Bishops were more or less mer∣ciful or tyrannical, and we find the chief persecution and havock to be made in London, and the Counties about it, as Essex, Northfolk, Suffolk, Kent, Surry, and the like: yet in other places we find several Mar∣tyr'd: for about the midst of this month, Thomas Hayward and John Goreway were Condemned, and burnt at the Town of Litchfield. Robert Glover and Cornelius Bongey Martyrs. On the 20th of September, two blessed Martyrs, to wit, Robert Glover and Cornelius Bongey, were burnt at Coventry. Robert Glover was the Son of a Gen∣tleman of good estate, whose elder Brother John Glover lived in Coventry, and was one who professed the Gospel, for which the Bishop of that Dicss sent to apprehend him, but the Major being his friend, gave him timely notice of it, so that with another Brother, he made his escape, leaving Rbert in his Chamber who by reason of a long sickness was not able to go out of it, or scarce from his Bed, yet these Papistical Catch-poles, full of all manner of cruelty, not finding the prey they look'd for, violently haled this Martyr out of the House, and carried him be∣fore the Sheriffs, who knowing he was not the per∣son
nominated in the warrant, would have dismis∣sed him, but the Bishops Catch-poles, would, right or wrong, though in a very weak condition, have him before the Bishop which they did, who examin∣ing him, and finding that he also held the same opini∣ons with his Brother, and also learnedly disputed the same with the Bishop, being a Master of Arts of the University of Cambridge, he was sent to prison (mark the Bishops Charity) and put into a Cold place next the Dungeon in Lichfeild, without bed, only a pad of straw to lye on, which in his conditi∣on, was enough to have kill'd him; had not God in his great mercy supported him. From thence he was had to Coventry, where he was kept in prison strictly, without letting his relations come at him, and without Pen, Ink and Paper, or any Books, but a Latin Testament & Prayer book he had about him unknown to them: After he was condemned, and the writ for his burning came down, he found him∣self very heavy and lumpish, at which being trou∣bled, he complained to a friend, nmed Austin, fearing that God had forsaken him. His friend bid him to wait the Lord's pleasure which he did, fer∣vently praying that God would send him comfort, yet he Continued heavy, pensive, and without a∣lacrity, tho not distrusting, till the day he went to be burnt, and he was no sooner in sight of the Stake, but he was suddenly replenish'd with the power and Love of God, feeling such comfortable and hea∣venly Joyes, that he Clapt his hands together, cry∣ing out, O Austin Austin, He is come, he is come, with such joy as if he had escaped some eminent danger, rather than going to dye, such was the wonderful change of this good man. With him was Burned Cornelius Bongey a Capper of Coventry condemned by the same Bishop, and both patiently dye I together praysing the Lord. As for John and William the other Brothers, who fled, they both not long after dyed, the latter in Shropshire; the Former some where in the Country near Coventry, being often sought for; so that by lying in the woods he caught
cold and an Ague which kill'd him, he was privatly inter'd in a Church-yard, without Parson or Clark, but it coming to the Ears of the Bishops Chancellor he sent a Command to the Parson, to have him ta∣ken up and his body to be thrown into the high way, the Parson returned answer, that the body was by this time putrified and stunk, that none could come near it: he then sent word, that he should lye for a year, and that then his bones should be dug up and thrown into the high way, for horses to trample on them, and that then he would come and hallow the Church yard. Williams body lay two dayes and a night without burial, being cast out in the fields, till some Charitable people buryed it by night in a broom feild. several others they served after the same manner, and taking up the bones of others, not letting them rest quiet in their Graves. On the 9th of October following, were condemned, & on the 16th burnt at Ely, two more, the one named Rb. Pigot a painter, the other Wliam Wolsey both of Wishbich These two tho burnt together, were of different tempers, the former was meek, gentle and humble, saying often to his adversaries, he would yeild to them if they could convince him by the Scriptures, but he could not do any thing against his Conscience, the other was bold, stout, and vehe∣ment, detesting their doings, and shewing a great aversion of Spirit against them, knowing he should receive nothing from them but Cruelty, unless he would prove an Idolater like them, and forsake Christ and his Gospel. He was therefore much a∣fraid of his companion, seeing him so meek and humble, lest he should yield to their perswasions, but he held out with great Constancy. Wolsey had so great a desire to the Crown of Martyrdom, that being sick in prison, he was so afraid of dying, that he was extreamly troubled, being overjoyed when the day of his execution came, which he called his Glad day. When they were at the Stake, they sung 106 psalm, and so joyfully received their Martyr∣dom with great Constancy praysing God.
On the very same Day, Month, and year, in which the last mentioned two Martyrs were burnt, vi the 16th of Otober, 1555. suffer'd at Oxford thos two great pillars and lights of the Protestant Church and true profe sors of Christs holy Gospel, Doctor Nicholas Ridly Bishop of London, and the ever fa∣mous Mr Hugh Latimer, of whose disputing and Condemnation at Oxford, together with the Arch-Bishop of Canterburtes, Doctor Cranmer, their fellow sufferer, we have already spoken, but here we shall as briefly as we can, give you the History o their Lives and Martyrdom. The History of Bshop Ridly Martyr. Doctor Ridly, descended from a right worshipf stock in Northamptonshire, was brought up at Schoo and thence translated to the Universiy of Cambridg where he extreamly profited in his Studies, being one of great memory, acute wit, and profoun Judgment, so that he attained to great Learning and became famous becoming head of Pembroc Hll, where he commenced Doctor in Divinity. After this he travelled to Paris, and at his retur was made Chaplain to King Hen. 8th, and after∣wards promoted to the Bishoprick of Rchester, and from thence in King Edward's days, was translated to the see of London, where he Continued preaching and teaching the true and wholsom Doctrine of Christ to his flock, except hindred by extraordinary occasions; most Holy days & Sundays he preached some where or other in his Diocess, the people every where swarming after him like Bees, so sweet was his eloquence. But he not only taught diligently but also liv'd holily, teaching them as well by his Life as Doctrine. He was a straight upright man, both in Body and Mind, of an handsom mke, and good Complexion, gentle and meek to all men, and a lover of his Relations. He bore malice to none, and was apt to forgive Injuries. He loved and cherished Goodness where ever he found it, and hated evil tho in his nearest Kindred. He was very Conversant in prayer and meditation in his greatest
prosperity, for assoon as his Cloaths were on he prayed by his bed side on his Knees, for half an our, and thence he went to his Study, where he Continued till 9 of the Clock, and from thence he came to the Common prayers read in his Family before Dinner, and this he dayly Continued. His able was free but chast, all discourses there being grave and edifyint; after dinner he sometimes play∣ed at Chess, and unless business called him abroad, e went again to his Study till 5 of the clok, when e again went to prayers with his family. After supper he would recreate himself for an hours space, and then retire again to his Study; where he continued till 11 of the Clock at night, the usual time of his going to Bed, which he never did, with∣out praying to God on his Knees by his bedside as in the Morning. And that we may see the diffe∣erce between a good & an evil Bishop, or between this man and Bonner, and to shew the latters wick∣ed ingratitude, we shall mention how kind Bishop Ridly had been to Bonners Relations, cherishing his Mother and sister as if they had been his own For all the time he was at Fulham, he never would sit down, till he had sent for his Mother Bonner, (as he called her) being Bishop Bonners own Mother, and dwell∣ing in the Town, and when come, allways placed her at the upper end of the Table, let what persons of quality soever dine with him, and would make an excuse and say, that was his Mother Bonners place, and would seat her there, giving her the same re∣spect as if she had been his own mother, and that he had been born of her Body; the like he did by one Mrs. Bungie Bonners own Sister, whom he cherish∣ed as if she had been his own: yet the ungrateful Butcher Bonner, when he was restored to his Bishop∣rick, by Queen Mary, prov'd the bloody persecutor of this good Man to death, and not only of him, but dealt cruelly and unjustly by all his Relations, ex∣torting from them all that they had, and had not some stood between, he had taken away the Life of Bishop Ridleys own sisters husband: such difference
is there between a good Bishop according to the Gospel, and an evil persecuteing papistical Bishop according to the Popes Doctrine. The first occasion of this good Bishops conversion to the truth, was by reading of Bertrams book of the Sacrament, and by his conferring with Doctor Cranmer and Peter Martyr, who confirmed him, and in which he continued to his Death, and sealed with his blood. You have already heard how this Bishop together with Dr. Cranmer and Mr. Latimer, were condemned at Oxford, after their several learned disputes there, with the Papistical Doctors, where they were kept prisoners in several places, till they came to dye, Dr. Ridley and Mr. Latimer being burnt in one fire, as we shall relate; only first a word or two of the education of this good man Mr. Hugh Latimer. The History of Mr. Latimer Martyr This champion of Christs cause, was the Sun of Hugh Latimer of Thirkesson in the County of Leicester, an husbandman of good repute, being his only Son, he bred him at School, and being very prompt at 14 years of Age he was sent to the University of Cam∣bridg, where he gave himself to the Study of Divi∣ty. Being made a priest, he was a most zealous ob∣server of all the Popish superstition, believing if be were a Fryer he should never be damn'd, with other superstitious fantasies, observing servilly all the Po∣pish decrees, and in his blind zeal a great enemy to to the professors of the Gospel; thus he continued till it pleased God to convert him to himself, by the means of Mr. Bilney, whom we have spoken of. After he was converted he soon left his old manner of Life, and began publickly to own and preach the Gospel, for which he was for a time silenced by the Bishop of Ely, but getting a Licence,, he continued there for 3 years teaching and preaching both pub∣lickly and privately, and with that applause and po∣wer, that his very enemies could not but admire him, for the Bishop himself one day coming in and hear∣ing him, was compelled to commend him, wishing
that he had the lik Gi. At last he was cited before the Cardial, and accued by his Adversaries, by several Articles, about the worshiping of Saints, which be dery'd, and praying to the Virgin Mary; Purgatory, and several other Popish tenents, for which be endured great troubles and persecutions by the B shs of London and Canterbury, Tokesly and Wham, about the year 1531. And he had then hardly escaped their Clutches, but by the fa∣vour of e King, by the means of Dr. Butts the Kin Physition who rescued him from the hands of his enemies, and by the assistance of Cromwel, ad∣vanced him to the Bshoprick of Worcester. Where be continued m fw years, nstructing his Dio∣cess, like a good B shop▪ & a diligent and faithful Pa∣stor where he likewise endured several troubles, &c. persecuions, beg brought before the King by his Advrsries, who thought to have put him into the Tower, but the King perceiving the Integrity of this good man, his heart relented, and he dismissed Mr. Latme to the grief of his enemies, But being pres∣sed hard upon the 6 Articles, not being able to do any thing against his Conscience, he of his own vo∣luntary mind resigned up his Bishoprick; and when among his friends, putting off his Rochet, he thanked God he put off so heavy a burthen. How∣ever he could not be free from troubles, which his Popish Adversaries followed him with though he kept silence till the Reign of the blessed King Ed∣ward: All whose days be preached constantly twice every Sunday, and often before the King who was delighted with him, though he was very aged, being above threescore. He was a Prophet, and foretold the persecution that followed after, saying he knew he should be put to Death for preaching the Gospel and that Gardner was reserved in the Tower for that purpose, as it proved; For he was no sooner released by Queen Mary, but he sent a Pursivant for this good Bishop, who having notice of it, refused to fly, but had prepared himself for his Journy to Lon∣don against the Pursivant came who wondring at it,
he said to the Messenger my Friend, you are welcome to me, and I go as willingly with you to London, being called thither by my Prince to render an account of my Doctrine, as ever I was to go to any place in my Life, and doubt not as God has enabled me to preach his word to two excellent Princes, so he will inable me to witness the same unto the Third. After which the Pursivant departed, and left him to go by himself, or to have departed the land, which his enemies would have been glad of, fearing his stoutness and constancy should do them more hurt, than his Death would do them good, as no doubt it did. Coming up to London, and riding thorow Smithfield, he said smi∣lingly that Smithfield had long groaned for him, and now he was come. After he had been before the Council, he was sent to the Tower, where he was kept very strictly, & it being winter & very cold & frosty, was kept without any fire by which means the good old man was almost starved to Death with cold which made him say to his Keeper, that he should tell his Master the Lieutenant, that if he did not look better to him he should shortly deceive him, upon which the Lieutenant put more Guards upon him, & came to demand of him the reason of his words, Indeed said Mr. Latimer, you expect that I should be burnt, but except you let me have some fire I am like to deceive your expectation, and die of cold. Afterwards he was with Bishop Ridley and Arch∣bishop Cranmer had to Oxford, to dispute with the Popish Doctors there, as you have heard, and where they were all condemned to the fire, the best way they had of confuting them. But it was observed, that appearing before the Commissioners, that when all of them upon reading the Commission, at the naming of the Cardinal as Legate à Latere from his Holiness the Pope, they all put off their Caps, Bi∣shop Ridley who stood uncovered before, put on his Cap, as not owning the Popes supremacy; and being chid for so doing as a contempt to the court, he told them he honour'd them as the Q. Commissioners, but should never acknowledge the Popes suprema∣cy;
upon which they caused his Cp to be taken off his head, which he suffer'd. And when they came to have him dgraded, f er their superstitos manner, he would by no means yield to it, so that they were fain by meer force to put on the Popish Trinkets, and to perform their Ash ceremonies of degrada∣tion against his will be all the time vehemenly en∣veying against them, insomuch that some would have had him gagg'd, to have made him Silent. After they had thus degrded him, the night be∣fore he was to suffer, he washed his feet and Lgs ad shaved his Bard, and appeared to his Friends so unconcerned, that they had never sen him mer∣rier in all his life, inviting them to his marriage the next dy, and desired his Brother-in-law and his Sister to be there, and when his Brother ster'd to Wtch with him that nigh, e would not suffer him, telling him he intended to sleep as quietly that night as he ad done in any of his Life, which he did, and tht tho in the morning he should have a sharp breakfst yet he was sure of a pleasant and sweet supper. On the Northside of the Town, in the Dch over against ael Coledy, the place for their excu∣tion was appointed. Mr. Latmer all igh was ear∣nest with God in prayer, to whom he made 3 re∣quests, which were heard and granted: The t was, That as God had made him a preacher of his word, so that he would give him strength to seal it with his death, and with his hrs blood; and it so came to pass, that he shewed amiable constncy, and the fire opening his breast near his heart, the Blood was seen to gush out in such abundance, run∣ning down his body into the fire, as if all the Blood in his body had been gathered to that plce. The second request was, that God would restore the Gospel to England, which also came to pass: And the Third was, that he would perserve the Life of the princess Elizabeth, from the Malice of her soes, that she might be the glorious Instrument of the Gospels restauration: which also came to pass. As they passed thorow the streets, a world of people
crouding to see them, for fear of ny tumu the L. Williams was Commissionated to see the execution performed, Doctor Ridly went in a black Gown furred and faced with faines, such as he was wont to wear when a Bishop, and a Velvet Tipper furred about his neck, a Velvet Cap upon his head, and a corner Cap upon the same, going in his slppers and led between the Mayor and an Alderman. After him came Mr. Latimer, in a poor old worn out Bristow frize frock, with a Keirchief about his head, and on it an old burton'd Cap with a new shroud under his Coat, that hung down to his feet, being ready for the fire, so that many wept to see him so poorly clad, who lived so well, and had been a Bishop. When Dr. Ridly saw him coming after him, O are you there, said he: yes said Mr. Lati∣mer, I am coming after you as fast as I Can. When they both came to the stake Bishop Ridly holding up both his hands and looking towards heaven prayed, and seeing Mr. Latimer come, he ran to him and embraced him and Kissed him saying, Be of good heart Brother, for God will either asswage the fury of the Flame, or else stregthen us to abide it. With that he Kneeled down at the Stake Kissing it, and then fell to prayer, and Mr. Latimer behind him, both earnest∣ly calling upon God. After they arose, and talked a little while together, when Dr. Smith who in King Ed. days had renounced Popery, now em∣bracing it, preached to the people on this Text, Tho I give my Body to be burnt &c. inveighing very much against the opinions of the Lutherans: after he had done, both Dr. Ridly and Mr. Latimer had a desire to have reply'd to what he had said, but as soon as they began to open their mouths, some ran to them and stop'd them, telling them, unless they would recant, they should not be suffered to speak. Gods will be done, then said Bishop Ridly, but so long as I have breath in my body, I will never deny my Lord Christ, and his known truth. Then he said with a loud voyce: I Commit our cause to Al∣mighty God who will indifferently Judg all. Then
Mr. Latimer said, what is hid shall be revealed. They were then Commanded to make themselves ready, which they did, and were both Chained to the Stake, and Dr. Rilleys brother-in-law brought each a Bag of Gunpowder to tye about them, which they accepted of as sent them from God. Dr. Ridley stripped himself and gave away his things among his friends, there being great striving to have some remembrance from this good Man: but Mr. Latimer suffered himself to be strip'd by the officers, have∣ing nothing worth bestowing. Dr. Ridly being now at the stake prayed saying; holding up both his hands: O heavenly Father I give thee most hearty thanks, for that thou hast called me to be a professor of thee, even unto Death. I beseech the O Lord have mercy upon this Realm of England, and deliver the same from all her Enemies. Then he made a Request to the Lord Williams, to intreat the Queen to be good to several poor people, to whom he had let Leases, that they mought injoy them; which he promised to do, but Bishop Bonner like a wretch took them all from them. Then fire was put to them, when Mr. Latimer said be of good comfort Mr. Ridly, and play the Man, we shall this day light such a Candle by God's Grace in England, as I trust shall never be put out. Dr. Ridly when he saw the flame approach him, he cryed out, In manus tuas Domine commendo Spiritum meum: Domine recipe Spiritum meum, that is, Into thy hands O Lord I commend my Spirit: O Lord receive my Spirit, which latter part he often repeated in English, Mr. Latimer crying as vehe∣mently on the other side, O Father of Heaven re∣ceive my Soul. Who receiving the flame as it were imbracing it, soon dyed, with little or no Pain. But Bishop Ridly by reason of the fire being ill made, endured great torment, having all his lower parts burnt, before his upper were touched, so that he was heard to cry to them often, for the Lords sake to put the fire to him, I cannot burn, and then crying out, Lord have mercy upon me, he Continued a long time, and all one side of him remained untouch'd,
till ast t Gowecr k fir, after which he w  sen to move y more. And this was the eth s two oly Martyrs, & Blessed Bishops, for the Gospel of Christ's sake, by the hands of per∣secuting Papisis, and by the Religion hen established by Law. The Death of pseting Gardner. Wit in a wilt afr, the B oody persecuting Pl Steph Gd dyed, for that day, the last mentioned Mrtys were put to death, tho the Duke of No hfolk and other persons of Quality came to dine with him, he would not go to dn∣ner till 3 or 4 of the Clock, expecting to hear of the Death of these wmn, and asson as his man rig post had brght him word of it, he began to be merry, and sat down to dinner, but was em∣mediately struck with the hand of God, the first but e put nto his mouth, being carried from the Table, Continuing for 5 days in great Torments, nor being able to evacuate Natur any way, and his Tongue (that had so often blasphered God) swollen, and black, lolling out of his mouth till he dyed. Tho he wee dead yet persecution Continued and the Devil found Instruments to do his Work. For in the Month of November three flour Champi∣ons of Jesus Christ suffer'd in one Fire in Canterbury viz Jhn wbb Gentleman, George Roer and Gegory Parke, being all condemned to the fire by the Bi∣shop of Dover and Nicoas Harspfield. As they went to the plce of their Martyrdom they sung Psalms; two of them were will striken in years but Rper was a younger man, of a fresh Complexion, going all ith whi e Linnen and their gowns upon it▪ They all shewd great Constancy but Rper especi∣ally who coming to the place leped for Joy, and whn fie wa put to hm he streatched out both his Ams into e lmes standing like a Cross unme∣vable, and so continued never stirring them till they were both burnt ff and afterwards his Body to Ashes. Several dyed in Prison in the llards To∣wer through the b arity of the Papists, and were Cast into t he open fields for doggs and swine to
tear with command that none  hm, yet by night some were ound to be o Ctable as to fling Eart over thm. Archdeacon Philpot burnt in Smithfield. The next  mt W ought to the stke, by thse blood sk, w Mr J  Archdeacon f Winc▪ e w te  Gentema f  god fmly, in  brought up in N Cocag in Ox,  died th Civil ws, 6 or 7 yeas w  ∣ral Arts  ence, and sply  in which he profite, and more  Hebrew: He ws of a prean t,  and resolution, fervent in Religio, ree from  ∣tery and hypocrisie, and hated ssiulatin Fm Oxford he went to travel, to improve himself, go∣ing thorow Italy, and other parts where he incread his knowledg, and lost nor (as many do) good m n∣ners, and Love to God. Returning into England, he was made Arcdacon of Winchester in King Edwrds days, under the Bishop Dr. Poinet, who had suc∣ceeded Gardner. But fter that Queen Mary came in, and caused a Convocation of Prelates to Assem∣ble about Religion, this good man believing they might there speak freely, he manfully maintained the cause of the Gospel against all its Adversaries; for which he was afterwards pioned, and after a twelve months time or more, w s had to be ex∣amined before Bshop Gardner, and afterwards be∣fore Bonner, and oher Commissioners, which ex∣aminations, and his slid and learted Aners, may be read at large in Mr. Fox's Martyrologie. He was carried to the Bishop of Lond's Colehouse, where he was kpt, and sh wed the Stocks there, which were made for me and Leggs, and hands, to torment poor men with, to bring them to thir bent, and thorow excessive torment and hardship to make them ont against their Consciences. After this blessed Martyr had been convented before the Popish Bishops 14 times, and they saw they were neither abl to pervert or confute him, Bishop Bonner read the sentence of Death against
him, condemning him upon 3 Articles. The first, that he was fallen from the Ctholick Church. The 2d That he had most Blasphemously spoken against the Mass and called it Idolatry. 3d. That he had de∣nyed the real presence of Christs Body and blood to be in the Scrament. After which they pronoun∣ced him an Heretick. to whom Mr, Philpot reply'd I thank God that I am an Heretick out of your cursed Church, But I am none before God. God bless you and make you repent of your cursed doings, and let all men beware of your bloody Church. After this he was had to Newgate, where the cruel Keeper load∣ed him with Irons, till one of the Sheriffs being made acquainted with it, sent his Ring off his finger to the Jaylor, to take them off. He was not long there, but he had notice to prepare himself the next day to dye, which he Chearfully received, spending his time in prayers. In the Morning about 8 of the Clock, the Sheriffs came for him, who came to them with a Joyful counteuance, and was led to the place of execution in Smithfield; when he came to the stake he kneeled down saying these words, I will pay my vows in thee, O Smithfield; After he had kissed the stake, shall I disdain (said he) to suffer at this Stake, seeing my Redemer did not refuse to suffer a most vile Death upon the Cross for me? Then he said the 106, 107 and 108 Psalms, and when he had done praying, he gave mony to the Officers, and so was bound to the stake, and fire was soon set to him, and in the midst of those fiery flames he yielded his soul into the hands of Almigh∣ty God, like a Lamb without strugling. And this was the end of this holy man, on the 18th day of December 1555. Seaven Martyrs burnt together. The fires rather increase than diminish, and there is no satisfying these Popish Canibals, with the hu∣mane flesh of Dissenters; And which they long to be at again, but we hope God has more mercy to poor England, and hi flock there. We are now come to the year 1556, and they begin it with the burn∣ing
of no less than 7 Martyrs in one fire in Smithfield, on the 27th of January, their Names were Thomas Whittle a Priest, Bartlet Green a Gentleman, John Tudson an Artificer, Job. Went, Tho. Brown, Isabel Forster a wise, and Joan Wrren alias Lashford a maid. These, as they were burnt together so were they all con∣demned together. But we shall mention something of them particularly, though as briefly as we can, First Whittle being a Priest was turned out for own∣ing the Gospel, yet he would privately preach some∣times, but it was not long before he was brought before Bonner, who finding his Answers not suting his proud stomach he buffered the poor man about the face, head and neck, the marks, of this Bishops fists remaining in his flesh several days. He was then sent to the Colehouse, & put into the stocks & so tormen∣ted, that for ease he subscribed a Recantation, that was brought him; but after he had done it, and was released, he found such an Hell in his Conscience, that it gave him ten times more pains than ever he had suffered: so that he could have no peace till he had got the bill of Recantation out of their hands, though he knew Death would follow upon it. But he had no sooner freed himself of the snare, but he found peace and Joy within, and being condemned, went chearfully with the rest to the fire, and sealed his Religion with his blood. Mr. Bartles Green was the son of a Gentleman, and bred up in the Romish Religion in Oxford, where he was at length Converted by hearing the Divini∣ty Lectures of Peter Martyr, and though he was removed to the Temple to study the Laws, yet he would not leave his practice of reading and study∣ing the Scriptures, and of divinity, but dayly in∣creased therein, till it was at last known, and then he had many temptations to return to the Romish Religion, & great proffers made him of preferment, but God was pleased to keep him, that he abode in the faith and like a good Champion fought the good fight of Faith, and gave his Testimony to the Truth of the Gospel with his blood.
Tomas Brwn lived in the Parish of S. Bd in F eeier, being presented for not going to Mass, upon which Boer took him to task but this Lay∣man so handld the Bshop with his Answers, that seg he could not bt im with Reason or Scrip∣tu, the other being too hard for him, he fd t his sword of Cutting off the Heretick, and so condem∣ned him to the fire, with t rest, where he manfully suffered with them. J hdson ws n Apprentise in Londo, in the Parish of St.  Bt, in the Diocss  Lodon, he being comlie of for an Heretick, was sent to the Bshop, w exmined him upon the Articles of the Sacrament, which he owned, not being unwill∣ing to Confess his faith, for wich he was soon con∣dmned ad suffred with the rest. In like manner, upon the same Article, in not yeling to own the bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, John Wnt was also Condemned: He was a Shecr nan by trade, an of the Diocess of London, and stoutly owned his Faith, before the Bishop, who urgeing him often to recant and sve his Life, he replyed: That e nver would, but by Gods leave, he would stand sm and Con∣stant to what he had declared, being only the Truth, and no other answer would he give; upon which being condemned he was committed to the Sheriffs, and with no less Constancy than the rest suffered the fire. With these five men were condemned also two women, the first was wife unto John Fster Culer in Fleestreet, her name Isbel, who bing had before the Bishop for not coming to Mass, the freely acknowledged her Faith, and ws sundry times ex∣amined and urged by the Bishop to recant, and to return to the Catholick Church; to wh she replyed, that she would not by Gods grace goe from what she had professed, and that she acknow∣ledged her self of the Catholick, tho not Romish, Church, being never ut of it. And when he saw no perswasions would work her to deny the saith,
she was condemned and Constntly suffered with the rest. The last of these seven Mrtyrs, was Jon ash∣for being the d nger f on Robert Lshford a Cutler, who dying, her Mother married John Warren an Upholster of whose Maydom, and also her Mothers Elizabeth Warre we h spoken, and now the dughter was also broght to the Stake; she was a maid of about 20 years of Age, and was brought before Bonner that mercfal Butcher, be∣fore whom she Confessed her saith, nd told him she could not goe to Mass, nor acknowledg the bodily presence in the Sacrament, and h seeing he could by no Perswasions make her turn from her Religion, she was condemned and suffer'd in the same fe with the rest, leling her faith with her blood. And thus these 7 blessed Martyrs ended thei lives, in the flames, being sent to heaven in a firy Chariot. On the 31 of the same mth, and yeer, no less than 5 more (viz. 4 women and one man) suffered in one fire at Cany: Their names were Jhn Lmns, a young man, Ann Albight, Jon Cmore, Agis Sth a widdow, and Jn Sole a Married wife: all of them being condemned for the same things, denying the Popish Mass to be a Sacrament, but Idolatry, for which they all joyfully received their Martyrdom, with reat constancy; when they were in the midst of the Flames they all fll to singing of Psalms, to the reat amn  of their persecu∣tors, some of them weeing to b ho hem. Archbishop Cranmer Mar'd  Oxford. In pursuance  this  view of istical perse∣cutions, we shall e yo a very nct Relation of the Life and  of that st worthy and Religious Prelate, Dr. , Arhbishop of Can∣terbury. who suffered for the Gospel sake at Oxford, On the 21th of March . He was born in Not∣ghamshire of a very  mily, bred up care∣fully at School, and sent to the University of Cam∣bridg, where he profited wll in his Studies, and was at last made Fellow of  Colledg. When
he was Master of Arts and Fellow of the Colledg, he married a gentlemans daughter, and so lost his Fellowship, and was made thereupon Reader in Buckingham Colledg. But not long after, his wife dying in Childbed his old Companions desirous of his Company chose him again Fellow of the Col∣ledg, where he grew in great repute, and Commen∣ced Dr. in Divinity, and was commonly appointed one of those who were to examine such as were to take the Degrees of Batchelours or Doctors of Divinity; now he favouring the knowledg of the Scripture, often put by such whom he found igno∣rant in the History of the Scripture, which ex∣treamly enraged the Priests and Fryers, many of which Mass-mongers could not tell who was Sol∣mons Father, so little were they acquainted with the History of the Bible, studying other Authors to little purpose. This First begat the envy of the Papists against him. He was however chosen to be one of the Fellows of the Cardinal's new found∣ed Colledg at Oxford, which he refused, not with∣out the great indignation of that proud Prelate. But it hapned, that whilst he Continued at Cambridg, the plague raging in the University, that he re∣moved to a friends at Watham, and the King pas∣sing that way, some of his followers, as Gardner his secretary, and Fox his Almoner, lying at the same house with Dr. Cranmer, whom they knew, had accidentally some discourse of the Kings scru∣ple of Conscience, for marrying his Brother's wife and upon the Divorce he had sued for at Rome, and the proceedings thereupon, which was the general Discourse at that time. Dr. Cranmer without any design, declared his mind so to the purpose, telling them that he thought they did not goe the ready way to work, by prosecuting the Laws Ec∣lesiastical, when it had been more proper, to have  the point discoursed by Divines, and the au∣ority of the Word of God, in the Scripture, which ght be better done in England, and in the Univer∣, than at Rome. This being told to the King,
he caused Dr. Cranmer to be sent for to him to Lon∣don, to the Doctors great trouble, not desiring to interest himself in the business, but the King send∣ing his peremptory command, he was forced to o∣bey against his mind, and having by several discour∣ses well satisfied the King, he commanded him to write his mind fully on the point, and ordered the Earle of Wiltshire, to entertain him in his house at Durham place, and to let him have Books and what ever he wanted. Accordingly Doctor Cranmer wrot his mind fully, and delivered it to the King, in which he shewed by the Authority of the Scrip∣ture, and of general Councels, and ancient Writers, that the Bishop of Rome, had no such authority whereby he might dispence with the word of God and the Holy Scripture. This opened the Kings eyes, and rejoycingly he asked the Dr. if he durst stand by it, which he told him he would even to the Popes face at Rome, if he would be pleased to send him thither; whereupon the King sent the question to most of the Universities of Europe to be disputed on, and by most it was Concluded, that no such Matri∣mony could be Lawful by the Word of God or Authority of the H. Scripture. The King also sent Dr. Cranmer to dispute the point at Bonnonie, where the Pope then was, with his Ambassador the Earl of Wiltshire, and several other Doctors and learned men in company. When they came before that proud Antichristian Bishop, he sat inthroned in great State, under a Canopy, in Rich Robes and Sandals on his feet, which in a proud manner he held out to the Earl to Kiss, but he disdaining it, stood still, but his spaigniel by what instinct we know not, ran to his held up foot, and caught it in his mouth so rudely and unmannerly, that the old Bishop was somewhat afrghted, which made the English men smile. But after the first Complement, the Earl told him from his Master, that he had brought with him certain learned men, who were there ready to prove, that no man jure divino could or ought to marry his brothers wife, and that the
Bishp of Rome, could or ought no to dspence to the Contrary. Promse was made that the point should be discussed, but th old fox, after many put offs and delays, ut them away without aing so ingrareful a dispute. The Ebs dot, and the rest returned home, but Dr. Cmer by order went to Vienna to the Emperor, to answer what the Emperors learned Council could say against it, and he so satisfied the gret and Learned Cortus ∣grppa, with his reasons, that no publick Disputation would be suffered to be had; for which that learn∣ed mn fell into the Emperors displesu. Upon his return home having done to the King such sin∣gular service, and Archbishop Wrren then dying, the King made Dr. Cranmer Archbishop of C∣bu in his place. Here he got the Envy of all the Popish Prelates his enemies, for oppugning the Popes authority, but this good and worthy man shewed himself a Bishop, according to the Rule of St. Paul, answering in all respects that of the 1 Tim. 3. and that to Titus Chap. 1. A Bshop must be faultless, as be∣cometh a Minister of God. Nr Stubborn, nor gry, no drunkard, sighter, nor given to filthy lucre, but Cha∣ritable, a lover of Goodness, sober minded, righteous, temperate, cleaving to the truth, and able teach or in∣struct. All this he was and that in an high degree. He studied much, riseing at 5 of the Clock in the Morning, Continuing private till 9. from which time o Dnner, he spent in hearing suitors, or mind∣ing the King Affairs. I shall not goe about to give you the history of this good man's life, which was exmpla not of ll the troubles and persecuti∣ons he ined, from his Enemies, the chief being Gardner the Bishop of enchesie, in this Kings days, who alway, stood by him and well perceived the Integrity of the Archbishop, and the implacable hatred of his Enemies, so that in his dayes he was preserved in the King Favour, and afterwards he was dear to  Erd, and one who assisted in the Reformantio of Religion, writing his Faith in 5 books concerning the Sacrament. But assoon as
Queen Mary cme to the Crown, yo my be sure she would emember what he hd done as to e Mothers divorce, and was indeed his bitter Enemy, tho he was very, rdly brought to subscibe against her, for the Lady Ja. We have lready told you how he was had from the Tower, with Bishop Rley and Lmer to dispute at Oford, and the issue thereupon, that he ws condemned, and where be continud a prisonr about 3 years, they using all ways an mnner of means to cause him to re∣cant, and sining tht force and threatning would not do, they tryed flattery and fair means, but he had resisted all things, till a lst, resolved they were he should be burnt, upon which they degraded him, and tho he told, them, they being but Bishops, and e their superior, they could not rightfully degrade im their Archbishop, however, saying, as they were the Popes Delegates and Commissionated by the Queen, they had power to do it, and so they use all their topish Ceremonies: Bishop Bonner using him roughly and umnnerly: All this need∣ed not said the Archbishop, for I had flng off all this gear long agoe. Then being stript to his Jacot, they put on him a Bedles old gown, and a Towns∣mans Cap, and so delivered m over to the scu∣lar power. Yet for all this, being extream desirous to have him recant, they afresh set upon him, trying all ways to allure him, with promise of Life, and hopes of Reward, and so importunate they were night and day, never ceasing to solicit him that at last human frailty appeared, and he was overcome, and they got him to sign a Recantation against his Conscience. The Queen received it very gladly, but bearing Revenge and malice in her heart, she nevertheless resolved he should dye, and for that End, dispatched away Dr. Cole to preach at St. Maries at Oxford, and to declare his Recantation. Cranmer was now Miserable, being tormented in his Conscience for what he had done, and too late began to perceive the Malice of his Enemies, who thirsted for his Blood. Subtilly and treacherously
they dealt with him, not giving him any notice of his death, but still put him in hopes of his Life, urg∣ing him publickly to make his Recantation in St. Marys, for which end they had prepared a stage in the midst of the Church; to which place they led him, whilst Dr. Cole mounted the Pulpit, to make his Oration. The Lord Williams, and several o∣ther Commissioners, were there, with a multitude of people, thinking to hear the Recantation of the Archbishop. But things could not be so closely carried, tho they kept all people from the Arch∣bishop, that might inform him, but he began to sur∣mise they intended to put him to Death, and at last plainly perceived it, when they gave him mony to distribute to the poor, as he passed thorow the streets to the Church. It was a lamentable spectable to the people, to behold the Metropolitan and Primate of England. standing with his bald head, and re∣verend gray beard, in an old tattered gown, on the stage, exposed to the Contempt of all men; which sight made many weep, especially seeing the Tears running down his Cheeks and beard: As he thus stood by a pillar, he lifted up his eyes and hands toward heaven, and prayed privatly to himself, till Dr. Cole began his sermon, the first part being passed over, he turned his whole discourse upon the Archbishop, exhorting him to take his Death pa∣riently, and to glorifie God with his Conversion, from his heresie, since it had pleased. God to reclaim him, saying that before in his prosperity he was not worthy of Life, but now since he could not Live, he seemed unworthy of Death: But he promised that Masses and Dirges should be said in all the Churches in Oxford for the succor of his soul, if he continued to dye a good Catholick. Cranmer with extream grief of mind heard out his Sermon, showing by his Countenance the agitation of his spirit, and when he had done and that all men ex∣pected he should have read his recantation, he pulled out of his Bosom a writing, which he had prepared, and began to read, Good people I be∣seech
you all to pray to God for me, that he may forgive me my sins, and especially one which I ominate to you by and by: then Kneeling down e made a most excellent prayer which being not long I shall here recite. O Father of Heaven, O Son of God Redeemer of the World, O holy Ghost, three Persons and one God, have mercy upon me, most wretched Catif and miserable sinner. I have offended both against Heaven and Earth, more than my tongue can ex∣press. Whither then may I go, or whither shall I fly? To Heaven I may be ashamed to lift up mine eyes, and in Earth I find no place of refuge or Scu∣cor. To thee therefore O Lord do I run, to thee do I humble my self, saying, O Lord my God, my sins are great, yet have mercy upon me for thy great mercy. The great mystery that God be∣came Man was not wrought for little or few offen∣ces. Thou didst not give thy Son (O Heavenly Father) unto death for small sins only, but for all the greatest sins in the world, so that the sinner return to thee with his whole heart, as I do here at this present. Wherefore have mercy on me O God, whose property is always to have Mercy. Have mercy upon me O Lord for thy great mercy. I crave nothing for mine own merits, bt for thy names sake, that it may be hallowed thereby, and for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's sake. And now therefore our Father, which art in Heaven hallowed be thy name &c. Then riseing up he desired he might exhort the people, before his death, that God might be glorified and they edified. He then began an excellent Exhortation, pressing them to brotherly Love, and shewing the Vanity of the world, exhorting to Alms, and obedience to the Queen, with many other excellent things, and at last He made a short Confession of his Faith, repeating the Articles of the Creed, continu∣ing: I believe every Article of the Catholick Faith, every word and sentence taught by our Saviour Jesus Christ, his Apostles and Prophets, in the new
and old Testament, an now (said he) I am come to the great thing th t so much troublth my Con∣science, more than ny oing tht ever I did or said in my whole Late, and that is the sttig my hand to a writing C ntrary to Truth, which I now renounce, being done only for fear of Death, and for as much as my hand offended against my heart, this my hand shall be first of all punishd for it, and asson as I can coe to the fire shall be first burt. As for the Pope, I refus him, as Cris Emy and Antichrist, with all his f s Dctrin. As for the Sacrament I believe is as I have taugh it in my Book, against the Bishp of Wincester, which shall stand at the last dy, before the Judgment of God, where the Papisti Doctrine Contrary thereto shll be never able to appear. All the people being amazed, looked one up another and all the Priests and Fryers were in an uprore, seeing their great expectation frustrated, and Cole bellowed from the Pulpit stop the Heretick: Mouth, pull him down, pull him down. Upon which the rabble of Priests and Fryers laid hands on Cranme, and pull'd him off the stage, and all things being prepared for his burning, in the same place where the Martyrs, Rey and Latmer suffered, they ha∣led and drgged him thither, to which place all the coany rn, yelping and hauling at the good Archbishp. When he came to the place he kneeled down, making but short prayer, seeing them so ager to have his Life, and putting off his garments to his shrt, which hung down to his seer, which were re, as likewise his head, being thus stript, they fsned the holy Martyr to the Stake, with a chain, and after several of them ad tryed in vain to move him to recant, and saw that he was sted∣fast, they caused fire to be set to him, into which assoon as i began to burn, he thrust his right hand, which had signed the Recantation which he hld therein stedfastly and unmoved, (seing that once therewith being of a stme be wipe his face) that all men might see his hand was burned before his
body was touched. His body aboad the burning and torment of the Flame with such Constancy and stedfastness, that he was not seen to stir or move any more than the stake, to which he was fastned, shew∣ing to their amazement a noble Constancy of mind, and heroick fortitude. His eyes were seen to be lifted up towards Heaven, and he was heard often∣times to repeat, whilst his hand was burning, O unworthy right hand: at last in the greatest of the flame, he gave up the Ghost, useing these his last words, O Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. This was the end of this blessed Martyr, Thomas Cranmer Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, who suffered about the middle of the Reign of the Cruel Queen Mary. Two women burnt at Ipswich. About the same time suffered in the Town of Ipswich in Suffolk two simple women, he one named Ages Potten the other Joan Trunchfeild the wife of a Shoemaker, both for that they denied the bodyly presence of Christ in the Sacrament: they both dyed with wonderful Constancy, exhorting the people at their death, today hold on and believe the word of God, and to despise the ordinances of the Romish Antichrist, and after fire was set to them; they stood holding up their hands, and call∣ing on the name of God in the midst of the flames, till they dyed. In the same Month of march on the 24th day, three men were burnt in one fire without Salisbury, in Wiltshire, for the same cause as other Martyrs be∣fore them, for denying the Popes Supremacy, Purga∣tory, and that murthering Article of the bodily presence; their names were John Mandrel an hus∣bandman who had long professed the truth and in King Henry 8. days had done penance. William Coberly a Taylor, and John Spicer a free-mason, all 3 Companions both before, and at their Deaths. They died with great fortitude, and when the Sheriff offered them pardon if they would turn, one of them replyed, not for all Salisbury. And John Spicer said O Mr. Sheriff must you be the Butcher
of these Papists, and be made guilty of Shedding innocent blood before the Lord, Coberly was longer in burning than the other, and when his Arms were burnt off, and his body hung over the chain black and shrunk up, so that all thought he had been dead, he suddenly rose up again, and then fell down and dyed. Six men Martyred in Smithfeild. About the 23d of April 1556. were burnt in one fire in Smithfield, no less than 6 blessed Martyrs, two of them being Ministers, viz Robert Drakes Minister of Tundersley in Essex, and William Tymes, Curate of Hookley in the same County, This Tymes, upon his examination before Bonner, one of his Arti∣cles being for denying the Popes Supremacy, told him that he owned no more than what his Lordship had maintained in print. Where have I written any thing against the Church of Rome? said the Bi∣shop angrily. In your Preface replyed Tymes to the Chancellors Book, Stephen Gardner, which he wrot purposely against the authority of the Romish Church, where also you in your preface inveigh against the Bishop of Rome, reproving his Tyranny and falshood, calling his power false and pretended only, and this is still extant. This much abashed the Bishop, and made him speak, more gently afterwards, saying, it was done in perilous times, and when it was death to have declared otherways, but that the Chancellour and himself had since own∣ed their errors, as he would now have him to do, but Mr. Tymes told him that would be against his Conscience, and he would never do it, for what he himself had wrote against the Popes Supremacy was according to the Scriptures, and he would prove it; upon which he entred on his proofs & was much too hard for them all in the Scriptures, but at last he was condemned, with the rest whose names were Richard Spurge Sheerman, Thomas Spurge Fuller, John Cavel Weaver, and George Ambrose Fuller, all of Essex, and of the Diocess of London, and so condemned by Bonner, and suffered toge∣ther
in one Fire, in Smithfeild, with the true Con∣stancy of other holy and blessed Martyrs. In the same Month of April, at Rochester suffered John Harpool and Joan Bench in one fire. Also in the same month suffered at Cambridg, John Hullier a Minister, brought up at Eaton School, and after∣wards Scholar and Conduct in Kings Colledg in Cambridge, where he at last suffered, being condemn∣ed by the Bishop of Ely, for preaching the truth, and owning the Gospel, and disavowing their Idolatry and Superstition. Essex was fruitful in Martyrs, & the fires were so frequent, that we can but just name them to you. On the 28th of April, Six were burnt together at Colchester, being condemned to the fire by the Bishop of London, or rather Butcher of London, Bonner, chearfully ending their lives, to the glory of God's name, and the great incouragement of others. This bloody Bonner had mercy on none, all went to pot who came under his Clutches, one Hugh Lavercock a Painter by trade, of the Parish of Bar∣kin 68 years of Age, and a Cripple, and John Apprice a poor blind man, were both accused to the Bishop, who sent for them to examination, which was a∣bout the Sacrament, the bodily presence of Christ, in the same, which they denyed, and Lavercock told him that their Doctrine was contrary to the Scrip∣tures. and the Blind Man said, you are not of the Catholick Church, for ye make Laws to Kill men, and then make the Queen your Hangman. This so enraged the Bishop that he immediatly caused the definitive sentence of excommunication to be pronounced against them, and so delivered them over to the se∣cular power to be burnt, they were carryed from the Bishop to Newgate, and on the 15. of May 1556. were both drawn thorow London to Stratford le Bow: when they were come to the stake, after they had put the Chain about them, the Cripple flung away his Crutch merrily saying to the blind man his fellow sufferer, Be of good cheer Brother, for my Lord of London is our good Physitian, he will shortly
heal us both, thee of thy blindness, and me of my lame∣nest. And so patiently, fire being put to them; these two poor men but holy Martyrs, suffered in the fire and praising God, yeilded up their Souls into his hands, whose name to the end they Con∣stantly confessed. The very next day after these suffered, being the 16th of May, 3 women were Martyred in Smithfield, a fourth was condemned with them, by Bonner, whose name was Margeret Ellis, but she dyed in New∣gate before the day of their execution: the names of the other 3 were Katherin Hut a widdow Joan Hornes a maid and Elisabeth Thackvel. These being examined upon several Articles but especially that of the Sacrament which chiefly touched their Lives, Katherine Hat told the Bishop that she deny'd it to be God, because it was a dumb God, and made with mens hands, and Joan Horns said, If you can make your god bleed or shew any Condition of a living Body, I will believe you, and not else: And as for the Romish See, I forsake all its abominations, from which good Lord deliver us. Those 3 innocent women were condemned for the cause of the Gospel, had to Smith∣field, and willingly gave their Bodyes to be burnt, dying more joyfully in the flames, than many in their beds: such a Lord is God, glorious and won∣derfull in all his Saints. A blind Boy and a Bricklayer burnt at Gloucester. In the same month of May at Gloucester, suffered one Thomas Croker a Bricklayer; and a blind boy named Thomas Drowrie, who had been much con∣firmed in the Faith by Bishop Hooper. This boy being examined upon the Article of the Sacrament, by Dr. Williams the Bishops Chancellor, and being asked if he believed the bodyly presence in the Sa∣crament, the boy answered boldly no, he did not believe it Then being asked who taught him that heresie, That did you (said the boy) in the Pulpit of this Church, where you told us in your Sermon: That the Sacrament was to be received Spiritually by Faith, and not Carnally and really as the Papists have
heretofore taught. At this the Dr. was vext, but says he to the Boy, do you as I have done, repent, and you shall live or else be burnt, Tho you (said the Boy) can so easily dispense with your self, and mock God, the World and your Conscience, yet I can't, nor will do so. Then said the Chancellor, I will read the sen∣tence against thee. Gods will be done reply'd the blind boy. And so he was condemned with the other before mentioned, and delivered over to the secular power, both of them in one fire, Constantly and Joyfully yeilding their souls into the hands of the Lord Jesus. On the 21st of the same month of May, three men were burnt together at Beckles in Suffolk, their names were Thomas Spicer a Labourer, John Denny, and Edmond Pool, whom they were so hasty to put to Death, that they burnt them before the writ de Comburendo came from London. When they were at the stake they prayed, and recited the belief and when they came to the Article of belief, in the Catholick Church, a Knight that was by said that is well, 'tis the best word you have said yet. To which Pool answered, Tho we believe in the Ca∣tholick Church, we do not believe in the Romish Church. Then fire being put to them they praised God in the midst of the flames, with such an audi∣ble voyce, that it seem'd wonderful to all those who stood by and heard them. But some were so wicked, that they bid the people to fling faggots at them, to stop their mouths, which however none would do. Several other Martyrs, and 13 in one fire. In the next Month of June, on the 6th day 4 more were burnt in Lewis in Sussex, after long Imprison∣ment; their names were Tho. Harland a Carpenter, John Oswald an Husbandman, Thomas Avington a Turner, and Thomas Read. In the same month in the same Town, was burned Thomas Wood a Mini∣ster, and Thomas Mills a lay man. Several dyed in prisons which we do not mention. We shall now mention a large malfire of humane
flesh no less than 11 men and two women burnt together at Stratford on Bow, condemned by Bon∣ner, three more were condemned, but reprieved by the Cardinal, these on the 27th of June were drawn from Newgate to the place aforesaid, most of them being of Essex; their names were Henry Adlington a Sawyer, Lawrence Parnam a Smith, Henry Wye a Brewer, William Hallywell a Smith, Thomas Bowyer a Weaver, George Searles a Taylor, Edmund Hurst a Labourer, Lyon Cawch a Broker. Ralf Jackson a serving man, John Derifal a Labou∣rer, John Routh a Labourer, Elizabeth Pepper the wife of a weaver, and Agnes George the wife of an husbandman, whose husband was afterwards con∣demned, but saved by the Death of the Queen. When they were brought to the place, they were divided, and put a while apart into two several Rooms, then the Sheriff going to one company told them, their companions had recanted, and had saved their Lives, advising them to do the like, but they an∣swered, That their Faith was not builded on man, but on Christ Crucified: The Sheriff finding no good to be done with them, he went to the other com∣pany, telling them the same lye, to whom they answered, as their brethren had done, that their Faith was not built on man, but on Christ, and his Word, &c. These 11 men were tied to 3 stakes, and the women were put in amongst them loose; Elizabeth Pepper being at the same time, 11 weeks gone with child. These poor Creatures shewing great love one to another, and such Constancy in their Martyrdom for the sake of their Saviour, that all the beholders marvailed very much, thus resigned their Souls and Bodys into the Hand of their Creator. Roger Bernard and others Martyr'd at Norwich. No less valiantly on the 30th of June, suffered the pains of Martyrdom by fire, at St. Edmunds-bury, Roger Bernard a Labourer, Adam Foster an husband∣man, and Robert Lawson a Weaver, condemned by the Bishop of Norwich. These ended their Lives
most triumphantly, shewing their Constancy in their Faith, and making a most Joyful, end, to the praise of God, and incouragment of others in the same Quarrel. Julius Palmer Martyred at Newberry. In July following, the 16th day, suffered that memorable Martyr, Mr. Julius Palmer, with two others in one fire at Newberry, whose History I shall briefly relace. This Julius was born in Coventry of good parentage, his father being an Upholster, and a Merchant, and had been Mayor of that City, he was bred at School, and sent to Oxford, where he profited much in the tongues, and Philosophy, and many times supplyed the place of the Gr. Reader in Magdalin Colledg, where he became Batchellor of Art, and became at last Fellow of the said Colledg, when he began to study divinity: He was of a very civil behaviour, courteous, pleasant, and chearful, without affectation, and of great simplicity, not knowing how to dissemble, an indefatigable Stu∣dent, riseing at 4 of the clock every morning to his Studies, and sitting up till 11 at night, so that in a little time he profited much. He was admitted to the office of a Reader in Logick, and thus Con∣tinued a stiff and zealous Papist, till the Reforma∣tion, and then owned the cause of the Pope so far, that he was expelled the Colledg, and was fain to go and teach School privatly, Continuing thus all the Time of King Edward, and when Papistry was restored by Queen Mary, he was also restored to his fellowship in the Colledg, having for his Religion undergone much hardship: yet see the providence of God, to bring this man home to him∣self, for it was the blood of the Martyrs, which is the seed of the Church, and their Constant suffer∣ings, which made him first to begin to look into the Doctrine they professed, and it so pleased God to open his eyes, that in a short time he began to see clearly the Superstition and Idolatry of the Popish Church, and being one who knew not how to dis∣semble against his Conscience, he was soon taken
notice of, and seeing they began to have n evi eye upon him, lest they should expel him the Colledg, he voluntarily left it. The cursing with excom∣munication, burnng, hanging, drowning, racking Scourging, and persecuting men for Religion made him see and know it could not be of Christ, who Commands the quite Contrary, and this made him cry out when he heard of the Constant Death of Bishop Hooper, Ridley, Latimer, and others: O Raging Cruelty! O Tragical Tyranny and more than Barbarous. Being about to leave the University, growing dayly more fervent in the Truth, one of his intimate Friends asked him, whither he would go, to whom he Answered, I know not, But the Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. Let God do as he please I will commit my self to him and to the wide World. And being advised by another to be∣ware of the fire, for it was no easy matter to burn he reply'd, I have yet escaped it, but I verily believe it will be my end, at last, welcome be it by the grace of God, it will be easie to be suffered, by the grace of God. He for some time kept School at Reading in Bark∣shire, but after a time being found to be a Gospeller he was forced to fly thence, and repairing to his own Mother, who was a Papist, and had heard of his turning from their Religion, hoping to obtain some monys due to him by his fathers will, and asking her blessing as he used to do, the unnatural Mother Cry'd out, thou shalt have Christs Curse and mine, where ever thou goest; being troubled at this heavy greeting, & amazed for a time, he at last said, ah! Mother you may give me your curse, which God Knows I never deserv'd, but God's Curse you Cannot give me for, he hath already blessed me. With that she reviled him, giving him most bitter taunts, calling him Renegade, and one who had embraced a new upstart Doctrine. It is not new (said he) but as old as Christ and his Apostles; with that she charged him to go out of her sight and never see her after∣wards, flinging to him a piece of Gold, and so leaving him to his sorrows. But being sought after,
it was not long e're he was taken, and cast into pri∣son, in a Dungeon prepared for thieves and Mur∣therers, and there left for a time hanging by the hands and feet in a pair of Stocks so high, that no part of his Body could touch the Ground: in this Cave or Dungeon he remained 10 days, under the Tyranny of an unmerciful Keeper. After this he was several times examined before the Mayor of Reading, and before the Bishop of Sarums Chancel∣lor; from Reading he was had to Newberry, and clapt in the Jail there, where he found two others, name∣ly John Guin and Thomas Askin, poor simple men, who were Martyred with him. Here he had his last examination, and was condemned with the two aforesaid Persons by Dr. Jeffrey. Many endea∣vours were try'd to make him recant, and great proffers of preferments to tempt him, but nothing would move him, and he also confirmed his fellow sufferers in their Faith: Happy are you when men re∣vile you; and persecute you for Righteousness sake. Re∣joyce and be glad for great is your reward in Heaven. Fear not them that can kill the Body, but are not able to touch the soul. God is faithful, & will not let us be tempted further than we can bear. We shall not end our lives but make a change only for a better life. With the like comfortable speeches he cheared his fellow Martyrs, and caused tears to fall from others who heard him. When they came to the place of execution, they fell all 3 on their faces, and prayed, and Mr. Paimer recited aloud the 31 Psalm: After that two Popish Priests urged him to recant, but he cry'd to them away, away, tempt me no longer: Away I say from me all yee that work In∣iquity, for the Lord hath heard the voyce of my Tears. Forthwith they stripped themselves, went to the stake, Kissed it, and were bound to it, then Mr. Pal∣mer said: Good people pray for us that we may per∣severe to the end. And for Christ's sake beware of Popish teachers for they deceive you, with that one of the Of∣ficers threw a faggot at him, and hit him on the face that all the blood ran down. When the
fire was kindled, and begun to take hold of their Bodys, they lifted up their hands towards Heaven, and quietly and chearfully as if they felt no pain, cry'd, Lord Jesus Strengthen us: Lord Jesus assist us. Lord Jesus receive our Souls. And thus they all end∣ed their Lives without any strugling, only Julius when that all people thought him dead, being al∣most burnt to pieces, he was on a sudden seen, as if awaked out of a sleep, to move his tongue and Jaws, and heard to pronounce softly the name of Jesus, and so being burnt to Ashes yeilded to God his soul. Three burnt in Garnsey, with a child which came out of the Mothers belly. I did not intend to mention any out of England that were Martyr'd, but these in Garnsey being our Kings subjects, and the Example profoundly Barba∣rous, I could not refrain mentioning it. On the 18th of July this year, Katherin Cawches, Guillemine Gilbert her daughter, and Perotine Massey another daughter, were burnt together in one fire for the Gospel, the Mother in the midst between her two daughters, and the youngest Perotine being big with Child, the fire seising on the belly of the Martyr, it burst on a sud∣den, and the Child sprung out alive thorow the flames, being a fine boy, and was taken and lay'd on the grass, but the wicked bayliff caused it to be flung into the fire again, and to be burnt with the Mother for an Heretick. So that this Infant was baptised in its own blood, was born, and dy'd a Martyr. About the same time 3 more were burnt at Green∣stead in Sussex, 2 men and 1 woman, their names were Thomas Dungate, John Foreman, and Mother Tree. Not long before a poor Simple man named Thomas Moor was burnt at Leicester, for saying he believed his Maker to be in Heaven, and not on the Altar. On the 22d of August following Joan Waste a blind wo∣man suffered in Darby. And on the 8th of September following Edward Sharp, an aged and devout person was Martyrd at Bristow: And on 25th another who was a Carpenter suffered, in the same place. On the 24th of the said September 4 more received Martyr∣dom
at Mayfield in Sussex, two of their names were John Hart, Thomas Ravensdale, the one was a Shoe∣maker, the other a Currier. Also one John Horn and a woman about the same time were burnt at Wtten Ʋnder-Hedge in Glocestershire. On the 11th of October a Shoo-maker suffered at Northampton. With several others who dyed in prisons in several places that are not mentioned; Five were starv'd to Death, in November in Canterbury Castle, who were condemned to be burnt. Their names were John Clark, Dunsten Chittenden, William Forster, Alice Po∣thins, and John Arches. Dear Protestant Reader, I doubt thou art almost tyred with the Continuance of these tragical Histo∣ries, I shall therefore hast to a conclusion, God not permitting any long Reign to this bloody persecuting Queen. We are now come the year 1557, in the be∣ginning of which Cardinal Pool visits the University of Cambridg, where he causes on the 9th of Jan. the bones of the famous Bucer and Paulus Phagius, pro∣fessors of the Gospel, to be taken up, and with a so∣lemn procession to be publickly burnt, with all their Books. Thus devillishly mallicious are these Pa∣pists, that they will not let men lye in quiet in their Graves. At Oxford this Cardinal in his visitation did the like by Peter Martyrs wife, whose bones he caused to be taken up and despitefully buried in a dunghill. About the 15th of this Month of January 6 men were burned at Canterbury, in one fire, their names were Kemp, Waterer, Powling, Lowick, Hudson, and Hai. Two more, Stephens and Philpot, at Wye, and on the 16th one Final and Bradbridg were burnt together at Ashford, in the same county. In February following, as if the Magistrates and Bishops were slack in estroying Gods people, whom they called Hereticks, a new bloody Commission is sent abroad, and new Inquisitors are made to torment and burn the professors of the Gospel. And not long after out of Essex, that fruitful place of holy Martyrs, were sent to London from Colchester no less than 22 persons at one time, men and women, all bound with ropes
one to another and so guarded up to London after a strange manner. On the 12th of April 5 were burn∣ed in Smithfield, whose names were Thomas Loseby, Henry Ramsey, Thomas Thirtel, Margaret Hide, and Agnes Stanly. In May following 3 others viz Mo∣rant, Gratwait, and King, were burnt in Southwark. On June the 18th 5 women and 2 men were burnt at Maidstone in Kent, their names were Joan Brad∣bridg, Joan Mannings, Elizabeth a blind maid, Wal∣ter Appleby, and Petronel his wife, Edmund Allin, and Katherine his wife. On the 30th of the same month were burnt at Canterbury 3 men and 4 wo∣men. I shall but name them, John Fishcock, Nicholas White, Nicholas Pardo, Barbara Final, a Widdow, the wife or Widdow of Bradbride formerly men∣tioned and Mariyt'd, the wife of one Wilson, and the wife of Benden: All these suffered for the Gos∣pel. The horrible usage of these poor Creatures in the Bishops Prison is unspeakable, where they lay upon straw, and had but 3 farthings a day apiece, allowed them; a halfpeny for Bread, and a farthing for bear, on which God enabled them to Live. On the 22th of June no less than ten Martyrs suffered together in one fire at Lewis in Sussex, their names were Richard Woodman, George Stevens, W. Main∣nard, Alexander Hosman his servant, Thomasin Wood his maid, Margry Morris, James Morris, her Son, Deis Burgis The wife of Ashden, and of Groves. On the 13th of July Simon Miller and Elizabeth Cooper were burnt at Norwich. on the 2d of August suffer∣ed no less than ten Martyrs at Colchester, Six in the Morning, & 4 in the afternoon. Their names were Bongeor. Purcas, Benold, Agnis Silverside, Helen E∣rine, Eliz. Folks In the afternoon were burnt. W. Munt and Alice his wife, Rse Allin their daugh∣ter, and John Johnson. When Munt and his wife were taken, the woman being sick in bed, desired her daughter to fetch her some drink, and as she was passing thorow the room one Tyrril, of the race of that Tyrril who Murthered King Edward the 5th met her, and bid her to give her Father and
Mother good Counsel, to whom the maid repyled; Sir, they have a better instructor than I am; For the holy Ghost doth reach them, who will not suffer them to err. Thou naughty huswise (said Tyrril) art thou of that mind? 'tis time to look to such Hereticks. That which you call heresie (replyed Rose) is the true Worship of the living God. Then Gossip (said this persecutor) I per∣ceive you will burn for company with the rest; not for companies sake, but for Christ's sake, who I hope in his Mercy will enable me to bear it, if I am com∣pelled thereto, returned the Maid to him again; with that this cruel Tyrril, took the candle which she had in her hand burning, and held the back of her hand over it, burning, it till the very sinews crackt and burst in two. And seeing the Maid did not cry out, why thou whore said he, wilt not thou cry? She reply'd he had more reason to cry than she, for she thanked God, she had no cause but to rejoyce. Thou young, strong, beastly whore, said he, get thee: gone: When she came to her Mother, and shewed her her Martyr'd hand, her Mother asked her how she could indure it; to whom she replyed, that at first it was some little pain to her, but the more it burnt, the less she felt, or well near none at all. The like cruelty you heard of Bonner, who also served a blind harper after the same manner, with a burn∣ing coal. Likewise one George Eayles a Taylor by pro∣fession, but privately preached the Gospel to the great Comfort of many good people, taking great pains therein drinking only water, and earing lit∣tle, lying in the woods and Fields, which secured him for some years, but at last he was taken, and had to London and there condemned for a traytor, for meeting in traytorous companies or Conventi∣cles, and stirring them up against the Q. though no∣thing of that nature could be prov'd against him, yet he was condemned and executed after a barbarous manner, at Chelmsford in Essex. On the 5th of Au∣gust suffered Rich, Crashsield at Norwich. About the same time a converted Fryer & a Woman who was
Sister to the late mentioned George Eagles were burnt at Rochester. Martyr'd at Lichfield Mrs. Joyce Lewis. About the same time suffered Mrs. Joyce Lewis, she was a Gentleman's daughter, tenderly bred up all her Life, and Marryed to Mr. Tho. Lewis of Manchester. who was her 2d Husband. She had been all her Life time a Papist, and so continued till the begining of Queen Maries reign, and that she saw such Cruelties exercised against the Gospellers, and especially upon the burning of that learned Martyr, Mr. Lawrence Saunders, whom we have mentioned, she began to enquire more narrowly into the matter, and more especially conversed often with Mr. John Glover, liv∣ing near him in Coventry, who taught her and in∣structed her in the Truth, so that she being through∣ly convinced of the Popish errors, and their damna∣ble Doctrins, she refrained from going to Mass, but her Husband one day forcing her to go to Church against her will, when the Priest went to sprinkle her with holy Water, she turn'd her back to him, upon which she was next day cited to come before the Bishop; but her Husband being enraged at the fellow who brought it, set his dagger to his throat, and made him eat the citation, and drink an health to it afterwards; but upon this, they were both had before the Bishop; the Husband submitted himself, & was bound in a recognisance of 100 l. to bring his Wife, after a months time given her to Considers which the unatural husband did, rather than to un∣dergo any farther trouble, and the poor Gentle∣woman being Constant, and rather resolving to suffer, than to deny the Truth, was committed to so nasty and stinking a prison, that her maid who went with her, not being able to endure it swoun∣ded; but God gave her strength, and tho she had many Temptations, yet by the power and assistance of God's holy Spirit, she overcame them all, she was several times had before the Bishop, who reasoned with her, endeavouring to make her come to Mass, but she still answered him, it was against her Con∣science,
and not Commanded in the Word of God, for if he could shew them there, she would with all her heart receive, esteem and believe them. To which this Popish Bishop replyed: If thou wilt believe no more than is in the Scripture, concern∣ing matters of Religion, thou art in a damnable case. Upon which she being somewhat amazed, told him his words savoured of ungodliness. She was then condemned, but after her condemnation, she was kept a whole year, ere she was burnt, but at last seeing they could not pervert her, they pro∣cured the burning writ, and she having notice of it received the news very chearfully, spending the night before her Martyrdom in prayers, receiving great Consolation and Joy in her Spirit, in that God had accounted her worthy to suffer for his sake; The next morning, refusing the Priest, they had sent to take her confession, she went to the stake prepar∣ed for her a Leichfield, being accompanied with se∣veral of her friends, & several of her Neighbours & acquaintance, she being beloved, and many of them drank with her at the stake, all which were noted by the Fryers, and made for so doing, to undergo publick pennance. When she was tyed with the chain, she shewed such chearfulness and patience, that all were amazed and most of them could not abstain from weeping, who beheld her. When the fire was set to her, she neither struggl'd or stir'd, on∣ly lifting up her hands towards heaven, she was quickly dead: the under Sheriff being her Friend, had prepared such stuff, as soon dispatch'd her. And this was the end of this good and blessed Gen∣tle woman and Martyr. Four burnt at London, 2 Women at Colchester, &c. On the 17th of September 1557 Ralf Allerton, James Austoe, Margery Austoe his wife, and Richard Roth, suffered all in one fire, at Islington; on the same day and year were burnt at Colchester in one fire, two godly women, Agnes Bongeer and Marga∣ret Thurston. About the same time one John Noys
a Shoe maker of Laxfield in the County of Suffolk was burnt. On the 23d of September the same year Cicilly Ormes a poor simple woman was burnt at Norwich, for professing the Gospel. At her Death she utterly renounced Popery, and admonished people to beware of its Idolatry: When she came to the stake, she Kissed it, and embracing it, she said, welcome thou Cross of Christ, being bound to it, and fire being set to her, she said: My soul doth Magnifie the Lord, and my Spirit rejoyceth in God my Saviour, and in so saying she set her hands together right against her breast, casting her eyes and head upward, she stood without moving till her Arms being burnt in two, fell into the fire, and so yeilded up the Ghost as if she felt no pain. On the 18th of November following, John Holling∣dale, W. Sparrow, and Richard Gibson, being all con∣demned by Bonner, suffered together in Smithfield. On the 22th of December, were also burnt in Smith∣field John Rough a Minister, and one Margaret Mear∣ing, in one fire. On the 28th day of March follow∣ing being the year 1558. Cutbert Symson who had been a Deacon in the Congregation, of the last men∣tioned Minister, Mr. Rough, was burnt in London. He was like another Stephen, most Zealous for Re∣ligion and never ceased, labouring earnestly how to help and preserve others from the Popish Tyranny. This man keeping the Books of the Register of the names and accounts of the Congregation, Mr. Rough, before Martvr'd, had a vision of his trouble, that came suddenly upon him, and lest they should find this Book and thereby know all the names of Gods Saints, belonging to the Congregation, to bring them into trouble, being warned in his dream, be cau∣sed Cutbert not to carry that book about him, as be was wonted to do; for it so fell out, he was layd hold on, and because he would not Coufess, and be∣tray those of the Congregation, he was had before the Recorder of London, and the Constable of the Tower, but he absolutely denying to Confess any thing, they set him 3 hours upon the rack, but
not being able to move him with their torments, they loosed him & sent him to prison for that time, but the Sunday following, he was sent for again, and being asked if he would ye▪ Confess the Here∣ticks, shortly answered, that he never would, upon which the Lieutenant of the Tower swore by God, he would make him, and presently caused his fore∣fingers to be bound together, and then betwixt them, thrust a sinall forked Arrow, drawing it backward and forward, Cruelly tormenting and curting his fingers, but still finding him Constant and resolute, these bloody and Tyrannical Papists rack'd him twice more, and set him 3 hours in an Iron Engine, in the Tower, called Skevingtons Gives, all which he with great patience suffered, and they could not get their wills of him. And Bi∣shop Bonner was forced to confess, that so patient a man he had never before seen, being thrice racked in one day, and it was pity he was an Heretick. The night before he was burnt, he heard his prison doors as he thought unlock, about midnight, he saw an ap∣parition of great brightness to enter the dungeon, saying nothing to him but Ha! and then departed, but the sight thereof filled him with extraordinary Joy and comfort. With this Constant Martyr Cut∣bert Symson, suffered also Hugh Fox and Jhevonish, for the same cause, all ending their lives on the day and in the place aforesaid, with great Joy and ala∣crity to the Strengthning of others. On the 6th of April following, was burnt at Ha∣verford West in Wales, one William Nicholson a plain simple man, who there lay'd down his life for the Gospel. Three Martyrs burnt at Norwich. On the 19th of May following, was burnt at Nor∣wich in one fire, Will. Seaman an husbandman, Tho. Carman a lay man, and Thomas Hudson a Glover, all of them condemned by the Bishop of Norwich Hud∣son had often prayed to God that he might suffer for the Gospels sake, and when he was taken, he was so far from flying, that he chearfully met the Offi∣cers
saying, welcome friends, welcome, my hour is now come: you are they that shall lead me to Life in Christ; I thank God for this, and the Lord inable me thereto for his mercies, sake. When they were brought to the plce of execution, which was without Bi∣shop gate in Norwich, called Lollards pit, after they had made their prayer, to God, they were chained to the Stake, when Hadson, not feeling that Joy in Spirit he used to do, he dsired them to stay a while, which some believed was that he might recant, but he falling on his Knees, prayed with great Vehe∣mency to God, to visit him with his spirit, and at last he received that comfort he desired, and then he arose up with great Joy, as a man new changed even from Death to Life, and said: Now I thank God I am strong, and pass not what man can do into me: And so fire being put to them, all three suffer∣ed most Joyfully, Constantly, and manfully, and were Consumed with the Fire, glorifying God, to the terrour and amazement of their bloody perse∣secutors, and to the comfort and strengthning of their Brethren. The 29 of the same month, were burnt also for the Gospels ske 3 more together at Colchester, their Names were, William Harris, Richard Day, and Christian George, who dyed chearfully and wil∣lingly. The Seven last Martyrs burnt in Smithfield. On the 27th of June following, being Anno 1558, were burnt together in one fire in Smithfield 7 blessed Martyrs, all condemned thereto by the bloody, butcherly Bishop Bonner, who gloried in his shame; the names of these men were Henry Pond, Raignold Estland, Ro. Southam, Mathew Richarby, John Floyd, John Holyday. And Roger Holland. This last was a Gentlemans son of Lanca∣shire, of great kindred, & many friends, being bred a strict Papist, and bound Prentise in London, where he lived so leud and debauch'd a Life, till the be∣gining of Queen Maries days, that there was little likelyhood of his coming to be burnt for the sake of
Chrisls Gospel. But it pleased God at last to work upon him, in the midst of his ryot and licentious Life, being given to dancing, fencing, gaming, banqueting, and all manner of luxurie, and one night having lost 30 l. at play of his Masters mony, he grew troubled, and resolved to run away and go beyond seas to France or Flanders, and making a Bill under his hand, acknowledging his debt to his Master, he privatly made his case known to the servant maid in the house, who was a reli∣gious maid, and one who professed the Gospel, and desired her to give his Master that Note, when he was gone, premising to pay him so soon as he was able, if he would keep it from his friends, for if they should know of it, they would never look on him, and it would be his Ruine. This maid pittying the young man, and hopeing to reclaim him from his Evil ways, haveing some monys by her, left to her by some of her friends, she kept the note and fetch'd him 20 l. to pay his Master, upon Condi∣tion he would leave his leudness and debauche∣ry, read the bible, pray to God, and frequent sermons, and to leave all his Papistical Books and licentious Ballads, and Ribaldry, and to lead a new life, giving him a great deal of good and grave advice. He promised what she desired, and endeavouring it, God so wrought upon him, and strengthened him in this good way, that in some time he left off all his wicked and debauch'd Companions, and became a strict professor of the Gospel, to the great Admiration of all those who had known his former wicked Life. After some time he bought several good books, and going into the Country to his father carried them, and be∣stowed them among his friends whereby his father, and many others began to tast the Gospel, and to abhor the Idolatry of the Papists; his father giving him a stock to begin with, his time being out, he goes to London and repairs to the maid, who had generously lent him the 30 l. pays her▪ and in return of her kindness Marrys her. Have∣ing
a child by her, he caused it to be privatly bap∣tized, for which he was lay'd hold on and cast into prison, and divers times had before Bonner, who by reason of his many and great kindred (the Lord Strange being one of them) he sought all he could to have him recant, and save his Life, but he was a stout and noble Champion, and would not be perverted by any means: He told the Bishop that he had been bred a Papist, and then liv'd in all manner of sin, being absolved by the Priests, so that he made no Conscience of com∣mitting any crime, whilst in their Church, for he knew that for a little mony, he could be absol∣ved from all his wickedness, and begin again anew, he could eat flesh on Frydays, whore, swear, drink, game, and all was well enough, so long as he went to Mass, but now the he lived a strict and sober life, leaving their Idolatry, he must be persecuted to death, being called by the light of God's Word to Repentance, and that by Priests, who blaspheme God, and lead Scan∣dalous lives, without punishment, some of them, having 6 or 7 Children apiece, to his knowledge, by four or five sundry women. He told them many other crimes and Enormities of their Church, to the Bishops face, too long to rehearse, which so enraged the Bishop, that he read the sentence against him, nor permitting him to speak any more, saying he was one of the mst blas∣phemous hereticks, that ever he heard of. He heard his sentence of Condemnation very patiently, and when they would have had him away, he de∣sired to speak two or three words, but the Bishop Cry'd, away with him, way with him; at last, some of his friends prevailed, not knowing but he might recant, and being permitted to speak he thus pro∣phesied: I tell you (said he) that God has now heard the prayers of his servants, which have been poured forth with tears for his Afflicted Saints, which you dayly persecute, as you do us. But this I s o you, moved thereto by his holy Spirit, that God will shorten
your hand of Cu d t nor Bthre ta shrt time will be able to  e, so to t you shall not be able to persecute them  more: For mark me, after this dan this place,  h I &  Bthren, and fellow Marty s are to suffr, no more shall undergo the try∣ of Fe and faggot. Upon this Bonner said, I ow perceive Roger that thou art as mad in thy sie, as ever was Joan Bcher. Thou wouldst f be accounted a railing prophet, and tho thou and all the rest of you, desire to see me hang'd  shll live to burn you, ye I will burn all of you  co under my hnds, that will not wos  blssd Sacrament of the Altar, for al  prating. And to they haled him away, but th Hl man was no false prophet, for he and his 6 Companions above named wo were burnt with him, were the last who suffered in that place, for the testimony of the Gospel. That day these holy Martys suffered, a proclamation was made, that none should dare to speak or talk a word to them, or receive any thing from them, or touch them, on pain of Imprisonment, without bad or main∣prise. Notwithstanding, the people cryed out, dsiteing God to strengthen them. When they all came to the Stake Roger Holland embracing it said aloud Lord, I most humbly thank thy Majesty, that hast called me from the State of Death unto the Light of thy heavenly Word, and now unto the fellow∣ship of the Saints, that I may sing and say, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts. And Lord, into thy hands I Commit my Spirit. Lord bless these thy people, and save them from Idolatry: so being fastned to the Stake with the rest, looking up towards Heaven, praying and praising God, with the rest of his fel∣low Martyrs, he ended his Life, and exchanged for a better, with great Courage, holy resolution, and manlike Constancy. Six Martyred at Brainford. Not long after the Martyrdom of these 7 last mentioned in Smathfield, viz. on the 14th of July following, Six more suffered in one fire at Brainford.
Their names were Robert Wills, Stephen Coltn, Robert Dynes, Stephen White, John Slade, and William Pikes a Tanner. All these were condemned By Bonner, and ordered to be burnt at the place afore∣said. When they came to the stake, they made their prayers with great humility, like so many Lambs prepared for the slaughter, thn and resing themselves, they went joyfully to the stake, to which they were bound, and the fire being put to them, and flaming about them, they yield  their Bodies, Lives, and Souls, into the hand of Jesus, for whose cause they suffer'd. The last mentioned William Pikes, being a very godly, holy and religi∣ous man, not long before he was taken, as he was reading the Bble of Mr. Rogers his translation in his Garden, 4 drops of blood fell down upon the Bible, from whence he could not tell except it came out of the Element, upon which he called his wife, and shewed her the prodigy, blotting out one of the drops with his finger At last he said, I perceive the Lord will have blood, his will be cone, and give me grace to abide the try∣al. And it was not long after that be was ap∣prehended. The same man being in Newgate, fell extreamly sick, so that none looked he could have lived 6 hours, being given over for a dead man; upon which he prayed, and desired of God, that he might glorifie his name at the stake, which came to pass accordingly God hearing his prayers. The Cruel Whipping of Thomas Hinshaw by Bonner. This Bloody Bonner, who in a matter of 3 years space, had destroyed one way or other, about 200 Martyrs for the Gospel, haveing one Thomas Hinshaw an Apprentice in London before him in Examina∣tion at Fulham, and not receiving satisfactory An∣swers to his mind, he set him in the stocks all night with bread and water only, the next day he sent his Archdeacon Harpsfield, such another persecutor as himself, who calling this young man, who was
about 19 or 20 years of Age, Prevish boy, asking him whether he thought he went about to dams his Soul, or no, unto which the said Thomas answered, that he was perswaded, they laboured to maintain their dark and devilish Kingdom, and not for any Love to Truth. This put the Archdeacon into a Rage, and away he goes to Bonner, who furned and fretted, not being able to have his will of a young man, presently he sends for him into an Ar∣bour in his Garden, untrussing him, he caused the young man to Kneel down, and to lye over a bench, where with his own Episcopal hands, he wore out a willow Rod upon him, who bore it all patiently, till this su whipping Bishop, who had none of St. Pauls Characters in him, could lay on no longer, for want of Beath. With this, and other ill suge, this poor young is an fell sick, and so continued in a ngring Stknss, till he was treed by the Death of this Popish Persecuting Queen Mary. The Whipping of John Wills by Bonner. Besides, this young man, there was another named John Wills a Capper, and was brother to the a∣bove mentioned Robert Wills, Martyr'd at Brainford; he was kept for some time in Bonners cole hole at Ful∣ham, and put into the Stocks, being taken at a meet∣ing in the fields at Islington: Bonner had him seve∣ral times in Examination, rapping him often on the head with his stick, and flirting him under the chin, and on the ears, when he cross'd him: The poor man often mentioning the Scripture to the Bishop, Ha Sirrah, said he, What have you to do with Scripture? Do you believe the Scripture? To whom this ho∣nest confessor reply'd that he did: why then said this learned Bishop, St. Paul says if the man sleep the wo∣man is at Liberty to go to another man and then wouldst thou having a wife be content she should go to another man, when thou art asleep? And yet this is Scripture. As thou seest the Bodies of the He∣reticks
burnt in Smithfield, just to do their souls hang burning in hell, for forsaking the true Church. They call me bloody Bonner, a vengeance of you all, I think you have a delight in burning, but if I might have my will, I'de soon be rid on you all, for I would sow up all your Mouths, put you into Sacks, and drown you: O excellent Popish Bishop! But see∣ing the honest Capper no ways approving his Do∣ctrins, he caused him to be untrussed, and in his Ar∣bour, this Whipping fat paunch'd Bishop, exercised himself on his hinder parts, with a willow Rod, which being spent, he sent for a birchen Rod, with which he clawed off the poor man, till he could La∣bour no longer. This man was delivered from his tyranny, by the Death of the Queen. A Child Scourg'd to Death in Bonners house. We will also take notice of another cruel Whipping in this Bishops house, either by himself of his Cap∣lains; one John Fetty of e kenwell, being for the cause of the Gospel in the Lollards Tower, where for many weeks he had indured great hardship, being often tormented in the stocks, it chanced that one of his Children, a Boy of about 8 or 9 years old, came to the Bishops palace, to see if he could get into the prison, to see his Father, and being met by one of the Bishops Chaplains, who asked the child what he would have? who told him he came to see his Father that was in prison in the Lollards Tower. Your Fa∣ther then said the Priest is an Heretick. No said the Child, he is no Heretick, but you are Hereticks, for you have Balaam's Mark: With that this hard hearted Priest took the Child in, and among them stripping him, whipt him all over, till he was of a gore blood, and then in that condition sent him to his Fa∣ther, which cut the poor man to the heart to see him so cruelly handled. He then asked the Child who had done it? the Child replyed a Priest in the Bishops house, with Balaams Mark on him, had used him thus; with that the cruel hangman, carryed the
Childback, where they to cruelly handled the poor Innocent, that  about 15 days after he dyed. The Bishop hearing that the Child was about to dye, faring he should be called to account for it, relea∣sed th Father, and so saved his Life, for murthering his Childs. Richard Yeoman a Minister, Martyr'd. On the 10th of July, one Richard Yeoman of 70 ears of Age was Martyr'd at Norwich. This Richard Yeoman was a Minister, and had been the Martyr'd . Taylors Curate, & to whom he had left his care, but being turned out, and a Popish Priest put in, ha∣ving a Wife & being aged, he fell into great poverty wandring about with a few Pinns, Tape, and Laces and such like to sell, and where he durst he often preached and instructed good people, in the true doctrine of Christ., After long wandring about he came home secretly to his Wife, who lockt him up in her Chamber, going abroad to get nd beg Victuals to maintain them, but at last it was suspected, that he was in the house, and in the night when in bed together, they broke into the house, where their Popish Adversaries found them; Ha, said the Priest, I thought we should find a Rogue and an Whore together; upon which the old man told them, they were lawfully Married, and they did ill so to erm those who came lawfully together by Gods ordinance, which he would own: They then forc'd him to rise, and had him to the Cage, where they kept him all night, & where he found one John Dale who had been kept there two or 3 days. Thence they were had before the Justice, and from him sent to the Jail at Norwich, where Dale dyed before he was executed, Yeoman being examined by the Bishop, who finding him resolute in owning the truth, he was condemned, degraded, and deliver'd over to the secular power to be burnt, and so on the day, & in the place aforesaid he suffer'd, sealing his testimony with his blood, passing thorow the tor∣ments of the fire to everlasting peace.
Mr. Thomas Benbridg Martyr. I am now come near to a conclusion of these cra persecutions of the Papists, and shall end w mentioning one or two more. Mr. Thomas Ben∣bridg of the Diocess of Winchester, was a Gentlem of Estate, and mought have lived in all plenty  Earthly pleasures, all which he forsook for the sak of the Gospel, and of his soul, which was more der than all earthly delights and pleasures, for which cause being apprehended and brought before th Bishop, he had several disputes with him, but i the end he was overcome by their cruel Topick th Fire, to which he was condemned: Coming to th stake very richly clad, his coat ing lay'd all ove with Gold and Silver lace, his Cap of Velvet and o∣ther things sutable, which he cast off at the stake, i being tyed thereto, was willed by Dr. Seaton to re∣cant, and that he should have his Pardon, but he re∣fusing it, the Dr. willed the people not to pray fo him no more than for a Dog, & because he said to th Dr. Away thou Babyoman, away! some would hard had his Tongue cut out, but his Adversaries seeing he would not yeild, try'd a new way to Tormen him, and instead of putting him to death, they rather rosted or broyled him with a few Faggots, that he might through the great torment of the sire recant, for they burnt part of his legs, and scorched his face and heard, i in a itious manner, so that the pain be∣ing so grea, he cryed out he would recant, upon which the fire was withdrawn, and he was led back to prison; but he was so troubled at what he had done, that he could have no quiet or peace in his conscience, till he had given under his hand that be utterly renounced that forced Recantation and that he was willing to dye for the Gospel, which he had and dd still profess Upon which his Popish Adver∣saries being enraged, that day seven-night after, he was had again to the stake, where they as before, ra∣ther broiled him than burnt him to Death, which he
then manfully endured, and so at la slept in the rd, July 19. 1558. Four Martyr'd at St. Edmunds-bury. About the beginning of August, and a little before een Mary sickned, 4 Martyrs were burnt toge∣er at St. Edmunds-bury, by the Bshop of Norwich, e names of these were James Ashey a Btchelor, on Cook is Sawyer, Robert les a Sheerman, and Exander Lane a Wheel-wright. In Ipwich on the 4 of November, one Alexander uch and Alice Driver were Martyr'd, the aforesaid e Driver having both her ears out off, for com∣ring Queen Mary to Jezabel. When they came to e stake singing of Psalms, the Sheriff was so cruel d chursh to them, that he interrupted them, and ould not let them stay to pray, but would have em fastned to the stake, and was enraged to see y take them by the hand, threatning to have them  prison, yet they would not forbear: Thus they xpressed their malice to these poor wretches, but his wicked Sheriff died within 3 weeks after, which as lok'd on as a just judgment upon so cruel a ersecutor. In the same month 3 more were burned at Bary, eir names were Philip Hmfre, John David, nd Henry David his Brother. At Exeter a poor oman was burnt, being the wife of one Pe, of bout 56 years of Age, and being a silly ignorant oman, in the esteem of the Priests, they thought hey should be able to overcome her, but they avelled in vain, and all they could do could not ervert her, being strengthend by the Spirit of od: When the came to the stake, she shewed eat chearfulness and alacrity, and said, I thank ee O God, this day I have found what I long ught r. And being uged to recant Nay (said she) God rbid I shuld lose Eternal Lf, for this Carual and ort life, I will never turn from my heavenly husband, my earthly huband, from the fellowshp with Angels,
to morial Children: And if my husband  han be faithfull, then am I theirs. God is my F God is my Mother, God is my Sister, my Brother  Husband: God is my friend, most faithfull. F being put to her she cryed out, God be mercif me a Sner, God be mercifull to me a Sinner, as so Continued whilst she had life. The last Martyrs burnt in Queen Marys days The last that suffered for the Gospel in the day of Queen Mary, and that but 6 or 7 days, be∣fore her death, were three mn and 2 women,  the 10th of November, at Canterbury: their a m were Jon Corajord Christopher Brown, Jo H Alice Snoth, and Ktherin  an aged wo∣man: These Five closed up the rage of Que Marys persecution for the rest mony of tht wr for which so mny had dyed before, and geve their Lives mekly and patiently, suffering th violent malice of the Papists The matte for which they were judged to the fire was, for believing that the Body, Blood,  Bones of Christ was not in the Sacrament of  Altar. Upon which, these poor people were  communicated, in these Words: In the name  our Lord Jesus Christ▪ the Son of the most mig God, and by the power of his Holy Spiit, and the Authority of his holy Catholick and Ap∣lick Church, we do hereby give into  Hds of Sathan to be destroyed, the Bodys of all these Blasphemers, and hereticks, that do maintain, &c Upon this they were delivered over to the secu∣lar power, and such was the inveterate malice of these Papists, to those who professed the Gos∣pel, that although they well knew that the Queen was given over by the Physitians, and that the could not live; yet they had a mind to dispatch these poor wretches, and to rid them of their lives, blasphemously making use of the names of God and Christ in their Excommunications, to torment the Bodys of the Saints with fire, and
give their Souls to the Devil, and all to ar∣ o their bloody ends. When these Five came  the stake, they prayed very fervently to God, at he would have mercy on the Nation, and at their Blood migt be the last that should  shed by the violent Rage of the bloody Papists; nd so it was, that God heard their prayers, for ese were the last who suffered for the Gospel  her Days; for on the 17th of the same month he dyed, and the glorious and renowned Queen hizeth her Sister succeeded, and put a full pe∣iod to the rage, reign, and bloody Tyrannie of he Church of Rome, in England, and restored the eformed Church as now Established, to its splen∣our and purity, which having passed the firy val, and drunk so deeply of persecution, one would believe should never go about to perse∣cute others: But God preserve this Nation from the dreadful Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and let all people heartily say Amen. FINIS.
