e3041 12497893 62575
ENGLANDS REPENTANCE Englands only REMEDY: Religiously propounded in a Seri∣ous Resolve of this ENQUIRY, Q. What is to be desired by all such as wish well to England? In a Letter written by a Minister in London, in Answer to one sent from a worthy Member of the late Long PARLIAMENT. Entred according to Order. London, Printed by D. Maxwell, 1659.
Honoured Sir, YOurs of the 18th instant I received; whereby I dis∣cern your sense of the sad hand of God upon these Nations, in the many sad Revolutions to which they have been subject. And now you seem studious of the way of its recovery, in which I rejoyce. Though, Sir, your Enquiry doth a little amaze me; not so much for the mat∣ter, as that you should press me to it in this juncture of time. You well know, Sir, I have not declined to let you know my thoughts of all the late transactions of those who called themselves, The Long Parliament. Did I not much presume on your Faithfulness never to use it to my damage (however God deal with you) I might burn my pen and paper for fear of a Treason and High Court of Justice. But I will not fear to write at his request to whom I have often spoken freely, and yet met with the fidelity of a Friend. Sir, your Enquiry is serious and seasonable, and calls for a better Resolution then I can render. It is this, Quest. What is to be desired by them that wish well to England? I understand your Enquiry as grounded on the present sad state of the Nations affairs; and so my resolution is, as of a Minister of God, that of Israel; Repentance pro∣mised in Hosea 3.5. Afterwards shall Israel return, and seek unto the Lord their God, and unto David their King, is the unum necessarium, one only thing to be desired for England as her sovereign Remedy against all her mala∣dies
by the hand of God inflicted on her. On serious observation of England, I cannot but judg her the parallell of the ten Tribes in sin and sorrow, and wish she may precede them in a serious and seasonable Re∣pentance. Methinks Sir, the Prophet Hosea his Prophe∣tical Marriage of an Harlot, and leaving her a long time with this charge, To abide for him, and not to play the Harlot,Hos. 3.3. or be for any other, is a lively Emblem of Eng∣lands state and duty. England, Sir, as Israel, have gone in the way of Jero∣beam, and have sinfully, against all Natural, Civil and Religious bonds, Englands Di∣sease. cast off and shut out their Lawful Go∣vernours and Established Government left them by their Progenitors, and under which she long flourished, unto the Enriching of her self, Envy of her Neighbours, Nati∣ons, and Encouragement of the Reformed Churches: And that after many Declarations, Protestations, Vows, Oaths, and the Solemn League and Covenant for the de∣fence and preservation of the Kings Majesties Person and Posterity, the Priviledges of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Subject, and that Sworn in a day of Extremity, when they seem'd to be in danger, and men were Jealous (the subversion since effected) was intended. Nay, and after a vast expence of Blood and Treasure in the defence of them; and when under an Obligation inviolable and never to be dispensed withall, wherein we have sworn to God, Not to suffer our selves by any comminations, per∣swasions or terrors whatsoever, directly or indirectly to turn aside to the right hand or to the left, or to make defection from this Cause. Yet have our Nation, to the Scandal of Religion, Reproach of the Nation, and Blas∣phemy of God, and Provocation of his Justice, with Is∣rael, made defection from their Lawful and Natural Prince, nay, and altered their unalterable Government at the Lusts of men subverting very Foundations. Only, Sir, I must be free to let you know, that in two things Englands de∣fection hath been more vile then that of Israeis, in that it was made by a violent, base, unjust, extrajudicial, bar∣barous
Regicidee with an hypocritical pretence of Justice. Secondly▪ In that Members of the Parliament have been to themselves an Hrod Ascalonite to violently break up their own Sandedrin; and Guido Faux, to blow up King, Lords and Commons in Parliamt assembled, to the ever∣lasting blemish of the Protestant Religion, and in the room thereof have been subjected to usurpati∣on and self-created Governours, with whom most of the Nation have concurred, and to them consented. And for the support of this Usurped Magistracy, Calves have been set up at Dn and Bethell, all falshood in Religion Tole∣rated, the Ministry laid common, who will becomes a Priest unto the Lod. So that, Sir, Schism and Sedition, Rebel∣lion unto Regicide, Perfidie and Perjurie is become Eng∣lands Guilt and impiety written in such legible and inde∣lible Characters, that all men must say, She is become an Harlot, and see Repentance absolutely necessary to prevent her ruine. Nay, Sir, give me leave to tell you, Englands sin (like Israels) hath been pointed out by her Sorrows;Englands Di∣stemper. for she having shamefully shaken off her Rightful Gover∣nor and Government, hath been prostituted to the Lusts and Ambition of particular men, and proudly trampled on by Military insolency, in so much that our very Bell men can reproach us as we lie in our Beds. Shall I, Sir, make bold to insert a Bell-mans sound which I heard with my own ears. It was this, Whilst you securely Sleep, I Ring my Bell, Which lately hath Rung out your Freedoms Knell. Your Souldiers, now, your Sovereigns are become, Your Laws and Liberties command by sound of Drum. Nor is it strange, for they read no Commission, Regard no Bonds, but prosper by Transgression. By Pride and Perjury, these Saints most rude, Have Cut off the King, and Parliament subdu'd. Your eyes have seen't, vile Slaves, yet in this season, You are Rid like Asses, and not Rul'd by Reason.
Oh, Sir, how many sad and shameful revolutions have passed upon us, and yet we are full far from Settlement? Authority, like a Tennis-Ball, hath been cast up and down for him to catch that catch can, and hath been tossed be∣tween a republican pack, and single Person, whilst both are plain and palpable usurpers; for indeed in nature, and by Gods just judgment, Revolution is the constant Atten∣dant on usurpation; the Globe of Magistracy must roule up and down, whilst off its Pin, and from its Center, it only resteth in right subjects; and now we are covered with confusion, and left without King, any lawful, nay, without Prince, any unlawful Governors without any establishment in Chair or State, Civil and Religious or∣der, and this was the punishment of Israels, now is of Englands adultery: the estate of her widow-hood, the time of divine desertion; for Civil Order is Gods presence in the world, and Religious Order his presence in the Church. The very heathen conclude from the confusions in the world, the Gods have forsaken the Earth; so that, Sir, he must have no Religion who seeth not in Englands case to conclude and cry out, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are all thy judgments. Now, Sir, I have shewed Englands disease and distem∣per; it remains that I direct the cure and remedy, and that I say is, Repentance, true and hearty, General and Universal Repentance.Englands Cure and Remedy. Let the Ministers of God lift up their voice, and cry, Repent, England, repent, repent; let all that wish well to England, pray that God would pour out a Spirit of Repentance, that from Dan to Bersheba all Israel may return and seek unto the Lord, and to Da∣vid their King. Sir, Repentance is the end and errand of all Afflictions, Isa. 27.11. Men cry out of doing the Work of God, nor do I deny it in all our strange revolutions; only I desire it may be noted, it is Gods strange work, speaking his displeasure, and summoning his Peoples Repentance: a relenting heart, a returning spirit shall no sooner be ef∣fected, but these sharp rods will be rejected, God will
walk contrary to a stubborn People, Levit. 16. until their uncircum∣cised heart be humbled, but no longer for, then his end is effected. Repentance doth engage divine return; for he hath promised, that when ever he speaks against a Nation, to pluck it up, or root it out, if that Nation repent, he will repent, Jer. 18.8. He ever meets relenting Ephraim with Repentance for inflicted judgments; his method is to give Repentance and Remission of :Je. 31 18. The greatest good in∣tended for Israel is contracted into the promise of repen∣tance; the Sun doth not more certainly follow the morn∣ing star, then the return of Gods presence doth attend repentance: Nay, Sir, in this case repentance is an actual re-enjoy∣ment of blessing, not only a quality disposing to it, but an act putting into the possession of it; as your Armies late repentance for their backsliding, put your Members actu∣ally into the House, to rule and govern, and their coun∣ter repentance put you out again, so the repentance of your pretended Parliament, and the People of England puts lawful Governors into their proper places, and sixeth Authority in its right Center, which sin unhingeth and expelleth. You may observe, Israels Repentance was an actual and ardent Contest to bring me the King. Repen∣tance breaks open the Bar of Sedition and Rebellion which shutteth out lawful authority; will but God give Repen∣tance, the Restitution o Englands Government will be very feasable and speedy. For this Repentance consists in two parts. 1. To abide for rightfull Governours, however expelled, and at present excluded; and not to be for any other Magi∣strate, by any act of Allegiance, First part of Repentance. or acknowledgment of Loyalty; strike not hands with, consent not to any self-created Governours, by Pride, Perfidy, and Rebellion, slipping into a Chair of State; play not the wanton with any self-advancing Absalom, be not seduced by every sedi∣tious Sheba: If proud men have power and profaneness to catch a Scepter, and stamp Authority upon themselves,
let men maintain their Chastity, deny their Allegiance, court them not as rightful Governours: Mens giddy unconstancy is he  that nrisheth Rebellion: resolved chastity is the rebuke of adul erous attempts; if with Mephibsheth, men cannot follow their exil'd David, let them bid in their widow-hood, and retain their Loyalty until her. According to Nature and Scripture a o∣ple may better be without ary Prince, then strike hands with a usurpt, for i that is sorrow, but in this is . I should Sir, wish that  and blind affection may not engage any to commit lewdness with any the Members of Englands late Husbands body; let not any the Members of our Collective Body now beheaded, and bemangled, cheat us with the claim of Allegiance by pretence of Relation, and cry of a Long Parliament; but rather let these Mem∣bers be dispersed throughout the Tribes of Israel as eviden∣ces of that unheard of violence, and unparallell'd cruelty which hath been acted on our Espoused Lord. Englands Subscription of sinful Engagements, and shameful Addres∣ses to unlawful Powers, hath been the breach of her cha∣stity; let us abide for lawful Government, when we can do no more, evidence our integrity, and assert our duty and re∣lation, when we cannot enjoy our right. The 2d Act of Repentance to be done is to return unto the Lord,Second at of Repen∣tance. and to David their King. Return to God, is the for∣mall act of true Repentance; Sin and Repentance have the same object, though some sin is more immediately against God. yet all sin is a transgression of his Law: the same God that said, Thou shalt have none other Gods before my face, said also, Thou shalt honour thy Father and thy Mo∣ther; and, Thou shalt not commit adultery: Israels Rejecti∣on o Samuel, was a Rejection o the Lord; as light as men make o Civil Right and Order, it is Gons direction in the second Table of his Law: The complaint of the Penitent for any sin, is unto God, Against thee, thee only have I sinned; seeking to the Lord, will spur a seeking unto Da∣vid their King; sence of God offended engageth a return from all sin, not only from last, but first acts o violence
done unto Authority; not only the interruptions made on you in 1653. but those chiesly made by you in 1648 and that with fulness of Resolution to backslide no more; a return to God will awe the conscience, and obviate all the difficulties and discouragements of Repentance; danger sinfully created by rebellion shall not deter repentance, because it is a return to God, ready to forgive; let me say to England as God to Israel, If thou wilt return, return unto the Lord, who enjoyned your duty; Jer. 4.1. whose law hath been violated by your impiety; unto the Lord, to whom you sware in the day of your distress; who is a God of Jealousie and will avenge the quarrel of the Covenant; sad is the Repentance which is but an exchange of sin, or of sins object; a bewailing of one rebellious act, but maintaining and proceeding in a series of Rebellion, vio∣lence, and sedition. Sir, whatever Souldiers do, Saints must not thus return. Israels return to God must be with a return to David their King; by David is generally un∣derstood the Messiah the Lord Jesus Christ, nor do I deny it, only Sir I wish it may be noted, the Messiah is called David for Relation and Succession sake, because the same seed and rightful successor of David, as the Pharaohs of Egypt, and Caesars of Rome; he is their King, not only as the Messiah, but by a lineal discent from, and lawful suc∣cession to the Crown of Israel; so that a return to Da∣vid their King is mentioned with an allusion unto their Apostacy from, and Rebellion against the House of David, which must be repented in their return; for they must em∣brace their Lord Jesus not only as the Messiah, but as their natural Prince and lawful Soveraign; and therefore Cal∣vin crieth out, Aliter vere & ex animo Deum quaerere noli potuit, quin se etiam subjceret Legitimoimperio oui astrictus erat; they could no way seek the Lord in truth, but by becoming Subject to their lawful Soveraign. Englands Repentance must be according to this, they must seek the Lord, through Christ, by subjection to their lawful Government and Governors, from which they have revolted; the formality of Repentance from Rebellion is a
return to Loyalty. Sir, Restitution is an essential act of Repentance; the only restitution made for repented of re∣bellion, is a re-establishment of authority, and a return to Loyalty, becoming subject for conscience sake: Israel repenting the rebellion into which they run after self-ad∣vancing Absalon, they sell to strife among themselves a∣bout fetching home their King:2 Sam. 19. Nay, Shime's Character o repentance is this, Thy servant doth know that I have sinned, therefore behold I am come down the first of all the House of Joseph to meet my Lord the King; if God will do England good, he will give them hearts to give God the things that are Gods, and Caesar the things that are Caesars, which have been too long held back with vio∣lence. I wish Sir that none may pretend an inconsistency be∣tween this act of repentance, and the good Old Cause of God and his People, for whoever shall so do, must sell them∣selves unto positive blasphemy, and perpetual profaneness, pretending that to be the Cause of God which is expresly repugnant to his revealed will, and resolving rebellion is the honour of Religion, and only work of Saints; and wilfully shut their eyes, that they may cozen their consci∣ences: For Sir, is not the Kings preservation, honour and happiness▪ the Priviledges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and defence of the Government by King, Lords and Commons, written in such Legible Characters in the Parliaments, Cties, and Armies Declarations, Remonstran∣ces, and Protestation; in all our Vowes, Oaths, and Covenants, as the good Old Cause for which so much blood and trea∣sure was expended, that none but the wilful impenitent can chuse but run and read it; I shall for more full convi∣ction refer you to Mr. Prynns Good Old Cause truly stated, which I know you have seen. Neither Sir would I have the hazard of any mans life or estate, threatned by this repentance, be any bar unto it; for Sir, this hazard is self-created, and sinfully procured; which, should it be inflicted, were but the proper effect of justice, better to be undergone here then hereafter unto
eternity; happy may be the stroak of justice which may save a Soul from Hell; the sinful escapes of humane justice will one day be found exceeding sad: running away rom the rod of correction, is an heightning rebellion, and note of a reprobate; and whether will such flye from Gods all-seeing eye? or will it boot any to contend with God or impunity? Oh no, it will not. But Sir, such men may be worse feared then hurt; repen∣tance is the spunge of Guilt in the sight o men, as well as in the sight of God: God who hath the hearts of Kings in his hand, and turns them as the rivers of water relents to∣ward a repenting Ephraim, and maketh David relent to∣wards a rebellious Absalon; Royal Clemency never shines brighter then in returns from violent exile; Shall any be put to death this day in Israel? for do I not know that I am this day King in Israel? is Davids answer to the son of Zerviah provoking against Shimei, who had full well de∣served it; any indifferent Politician can give assurance of indempnity for general delinquency, especially, when true repentance is the spring that doth enforce it. Lastly, Sir, let none stand up against this act of Repen∣tance, and cry, It is dangerous to Religion, a Free Parlia∣ment will call home the King, and he is rude and pro∣phane, and converseth among Papists, and will bring Po∣pery into the Land with him. To such I say in short, How came they into Gods Chair to become solicitous of Event? Is uncertain fear of an issue any ground of bar to duty? Where is our Faith should carry us on in duty against all dread? Needs God our Sin to preserve the Sanctity of his holy Name? Will not this prove a sad support unto Religon? But is not this fear groundless? Is not the King a Protestant born and brought up? bound in the same Solemn League and Covenant with our selves? Hath not our sin subjected him to the saddest temptati∣on to turn Papist that ever poor Prince underwent? Doth not Mr. Prynn tell us plainly and upon good demonstra∣tion, That his exile is the great propagation of the Catho∣lick Cause, and high courtesie to Rome? Sir, these ob∣structions
are all frivolous, and so will appear, if ever God pour on the Nation a Spirit of Repentance. Worthy Sir, I have with the plainness of a Minister, and freedom of a Friend, given my thoughts on your Enqui∣ry, and that not Rashly, but as having consulted the O∣racles of God. And I cannot but beg that you persist no longer in your way of sin: Oh that God would give you and your fellow. Members hearts to give him Glory, and after your success, to take to your selves shame for your sinful subversion of an Established Government, and that with pretence of Law, calling your selves a Parliament when your own Consciences tell you, you are no such thing. Sir, England is inclining to repent, if your House prove not a Sheba to sound again the Trumpet of Rebellion. However, my advice is, Let the Ministers of God cry out, Repent, England, Repent, Repent; and let all the people of God pray, That England may return and seek unto the Lord, and to David their King: Then shall we be esta∣blished enjoying our Princes as at the first, and our Rulers as at the beginning. I have no more, save with the Prophet Ezekiel, They, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are a Rebellions House, yet shall know there hath been a Prophet among them, Ezek. 2.5. FINIS.
