F1232 08121992 40918
RELAT Of ten Years TRAVELL IN Europe, Asia, Affrique▪ and America. All by way of Letters occa∣sionally written to divers noble Personages, from place to place; And continued to this present year▪ By RICHARD FLECKNO. WITH Divers other Historical, Moral, and Poetical pieces of the same Author. Haec olim meminisse juvabit. LONDON, Printd for the Author, and are to be sold by
The Epistle Dedicatory. To all those Noble Persona∣ges mentioned in these following Letters. TO you, with good Rea∣son I dedicate these Letters, to whom they were writ, and to whom I have Dedicated my self: For whilst others were desirous of pleasures, Ambitious of Honors, or Covetous of wealth, you were all in all to me, all my pleasure, all my honour, all my wealth; nor had I other desire nor Ambition, but of you; so became I more deseving, similitude of disposition best gain∣ing and conserving Frends, know∣ing
you were not to be purchas'd bu by worth, nor conserv'd but by merit. Never any man then gain'd more by his Frends than I, not without some Acknowledgment to mine Enemies, (of whom I should have fewer, if they would be content to stand Neuters) Of which sort though I make no men∣tion, yet had I ever some who ad∣ded sharp spurs unto me of doing well, not to afford them the plea∣sure of my doing Ill: as Souldiers in battel, ar most commonly as much encouraged to fight, to deprive their Enemies of the Victory, as to gain it for their Frends. Accept then of this Dedication, and be still to me as you have ever been, so shall I study still to be alwayes to you as I have been, Your, &c▪
To the Reader. Gentle Reader, TIs for no vaunt nor boast that I write my Travails (I esteeming my self (I can assure thee) a far lesse Travailer now (having sail'd of seeing the East-Indies, and consequently all the Eastern Monarchies) than I did when I past over Seas to Zeland first) but to satisfie the curiosity of some noble friends, and make honourable mention of o∣thers, to whom I am infinitely obliged, (so thou wilt find whilst I make but slight menti∣on of those, I am most acurate in mentioning these) nor is it vaniy in me, that I make men∣tion of so many, and noble ones, all that know me, knowing I never willingly converse but with the noblest in every place, finding them still in every respect the best; besides, since Fortune maim'd me, and brought me to my Crutches, whom should I rely upon but the best able to support me? which they the more wil∣lingly do (perhaps) because I lean so light∣ly on them, and alwayes strive to afford them some pleasure for the profit I receive of them.
And thus much for that, for the following Letters, I must advertise thee, that most of those writ abroad are but translated out of the several Languages I writ them in originally, nor art thou to imagine them lesse English for that, there being as much difference betwixt the Authors translating his own conceptions, and those of an others, as betwixt a Prētises copying, and a Painters drawing the same piece agen, the one having a dead Copy for imitation, the others pieces being all drawn upon the life. For the rest, some faults thou must allow the Printer, & some me, neither having bee so acurate as they might have been, and for all testimony of frends, give me leave to prefix only this following one beore my Book, Qui mihi mille testes erit.
To the Lord Marquis of NEWCASTLE. Who in Answer to a Copy of Verses of his sent him these following, FLeckno thy verses are too high for me, Though they but justly fit thy Muse and thee, Caesars should be thy Theam on them to write, Though thou'dst expresse them more than they could ight, Those Worthies rank them in thy wits pure fil, Though Homers blush, and Virgils lofty stile: For thy Poetique Flame is so much higher, Where it should warm, 't consumes us with thy fire. Thy vaster fancy does imbrace all things, And for thy Subject ought t' have greatest Kings. My Lord, I Receiv'd the Verses you honored me with∣all, which impose on me a necessity of de∣serving them, although I do not yet; to which end I know you writ them (for 'twere oo great presumption in me to imagin you flatter'd me) it being one of the Gentlest Arts of Frend∣ship,
laudando praecipere, to praise one for somewhat they are not, to incite them to what they are praised for; yet must I glory in it, and publish it every where; Since, if as Cicero says, laus est laudari à laudabili viro, 'tis only true praise to be praised by a praise-worthy man, how glorious must it be to me to be praised by the most praise worthy-man alive? by one who has the most of the noble man in him, the most of true greatnesse, and who is of so equal a mind in all Fortuns, as prosperous could never elate, nor adverse e'r depresse; no more My Lord but the assurances that I shall always be Your Lordships most &c.
I. To Col. Will. Euers from Gant, Anno 40. The Reasons of his Going over Seas. Noble Sir, THere are divers Birds that flie away, when Stormes and Winter comes, one of those Birds am I: for all progno∣sticks Mariners observe of en∣suing Storms, I have observ'd in England, the billows beginning to swell high, and those Porpoics which, were the Times far and serene, should be i'th' Bottom, dauncing on the Top. Mean time, let your vast and strong built Carracks ride out the storm for me, I'm too weak and slight-built a Vessel for Tempestuous Seas; Besides educated as I am, in the Arts of Peace, (Musick and Poetry) and your Musick of Base, Superious, and Rectr chori, o King, Peers and Commons being all
diconsorted, the Base neither admitting of Master of the Quire to moderate it, nor Supe∣rious to consort with 't, without which, tis ra∣ther a Loud Tumultuous noise, than Musick and Harmonie: England is no place for me, and for Poets, they are well feign'd to delight in Hills and Mountains, where there are al∣wayes some Eminences above Lycurgus valleys, or fields of standing Corn, where all heads are equal, England begins to be a place too much overgrown with Shrubs and Underwoods for me. And thus much for my leaving it. Now for my Retreat hither, 'twas altogether with∣out design; I, like one who flies an Incendium, wholly indifferent whither I went, so I sav'd my self; and if any thing turn'd the scale for Flandres, 'twas its near Vicinitie to England; and for Gant, because 'tis the chief Town here, (whosoever would know any thing, or be known in any place, being ever to reside in the principalst City of e Country where he is) yet did Fortune, (the best director of indiffe∣rent Things) dispose it better for me, than Councel or Dliberation could (the Directors of things where there is choice and difference) I lighting hear on a neat Town, Good Air, and excellent Company, of the Count Salazar Governor o the Cittadel, his Lady, the Baron Reurt her noble Brother, the Blangelvals, the Mrquiss of Libourg, with divers others of the Nobility, extremely curteous and obli∣ging, (as most commonly they are all, when
out of Court and Competency with others) amongst these I am daily Conversant, there is no Feast nor party without me. In all their sports and Exercises I must make one, for their Games, they teach them me, and make me win, or if I chance to lose, they are as much con∣cern'd as for their own losses, and more than I am for mine. It were too great a vanity to tell you this, if it were not a greater Ingrati∣tude to conceal it, and you know (Sir) I can so little conceal the honour my Frends do me, as I publish every wher the honour you do me, in being one of them, as that I have in being, Sir, Your, &c. II. To the Lord—from Gant, An. 41. With the Character and Epitaph of the Earl of STRAFFORD. My Lod, YOu would not believe me, when I told you which way things tended, and see what comes of it. One of you is brought unto the block already, for whom I have made this fol∣lowing Epitaph, To see such Heads off, on the Scaffold lie, Only to keep on th' Head of Majestie,
What is't, but Admonition to his Peers, Sch Heads once off, 'tis time to look to theirs. As for this following Character, because I know my Lord amongst your many other com∣mendable qualities, you have this, not to Envy others commendations, I send it you withall. The Character of the Earl of Strafford. He was the fullest Man of all the Eminent parts and qualities of a Great Minister of State, as England ever bred, and both in Ca∣binet, and abroad, exprest it as fully too; his unhappinesse 'twas, (or rather ours) that he liv'd not in happier Times (might have rather Admir'd, than Envyed those parts of his) so as that Epitaph of Adrian the 6th, might well be applyed to him, Proh! dolor quantum refert in que Tempora vel optimi cujusque virtus inci∣dat. Many Envyed him, because few under∣stood him, and 'tis almost to be wisht that his Prince had not don't so well, since 'twas his overthrow (so much more it imports the Peo∣ple than the Prince be Good, they being many, and he but one.) He was a Iewel sit for the Crown of any Prince to wear, and that his Prince well knew, and therefore wore him him there; but being matcht, and overmatcht too with counterfeit ones, they fearing his splendor should dim and offuscat them, snacht him thence▪ and cast him into the obscurity of
a Prison, from whence he might have escap'd, had he preferr'd his Life before his Fame; but he had higher Thoughts, and look't only af∣ter Eternitie, and the perpetuating his Memo∣ry; so while 'twas irreparable losse unto the Crown, 'twas his gain to die with the glorious title, and high reputation of his Princes Mar∣tyr. Nor wanted there as great prodigies at his death, as ever fore-run any Heroes yet, all the Laws of the Land being first subverted, the King losing his Authority, and Kingdom chang'd into Democraie, Er' he could die: so as his noble House was more honour'd and il∣lustrated by his fall, than ever't could have been, even in his greatest rise. And now (my Lord) comfort your self, if you chance to be the next, that you shall not want one to make your Epitaph, and Cha∣acter at least; but I rather wish and hope 't may be your Elogium, in celebration of your Glorious Actions. For if things look towards a Warr, (as I'm affraid they do) 'twill be as well the Glory of your Judgement to chuse the better side, as of your Valour to defend it bravely; for Valour is either Virtue or Vice, as 'tis well or ill imployed; and 'tis hard to determine which is the greater Crime, to de∣fend an Ill Cause well, or a good one ill: You then being of Brutus disposition, (Quicquid vult, valde vult) that is, vehement in all you undertake, I cannot end this Letter with a bet∣ter Prayer, than God blesse a good Cause from
having you for Enemy, and God blesse you from being Frend unto an Ill; which is the prayer of My Lord, Your, &c. III. To Mr. Henry Petre from Gant, Anno 42. Of his Resolution o leave GANT. Noble Sir, I Have liv'd to see the day, when having lost all  sinc, I may thank God for having nothin now, nor did I ever know how great a happinesse 'twa, till I saw their unhappi∣nese, w are bemir'd and hog'd in their own L, and bound to ther Countries by the ie of fe and Children: For what avails it such to ve their Bodies free abroad, whilst their Souls are imprisoned at home? or to flie the miseries of ther Country, whilst they have lef Pledges with Fortune there to be miserabl still? I speak this in regard of many Engli here, retir'd (as they imagine) from th Noyse and Tumult in England, whil their ea are as much beaten with it here, and thei minds as much sollicited and perplex'd, as they were present there. They receiving wee∣ly
Intelligence from their Wives, Frends and Servants there? This, that his house is plunde∣red; that, that his Tenants refuse to pay their Rent; a third, that his Estate is sequestred, &c. when I must make sad faces with them or com∣pany, or they cry out, I care not how things go. I answer, If my care could remedy it, I should; And for their Losses, I protest they touch me as neerly, and 'm as sorry for them, as I should be for my own, and if that suffice not, I am sorry Nature made me not of another Temper and Disposition for their sakes; Neither was this any Stocal Indolency in me, who could suffer, nay die for a Friend, but yet without trouble and vexation. In ine, I'm so wea∣ried out with this sad sport, as (not to be made miserable at second hand) I'm resolv'd to quit this place, and retire me to Antwerp or Bruxelles (for I'm indifferent for either) you laugh now at my Indifferency, but may I die, or lose your Frendship, which is more, if I find it not an Immense happiesse to say with Bias, Omnia mea mecum porto, and while others by heaping up wealth on wealth, make themselves at last so cumbersom a load of it, they cannot stir for it; I by reducing all to the narrow compasse of one Portmanteau, travel lightly up and down, injoying that Liberty, Fortune has bestow'd on me, and Nature inclines me to, wanting nor wishing for nothing more (Sir) than your Company, being as I am, Sir, Your, &c.
IV. To the Lady Audley, from Bruxelles, Anno 42. Of his Arival there. Madam, I Am at last arived at Bruxelles, where for some Time I intend to stay, having by row∣ling up and down like a Snow-ball contracted so many Acquaintances, as I am now incompast with them, and in the Center of them all. The Town is exceeding pleasant, the Nobilitie nu∣merous, and Ladies generally handsom, more sprightly than the English, and of graver Tem∣per than the French; (in a word, Madam, just like your sel) to tell you of their Generous Actions, (For I know you love Generosity, and they but imitate you in it) the Marchio∣nesse of Bergues, Mother of those two incom∣parable Ladies, the Dutchesse of Lrein, and Madmoiselle d Beauvais, after my first visit, singling me from the Company, told me, that since she knw those of my Country and Con∣dition (as the Times went) could not be so well accommodated, she should take it ill of me, if in my wants I had recourse to any but her self. To whom I answered, (after my most humble remerciments for so high a fa∣vour) That as I yet wanted nothing: so 'twas now impossible I ever should, having the ho∣nour
of her good Graces, which I beseech'd her to continue only, and I should be Rich e∣nough. After this, visiting Madam Berla∣mont, (whose very Name is story) she freely and nobly offered me the honour of her Ta∣ble during my abode in Bruxelles, where on∣ly Eat her self, her two Neices, Daughters to the Duke of Arschot, and the young Prince of Arembergh his Son, whence you may conje∣cture how great an honour 'twas, but much more by that which followeth. She having the great Spirit of the Nobility here, not only Hereditary, but almost all contracted in her self, not brooking the Spa∣nish domination (besides some Pcque with the Infanta) was banisht the Court to her House at Audenard, where for some years she lived retired, like a Great Princesse as she was, till at last (the Infanta dead) her Banishment was exchang'd, for Confinement to her House at Brxelles, which she carried so wisely, and so cunningly dissembled at her Return, as making vertue of necessity, she reclus'd her self in her own House, as in a Monastery, together with her Neices, every one the whilst envying her felicity, accompting t a point of solemn great∣nesse in her, to be visited by all, without obli∣gation of revsiting any, and of great happi∣nesse to live so in the world, as she were ou of it▪ and so out of it, as she enjoy'd it more than those who were in it, living at vast ex∣pence, keeping a Noble Train and Tabl,
wanting no pleasures nor delights a plenteous Fortune could procure, or honourable mind could wish, having Woods, Gardens, Fish∣ponds, Banqueting-houses, all within the in∣cinct and inclosure of the Walls, with cooling Fountains, where under the shaddow of fresh Arbors, she eats all the Summer Time. And in that state she was, when she offered me the honour of her Table, and Freedome of her House; which her Noblenesse not suffering my Modesty to reuse, imagin Madam, what a delicious life I lead, in so noble Company, so splendious Entertainment, and so Magnificent Equipage; which that you may not think too voluptuous a life, 'tis requisite you know, that the Mornings we imploy in our Devotions in the Chapll of her Monastery, into which she has a Dore opening out of her House, where on Sundays and Holydayes is frequent con∣course of all the Nobler sort, to hear the Nns Musick, absolutely the best in Bruxelles, for Voice and Instrument. You'll pardon Ma∣dam, my Tediousnesse in relating these parti∣culars, and consider how hard it is to mode∣rate ones self in so great Felicitie, which yet I can assure you, without Complement, I would exchange, were it far greater than it is, for one day at Holicroft, or whersoever you are. Mean time be pleased to believe, that wheresoever I am, nothing can change me from being Madam, Your, &c.
V. To Mr. Edward Lewis at the Spa, from Bruxelles, Anno 43. Of Convesation with Ladies. Noble Sir, YOurs from the Spa I received by the last, for your Newes I thank you, that of the Prince of Gaure was welcom to Mada∣moiselle d' Arschot, and more to Madam Bar∣amont, who both command me to present their best respects and remembrances unto you. But now touching our Quarell. You wonder I am always amongst the La∣dies, and I wonder, you and all men are not so; for amongst them, one learns nothing but Vertue, high honour and Noblenesse, whilst a∣mongst Men (such is the corruption of the Times) one learns nothing but Libertinage, Vice and Deboisherie; Mistake me not yet I mean not all Women, but only such you left me with, and Madamoislle de Beauvais, whom I look not upon as Woman, but Vertu's self; of whom you remember I said upon another oc∣casion, that She was so wrapt up from our mortal snce, In all that's Excllent, as one by one Unfolding her out every Excellence, You never should unto bare Woman come. Nor mean I all Men neither, but only your young Gallants of the Time, who have little
of the Court, lesse of the School, and all of the Bourdel in them; who, whilst they learn only to manage the Sword, leae the Ladys in pos∣session of their Books at home: and at best, talk of nothing but Rampards and Parapats, Mosquetad, Estramacons, and Canonads: so as you have nothing but the noise of Drums and Trumpet in your head, whilst they are pre∣sent, and the ringing of it in your ears a month after they are gone. I know too there are bad Women in the world, such who have put off Woman, and put on Impudence; but I thank God I know them not, nor ever mean to do: So are there many learned and pious men; but still me thinks they are but Men, and have their Imperfections. If they be learn'd, they are most commonly too positive and Magisterial, and so opiniatre, as none's opinion must be heard, but thirs. 'Tis a Tyranny to con∣verse with them, and Conversation, you know, should be a Republique, where every ones dis∣course and opinions should be Free: So your Pious men have somewhat in them (common∣ly) of te supercilius, rather deterring than inviting to their conversation; They would have all Grave like themselves, without di∣stinction of Age nor persons; every thing is Vanity with them, every thing Levity: which quality till they sweeten, they are too Austere for me. Now for your Ladies, without noise and quarel you converse with them, there is no contention with them, but in courtsie;
they gentlely give you their opinions, and let you retain your own; they pursue not con∣tention, but Truth, and have no Author to maintain beyond it; their Vertue is charming, and Honour without boast; and finally, 'tis pleasure, not pain, to converse with them. I grant you, they have their Imperfections too, but they are noble ones, and their Birth, their Education, and the modesty of their Sex, makes them nothing, in comparison with those of men; For example, an Oath, an Obsene word with them is horror and blasphemie, that is but sport and gallantry with Men. But what doe I talk of Imperfections, having so newly men∣tioned Mad. de B. with whom Imperfections the same day are not to be nam'd, and of whom I must make more hast to speak, whilst she is effable, she advancing so fast towards perfecti∣on, as she will be ineffable e'r long, and here I must end, since having but named her, I have no more to say, but to admire, and abruptly to tell you that I am, Sir, Your, &c.
VI. To the Lord—from Bruxelles, Anno 44. Of his Resolution to trael into ITALY. My Lord, YOu will wonder, living so deliciously as I do, so as 'tis the general voice of Brussels, None lives but I, every day with Madamoi∣selle de Arschot and the Princesse d'Hghzolern in the Park, singing, and making Msick at foote of every Tree, and head of every Fountain, every day in Feasts at home, or Col∣lations abroad, I can resolve so soon to quit Brusselles, having scarcely yet resided here a year; And you will lay perhaps, (as others do) that I am unconstant, fickle, and even a∣weary of mine own licitie. But I will tell you now, in confidence, my Reason for't. Tis no Inconstancy, but rather a constancy to my first Resolution of lying war and trouble, makes me now resolve to leave this Coun∣try, and travel into Italy; Nor could I excuse it to mine own Country, should I longer stay here, where the French and Hollander be∣twixt them, wast and consume this Country; just like a Taper lighted at both Ends; nor is there any retreat here from the noise of Warr and Tumult, every place being Frontire to some
Enemy or other; nay the very Walls of some Towns (so narrowly they are prest) frontire unto both. Mean time, imagine with what heart I can behold so many noble creatures (so nobly obliging me) suffering under so many heavy Calamities, one's Territory spoyl'd, an others Castles raz'd unto the ground, and all reduc'd by it to such want and povertie, as I heard a Great Princesse say not long since, af∣ter she had reform'd her House and Family al∣most to a fourth part, That she fear'd she should be forc'd to Spinn to maintain the rest. Yet do they venture Lives & Fortunes here to maintain their King in possession of his own, whilst better cheap they might be subject to an other Prince, and change hands, only by crossing of their Arms, and sitting still (a rare Example of Loyalty in Subjects now adayes.) Italy then, being the only Country now free from Wars, and the miseries it brings in train of it, thither I resolve to go, in search of that Peace all Countrys have lost but it. And if you ask me, with what heart I can leave this Noble Company, I am so much obliged unto? Truly, just with such an one as I should depart with Life, or whatever were dearer unto me then it; Nor could I ever resolve to do it, without hope of returning soon again, and some sudden change of Fortune. Mean time, part of my Grief, and resentment of my depar∣ture, I have endeavoured to expresse in this following copy of Verses, which, cause
they are but short, I send you here. Absence, that in each soft and gentle mind, With parting frends dost leave a sting behind; Iust like the Bee, but with far different Fate, Thou wounding where thou lov'st, they where they hate: Since Destiny of things would have it so, What most we love, with pain we should for go; And that the smart of all lov'd things be such, Nothing hereafter may I love too much: So, though I prove less happy by't, ('tis true) I shall, withall, be less unhappy too. This, my Lord, if you shall read with some re∣flexion to your self, you shall do but Justice to Your Lordships, &c. VII. To Madamoiselle de Beauvais, from Paris, Anno 44. Of his Arival at PARIS. Madamoiselle, IN complyance with my Duty, and your Commands, I shall have the honour to let you understand that I am arriv'd at Paris, (thanks to Count Grancy, who arrested all
my Company (except my self) for comming to Gravelling out of the Enemies Country, without Pasport. For Paris, what should I say of it, but that 'tis one of the greatest Cities in the World? and where there is the greatest disorder; 'tis all Hurry, and one spends more spirits with noises here in a week, than he can recover in a years Solitude. They accompt their Kingdom greater than any three of the King of Spains, and so they may this City, then any three of his Cities, Madril, Svil, and Sa∣lamaca, for Court Ville Marchante, and U∣niversitie, not being altogether to be compr'd with it. For the rest, leaving every one to ad∣mire somwhat or other here, evē to that Italian Prelat, who admir'd the Great Aboundance of Cooks shops, and Alloys of Bief. I admire nothing in it; for he ariving at admiration, who gos but a step beyond that he Knows already, I (Madamoiselle) am gon a step beyond Admira∣tion it self, in knowing you. I dare make no stay here, for fear of being tempted to longer stay; nor visit any, for fear of Ingaging my self in too many Visits, the abstinence from things being sar easier than the Temperance of them; wher∣fore tomorrow I depart for Lions, and so for∣wards on my Journy towards Italy. Of the progresse of my Voyage I shall not fail to ad∣vertise you from place to place, since you do me the honour to permit me, and esteem me for. Your, &c.
Postscript: My most humble Baisemains I beseech you to the Lady Marquesse your noble Mother, to Madamoiselle d' Arschot when you see her, and all the rest. VIII. To the same from Marseilles, Anno 44. The Description of the place. Madamoiselle, BY my last from Paris I had the honour to write unto you, Now this is (if you please) to let you understand, that the next day I de∣parted thence with the Messenger for Lions, from thence down the Rhosne by water to A∣vignon, and from thence by Horse to Mar∣seilles all my journey through France being only a bon voyage, or pleasant journey in ex∣cellent company, with Wines that would tempt a Nazareth, and Flesh and foul that would deboish a Minime. For Marseilles, 'tis one of the delightfullst places as yet I ever saw, situated in a corner of the Mediterranean sea, at equal distance betwixt Spain and Italy, in∣joying in a more temperate climat than either,
all the commodities of both. The Sea tam'd and broken by the force of the opposit Hands before it arives unto the walls, flows thither, (leaving all its ragngnes behind) as gently as any River, when by an In-let entring the Port it becomes as calm and smooth as any Lake. The Town on the left hand of it Thea∣ter-wise, (with one house elevated above an other) seeming situated on purpose to behold the pleasant spectacle of the Port (some two miles about in Oval form) where ride all the French Galleys, so evenly rank'd, as whilst their Becks like a stand of Pikes seem to charge the Water, their Prows seem to assault the Land, and brave the Cawsway surrounding all the Port, where towards the Town-side the La∣dies accompanied with their Gallants walk every Evening some ten or twelve a breast, sollacing themselves with Musick and Conver∣sation til Midnight; Nor shall you easily find any where in France bandsomer Women, bet∣ter behaved, nor richlier clad, so accostable and free of Company and Entertainment, as none (no not strangers themselves) are stran∣gers there to any: o as comparing them with the Maritime Women of other Seas, (for the most part fowl, ugly, and weather-beaten) you would easily conclude, 'twas only on those Seas Venus was born. For the Town, 'tis ra∣ther well compact, than great, and more com∣modious than magnificent, containing about some seventeen thousand Houses within the
walls, and without (on the adjacent Hills and Vallies) some two and twenty thousand more: so as you'd imagine them an Army of Houses in disrout, or the greatest part o'th' Towne broke out the walls, their incinct not being ca∣pacious enough to contain them all. To these Bastids or Houses of Pleasure, in Spring and Summer time, (which is with them almost all the year) they retire themselves, and passe their Time in nothing but Sports and Jollity, where for more than this fortnight I have past my Time amongst the rest, in expecting the commodity of Embarquement for Genoa. Mean time, Madamoiselle, be you who are Pa∣tronesse of my Voyage, but as propitious to me by Sea as you by Land have been, and I shall soon be at my journies end, of which I can no waies doubt, being as I am, Madamoiselle, Your, &c.
IX. To the same from Genoa, Anno 45. Of his Arival there. Madamoiselle, VVith good Reason I imagined my Voyage by Sea would prove as for∣tunate as my journie by Land, having you for Patronesse of either; We having past with favourable Wind, and prosperous Navigation from Marseilles hither, frighted only a little with Pirats on our way, which necessitated us to put in at Monaco, where for some foure or five dayes during my Residence there, the Prince did me the honour to lodge me in his Pallace, being a great Vertuoso, and not only a great Lover of Musick, but an excellent Mu∣sitian. He is really a Prince very noble and generous, deserving a far greater Principality, it being only a Rock or Promontory into the Sea, some mile about, o' look'd by Horrid Cliffs, hanging like Clouds or Tempests in the air, threatning each moment to fall upon their heads. It has a pretty Port, capable of some twenty Ships and Galleys, which is his chief∣est Revenue, every Ship paying some 3 Crowns for Anchorage; yet is his Pallace magnificent∣ly built, a' Italian, and richly and nobly furnish'd. And so much for Monaco. From
whence I imbarqu'd for Genoa in the Princes own Faluque, all the strand of Genoa for more than  hundred mile seeming but one continu∣ed Town, allowing the interjacent Mountains and Valleys for Gardinage, planted with all sorts of delicious fruit, Oranges and Limmons amongst the rest, in so great abundance, as their flowers perfume the Sea all the way you passe along. Ariv'd at last at St. Pietro d' , the Suburbs of Genoa, you would ima∣gine that Architecture had install'd there all the raities of its Art, and given the last proof o is excellency, it being a Seminarie of Palla∣es; no one plot in the world, for its bignesse, being able to shew so many and so stately, . From thence passing by the  pot into the Town, first thing you admire fr 'tis Admirable all) is its Mole or Wall, forc't all along into the Sea to secure the Haven, rampir'd with whole Rocks thrown in at foot thereof, to break the fury of the waves, in beholding which, you would imagine, that as the Giants formerly pil'd Mountains on Mountains to scale the Heavens: so▪ these threw one upon another to penetrate the Abysse. Next prospect that takes your eyes, is that of the Pallace of the Duke 'or, fron∣ting the Haven with its Gardens, and Collose∣an Statuas, making a glorious shew. Whence you passe onward towards the City, situated on rising ground, all built of white Stone, ma∣king a fairer shew without, than it does with∣in,
by reason of the narrownesse of the streets. Here I no sooner ariv'd, and had ta'n up mine Inne, but the Marquis Philippo Palavicino fetcht me straight away from thence, and lodg'd me in his Pallace, I easily imagining upon whose accompt it was, when that Night at Supper the Marquesse his Mother drank a health to all the Flandres Ladies, as he him∣self did afterwards, in a solemn Entertainment he made for me aboard one of the States ships in the Harbour, together with divers other noble Genueses, where whilst he drank your health, Ecco reported to Land & Sea, the Fame of the Flandres Ladies, and the Canon unto the skies; 'twere infinite to tell you all my Entertainments here, all (Ladies) to expresse his Gratitude unto you, as I in Gratitude to him am oblig'd to let you know. One thing I observ'd here, that whilst they glory in being a free Estate, even to have Libertas written on the Arms of the Commonwealth, the Nobili∣ty notwithstanding abuse the Common people at pleasure, they having onely the Liberty to hang themselves, if they please, for other Li∣berty they have none. Whence I see 'tis but a meer cheat this Popular Liberty, the Inchant∣ment of the vulgar, and Gugaw they pro∣mise Children, to make them good Boyes; yet 't has been, and ever will be the madnesse of the Common people to goe in quest of it, as Don Quixote did of his Dulcinea, or Sancho Pansa of his imaginarie Iland or Government,
which, just like your floating Ilands, slips away from you, when you think to set foot on it, and so eludes your imaginary possession, which those who govern them well understanding, they alwaies delude them with that specious name, when in reality there is no such thing at all, the true liberty of the people only consist∣ing in being well commanded, and the Magi∣strates in being well obeyed: From whence results the perfect Harmony of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, which then is disaccorded, when the one deflects to Tyranny, and the o∣ther to Riot and Licentiousnesse, the one a∣busively call'd Absolute Domination, and the other Liberty: From whence finally results those two Extreme mischiefs of all Estates, by Fronto wisely observ'd to be equally dange∣rous, where all things are lawfull, or where nothing is. But enough of this discourse: and to conclude with Genoa, their Churches here are most of them richly guilt, Marble being their vildest material, their Musick very good, but that of their Comedys excellent. I ariving here just at the overture of their Theater. By my next, Madamoiselle, I shall have the ho∣nor to write unto you from Rome; towards which to morrow is going, Madamoiselle, Your, &c.
X To the same from Rome, Anno 45. Of his Aival tere, and e Overture of some Aais. Madamoiselle, BY my last from Genoa you understood of my Arival there. Now this (if you please) is to let you understand, how from thence by Lucca, Pisa, Florence, Sena, &c. finally I am arived here at Rome, admiring nothing so much in all my voyage, than that from Bruxelles hiter, having made the Tour of Cls, 't has cost me only two and twenty Pistlles. Next day after my Arival here, I visited the Duke and Dutchesse of Boullon, who live here ve∣ry privatly since the last Popes death, with the fall of the Barbarins, they flling lewise in Credit and Authority: so they being no frends of her Highnesse, (as you know) no matter how great Enemies they are. One pretty mistake I ran into at unawares, treating him with Ex∣cellence, (as formerly I was wont to do) when e pretends (as since I have understood) to be treated with Altezze, which I am glad of (who otherwise should be sorry to err in so main a point of Civility, in giving an Ace too little, rather than an Ace too much) since he treats her Altezze with nothing but Excellence. I
have been also to visit the Marquis Rene Ben∣tivolgo, who retains still a grateful memory of the Curtesy he receiv'd in Flandres of par∣ticulars, though as to the general he is so little Frend, as I'm inform'd he is taking conditions under France. The Marquis Matthei I saw too, there being a solemn Justing or Running at Ring and Sarazen this week at the Cardinal d' Estes (where all the great Ladies of Rome were present) consisting of three Bolonez, three Fer∣rarians, and three Roman Knights; of which the Marquis Mathei was chief of the Romans, and Bentivolgio of the Bolonez, both doing ex∣cellent well, adding somewhat of the aire of Flandres to that of Italy, that made them ex∣cel the rest. His Highnesse Agent in this Court I have not visited yet; thinking it high time, after I have prepar'd my materials, to as∣semble my Workmen for finishing the Edifice, towards which one main Help I hope to have of Cardinal Carasfa, newly promoted to the Cardinalat. More Madamoiselle by the next: Now give me leave (if you please) to conclude this with my must humble baise mains to her Highnesse your Sister, my Lady Mar{que} your Mother, and with the Assurance that I am ever, Madamoiselle, Your, &c.
XI. To the same, from Rome, Anno 45. Containing an Historical Narration of the Mariage of the Dutchess of Lorain. Madamoiselle, SInce those who are to Inform others ought first to be well informed themselves, you will please to correct me, if any where I have err'd in this following Narration of her High∣nesse Marriage, wherein, as 'tis my duty, I have endeavoured to vindicate the Justice of her Cause, and declare her Innocence. Henry Duke of Lorain dying without issue Male, leaving only two Daughters, Nicole and Claude. The Count of Vandemort (Father of the present Duke) assum'd the Dutchie, as next Heir unto the House (by right o'th' Law Salique, as he pretended) in deffalance of the Masculin Line (the Daughters of the last Duke but weakly reclaiming) when more to streng∣then the title of his House (by connecting the branches of either Stock together) he propos'd the Marriage of Charles his eldest Son, with the Princesse Nicole, eldest Daughter of the deceased Duke, with Protestation in case of his refusal (well perceiving his unwillingness) to marry her to the Prince of Faulxburgh, and disinherit him, when he knowing there was no
dallying with his Father, of stern nature, ren∣dred more violent by opposition, seemingly assented, and so was forc'd to marry her, yet would he no ways bed her, such an Aversion he had from her, til his Father perceiving it, (and knowing he had don nothing, until he had don also that) he forc'd him to bed her in his pre∣sence, taking witnes of it, as his son did present∣ly after of the force thereof; who though a Re∣ligious Prince, was not Religious yet, to that point, to lose a Dukedom for want of bedding a Lady, shortly after his Father dying, he conti∣nued still his cohabitation with her, til having assured, as he thought, the possession of the Dutchie, they severed at last, like Bodies never well joyn'd, having no other Issue of their Mariage, but nails and teeth (as one said anti∣ently) whē he accounting himself free from all Bonds of Matrimony, (being assur'd so, by many grave Divines, not only of his own, but of others Dominions) after some years sute, & all the precedent formalities of the Church, Maried publiquely the Lady Beatrix de Cu∣snce, Princesse of Cantacrox, one of the con∣siderblet Mariages then for noble, rich, and fair (under the degree of absolute Soveraigns) in the Christian world, her House having of∣ten allyed with that of Loraine, and her De∣mins when he maried her (as I have often heard) amounting nigh to Thirty thousand pounds a year: In which Mariage [Celebra∣ted by a Bishop in the face of the Publick
Church] they liv'd some 7 years happily to∣gether (he having fair Issue by her) when a storm was rais'd against them at Rome, by the suscitation (as was imagined) of his Brother Prince Francis, and the Princesse Nicole, he (having espous'd the second Daughter of Duke Henry, by whom he had numerous Issue) for the Intrest of his Children, and she for e∣mulation, and Revenge on her fair Rival; which proceeded so far at last, as Excommuni∣cation was denoun't against them, not to be revok't, till they mutually separating, should submit their cause to the decission of the Court of Rome. This occasioned many Rumours in the world, some allowing no Divorce at all, but only by Death, (as if the tie of Mariage were like that of the Gordian knot,) others inferring from their long Cohabitation, their validating the Mariage, when all Casuists agree, that no length of Time can render that Mariage or Contract lawfull, which was unlawfull at the first, and that force or metus cadens in constan∣tem virum, (as they tearm it) was one of the principal Anullers of Mariage, nothing being more essential to it than the free consent of the parties. Their long cohabitation then was still but the same force drawn out in length: And for their main objection of all, the Censure of the Church▪ What should I say? But many a Veritie may be doubtfull, for want of being well explicated and understood, that Truth
has no greater Enemy than verisimilitude and likelihood; and that the condemnation may oftentimes be just, and the person condemned innocent. This inclosed I beseech you to her Highnesse, with the most humble baise mains of Madamoiselle, Your, &c. XII. To the Dutchesse of Loraine, from Rome, Anno 45. Touching the state of her Affairs. Madam, AFter long poring in the dark, I begin at last to perceive some light in your High∣nesse affairs here, and to find how his High∣nesse Agents negotiation here, is more to take off the Excommunication, than to procure a Divorce from the first Mariage, or Ratificati∣on of the last; and this I came to light of by this occasion: I recommending your Affairs the other day to the Dutchesse Matthei, one who can do all here, his Holinesse Governing Rome, Donna Olympia him, and she Donna O∣lympia. She most readily undertook it, first, for your Highnesse sake, next for her Brothers, and lastly perhaps for mine, (I having the ho∣nour
to wait often upon her) commanding me to bring my Man, and his businesse should be dispatcht. Whereupon I joyfully ran to inform his Highnesse Agent of what had past, imagining he would have run as joyfully to imbrace the occasion, when contrary to my expectation, I found him nothing mov'd with it all, rather surpriz'd, confus'd and Interdict, and so cold (in fine) as conecting delays unto delays, at last he absolutely refus'd to goe, less he had his Highnesse warrant first, whih ex∣cuse appear'd to me frivolous; for if he had order to do the thing, (as now I suspected he had none) what need he further order to do it well? This suspition shortly after grew up to certitude, when discoursing with Cardinal Caraffa about your Highnesse affairs, and recommending to him the Iustice of your cause, and expedition of the Rhota, He an∣swered me, with the prudence of an Italian, and franchize of a Germain, (with whom he was Nuntius, when I had the honour to know him first) that I urg'd the expedition of an affair, wherein they should disoblige both the Emperour and the Crown of France, without so much as gratifying the Duke himself, who being the main party, sollicited it not at all; Whereupon I wondred at mine own blindness all this while, not to have perceiv'd, how whilst the Emperour embrac'd Prince Francis Intrest, (who had put himself under his Protection) and the Crown of rance (for the same Reasons)
that of the Princesse Nicole's; his Altzze of Lorain had his Interest too, not to set the Princesse Nicole at Liberty to marry with any other, till she were past estate of bearing chil∣dren, lest some foreign Prince having issue by her, might claim the Dutchie in their right, to the Exclusion of his own House, if not of his own Body. This, Madam, I could not but re∣present to your Highnesse consideration, that you might perceive how all the World (not only there but here) is govern'd by Interest and Reason o State, in spight of Iustice and Innocence. Mean time, for my part I can on∣ly assure your Highnesse, that I have none, nor ever had other Ambition, than only (Madam) to declare upon all occasions how much I am Your Highnesse most humble, &c. XII. To Sir J. S. from Rome, Anno 4. In answer to hs Nes of the Scots comig into England. Noble Sir, I Give you humble thanks for your News, and if it were not an homely complement, could wish it better for your sake: since if I be n't deceiv'd, (as I shall never be, in thinking too well of a Scotch Prebyterian) they come but
into England with their Arms, as Butlers doe at Christmas with their Cards, to set you a playing, that all the Gains may come to their Box at last; for if you remember, they have much to retaliate with the English, both for injuries and benefits; of the first sort are our often Inrodes into their Country, and the deadly fewd of the Nations; of the second are our assisting them to change Religion, and Re∣bell against their lawfull Prince; Now, if they should have a mind to be quit with us, I know not whether twere not better have them Ene∣mies than Frends. And thus much for your Newes. Now for ours, I'll tell you a pleasant passage hapned here about the Book you sent, in front or title thereof was a Dove, with an Olive branch in the mouh, and the word or motto, Holy Innocence be blest, (which if in∣tended by the Scots, might better have been a Vulture, with its prey i'th' mouth, and this motto, Curst be their Rapine) which coming in conjuncture with his Holinesse Innocent the Tenth's assumption to the Papacy, whose Arms are a Dove, with an Olive branch in the mouth, 'twas interpreted as a prophecy of him, so ridiculous they are, wherefore prethy come up to Rome, that we may laugh at them, I be∣ing in mighty want of one, as Cicero says, Cum quo doctè rideam, that may laugh learnedly with me; for these Italians here are such wise men at home, and such Fools abroad, as they know nothing out of Italy, though they pre∣tend
to know every thing: And for the place, 'tis a common saying, that to like Rome, one must be either very vertuous or very vicious: if so, I am neither, for I swear I like it not. Good meat there is, delicious wine, and ex∣cellent fruit; but that is the Climats vertue, and none of theirs. Give me good Company, good Natures, & good Mirth, & the Devil of a∣ny such thing they have here, all being for their Interest, and conserving their Individuums, I ne∣ver hearing a hearty Laughter since I came, nor seeing a smile but from one end of the mouth to th'other. In a word, when you have seen their Ruins, you have seen all here; for all their an∣tient Virtues, like their antient Structures, are fan to ruine: and for Generositie and Magni∣ficence, it seems to have dyed with the last Pope, for now there's none left alive; Yet do your Cardinals (I'll say that for them) live like great Princes as to the Exterior, with great trains of Coaches, Staffires and other dependancies; but examine their Interior, and you'll find, while their Bodies inhabite whole Acres of Palaces, their souls in their straight narrow bo∣oms are stifled for want of Room. And hus much for the better sort; for the other, I must confesse they are the civillest, and farthest from Quarrel in the world, (thanks to their cow∣ardise) so as saying but con licenza, you may pluck them by the Noses, tread upon their Toes, or do any thing but touch their money or their Wives, and they'l tell ye, Vostre Sig∣niorie
e patrono. In fine, with the old you shall hear nothing but quattri in their mouthes, and with the young Putana, yet with all these Vices, if you'll believe them, there a no where in the world more Virtuoso's than here; for if an Ape do but his tricks well, or an Ass leap thorough a Hoop, they call him a Virtuoso strait. But you'll say this is an odd way to invite you hither; wherefore I'll take an other way, and tell you there is no Town nor Country in the World better Govern'd than this, nor where there's more variety to satisfie the Curious, where one of your Reli∣gion lives more free, nor one of your know∣ledge better improves himself, (their very streets being as learned and full of Erudition, as others Histories) Every wall is a Monument, and the stones of more than a thousand years standing, stand up in testimony of their Reli∣gion, of the Truth of which, though there were no other Argument, yet twere enough to convince any Rational man, that it must needs be that Church and Religion our blessed Saviour promis'd perpetuity unto, since in so great corruption of manners it stands still, and falls not to the ground, while so many others who pretend to more vertue and morality of life, are wholly perisht and decay'd. Farwell, and prithy come up (I say agen) that we may laugh, for I have great need of it, Your, &c.
XIV. To the Lord Marquis Camillo Bagni, from Rome, Anno 45. Declaring unto him the nobleness of N. My Lord, SInce you did me the honour to make me of your Confidence at Bruxelles, 'tis but Justice I make you my Confident from hence, and dis∣cover t' ye a noble piece of bravery of the Ad∣mirable person we both Admire so much, yee can never Admire enough. Know then, that I lately receiv'd from Mad∣de. B. a Letter of Exchange, in so obliging terms as none but her own words can expresse them, and therefore verbatim I send them here. Sir, I esteem more this occasion than to have found a Treasure, as in effect 'tis one for to oblige ones Frends. You may give this inclosed to Monsieur d' Armencourt, who will make no difficulty to deliver you the sum therein exprest, neither does he know where∣fore 'tis, but may imagine I owe it you. I let you understand this, because I know every one is not willing to have these things known. In fine, I deal with you, as I would another should doe by me, if I were in your place. Words so nobly obliging, and so worthy
of Eternal memory, as if ever any thing I write may last, 'twill be for having inserted them in my Writings, every word that proceeds from her, being a certain charm against forgetful∣nesse; But I forget in the mean time to tell you how I have seen the Marquese your Sister here, who complains of your forgetfulnesse of her; whence it seems that charm has rather a particular than a general influence. Pray ob∣lige me to let you hear from you by the next, and esteem me ever, as really I am, for Your Lordships most humble, &c. XV. To Count Salazar, from Rome Anno 46. On the taking Pimbino and Porta Longona. My Lord, I Congratulate (with all my heart) your new Accession of honours, and wish that Goulden Key you have lately received in mercede from his Catholique Majesty, may but serve to open you the door to many and greater, &c. The taking of Piombino and Porta Longona hath occasioned many rumours here amongst the Italians, to the disdvantage of his Majesty of
Spain, to stop the mouths of whom, in imita∣tion of Boccalino (a way much taking heer) I have made and published this following. Lusus Hispniae, & Galiae. A Spaniard and Frenchman playing in Ita∣ly, the Spaniard played negligently, as one who had much to lose, and was too confi∣dent perhaps he could never lose it all; whilst the Frenchman like a cunning Gamester, knowing all the slights and advantages of play ha uddenly won of the Spaniard Piombino, and ta Longona, he esteeming the one no moe thn a leaden token, and the other but nl a a nst o Rocks, for a few ships to har∣bour in: But the Italian standing by, who had learnt (o the Iews perhaps) to estimate things on another manner (In detaille, not in gosse as did the Spnard) thought it a migh∣ty matter, and wondred at the others negli∣gence, as you might perceive by the often, casting up his eyes, lifing up his hands, shrug∣ging his Shoulders, and crying out Capito ever and anon, inclining toward the French party by degrees, in wishing him good luck, (as your Rooks do always to those who win) and seeming much to rejoyce in his good fortune; but seeing no Baratta coming in, as when th Spaniard won, his joy began to cool, and he was a little out of countenance, when tha
which put him quite out, was this Reproach made to him by the Spaniard. Thou silly penurious Italian, that begin∣ning with Quatrius, counts a Iuli thy bloud, a Teston thy Livelihood, and a Crown thy soul, with a heart and Brest narrow as thy country, that accounts Massa and Moaco two mighty principalities, & them Soveraign Prin∣ces, the one for being Lord and Master of some mile of Rock, wih a Port no bigger than a duc∣king Pond, and tother for having dominion of a Plain twenty Farmers in Flandres have big∣ger fields to feed their Oxen on; and for his marble of Carrara, it only shews how hard a Country Italy is, and how hardly you live in it, when stones are the chiefest revenue of a sove∣raign Prince. Thou thinkst me now quit undon (I warrant thee) for losing two petty places, they afford no Place in the mapp of the world too, allowing no more to your Italy it self than a Flys wing cn cover, whilst I am Lord of Ter∣ritorys wearies the Sun to travel over, nor can he sooner end his journey on them in the West, but he begins it on them in the East agen. Get the a greater Book for shame, and leave thy Hornbook of Italy, if thou wouldst not be alwayes esteemed a Baby in the world, when thou wilt know this is nothing, and know thou know'st nothing too. Mean time, I would thou hadst felt the heaviness of the French yoke thou wouldst so fain bring on thy neck, that thou mightst find by Experience how light that of
the Spaniard is, which tho'w'dst so fain shake off; so he, when the Italian left off his insul∣ting, and the Spaniard continued playing till he had won all agen. As 'tis the wish and prophecie of My Lord, Your, &c. XVI. To the Princesse of Hoghzollern, from Rome, Anno 47. Of his Irksom lise at ROME, and hope he had to revisit FLANDRES. Madam, MAy I not live, if I breath the Air of Rome but only to sigh after that of Flan∣dres, I living here me thinks (wanting that Company I had there) just like Adam out of Paradise, among Beasts, having lost the blessed conversation of Angels; for what comfort's in a Heaven, where one never sees the Stars? I mean those living Starrs I saw in the Hea∣ven of Bruxelles, without whom me thinks the Sun at Noon-day is but Cimmerian darknesse, for 'tis not the Eyes, but the Mind is cheared with light. Whence 'tis that I converse more with the dead than living here, (their antient Statua's and Pictures I mean,) and find
them  far the better company of the two. And if for those few months of your Excel∣lencies absence in Holland I liv'd so melan∣choly a life, my Lute being silenc't, and I ne∣ver appearing in Park but like a walking ghost, or a body without a soul; Imagine Madam now how melancholly a Creature I am, and how I pine away, so far from you, and so long absent. One thing comforts me, that by all Prognostickes both there and here, I conjecture my Absene now can∣not be long from thence: When but con∣serve for me (Madam) your good Graces, and I shall be more happy than before, the more of unhapinesse I have experienc'd since; None knowing better the benefit of health, than those who have been sick; nor rellishing prosperity better than those who have tasted adversity before, as has in being deprived of your sight, Madam, Your, &c.
XVII. To the Count Salazar, from Genoa, Anno 48. Of the Reduction of NAPLES, and some passages concerning it. My Lord, OF the Reduction of Naples, I gave you advertisement by my last from Rome, from whence I departed just upon the advice there, Embarquing in the Popes Galleys at Civita Vecchia, together with the Marquisses Iean Baptista, and Felice Mario, with the Marquesse Spinelli, recommended particularly to them by the Marquesse de Buffalo, and trea∣ted by them with all noble courtesie: Our Navigation being so speedy, and prospe∣rous, as in lesse than three days we arrived at Genoa; on the way we met with the Duke of Tursi comming from Naples, who confir∣med all I writ unto you, as did likewise your Ambassadour Signior Roncilio at Genoa, we conferring Letters together, and he ma∣king solemn bonfires for the news; yet do the French report the contrary, the best Archi∣tectures in the world of false rumours, when it makes for their advantage, as does this, they knowing how 'tis only the first reports of ill news, that dismays, astonishes, and disanimates,
which if you can divert and damp a while, people are nothing near so struck and startled with it afterward; which false rumours I tracted from the very Fountain, finding them on the Friday after, the day before the General Postday; impoysoning with it all the pub∣lique places of Rome, from whence news is derived, and flowes abroad in the World. The Copy of that Letter Count de Ogniato thought fit to make use of, to injealouse the Nea∣politans, upon the arrival of the Duke Guise, as written from France intercepted and interpre∣ted, is thus. Behold the best sport in the world for us, our Enemies fighting against our Enemies; to prevail our selves of this occasion, you must be sure to keep the parties so equally ballan∣ced, one mayn't destroy to ther, but with its own destruction; wherefore if you find the Neapolitan too weak, you may strengthen them with small succours; if too strong, you may weaken them, with drawing them out in small factions, ever keeping your main de∣sign secret, till they be both so weakned, you may easily make an absolute conquest of ei∣ther; Let the Duke of Guise then be precau∣tioned by the Duke of Alansons ill successe at Antwerp, In discovering his designs too soon, and allaruming them by it, to unite forces as against a common Enemy; whence I wonder why he proclaimes so loud his de∣scendency from the house of Anjou; enough
to waken their jealousies, that he intends to set on foot the Title of that house again; pray let him be advised of it. More Instru∣ctions you need not; all being compriz'd in this only, that you look upon the Neapoli∣tans as wild beasts, that may be subdued, but never tamed. This published amongst them work't such effect, as out of this Letter they sinisterly inter∣preted all the Duke of Guizes Actions, every thing he did, stumbling them afterwards, just like French Posthorses, who stumbling once, never leave running headlong till they be down. Thus you see (My Lord) how little things sometimes (which History never menti∣ous) confer mainly to the performance of greater ones; and the smallest occasions as hinges somtimes serve to turn the world; No more; but my most humble service, and best respects to your self, your Noble Lady, and Monsieur Recourt, &c. being Your Lordships most, &c.
XVIII To the Lord Thomas Somerset from Marseilles, Anno 47. Of his voyage and return out of ASIA. My Lord, I Have travail'd farther than ever Vlysses did, since I left Italy, and had the honour to see you last; yet write Odysses of my travails he that list, for I have nothing of rare or parti∣cular to write, but what has been heard of a hundred times before: For that little then I have seen of Asia, the Isles of the Archipela∣go, the Dardanelles, Pontus Euxine, and the Helespont, &c. consult Sands, and others travails (if you please) where you shall find them acurately and at large set down; for me, He only say of Constantinople, that for an Im∣perial seat, 'tis one of the noblest Cities I e∣ver saw, situated on two Seas with its two feet Collossean like, treading on Asia and Eu∣rope, nor did I ever see truer bravery, or grea∣ter gallantry than there, every one wearing such various coloured silks, with swelling Turbans, and flowing garments, as their streets appear just like Tulipp Gardens, whilst ours (with so many's wearing black) appear just like mortuary houses, all mourning for the dead: Here finding no commodity of voya∣ging
farther Levant, the Seas being all ob∣structed by reason of the Venetian warrs, after some two or three weeks residence, I returned again in a French Bottom, and am at last arrived at Marseilles, where I am now on point of Embarquing for Spain on an En∣glish Vessel having only Time from my ne∣cessary preparatives, to assure you my Lord, that as there is none I am more obliged to than your self, so there is none who can with greater verity say that he is, My Lord your, &c. XIX To the Lord Charls Dudley, Prince of the Empire, &c. from Lisbon, Anno 48. Of his Sea voyage from PROVNCE to POR∣TUGAL. My Lord, IF he that's at charges of setting forth the ship has right to the voyage it makes, Cer∣tainly your Lordship has right to the relation of all the passages of my voyage, who was at charges of setting forth the Passenger. You may please to understand then, that the same
day I parted from you at Marseilles, I met at Toulon with the Captain of our Ship, with whom I went to Eres, where our Ship lay at Anchor; Nor am I so great a contemner of Vanitie, but I confesse I took a little, to find Fame, like a Harbinger flown thither before me to take up my Lodgings; whilst all the Town was taken up for Lodgements of Soul∣diers, the Dean o'th' chief Church meeting me, and knowing me by the same he had heard of me at Marseilles, courteously offe∣ring me Lodging in his house; The next day the wind turning fair, we imbarqu'd, and mer∣rily sayl'd along the Coast of Provence, find∣ing the Gulph of Lyons, so furious to others, as gentle as a Lamb to us; yet had we so fresh a gale of wind, as in 4 or 5 dayes say we had left the coast of France, Catalonia, and Valen∣tia behind, and were now where the Mediter∣ranean (like a wide Vessel with a narrow neck) began to streighten a little, betwixt Minorca & Murcia, when one Evening tacking once or twice about to hale up the beck or spur of a Galley, driving on the waves (the relicts of some wrack perhaps) we might perceive two great ships chasing us, when we needing no more spurs, clapt on all the Canvas we could make, and fled away so fast before them, as our cha∣sers perceiving they followed us in vain, gave o'r their chase about the shutting in of the Evening, and fell to Seaward of us; when full glad and joyful were we, but 'twas but a short
Joy and Gladnesse, for the next morning by break of day two Turkish Galleys from a nest of Rocks (where they ordinarily sculk, called the Collybre on the Spanish coast) made towards us amain, neither could our best defence of flight avail us now, the Sea all becalm'd, and winds breathlesse (as we were our selves for fear, our ship though call'd the Hercules being of small defence, since ne Hercules contra duos, what is Hercules against two?) whilst those Catterpillars the Galleys on their Oares, as on so many feet, made towards us a main; at which we looking about us, (as People in danger do, who would be glad to run away) might espy a far off those two ships had given us the chase o'r night, which comforting us not a little, we gave them a warning-piece (at all adventures) to advertise them of our dan∣ger, when presently we might behold them tack about, and make up towards us, which the Turks and we joyntly perceiving, we sudden∣ly chang'd minds (Fear departing from us to them, and Courage from them to us) and they of chasers, now becom our chase, whilst we in∣compassing them with our three Ships, as Hun∣ters with their Toils doe wild Beasts, or so many Greyhounds would a Hare, gave them a turn or two, now from the Spanish shore to∣wards Barbary, and now back agen, till at last they escap'd away before us, on the strength of their Oars, whilst our flagging sayls seem'd to chide and murmur at the winds deserting them
This danger past, we has'd out our Boat, and went aboard the other ships, to thank them for their timely Aid, whom we found to be two Holland men of warre (the Tergose, and the Lewarder) part of a Squadron whose Ad∣miral was in Portugal, sent out with expresse Commission to scour the Seas of Turks and Pi∣rats, with the Vice Admiral of whom I present∣ly making Acquaintance, he easily invited me along with him to Lisbon, ( being not secure in the other Ship where I was,) so altering my course from Spain to Portugal, and changing ships, I began a new Voyage on Sea, without ever going to Land. Thence we sail'd along the Spanish coast from Cap to Cape, escaping a little danger nigh Cape de Pales of driving on Land) our Cable sheering whilst we lay at Anchor there, to make provision of fiering in a Juniper wood nigh Carthagene) the King of Spain being not more absolute Lord on Land, than we were on his Seas, hasing all ships in keen of us, every one contributing somewhat to us of Sea provisions, til at last drawing nigh the Strights, the shore now on both sides af∣fording us a delightfull prospect, betwixt the steep Rocks of Gibraltar on the Spanish coast, and the Embattaild walls of Zent, situated on the high Mountains on the Barbary shore, in less than 5 or 6 hours we pass'd all the streits, and out of the Mediterranean Sea past into the Grand Ocean, when steering our course directly towards Portugal, within som two days after we
arived at Cascais in the mouth of Lisbon Road, where I landed some 5 or 6 weeks after my de∣part from Provence, and took leave of my Hollander, who had treated me most courte∣ously and nobly all the way; neither did I ever meet with any of that Nation more a Gentleman than he. Of his Arival to LISBON. And now behold me (my Lord) safely ari∣ved in Portugal at Cascais, some twelve Eng∣lish miles from Lisbon, where the Governour (besides the ordinary vice of that Nation, the foolisher the wiser they pretend to be) would needs play the States-men, and be wiser than the Truth, in suspecting me for some Spi, or else come thither upon some great design, and so presently he sent me to Lisbon with a Souldier along with me, with express order not to leave me till he had deliverd me to the Secretary of State, who being altoge∣ther as great a Politician as my Governour, made great difficulty of my stay in the Coun∣try, till spying my Lute, the suspition I was a Musician, as clavis clavem pellit, soon drove out of his head the suspition that I was a Spy: so lodging me by way of Caution in an English Gentlemans house, a great Confident of the Kings, till he might inform his Majestie of me (who being an excellent Musician, was cove∣tous of knowing all Strangers of that professi∣on) He no sooner understood of my arival,
but he sent for me to Court, and was so well satisfied with me, as continuing my Lodging in Mr. Iohn Muley's the same English Gentle∣mans house, than which the whole Town affor∣ded not more noble accommodation, The next day he sent for me again, where after some two or three hours tryal of my skill, (es∣pecially in the composative part of Musick, in which his Majesty chiefly exceeded) I past Court Doctor; though Don Emanuel Sa, Grand Chamberlain to the King, swore 'twas rather a tryal for a Doctor in an Universitie, than a Gentleman in the Court. After this, his Majestie was pleased to assign me a certain Cavallier of th' Order, to whom I was to ad∣dresse my self for Audience and accesse to his person as often as I pleas'd. Mean time, Regis ad exemplum, I was lookt upon with particular regard by all, passing most of my time in Mr. Muley's Kinta, or Garden house some three or four English mile from Lisbon, whose Amenity I cannot bet∣ter set before your Eyes, than in this follow∣ing Copy of Verses. Where in a Vale near Tagus Golden side, Through all the world renowned far and wide, Though now for Silver waters famed more Than e'r it was for Golden sands before, Circled with fruitfull Olives, Vines, and Corn, A! Pallas, Ceres, Bacchus, there were born,
A Kinta stands so situated t'has Resort unto 'r of every Rurall Grace, (And Rurall Graces are in Summer far Iollier than those of Towns in Winter ar) Whose fairest Garden's planted round with∣all Those Trees wee fruitfull and delicious call, As Orange, Lymon, Apricock and Peach, (Whose rudier sides do Nimphs their blushing teach) Silk animating Mulberies, spreading wide, Pomegranads, Figs, and hundred more beside, Under whose leaves the Sun-shine all the day Delights with dancing beams to sport and play, Whilst to its Walks each cooling wind dos come, T'asswage the Calenture o'th' burning Sun. Here, whilst I often us'd to make resort, To quicken the dull pleasures of the Court, One day my Muse (that ne'r in any place More present to me, nor propitious was,) Appear'd to me in all her best aray, And ths to th' Kinta's Glory bid me say, How all the Gardens of th' Hesperides, Semiram's pensil' ones, Alcinous'es, Lucullus's nor Seneca's to boot, Compar'd but unto this, were nothing too't.
XX. To Doctor Hart at Rome, from Lis∣bon, Anno 48. Concerning some reprts of him at ROME. Deer Doctor, THere are some places, as some persons, better agreeing with our Genius and disposition than others; and if ever there were any that agreed not with mine, 'twas Rome, where one cannot stand without supplanting, speak without Caution, nor live without extreme Industry, all is Insidiousness, all shoving and shouldring, and all sollici∣ting, making businesse of every thing, and then following close that businesse; which considered, 'tis no wonder I ne∣ver agreed with it, nor it with me: Nor need I goe so far as the stars with the Astrono∣mer to find the cause of it; for when good fortune falls, I cannot crowd and shove to catch it: I had rather be silent than be solici∣tous what to say, nor am I busie body enough to have a head fit for businesse, and for Indu∣stry 'tis not in my Nature, nor I can no more change my disposition of mind, than my linea∣ments of body. This I say, to let you know, that as I liv'd, so I came a discontented person from Rome, which I declare on every occasion,
so 'tis true (what is reported of me) that dis∣coursing oe day here with his Majesty of Portugal, and he demanding of me how Atts flourisht at Rome, I (betwixt malicious and merry) answered, that as those Arts his Ma∣jesty favour'd Regis ad exemplum, were the study of the Portugal Courtier, so all at Rome studied the Popes Arts, which was Hording up of money, and nothing else. And though I wonder how his Holynesse came to understand this, there being scarce four persons in the Ca∣binet beside the King and I when 'twas spoke, yet I am glad he did, it being necessary Prin∣ces should know, that their better lives live by the breath of Strangers, and their Fames can no more fly out of their own Territories and Dominions without obliging them, then they can voyage by Sea, or travail by Land, with∣out some Vehicule to transport them, their own Subjects being but as their own leggs, whilst strangers as those ships and montures which easiliest and best can do it. And thus much for that, for the rest dear Doctor hold me alwayes Your, &c.
XXI To the Countesse of Berlamont, Anno 48. Where he merrily describes his life at LIS∣BON. Madam, &c. I Am not yet so heavenly minded, to count all the world a Prison, but I no longer ad∣mire those that doe, since really, I count my self as absolutely in Prison here, in not being able to goe out of this Kingdom, for Flanders, as ever any did in a common Gaol; for tis not the bignesse of the place, but the restraint that makes the prison, so they are as much Priso∣ners who are in the Bois de Vincent, as those who are in the Dungeon. To de∣scribe unto you my prison, and my company in't (that you may pitty me) I am here in Lisbon, a City of but 9 or 10 mile about, all built upon Hills and Dales, rising just like the great Billows of the Ocean (when you are in the bottom, and wonder at the vastnesse of one, passing that, you find another as vast to wonder at) there I have a Garden no bigger than your Park at Brussels (to walk in, and take the air) where ther's all sorts of fruit the East or West Indias can afford, or the Nor∣thern or Southern climate of the world produ∣ces,
Figs that make beccoficos of men, and Me∣loons both red and green, beyond their Mar∣malds for meltingnsse; but alasse, what are these unto your Pompions? Now for my Com∣pany I have none but such, one would be asha∣med to keep company withall; The King here a mn of no estate, but only besides the King∣dom of otul and the Algarves in Europe, Lord of two or three Kingdoms in Affrique, of the Western Islands, the Maderas, the Isles of Capo Verte, St. Thoma, the Empire of Goa in the East Indies, and of Brasilia in the West, alone bigger than all Europe together, poor things God wor, that with good Husbanding might only yeeld about 9 or 10 millions eve∣ry year. Now to describe unto you his person, and the Queens: the King is an honest plain man, changing nothing of the Duke of Braganza by being King of Portugal; faring as homely as any Farmer, and going as meanly clad as any Citizen, neither did he ever make use of any of the Crown Wardrope, since he came unto the Crown; his ordinary Exercise is Hunting, and Musick, never omitting the first every Mondy, not the second every day after din∣ner, for any businesse. But for the Queen, she has more of the Majestick in her, and if she be not King, her Ambition 'twas that made the King; She has a goodly presence, a stately Gate, and uses the Trowel in painting, with better reason than other Ladies do the Pencil,
having an Epilipse makes one side of her face reder than the other (like the sunny side of fruit) did not her painting make both sides red alike. For Prince Theodosio her eldest Son, he is a Pr. of great expectation, learned, and of great wit and courage, of person tall and slender, about some 18 years of age. And this is all Madam I can say of their Persons, as all I desire should be said of mine, is, that I am Madam Your &c. XXII To Madamoiselle de Beauvais, from Lisbon, Anno 45. Madamoiselle, YOu will wonder, that having seen the Court of the world, in Paris, Rome, and Constantinople; the City of it, in Venice, Genoa, and Lisbon; the Garden, in Provence, Anda∣luzia, and Italy; and the Paradise of it where you are, that I should now go see the Desart and Wildernesse of it in Affrique and America, the one (all the Coast along) nothing but barren sand, and the other where I am going (the Brasils) all overgrown with woods and Trees; And that too in midst of so great de∣sire to return for Flanders, as never any thing
was more ardently desired; but when you hear my reasons for it, you will absolve me, Madamoiselle, I'me sure of Legerity or change of resolution. B pleased to know then, that just upon point of my Embarquement for Flanders, un∣derstanding of the losse of the Battail of Lens, I thought it no ways fit to render the joy I hop'd to conceive at sight of my friends in Flanders abortive by their general sadnesse there; Wherefore casting about for some di∣version for a year or so, till your losses might be recovered or forgot, there opportunely of∣fered it self unto me, the voyage of Brasil, which having propos'd unto the King (with∣out whose permission no stranger can under∣take that Voyage) his Majesty not only gave me permission, but 200 Crowns aiut a de costa for my voyage, when a hundred other con∣siderations began to encourage me to the un∣dertaking it (besides the ardent thirst I had of voyaging, which nothing but the whole oce∣an could quench) first having seen so many ra∣rities of the Brasils in Portugal; I thought it worthy my voyage thither to fetch you some of them. ly. According to the antient ex∣piation of fire and and water, I thought it fit to passe whole Oceans, and the Torrid zone, before I approacht unto your presence. 3ly. Having somewhat in me of the Philosopher
and Astrologer, I imagined it richly worth my journey, to see the stars of the other pole, and nature of the other Hemiphere. And last∣ly my desire of seeing all the world is so insati∣ate (whether the more one sees of it, the less he is satisfied, or that it satisfies so much, as one has still a desire of seeing more) as just like another Alexander, not thinking one world sufficient, I am seeking another forth; Mean time (Madamoiselle) your goodnesse will pardon this presumption of mine (who ought not to stir out of one Room into ano∣ther without your permission) that I dare pre∣sume to goe out of one world into another without your Licence, being as I am Madamoiselle, Your, &c. XXIII. To the same. Anno 48. Of his Sea Voyage from Lisbon to the BRASILS. SOme week after we set sayl at Lisbon, we a∣riv'd at the Madera's (one of the Affrique Ilands) where landing at Funchal (the chief City, or Bishops seat) we were kindly enter∣tain'd by the Merchants there, contending in
Hospitalitie who should first lodge and enter∣tain us, (as the manner is, where provisions are plenty, and Strangers rare) here we staid some 4 or 5 dayes feasted and regaled every day, and presented at our departure with the rarities of the Isle, they making the best con∣fectures in the world, both for dry and wet, Sugar growing there in great abundance, and their Wines surpassing for Generous all that e∣ver I tasted yet: when prosecuting our voyage, after a few dayes sayl we had a sight of the Ca∣naries or Fortunate Ilands, where under the pick of Teneriff we lay some dayes becalmed, it being one of the highest mountains in the world, all green unto the Top, and of so equal an Ascent, that those of Babel might have innocently built their Towr there, secure from Deluge, and did it extend itself a little higher, one could not imagine a more pleasant nor ea∣sier passage unto Heaven. From thence we say'd along the coast of Affrique, towards the Islands of Capo verte, which we past with∣out touching at them, the Air being general∣ly held unwholsom, but at that Season Infecti∣ous; after which, steering our course West∣ward towards the Brasils, and once past all comerce the land has with the Sea, of common air, and repercussion of waves, &c. we had the pleasantest Voyage as could be imagined, no storms, the Winds (which surely on those Seas blow all from Land) hardly having breath enough (for the long Voyage they had made)
to fill our sayls, and the air so pure, as in comparison with the pleasure of it there, it seemes a paine to breath on Land, where the air is stuffing, suffocating, and noisom, tainted as it passes with Ordures and Filth, (there being few Countryes like Arabia, af∣fording more sweets than stenches) whereas that of the Sea comes purely (as it were) drayn'd and purified by the Sun-beams, as it passes to the sence. Then for other plea∣sures, you have none on Land, but we had some at Sea to equal it; and to begin with the most incredible, Hawking and Hunting. (besides Fishing) we had perpetually for more than a moneth together. Our ship be∣ing all incompast with Dorado's or shining Fishes (somwhat like Dolphins) hunting the Flying Fishes, which you might see on Top of the water, fluttering to escape, and the Do∣rado's bounding to overtake them, till being hard pursued, and so near prest, as they were in danger to be ta'n, the poor flying Fish would get on wing, and flying one danger, incurre another; for a slight of Sea fowl (call'd Booby's by the English) followed us all the way hovering in the air, in expectance of their prey, seeing the flying fish on wing, would stoo at them, and each one singling out one, flye them to a mark. Then for Fishing, our Mariners had but only to choose out their Do∣rads (as a good Woodman would a Dear) and strike him straight with his Fisgigg (or Dart
with many barbed heads) never failing of their Cast, and this furnished us with fresh Fish all the time, it being excellent meat, short and crisp like our Salmons, and much like them in bignesse; which being ta'n, strange it was to behold the curious colours of its scales, fading by degrees, as death won on life, (just as the skies colour does when night comes on) till quite dead it became all black, with good rea∣son, it putting on mourning for its death, whose life had cloath'd it in such rich and glit∣tering colour. An other sort of Fish we took call'd the Shark or Tuberon, black and great as a Porpoise, with terrible long Teeth, huge wide jaws, and so ravenous, as at a bit 'twould snatch a Legg or Arm away of any it found swimming in the Sea; these have certaine little Fishes called the Pilot Fish, cleaving to them so fast by a Fynn o'th' top of the head, you can hardly separate them by any force: they have great heads, some spann long of body, and are excellent meat. Nor wanted we the pleasure of Gardens too at Sea, the Ocean (for many hundred miles from Land, and many miles together) being all cover'd over with a certain Green, so thick as the Ship could hardly make way tho∣rough it, with many Gridiline Flowers be∣sides like our Crocus's, rendring it a most delightfull spectacle. Then for o∣ther prospect, do but behold the rising and setting Sun, and you should see a
hundred several forms and figures, like your scenes in Masques and playes, with lights be∣hind them, reflecting them to the Eye, and betwixt light and shadow, setting them off more resplendently to the view. For other commodities and delicacies you have on Land, we wanted none, Our great Cabines being large as your Chambers, our Beds as commo∣dious, our Decks spacious as your Galleries to walk in, our Kitchin our Sellars as well furnished, heards of Swine, flocks of Sheep, and Pullen of all sorts aboard, perpetually fea∣sting, nor wanted we Musick to our Feast, (besides an excellent set of Trumpets) the Mariners having some Fiddles amongst them, to which they often danc'd to delight the Pas∣sengers. And thus sleeping, eating, drinking, and recreating our selves, we made our voy∣age secure from storms, secure from Pirats and Enemies, till making Land about Capo St. Augustine, we might decry some 3 or 4 sail which knowing to be Hollanders of Fernambucca, and not willing to encoun∣ter them, we steered to Seaward again, being that night overtaken by one of them, who allarumn'd us as if their whole Fleet had made after us, appearing on every side of us with fiers on his main Mast, and about the wast of his ship perpetually burning (as a call it seems for his Companions, if any were in sight) sayling away in the morning to find them out, and returning towards Evening,
(ever endeavouring like a Kite to snatch a∣way our Carvel and Pattachio, which lay like Chickens close under our Wings) till at last, about the height of Baia, it left us, despairing to meet any of their Fleet higher up, when holding on our course for the Rio, and soun∣ding all the way, we found it a bold Coast, some 35 Fathom all the way, with neither Flats nor Rocks, so passing by Capo Frio (so call'd from the excessive cold there, though under the Torrid Zone, and the climate on either side be exceeding hot) at last we arri∣ved before the mouth of St. Sebastians Haven, where under a little Isle we cast Anchor, ha∣ving in lesse than three moneths, deducting our stay in Assrique, made the voyage almost to the Antipodes, of 4 ships (as we were) and more than 4 hundred men, losing only one man in all the voyage; and here let me cast Anchor too, er' I prosecute my voyage. Of our arrival to St. Sebastians, or the Rio de Ianaro in Brasil. Whilst we lay hre at Anchor, our Ma∣riners Angling, took certain Fshes about the highnesse of Rocats or Gurnet, which they call Cunny Fishes from their resemblance of our Cunnies in face (but only they wanted Ears) with bellies all white and chequered, which swell'd just like blown bladders, when they had lain a while panting on the Hatch, these
were rank poison, as the Portuguez assured us, the Sea being full of divers other venomous Fishes, which renders the water unwholsom, as I experimented my self, when bathing me in it, I came out all faintish and ill-dispos'd, accustom'd to come out of other Seas more strong and vigorous. Mean time advertise∣ment being given from the Fort unto the Town of our arival, they (perceiving us to be frends) sent divers Boats and Canoes forth to welcom us, and bring us aboard all sorts of fresh provision and fruits of the Country. Their Midsummer being our Mid-winter here. Amongst the rest, having Pilots sent us to conduct us in, we weighed Anchor to∣wards Evening, and with a gentle Brize or gale from Seaward, blowing constantly every Night from Sea, as every Morning it does from Land. We entred the Bay betwixt two mighty Rocks some mile assunder (the one (from its form) call'd the Sugar loaf) when having past the Fort some mile or so, beyond the Entrane of the Bay, we discover'd the pleasantst prospect in the world for natural Landschap, of the Rio or Lake some twenty mile or more about, all tuted with Green Islands, some a mile about, some more, some lesse, the Town situated on the left hand, some 2 or three mile beyond the Fort, where was safe harbour for many hundred ships. Here ariving, and going on shore, I found a Lodging prepar'd for me, by the Fathers of the Company, with two Mola∣to's
or Mungril Negro's to serve me, with my dyet from their Kitchin, just against my Lod∣ging, whether by order from the King, the recommendations of the Governor (who came along with us) or the charity of the good Fa∣ther I know not, but certainly 'twas so extra∣ordinary an accommodation, as no money could have purchased the like, there being no Innes nor Pensions to lodge or eat at, as with us; all who frequent those parts being either Merchants, who lodge with their Correspon∣dents, or Seafaring men, who lodge aboard, never any man like me before making that voy∣age merely on Curiosity. Of Brasil in general. Brasil, as 'tis confined by the Ocean on th' one side, and the Rivers of Amazones and de Plato on th'other, is a vast Continent, and far bigger than all Europe, the Climat is hot and moist, by reason of the aboundance of Rain that falls there continually; yet are there no Rivers at all in the Country (but only those it is surrounded with) from whence any wa∣try vapours should exhale. It has only some 4 or 5 Ports by which you may enter in∣to the Country, all the rest o'th' shore be∣ing impenetrable, by reason of Rocks, and inextricable woods, for many hundred miles together, the Countrie seeming rather re∣serv'd
for the habitation of men hereafter, than ever to have been Inhabited heretofore; and one of these Ports was that we now en∣tred. Of the Town. The Town of St. Sebastians is situate in a Plain some mile in length, bounded at either end with rising Hills, the inmost towards the Lake inhabited and inclos'd by the Benedictins, and the outmost towards the Sea by the Fa∣thers of the Company; upon which hill was formerly situated the Antient Town (as the Ruins of houses, and the great Church, yet remaining, testifie) till for the commodity of Traffique, and portation of Merchandise, 'twas by degrees reduc'd unto the Plain, their buil∣dings being but low, and streets not above 3 or 4, the principal regarding the Haven. Be∣hind the Town is a great plain some two mile over, part of it bushy, part woody, and part medow ground, beyond which you find a Country so wholly different from ours, as there's not a Tree nor Plant, Bird, Beast, nor any thing you ever saw in Europe to be found, and to speak somewhat of each one in par∣ticular.
Of the Country. The Country is for the most partall o'r∣grown with wood, which the soyl, unforc'd since the Creation of the world had produc'd without culture, amongst which are some trees of such vast bignesse, as th'ar above 7 or 8 fathom in Diameter, and 70 or 80 high, of which they make Canoes, or Trees hollowed into Boats of 2 or 300 tun. As for the Brasile wood, by excellency taking its denomination from thence 'tis but a shrub in compari∣son with the other Trees, much like our bigger sort of Hawthorn Trees. The Country i naturally hot and moist, by reason of frequent rains; whence in many places, where the moi∣sture settles in the bottoms, you have medow grounds, some 20 or 30 mile over, (seeming a∣bandoned by those Trees, for not being firm enough to sustain the weight of their huge vast bulks. Of the Fruit Trees, and Plants▪ For Fruit Trees, besides wild Limons, which grow every wher in great abundance, the Bona∣no deservedly claims the first place, it being a Tree that from the root grows yearly up to the heighth of an ordinary Pium or Cherry-tree,
and much about that bulk; tis all green, the body being nothing but a collection of the leaves, which spred out towards the Top, and fall like plumes of Feathers, each leaf being some 6 foot in length, and 2 in bredth, on top of which, the fruit grows some 40 together in a bunch, in husks like Beans, all yellow when they are ripe, the fruit of colour and tast much like our Apricock, but much more firm and more delicious. For their Caijus, it is a sort of Tree of the bignes of our ordinary Apple-trees, the leaves like chesnut leaves, and fruit much like the bigger sort of green Figs, fastned to the Tree in lieu of stalk, by certain Chesnuts, which roasted are excellent meat, the fruit ea∣ten whole, melts all away to juice, exceeding cooling and refreshing, excepting certain strings which hang in your teeth, so tough, you cannot swallow them. The Guaver is a certain Tree about the same height and bignesse, the Fruit is round and green, like to our Necta∣rins, but crusht, you finde a round red pulp within, about the bignesse of a Bilyard ball, eating like so many Strawberries moulded into a past. Another sort of Fruit they have call'd Mamons, growing like great green pears, some 20 or more in cluster on the top of the Tree, never ariving to the maturity of being eaten raw, but they make a good conserve. Limons, Oranges and Citrons they have in great excellence and abundance (which I sus∣pect to have been transplanted thither at first)
and Limas of a mixt spcies, betwixt the O∣range and Limon, all round, with a bunch on the top, of a drier tast, & mor eager douce than either. Another Tree they have, of whose root dryed, and the moisture prest out o it (which is rank poison) they make their fria de pan, as they call it, which they use instead of bread, when fresh and recent, tis like the Crums of wheaten bread, and when stale, like pownded Oatmeal; by every ones Trn∣cher they lay heaps of this, and though Bread (made of Corn, brought from Portugal and the Western Islnds) be neither scarce nor dear, yet most of the Inhabitants rther eat of that. But above all, the Ananaz is one of the deliciousest Plants the Earth did e'r produce, it growing like an Arcoke, the leaves thick and sharply Indented, like those of Semper∣vive, thistly on the top, with a rind all scaly like the pine-apple, which paring off, you find the fruit of the bignesse of an ordinary M∣loon, of a Golden colour, and distinguisht ino Cells, like Oranges, which slicing and eating in wine (as 'twas affirm'd of Mnna) every one finds▪ that gust and tast in't, he is the most de∣lighted with. Meloons they have too, both yellow and green, far better than those of Eu∣rope (though transplanted from thence per∣haps at first) and Boratos in as great abundance as Turnips and Carots are with us. To con∣clude, another Tree it has called the Pnto, which though no fruit Tree, yields them more
profit than all the rest; growing most com∣monly in moist places like our Willow, the body growing Cane-wise, distinguisht by se∣veral knots, out of whose poory sides, the bran∣ches issue forth in round, with their several falls rendring it so many stories high; of a de∣lightfull green, body and all, whose leves be∣ing thick and filmy, they use to sleave and spin to what finesse they please; the grosser serving for Hmp, the middle sort for Flax, and the finer for Silk. Of their Beasts. For their beasts they are all strangely diffe∣rent from ours: The Coty has some resem∣blance to our Hare, but bigger, without Ears, and its back parts ending more bluntly towards the Scut, and of a redder colour than all the rest o'th body: The Tatoo is, not much unlike our lesser sort of Swine, but 'thas a more swag belly, and longer snout. Pigritas they have, so called from the slownesse of their pace, so monstrous, as no Devil can be pain∣ted more horrible and ugly, all scally like the Rhinoceros, but more Serpent like, going so slowly, as it scarcely advances a pace a day: Ounces, Tigers, & Leopards they have too for wild beasts, and for me, Sheep, Swine, Goats and Oxen (al imported) and bree∣ding there in so great abundance, especially
the latter sort (which they nourish both for food and service, to turn their sugar-mills) as the fathers of the Company have for their share (not far from the Rio) more than twenty thousand all grazing in one pasture. Buiis or Apes, they have in great abundance, most com∣monly all black with white faces, their tails in spire, turning inward, they smell sweet, and when they have done any mischief, will so hugg you, whistling lamentably with their mouths, as you cannot but pardon them; but above all, the prettyest Animal Nature ever made is the Saguin, about the bignesse of a lit∣tle Squirrel, with long shag mains, and bushy tails, of golden colour (most commonly) fac't and handed like a Black-more, with small sin∣gers and smiking countenances; peeping or squeeking like a Cricket when it craves, so as could it be but transported (as 'tis so tender and delicate, it commonly dies on change of air) all your Island Shoks, and Bollonian dogs would be banisht Ladies Laps and Cham∣bers, and these be their sole Minions and Fa∣vourites. Of their Fowl. For their Fowl, they are all so beautifull in comparison with ours, as we may well say, Nature learnt her colouris there, when she painted them; and that for Birds, whilst
those of Arabia are call'd birds of Paradise, Brasil may well be called the Paradise of Birds. Amongst the rest the Arara is a cer∣tain Bird about the bignesse of a Goshawk, seeming a whole Garden of Tulips, every Fea∣ther being of a several colour, which be∣held in Sun-shine, even dazle your Eyes, they are so bright & glittering; of these I had one I taught to speak like a Parrot, but in so grosse & big a tone, as you could not abstain from laughing to hear it; an other Bird they have call'd a Canada, differing from the Arara on∣ly in colour; its back and wings without be∣ing all Azurine, and breast and wings within of golden yellow: Others all jet black they have, with a stomacher of Aurora colour, borthered with Crimsen, others again all scar∣let. In fine the ordinarest Bird they have, is the Parrot, of which they have hundred sorts; The Parrachitos about May coming thither in flocks, just like Starrs in other Countries, and are sold as cheap, & eaten as ordinarily as they. With the rarer sorts of all which beasts & fowl I had my Chamber furnished, during my stay in the Country, as Sanguins one or two, which I always carryed along with me, cal∣ling them my Pocket Lyons, out of which at meals they'd come, and on either shoulder one, take meat from my hands and mouth, of my kindnesse to which, I had an Arara was so jealous, as it never left importuning me with its caresses, now looking me in the face, and
talking to me, now climbing up my back, it being a good-natur'd Bird, having only this ill quality, to be alwayes pecking and tearing with its Bill what ever was next it, which makes your frugal Portuguez, or wholly ba∣nish them their houses, or provide them Iron Perches to exercise their Beacks on. Many other sorts of Animals I had, which all peri∣shed by Sea, my Sanguins by change of air, my Arara's drown'd, on which I made this following Epigram. Since thou so like unto the Phoenix wert, In shape, in colour, and in every part, That so unlike should be your destiny, That should by fire, thou shouldst by water die. Of their Insects, or lesser sort of Ani∣mals. For their Insects, a certain little crab or cre∣vish they have, no bigger than Beetles, earth∣thed in banks of sand, as Cunnies are in Bur∣roughs, with one claw far bigger than the o∣ther, which makes them turn whirling about, as other Crabs motions are retrogred: another strange Insect they have the Portuguez call Lobedio, or Praise God, as for some admirable thing, as indeed this is; It being a certain a∣nimated stick, like the end of some small twig, some fingers length, out of the joynts of which
there grow out leggs by pairs, on which it crawls, like walking Tressles, nor can you per∣ceive any other life it has, nor any other part of living Creature; as Eyes, Mouth, &c. I finding one of them crawling on me as I wal∣ked forth into the Woods, which tyed with a Thrid, and fastned to a bough, I kept long time in my Chamber, not perceiving any suste∣nance it took, often peircing it, to find if it had any sence; it alwayes crawling in the the same manner about, until at last it vani∣shed, I know not how; but that which mole∣sted me most of all, was a certain kind of ani∣maed dust, which insensibly ingenders to worms in your feet as big as Magots in a cheese, which unless they be carefully extracted, leave each one the seeds behind of a hundred more; these was I grievously tormented with for a month together, so as I could not slir, but as I was carryed in a Hamatta; nor did I ever know before, how near confining pain and pleasure was; , at their first ingendring in my feet, being assaulted with so fierce an itch, as 'twas the greatest pleasure in the world to scratch it, which presently was succeeded by so intollerable a pain, as I never remem∣ber to have felt the like. Of the Salvages, or Natives of Brasil. Of the Natives or Inhabitants what shall I
say, but if, as Iohn Baptista de porta says, every Nation has resemblance to some certain beast or Animal, certainly these Brasilians are most like Asses, dull and phlegmatick, in servitutem nati, and only fit for tol and druggery, which is the reason Nature perhaps provided that Country with neither Horse nor Asse, nor a∣ny beast of carriage or burthen besides them∣selves, yet are they rather squat than robust, with broad Bodies, and little Leggs, small Eyes, of sallow, sickly complexion, ill fea∣tured, with black and greezy hair, nor curl'd nor dangling, but flagging Ill-favouredly a∣bout their Ears, going for the most part all naked both Men and Women, with only some rag to hide their privy parts, which you would never desire to see, you ar so disgusted with the rest, they being all Christians, but such, as put me in mind of that sentence of Holy Scripture, Homines et Iumenta salvabis Domine, that the Lord will save both Man and Beast; for surely they are both, having not wit enough to commit ingenious Vices, nor Temperance enough to abstain from brutal ones; and thus much for those who live among the Portugals, betwixt which and the other Savag's I imagin there is as much difference as between wild Beast and tame; neither can I believe what is reported of their fiercenesse, though all that is reported of their ferity I do, as their eating one the other, and having not so much as a word in their language, signifying nor
God, nor King, nor Law, for were they so fierce as 'tis reported, certainly they would ne∣ver have yeelded their Country up so tamely to the Portugal, nor suffer them to enjoy it so quietly as they do; But to return to my tame Salvages, I hired 4 of them for a journey I made by Land, to carrry my Hamatta, whilst tother two ran Lacqueying by, which was on this manner. Your Hamatta is a certain cot∣ton Net about the bignesse of a Blancket, drawn together at each end, and fastned by a strong Line to a Cane as big and long as a Colstaff, carryed on their Shoulders, where you sit or lye in what posture you please on a Boulster or Pillow, far more easily than in a∣ny Licter (the Portuguez men having a Negro carrying a Parasol or Umbrella to shadow them from the Sun, whilst the Women are shadowed and defended from publique sight, by some rich coverture thrown over the Ha∣matta, with two Negro Maids going by their sides, to help them up, and put on their hop∣pinas when the Net's laid down, and they rise to go out of it to any place. In one of these was I carryed some twenty miles a day, more or lesse,  according as the way was more plain or mountainous, covenanting with my Sa∣vages for a small matter in money, besides my finding them dyet, which was only a little fa∣rina de pan (or bread made of the root of a certain Tree, as we have said before) for the rest they rather finding me, for to our Fari∣na
we had ordinarily no other meat but Fish, of which at every plash of water where they came (but casting in their hooks) they took enough for twenty men, when we presently made fires upon the place, and broyl'd them, eating them aftewards with the juyce of wild Lymons, growing every where in the woods; and this, with water for our drink▪ was all our sustenance, and for our lodging at night, we hung up our Hamattas betwixt two Trees, and there slept till morning, only along the Coast, in that tract which the Portugls have made to travel by Land from place to place, you sail not every second day at most to find some Rss or Country Farm of the Portuguez where for your money you are well accommo∣dated with all sorts of pullen and fruit. One pleasure I had in passing through the woods, was to see the Trees full of Apes and Parats, (as if they had born no other fruit) one cha∣sing another with such noise and chattering, you could not hear one another speak, and you should see those Apes which had young, with 2 or 3 claspt about their neck, or hanging on their back, which they went thus lug∣gering, till they waxed big, to catch which, the Natives would shoot the old ones with their Arrows (with which they are the best mark men in the world, considering what clouterly Bows and Arrows they shoot with∣all) when the old one tumbling down, the young for want of exercizing their Legs,
had not th' addresse to runne away. Of the Commodities of the Country. From my Voyage, I will return to speak of the Riches of the Country, chiefly consisting in their Sugar, which when I have named, I have named all; not that it wants others, but that it can want no others, having that, since that country which abounds with that com∣modity which all others have need of, can ne∣ver want any commodity which others abound withall. For the rest, it produces neither Corn, nor Wine, nor Salt, which I attribute not so much to the difference of the Climate, as some politique reason to keep them with that necessary dependency on Portugal, to vent their commodities, and prevent revolt. Now for their Sugar thus it grows, and thus 'tis made; Their Sugar canes are prun'd to the heighth of standing corn: nor need they other culture, but every second year to cut them close by the roots, as we do Osiers, when a∣gainst the next year they never fail to spring up agen, the flaggs of which Canes are of a plea∣sant green, and shew a far off just like a Field of Corn, which being ripe about the month of Iune, they joint them in pieces some foot¦long, and carry them to the Mill, turn'd by Oxen, or Water, consisting of two round Cylinders, about the bignesse of Mil-posts, pla∣ted
with Iron, which turning inwards, and joyning as close together as thy can meet, so squeez the canes in passing through them, as they come out on th'other side all bruzed, and dry as keques, which were all liquid before; which Liquor is conveyed by Troughs to cer∣tain Caldrons, wher 'tis boyl'd, still retaining its amber colour, till powr'd out at last into their forms or coolers, with a certain Lee 'tis rendred white; And in these Mills (during the season of making Sugar) they work both day and night, the work of immediatly applying the canes into the Mill being so perillous as if through drousinesse or heedlessnesse a fingers end be but engag'd betwixt the Posts, their whole body inevitably follows, to prevent which, the next Negro has alwayes a Hatchet readie to chop off his Arm, if any such Mis∣fortune should arive. Of the Starrs, and Heavens of the other Hemisphere. I will conclude this Treatise of Brasil with a word or two of the Starrs of the other He∣misphere, garnisht with many constellations wholly unknown to us, of which the Cruciero or Crosse is the principalst, consisting of 5 or 6 Stars of the first magnitude, as bright as any in our Hemisphere; whose brightnesse, as with a foil, is set off the more by a great black cloud
that's continually under it, as is the whitnesse of the Milky way rendred more perspicuous, by a streak of black in the midst of it, tending towards the same constellation; both which, as also another great black cloud on th'other side the Milkie way, I observ'd at my being there, for more than six months continually: whence I concluded, 'twas the natural complexion of that sky (as ours is blew) to have much part of it black, which perhaps renders the people of that Climat far more melancholy than ours, which black clouds I much wonder none (as I know of) has observ'd besides my self, especially since there ar 2 white clouds not far from the Cruciero appearing always in the same posture and figure, so generally observ'd and known, as they are call'd Nubes Magellanicae, from Ma∣gellan, who first discovered them. And thus much for Brasilia may suffice; In which, if I have been too long, you will perceive at least, I have made al hast I could away. There being nothing in the Country, besides the satisfying my cu∣riosity, that could invite me to longer stay than whilst the Fleet was preparing, which in the beginning of August, the 8th month after our Arival there, was ready to depart, I being to Imbark on the Admal Don Rhoderigo d' A∣lancastro, who nobly invited me to dyet and lodge with him in his own Cabbin.
XXIV. To the Reverend Father John Pererio of the Society of J. in Brasil, Anno 50. Reverend Father, T'Il I can do't in deeds, you will please to ac∣cept of my thanks in words for al your no∣ble favours in Brasil, by whose curtesie twas that I not only lived there, but that my life in all my voyage has been prergued ever since; for Non vivere, sed bene vale vita est, you know: and I can assure you I never far'd better than I did on ship-board with the Ge∣neral Drn Roderigo d' Alancastro, to whom you particularly recommended me, who lodg'd me in his own Cabbin, plac'd me at his table next himself, and not only made me companion a∣live with him, but would have don't in death oo, f there had been occasion, (as we imagi∣ned, on sight of another Fleet, which afterward proved frends) when putting a Rapier in my hand, and arming me with a Rondache or Shield, he bid me (if we chanc'd to fight) keep alwayes close to him, that we might live or die together. So as (my dear F.) whilst others oblige as 'twere by chance, you only have the Art to do it, by linking benefit thus to benefit, till you make such a chain of it, as he must be
most ungratefull should not alwayes remaine your Thrall; but that which your Modesty will not hear from me, I hope shortly you shall hear from the King himself, whom I have in∣formed since my Arival of the many favours I received from you in Brasil, chiefly for his sake, next to God; nor have I limited my Gratitude only to this place, but I have written also to Rome, that I might repay your curtesies the sooner, the more I should call into contributi∣on to the debt, of which Letter behold the Copy. Ad Eminentissimum Card. Fra. Barba. Anno 50. Post suum ex Brasilia reditum: Eminentissime Domine, EX quo soed a illa Tempestas nuper in Anglia exorta me quasi Naufragum in alienas or∣bis terrarum oras ejecisset, ego, ac si omnis ter∣ra mihi patria suisset, vel polius nulla, magnâ prê Europae peragrâta, atque nonnulla Asiae, Affricae{que} Brasiliam tandem in A∣merica cogitavi, quo à nobis remotior o pro∣pius men notitiae admoturus.
After which Exordium I proceed, and say, that though it abound in many things; and that a Gold mine has lately been discover'd there in the Territory of St. Pauls, and a veyn of Emeralds nigh Sancto Spiritu, yet I esteem more than any Gold or Pretious Stones, the planting of the Christian Faith, (I having no were seen Learning and Piety more flourishing than there) chiefly by the Industry of the Fathers of the Society, who converting those Barbarous people daily, whilst they exercise their Bodies in cultiva∣ting the Land, do cultivate their Souls for Heaven. I will conclude, by telling you how our voy∣age was so prosperous all the way, as for more than 3 months none of our 22 sayl ever lost sight of one another, til nigh the Western I∣lands; or Tircieros (where I only with our Purser went ashore, the Generall suffering none else to stir) our Fleet was so distipated by fowl weather, as only 7 of us entred Lisbon road together, the rest comming afterwards dropping one by one, excepting 2 or 3 catcht up by the Hollanders, and one or two lost: And this is all I can tell you of our Voyage hi∣ther: besides which, I have no more to say, but only agen & agen to Iterate my many thanks unto you, R. F. Rector, F. Vasocells, and all the rest, with the assurances that I shall al∣wayes be Your R. &c.
XXV. To the Lord — from Lisbon, Anno 50. Of some Discourses in PORTUGAL. My Lord, BEing return'd from my Brasil voyage, my next is for landrs, whither I tended in my thoughts, even whilst I tended farthest from it; they like Compasses having one foot fix'd in that, whilst the other compast the whole world about, for which whilst I expect an Embarquement, I cannot better entertain my sel, than by eneraining you with some passages here; be pleas'd to know then, that discoursing the other day with one of the grea∣test in this Kingdom about our affairs of Eng∣land, (which have so chang'd face since I left 'em, as I should hardly know them. I having been so remote from them, as the blow of that fatal Axe which took the Kings life away, was not heard there till six moneths atr) they thereupon vilifying the Supreme Autho∣rity, imagining none great enough, that is not monstrous, and that to Reign courte∣ously, is onely to reign at curtesie of others, and not rightly understanding that of our Par∣lament; I to rectifie their understandings in either, told them first, That the right Institu∣tion of the Parlament of England was so far
diminishing the Royal Authority, as on the contrary it rendred it, but the more absolute, whence they were deceived, who imagined the Parlament there an imperious Maister, as 'tis in some Countries, or an abject Vassal, as it is in others; it being rather in nature of an humble frend, to advise and counsel as often as was requisite for the Kingdoms good; That there are some things which like the wheels of Chariots, or wings of Birds, look like bur∣thensom; when indeed they are but helps to support and lighten the burthen, and one of those things was the Parlament of England; not so much an Embarasment to the Royal power, as an expediating and faciliating it, not so much to Limit the Regal Authority, as not to leave it altogether Limitlesse, that its bounds was like that of the Ocean, boundles, but for its own conservation, that the King could do all things, but ruine and destroy himself and his Kingdoms, an Impuissance so far from Im∣perfection, as is that of Almighty God not be∣ing able to sin, which is on the contrary one of his most God-like Attributes. In fine, that the King of England was one of the potentest Kings in the Christan world, but with his Par∣lament omnipotent, and that without that he was but one 'tis true; but that without him no∣thing. For the rest of our affairs, his Religi∣on had rendred him more intelligent; and he could say, That as 'tis not then when the House falls, that the ruin begins, but when
some main pillar or foundation is neglected, the want of maintaining which, draws on the Ruine of all the rest: So 'twas not now the Ruine of the Royal Authority began in Eng∣land, but then when the Schism began; when that foundation of Monarchy, Pr me Reges regnant, was so shaken and weaken'd, as it has stood wavering and tottering ever since. That the Spiritual and Temporal Monarchy are that Murale and Antemurale, fortifying one another; neither could the one more subsist without the other, than the Walls of a Town without its Bulwarks and Outworks can defend it self. That so the King, in taking the Eccle∣siastical Authority upon himself, did but like him who foolishly took his Horse on his own shoulders, and fell to the ground with't, whilst he vainly indeavoured to carry that, whith should carry him; and so we see all had fayl'd in their Ends they propos'd to themselves in that preposterous change; the King in establishing a greater Autho∣rity, the Bishops, or Spiritual Lords, in i∣magining they should grow more absolute by the ejection of Abbots; and the Lords Temporal by the ejection of Bishops after∣wards, all but making way for their own ruine; nor were the Commons to imagine they had much mended their Mercat by it; since whosoever cheaply fells another au∣thority makes but the Market to buy his own: So we see since the first change of
that Religion, wherein England had conti∣nued flourishng more than a Thousand years, how 't has been hurryed from one to anter ever since; it being as impossi∣ble things divrted rom their pristine Insti∣tution,  which by long tract of Time they h been Accustomed, should after∣wards stand firm and stable; as for the nee∣dle o'th' Compasse, diverted from its North, to cease its restlesse motion, till it return un∣to't agen. Thus he, which how truly, the Event o things will shew: for my part pre∣p'd or ll Evnts, when I am in Flandres, if there be any Sttlement in England, and subsistence for an honest man, who loves to be quie, and let others be so, I may see it agn: i not, I have learnt how wide the wold is, an to esteem every place for my Country, wre I may live quietly, and with∣ou molesttion; which humour and dis∣position (my Lord) I know you will not dislike, in Your Lordships most, &c.
XXVI. To Mr. John Mulys, An. 50. Worthy Sir. THe courtesie I have received in all my voyages from those of your noble proses∣sion, especially from your self, obliges me in gratitude to the publishing every where of this following CHARACTER Of an English Mercha reside in sorin pas. He is one, who goes abroad with a stock of honour, as we'l as mony to Traffick with, and manages either bravely, being a Master, and not a slave to wealth, and such a Master as honours it by his commands, making it on∣ly serve to noble ends. He neither sticks at Trivial expnce nor gain, nor Anticipates po∣verty for fear of being poor (like those who kill themlves for fear of death) nor accele∣rates it by vain glory of appearing rich (like those who guild o're ruinous Palaces) but look in his Accomps and Ware-house, and you find him a wealthy Merchant, but look in all the rest of his House and Family, and you find him a noble and gallant minded Gentleman. In brief, he neither starves the
Chanel with penuriousnesse, nor exhausts the Spring with prodigality, but has a particular Art to keep a full stream still running, and the Fount still full, so as we may well say of him in these dead Times, that there is none lives but he; who whilst greatest Landed men are outed of all they have, as long as the Sea is o∣pen, is sure of his coming in: To conclude, he is the honour of his Nation abroad, and there∣fore his Nation should be very dishonourable and unworthy, should it not alwayes honour him. For the rest (Sir) you will please to know, that about a month after my departurture from Lisbon, and Embarquement at Setval I arrived in Holland, the travailing through which by Land, from the Texel to Amsterdam, from thence to Utrecht, Dort, and so to An∣twerp, &c. cost me more than all the Sea Voy∣ages I made in all the four parts of the world beside, and Land too, since I left Italy. They will imagine this a Paradox, who know not that all my other voyages cost me nothing (which by computation in four years only, had cost me more than 2 or 3 thousand Crowns) If the accommodation I had with Princes by Land, and Admirals by Sea, could have been purchased with money, to say no∣thing of the Entertainment I found by Mer∣chants every where; Of which now I say no more, but only that I can never say enough. In fine ( having compleated my ten years
Voyage, I am now arrived at Bruxelles, as Stones to their Center, and Elements in their Sphere, wanting nothing of that requiescence which every thing enjoys in that which it most desires, where I remain Sir, Your, &c. XXVII. To the Dutchess of Lorain at Berseel nigh Brussels, Anno 50. The Description of the Countesse of BERLA∣MONTS Funeral. Madam, YEsterday were the obsequies of Madam Berlamont celebrated with all magnifi∣cence in her own Chapel, hung all with black Velvet, bordered with Cloath of Gold, the Hearse in like manner with a Coronet and Ca∣nopy, The Holland Bishop officiated, all the Privy Councel, and Magistrates in Crops assist∣ing, together with all the Nobility, her two Nephews, the Duke of Arschot, and Prince of Gaue the chief Mourners; but the Prince the more officious of the two, as most concerned in her Testament, Father Mallyard made the Funeral Oration, indiscreetly enough, who
whilst he excused her for not intermedling with State Affairs, accused her the more, there being some incurable wounds of Fame, which like soar Eyes are but made worse with hand∣ling, nor wanted there positive vertues enough to praise in her, that he should need to seek out negative ones; but 'tis the vice of your petty Orators, to o'rpasse familiar and obvi∣ous things, & seek out uncouth and abstruse, thinking they are never eloquent enough, till they are extravagant. The Ceremonies o'th' Chapel performed, the Prince of Gare and I in manner soly accompanied the Corps into the Vault (perhaps the only true and real mourners there) where I complemen∣ted him, in telling him I wisht with all my heart all his misfortunes buried in the same Grave with her, and he answered that he ne∣ver had, nor could have a more sensible one than the losse of her. In fine (Madam) it were no ill complement to your Highnesse (I imagin) to wish all your Enemies buryed in the same Grave too; she having nothing I e∣ver dislike in her, but her Enmity to your Highnesse; for which Sin God forgive her and I doubt not but he'll forgive her all the rest; I having been always of opinion, that somes ob∣liging vices ar better than others sowr and au∣stere vertues, learning of that Fryer in Comi∣nes, to pray alwayes for those who do me good, and for me, your Highnesse knows the many obligations I had unto her, so great
really, as all the joy I had of living in Flan∣ders had been buried in the same Grave with her, had she not left your Highnesse Execu∣trix of it before she died; so Madame having rather gained than lost by the Exchange of the Hand, I may the more truly say now, that I am solely and absolutely Your Highnesse most &c. XXVIII. To the same. Apprehending danger from the Inflamation and rediness of the Princesses Eys. Madam, I Am so concern'd and sorry for the Princesse maladie, as did I apprehend the least dan∣ger of it, I should not be now alive to tell your Highnesse so; but I am so far from it, as whilst Doctor Forges is busie with the rest, consulting the remedys, with half the consul∣tation, I'll tell your Highnesse the cause of it, (when the malady is half cured they say.) First then, The rednesse of her Eyes is nothing else but as the blushing of the Morn is to the day; and no wonder that Aurora should precede, the fair Sun-shine her Eyes promise; Next 'tis but Iustice, that those Eyes which are to in∣flame so many, should first experience what
tis to be inflam'd themselves; that she may say with Dido, She has learnt to pity others by her own harmes, &c. besides by her draw∣ing Green Taffaty Curtains over them, I sus∣pect some design of keeping them for re∣liques (as the manner is) if so, I desire she should understand, that there are some things ('tis true) are more esteemed and reverenc'd the lesse they are beheld; but such as her Eyes are, the more they are beheld, are ever re∣verenc'd and esteemed the more. How ever, to morrow I shall not fail to come and pay my Devotions at her shrine, when if she look well upon me, I shall esteem my self highly blest; Mean Time, I desire she would esteem me for the humblest of her Votaries, and that your Highnesse would hold me for, Madam, The humblest of you Honourers and Admirers.
XXIX To the same. Merrily describing his journey on foot from BERSEEL to BRVXELLES. Madam, YEsternight e'r I reacht Bruxelles I was suf∣ficiently punisht for my unmannerly (or rather too mannerly) refusing your Highnesse Coach, the sudden rain having rendred the ways so slabbery, and me so dirty, as I can assure your Highnesse it put me more in mind of Adam's clay than a hundred Aswednesdays with its memento homo's could have done; I having more on my shooes than went to ma∣king the first man, and one might have planted more Salads on them than would serve Ma∣damoiselle de — s little houshould a year at least, so as my feet were like Nebuccadono∣zors Image all of clay, and they had like to have cost me twenty quarrels in coming hom. The Master of the Brick-kills had like to have quarrell'd me for carrying away all the Clay upon my shooes he had been preparing and making provision a whole week of to make in Bricks; and a Spaniard lookt grim and furly on me at the Gate, for carrying away so much of the Kings Highway on my Shooes; at my Entrance into Town, I might have had two pence for it of an Ale-wise for stopping Bung
holes, and a moulder of Images bargai∣ned for it to make his moulds of. But he who made most profit of it, (next to the Shomaker) was your good Frier Termi∣narius of Berseel, who meditating on his way, how Adam in State of perfection, of clay was made made man, at sight of me fell on ano∣ther conceit, how man in state of Imperfecti∣on was made clay. In fine, Madam, all the pro∣fit I can make of it, is to learn how I go on foot again when I may have commodity of a Coach, and not to refuse any thing that is of∣fered me. XXX. To the Lord Duke of Buckingham. In praise of Berseel a Castle of Maamiselle de Beauvais nigh Bruxelles. My Lord, THere are certain moments and ravishing Minutes like the divine Extasies of Saints, we should desire might always last; and if our lives were all of the same piece with them, how happy should we be? one of these in my opi∣nion (and I doubt not but I have your Graces suffrage) was that we had tother day at Ber∣seel,
when May had put on its best attire, the day its sereuest Countenance; Madam the Dut∣chess was never more pleasant, your Grace in better humour, nor my Late in better Tune. For Berseel it selfe, I could not at my return but give it this Character: That 'twas the only remains o'th' Terrestrial Paradise, the world being still ther in its first Innocence, the Tree of  only wanting to make them live perpetually, The air being so pure, as healh has made there its constant residence: and sickness dares not come within the sphere of Zephrus breath, who has taken possession of the territory thereabouts, and suffers no wind to blow there besides its self, whilst the Liquid Christal of its silver Moat serves both for Mirour to its lofty buildings, and the Wood Nymphs too, who with little Sports and Cupids on every Tree, in fresh revelry every day, pass all the year. The Genius of the place is al∣wayes sprightly, and the spirit of May is alwayes there. In fine, 'tis an Academy of Nightingals; and the Bees, those little Hunt∣feasts of Flowers, sind no where better, nor more abundant store, than there, where flowers grow every where, and crop but one, and strait seven more spring up in place of it, whether 't be the goodnesse and fertility of the soyl, or the vertue and fairnesse of the hand that gathers them; Heaven having priviledg'd this place, with that happinesse above all o∣thers, that it should never fall, but into the
fairest hands of the Universe. Thus I; but this I know (my Lord) comes short of your Idea of it, whose quick Imagination goes far beyond all others Expressions, where∣fore I'll leave this Theam, and come to that other of the Reason why after Madmoiselle de B's letting bloud there was found so e∣quall a mixture of bloud and water, as the nicest sense could not distinguish it; for which, whilst we were solliciting our Muses till after Midnight, and could not obtain any Reason of them, behold that mine gave me next morning. Of this so just and equal mingly Of water and bloud, what should the Reason be? But only this, being forc'd to part from her, Each drop of Bloud for Grief did shed a Tear. And now (my Lord) your Grace is oblig'd to admit of this Reason, or afford a better; which I know is as easie and natural to you, as 'tis to me to be alwayes Your Graces most, &c.
XXXI. To Madamoselle de B. Anno 50. The Reason of his leaving BRUXELLES to wait upon the Dutchess of LOREIN into the Country. Madamoiselle, THe Roman Stories make mention of a certain Lady so nobly constant to the Af∣flicted, as when her Husband had cast her Fa∣ther into banishment, she left her Husband, and follow'd him; and when her Fathers Faction (afterwards prevailing) did the like by her Hsband, she followed him agen, and lef her Father; and I should more praise this dis∣position, if it were not mine own, I having followed the Queen Mother so, as now I do her Highness, that they might see, I follow'd not their Fortunes but themselves; nor is it ver∣tue, but Interest in me, who love the good Graces of those I am with, above all the be∣nefits they can bestow on me; of which your Princes are then most liberal, when they have nothing to bestow on you besides; so there is somwhat me-thinks in great Princes, as in the Sun, that makes them the more regardable the more they are Eclips'd, and somwhat more venerable in ruined Palaces, than when they are intire. I speak not this (Madamoiselle)
with any reflexion on her Highnesse Fortune, but on mine own disposition, who was pleas'd to say publiquely, when I had resolv'd to wait on her into the Country; That none ever running at the Ring was more sollicitous to carry away the prize, than she was to carry me away from you. In revanche of which I can assure her Highnesse, that none ever ha∣ving gain'd in prize some precious Jewell, was more carefull to conserve it, than I shall be the honour of her good Graces. Mean while think not, (Madamoiselle) that I leave you for her; but only hope to serve you the more in ser∣ving her; You being so good a Sister, as I know you prefer her contentment to your own, or rather have no contentment but only hers; to which if I shall confer any thing, 'tis all the Ambition, as 'tis but the duty of Madamoiselle, Your, &c. XXXII. To Monsieur Laurins, Lieutenant Ci∣vil at Gant, Anno 50. Noble Sir, I Have finished my little Circle of the world (incompassing only the Borders of Asia, Affrique, and America) and am return'd to
Bruxelles, the point where I first begun, remai∣ning much unsatisfied (the while) that I took no greater compass; yet was I rather want∣ing to the opportunity, than the opportunity to me: The Count d' Averos (newly made Vice-Roy of the East-Indies at my return from the West offering me the like accommodation with him thither, as I had with Don Roderigo d' Alancastro (who had maried his Daughter) in returning from Brasil (that is, my diet and lodging with himself) (to which the King would have willingly assented, and munificent∣ly contributed) which, with many humble thanks I refused then, and if I repent me now, 'tis because I weigh it without the same Cir∣cumstances which then turn'd the Scales, (the extreme lssitude of one Voyage, and danger of th'other) not one Portugal ship of three returning safe from that voyage, whilst not one in ten of the Hollanders ever miscarries, the doubling the Cape of Bona Esperanza be∣ing onely dangerous at some seasons in the years, which season they never avoid, (by their own confession) so unwise men, or so ill Mariners they are, not better to know to Time their Voyage, or Trim their Ship; But enough of Voyaging: and now 'tis time for me, like a ship safe return'd to Harbour, to Carine and rest awhile, and tempt Fortune no longer, since Quem saepe transit sus aliquan∣do invenit, not one in a hundred ever having been so fortunate as I, nor (perhaps) did I live
hundred years, should I ever be so fortunate again, I never knowing what danger was by Lnd, nor stormes by Sea, in 8 years travel∣ling by one, and two years Voyage by tother (so rare a felicitie as (perhaps) none could e∣ver boast besides my self) so are there certain conjunctions which never but at certain periods (like Ecclipses) encounter, as was this to be defrayed and entertained, where e'r I went (in manner) at the publique cost, like some publike Ambassadour; one chief reason of which I imagine to have been my indifferency of travelling to any place where I had not been before (those who bind themselves to a∣y one course n particular, renouncing to For∣unes concurrency to all the rest) yet let none ever hope the like advantages, that are not signaliz'd by some remarkable qualities (as I was by Musick, &c.) There being somewhat in Art (whilst exercised in no Mechanique way) above Fortune, that makes Princes more favour those tat excell in t'one than t'other, they looking on t'one, as their Subjects, but on t'o∣ther, as their Companions (there being no su∣periority in Art as there is in Fortune, but the best, not the greatest carries it) This you should see now Sir if you were at Brussels, where whilst others far richer than my self are kept at distance, I am admitted to such a fa∣miliarity with those Grandees, as some Admire, some Envy, and all Emulate, all which honour I should not glory in,
if it were not accompanied with that of being Sir Your, &c. XXXIII. To Madamoiselle de B. Anno. 50. Of Language. Madamoiselle, SInce you honour me so much to permit me to entertain you weekly (or oftner) with our occurrences, and my meditations here, and please to give me the hint sometimes of the Subject I am to treat of, as now you do; be also pleased to understand that for Languages, tis to Embarque without Bisquet, or travel without viaticum for any to travel, or under∣take a voyage without the Language of the County, where he goes; for a shift (tis true) one may have recourse to their Country men in forein parts, but that is but a kind of beg∣ging to be understood, and travelling in for∣ma Pauperis; and as you must seek them out in Corners, so must you confine your self to Corners while you converse with them; for my part I account it altogether as necessary for those who travel to make provision of Langua∣ge
as of money, & therefore I never travail a∣ny wh, but  provide me with furni∣ture  of anguages for so vast a Room, as those  ries  travail through: and if you demand ofe which Language I found the most lrge an preading, and of greatest latitude and extension, the best way to answer you, is to give you first the plane of the Room, and next to let you see the several pieces of Languages to furnish it. First then for French it serves you thorough all Flandrs, Spain, Sa∣voy up to Italy (exclusively) as through the Neitherland up to Sweadland, Denmark and Poland, the other way) where almost all the people of quality speak French. Then for I∣talian it serves you not only through all Italy, but Sicily, Malt, and almost all the Isles of the Arhipelag and Medditerranean Sea, up to Constantinople, where your Language be∣gins to change, and fails you in travelng fur∣ther Levant▪ wherefore to return back again, It serves thorough all Dalmatia, and byond the Venetians Territory up to Austria, where tis spoke commonly in the Emperours Court, as almost in all the Princes Courts of G∣many. Now for Spanish it not only serves you thorough all Spain and Portugal▪ but along all the Coast, and the Isles of Afrique to the Brasils, and either Indies. For Dutch next, It not only serves you in Germany, Switzerland, the Low Countries, Denmark, Sweadland, but every where by Sea, which is as properly the
Hollanders Country, as any Land they or any other Nation Inhabit and possesse; and lastly for Latine and English (to tell you true) they only served me to stop holes with; the Eng∣lish Language out of our Dominions being like our English money current with much adoe in neighbouring Countries who traffick with us; but farther off you must go to Banquers of your own Nation, or none will take it of your hands. And for Latin, it being no where a vulgar Language, but the Sacred and Eru∣dite Tongue, take even the Clergy and School∣men themselves (whose proper Language it ought to be) out of the Church or Schools, and you cannot doe them a greater displeasure, than speak Latin to them, so as it rather serves to interlard other Languages, than to make an intire meal of discourse, and but upon great necessity is never to be used. And now I'll tell you an observation or two concerning Lan∣guages, e'r I end this Letter; and the first is, that (almost) all the Languages of Europe, are originally derived from the two main Fountns of the Almain or Latine Tongue, the Italian, French and Spanish branching from the last, as the Low Dutch, Dnish, Eng∣lish, &c. from the first. The next is the influ∣ence they have, according as their Countryes, Border and Conne one upon another, or by flux and reflux of Trade; The Italian for example being more Current in Turky than the French, for the first reason: As the French
(for the second) is more current than the Spa∣nish there. The last is concerning your subor∣dinate Languages, as the Walloon and Liegois to the French, the Portuguez to the Spanish, and Scotch to English, &c. all which under∣stand you in speaking the chief or Master Lan∣guage, but not o'th contrary, and all these your Master Language says use but their old absolet words, as Servants wear their Masters old Garments, but they (too proud to acknow∣ledge this) say rather, that as old men keep constant to their old fashions, whilst their Sons refine dayly upon them in bravery, and change for new, so the plainesse of their Lan∣guage, is but an Argument of the antiquity thereof. To conclude (Madamoiselle) 'twould be difficult for me to tell you which of these Languages serv'd me most in travelling about the world, were not the French that I have the happinesse to converse with you in, whom I esteem above all the world besides, to that therefore I must give the preeminence, and subscribe as I do this Letter, with the Assu∣rances that I am Madamoiselle, Your, &c.
XXXIV To the same. Of the pronunciation o several Languages. Madamoiselle, IN my last I discours'd t'ye of several Lan∣guages; now if you please I'll treat of their several pronunciation, and withall make a lazy Apology for my pronouncing them so ill: First then for French, you know the Queen-Mother would never suffer them to correct me when I err'd, saying, that If they taught me to speak well, she should want the sport of hear∣ing me speak so ill; and betwixt the Latin, Spansh and Italian there is so little difference in most words, as what betwixt negligence and unadvertance, assured to be understood, though they pronounce them ill, sew are care∣full and curious enough to pronounce them well; besides their similitude is so great, as (like Twins of the same Parent) one hardly distinguishes them, which, similitude as it faci∣litates the understanding of them in general, so it renders the pronunciation of them in par∣ticular more difficult, so as I (for my part) count it as hard to speak pure and without mixture, as 'tis for your Water drinker there to spurt several Liquors out of his Mouth, without confounding the tast of Bear with Vinager, or Aquavitae with Wine, &c. Besides
to one (like me) who regards more the mat∣ter then the words, and the words then the pro∣nunciation; and are of opinion that there is no supreme excellency in the world (besides only in your self) I count it as great trifling in him should seek to rid and weed his mouth of all Impropriety of some words▪ and mis∣pronouncing of other (in speaking other lan∣guages) as tis in him should go about to sweep an earthen floor too every gain of Dust, or rid a Garden from all its weeds, quod ere nas∣citur, vix evitatur, that which i catural to a thing being impossible to be avyded. Suf∣fice it then, that speak as well as one can other languages besides his own, unlesse from his Childhood he has been train'd up in them, In which case they are as natural to him as his own, and he sha speak with the allowance of a stranger still (It matters not much, whe'r' be a grain or two more or lesse) let me then understand a stranger Language, so as to make all I hear or read in it mine own, and speak it so as I may be understood, and let whose will take the bootlsse pains to pronounce it well, and have the reputation of an affected Travel∣ler for me: To conclude (Madamoiselle) I shall never envy him who tells you in finer language than my self, that he is your most Humble Servant, &c. but 'twould inflict me much that any one should be indeed more than I am Madamoiselle Your, &c.
XXXV. To Madamoiselle de B. Of Fame. Madamoiselle, COnsidering the mighty Elogiums and magnificent prayses that has ever been gi∣ven to Fame by all Kingdomes and Republi∣ques on th'one side, the airinesse and the Fabulousnesse of it on th'other side, it makes me half suspect that there is more of Policy than Reality in the thing; for who would doe great and noble Actions? who would expose their lives for their Countries? if somewhat beyond their Lives did not excite them to't? If the memory of what they did were termi∣nated with themselves, or that memory no∣thing appertained to them when they were gon, Hence 'tis, that this is used as a spur to incite men unto Vertue; 'Tis Fames Trumpet, that encourages men, and edges them to valor, and the sound of this like that of Meltiades Trophies to Themistocles, is still resounding in our Ears, and animating us to great and noble Actions; But if (as I say) we examine on th'o∣ther side, the frivolousnesse of the Thing, we shall find our selves impos'd by Antiquitie, and conclude with that Greek, who taken with the voice of the Nightingal, and imagining it
some mighty thing, pluming it (for curiosity) and seeing what it was, cried out, Vox est, & praeterea nihil, that 'twas a Voice, and nothing else. For first, if we consider the Fame of Writers, (in which the Fames of all others are included) both in its duration and Immensi∣tie, (for these two, forsooth, they promise you, shall never be terminate, and alwayes perma∣nent) if we consider, I say, unto how small a part and portion of the world their Fames can penetrate, how few understand their Lan∣guage, and how few of those who do, can read it, and lastly how few of those who can are curious; surely instead of painting it with wings, we might more properly paint it with Plumets at the heels, and in lieu of imagining it flying about the world, we may imagin it rather pent up, and fluttering about some nar∣row Bird-cage or volary: So as 'tis as great a folly and vanity to imagine what we write in our Language, or any other crudite Tongue whatsoever, can make any ar progresse in o∣ther Countries, as to imagine the sound of a Cymbal, or little Tinckling Bll could be heard over all the Universe. Then for the duration or perpetuating of it when I am dead, what a∣vails that me, or how can it more rejoyce and delight me, than Musick playd at my Tomb or Monument? When I am nam'd, who re∣members what I was? or when those are dead that knew me, who reflects upon my person hearing me mentioned; give me then Fame
alive, and take whose list my Fame when I am dead, which at most, is but as the Eccho of dying voices, or the perfume of expiring Odours, rather shaddows than substances, and not so much as pictures, which terminate at least the imagination to certain species and Resemblances. And if any one object, By this opinion all Incitement to Ver∣tue and to noble and Heroick Actions is ta'n away; I absolutely deny it, and affirm that the Fame we enjoy alive, and our Countries and Families after our death, is sufficient in∣citement, and encouragement enough: so as to conclude, I must answer you, Madamoiselle, demanding what Fame is, as that Antient did him, who desir'd to know of him what God was, That he would tell him on the morrow; when summoned of his promise, he demanded two dayes respite more: and so went multi∣plying Time and delays, till being prest at last, he answered ingenuously, That before he thought of it he imagined he know it, but the more he thought of it, the lesse he knew of it; and here (Madamoiselle,) before I conclude, that the worshippers of this Fame may not think me Atheist, I have made this following Hymn, here to its honour, to acquit me of Im∣piety. Fame that from great & noble Actions coms, As pretious Odours from Arabian Gums, The shadow that from brighter vertue flows, And follows it along where ere it goes,
The Eccho of great names, the walking spright, And Ghost of mighty men, the Tripartite Division of us, when we'r dead and gon, And nothing left of's here, but thee alone. When Heaven our Soul has (where it never dies) The Earth our Bodies, Fame our Memories; Since only thou 'tis mak'st our memories last, Nor can oblivion ever draw so fast Her Curtain or't, as thou't undraw't agen, To shew the fairer Portrait of 't to men. To whom, fair daughter of Eternitie, Should we commend our selves and works, but thee, Through whose sole benefit 'tis, if we survive, Long as ther's worlds, or men be left alive. XXXVI. To Madamoiselle de Clerque at Gant, Anno 50. Wherein he declares the Life they led in the Country. Madamoiselle, MY Indeavours have not been wanting, nor ever shall, to maintain that good Intelligence betwixt her Altezze of Loreine
and you, who often mentions you with much honour and tendernesse, and the ofter perhaps for my giving her the occasion, She always honouring me with that complacency, to pro∣secute willingly that discourse which I begin, we often wish you here, and to incite you to visit us the sooner, I'll tell you how we passe our time. The mornings, having finished our Devotions, About an hour before dinner we have a little consort of Viols, Lutes, and Ghit∣tars, which we often vary, together with our pieces for more variety; neither the Dutchesse, Princesse, nor I, but play our parts on all, and if Madamoiselle de Beauvais be with us, as of∣tentimes she is, they sing 3 parts, to which I play the Base, nor shall you any where hear more excellent voices, nor airs more excellent∣ly sung; having dined, and some one or two hours past in pleasant conversation; If the day be fair, we goe abroad in Coach to take the Air, a second Coach following, and some Horse, besides the Princesse in Side-Saddle, who takes much delight in her little Palrey, and rides excellent well, though not above 12 year old: From our journey, which ne∣ver ends without some Banquet or Collation, we return about Sun set, and dance Court and Country Dances, some hour or two before Supper, our company of Women Dancers, or Ladies of the Court being strong, but of men weak, unlesse some noblemen of Brussels or Englis Gentlemen come over to us, as ordi∣narily
they doe: After Supper we either play at Cards, or at the sports of wit and laughter, and all sorts of Petits Ieus, which ended, the Dutchesse and Princesse retire to their several Appartements, and each one to theirs, we having one main advantage here, to be free from the tyranny of Clocks, which tells you peremptorily what hours you must rise, eat, and go to bed at, whom you must punctual∣ly obey forsooth (as Sheep go to Pasture, or Hens to roost) whether you have mind or ap∣petite to't or no, or y'ar disorderly and irregu∣lar; An Order and Regularity fitter for Monkes and Friers than Seculars, for Slaves than Freemen▪ and for Knitting women than Ladies, If you like this life (Madamoiselle) do but come over to us, and you shall have your part of it, and find the Dutchesse ready to welcome you, and me most ready to wait upon you, who am Madamoiselle Your, &c.
XXXVII. To Madamoiselle de Beauvais. The Vices of evil Tongues Arraign'd. Madmoiselle, I Know not how you got the secret (but I'm sure you have it) to charm ill Tongues, and so stop the mouth of Mesdi sance, as whilst e∣very one (almost) speaks ill of others, every one speaks well of you; Is it because you speak ill of none? and give none occasion to speak ill of you? but they can doe it without occa∣sion, and when you give them none, can take it of themselves; or is your high Vertue above the reach of evil Tongues? but nothing in this Age is above their reach, who are so curious of finding fault, as where their eyes fail them, they invent new Prospectives, to find spots our even in the Sun it self; or is it lastly, a certain Majesty in your person, that daunts and aws them to Reverence? What ever it be, I must admire and congratulate your felicity, and pro∣fesse my self as glad of't, (being to speak a∣gainst the Vices of Evil Tongues) as one would be in a strange Country to find out one that understood his own Language. Purpo∣sing then to arraign those Vices, I have cho∣sen you for judge, the only Impartial one I know of, that is not complice with the Crimi∣nel.
First Vice then I intend to call unto the barr, shall be Mocking, Ieering, and Derision, rather Abuses than Crimes, and next the more Criminous ones of Calumnie, and Detracti∣on. Of Mocking, Ieering, and Derision. Mocking, Ieering and Derision, may be de∣fin'd a malicious publishing of others Imper∣fections, with intent to render them ridiculous, (for if it be their Vices, 'tis Reproach and Con∣tumely, and done on purpose to render them odious,) and 'tis lawfull in no case, but only when Imperfections are affected, to laugh them out of them; whence 'tis good when us'd for Physick, but when only for poison, 'tis detesta∣ble. However, it becomes none but Buffoons, and under pain of becoming Ridiculous ones self, none is to endeavour to make others so. It tends to Enmitie, if it proceeds not thence; (for the faults of those we love, we seek to hide, and never seek to find fault with any, but those we care not for:) Mean time, whilst they imagin they shew their wits, they but shew their folly by't, and want of wit, none more foolishly purchasing Enemies, than they; it being as great a folly for a Iest to lose a Frend, as to sell ones Horse to buy him Pro∣vender. 'Tis a dangerous Vice too, being com∣monly the occasion of quarrel, (whilst it
touches men where th'are most sensible) and therefore none but Women may safely use it; which is the cause (perhaps) why now adayes more women ar tainted with this vice than men. And if you mark it, their Mocking and Jeering at others, is principally for not being fine Gen∣tlemen, and a la mode (forsooth) they learning by looking on their Glasses, to looke on nothing but superficial things; (having more regard to the discomposure of ones Garments, than of their manners, and the disorder of their hair, than of their mind) and for such as these, your blunt man marrs their mirth, his not be∣ing put out of Countenance by't, putting them out of countenance themselves: Such an one was our Countrymen Sir Roger Williams, an excellent Souldier, but a blunt Courtier, who coming to Court after the losse of Sluce in Flandres, and being jeer'd for it by the La∣dies, with Is this he that deliver'd up Sluce? Pray let's see him, a doughty souldier no doubt he is. Answered them brusquely, Yes Ladies, I am he; and on so good conditions, there is none of you▪ but would have deliver'd up your Sluces too. Nor did he spare Queen Elizabeth her self, when waiting long at Court to deliver a certain Petition for arrears of pay, and the Queen not willing to see him, he one day Encountring her where was no a∣voyding him, she, to put him out of counte∣nance, feign'd to smell some evil savour in the Room, crying nicely out, Fogh, What a stink's
here? Williams, I think it be your Boots (said she) that smell so. No by — said he, 'tis my Petition (Madam) I have kept it so long, e'r I could get it deliver'd. But to return to our subject. There are divers sorts of Deri∣sions and Mockery; Some by whisper, others more openly; some before ones face; others behind ones back; some finaly by laughing out-right, and others Ironically, and by dis∣sembled scorn: Of which, that of whisper is commonly the most offensive, which, whilst it takes away all place from Reply, leaves place to imagine the Injury greater than it is; whence, whilst the Affront perhaps regards but one, the Offence of it extends it self to all. Your publique way of Jeering is most dange∣rous, and your secret more base and cowardly; above all your Ironicall one does the least harm to those they mock, and the most to those who use it; it marring their Natures quite, and tea∣ching them falshood and dissembling. And generally those who are so diligent in marking others faults and Imperfections, must needs be full of Faults and Imperfections themselves; Since, whilst their minds are still abroad to ob∣serve others faults, they can never be at home to mark and amend their own. In fine, how∣ever light they make of it, they are to know, that no Generous spirit but can easilier brook Injury than Scorn, and the reparation of it too, is easier made: and that they but render themselves by it odious unto all, it being na∣tural
for men to love those who esteem them, as tis to hate all those who disesteem them, (as those who mock and jeer them manifestly de∣clare they do.) To conclude, I could with them only to observe this rule, Never to say any thing of others, but what they would say be∣fore their faces, or what they would others should say of them behind their backs. Of Slander, Calumnie, and Detraction. But Mocking, Ieering, and Derision, are nothing to Slander, Calumnie, and Detraction. Those but point with the finger, but these brand in the forehead; those but strike, but these wound; let those say no more, and ther's an end, but these must unsay what they have said, and like venomous Beasts, resorp their own poyson, and like Witches and Sorcerers undo their own spells and charms, or the poi∣son and the mischief remains still. To distin∣guish them, Detraction seeks to take away my Good name, and Calumnie to purchase me an Ill. For Example, Detraction comes and sayes of one that's esteem'd an honourable and ver∣tuous Lady, that she is not so honourable and vertuous as is imagined; when having laid the Egg, Calumnie comes and hatches it, say∣ing that she has her Gllants too, as well as o∣thers; after which▪ comes Slander, and for
conclusion, names persons, and charges her with certain Crimes; whence you see, the first has more of the Envy, and the second two more of the Malice; the first Slights, the second Reproaches, and third Defames; These (is those who have the Plague seek to to infect others with their sores,) you shall alwayes find sowing of their malice in others minds; when take it for a General Rule, what ever they report to you of others, is ther wholly false, or never wholly true; for they doing it to mischief others, do it with ll the malice they can devise, and owing a  to those they calumniate, doe it, you  be sure, as spightfully as they can. But let tm take heed, for where the Scripture ss  hall answer for every idle word, (such as  Mocking and Jeering) On the contrary, we shal never be able to answer for our spight∣full and malicious ones, (such as are Detract∣on, Slander, and Calumnie) whence it distin∣guishes▪ and says (in effect) that whosoever concristats and offends his brother, shall be lyable to Iudgement; but whosoever injures and desames him, shall be lyable to Condem∣nation: but as there would be no Thievs, if there were no Receivers; so there would be no Calumniators, if none would give ear unto their Calumnies, wherfore 'tis rather our faults then, than theirs, who whilst we vainly imagin the depressing others a kind of exalting our selves, and that we are magnified, whilst others are
lessened, if we truly consider it, we shall find we but depress & lessen our selves by it, & declare our own indigence & want of worth the whilst, as Ladies who use painting or choppins do their want of beauty, and their own littlenesse: For me then, when any goes about to make me Enemy of any, I conclude he is their Enemy, and no friend of mine, with this distick. ▪Who'd have me doubt another is my Foe, First makes me doubt wh'er he's my friend or no. XXXVIII. To the Lady, — An. 51 Of Secrets. BEtwixt making a secret of every thing and nothing, there is a difference and mean, and great judgement is requisite to know what's to be kept secret, and what not: you shall have some of so Laxative Tongue, they are in pain to be delivered of all they know, and these are never to be intrusted with any re∣ports above the Region of Bake-house or Bar∣bers news: Others again are so Costive and had-bound, as they will not tell you how they do without caution, and will whisper
you the Weather and Time of the day as a great secret. When you hear one say, I know more than I will or dare speak of, &c. know 'tis but a call for the Curious and Inquisitive, & he longs to tell it you; so when you see any Inqui∣sitive, you may conclude them talkers too, and but factors & Ingrosers of news only to divulge it afterwards. These are those who with their reports Embroyl themselves and others, so sophisticating what they hear (as Hucksters do their ware) as e'r it passe their mouths, you may be sure 'tis either wholly false, or never wholly true, they corrupt & fly-blow it so with their reporting it; and such should be banisht all civil company, where they only sow the seed of lies, mistake and quarrel: For my part, I observe this rule in all companies where I come, never to speak any thing of others that may do harm; but on the contrary all the good I can; or example, when I say this or this such an one said of you, &c. It shall be so advantagious to either, as to beget a good opinion and intelligence in both; But what if they did not speak well or them, will you say? why in that case Ill tell the speaker of it, not those are spoken ill of; for this may mend matters, tother but make them worse, and exasperate them the more, for the rest, what every one may know, I'll make no dainty to tell every one; for he to no purpose gets the reputation of close and shy, who is continually reserv'd; and who on or∣dinary
occasions is so cautious, for extraordi∣nary reserves no caution for himself. Above all, I'll willingly participate no secret which o∣thers may know besides my self, not to be re∣sponsible for their blabbing it, neither are they more secrets insus'd into many conscious brests, than waters are Rivers when cut into ma∣ny branches & Rivolets. In fine, Madamoiselle, as that Princes Favourite was wise who when his Pr. demanded of him what he should im∣part unto him of all he had? answered any thing, but his secrets, and so say I: Wherefore chide me and spare not, if ever you perceive me inquisitive of others secrets, or injurious in my reports of them, and this Madam I give you under my hand, that when I trans∣gresse herein, this Letter may be witnesse a∣gainst me of that want of Temper and discreti∣on that is requisite in one that has the honour to be Madam, Your, &c.
XXXIX To the Lady, — How we are to contemn the Calumnies of the World. I Never knew any one nobly eminent in any kind but they were envyed and calumniated; It being the nature of base and low spirits, des∣pairing to arrive to that height, to which o∣thers by their merits and excellencies are at∣tain'd, to seek by detraction to pluck them down as low as they; nor will it be ever so happy with the world, to have more Emula∣tors than Envious: Emulation making men strive to be as good as others, but Envy to make others as bad as it, whence this vice is only found amongst the worser sort, to whom every one thats better than they seems to exprobate their being so ill; so as 'tis either some particular hate or self love that blinds them from seeing their own faults as well as those of other mens, else they would never calumniate others as they do, if they but considered, that one ought to be most cleer themselves of those faults they reproach to others, and he who cheaply sells others fame (upon th' accompt) makes but the Mar∣ket to buy his own. Mean while it being as impossible all should speak well, as that all
should do well, and 'tis not what we are, but what they are that make them speak ill of us: we are to indeavour so to live, as our lives may give the lie to their reports, and that they may never say true any harm of us, and let them say false what they please, twill be more their own harm than ours. To this purpose (Madam) I'll tell you a pleasant story, which I use often to recount, when I would laugh at these busie Censurers of others Actions. An Old man and his Son (a young stripling) travelling on the way, the Boy mounted on an Asse, the Father trud∣ging it on foot; The first Company they met began to revile the Boy, calling him ungra∣cious Rascal, was he not asham'd to ride, and let his Father walk on foot (nor must you i∣magine the charitable presage of hanging was forgot amongst them.) At this the Boy desired his Father to get up, and let him walk on foot; which being done, the next Company revil'd the Father as much as formerly tother had done the Son, calling him hard-hearted and cruel (strong and robustous as he was) to ride, and let the Tender Infant walk on foot; when the Father to content them took up his Son be∣hind him, and so they jogg'd on a while, till the next Company raild on them afresh, for over-burthening the poor Asse, calling them more Beasts than he (nor did the Asse ever know before how many friends he had a∣mongst the multitude) when to content these
at last the Father and Son both light and led the Asse, which when the next Company e∣spy'd, they laught at them more than the o∣thers had rail'd at them before, calling them a hundred fools, to tire and weary themselves, having an Asse to ride on: When the Good man perceiving the impossibility of conten∣ting the world, and avoiding its censure, wise∣ly resolv'd thereafter to content himself, and let them judge and censure him as they pleas'd. And 'twas a wise resolution, I having found by experience, that one sooner stops he mouth of Calumnie by a resolute going on their way, than a too nice fear of irritating it, it being of the nature of Cowards, the more you fear it, the more outragious it becomes, and the vulgar like Apelles Coblar, but care for its censure once, and they will never leave censuring you; Mean time I know, as the Apostle says, that I am debtor in point of Fame both to the foolish and the wise, but if they wo'nt accept the payment, when tis lawfully tendered them, but find fault and cavill still; let them still remain unsatisfyed for me, and for that vae scandal, that woe to scandal, 'tis to be understood where scandal is given, not where 'tis taken before 'tis gi∣ven. To conclude this point, never brave spirit yet, car'd what the Vulgar said, nor ever was brave nor noble Action perform'd by those
that did. Insomuch as Alcibiades would ad∣minister them matter himself to censure him. Alexander gloried in it affirming nothing was more great, nor Kingly, than to do well, and hear ill for it; and Aristides was so offended at the peoples speaking well of him, as he askt his Friends, not without Indignation, What ill he had done that he should deserve it at their hands. But what should we goe so far for Examples, when we have others nearer home, I remem∣bring to have heard of the late Earl of Exce∣ter, how (amongst his many other Excellent Apothegms) he demanded one day of his La∣dy, Whether none spoke ill of him? and she assuring him they were so far from it, as (on the contrary) every one spoke well of him; Mary, and I am sorry for it, said he, for 'tis a sign I have nothing of extraordinary, they being most commonly your ordinariest persons of whom the world speaks well, with the slight commendations of Oh he is a good man! An honest man! &c. But God be thanked there is no great danger of that in the Age wherein we live, Calumny being so universal a a Trade now, as every one is of it; Neither need you take care to afford them  matter, for they can make it of themselves, and out of themselves (as the Spider does) So whilst 'twas the Custom in antient Times (when there was more Charity in the world) to excuse the Act by the Intention, we are now ar∣riv'd
to such a height of uncharity to con∣demn the Intentision, when we cann't the Act, at least, calling Devotion, Hypocri∣sie; Honest Liberty, Dissolutenesse; Com∣placency, Flattery; nor is there any Action so Good, they cannot sind a bad name for; nor intail upon't an ill intention, insomuch as one was so injurious to his Mistris Beauty not long since to say, "Cease jealous Thoughts, and thus resolve at last, "She has more Beautie than becomes the Chast, Worthy of no Mistris, but such an ugly one as none should Love but he, who would intitle Deformity, rather then Beauty to vertue, a∣gainst the intention of Nature, with whom it implies a certain fitnesse to conserve choicest Iewells in the fairest Cabinets, and to lodge the noblest persons in the stateliest Palaces; Yet such is the Iniquity of the Times, as Beauty only, because 'tis Beautiful, is calumniated now, as Vertue, because 'tis out of fashion: And this Madam is just your case, whose excessive Beautie makes you not onely the mark of Envious Eyes, but also of malicious Tongues, to spit their venome at, whilst de∣fended by your Innocence, their poyson, like the Cockatrices, but returns upon themselves. Mean time thank your beauty (Madam) or rather he who gave it you, for delivering you by it from the many vices of your detractors,
you having too many perfections to envy the praise of them in others, or to calumniate that in them, which is so praise worthy in your self, whilst you need not vex Nature nor your self, as they do, to become fairer than you are. To whom (or rather to the Truth in∣deed) I must give this Testimony, that ha∣ving as a Spy of all that's fair and good, tra∣vail'd almost o'r all the world, I never met with greater Beauty accompanied with grea∣ter Innocence, nor one who thought lesse harm, because she did none, nor judg'd lesse ill of others, because she knew none in her self, and of this your chearfulnesse and free∣dom of behaviour is to me sufficient Argu∣ment; Those who dissemble most common∣ly over-doing, whilst they are over-anxious to do enough; whilst who are secretly im∣modest, cloath it in an outward demurenesse, and feign'd modesty, which most commonly, like Gold gilt, shews fairer than Gold  it¦self. If any fault then there be, tis in the Time it¦self, which though it can never warrant bad Actions, can render Indifferent warrantable at least, and so I see no reason but our behavi∣our, as our fashons, may alter with the times, and become more large or strait, as the fashons are. To conclude this point, what is affected is deform'd. as what is naturall is ever beco∣ming as 'tis (Madam) in you to be cheerfully free, and in a word, your self▪ In which I wish
none to imitate you, if they be not of your dis∣position, nor you to alter, unlesse you be of theirs. Be still then your self (Madam) in spight of your Detractors; that is, one of the fairest and beautifullest creatures in the world, and let none make you lesse Good, by calumnia∣ting your Goodnesse as they do; And in con∣lusion assure your self, that as you shall never want Detractors of the baser sort: (as are all such who detract from you) So of the better and nobler you shall never want Admirers and Honoures: amongst the rest (Madam) I hope more than one Age, as more than one Nati∣on shall testifie how much I am your Faithfull Honourer and Admirer. XL. To Madamoiselle de B. Of Affectation. Madamoiselle, YOu know the Sun with his beams chears not, nor is more diffusively good, tha her Highnesse with her presence. who Yesterday was pleas'd to graoe a Coun∣try Wedding here with her Company, where the Country people (you may imagine) put
on their best Mine to entertain her, and the Dauncers set the best foot forwards to shew their Agilities: Amongst the rest a Country Fellow laid about him with Arms and Leggs, so as I look'd still when they would fly off from him, and fear'd ever and anon as he approa∣ched me, lest he would throw them at my head, at Boyes do Cudgels at Plum-trees. Verily, Madamoiselle, never any Wheel so whirl'd a∣bout, nor spoaks e'r turn'd so fast, so as you could not perceive whih part of him was up∣wards, or which was undermost; yet did he imagin he daunc't excellent well, and was the more confirm'd in it, the more we laught at him: such Fools self-opinion makes of men, whilst it hood-winks them so, they cannot see their own Imperfections, and so besots them, as they imagine none else does; Nay, makes them mistake Vices and Faults for Im∣perfections; Whereupon I considered the deformity of Affectation, which makes people so anxious to do enough, as most com∣monly they over-do, and all Excesse you know is Vitious, as all that's vitious is ugly and de∣form'd. In fine, after the poor fellow had ta∣ken pains a great while to make himself Ridi∣culous, he gave over for pure wearinesse, and all panting, lookt about to see who commen∣ded him, when frustrated of his expectation, he was as much dejected with the want of it, as he was elated with the expectation of it be∣fore: so it exposes us not only to the Deri∣sion
of others, but to dejection also in our selves. You see the use I make of my time in every place, and how I Philosophy on every thing, with only this difference, that where you are, my meditations are delightfull and serious, wher you are not, every thing eems to me Irksom, and ridiculous; no more but he tres-humble baisemains of all the Ladies of our Court, and of Madamoiselle. Your, &c. XLI. To Madamoselle de B. Anno 51. Inviting her into the Country, the Plague be∣ing hot at BRUXELLES. Madamoiselle, IT being absolutely necessary in these dange∣rous Times, that you quit Bruxelles; 'tis concluded in a Council of War, to use all means of perswasion, force and stratagem, to make you abandon it. First we send you Master Iohn here, to make you an eloquent Oration with all his Tropes and Figure, and his Topicks de bono utili, & delctabili, to per∣swade you into the Country; neither wants he his flowers of Rhetorick out of Cicero, and the Muses Garden, far beyond all the Gar∣dens
you have at Bruxelles. If that won't do  we are resolved to try force an other while; to which end we'l implore the assistance of our Ladies of Succour by our Ambassadour Sir Toby Matthews (powerfull wih Ladies as you know) and old Monsieur Hurdlestone with his Baston of Marishal de camp shall lead the succours up. If that fail, we'll imploy strata∣gem, and Gros Iean shall be workt to under∣mine you in the Sellar he has in keeping un∣der your Appartement, or if he can't be cor∣rupted, we'll imploy some Holland ingenier to derive all the Spa water from Bruxelles hi∣ther, that you may be inforc'd to come and take it here. In fine we are resolved to use all possible means to make you leave the Town, when having got you here, we will erect a Trophy of Bottles on the place, and drinking you health in pure Mosella wine, so triumph for it here, as you shall not need to envy them the recreations of the Spa, we'll walk i'th' mornings, and ride abroad to take the Air every afternoon, & instead oth' Meadow, we'll dance here on the green a Chanson, and our six and Thirty English dances every night; After which, Madamoiselle, twill be ime, I think, to bid you Good night Your, &c.
XLII To Madamoiselle— Taking Exceptions at somewat he had writ. Madamoiselle, I Lay me down most humbly at your feet, demanding your pardon — Madamoiselle, WHat should I say, or what should I not say in my excuse? — Madamoiselle, TO say your Exceptions were not just, were to accuse you, and to say they were, were to accuse my self — Madamoiselle, THat Friend that suspects me without cause, must attend lesse satisfaction from me than an Enemy — Madamoiselle, NEver was man so Embaras'd and perplext as I; not knowing betwixt the too humble, and the too brave, what to write or say. Ther's none than your self, I'm sure bet∣ter understands Railery, nor better knows to
distinguish betwixt the Gentle and Piquat, yet do you interpret to evil sence and intenti∣on my but naming the Duke of — and de∣ducing a parallel betwixt the shynes of Damo∣sels in this age, and those in the days of Knights Errantry, who were not afraid to encounter Cavaliers alone in Wildernesses; whilst those now a days are afraid to meet them in a Park or Garden, and that in Com∣pany. I pray Madamoiselle hereafter have more bounty for me, and declare your self at least so much my friend, as not to look on me as an Enemy; for if you did not, you could not interpret my words so sinisterly as you do. There are some Pictures so contriv'd, as look on them on t'one side, and they appear Angels, on t'other Devils, and in the middle Men. Just such things are words (the Pi∣ctures of our mind) a Friend interprets them to good, an Enemy to evil, and one indiffe∣rent to neither. How, Madamoselle, I should esteem of you, declare I beseech you by your more favourable interpretation of all I write and do, whilst how you should esteem of me all I write and do shall testifie, which is, that I am Madamoislle, Your, &c.
XLII. Per speculum in Enigmate. Or a Mirour in Enigma presented to the Princess of LOREIN. Spoken by the Mirour. Madam, AS 'tis the fashion of all those who present their services to any one, to declare their Countries, Birth, and Quality, your Highness may please to know that I am Venetian by Nation, of as Illustrious Extraction as any Magnifico of them all, and of a Family as un∣ble misht and untainted; for my Qualities, I am sincere, and tell others there faults with∣out flttery, and that so far from humour of finding fault, as I tell them as well their ver∣tues and perfections too. I am strangely fan∣tastique (I must confesse) wearing my cloaths within, as others do without, and o awkward, as where others use their right hand, I use my left; For the rest, (to confesse my weaknesse) I am most frail, and subject to fall, if I be'nt look'd well unto, and am so weak of constitu∣tion, as 'tis a hundred to one afterwards, if ever I recover it. In fine, I am somwhat of the nature of a Cameleon, changing colour of∣ten by reflexion; nay, what is yet more strange,
I often change Complexion and Sexes too, be∣ing now fair, now fowl, now a Woman, now a Man, though I'm oblig'd out of Gratitude to love more the Feminine Sex, and can assure your Highnesse on my faith, I am never fairer than when you look on me. XLIV. To Madamoiselle de Beauvais, in Raillerie, On his being King on Twelf-niht. Anno 51. Madamoiselle, PYthagoras (or I imagin) would never have been such an Enemy to Beans, had he re∣ceived such favours from them as I have done, who by the Suffrage of one am chosen King to night; Think me not now one of those who change their natural Condition, with the con∣dition of Fortune, and wax proud with their honours. No, more I am in capacity of doing good, more good I mean to do; and I promise you on my Royal word▪ my Subjects here shall all have cause to rejoice whilst I reign over them, my raign shall be nothing but one continued Feast, which
they shall celebrate with joyful acclamation, nothing shall be consum'd but in the Kitchen; and nothing be exhausted but the Cellar, I will do Grace to all, and no Justice shall be done, but in drinking healths, amongst the rest Ma∣damoiselle, yours shall not be forgot, and think but what Grace I may do you, and ac∣count it done. Il Rey. The Answer. A sa Majeste Flecknotique. SA Majesté scaura que je me rejouie Insin∣ment de son heureux avenement a sa coronne, et je le cris d'autant plus facilement, pour que l' on a tousieurs este d' opinion du temps passé, que le  Royaumes seroient heureux quand les Rois eront philosophes ou les philosophes Royes. Pes∣per e que vostre Regne en sera extremement, et que vostre grandeur n' empeschera pas, qu' elle ne se souviene de mapetittesse. The same in English. To his Flecknotique Majesty. YOur Majesty may please to know that I re∣joyce exceedingly for his happy accession to the Crown, which I easily believe will be the
more happy, since Antiquity has alwayes been of opinion, that then Kingdoms would be happiest, when Philosophers were Kings, or Kings Philosophers; according to this, I e∣steem your Kingdom very happy, and hope your Greatnesse will not hinder you from re∣membring one so little as I, Your, &c. To Madamoiselle de Beauvais, An. 51. On his leaving BREEN. Madamoiselle, I Am lookt on here as an Ingrosser of her Highness favours, which (having no Intrest) I have no Arts at all to conserve, but only my sincere honouring her; for the rest, I have so little complacency (I profess) as I imagin 'twere too much spending on the main stock, to be complacent to all, and every one thinking they deserve it, imagine they are injur'd if they have it not: this makes those Enemies, whom I care not to make my Frends. Since then those who live in Court, are like those who Embarque on Sea. The Prince is the Sea, your open Ene∣mies, the Winds, and secret ones, the Rocks and Shelves; Yon, who are not only my Cynosura, or Pole-star by whom I direct my course, but
my Pilot, who are also to direct me, knowing better than I the nature of those Seas, will be carefull I hope to preserve me from these rocks and shelves, and for greater storms I will take care my self, who am of the nature of your Holland Yauges or Barks of pleasure, which when any storm arise, put to land presently and secure themselves; and just as in those Boats, when the Sea is calm, and the Skie fair and serene, you shall hear nothing but laugh∣ing and meriment, but when storms arise, and the clowds gather together once, they are all husht, and there's an End of their Jovi∣ality; so I lose my good humour straight, when I perceive any clowdy countenances, as I imagin I doe here now. You'll say perhaps, 'tis but my Imagination. It may be so, how∣ever I'll retire a while, so shann't I break with my Frends, but avoid breaking with them, it being not my manner, who love not to be trea∣ted with Indifference, much lesse neglect, to importune any with my Company, longer then they may take delight in it: so shall they re∣turn to't with appetite again, which else, as meats they are once cloyd with, they alwayes look afterwards on with loathing & nautious∣es. Besides, I find it no ways conducing to my health, to remain longer here this Winter, which (as a hole in the wall, is no part of the building) is so deep sunk in a bottom, as it seems no part of the world, there being a hole in Ireland they call Purgatory, and another
in the Isle of Lipary they call Hell, but if e∣ver there were any place that deserves the name of both, in my conceit 'tis this. You see how Satyrical discontent makes a man; and in the humour I am in, will excuse I'm sure my leaving Breen, only with intension, when they and I am am in better humour, to return again; Mean time (Madamoiselle) I beseech you conserve me, not only in your good graces, but also in theirs, to whom I am, and ever shall be as I am to you Madamoiselle, Your &c. XLVII To the Lady Tenham. An. 54: In sending her a Song or Ballad. Madam, I Send you here a Song made upon this occa∣sion: The other night almost all the Ladies of the Time were in the Garden, with none to wait on them but my self, when if a Hand∣kerchief but fell, I must strait reach it up, and with a couple of reverences, and kissing my hand, deliver it them again. If a Fan dropt, I was to do the like, and if a Glove were lost, like a good Water Spaniel I must go hunt it
out▪ and fetch it them again. In fine 'twas impossible Sir Toby Matthews himself a∣mongst so many Ladies could have been busi∣er than I was, nor more officious; with which notwithstanding I was so wearyed at last, as returning to my Chamber I made this follow∣ing Song, In revenge of those who left me all alone under so great (yet honourable) a bur∣then. SONG. I NOw into what Times Are we faln for our Crimes, Or what ever the matter of't may be; It does not afford So much as a Lord To wait upon a Lady: But now all alone A walking they come, With none to wait upon them; Your Gallants are grown Such tarriers at home, A Murren and Shame light on them.
2 Is't boldnesse they lack, They are grown so slack, Or each turn'd Woman hater, Or money they want, Of which store God grant, Or what the Devil's the matter; But yet we behold Them dayly more bold, And their Lands to Coin they distil ye, And then with the Money You see how they run ye, To lose it at Pickadilly. 3 Your Country Squire I far more admire, (Whose Father that's dead God pardon) He knows 'tis the fashion To give them Collaion, Who go to the Park and the Garden; Whilst he of the Town Is grown such a Clown, Yo wait on them he is unwilling; But away he does run, When the Ladies do come, And all for to save his Ten shilling.
4 But Ladies you'll see, Be ruled by me, And this geer will soon be amended; Upon them but frown, When you have them at some, And all this quarrel is ended; Sharp Hawks we are sure Will come to the Lure, Then of Favours in private but starve them And strait you will see In publike they'l be More ready and glad to deserve them. XLVIII To Cloris, Anno 54▪ On her going out of Town. SEE fair Cloris how you deal with us, you left us in the Spring to deprive us of Flow∣ers, and you leave us now in Summer to de∣prive us of the fruit of them; but you know what you doe; two Suns at a Time would be too much now in the Town, and therefore to prevent plagues and Calentures, you go out of it; but now our better Sun is gon into the
Country, what should we do here; where that we have, only serves to scorch and burn, not to comfort us: It being more safe and comfortable then to follow you into the Country, than longer to remain in Town here; If now we suffer by your absence, we may thank our selves, and none would pitty our complaining of it, when we might enjoy your presence with but only going after you. Expect me then next week with you (fairest Cloris) and if you find not yet in my Heart the Rea∣sons for it; look but in your Glasse at least, and you'll find it in your Face, the Sun never attracting more flowers, than that does hearts to follow it, and amongst the rest (if not above the rest) that (Aimablest Cloris) of Your, &c. XLIX To the Lord Rich. My Lord, I Have considered since I saw you last, wha vain boast 'twas in those who threatned (on I know not what particular picque and quar∣rel of their own) to deprive me of all my friends; for besides few are so indigent of E∣nemies now a day, as they need to take them up on others scores; If another can deprive
me of them, they are no friends of mine, and to imagine others should be angry with them when they are angry, is as great a folly, as to imagine others should be sick with them when they are sick; besides I should be very greedy of the store, should I not content my self with those for friends, (should they de∣prive me of all the rest) whom they have for Enemies; but all this proceeds from their not considering the differences between Acquain∣tances and Friends, which are so hard indeed to distinguish (but on such occasions) as pray tell them when you see them) they shall much pleasure me to do it for me, when with all their blustring they shall do me no more harm by it, than the wind does to the Trees, by blow∣ing off their old wither'd eaves, ro make place for new flourishing ones; Mean time I assure my self, My Lord, you are none of those who think those that cry loudest have the greatest wrong, when 'tis rather their weak∣nesse than any just provocation of mine, un∣lesse they take it for an injury and affront, that I'd receive none from them. For me, though I should not be so good a friend, unlesse I knew how to be as bad an Enemy; yet I professe I had rather contend with them in any quarrel, than in such an one; where 'tis a greater shame to overcome, than to be overcome, so tell them, if you please My Lord, assure your self from him who knows not to dissemble, nor to be other than Your Lordships most &c.
L. To the Lady — Of the Temple of Frendship, a Tragi-comedy he was writing, with the character of the Persons. FRendship being our second Religion, and so main a part of our first, I have design'd to present it so beautiful to the Eye, as all should be ravisht wih its Love and Admirati∣on. To this end I have personated it in the loveliest sex, and that betwixt persons of the same sex too, for avoiding all suspect; Frend∣ship being nothing but Love stript of suspi∣tion of Harm. For representing it by Ladies, after the like example of the Queen and her Ladies here formerly, & of the greatest Ladies & Pincesses in Spain, France Flandres, and else where, I thought none reasonably could take exceptions, nor think me too ambitious in', e∣specially I having been long Time train'd up & conversant in the Courts of the greatest Queens and Princesses in Europe, and consequently not altogether ignorant of personating and pre∣senting them according to their dignity and quality. First then for Blondinia and Lindiana, I make them vindicating to their Fair Sex, all the Noblenesse & Generosity as ever was in man,
and to their Friendship all the dearnesse and tendernesse as ever was in Love. For the two Princesses artiana and Philo∣thea, I make them of equal perfection, though of different disposition (like Pamela and Phi∣loclea in the Arcadia) high minded, magnani∣mous, excelling in all the Vertues of great Princes, and not to make them more than Princes, subject too to their noble Vices of Anger, Ambition, &c, To shew in fine that they are not vertuous by chance, but by choice and Election, since they may be otherwise. For Bellara, she is a person whose divine Conversation would even make you doubt whe'r she were humain or no. Her wisdom is so great as there is no Labyrinth in this world she would not help you out of, by conecting a Thrid of first and second causes together. She has charge both of the Altar and Oracle, yet is her breast the purest Altar, and mouth the truest Oracle: so as in following her opinion, you are sure of Truth for guide, and in follow∣ing her Example you are sure of Heaven for Frend. For Euphemia, so young yet as she is but a Neophie, and under Bellaras tuition, she is of so pure a brest, as like white paper she is ap∣ted for receiving all the others divine Precepts and Impressions: so as you may well guesse at what she will be hereafter, by what the other is at present. For Compase lastly, and the rest, we may
well say of them, that as those who play the Fools part in the Play, are most commonly the wisest men: so those are most commonly the best Actors, who play those Treacherous parts, and though they be not lookt on with such gracious Eyes for the persons they represent; yet certainly they are most Admir'd, when they represent them well, as Painters when they paint some ugly Body to the life. For the Plot, to give you some light of it, I feign a Commonwealth of Amazon, and (to render it more propable than tother) of peace∣full ones, sent there in Colony, though for the greater variety distemper'd into Warr; In which (Heroina's as they are) you are not to wonder, to see them do Actions of greatest Heroes, and capable of all the Heroical Ex∣ploits you admire of men in Story. I ha∣ving found in your noble Sex a capacity of all the Excellency I ever yet found in man.
LI. To Lilly Draing CLORIS picture. STay daring man, and till perchance thou sinds, Colours so rare, and of such orient worth, To paint bright Angels, or Celestial minds, Never presume to paint bright Cloris forth. Till rom all Beauties thou extracts the Grace, And frō the Sun beams gets the dazling thred, Never presume to draw that Heavenly face, Nor those bright radient Tresses on her head. Ve not thy Art, the while, t' expresse th'e∣clate That from her Beauty and her Eyes do shine, All earthly things thy Art can imitate, But Cloris Eyes and Beauty are devine. What needs thou then the bootless labour take, When none can paint her out to her desart, She that's above all Nature e'r did make. Much more's above all can be made by Art. But yet go on too, since who ere does see't, At least wih admiration must confesse,
It has an Air so most divinely sweet, 'Tis more than others, hough than her much lesse. So they who shoot at Heaven, though they propose T'emselves a Butt, to hit they ne'r may hope, Level and shoot far higher yet than those, who aim but at some Tree, or Houses top. Comfort thee then, and think it no disgrace, T' have fail'd where none could hit and know (In fine) (Unto thy higher praise) the cause of 't was, Her too great Ex'lence, and no want of thine.
LII. To the Lady Biron. On the black hair of a fair Lady. RArest of all that nature ever nd do, Light in the dark, and Sun-shine in the Shade. Tresses so black, and Eyes so fair and bright As it a mixture seems of day and night Wonder! whence this so strange conjunction Of meeting oposits and extreems should come! Did Nature fear, when those fair Eyes she made. They'd not have shone so bright unlesse they had; Foil of black hair, to set them off, or did She with those shadowy Curtains keep them hid Left their so radient and resplendent light, Should dazle our weaker sight, and blind us quite. Or to defend us from their scorching Rayes, This needfull shelter she invented has; As in the torrid Lybian desart, where Th parching Sun shrinks up the Traveller, To 's nontide shade, black clouds she does pro∣vide. Poor fainting wretches from its beams to hide, Or cause 'tis controverted which does make, the perfects Beauty, or the fair or black,
Did she together curiously place The choice of eithers Exellence in in her face. Or is't the Harmony she'as within doth make, Her outward form, o'th Harmony partake; Discord in concord so has reconcil'd, She's sweetly rigid, and severely mild. She's simply wise, modestly confident, Gravely pleasant, and wittily innocent: What ever 'tis our wonders all will ase, When we shall hear 'tis Biron is all this; Or rather (Madam) we shall wonder more, Hearing you mention'd, than we did before, Since all must needs confesse, beholding you, Your Beauty's Beauty and Admiration too. LIII. To Briget Countess of Desmond. In Excuse of his no sooner celebrating her praises. Madam, YOu being all Admirable as you are, No wonder yet I never did declare, But in an Aspiration or two, The Admiration which I have for you, For Silence (Admirations tongue) can best Speak that, by words can never be exprest; For 'tis not with me, as with one that has Some slight and easie subject for his praise;
For plain and obvious Texts all at first vew Can understand, but one must study you: So th' superficial Beauty of a face Each superficial brain knows how to praise, And th' shallower bosom every shallow wit Can dive into, and sound the depth of it. But your fair soul, so deep, and so profound, Fews wits have fathom-line enough to sound; And for each several Grace one might agen Number as well the Starres as number them; Besides, what most perplexes, is to see You equally possest to Excellency Of all th' perections of your fairer sex, And equal, not unequal, does perplex— So as whilst others th' subjects penury Deters, 'tis th' store only deterreth me, When, seeing so much to praise in you, I'm lost, Not knowing what in you to praise the most. Thus y'ave the Reason of my praising you No sooner now, but (silly) what do I do, He's a meer Trifler and nothing does, In general terms, praises a subject thus, And should I to particulars descend, 'Twere easier to begin than e'r to end.
IV. To CLORIS. CLoris ne'r think that I should whyne and cry At Womens humors & Inconstancy, Or, like the Amorous Knight In the Romance, Look pale for't, sound, & fall into a Trance. I know you love to change, & would that you Shu'd know, that I can change as easily too, When summ of all the harm can come of it, Is, you leave me, I you, and so w' are quit. Mean time yours, & not mine shall be the loss, When Cloris forth in all her bravery goes. Contending whe'r the gaudy Spring or She, To eyes end hearts more ravishing shu'd be, T' have none with praise usher her forth, & say, This is the Spring, tother but only May, This, this is she, so glads these hearts of ours, Whilst that glads only Trees and sencelesse flowers, And more to heighten th' glory of the Spring, Birds do but chirp, Cloris does only sing. Be then my Goddess, as you were before, Or ne'r expect such offrings from me more, And as propitious as y'ar wont to be, Or you have lost a worshiper of me, Who never yet a Reverence did bear To Deities, wou'd be only serv'd for fear: So your young Novice in Religion, Is's Goddess frown, thinks he is quite undon,
And fondly superstitious seeks in vain, By Prayers and Tears her favour to obtain, Whilst th'old Egyptian Idolater His Idol fire to Nylus bank does bear, And 'lesse he finds it in a better mood, Do's threatē straight to quench it in the sloud. LV. To the Lady Elizabeth Darcey. The Farewell. Madam, TO my departing Grief tis some allay, That all my better Thoughts with you do stay Whilst only thought of you I bear away. So whersoever Absence us confines, 'T can never seperate resolved minds, Whom mutual bonds of thought so fast com∣bines What need I care then whilst from you I part, So long as you are present to my heart, Whe'r Eyes or no 'th' joy have any part. Eyes are dull Instruments, that only hew Out forms i'th' mind, with oft repeated vew, Or being decay'd those forms again renew.
Whence, as 'twer folly in Painters more to stare O'th person, when their Pictures finisht are So 'twer in me, for Eyes now more to care. Howe'r since Frendship and Suspicion Trade both in the same mind, I've but this one Boon (Madam) to crave of ye, and I have don. And tis t'assure ye, I am none does take The last Impression still his Eyes does make, But what his heart once has, does ne'r forsake. To end then, after this assurance, know, That you who are my last thought now I go, Shall be when I am gon, my lastingst too. LVI. To the Lady Isabella Thinn. MAdam, i'th' worlds great Liberary, whe I've studied Men far more than Books, and there Have learnt to know their differences too: Some are my Classique Authors, such as you, From whose fair Lectures I have learnt alone, What's profitable, and fit or to be known. Others light Pamphlets, which when once w've read, W're straightways cloy'd with them and satia∣ted.
Others meer out-side hore for Ornaments Of studies, than for inside or contense, (For Libraries are like th' Stationers stall, Defective, if not furnished with all) And fin'lly some too hard and Tetrical For th' Muses to be conversant withall: Having at last perused every one, I must conclude of all I've ever known Or read, both for contense and outside too. The fairest, best, I ever read, is you. LVII. The fair Mourner. To the Lady HOWARD. IN fable weeds now all the Graces mourn, Till she to brighter Colours does return, And just like sad Camelions appear, Taking their dark reflections all from her, From her, whose Beauty can't go more nor lesse, For any additionary wear or dresse. Who gives her Robes, their chiefest ornamesit, Whilst others chiefly from their Robes are lent; And does herself within herself contain; All that's by others sought and, sought in vain;
Not France does on the Neighbouring world impose, (As it had Pattent for't) its garb and cloaths, Nor Ladies teach with more becomingnesse, What Habits they should wear, what tire, what dresse Then she on all that's excellent, sweet, and fair, Happy to take examples all from her. Mean time was never sweeter sorrow seen, Since for her Favourites losse the Idalian Queen, Taught lovelinesse [could only smile before] The Gentle Art to weep and to deplore, Which she Improving makes her Tears the while More pretious sweet, than e'r was any's smile, Enhancing of their value by't so high, 'Twould beggar either India to buy; Ah Gentle Nymph then shed them not so fast, Of pretious baum make not such lavish wast; One drops enough to satisfie for all Misfortunes in this world co'd e'r befall, And then the living make (by odds) the dead Happyer, for whom those pretious Tears are shed, Who would, you'd spare them yet, their care is such, (Though most concer'nd) lest you should weep too much; Happy the whilst are both the joy and care, Of all that's dead, of all that living are,
LVIII. To Misa. Angry because she was old. NOw what a Devil Misa makes Thee with such eyes behold me stil. Cause from thee time thy good looks takes, Must I therefore have thy ill? I prithee Misa don't behold Me thus, as if I were thy Foe, For howsoever thou art old, I am not Time that make thee so. And rather than to quarrel with me, As if I had done thee wrong, Go quarrel with thy Age I prithee, Whose fault 'tis that thou' ast liv'd too long. How e'r (for me) thou well may'st spare, Thy anger, and thy frowns may cease, who for thy good looks little care, For thy bad ones care much lesse▪
LIX To the same. On her striving to appear still fair and young. LEt Autumn paint her wither'd leaves, And Winter dye his snowy hair, Yet he's a fool that not perceives Both aged and decayed are. So while thou't needs look well again, And still seem fair unto our sight, Misa, thy labours all in vain, Like his who'ud wash the Ethiope white. Nature by Art is better made, Whilst Art has ground for what it does, But when that Nature's once decayed, All Art but more deformed shews. Who look't well in King Iames's raign, And in King Charl's old appear'd, Will hardly now look young again, When th' Commonwealth has got a beard. Then Misa follow my advice, And leaving off thy bootlesse care, Strive rather to win hearts than eyes, And to appear more good than fair.
LX. To Phillis. Reporting he loved her, because he praised her. PHillis, how you your Ignorance discover, Whilst you mistake a Poet for a Lover, Who when he verses writes, makes Love tis true, But 'tis unto his Muse, and not to you, And oftentimes does Mistresses invent, To exercise his wit, and complement; Iust as I've Gallants seen (dispos'd to mock) Make leggs and faces to a courting stock. When then I prais'd you with Hyperbolies, Nought but impossible, excus'd from lyes, Planting the Rose and Lillys in your cheeks, (Where one more truly might have planted Leeks,) And talkt of your divinity of mind, (When I human'ty here co'd scarcely ind) And much more when  flatt'ring ye did bring Sweets from Arabia, Flowers from the Spring, From Beauty all was excellent and fair, And from the Graces all was choice and rare. Were you so simple, to believe that I, Could e'r commit to grosse Idolatry? Or that I had so little sense and wit, To mean all this by you? or you by it? Pray be more wise hereafter, left you make Me blush (not for mine own) but for your sake,
And understand against another Time, Ther's no smal difference 'twixt Prose & Rhime, While t'on for what you are commendeth ye, Tother for what indeed you ought to be, Your Poets end being only to make men Better than th'ar by their commending them; Make you like use of't then, and so I may Perhaps admire ye, as you think and say; Mean time all (Phillis) I admire in you, Is (saying I admir'd ye) you could think it true. LXI. To the Vice Roy of Norway, Anno 55. Insending him some Verses which he desired. My Lord, BEhold your desire has a greater force with me, than any others commands could have, I obeying it even when I was not in estate of obedience, being in the heat of a Feaver, and consequently unapt either to write or compose any thing. If your Lordship find any heat then in these Lines, I will not say tis of the Feaver, nor that of Poetry; but of the desire I have to serve you: and if you like it not, you will think it worth burning at least: so shall it but die a natural death, and but re∣turn
to its first being, being begot in flames. I will detain your Lordship no longer from reading it, being able to write no more, but only that I am Your Lordships most, &c. On his choosing Valentines. HOw great a Freedom he injoyes Who loves not without Counterpoise, Since be th' attraction what it will, He stands upon firm basis still: So tother day my chance it was, Choosing Valentines in a place, T' have one draw me, and I an other, Who so counterballanc't t'other, Neithers Captive I was made, Both such equal Beauty had, Eithers Captive else had been, Had I both assunder seen, So true tis when two such as those, We to our equal choice propose, We should dye e'r we could choose Which to take, or which refuse. No danger's then of eithers harms, Whilst th'one undoes the others charms: But when these Circes are alone, Then all the loving harm is done; So she who made Alcides spin, His Club layd by, and Lions skin,
Should soon have seen with what disdain He would have snatcht them up again, And thrown his servile work aside, Soon as some Dame he had espy'd I'th' room with Omphale appear, At all parts equalizing her; So great a freedom he enjoys, Who loves not without counterpoise, Since be th'attraction what it will, He stands upon firm basis still. LXII. To the Countess of Desmond. On the Death of the Lady Theophyla Ca∣rey, Daughter to Henry Earle of Monmouth, Anno 55. Madam, I Saw so many Graces and Perfectons in the Lady Theophyla Carey (for she was all trans∣parent, and her very Soul did shine thorough her Body) as I must wish (with her noble Familie, and the rest of her Honourers and Ad∣mirers) that either I had never known her, or that we had never been depriv'd of her. But being fair as an Angel, having an Angels mind, and singing too Angelically as she did, we might well imagine her one of those Ce∣lestial
Quires, and cease wondring, being all Angel as she was, that we had onely a Glympse of her on Earth, and that she should straight vanish like some Heavenly Apparition into Heaven; It dealing so ordi∣narily with us in this manner, to shew us such as she only, and straight to snatch them a∣way agen, as I begin to suspect 'tis but a bait to make us desire to follow them, knowing us so Earthly minded, as there's no other way to intice us unto Heaven. For my part, (at least) upon her death I've left the Town (so much I am displeas'd with it, could no better conserve the choicest Rarity it had) and that after Times might know what a losse they had in her, as well as the present, have made this Epitaph on her before I went into the Country. REader, if th' art courteous slay, And understand before thou go, Here lies th' admir'd Theophila; More of her if thou wilt know, For Beautious features, lovely Grace, For candid breast, and purest mind; She Glory was of Careys race, And excellentest of Woman kind.
LXIII. To Mr. Thomas Higgins With his Ode in praise of the Country life. Noble Sir, IF those on whose soyl the Tree grows have most right to the fruit, none has more right than your self to this following Ode in praise of the Country life, since 'twas made at Grewel with you in the Country. After which I know not what excuse to allege for my living in the Town, but that self-accusing one of Phe∣dra, Video meliora, pj rasequor, or this, that when I would live to my friends and self, I go into the Country, when to others, I goe to Town; However, I being of that Amphibean Gender, with those who are now in one, now in tother, do receive this benefit (at least) by it, that the one but begets an appetite to tother; all pleasures in this life consisting in a certain change, and vicissitude, which indeed is but a pause and respite of pain, or relaxation from misery (none taking pleasure in rest, but the weary, nor in eating but the hungry, &c.) which you'll easily perceive, when continue them but too long, and you make a pain of that pleasure, and begin to long for the plea∣sure of the pain you had before; such is our humane infirmity, as like sick men in their beds,
we lye tossing and tumbling up and down, and restlesly change place, only to find rest, which we can never find, because we carry unrest a∣long with us, quod è re nascitur vix evitatur; the purest company which I find without lassi∣tude is the company and conversation of a frend, which is the more pure the more spiritual they are; and that, Sir, I never enjoy in grea∣ter perfection, than when I am with your com∣pany. ODE In praise of the Country life. O Happinesse of Country life, Which own nor Palace ne'r could boast, Where men are even with Gods at strife Whose happinesse should be the most. Whilst innocently all live there, Lords of themselves, as well as Land, Out of the Road of Hopes and Fear, And out of Fortunes proud command. Where to deprive men of their own, Is crime which yet they never saw, Nor more injustice e'r was known Than not to give Beasts hunted, Law.
Where but for fish ther's none lays baits, Nor traps, but for some ravenous Beast, And but for Foul there's no deceipts, So harmlesse th'are in all the rest. Where of false dealings none's afraid, And soothing flattery none allowes, But only in the Dairy Maid, Who whilst she milks them, stroaks her Cows. Where only in Sheep-sheering Time The Rich the Poor do seem to Fleece, And of oppression all their crime Is only whilst they make their Cheese. Then for the pleasant, do but think, Th'vast difference there is twixt both, Whilst men in Towns live in a sink, A life, even very beasts would loath. Where nothing on the Earth does grow, To speak the seasons; but (in Summ,) By Dirt they only Winter know, And only dust shews Summers come. Then for serenating the mind, Without which no contentment is, Where in lowd Cities shall you find A recollection like to this?
Where on some Object whilst X stay, And hidden cause of it would find, No noice does fright my thoughts away, Nor sudden sight distract my mind. Or if that any noise there be, 'tis such as makes me not afard, Of Waters fall, Birds Melody, O'th' bleating flock, or lowing heard. Mean time how highly are they blest, Whose conversations all with them, Who only but for th' name of Beast, Are (in effect) lesse beasts than Men. For no ambition makes them fight, Nor unto mutual slaughter run, Invading one anothers right, Till t'one or both be quite undone. None others acts calumniate, Nor mis-interpret every word; For others lives none lies in wait, Nor kills with poyson, nor with sword. Then to conclude the Country life, Has happinesse Towns could never boast, Where men are even with Gods at strife, Whose happinesse should be the most,
And since life somewhere must be spent, Give me but Amorets Company, Without which life has no content, And here I could both live and die. LXIV A condoling Epistle To the Dutchesse of Richmond. Anno. 55. O the deah of my Lord Duke her Hband. Madam, AMidst the greatest discomfort I ever had, This comfort my Lady Kingsmel gave me at my arrival to Town, that a more be∣coming sorrow, nor more natural than that of your Graces, as yet she never saw, which made me (Madam) instead of condoling (in some sort) congratulate with your Grace, that as y'av formerly performed all the parts of a most illustrious wife, so now you do of a most ex∣mplar Widdow, one of which is not to mourn ambitiously as others doe, and with such a studied sorrow, as if they courted new Husbands in mourning for the old, but with such a Grief, as shews them rather dying than living, since those are dead whom they most lov'd alive. Mean Time (Madam) since vir∣tue
always consists in the mean, and all extr∣mities are vitious, Give me leave (I beseech your Grace) only to put you in mind that you grieve not too much (like those who are over anxious to grieve enough) but imagin (a∣mongst your other imaginations of the dead) that you hear your noble Lord and Husband expostulating with you thus; Why (dearest heart) having left thee three main businesses to do, to have care of my Children, to have care of my estate, and to bewail me dead, why wouldst thou frustrate and irritate my will in all these three, by making my Chil∣dren compleat Orphans by thy death? by ru∣ining my estate if thou dyest? and lamen∣ting me so dead, as 'twould kill me a second time were I alive? Modera thy sorrow then, and kll me not wholly by't, who am not wholly dead, as long as thou'rt alive, but live, as (if 'twere in thy power) thou'dst have me live again, so shall thou comfort me by com∣forting thy self, so shall I more perceive thy love, than if thou dyedst for me. Those (Madam) I beseech your Grace to beleeve are rather his words than mine, after which I' say no more but only weep, whilst I write this following Elegy, and subscribe my my self (as really I was, and shall ever be) his and Your Graces most &c.
On the death of the Lord Duke of Rich∣mond and Lenox: ELEGIE. AS when some mighty blow is given, By which our Walls & Towers ar shook, Some all agast look up to Heaven, Some wildly on each other look. Nay somtimes too (w'are made of such Frail brittle stuff) it may so fall, The violence of't may be so much, To shatter in pieces life and all. So, at Report that Richmonds dead, Whilst some Astonisht stand at Gaze, Some towards Heaven lift up their head, In witnesse of their sad amaze. We whom the blow does strike more neer At the report even dead do fall, Whilst sad and dolefull news we hear, Of such a Death that kills us all. How would that Tyrant (then) be glad, To Mankind was so great a Foe, He wisht that all but one neck had, To take them all off at a blow?
When he sh'd see, now Lenox' gon, How dead and sprightlesse each one is, As if to kill us all in one, Did need no other Death but his. Mean time soft rest I'th' sacred Vrn, Vnto his Noble Ashes be, Where lies intomb'd, not to return, All Vertue, all Nobility. Vntil the Heir h'as left behind, In whom his House's hopes remain, True Offspring of the Phoenix kind, Revive them from his dust again. Then shall his Mother tears refrain, Then shall she cease to sigh and moan, Seeing her Husband live again, With all his Glories in her Son.
LXV. A Consolatory Epistle, To the Queen Mother of France, Mary of Medices; written about the year, 41. Omited in its place, and inserted here. Madam, YOur Majesty knows (whose chief study these many years has been Divinity) how our B. Saviour in one place of Holy Writ, says, With∣out him we can do nothing; and the Apostle in another, That he could do all things in him who conforted him: which two passages conferr'd together, (as two contrary Medicaments in mixture) are a Soveraign cure for those two ex∣tream maladies of our soul, a too great Pre∣sumption, and too great diffidence of our selves. For who will ever despair hereafter, when he considers the second saying? Or, who will presume too much of himself, who considers ut the first? In consideration of which, a ertain Holy man was wont to say, God, and I can do all things; and if it seem too great a presumption in him, to name himself with God, certainly a greater presumption 'tis for any to name themselves without him. This receit (Madam) your Majesty has got, and this con∣sideration 'tis, that makes you bear all your Afflictions with so great patience, as Iob will no more be mentioned for it, when your Ma∣jesty is named, nor David for mansuetude and
forgiveness of his Enemies; I having heard (with Admiration of your Majesties vertue) whilst one inveighing against your Enemies, your Majesty interrupted them, with intreating them to desist, and affirming that they were per∣sons you daily and nightly prayed for. Oh gene∣rous and noble example of Christian Patience and Charity! worthy perpetual Remembrance, which (Madam) I set before your Majesties eyes, knowing that nothing comforts more for the present, then the recordation of our good Deeds past, as nothing incourages us more, to those that are to come. And this I desire to set before the eyes of all the world, that the joynt concurrency of the Great∣nesse of the person and example might nore move them to Imitation. Be pleas'd to go on then (Madam) in being a pattern, as you ae, not only to these, but also to future Times, f Longanimitie, Patience, and Sufferance, G ever from time to time renewing in his hurc such examples as these, that beholding them near at hand, we might believe them possible, which else beheld a far off, might be imagined Fabulous, and but the illusions of Fancy and Imagination: so shall you receive (Madam) of our B. Saviour, who has said he is the way, the truth, and the life, for your following his way, and his Example, Truth for your Guide, and Eternal life for your reward; which is the wish Mdam, of Your Majesti most, &c. FINIS.
