F1209 11209879 46817
ARIADNE Deserted by THESEVS, And Found and Courted by BACCHUS. A Dramatick Piece Apted for Recitative Musick. Written and Composed by RICHARD FLECKNO. LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. MDCLIV.
DEDICATED To the Dutchess of Richmond and Lenox, her Grace. Madam, ACcording to my Accustoman∣ces of making my Addresses always to the Noblest and Worthiest wheresoere I ome; permit me, I beseech your Grace, in the most humblest and respectiv▪st man∣er, to present this model of my Recitative Musick to your fair Hands, as I shall
shortly my Musick it self, to your admira∣ble faculty of judging and understanding it, as also to subscribe my self, Madam, Your Graces most Humble, most Obedient, and most Devoted Servant, Richard Fleckno,
The PREFACE. Declaring the Excellency of Recitative Musick, TIs many years since I proposed unto a Sove∣raign Prince the con∣guity, that as their ersons, so their Mu∣sick should be elevated above the Vulgar, and made not only to de∣light the ea but also their under∣standings; not patcht up with Songs of different subjects, but all of one piece, with design and plot, accom∣modated
to their several dispositi∣ons, and ocasions; which they then gratiously pleased to be inclined to hearken to, when the intervening of certain unexpected accidents, di∣verted their ears from it, and me from farther thought thereof, till travelling into Italy I found that Mu∣sick I intended to introduce, excee∣dingly in vogue, and far advanced towards its perfection, which made me also more study the perfectio∣ning my self therein, I mean Reci∣tative Musick, being a compound of Musick and Poetry together, affe∣cting the mind and sense with re∣doubled delight, since if a thing but
barely pronounced has such force to move the Soul, how much more forcible must it be, when the Har∣mony of Musick is added to the pronuntiation? And this Musick it is, (and no o∣ther) that hath wrought all those miracles recorded in antient Story; this tis that preservd Penelope chast, and Alexander valorous, that expels evil spirits, and appeases troubled minds; and that finally hath caus'd all those admirable effects of Musick (whether real, or figurative) per∣form'd by Amphion, Arton, and Or∣pheus, &c. All your antient Musicians having
been Poets too, as your Poets Musi∣cians, (having by it a main advan∣tage of best expressing their own fancies and conceptions) and so they were called Lyricks, and the Muses and Musick, perhaps, were but reci∣proque denominations: Nay, not only almost all the Erudition of those Times, but even the Religion too was delivered in Musick▪ witnes the Canticles of Moses, the Psalms of Da∣vid, the Hymnes of Orpheus, and fi∣nally the Druads Songs, and the Bal∣lads of the British Bards, &c. Which Ballads (such was the Bar∣barism of insuing times) was in manner the sole relict of this divine
Science, untill Claudio Montanendo (in our Fathers days) principally, revived, it shall I say? or renewed it again by his admirable Skill (like another Prometheus) conjoyning in one body again the scattered limbs of Orpheus (Musick & Poetry) which the ignorance of Poets and Musici∣ans had separated, and disseered: The Italian of all other Languages being most happy in it, in having their Tongue and Genius apted to it; the Spanish Genius not lying that way, though there Tongue be fit enough; nor our Tongue fit for it, though the Genius be not wan∣ting. Now the advantage the
Italian tongue hath of ours in it, is chiefly, as I conceive, in the strength of their words, they be∣ing composed more of the A, and O, (the sinewousness of a Tongue) as also the length of them, where∣by each one is able to sustain it self; whereas our Language is so debile and weak, as our words die in a manner as soon as born, not being able scarcely to brook the air; En∣ding also so faintly and feebly for want of length, as they are forced to fall upon the next following for their support, whence comes the difficulty of pronouncing our words distinctly, or understanding our
Language when it is sung; which Inconvenience to Remedy, I con∣cluded first, That your long dis∣courses, and periods, were careful∣ly to be avoided by us, in Recitative Musick, that so the often coming to a close, might make up in the full stop, our words want of length, and by severall reprises more strengthen them. Next, your cu∣rious recerched words out of the way of common understanding, were carefully to be avoided, since the main Reason, why commonly we understand not so well when one sings, as when they write, is, because the delightsomness of the
Harmony, takes part of the Attenti∣on away from the understandin of the words; whence the words consequently are to be made as fa∣cile as may be, the better to be un∣derstood. Where I cannot but note their want of judgment, who have en∣devoured to imitate at all parts in our language the Italian Recita∣tive Musick, not considering, that the Musick of all Nations is cast in the mould of their language, whence there being great diffe∣rence betvvixt their verbosity, and our concised speech, it consequently follows, that that difference should
also be betwixt their Musick and Poetry, and ours. To conclude then, you may ob∣serve in this composition of mine, a particular way of Recitative, dif∣ferent from the Italian, as our lan∣guage is different; insomuch, as though others, both in Italian and English, have composed upon this subject, I am confident yet, whosoe∣ver peruses them wil absolve me of theft frō either, so have I endevour'd short periods, and frequent rithmes, with words smooth and facile, such as most easily might enter into the mind, and be digested by the understanding; studying nothing so
much, as that my words should not at all appear studious, your diffici∣les nugae, or difficil toyes, being in nothing more ridiculous than in this; with finally a pathetickness in lieu of all other Rhetorick, ha∣ving observ'd, that your Italian O∣rators, with an Oh or a Misericordia, do more move their Auditors to tears and compunction, than with all their curious Rhetorick besides. Of the composition of the Mu∣sick, I shall defer to speak, untill the publishing of it, as shortly I intend to do▪ with a Treatise of the Air of Musick, and of this in particular, to shew, that as no composition seems
more easy to the ignorant than it, so none is more hard to those who understand it. Hoping that I shall not appear to have ill merited of my Country, in studying Musick and Concord, whilst others study only discord & dissention; and in striving to delight raher than contristat it, in the sad and sorrowfull condition wherein it is.
ARIADNE. he Landscapt, or Prospect of a Desart Isle discover'd, with a Ship afar off sailing from thence; when Ariadne, awaked out of sleep, by sad (but delicate) Musick, (sup∣posed the harmony of the celestial minds) and finding her self deserted by Theseus, thus expresses first, in recitative Musick, The Confusion of her Thoughts, and her distracted passions. Ariadne. AY me! and is he gon! And I left here alone! Ah Theseus stay— But see he sails away, And never minds my moan— Yet sure he do's not fly me, But only dos 't to try me;
And he'll return again— Oh no! that hope is vain, Hee's gon, hee's gon, And I left here alone, Poor wretch! the most forlorn, As ever yet was born, With killing dolors more than Tongue can speak, O heart, why dos't not break? Here the Winds and Seas seeming moved with her Sighes and Tears, (the supposed Companions of her Solitude and Affliction) the first represented by the Aeolides, or wing∣ed heads, puffing out of bigg-swoln clouds, and the second by the Nereides, or Sea-Nimphs, Syren-like, Sing this in Chorus. TIs still the Heavens peculiar care, Of all that's nobly Good, and Fair, That when they suffer, every one Claims right to soft compassion;
So th' liquid Waves do weep, and moan, The gentle Winds do sigh, and groan, While th' Rocks with Ecchoes measure keep To th' Musick of the Air, and of the Deep; Only Theseus, more hard, more cruel far than they, Ne'r minds her grievous plaints, but sails away. Here she starts up, and first expresses her Rage and Anger, next her pitifull Lamen∣tations and Grief. Ariadne. BUt why thus weep I, for that perfidious, who Abandons, and leaves me so? Let him weep rather, so perfidiously Leaves and Abandons me. "Only for proper Guilt, "Tears should be spilt. And so they shall, if there be any Pow'rs Beyond this Sphere of ours, In Heav'n, or the Abyss, To punish crimes like this.
As 'tis your Int'rest, O ye Pow'rs divine! As well as mine: For let him pass unpunish'd, and who shall Hereafter think there's any Gods at all? But you 'r too pitifull, and are not bent Cruelly enough;—I'll be his punishment; If there be any Magick in a Curse, Dire Imprecations, horrid Vowes, or worse, I'll thunder Tempests on his catif head, That now is fled, I'll storm, and whirlwinds of my breath, Mix'd with the angry lightning of mine Eyes, More violent by far Than those that darted are From the inraged Skies, Shall hurry him to death, My Angers sacrifice: When thou pale trembling Theseus then, Wretchedst of Men, Shalt find, when 'tis too late, "Nothing 's more cruel than a Lovers hate.
Chorus. Shall we the whilst contribute nothing to Her rage, as well as to her woe? Winds. Yes, first we'll murmur, and hiss him unto scorn, Then rage, and crowd our selves into a Storm. Sea. And up we'll bear him, till he touch the Skies, Then down, till buried in the Deep he lies. Winds. Away, away, then let 's about it strait. Sea. Stay, yet her farther pleasure let's await. Ariadne. BUt alas! what can I do? But only wish and wish, and scarcely too, For I recall them, wou'd to Heaven, withall, I Theseus but as eas'ly could recall; I repent me of them too, wou'd thou cou'dst tell, O Theseus, to repent thee but as well; Then should poor Ariadne not complain, As now, alas! she does, nor burst again With thronging sobbs and sighs, more than she e'r can vent, For thy griev'd loss, more than she can lament.
Here, after sad Musick, she falls into a passi∣on of sighing, weeping, and lamenting. Ariadne. BLow, blow, my Sighs, Flow, flow, my Tears then, till you overflow, And drown me so; And then congeal, till Ariadne be A colder Stone than Niobe; And so become Her own sad Tomb: Or let my pining Grief consume me so, Hereafter none may ever know, Unto her foul disgrace, Ariadne ever was: Or chaage me to a thin unbodied Ghost, Some aery spirit, or substance, or at most An Animated groan, And an Eternal moan. Here lively, and sprightly Musick is heard afar off, by degrees approaching
the Place, and at last the Bacchanti, or Fore-runners of Bacchus, appear, in Ovant Triumph, with their Timbrels, Systrums, Thyrseses, and other Ensigns of Bacchus Orgyes. When suddenly they fall into this drin∣king Catch, COme Children o'th' Bottle, and let's have a round As long as but liquor in the Bottles is sound, Drink, merrily drink, Whilst the Flaggons do clink, And glasses do tink, And each one does think That the world turns round a, round a, And no body sober be found a. Fill the Cups full, Fill the Cups full Boyes, And say what they wull, Say what they wull Boyes, There is no life but in Liquor. For Aesculape 's but Phoebus's Ape, And Phoebus but Bacchus's Vicar.
Here Bacchus appears, habited like a Con∣querour, with his Lynxes or Leopards Skin fastned on one shoulder, and hanging down under the other Arm, crown'd with Ivy, and his Thyrses intwin'd and wreath'd with Vine leaves in his hand, followed by the Satyrs and Sileni, &c. whilst the Chorus sings. Chorus. IO, Lyaeus, Evan, Bacchus, Nysaeus, Bromius, and Iacchus, Twice-born, to shew, Divinity Was redoubled in thee; Whilst all th' Inhabitants o'th' Skies Besides, are simple Deities. Io, Lyaeus, Evan, Bacchus, Nysaeus, Bromius, and Iacchus,
Here Bacchus spyes Ariadne weeping, and stands amaz'd. Bacchus. O All ye Heavenly Deities! What lovely grief and sorrow 's this, At once mine eyes, and admiration draw? Surpassing far All ravishing joyes that are, Or yet I ever saw! And can those sighs be breathed into air, From lips so fair, and sweet, But we must straightway see 't: Ambrosique sweet, as Rosie fair? And can those Tears, let fall From her bright eyes, not strait congeal withall To Pearls, we more than Oriental call?— Divine beauty, compar'd to whom, Divinity do's less becom, Who hast un-godded Bacchus, and Made him here thy Suppliant stand, Doubtful whe'r any thing he be, Till 't be determin'd of by thee.
Neither wou'd he be divine, Farther than he may be thine— Behold a God falls down before thee, Lowly prostrat to adore thee. He kneels, whilst the Chorus sings. Chorus. SOveraign Beauty, hast the power, To conquer that great Conquerour Of all the Indies far and wide, And all th' adjacent world beside; Sing we of all the Gods above, The mightiest of all is Love, In Heaven and Earth, when e' he please, Can do such mighty things as these. Bacchus. SOrrow do's so heavy sit Upon her, as she moves not yet: Sing then again, and with a merrier lay, Chace her importunater grief away.
Chorus. THen let us sing to make her merry, And laugh til our cheeks be as red as a cherry And make all laugh as well as we▪ With ho, ho, ho, and he, he, he. 1. Laughter every one does love, From him below, to him above, Appearing still with count'nance gay, Chasing care and grief away, Chearing with her cheerfull face; Whilst your melancholy Ass, Who smiles just as his Lips were starcht, Or his mouth burnt up and parcht, Nor does ever laugh out-right, But when Dogs, perchance, do fight, Or some other mischief 's done, Is hated for't by every one.
Chorus. LEt those then care and sorrow love, Weeping-Heraclites approve, Laughing-Democritus for me, With ho, ho, ho, and he, he, he. 2. He who laughs not at a Jest, 's like him who eats not at a Feast, Either of them, you must grant, Do's both wit, and stomack want; I'd not give a pin for him, Cannot laugh at every thing, At the wagging of a Feather, Or Straw's motion (choose ye whether) And but fall, and there is laughter For a week or fortnight after. Who say Fools only laugh, do lie, I say th' are only Fools who cry.
Chorus. LEt those then care and sorrow love, Weeping-Heraclites approve, Laughing-Democritus for me, With ho, ho, ho, and he, he, he. Here she looks up, appearing a little com∣ted, when Bacchus thus makes his Addres∣ to her. Bacchus. Airer than fairest, if your eies, Cleerer than the cleerer skies, ign to look upon a Lover, o this bold Truth dares discover at he loves, and loves most true, withall loves only you, old none of th' ignoblest I, nd here, cou'd boast a Deity, that I hold it greater boast, vaunt that I love you the most—
In pledge of which love, deign O fairest, Sweetest, dearest, and the rarest, T' accept of this poor Crown you see, And with 't of Immortality; Since after once 'tis dignifyed By you, 't shall strait be stellifyed, And in the clearest Skies appear, Exalted to the highest Sphere, The brightest Constellation there What sayes my dearest? Ariadne. What shu'd I say? But where the Gods command, there Mortals mus obey▪ Bacchus. LEad on in Triumph then, and let the Fame Of brightest Ariadne's name, Whilst with glory she is crown'd, From Earth to highest Heav'n resound,
From t'on to t'other Pole be known, From the Suns rise, t' his going down. Here, whilst they go off in Triumph, the Chorus sings this Triumphant Song. Chorus. NE'r was conjunction more sweet, Than where Divine and Fair do meet. Nor ever were this happy pair, Happier than now they are, In his blest Consortship she, And in her Emoraces he. Let Bacchus and Ariadne's name, Be ever (then) i'h' mouth of fame, And ever fill the worlds large ear, And in Accents lowd and cler, From t'on to t'other Pole be known, From th' Suns rise, to his going down. FINIS
