F1817 12211662 56316
A few plain vvords by vvay of Querie, and Information to the TEACHERS and PEOPLE of the Nation. Friend! WHo art called a Teacher of these people of the waies of God, How many hast thou brought into it? or art thou thy self in it? How many hast thou brought out of evil waies? Or art thou thy self out of the evill ys? Wilt thou not preach peace to them that Curse, Swear; that are Drunkards, lterers, Idolaters, envious, strikers and covetous, mockers, such as follow pleasures, and s wantonly upon earth, and Liers, Cozeners and Cheaters, while they put into thy aith? wilt not thou preach peace to such as these are before-mentioned? d will not these serve to put into thy mouth? And did not the Prophets and ostles cry against such who taught the people for covetousness, and made mer∣andise of them through it, and fained words and speeches deceived the hearts  the simple? That such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies; o mind earthly things. Did the people do well or ill in holding up these Tea∣ers which the Prophet reproves? And might not the Teachers say (who taught  filthy lucre) it was sad times when the Apostle was come to draw the people from , and to reprove them who taught for filthy lucre? as now the cry is a∣ngst you, who have taught for filthy lucre, that have preached peace to people ile they put into your mouths, but now they do not put into your mouths, inst whom ye prepare War, not peace, and cry, sad times, Mic. 3. Where is  man that Divines for money now? Where is the man that prophecies for mony ? And did not Micah cry against such? Is there none of Micahs spirit, nkst thou, to bear testimony against such as preach for hire, and Divine for mo∣, and preach peace to people, while they put into their mouths? Is there none of this rit, thinkest thou, to cry against these things? Where is the man now that acheth for hire, that seeks for his gain from his quarter; That's a greedy dumb dogg, who  never have enough? Did Isaiah well in crying against such? Isaiah 56. Did the ople do well in spending their money for that which was not bread, and their labour for that ch doth not satisfie? And did they do well that took their money for that which s not bread, and made people run after that which did not satisfie? Did Isaiah do  in reproving such, or ill? And is there none in our Age that are greedy dumb , who seeks for their gain from their quarter, that makes the people spend their money  that which is not bread, and their labour for that which doth not satisfie? And is there ne our Age of Isaiah's spirit, raised up to cry against such, think ye? And ere is the Priest that rules by his means, and the People love to have it so? Which is a orrible thing committed in the Land, for which cause will Gods soul be aveng∣ on such a Nation: And think ye not that Gods soul is avenged on this Nati∣n in such a horrible filthy thing as this is committed in the Land? Did (and oth) the Priests do well in bearing rule by their means? Did (and doth) the peo∣le do well in loving to have it so? Did Jeremiah do well in crying against those hings? Or those that be in Jeremiah's spirit, against them where these things are ound? Did the Shepherds do well that taught for the Fleece, from whose mouth he Lord said he would gather them that have been made a prey upon in the loudy and dark day? And is it not the cloudy and dark day now, that the Shepherds make a prey upon the people, from whose mouths the Lord will gather his peo∣ple? Will not these Shepherds be offended then, and say its a bad time, that now hey cannot get the fleece? Is this the time that the Clouds and darkness is going away? Did Ezekiel do well in declaring against such that made a prey upon the sheep in he cloudy and dark day, when they wandered from Mountain to Mountain? And do hey ill who be in Ezekiels spirit now, that cry against such that make a prey up∣on the sheep for the fleece in the cloudy and dark day, where the sheep are wander∣ng from Mountain to Mountain, and thinks that some Mountains are greener then others, and fresher, on which is better feeding, that ean the sheep are grown on the barren Mountains? Therefore must not the promise of God be fulfilled, That he will seek his sheep, and gather them where they have been scattered, and feed them him∣self Ezek 34. Therefore now is the cry and the call, To come off from the barren Moun∣ns, and to feed not among the Thorns. Did the Pharisees do well in loving to be cal∣ of men Masters, in getting the chiefest Rooms at Feasts, and greetings in the Markets? nd dost not thou do ill in following the Pharisees in these steps, seeing Christ orbad these things? And if it be well, dost not thou do ill in not saying, Mr. Paul, Mr. Peter, Mr. John, Mr. Mark, Mr. Timothy, Mr. Titus, Mr. Matthew, &c? Did the Common-Prayer-men do well in putting the Papists out of the Mass-House, nd so call it their Church? Did the Presbyterians do ill in putting the Common-Pray∣er-men out of the same Mass-house, and call it their Church? And so likewise the Independents? And did not the Papists say, The Gates of Hell should not prevail against it? And have not ye all done ill in telling the people the old mass-house is the Church; when as the Apostle said, The Church was in God, Thess. 1.1. Did the Papists do ill in selling their mass by the Hour-glass? Do ye do well that sells your Prayers and Prea∣chings by the Hour-Glass, and when Glass is run, the time is spent Neighbours? as much to say, Ye have your measure and bargain, give me my due that the Pope my Father gave me; for Christ and his Apostles made no such provision for me, but sent his with∣out bagg, and would not suffer them to preach for filthy lucre; Surely is not this he hard Master? But is not this the man that hid his talent, that said so; that must be bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, and his talent taken from him. Was Tithes, Midsomer-dues, Easter-reckonings, Gleb-lands, Peter-pence, Clerks-wages, Preach∣ing over the dead for money, marrying people, Christning children for mony, the Popes pro∣vision he made for yee, and his dregs you drink, that lay in the bottom of his old bottle; And are not yee Popishly minded, and Jesuitically affected who uphold these things? And was not all these times, as Christ-mass, Michael-mass, Lamb-mass, Candle-mass, and all these daies named by the Saints names, and all these naming of the Steeple-houses, the old Mass-houses and Colledges the Popes doing? Did he well in doing this, or ill? If well, Then why cry yee against him who is your Teacher, and call him the Whore; Is not this ill-breeding? Or did the Apostles give all these names to them before-mentioned? If so, shew us the Scripture; was the Scripture given forth for men to make a trade of them, or for men to believe them, and read them, and come into the thing they speak of? Have yee the same spirit and power the Prophets and Apostles had, who call your selves Teachers? If not, how can yee sow spiritual things? How can yee plant Vineyards? How can ye get flocks? How can ye (thresh in hope, and plough in hope) but plough in vain, and thresh in vain, and make wildernesses, and but turn against the flock that gives the milk, not being in the power and the spirit the Prophets and Apostles were in? Had the Beast, Dragon, False-prophet, Anti-christ, mystery-Babylon, the false Church, the Tongues they sate upon, the same spirit and power which hath kil, the Prophets, Martyrs and Saints, and them which hath kept the testimony of Jesus since the Apostles dayes, unto this day? Have these been in the same spirit and power the Apostles was in? And again, Have these had the same spirit and power the Apo∣stles had, that have their Goals, Houses of Correction, Inquisitions, to hold up their Church, Worship, Religion, Ministry, and Maintenance? Seeing the Apostle said, Their Weapons were not carnal, but spiritual, and they wrestled not with flesh and blond; therefore are not the other things before-mentioned, the dregs that came out of the Popes old bottle, like unto that which came out of the Jews old bottle, against Christ and his Disciples, and John Baptist and rather worse? For did they ever put any to Death for not putting into the priest's mouth? Did they fine or imprison any for not putting off the hat? Did they plunder or rifle the Houses of people for not mending their Temple, and paying the Clark for saying Amen, and bringing a Cu∣shion, and hanging a prophet's or priest's pulpit; as ye have done now, for not mending the old mass-House, not paying the Clark that turns the Glass, and sayes Amen, and layes the Cushion, and hangs the Priest's Pulpit? Was this the Dregs of the Popes old Bottle, or from the Spirit of glory that rested on the Apostles? Did the Prophet do wel that prophesied to the people for handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread? Were the people wise that gave it them? Did Ezekiel do ill in crying against such? Was it not a bad time, they might say when Ezekiel cryed against them that prophesied for handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread? Ezek. 14. And will the Priests prophesie now with∣out shocks and cocks of Barley, Wheat, Pease, and Beans, Midsummer-dues, Glebe-lands, Easter-Reckonings, Augmentation, &c. Is not this more oppressive then for handfulls of Barley, or pieces of Bread? And do not they now cry bad times, because the spirit of Ezekiel is raised to bear testimony against these things? And might not the Jews say it was a bad time when that the Apostles went to bring the people off from the Priest, off the Tythe, off the Temple, and that Stephen said, The most High dwelleth not there? Did the Apostle do well in doing so? If so, then have ye not done ill, that have set up Temples, Tythes, and Priests, since the Apostles dayes, which God never commanded, which ye have invented, that cry, Now is bad times, because people are brought off your inventions by the power of God? Did the Apostle do ill in bringing the Gentiles off their Temples which they had invented? Might not the Gentiles cry then, It was a bad time, as ye do now? And as the Jews called the Apo∣stle a pestilent fellow, a sower of Sedition: Do ye think the Jews would not say it was a bad time, as ye do now that stick in your popish inventions which have got up since the Apostles dayes, for which ye have no Scripture, that now these come to be cryed against by them that comes into the power of God. Did the Prophets, Christ, and Apostles, do well in saying, The Children of the Lord should be taught of the Lord; and the Kingdom of Heaven was within people; and the Word was within them, and the annointing was within them, to teach them; and the Law was to be put into their hearts, and their minds, that they need not say one to another, Know the Lord: And the Light that shi∣ned in their hearts, was to give them the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ; and they that had not the spirit of Christ, were none of his. And have not ye done ill who have denied this, that sayes that ye nor no one else hath the same spirit and power as the Prophets and Apostles had, neither shall the things before mentioned be looked for in our dayes? And have not ye done ill in keeping people alwayes teaching, that they may be alwayes paying, and hath brought none to the condi∣tion the Apostles did, That they need none to teach them to know the Lord, Heb, 8. 1 Joh. 7. Isa. 54. Luke 17. Rom. 8. Are ye innocent? are ye innocent, Oye Teachers, (before the Lord) of all the prison∣ing, and persecuting, and shedding of the blood of the innocent, which is shed in this your day? Oh all ye Gentry (so called) of all sorts, does not all your Manners and Breeding stand in Capping, doffing Hats, and Scraping, Bowing, and Courching, and speaking the improper Language You to a single person, as All honor, all praise, all reverence, all holiness, all Majesty, all dominion, is due, and peculiarly ascribed, and ought to be gi∣ven to God alone, who is God over all, the Unbelievers, who give and receive honour one of another; for how can ye be∣lieve, who receive honour one another? Your Worship, Your Majesty, Your Lordship, Your Honour, Your Highness, Your Grace, Your Holiness, Reverend Brother; And such like blasphemous titles. Rejoice yee Inhabitants of the Earth. G. F. London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at he Black-spread-Eagle and Wind-mill, in Martins le Grand, 1660.
