f472a 99829879 34326
A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF THE Kingdome of ANTICHRIST. And the downfall of it hasteth greatly. WITH A Difference betwixt the Ordinan∣ces of Christ and of Antichrist. 1 THES. 1.3, 4, 5. The Man of sin, who is exalted above all that is called God, and sits in the Temple of God, as God shewing himselfe to be God, de∣ceiving the Simple Ones. WISDOME now cryeth out in the Streets, cal∣ling out of Babylon, Sodom, and Egypt, where our Lord hath been Crucified; and spirituall wic∣kednesse ie now committed in high places; there∣fore return and hearken to the vioce of Jesus Christ, and turne at his reproofe. 2 THES. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, &c. the Lord is comming in power and great glory, and Antichrist shall be consumed by the breath of his mouth, and the brightnesse of his coming. This was written by One the World calleth A QUAKER, in March 1653.
A Discovery of Antichrists King¦dome, and the downfall of it hasteth greatly. NOw the Kingdome of Jesus Christ is setting up in the spirits of his people;Dan. 12. And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which standeth up for the Children of my people, saith the Lord, and there shall be a time of trouble, such as there never was, since there was a nation, even to that same time, and at that time there shall be deliverance, every one shall be delivered, that shall be found written in the booke of life, in the day of the day of the Lords power,Zeph. l. 12.13. Dan. 12 1. And it shall come to asse at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with Candles, and punish the men that are settled upon their Lees, that say in their hart the Lord will not doe good, neither will he doe evill: Therefore their goods shall become a boty, and their houses a desolation, ther shall also build houses but not inha∣bite them; and they shall plant vincyrds, but not drinke the wine thereof. The great day of the Lord is neare, it hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: there the great man shall cry bitterly. Zeph. 1.14. Now the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet stands up; let him that readeth understand.Mat 24. Now the man of sinne is revealed, and revealing, even the Son of perdition, who opposeth and exalteth himselfe above all that is called God, and sitteth in the Temple of God, as God, shew∣ing himselfe to be God, spoken of by the Apostle, in
2. Thes. 2.2, 3. and the vialls are to be powred out upon the man of sin,Thes 2.3. v. 16.17.  19. spoken of in the Revelation. The Prists are the greatest persecutors of the truth of God; now where it is made manifest in the spirits of the people of God, the Lord hath sent to declare and te∣stifie against their deceits and deceivablenesse, whereby they doe deceive the people, and they are raging mad because they are discovered;v. 16.10, . and they persecute, im∣prison, and petition, and doe all that beastly corrupt wills can invent, to keep the Isaeles of God in bon∣dage, that they might still be Lords and Rulers over Gods heritage,v. 12.15, , 17. but though Gog and Magog joyne in battel against the Lamb, yet he shal prevail and get the vi∣ctory, and the beast and false Prophet shall be cast into the lake tha burneth,v 1.11,  3, &c. Rev. 19 20. and they that wor∣ship the east and his Image, and receive his marke in their right hand, or in their foreheads, the same shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of the Almighty, poured forth into the cup of his indignation, and shall be tor∣mented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lambe, and the smoake of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever; and they shall have no rest day nor night that worship the Bast, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. Come out of the beastly worships God is a Spirit,Th. 4.23, . and he will be worshipped in spirit, and the glorious Lord will be unto his a place of broad River and streames of lve,. 33.21..54 13. eb. 8 .. and peace, and joy, and rejoicing for ever and ever, and all the children of the Lord are taught of the Lord, hee is Teacher alone by his spirit, and causeth people to profit by his Ministery. Therefore cease wholy from all your Priests,. 2.22. John 2. they are Decivers, and lead you from the teachings of the spirit, to observe dreames, and fancies of their owne brame, and are the upholders of pride,. 23.30, ▪ 32.33. coverousnesse, and oppression, and never were yet taught themselves; they are in he state
and condition that the false Prophets were in, all tea∣ching for hire, and are Lords and Rulers over the peo∣ple, and ran but the Lord did never send them, as those did, that the Lord sent his true Prophets to cry out a∣gainst, as in Jer. 23. and Jer. 5 30, 31. and Isaiah 56.10, 11. Ezek 34. Mitha 3.11. Hosea 6.9. As a troop of Robbers wait for a man, so the Priests they murder in the way by consent. Now the Scripture is fulsilling,Hos. 6.9. the Beast makes warte with the Saints; those beastly Priests make themselves manifest, that they are of the generation of Cain, and are of their Father the Devill, persecuting and imprisoning the servants of the Lord, as the Jewish High-Priests did. Persecution is begun here in York-shire, by the Priests of Baal, they cannot defend their Ministery any wayes, but by an outward Law, when any are moved by the Lord to speake against their deceits, they run away, as the Priest of Finningley did, and he Priest of Arkworth and others did, and will not stand to their flocs, but leave them, but the Scriptures is fulfilling,Joh. 10.12 13. the hireling fleeth because he is an hireling. See if this be not contrary to that of the true Shepheard, that layeth down his life for the Sheep, John 10.11. and 15, 16, 17. verses. They take the words of the good Shepheard to speak of, but deny to live his life; and they walk con∣trary to the Scripture. See if this be not errour; the true Ministers of the Gospel were to take the care of the flock willingly, not by constraint, but of a ready mind, and not for filthy lucre; neither were they to be Lords or Rulers over Gods heritage, but they were to be exam∣ples to the Flock, as in 2 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. But these are constrained by great Parsonages,Tit. 1.7, 8 1 Tim. 3 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. and fat Benefices, and are Lords and Rulers over Gods He∣ritage, being puff't up in scorne and derision, pride, and ambition, and swell in iniquity, persecuting, and im∣prisoning the servants of the Lord, and act contrary to
the Scripture, shewing the spirit of errour, 1 Joh. 5.  As the Priest of Tharnisworth, when one of his Heare  that had been from him a while, and went to hear him  gaine, that he might have spoken to that which had n beene according to truth; after that he had done, b so soone as he came into the Idolls Temple he ga over his speaking, and sooke to him, and had befo beene at his house to bid him come againe to her him and when he went, the Priest begun to examine hi he being asked a question, made an answer, and f that was he impisoned by him, and hath lyen hee  most a yeare, and doth still continue, for speaking  truh as it was made manist to him by the Lord; b¦ing asked the question two or three times before  answered: see if this be not contrary to that Scriptu in 1 Cor. 4. and see if this bee not errour; when  whole Chuch were together all might peake one  one, that all might be edifyed; and if any thing was ¦vealed to him that sate by, the first was to hold  peace, Cor 14.3, & 30, 1, 32, 33. 1 Cor. 14.23.30, 31, 32. but this Priest a contrary to the Scripture, and shewes the spirit of ¦rour. With the Priest of Tickhill, when one was moved  speake in the Steeple-house, after that hee had end his Sermon, he would not stand to vindicate himsel by Scripture, but got him st into the stocks. See  this be not Antichrist; where ever. did Christ or  true Ministers any such thing? and when he was  in the stocks, many people, scoffing Ishmaels w about him, and the rude multitude; and one w moved to goe upon the Crosse to speake to the peopl and one of those called Church-wardns, Act. 4.1, , 3. . 5, 6, 7. &. . 17, 18, . 20, 21. threw hi downe some 13. steps high, and then the rude peop threw dirt in his face: see if these doe not act the ve same things that the Jewes did to Paul, when they hal him out of the Synagogue, and when they struck P
d Silas, and set them in the stocks,Acts 5.2▪ 28. to th 34. Act. 5.40 41, 42. Act. 6. 10 11, 12, 13 Act. 7.52 53, 54, 55 56, 57. Act. 7 58 59. Acts 14. 2. & 4, 5. ver. 19. Act 16.1 20, 21, 22 23. Gal. 4.29 and threatned ter and John that they should speake no more the ame of Jesus, and stoned some, and imprisoned o∣ers: and now the same things are acted by those that ofsse themselves to be the people of God, as the Jews id, but they are found to be in the same state and con∣tion that they were, as their fruits doe make manifest. This Priest afterwards would not rest till be had impri∣oned the party that spoke to him, and filled a paper f lyes, in a Petition that was rejected. See what fruits ese are; and the people at Leeds, with the Priests im∣risoned others, and at Wakefield both stoned, so that tones flew like bullers in a battell, and slet their doggs, nd none looked to still the rage, not so much as a Townes Clerke. See what fruits these are, whether of e flesh or spirit, and it will not be denied, but that hey are of the flesh; then what reformation is there rought by the Ministers of the world? for they that re in the flsh cannot please God: and so the Scri∣ptures ae daily fulfilled; they that are after the flesh, they persecute them that are after the spirit. The 2. Priests of Wakefield themselves came by at one time, and when they were spoken to, they would not stand to prove themselves. See if these be the Mini∣sters of Christ, or of Antichrist; a good Shepheard layes downe his life for his Sheep. There was one Priest Robbison stood up in the Market at Wakefield to have maintained himselfe to have beene a Minister of Christ, but one taking him by the arme, and hee, the said Priest, being proved a lyar in the open Market, ran a∣way, and the people set up a shouting: Is this the Mi∣nistry of Christ, or of Antichrist? hold them not up for shame. The Priest of Fetherston, when one was moved by the Lord to go speak to him,Acts 13. 14.15. v 50.51. he caused that before ever he spoke word he should be put in the stocks; and the
Priest when he had done,ohn 10.1 8, 9, 12, 13. one would then have prov him a Theefe and a Robber, but he got away. These Priests, with many more in York-shire, whi is too large to expresse in writing, the passages of the with the Priests in Lancashire, Westmorland, Notingha-shire, Lincoln-shire, and Darby-shire, where the Lo hath raised up any to speake against their deceits;  would fill up volumnes, but all ends in persecution,  the Jewish High-Priests did, when Jesus Christ ca in the flesh; so do these now, when Jesus Christ co to be made manifest in the spiris of his people, to test¦fie against their deceits, wherein they have beene dece¦ved by them, that others may not be led to destructi by them; For the leaders of the people cause them to en Isaiah 3.12. Isaiah 9.16. And if the blinde leade  blinde, they shall both fall into the ditch, Math 15.14. All people, take waning betime, and hold them  up, but come out of thir dark Ministery, which is S¦dome and Egypt, where the Lord is crucified; they a committing spirituall wickednesse in high places, bo Priests and People;Hos. 4 9. Rev. 18.4, , 6, 7, 8. like Priests, like People, Hos. 4. Thus saith the Lord, Come out of Bb my people  ye be partakers of her plagues: come out of the Ido Temple, and out of the Idolls Worship; come out of Bab¦lon with n in your hearts, and touch no uncleane thing, a the Lord will receive you, Cor. 6. 6, 17, 18. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. The High-Priests were ever the greatest enemies  Jesus Christ, and they are yet alive to persecute him  where he is made manifest in the spirits of his peopl Christ is the same yesterday,Heb 13.8. Mat. 2.5. to day, and for ever, Heb▪ 1 8. The Chiefe Priests ae the same that they were,  they did then, they shew the same deede: now; see th Chiefe Priests first begun to joyne persecution wi Herod against Christ, when he was borne. See Math.  5. to the 16. see Mat. 16.21. The Chiefe Priests we
sore displeased at him, Mat. 21.15, 16. The Chiefe Priests and Elders came to question his authority, ver. 23. Mat. 20.18, 19. The Chiefe Priests condemned him, and delivered him to the Gentiles, to mock him,Mat. 2 18, 19▪ Mat. 2 14, 15▪ ver. 47 and scourge him: The Chiefe Priests covenanted with Judas to betray Christ, Mat. 26.14, 15. A great multi∣tude came with Judas from the Chiefe Priests, with swords and staves to take Jesus, ver. 47. and Jesus was led to the High-Priest, where the Scribes and Elders were assembled, ver. 57. The Chiefe Priests and El∣ders,ver. 57 and all the Councell sought false witnesse against Jesus to put him to death,ver. 59 to the ver. 59. at last came two false witnesses, then the Chiefe Priests adjured him to speak, and when he spoke the truth, the Chiefe Priest rent his cloathes, and said he spoke blasphemy, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65. truth is blasphemy to the deceit; when Jesus was con∣demned to dye by the Chiefe Priests, Rulers, and El∣ders of the people, they spit in his Face, and smote him on the Cheek, and buffeted him, ver. 66, 67.Mat. 2 66, 67. And thus the Serpent spued out his venome then against the truth; and the Jewes, Chiefe Priests, and Elders are alive yet, to persecute Christ in his Members. This is the same generation of Cain that persecutes, a seede of evill doers: see if these doe not deny the Scriptures, and shew the spirit of errour, and cannot make good their call, but ran and the Lord never sent them, and have nothing but what they have studied out of Bookes, and Studies; and the Hireling fleeth because he is an Hireling, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, John 10.13. John Cart, the Priest of Hanseworth, when one was moved by the Lord to speak to him, he caused him to be taken prisoner; and so they all act in the same state and condition that the Jewish High-Priests did, and are enemies both to Jesus Christ and His; for inas∣much as they doe it to one of his, they doe it to him,
and make their refuge to the Popes Law, that wa made to uphold the Popish Clergy by, when they di uphold the Masse made by Queen Mary; see the Sta∣tute in the first of Mary, 2. Ass. 3. Ch: and againe see i it be not repealed by Elizabeth, in the first yeare of he reigne, 2. Ch. last clause. See Coke. pla. fol. 352. Si Nich. Hides Chiefe Justice then in England cited, tha it was wholly repealed by that of Elizabeth, in the first yeare of her reigne, 2. chap. last clause: see Dalton, 103.104. pag. See if these be the Ministers of Christ, or of Antichrist, that make their refuge to the Popes Law to imprison by; neither Jesus Christ nor his true Ministers did ever so. Let truth come to light, and deceits and deceivers put to shame;. 33.22. God is judge, Law∣giver, and King. The said Priest, John Cart, he dealt deceitfully, just as Pilat did with Christ, who said he would wash his hands in Innocency, for, said he, I will forgive him, but Officers, saith he, looke you to your office. Pilat and Herod both joyne together to persecute Christ in his Saints; many friends went up to have spoken with this Priest afterwards, but he would neither come at them, nor suffer them to come at him, those which had been the chiefe hearers: see if the deceits bee not afraid to come to light, for truth seekes no corners; therefore love that which is good, and hate that which is evill, every one, and prove your owne worke: so shall you have joy in your selves and not in others,al. 6.4. Gal. 6.4. prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, but cease from all your Priests, deceivers, blind guides, Hirelings,r. 23.1, 2 Seducers, and Antichrists, they shall never profit you at all; they ran but the Lord never sent them, hold them not up, the Lord is against them, Ier. 23.30, 31, 32. The Priest of Doncaster, he imprisoned one for asking him a question, and when he was before the Major
and Justices to be examined, the Priest fled into the further corner of the house, as one James Nayler spoke to him, and the Priest did confesse there openly, that he had not attained to that which the party imprisoned by him had done, and desired the prisoner to pray for him; yet nothing will serve but imprisonment. See if this be not Antichrist, hold them not up, downe with them all, they are all falne backward, and gone out of the way of obedience, and selfe-denyall; but they must be called to account before the righteous Judge, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, that they may have their tryall: thus saith the Lord, Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with them, and they shall be rewarded according to their doings, Isa. 3.10. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all those that forget God, and have their portion in the lake that burneth. The Lord is sending forth his Angels to gather out of his Kingdome all things that offend; then shall the righteous shine forth in brightnesse, in the Kingdome of their Father. The vials are pouring forth,Rev. 18 7, 8, 9. and the beast begins to roare, the Lord is Judge himselfe, and he will plague the Beast, and burne the Whore, and torment the wicked for evermore. Both Gog and Magog is gathering to battell, as the number of the sand of the Sea, going on the breadth of the earth, to compasse the Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City, and fire will fall downe from God out of Heaven and devoure them, Revelations 20.8, 9, &c. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first Resurrecti∣on, on such the second death hath no power, but they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reigne with him a thousand yeares. Rev. 20.6.
This was written by a Thresher, that goeth about with his threshing Instrument, labouring where he findes work. Arise Sion and thresh with a new threshing Instrument,sa. 41.14, 5. lie. 4.13. having Teeth. Thus saith the Lord, Hearken unto me y stout-hearted that are farre from righteousnesse. I bring neare my righteousnesse, it shall not be for off, and my salvation it shall not tarry, and I wi place salvation in Sion for Israel my glory▪ Isaiah 46.12, 13. FINIS.
The Difference betweene the Ordinance of Christ and of Antichrist. TAke heede of despising the Ordinance of Jesus Christ, who hath left it upon record, and also wri∣eth it in the new Law of Righteousnesse, in the hearts f his people, saying,Heb. 8.10 11. Jer. 31.31 32, 33, 34 Joh. 14.1 Col. 3.4, Joh. 8.44 Colos. 3.2, 3. Rom. 8. Phil. 3.1 19. Luke 12 29, 30, 3 1 Cor. 1 19. 1 Cor. 1 17, 18. If ye love me keep my Commande∣ents: I. love God with all your hearts, 2. forsake your sts and vile affections in affecting earthly things, that s the Devils Ordinance, saith Jesus Christ, set not your ffections on things which are on the earth, but set your affe∣tions on things in the heavens; that is the Ordinance of Christ: for sake your carthly mintlednesse, for that is he Devils Ordinance; to be carnally minded is death, nd the carnall minde is enmity to the Cross of Christ; Christ saith, Seeke first the Kingdome of God, and his ighteousnesse, and all things else shall be added; and ove thy Neighbour as thy selfe, and doe unto all men as ye would be done by, and feed the hungry, and cloath the naked, and let the oppressed go free, and deny thy selfe of thy own wisdome, and selfe-righteousness and conceitednesse, and heady high-mindednesse, and thy selfe-love, and the honour of the would; and forsake all vaine delights, and vaine pleasures, and take up a daily Crosse to thy own will and follow me, and learn of me, for I am meeke, and lowly in heart; and so shall you finde rest to your soules, following through the streight way of obedience and selfe-denyall. These things with many other, thou shalt finde commanded to be done by the new Law of Righteousnesse in thy heart; leave them not undone, Christ doth require it of thee, it is his Ordi∣nance.
The Priests of the world are carnal and earthly mind∣ed, coveting after great Benefices, swallowing up th earth like Bell, and the Dragon, never have enough, bel∣ly, gods, that doe consume and devoure the Creation upon their lusts,il. 3., 19. pride, pleasures, & heady high-minded∣nesse, living in lust and excesse; oppressors they are, op∣pressing the poore people, and persecuting the servants of the Lord;il. 3.20. the true Ministers had their conversation in Heaven, as in Phil. 3.20. and they did exhort others to follow their example, and to marke those that did not follow them in life and conversation, Phil. 3.17. but these walke contrary to them,se 27. and have lost their example; herein they walke contrary to the Scripture and shews the spirit of errour. The Priests of the world doe persecute and imprison, as the Jewish High-Priests did imprison the Apostles, which were the true Mini∣sters of Christ, who were blamelesse in their lives and conversations, and did walk blamlesly, giving no offen in any thing, that their ministery might not be blamed; but in all things did approve themselves as the Ministers of Christ, in much patience, afflictions, in necessities, in im∣prisonments, in tumults, in watchings, in fastings, &c. 2 Cor. 6.3, 4, 5. But these are contrary that doe imprison others,Cor. 6.3 5. and consume the creatures of God upon thei lusts, living in pride and excesse, and by their cold, dark, barren Ministery, stadve the soules and bodyes o others, and walk contrary to the Scriptures, as in thi of 2 Cor. 6.3, 4, 5. &c. and that of Tit. 1.7, 8. and 1 Tim. 3.1, 2, 3. &c. and that of 2 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. The Ministers of Christ are to take care of the flock willingly,Tim. 3.2, 3, 4. Pet. 5.2, 3. of a rea∣dy minde, not by constraint, nor for filthy luere, not to be Lords over Gods heritage; but the Priests of th world are constrained by fat Benefices and great Par∣sonages; and if they can but have 10, or 20 l. moe yeare in another place, it will constraine them to lea them where they are to goe to that: see if they doe no
act contrary to these Scriptures, and are guided by the spirit of errour,1 John 4.5, 6. 1 Iohn 4.5, 6. The Ministers of Jesus Christ were to be gentle towards all men, even to those that did oppose themselves, and were not to be Lords and Rulers over Gods beritage, but these are, and just act all those things that are forbidden:2 Pet. 5, that which they should not be that they are, that which they should be that they are not, and have lost their examples in all things: see if this be not Antichrist; who deny the Scripture but the Priests of the world? and who cry out of errour more then they? but now they are found out, they cry as the Thiefe doth, that sayes, turn Thiefe, turn Thiefe, that he he may not be looked at, but sets the people to looke out at some others, and not at him: and see if the Priests doe not so; looke well to them, they can deceive none now, but blind-men, and fooles, that gaze abroad, for wise mens eyes are in their heads, in Christ that doth enlighten them, and so shews them their deceits; they that walk contrary to the Scri∣ptures are to be noted, that they may be put to shame,2 Thes. 5, 6. 1 Tim, 9.10. Isa. 9.1 2 Thes. 2. Now Priests be ashamed of the evill of your doings, that take the Scriptures to talk of, and make a trade of them for money, which is your Diana, and walke contrary to them: but it is fulfilled, the leaders of the people cause them to erre, Isa. 9.16. Blush for shame, and give over deceiving of the people. The Priests in the first Covenant were to live of the sacrifices that were of∣fered up, which a people brought in freely,Rev. 1.6, 7. 1 Cor. 10, 11, 13. 1 Cor. 14, 15. Gal. 1.12. and had no other wayes: they were to wait upon that Ministery, and they sacrificing and waiting at the Altar, taking of the things sacrificed and offered up, was a type or figure, that they that preach the Gospell should live on the Go∣spell, and be set apart wholly for that worke. Now the Gospell is spirituall, and not carnall, and: the carnall man knowes it not, because he doth not understand the things of God, who is a spirit, and the Gospell is spiri∣tuall
and none can preach that everlasting Gospel but Jesus Christ who lives in our bodyes,l. 1.15, Cor. 3..6. Cor. 6.. that are made the temples of the Holy Ghost, and he preacheth to the spi∣rits that are in prison, and he doth it freely, it is his de∣light to do his Fathers will, killing all our lusts, that were sacrificed too when we lived in the lust of the flesh, and he crucifieth them, and works us out of our selves in∣to the divine nature,Cor. 6.17, 18. or. 13.5 l. 1.17. b. 7.24. and his life is in doing us good, being his Fathers will, offering up our requests to the Father in us, and for us, that he by his own bloud, the spirit of life in us, killing, slaying, and crucifying the corrupt nature in us, and working out that which is evill, being made manifest in us to destroy the workes of the Devill,h. 2.4, , 7 oh. 3.7, taking our mindes and affections into that which is eternall and invisible, working us into that which is pure and spirituall, that we may praise and gloify his great and glorious name, being made parta∣kers of his divine nature fely for his names sake,h. 2.13,. and not for any deserts in us, and being brought out of dark∣nesse into his marvellous light by the guidance of the eternal spirit in us,h. 3.17, &c. m. 8.10 leading us out of bondage into liber∣ty, sending the spirit of his Son into our hearts crying Abba Father, which none can do but those that are born againe,m. 14.16, 17, 18 v. 3.12.49.8. or. 12. having their Fathers name given them at the entrance into the new Covenant, which is inwardly, to the Jewes inwardly, the seed of Abraham after the spirit, being baptised by the free spirit into that spirituall bo∣dy: all that are born againe are redeemed from their vaine conversation to serve the Lord in newnesse of spi∣rit in walking humbly before him,et. 1.23. oh. 3.1, , 45.. 9. h. 5.11. being borne againe of water and the spirit of the family of Abraham the Fa∣ther of the faithfull; we are set apart to testifie against all unfaithfulnesse, for faith worketh by love, and cau∣seth love to run forth to others, to all creatures, even to enemies; and so the Gospel comes to be preached to every creature in living in love with one another, even
Jesus Christ, which is the Son of his love,2 Cor. 4 10, 11. Eph. 2.1, Ezek. 37.13, 14. Ezek. 37.23, 24, 2 &c. having his treasure in earthly vessells: God manifesting him. else in our flesh, and dwelling in us, taking away our ony hearts which was the cause of oppression, which aused the creation in us to groan under the burden of ppression by reason of that cursed nature which did ear rule over the pure seed in us, which now the Lord f his infinite mercy hath delivered us from by the po∣werfull operation of his spirit in us, changing our vile ffections that were set altogether on earth and earthly elights and vanities, and so ran after covetousnesse,1 Joh. 4. 1 Ioh. 3.2 Ezek. 36 25.26, 2 28. and o satisfy the earthly lusts did oppress and burden o∣hers; but the Lord by the power of the eternall spirit in s, the divine operation hath wrought out our corrupt atures, & engrafted us into the divine nature, being the workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,John 17 6, 7, 8, 9.10. Ioh. 14.2 Ioh. 15. 10, 11, 1 13, 14. which is the fruits and effects of the spirit of God hat wrought faith in our hearts, giving us new hearts, do∣ng good to all, even to enemies; for faith worketh by love, which love is Iesus Christ the Son of God, who preacheth he Gospel of is Fathers love in us that we may bee what we do profess, not loving in word and in tongue, s the world doth, that lives in dissimulation, but in eed and in truth; for he that saith he loves God and ates his Brother, is a Lyar, and the truth is not in him;1 Iohn 20. Eph. 5.1 Isa. 58.1 but truth dwelling in us, which is Iesus Christ the ower of God that hath reformed and changed our na∣ures and dispositions, and hath put in our hearts to exe∣cute, to doe his will, which is to tessify against all de∣eits and oppressions,Isa. 28.1, Isa. 30.1 that are covered under a cloak of rofession, and no true love but lust, both to pride and ovetousnesse, anger and envy, lying and swearing, runkenness, oppression,Mic. 2.1 2, 3, and grinding the faces of the oore, living in lust and excess; ye live in pleasures nd wantonness upon earth, ye the proud Priests,Iam. 5.5. and ovetous professors, and heady highminded ones that
fare sumptuously,el 3.11. al. 24.1.  Cor. 10. feeding upon your dainty dish Dives like, and griding the poore to powder in taxa¦ons and oppressions; you that have got a great deal  the earth into your hands, which is the Lords, and  provides largely for every creature, but that proud D¦vill that rules in your proud flesh, doth oppress and gri the poore to pieces:a. 3.15. icah 3. 2, 3. Thus saith the Lord, What me ye to beat my people in pieces, and grind the faces of the poo Dives fares sumptuously, and poore Lazarus is in wa the rich drink wine in bouls, and the poor starve in  streets: never like was seen in this generation,  Lord is so displeased at it. Professe no more love  Christ, Iohn 3.7. at. 5.42 3, 44. a. 58.6, 7 ye poud and lustfull ones; if ye did but kn him ye would keep his Commandements, as to do to  men as ye would be done by, and to love your enemi and seek out the poor & needy, and feed them, and clo them, that the oppressed might go free; you consu moe upon your lusts, pride, and covetousnesse, t would satisfy all that are in wants; pride, and co¦tousnesse, and the honour of the world, they swallow  all, as Bell and the Dragon did, and are never satisfy  thirsting altogether after the earth, and love of  world, and the enjoyment of the world for the hon of your names, as Nebuhadnezar did, and talke  God, and Christ. Professe lesse, and practice m you are wise to do evil, Priests and People, but to  good have no understanding; cease to doe evil, a learn to do well: did you but know Christ you wo not suffer him to want in his Members,sa. 1.17. Mat. 25.1, 42, 43, 4, 45. you would  imprison him to satisfy your lusts; and you that p¦fessse to be his Ministers would not so much run abou get all the rude people, boyes and girles, that k not their right hands fom their left, to put their ha to your Petitions, as the Priest of Sheffield and others  cry as he Iewes did, Crucify him, Crucify him, wh he is made manifest in spirit, and cryes for Barabba
e at liberty, that your lusts may be fed; ye lustfull ones,Isa. 51.2 22, 23. Isa. 52. Christ is risen, and is arising in the hearts of his people o testifie against all deceits and deceivers: repent, and ive over deceiving the people, now whilst you have ime, lest his judgements come upon you and destroy ou with a sore destruction:Iam. 5.1 3, 4, 5, 6 the Lord is now looking or fruits▪ and here is nothing brought forth by the high∣est profession but wild grapes, as pride, and oppression, and grinding the faces of the poore; be not deceived,Gal. 6. Ia. 4.2,  God is not mocked, for such as ye sow such ye shall reap; they that sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; and see whether there be any other fruits brought forth by the Ministery of the world, but fruits of the flesh, yea or no; Is not pride a fruit of the flesh? Yes, it is one of the seaven abominations that the Lord loatheth, Prov. 6.16, 17, 18. and doth it not swell in England,Isa. 3.5 Mal. 3 Iam.  both in Priests, their Wives, and Lawyers? all swell in pride which is an abomination to the Lord, and cry out of those that are brought to deny themselves of it, and walk in humblenesse of heart, and lowliness of minde, and proud men say those deny the Ordinance of Christ; but let me ask thee one question,Iam.  Mat.  Whether is pride an Ordinance of God, or an Ordinance of the Devil? It pride be of the Devill, then thou that livest in pride and haughtiness, thou obeyest the Devills command, and disobeyest the command of Iesus Christ, who saith, learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart;Pro.  Isa. 2  Jer.  v. 14  Isa.   pride goeth before destruction; wo to it, woe to it. The Land mourneth by reason of pride, both in Gentry and Clergy; the Lord will cut downe the fruitlesse Tree that cumbers the ground: some swel in pride, and o∣thers goe in nakednesse and wants; then thou proud professing Pharisee, how dost thou obey God and walke in his commands, when thou swellest with pride, and lettest others starve for want? when as Iesus Christ saith,Ma  45. love thy Neighbour as thy selfe: and againe, he that saith
he loves God and keepeth not his Commandements is a ly and the truth is not in him;Ioh. 2.4, 6. and he that saith he is in Chri ought to walk as he wilked. Now read the Scripture  and see if Iesus Christ was proud, but on the contra forbids it,t. 17.  20.  25.41  33, &c and threatneh woes to it: howle thou prou and lofty one, thou art a fruitless tree, and cumbers th ground, thou must be cut down and cast into the fire o the indignation of the Lord, and the Ordinance tha thou talkest so much of will not save thee; it is not he tht saith Lord,t. 7.21. Lord, that shall enter into the King¦dome of Heaven,h. 3.17 but he that doth the will of God  Now his will is, that thou shouldst doe to all men as thou wouldst be done by;. 5.20. if hou wouldst have the Lord to do good to thee, then thou must do good to others, for he that hath this worlds good, and seeth his Brother stand in need,. 2. 7. 21.19 and shut eth up his bowells of compassi∣on from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? Talk no more of thy Odinances, excpt thou walkest in them, walk in the waies of Iesus Christ who went about doing good, thou savest well, but thou doest con∣trary, thou dissembling Hypocrite, the Lord knowes thy hypocrisie and dissimulation; all thy profession is as the cursed fig-tree that bringeth forth no fruit, but leaves: here are faire words, but foule actions, nothing but fruits of the flesh, and they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Rom. 8 8. See then what fruits grow on the great tree n England, the flourishing tree of profession, is it not now read for the fire? doth it bring forth any thing but cumbers the ground? is not pride the top branch of it? and covetousnesse beares a great sway: there is much of that fruit groweth out of it;. 15. and see if this bee the Odinance of Christ or of Antichrist▪ thou blinde Pharisee,, 29 3 thy eyes are stopt with dirt, dawb'd with pride, and the D vill he is King, and rules in thy heart, and thou cryest out of denying the Odinance: thou that livest in pride and covetousnesse, where art thou got?
to the Kingdome of Antichrist, but woe is comming,Eph. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. Luc. 12.1 Luc. 16. 1 14, 15. Hab. 2. Psal. 9.8. Psa. 10.3 Psal. 7.1 12. Isa. 56.1 16. vertousnesse is the root of all evill, and there is great re of this fruit groweth on this tree of oppression, at stands in the heart of the earth; thou covetous ofessor, thou proud Priest, and Prelate, the Magi∣ate bears not the sword in vain, the Lord is the righte∣s Iudge, and all things are naked and bare before , he is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, and he ll not let the wicked go unpunished; thou cryest out  denying the Ordinance, but thou art ordained for struction, except thou returne to the Lord with speed,  he is comming to plead with all flesh, by his sword, d by fire, and great shall be the slaine of them, Isa. 6.6. , 16. and thus saith the Lord,Mal. 4.1. Behold the day commeth  shall burn as an Oven, and all that are proud, and all  doe wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that com∣h shall burn and consume them up, and shall leave them ber root not branch, Mal. 4.1. and then they that disobey  Ordinances of the world,Mal. 4.2, 3, &c. Mal. 3.15 16. Mal. 2.1, 2 3, 4. Luc. 17.2 2 Cor. 4, 6 1 Cor. 4.5 Mal. 3.17 and the Traditions of n of corrupt hearts, and walk in the feare of the rd, in departing from iniquity, and do professe little, d possesse much of the love of God, it will cause them  walk in obedience before him, who is of purer eyes; d he will set up the Kingdome of his Sonne in their rs, the ministration of the spirit; it is set up in e already, and lets them see all the deceits of Baals ests and their upholders; but the Lord will cut off  of the land the remnant of Baal, and the names of  Chemarims, the Black-coats, with the Priests, and  shall wear no more a rough garment to deceive,Zeph. 1.6 7, 8. Zeph.  Zech. 13.4. nd the Lord will cut off all those that are turned out the way of self-deniall, and are guided by their beast∣ orrupt wills, which lead them into pride, covetous∣,Isa. 3.13, 14, 15. Isa. 2.22. and oppression, and grinding the faces of the poore,  denie to walk in the Ordinance of Christ, as to feed
the hungry,at. 25.34 5, 36, 37. Mat. 5.48. Mat, 5.20. sa. 33.10, 11, 12, 13, 4, 15. sa. 34., &c. cloath the naked, and let the oppressed  free; if ye love them that love you, what reward b you? do not Publicans so? But except your righteous exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees,  shall in no wise enter into the Kingdome of Heaven. N profession must be tryed, so as by fire, and those  feede on the for bidden fruit, as pride and covetousne oppression, and grinding the faces of the poore, ly and swearing, and envying, backbiting, and masici¦ness, scoffing, and scorning, pleasures, and wanton revenge, and persecution, which are fruits of the De and ordained for destruction;Gal. 5.7, 8 Col. 3.12, 13, 14.15, 16. Gal. 6.15. Gal. 5.24. be not deceived, su ye sow, such shall ye reap: and know ye not that the unrig¦ous shall inherit the Kingdome of Heaven? 1 Cor. 6.9  11. and see if there be any other fruit brought fort the Ministry of the world but fruits of the flesh, w proceeds from the spirit of errour, as in Gal. 5.19  21. and they that do such things shall not inheri Kingdome of Heaven. Now all your forms of  ships have not yet wrought a Reformation in you,  the Priests and Professors in England, that makes  deny the Ordinances of Christ, as to walk in the sp and to bring forth the fruits thereof, Gal. 5.22, 23.  for those that are brought to walk and act in righte¦ness,Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. and to bring forth the fruits of the spirit, as  peace, meekness, gentleness, goodness, temperance, ¦ence,Rev. 17.13, &c. &c. them you hate, devour in your hearts, and ¦tion, if not to take away their life, yet you would  away their liberty, but it is hard to kick again  pricks; the Scriptures must be fulfilled, and the fufilling daily; The Beast makes war with the Sa and he that departeth from iniquity makes himse prey for the wild beasts, as a Troup of Robbers wait  man,Rev. 9.19, 20, 21. Hos. 6.9. so the company of Priests murder in the way b sent, Hos. 6.9. like Priest, like people, all live i nature. Run on, and fill up the measure of ini
with what measure ye meat the same shall be measu∣ to all againe;Luk. 11. & 47, 4 49, 50. Ier. 23 Iude 11 Mal. 4. Isa. 66  16. Isa. 30. 3, 4, 5,  8, 9, 10  v. 12, 13,  Isa. 5 Zeph.  9, 10. Ioh. 1 Rev. 21 The Lord will plead the cause of all  himselfe, wo to the Priests and the enemies of the ord who act in unrighteousness: the Lord is com∣ing to plead with all flesh by his sword, and by fire,  cut off the wicked out of the Land; all your covers of ofession will not hide you from the presence of the ord, the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth. Alas, ore Priests, your downefall is at hand, and the least int out of form shall scourge the greatest formalist, the ord is teacher himselfe alone, the Lord wil returne to s people a pure language, and they shall all serve him ith one consent, and there shall be but one Shepheard nd one sheep-fold, the Lord one, and his Name one, nd he will dwell in these earthen Tabernacles of ours, nd sit as Refiner: then shall the righteous shine forth  brightnesse in the Kingdome of their Father. Rejoyce ye Saints and righteous ones, the Lord is udge, Lawgiver and King, and he will save you out of he paw of the Lion and the paw of the Bear, and set you ree from slavish feare: wo to the wicked, it shall be ill with them: though the Beast make war with the Saints, yet be of good chear, the Saints shall overcome,Rev. 1 12, 13,  15, 16. the man that sits upon the white Horse with his sharp sword shall prevaile and get the victory, and deliver out of the paw of the Lion: Prophet, proud Priest, Formalist, self∣conceited Pharisee, covetous Professor, Hypocrite,Rev.  18, 19  21. Mal.  Zech  and Dissembler, shall all fall together, the Beast, and the 24. Elders, Antichrist, and all his upholders must be cut off, and fall down before the power of God, in his poor de∣spised people, the wicked shall be as a shell under the soals of their feet. The Kingdomes of the world must bee the King∣domes of the Lord, and of his Christ,Rev.  15. and the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, and every man shall sit under his owne Vine, and under his owne
Fig-tree,a. 66.12, . and none shall make him afraid; then shall  be Judges as at the first, and Counsellors as at the begin and Sion shall be redeemed with Iudgement, and he ¦verts with righteousnesse, and the destruction of the  ¦gressors, and of the sinners shall be together, and they  forsake the Lord shall be consumed, Isa. 1.26, 27, 28. Seek peace, seek righteousness, if so be that ye m hid in the day of the Lords wrath. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteou his thoughts,a. 55.7, 8 and turne to the Lord, and he will have  upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pa for your sins and your iniquities have separated be you and your God. Undo the heavy burthens and let the oppresse free, the Lord doth require it. Written by one that is called a QUAKER,  To warn those that knowes not their Maker, who o divine nature are not made yet Partaker; that  doe not dissemble, for God is a consuming fire,  he is the heart-Searcher and Tryer, and will not  mocked, and you must all give account, and tre and quake before him at Sinai the mount; before  come at Sion to sing, Praises and Hallelujahs to Is Keeper and their King. FINIS.
