G1271 18447872 107671
A PROPHECIE Lately Transcribed From an Old MANUSCRIPT Of Doctor Barnaby Googe That lived in the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth, PREDICTING The Rising, Meridian, and Falling condition OF The States of the Vnited Provinces, Which started up immediately after the ap∣pearance of the new Star in Cassiopoeia. In which Prophecie it is predicted, that that State will suddenly be brought to that mean and low condition they were in a∣bout an hundred years since. Now Published and Explained. LONDON: Printed by J. C. for R. Robinson, neer Grays Inne, Holborn. 1672.
The Prophecie. WHen a new Lyght shall shyne whose name none ken, Ne hath beheld the lyke all Christen men; A Lyon from a Castll shall break loose, Who shall a Mayden for his Guarden choose: Shée by her Skyll and Myght shall guard him too From Foes that eagerly do him pursue. But this vile Viper, after myckle tyme, Shall Foster harm geust them that succour'd hym. This happens, when within a Solar year Thrée Starry Lanthorns in the Sky appear: And to his help he subtilie shall draw The Lilly, Fir-trée, and the Eagles Claw. But the just Heav'n agenst them all shall fight, And thrice shall cause this villanous Lyons flight. Then will agen this Lyon Couchant lie, But yet shall ponder Mischief privilie, Till the Hygh Lyghts of Heaven Aspected are By Opposition from the Maiden Star: Then shall the Virgins Kyn this Lyon make, For his false plays and Fiend-like Villanies quake: Then will he séek for Aid, but all in vain; He is begirt with Foes by Land and Main: His privie Wiles Heavens Justice will disclose, Which makes his former Friends to be his Foes: He wooes the Eagle; but the Crescent Moon With her sharp Aspects quickly calls him home: He will the Heliotrop eke to his Ayd pray, But he will onely Féed him with delay: For, former faults, that Flower of the Sun Will cause to be espyer of his Doom. From henceforth Heaven foretels this Lyon shall Like to his Astral Guarden, backward crawl, Till Iove five times Chronos oppose, and then Thrée Lyons shall confyne him to his Den.
The Explanation of the Prophecie. When a new Lyght shall shyne, whose name none ken, Ne hath the lyke beheld all Christen men. BY this is meant the appearance of a new Star in Cassiopoeia, which the famous Tycho exact∣ly observed; and from which appearance, the Astrologers of that Age did predict the rise of some new Government that should trouble and vex the world. A Lyon from a Castil shall break loose, Who shall a Mayden for his Guarden choose. By the Lion, is meant the United Provinces, who bear a Lion in their Arms: by from a Castil is meant Spain, which was anciently called Castile: shall break loose, that is, shall throw off that Go∣vernment. Who shall a Maiden for his Guarden choose: by this Maiden is meant Queen Eliza∣beth, to whom the then Poor distressed States came for Aid, viz. in the year 1581. Who by her Skyll and Might shall guard him too, From Foes that eagerly do him pursue. By the prudence and valour of her Comman∣der and Forces which she sent to their assistance, the Spanish Armies were overcome, and They
acknowledged and established by the King of Spain to be a Free State. But this vile Viper, after mickle tyme, Shall foster harm genst them that succour'd him. They shall forget, after some time, them that set them up, and shall supplant their Trade, and deal treacherously with them; as it hath been verified in Amboyna, Surinam, and other parts of the East and West-Indies, where they treache∣rously burnt our Stores, and murdered our Men, committing outrages that the world cannot pa∣rallel. This happens when within a Solar year Three Starrie Lanthorns in the Skie appear. By the three Starry Lanthorns, is meant the three Comets that appeared in the latter end of 64, and the beginning of 65. This is so remark∣able, as the like no History relates. And to his help he subtilly shall draw The Lilly, Fir-tree, and the Eagles Claw. By the Lilly is meant France; the Fir-tree, Denmark; the Eagles Claw, Munster: all which were assistants to Holland in the years 65 and 66. But the just Heavens against them all shall fyght, And thrice shall cause this faithless Lions flyght. Heaven shall defend the Justice of our Cause against all our Enemies. This was verified in the
years 65 and 66, when we obtained three re∣markable Victories over the Dutch Fleet. Then will again this Lion couchant lie, But yet shall ponder Mischief privilie. They shall come to Articles of Peace, and couch their Lion when they see ours passant. But yet they will follow their old treacherous Designes against the lives and fortunes of the Kings Sub∣jects. Till the hygh Lyghts of heaven Aspected are By Opposition from the Maiden-Star. That is, till Saturn and Jupiter oppose each other; which happened Octob. 25. 1671. Then shall the Virgins kin this Lyon make, For his false plays, and all his treacheries, quake. By the Virgins Kyn is meant the King of Great Britain, being of the Kindred of the Maiden-Queen Elizabeth. Then will he seek for Aid, but all in vain; He is begirt with Foes by Land and Main. They shall send their Ambassadours to the Princes round about for Aid; but they shall re∣fuse to assist them; and on the contrary, shall become their Enemies. His privie Wiles heav'ns justice will disclose; Which makes his former Friends to be his Foes. Their former Friends, that before assisted them, now discovering their frauds, become their Ene∣mies.
He wooes the Eagle; but the Crescent Moon With her sharp Aspects quickly calls him home. They court the Emperours Aid; but the Tur∣kish Forces making some attempts and inroads into Hungary, findes him work enough to secure his own Dominions. He will the Heliotrope eke to his Aid pray; But he will onely feed him with delay. They will court the Spaniard; but he must take care of his own Territories. For, former faults, that Flower of the Sun Will cause to be espyer of his doom. The Spaniard will remember their former Re∣volt, and for that reason will rather stand Neu∣ter then assist them. From henceforth Heav'n foretels this Lyon shall, Like to his Astral Guarden, backward crawl. That is, from the time of the first Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter, they shall decline, and go backwards, like their Astral Guarden, which is the Crab, the Celestial Signe that rules over Holland. Till Jove five times Chronos oppose, and then Three Lyons shall confyne him to his den. That is, till Saturn and Jupiter oppose each other five times, viz. the first Opposition Octob.
25. 1671. the second Opposition, Jan. 15. 1671-72. the third Opposition, Sept. 12. 1672. the fourth Opposition, April 20. 1673. the fifth Opposition, August 6. 1673. Then, by the Force and Va∣lour of the Fleet and Armies of his Majestie of Great Britain, who bears in his Arms three Li∣ons passant, they shall be brought to that low and mean condition in which they were, in the year 1580. For by the Prognostication of the fa∣mous Astrologers that have calculated the Horo∣scope of the State of Holland, it should last but one hundred years, which will be compleated in the year 1680: of which year the Learned Cardanus writeth these words: Incipiet mutatio Legum, cui nunquam fuit similis, & consurget una nova Lex, & cum his alia multa. FINIS.
