G1657A R36553 15724868 104531
Great and Joyful News for England, Giving an ACCOUNT OF K. William's happy Voyage With PRINCE GEORGE FROM LIMERICK to LONDON, And of the great Victory obtain'd over the IRISH-REBELS. K. William being in the heat of the Action. Also the number of what Officers and Soldiers were kill'd and taken Pri∣soners on both sides.9. Sept. 1690. Printed according to Order, September 8th. 1690. SInce our Gracious Kings Resolution for England, great preparations were made for His Majesties setting forward, who accordingly took Shiping at Waterford, and Landed on Saturday Night at Aust-Ferry, Four Miles from Sir Robert Southwells, and lay at Sir Roberts that Night, and on Sunday went to the Duke of Beaufords House at Major-Babington in Wiltshire, where he lay that Night, and this day he comes to Sir William Rich's House at Sonning near Reading, and to Morrow designs to Dine at Kingsington, whither his Royol Consort is gone to order the Affairs for his Reception, and designs to meet his Ma∣jesty at Hampton-Court. Orders were given to Relieve them at 4 in the Afternoon, being the 19th, which was accordingly done by Count Solmes, Count Nassau, and Sir John Hanmore, who it was thought would have stormed the Fort but did not, this day the Cannon on both sides fired very briskly, we dismounted 3 of their Guns, but all Night both sides were quiet, we prepared a Battery for Six 24 pounders, which were drawn all but one and planted within a Carbine Shot of the Wall. Wednesday the 20th. This Morning Early we played on the Fort with 2 Batteries, and by 3 in the Afternoon had tumbled down a good part thereof; His Majesty after Dinner went to a place near the Battery, and
on a Signal of 3 Guns, our Granadiers being ready, each having 3 Gra∣nadoes, Storm'd the Fort, and in less than half an hour were Masters of it, putting all to the Sword they found therin, being 150. except the Officer one Captain Barret, who was brought to the Guard by his Ma∣jesties Order: The Enemy made a brisk Salley with Horse, they expect∣ing to beat us out of our new gain'd Ground, but our Men being prepa∣red to receive them sent them in again quickly with great loss, for just as they Sallied, Major General Kirk relieved our Trenches, and those that were on before, joyned him, and gave them so warm a Wel∣come, being seconded by a Detach'd Body of 600 Horse, and a Peal or two from our Ordinance, that they ran in again. We had some Officers killed and wounded, Capt. Lucy of the Lord Oxfords Regiment Killed; Col. Belliastle (formerly Lieutenant to Callimote) Wounded; and about 100 private Soldiers Killed and Wounded; But the Enemy had at least 500 Slain, and the Wounded we cannot learn. Capt. Needham of Lord Meathes Regiment of Granadiers (who behaved himself to admiration, as indeed did all our Officers and Soldiers) was Killed coming from the Trenches after they were relieved. This morning between 3 and 4, being Thursday the 21th, the Enemy made a brisk Sally, and Kirk whose Post they Attacked) let them come up to his Trenches, and then gave them such a welcome with his small Shot, and seconded by our Cannon, that in less than a quarter of an hour they ran in again with a very considerable loss. This day the Enemy Fired upon us in the Fort we had gained, from a Roundal and Square To∣wer which over-looked it, and fired with small Rubonetts, which galled our Men much, so that this day we could do little but shelter our selves with Fachines and other blinds, till our Works could be made to secure us better, and in making a Battery nar our Fort, which we compleated, and planted 4 Guns carrying 24 pounders: this Night the Enemy did not Disturb us. Friday the 22d. About 5 this Morning we battered the Roundal with our 4 Guns, and with that success, that about 4 this Afternoon we brought it down, which covered another small Fort the Enemy had; we have since been battering the square Tower which covers their Spurr be∣fore the Gate, in which we have made a considerable Breach. This day came up our great Guns from Carrick and some Mortars, and are carried down to the Battery, so that I doubt not but to Morrow the Spurr Tow∣er will like wise fall, and then we shall storm their Counterscarpe, which is well Pallisaded, they having left nothing unatempted to strengthen the Town, yet nothing can stand against us. This Evening his Majesty sent a Drum into the Town with Offers of mercy, or else to expect nothing but Fire and Sword. His Majesty never had his health better, to whom God of his mercy continue it. Here has been one Crosby seized for having Letters sent to him by Pst, which were opened at the Post Office here, and found to be of ill Conse∣quence; he was last Night before the Lords Commissions of the Great-Seal. The Almighty God has blest us as yet with fair Weather for our Camp, and I hope will continue his Mercy. The Irish do commit great Barbarities in the West: the Papists here were in great Consternation for fear of being generally Plundered by the Soldiers, but there ia a Proclamation out against it, which has quieted their minds till the next time. FINIS. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Moore. 1690.
