G1729A 09531646 43534
Great News FROM SALISBURY, The Sixth of December, 1688. HIS Highness the P. of O. Enter'd this City on Tuesday, with Bonfires, and Ringing of Bells, and attended with the Mayor and Aldermen in their Formalities, and the loud Acclamations of the People. He spake to them, and said, That he came, (being Invited) to Restore their Liberties, and Preserve their RELIGION; but the shouts of the People would not permit him to go on. He intends to stay here a day or two. Here came a Trumpeter from the three Commissioners last Night, to let the Prince know they were at Andover, and to desire a Meeting. The Trumpeter desir'd also a Cessation of Arms, and Liberty of Treating, in Order to a Free Parliament. It's said here, that the Lords of his Highness's Council met with∣out the Prince, and they declared, that a Free Parliament they took up Arms for, and that they would give Passes for the Coming and Going of any that should come to them; and that they were com∣ing to London, in Order to a Free Parliament. It's also Discourased his Highness said last Night, That he wonder'd what he had done in his Life, that should give cause to think he used to break his Word and Declarations like some others; for nothing could be done but in Conjunction with the Lords and Gentlemen, who had taken Arms (with him, and also in other parts of England) in order to settle all things in a Parliamentary way. The Earl of Oxford came hither yesterday. This City and all the Corporations in the West Engage themselves, and declare for a Free Parliament, and the Protestant Religion. Just now Advice is brought, how that the Lord Herbert of Cher∣bury, Sr. Edward Harley, and most of the Gentry of Worcester∣shire, and Hereford-shire, with a great Body of Horse, the 5th. In∣stant enter'd Worcester, and that in a few days their Number would be very great. The Lord Herbert with a Party of Horse Seized on Ludlow Castle, a place of great strength, and vey Rich in Plate; and that another Party seized Sir Walter Blunt, the Pop. High Sheriff Worcester, and secured him in Ludlow Castle.
