Gg1718a 09531593 43531
Great News from Dundalk Giving a Full and Particular Account of the late Great and Famous Action Between His Majesties Forces under the Command of Brigadier STUART And a Party of the late King James's near the Town of Dundalk: With an Account of the Numbers Slain and taken Prisoners. In a Letter from Chester. Printed according to Order. A Vessel which departed from Belfast on Sunday the 25th. of May, and Arrived last Night at Highlake, gives us certain Intelligence of a late Action in Ireland, which has prov'd very Successful to the English, the particulars are as followeth: Captain Stuart, an Officer of Reputed Courage and equal Conduct, in his Majesties Forces in Ireland, was Commanded to lead out a Party of Horse and Foot, consisting of Three Thousand, against Dundalk, which was made a Garrison by the Irish, who had been a considerable time to fear of the English coming down upon them; who having No∣tice of Captain Stuart's approach with a Par∣ty, (though uninform'd of what number) expected them to be but of indifferent strength, so that upon Notice of their com∣ing, the Garrison was drawn out, and ap∣pear'd in a Body without the Town, as if they had an intention to Ataque them: But their whole Body consisting of no more than two thousand and odd Men, which were divided into three Companies, and seeing our Men exceed them in number, and make an appearance of so considerable a strength they began to Consult their own safety, and Retir'd began to Consult their own safety, and Retir'd back into the Town, be∣taking them selves to their respective Houses, Captain Stuart and his party making hot Pursuit after them, recover'd the Gates be∣fore they had time to make any Baracade against him; so that he enter'd the Town: But the Irish Fir'd out of Windows upon them, and Killing several of our party be∣fore they could firmly possess themselves of the place; who were forc'd to put a great many to the Sword before they could Re∣duce them to a due Subjection. Our party, found but little Booty in the Town, the Inhabitants having remov'd all their Goods of any value, under the Con∣duct of a small party of Dragoons, which the late King James Commanded some short time before, to Retire to Kells, to secure them from the Irish Souldiers, who were very Cruel to the Inhabitants during the time of the Garrison. There were found but two Field-pieces at the entrance into the Town, that be∣ing all the Artillery they had. This Successful Action was perform'd on last Wednesday was Seven-night; the Report of which immediately flying to Loath, brought the Inhabitants thereof under a great Con∣flict; who beginning to have a due sence of the Misery they were like very speedily to fall under, without an Early Submission, have sent to Duke Schomberg, to the num∣ber of Ten Thousand, to desire his Protection. There lyes at Highlake, Three Hundred Sail of small Ships, and Eleven Men of War, waiting for his Majesty, to Convoy Him, and His Retinue, to Ireland. ADVERTISEMENT AN Exact Description of the ROADS of IRELAND, according to the lost and best Survey; Giving the True Distances of all the Cities, Towns, Castles, and other Passes and Places of Strength (each from the other) in that Kingdom. And the most Passable Roads for the Army to March to the Siege of any Place. With an Account of the Number of Cities, Towns, &c. now in the Possesion of Their Majesties King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Very necessary for all Gentlemen and others (during the War in Ireland) in reading the Gazette, or other Intelligences, of the Monuments and Actions of Their Majesties Armies. Printed for R. Hayhurst in Little-Brittain. Price 2 d. Printed for R. Hayburst in Little-Brittain. 1690.
