G1951 16439337 105413
AN IDEA OF A PHYTOLOGICAL HISTORY Propounded. Together with a Continuation of the ANATOMY of VEGETABLES, Particularly prosecuted upon ROOTS. And an Account of the VEGETATION of ROOTS Grounded chiefly thereupon. By NEHEMIAH GREW M. D. and Fellow of the Royal Society. LONDON, Printed by J.M. for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Pauls Church-yard, 1673.
To the Right Honourable WILLIAM Lord Viscount BROVNCKER THE PRESIDENT, And to the rest of the Fellows of the ROYAL SOCIETY. Right Honourable and most Illustrious, IF the Dedication of Books were not in use, yet here I think I might have been a precedent. The pro∣motion of Phytological Science is one part of Your Work; and 'tis You have called me to the management of this part, for some time have intrusted
me herein, and by Your most benign and candid acceptance of what I have performed thus far, have encouraged me hereunto: I therefore present but Your own into Your hands. The great Honour and Advantage of Your Fellowship, I first obtained by Me∣diation of the late most Reverend Bi∣shop of Chester; whom I cannot name without saying thus much of him, That He was a Person of that eminent and happy Worth, which as it was too good to fear envy, so is it too great to need an Elogie. With Him it was You were pleased to approve of me for that Vndertaking which I have here begun. Had I con∣sulted my own abilities altogether, I should scarcely have ventured upon it; seeing very little for which I could think well of my self, saving that I had lear∣ned upon good grounds, to think of You with greatest Honour. But I also con∣sidered, That to insist hereon too much,
might be a reflection upon Your Judg∣ments, who had thought fit to make choice of me. And, That You were not more the Patrons of Wit, than of Indu∣stry, and of all who shall endeavour to find out, or to confirm the Truth of Things. Withal, I looked upon Nature as a Treasure so infinitely full, that as all men together cannot exhaust it; so no man, but may find out somewhat therein, if he be resolved to Try. In compliance therefore with Your Commands, I have hereunto devoted my self. These adding force to my own desires of being somewhat instrumental to the improvement of Medicinal and and other wholesom Knowledge: if peradventure, as we increase herein, we may become better and more happy. As to which Improvement, though I could not hope, yet I would not despair. I have already prepared the Soil, and made some Plantation; what remain∣eth behind, and the Vintage of the whole,
will depend much upon the continued In∣fluence of Your Beams: for how unpro∣mising soever the Stock may be, yet the Fruit cannot but be somewhat matured upon which You are pleas'd to shine. I am also confident, that the same Nobi∣lity and Goodness which accept the en∣deavours, will likewise pardon the faults, of Your most humbly and most sincerely devoted Servant Nehemiah Grew.
THE PREFACE. HAving divers years since di∣rected my thoughts to∣wards the Anatomy of Ve∣getables; what Observa∣tions I had from time to time occa∣sionally made, I published some time since. In making whereof, I proceed∣ed from the Seed sown, throughout all the Parts, to the Seed again. Sub∣joyning to the Anatomy of every Part, my thoughts of their oeconomical Uses thence deduced. Hitherto I had examined the Parts chiefly by the bare eye: some few Observations excepted, which were made by the Microscope. And this
I did, to the intent I might make proof, both for my self and others, how far it is possible to go with the eye, without the help of Glasses: pur∣posing afterward to make the utmost use of those also. Immediately after the Publication of These, a Discourse from the Lear∣ned Malpighius (to whose most inge∣nious and accurate industry the World is much beholden) was presented to the Royal Society upon the same Sub∣ject, Decemb. 7. 1671. and Dated at Bononia, Novemb. 1. 1671. By whose Suffrage I was glad to see the Truth of my Observations all along confirm∣ed; his very little differing from mine, though He hath every where made use of the Microscope. As for the Air-vessels, (which he calls the Fistulae Spirales) although I have long since taken notice of them, as those which, being much larger than the rest, are more easily discoverable; yet
the manner of their Spiral Confor∣mation (not observable but by a Mi∣croscope) I first learned from Him, who hath given a very elegant De∣scription of them. He communi∣cates not many of his thoughts of the oeconomical Use of the Parts. And some Things observable of the Parts of the Flower, Fruit, and Seed, not there found, He may possibly reserve by him amongst others. I could heartily wish He would have publish∣ed his Discourse, but that He is un∣willing to, before it be furnished with Figures: for which reason I thought good to give this account of it. Presently after the Impression of my first Endeavours, I resolved upon a further prosecution of them. The Series of my Thoughts and Observa∣tions following thereupon, I have di∣stributed into three Parts, and in obe∣dience to the Command of the Royal Society have now made publick.
Which I have the more willingly done, that others may hence take oc∣casion the better to consider, what they have to do as well as I. For we may as well commit the Government of the World, as the Management of Philosophy to any one: and much better, since Things are far more nu∣merous than Men, and no less various and out of sight. For the first, it is as comprehensive as I could at present make it. I doubt not, but that further Means and In∣quiries may be suggested; and per∣haps no way better than in the prose∣cution of these: the generation of Experiments being like that of Dis∣course, where one thing introduceth an hundred more which otherwise would never have been thought of. The second is the prosecution of what I had before begun, and pur∣pose to continue, both of the Root, and all the other Parts. For this I
apologize not; for what I here re∣present, are neither Words, nor pro∣bable Things; but both the real and the visible Works of God. As to the last, I only desire it may be remembred, That while I speak of Natural Causes, and particularly of those of Vegetation, I intend only the Material ones, which (whatever others, besides the first, be assigned) we must allow to be so qualified as to become instrumental thereto; un∣less it be denied that there is such a Thing as a Material Cause. If it be asked why I insist so much on These, whilst I am silent of the Existence, Nature, and Energy of the Anima Vegetalis, the Vis formatrix, the Vis Motiva, or other Immaterial one? To this, because I am willing to sup∣pose the Question soberly propound∣ed, I answer; That it is not for that I have had no thoughts hereof; but because I do not find they do so well
answer the Scope whereto I am more obliged: for the investigation of the Nature of any other Secondary Cau∣ses, than such as are Material, cannot be so useful to one that is considering the Nature of a Disease, or Com∣pounding or Applying a Remedy thereunto. And if any of the Prin∣ciples or Discourses of Cartesius, Gas∣sendus, or others about Material Cau∣ses, may, upon a right Judgment made, be found culpable, I am not about to answer for them.
THE CONTENTS. THE FIRST PART. UNto what degree the knowledge of Ve∣getables is arrived, pag. 1. Wherein defective, 2. Why concluded to be so, 2, 3. Yet capable of Improvement, 3. And worthy of it, 4. Divers Instances given wherein; first of the Organical Parts, as to their external Acci∣dents and oeconomical Vses, 4, 5, 6. Then of their Contents, Qualities, and Powers, 7. And an Improvement of this part will further that of divers other parts of know∣ledge, whereof Instances are given, 8, 9. In order whereto, five general Means are pro∣pounded. The First, a particular and com∣parative Survey of whatever is of more ex∣ternal
consideration about Vegetables, 10, 11. Instanced as to their Figures, 11, 12, 13, 14. Proportions, 14, 15. Seasons, 15, 16. Places, 16. Motions, 17. The Second, a like Survey of the Organical parts by Anatomy, as that which is very necessary, 17, 18, 19. In what manner to be prosecuted, both without and with the Microscope, 19, 20. What thereupon to be observed, 20, 21, 22. And what from ob∣servation made probably attainable, 22. The Third, a like Survey of the Contents of Vegetables; their several Kinds, 23. Of all which, their Receptacles, 24. Motions, 24. Qualities, 25. Consistence, ibid. Co∣lours, Smells, and Tastes, 26. Where also the same Qualities are to be inquired into as generally belonging to Vegetables, ibid. As their Colours, 27. Odours, 27, 28. Tastes, 28, 29, 30, 31. Also their Faculties, 31, 32, 33. All these to be further examined by Conusion, Agitation, Frigifaction, Agi∣tation, Infusion, Digestion, Decoction, De∣stillation, Arefaction, Assation, Vstion, Cal∣cination, 34 to 39. By Composition with other Bodies, 39. And by Compounding the Experiment it self, 40. What hence attainable, 40, 41. The Fourth, a like Survey of the Principles, as well as of the Contents, of the Organical
Parts, 41, 42, 43 Whence will be attain∣able a further knowledge of the Modes of Vegetation, 43, 44. Of the Qualities of Vegetables, 44, 45. And of their Powers, 45, 46, 47. The Fifth, a like Survey of those Bodies either from which these Principles are derived, or wherewith they have any communion; which are four in general, scil. Earth, and all solid Receptacles, 47, 48. Water, and all liquid Receptacles, 48, 49, 50. Air, 50. And Sun, 51. A Sixth general Inquiry omitted, 51. The Conclusion, 52, 53. THE SECOND PART. CHAP. I.OF the Figures of Roots in general, 54, 55, 56. Of their Motions, 56 to 59. That of Descent proper to very many other kinds besides the Bulbous, 57. Demonstrated, 58. The immediate Cause hereof, ibid. What hence resolvable, 59. And of their Ages, 59. How Bulbous Roots are perennial, 60. How other descending Roots. And what thence resolvable, ibid.
CHAP. II.Of the Skin. Its external Accidents; and Original, 61. Compounding Parts. Where∣of the one Parenchymous, consisting of Bu∣bles, 62. The other Lignous, consisting of tubulary Vessels, 62, 63. CHAP. III.Of the Bark. Its Original; and external Ac∣cidents, 64. Compounding Parts. Whereof the one Parenchymous, compared with a Sponge, 65. The Bubles hereof observed by a Microscope, 65, 66. Their Sizes, Positions, Content, 66, 67. The Diametral Portions of this Parenchymous part, 67. Their various Extension, Original, Di∣stance, Continuation, 67, 68. Their Num∣ber, Size, Bubles, 68. Content, 69. The other part lignous, consisting of Succiferous Vessels, 69, 70. The Braces of these Ves∣sels, 70, 71. The Vessels conjugated into Threds, 71. But no where Inosculated, ibid. Nor Ramified, but distinct as the Fibres of a Nerve, ibid. Their Kinds, denominated from their Contents; as Lym∣phaeducts,
72. Lacteals, &c. 73. Whence their Content of a white or other like co∣lour, 73, 74. Of divers kinds in the same Root often, if not always, 74. Their different Number, 75. Size or Capacity, 75. Their various Situation, 76, 77, 78. CHAP. IV.Of that Portion of the Root next within the Bark. Its Compounding Parts, 79. The one Parenchymous; its Original, 79. Po∣sition or Configuration, 79, 80. Texture, 80. The other part Lignous. Vsually com∣pounded of two kinds of Vessels. The one Succiferous, either at present, or originally such, 81. The other Air-vessels. Both of them as to their Braces, Conjugations, Con∣figurations agreeing in general with those of the Bark, ibid. Their Braces how dif∣ferent, 82. The Structure of the Bark, and more visibly of this Portion of the Root compared with that of a Muscle, ibid. The various Position of the Succiferous Ves∣sels herein, 83. Of the Air-vessels, 83, 84, The various Number and Size of the Air-vessels, 84, 85. Compared to Nerves, 86. The Spiral position of the parts whereof the said Air-vessels are composed, ibid. What
further observable of these Spiral parts, 87, 88. What that Wool is whih appeareth upon breaking the Leaves and other parts of many Plants, ibid. The Contents of these Vessels, 88, 89. CHAP. V.Of the Pith. Not common to all Roots, nor in some to all parts, 89. Its various Size, 90. And Shape, ibid. Succiferous Ves∣sels sometimes and in different manner mixed with the Pith, 90. The Original of the Pith, 91. The Pith of the same sub∣stantial nature with the Parenchymous part of the Bark, and of the same Texture, scil. composed into Bubles, 91, 92. The various Size, Position, and Shape of the Bubles, 92. The Pith à Re mirabile, the sides of all the Bubles being made up of interwoven Threds, 92, 93. And these Threds of most extreme small Fibres, 93, 94. The Si∣tuation or Continuation of the Threds, 94, 95. The Texture of all the other Parenchymous parts of the Root (or of a Plant) likewise Fibrous, 95. How these Fibres subservi∣ent to the making the Braces and Threds or Conjugations of the Vessels, ibid. Out of these the secondary Air-vessels probably for∣med,
96. What hence inferrible of the parts both of Plants and Animals, ibid. The Contents of the Pith, 97. THE THIRD PART. ALL true Philosophy necessarily asserteth a God, 98, 99. And secureth our ve∣neration of Him, 99. And of his Laws, 100. And of his Mysteries, 100, 101. And of Providence, 101, 102. Nature being one universal Monarchy, 102, 103. Visible, as in all other particular Oeconomies, so no less in that of Vegetables, 103. If we consider. How the Soil is prepared, by Rain, Sun, Wind, Air, and their several successions, 104, 105, 106. The Vse of the Parenchyma of the Bark, 106. The Principles of the Sap herein why less discernable, 107. The Vses of the Skin, 107, 108. A further Vse of the Paren∣chyma of the Bark, 108. One Vse of the Bubles, ibid. The Principles of the Sap how, and of what kind adherent to the Fi∣bres of the Bubles, 109. With the Prin∣ciples of these Fibres how the Sap tinctured, ibid. The Principles of the Sap how, and of what kind agglutinated to the Succiferous
Vessels, 109, 110. The Sap how refundent from the same Vessels, 110. How aggluti∣nated to the Parenchymous Fibres, ibid. To the Air-vessels, 111. How and of what kind trajected into their Concaves, ibid. The Vse of the Braces, 111, 112. Of the Diametral Portions, 112, 113. The Vses of the Pith, 113. The Organical Parts why void of taste, smell, and colour, 114. Whence the Succiferous Vessels tough, 114, 115. And the Paren∣chymous parts friable, 115. How the Suc∣ciferous Vessels grow in length, Cylindrical, and hollow, 116. The Lactiferous, how and why wider, 117. How the Air-vessels are formed; grow wider as they grow older, and as they stand deeper in the Root, 118. How the Parenchymous parts become fibrous, and the Fibres disposed into Bubles, 119. How all stitched up together, 120. The Situation of the Air-vessels whence, 120. And of the Succiferous, 120, 121. The Motion of the Air-vessels towards the cir∣cumference of the Root whence, 121. And whence various, 121, 122. Whence many of the succiferous left behind the Air-vessels in the Pith, 122, 123. Whence the eru∣ption of Strings, the Leaves, and Trunk, 123. How Roots variously sized, 123, 124. How
variously shaped, as slender or thick 124. And how the Pith made as the Root thick∣neth, 124, 125. Whence the Root long, 125. Whence less or more stringie, or Ra∣mified, 126. And how Strings and Bran∣ches made, ibid. Whence Root-Buds, 126, 127. How diversly situated, 127. Whence the Root Cylindrical or Pyramidal, 127, 128. How Roots variously moved, as in a level, 128. Or perpendicularly, ibid. How they grow deep, 129. Or shallow, ibid. How they descend, ibid. Descend and ascend sometimes together, 130. How variously Aged; Perennial, ibid. Biennial, or there∣about, 131. Annual, 131, 132. The Contents of Vegetables whence various, 132. The Content of the Parenchymous Fi∣bres how made, 132, 133. Whence the Dia∣metral Portions filled with Air, 133. Whence the Pith, ibid. The Content of the Lymphaeducts how made, 134. Of the La∣ctiferous Vessels, ibid. And of the Aerial, 134, 135. The Content of a Vine, Corn, &c. whence so little oleous, of others more, 135, 136. Some Observations of the Odours of Vegeta∣bles, 136, 137. Of their Colours, 137 to 140. And of their Tastes, 140 to 144.
AN IDEA OF A PHYTOLOGICAL HISTORY Propounded. THE FIRST PART. IF we take account of the degrees whereunto the knowledge of Vege∣tables is advanced, it appeareth, That their Descriptions, Places, and Sea∣sons are with good preciseness and curiosity set before us. Likewise, that we are informed of the Natures and infallible Faculties of many of them. Whereunto so many as have assisted, have much obliged their Posterity.
By due reflection upon what they have performed, it also appears, what they have lest imperfect, and what undone. For the Vertues of many Vetegables are with much uncertainty, and too promiscuously ascri∣bed to them. And of the Vertues of many they are altogether silent. And although, for the finding out and just appropriation of them, they have left us some Rules, yet not all. The Descriptions likewise of many are yet to be perfected; as also their Draughts, especially as to their Roots. And their proper ranks and affinities much un∣dermined. But for the Reason of Vegeta∣tion, and the Causes of all those infinite va∣rieties therein observable (I mean so far as matter, and the various affections hereof are instrumental thereto) almost all men have seemed to be unconcerned. That nothing hereof remaineth further to be known, is a thought not well calcu∣lated. For if we consider how long and gradual a Journey the knowledge of Na∣ture is, and how short a time we have to proceed therein; as on the one hand, we shall conclude it our ease and profit to see how far others have gone before us: so shall we beware on the other, that we conceive not unduly of Nature, whilst we have a just value for those who were but her Dis∣ciples
and instructed by her. Their time and abilities both being short to her, which as she was first designed by Divine Wis∣dom, so may her vast dimensions best be judged of, in being compared therewith. It will therefore be our prudence, not to insist upon the invidious question, which of her Scholars have taken the fairest measure of her; but to be well satisfied, that as yet she hath not be circumscribed by any. Nor doth it more behove us to consider how much of the Nature of Vegetation may lie before us yet unknown, than to be∣lieve a great part thereof to be knowable: not concluding from the acknowledged, much less supposed insuccessfulness of any mens undertakings; but from what may be accounted possible as to the Nature of things themselves; and from Divine Pro∣vidence, by infinite ways conducting to the knowledge of them. Neither can we de∣termine how great a part this may be; be∣cause it is impossible to measure what we see not. And since we are most likely to under-measure, we shall hereby but intrench our endeavours, which we are not wont to carry beyond the Idea which we have of our Work. And how far soever this kind of Know∣ledge may be attainable, its being so far also
worthy our attainment will be granted. For beholding the many and elegant varie∣ties wherewith a Field or Garden is ador∣ned, who would not say, That it were ex∣ceeding pleasant to know what we see; and not more delightful to one who has eyes, to discern that all is very fine; than to a∣nother who hath reason, to understand how. This surely were for a man to take a true Inventory of his Goods, and his best way to put a price upon them. Yea it seems, that this were not only to be partaker of Divine Bounty; but also, in some degree, to be Copartner in the Secrets of Divine Art. That which were very desirable, un∣less we should think it impertinent for us to design the knowing of that, which God hath once thought fit to do. If for these and other reasons an inquiry into the Nature of Vegetation may be of good import; it will be requisite to see first of all what may offer it self to be in∣quired of, or to understand what our Scope is; that so doing, we may take our aim the better in making, and having made, in ap∣plying our observations thereunto. Amongst other inquiries therefore, such as these de∣serve to be proposed. First, by what means it is that a Plant, or any part of it, comes to grow; a Seed to put forth a Root and
Trunk; and this, all the other parts to the Seed again; and all these being formed, by continual nutrition still to be increased. How the Aliment by which a Plant is fed, is duly prepared in its several parts; which way it is conveyed unto them; and in what manner it is assimilated to their respective Natures in them all. Whence this growth and augmentation is not made of one, but many differing degrees, unto both extremes of small and great; whether the compari∣son be made betwixt several Plants, or the several parts of one. How not only their sizes, but also their shapes are so exceedng various; as of Roots, in being thk or slendr, short or long, entire or partd, stringed or ramified, and the like; of Trunks, some being more entire, others branched, others shrub'd; of Leaves, which are long or round, even edg'd or escallop'd, and many other ways diffrent, yet always flat; and so fr the other parts. Then to inquire, what should be the reason of their various Motions, that the Root should d∣scend; that its descent should sometmes be perpendicular, sometimes more level; that the Trunk doth ascend; and that the ascent thereof, as to the space of time wherein it is made, is of different measures; and of divers other Motions, as they are observa∣ble
in the Roots, Trunks, and other parts of Vegetables. Whence again, these Mo∣tions have their different and stated Terms; that Plants have their set and peculiar sea∣sons for their spring or birth, for their full growth, and for their teeming, and the like. Further, what may be the causes as of the seasons of their growth, so of the periods of their lives; some being annual, others biennial, others perennial; some perennial both as to their Roots and Trunks; and some as to their Roots only. Then, as they pass through these several seasons of their lives, in what manner their convenient feeding, housing, cloathing, or protection otherwise, is contrived; wherein in this kind and harmonious oeconomy, one part may be officious to another for the preser∣vation of the health and life of the whole. And lastly, what care is taken, not only for themselves, but for their posterity; in what manner the seed is prepared, formed, and fitted for propagation: and this being of so great concernment, how sometimes the other parts also, as Roots in putting forth Trunks, Trunks in putting forth Roots, yea in turning oftentimes into Roots them∣selves; whereof I shall in the following Discourse give some instances: with other Heads of Inquiry of ths kind.
Nor are the Natures, Faculties, and Con∣tents of Vegetables less various, or a parti∣cular inspection hereinto of less concern∣ment. For since all, or most, seem to grow in the same manner, with one Sun, one Rain, indifferently well upon one Soil, and to outward appearance to have the same com∣mon parts; it may be asked, How it comes to pass, that their liquors, or other contain∣ed parts are of such different kinds, one being watry, another winy, a third oily, a fourth milky, and the like. How also there is such a variety in their sensible qualities, as their Colours, Tastes, and Smells; what those Materials are, which are necessary to the being of these qualities; and those for∣malities wherein their Essence doth consist; as what it is that makes a Plant or Flower to be white or red; fragrant or fetid; bit∣ter or sweet; or to be of any other colour, smell, or taste. In like manner their Fa∣culties and Powers, what that is or those things are by which they are constitu∣ted, as whence one becomes purgative, another vomitory, a third Diaphoretick, &c. These, I say, with many other par∣ticular inquiries depending hereupon, as they cannot but much oblige the reason of man to be obsequious to them; so by bring∣ing in at least some satisfaction with no less
reward it. Especially if it be withal con∣sidered, that besides our satisfaction as to the Nature of Vegetation, some further light to divers other parts of Knowledge may likewise hence arise. For since the present Design will ingage us to an accurate and multifarious observa∣tion of Vegetables; we may hereby be en∣abled to range and sort them with more certainty, according to the degrees of their affinity. And all Exoticks, Plants or parts of Plants, may probably be reduced to some such Domesticks, unto which they may bear the best resemblance. Again, it may fre∣quently conduct our minds to the conside∣ration of the state of Animals; as whether there are not divers material agreements betwixt them both, and what they are. Wherein also they may considerably differ, and what those things are which are more essential to their distinguishment. And be∣sides, not only to compare what is already known of both, but also by what may be observed in the one, to suggest and facilitate the finding out of what may yet be unob∣served in the other So also the considera∣tion of the Colours, Smells, and Tastes of Vegetables, may conduce to the Know∣ledge of the same Qalities in general; or of what it is that constitutes them such in
any other body: not as they are actually received by sense; but so far as such Ma∣terials or external Circumstances are requi∣site to their becoming the adequate objects thereof. It may lead us also to inquire into further ways of Cultivation, with respect to the whole Plant, or to the Flower, Fruit, or other part: To amend them as to their Sizes, Colours, Tastes, Fruitfulness, or o∣therwise: To think of other ways of Pro∣pagation, or to apply those already known to other Vegetables than hath been used. Likewise the knowledge of their Mechani∣cal uses may hereby be enlarged; both as to the reason of their use, in such particular Trades and Manufactures, already known; and the discovery of other uses yet un∣known. As also their Alimental, with re∣spect both to Meats and Drinks; the pre∣paration of some, and the finding out of others. But especially their Medicinal; some Vegetables which have hitherto been neglected, may be applied to use; the pre∣verted uses of some, and the confused uses of others may be rectified. What may best correct their Malignancies, or inforce their Vertues; when needful to add the prepa∣rations of Art to that of Nature; how to enlarge those of Art, and rectifie those which are indeed inartificial, may hereby be better
conjectured. The knowledge of all which, that we may know how far it is accessible, and what probable approaches may be made towards it; those several means I have thought of, and suppose necessary thereunto are next to be proposed. Reflecting then upon the present Design, and seeing this to lie wide; we shall in the first place conclude the Means attending thereon should do so likewise. Wherefore although some may present themselves unto us as more promising; yet let us suppose what others also were they hereunto enga∣ged, each according to his sense and Genius, would possibly make choice of. Believing, that although considering men may vary in the approval of their own sense and notion; yet not always meerly, because it is their own, but because each may probably see somewhat more in his own, than others do. Wherefore it will be our surest Logick to conclude, not because no Mean may be ap∣proved by all, that all should be rejected; but rather because each may be approved by some, that therefore all be made choice of. And first of all, whatever is of more ex∣ternal consideration, as the Figures, Pro∣portions, Motions, Seasons, Situations of Vegetables, and of their several parts,
should be observed. In doing which, a particular survey of all their varieties should be taken. And then a comparison made betwixt these and the several Plants or parts of Plants whereof they are the pro∣perties. To the end we may, if possible, be thereby conducted to find out what other sensible, or more recluse property any of them may agree together in. For it is not more certain, that the three Angles of every Rectilinear Triangle, because all ways equal to two Right Angles, are therefore, if put together, always the same: than that one property agreeing to divers Vegetables, should have one cause: for although the scope and end may vary, yet the cause, as it is the cause of that property, must be one: and consequently must also import some Identity in the Nature of all those Vegeta∣bles wherein it acts. Wherefore by thus comparing of them, we shall be able more exactly to state the Orders and Degrees of their Affinities, better to understand both the Causes and Ends of their Varieties, and more probably to conjecture of their Na∣tures and Vertues. First then the various figures of their several parts should be observed; and that with respect both to the forms, and the po∣sitions by which their Roots, Trunks, Bran∣ches,
Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, and Seeds may vary or agree; and those several Lines by which both the said Varieties are draw. In which of these parts the agree∣ment chiefly lies; this being both more ob∣servable, and material in some of them, less in the Root, more in the Flower or Seed. And in how many of these parts together, whether one, more, or all. By both which the Orders and Degrees of Af∣finity may be accounted, either as to what we strictly call Kindred, or else Analogy. Thus all Strawberries are 'akin together in the first degree, with Cinquefoyl in the second, with Tormentil in the third, and with Avens, &c. in others more remote. So Agrimony hath alike Analogy unto Straw∣berry, as Goats-Rue hath to Claver; and Strawberry the like unto the Rasp, as Goos∣berry to the Vine, or Burnet to the Rose. So all Pulse are not only of kin in their se∣veral degrees to one another; but likewise to almost all kinds of Trefoyls, as Melilot, Foenugreek, and the common Clavers themselves; as by comparing not only their Leaves, but Flowers, Seeds, and Cods toge∣ther may be evident. For the several parts of the flower of a Trefoyl are so many more Flowers, containing so many Cods of small Seeds, all in shape agreeable to the
Flowers, Cods, and Seeds of Pulse. From hence likewise the Natures of Ve∣getables may be conjectured. For in look∣ing upon divers Plants, though of different names and kinds; yet if some affinity may be found betwixt them, then the nature of any one of them being well known, we have thence ground of conjecture as to the nature of all the rest. So that as every Plant may have somewhat of nature indi∣vidual to it self; so as far as it obtaineth any visible communities with other Plants, so far may it partake of common Nature with those also. Thus the Wild and Gar∣den Cucumers have this difference, that the one purgeth strongly, the other not at all; yet in being Diuretick, they both a∣gree. The Natures of Umbelliferous Plants we know are various; yet 'tis most proba∣ble that they all agree in this one, scil. in being Carminative. The several sorts both of Corn and Grass are all 'akin; there is no doubt therefore but that the seeds of Grass themselves (of Rye and Oats it is tryed) if it were worth the while to order them, as Barley, would yield an inflammable Spirit. So likewise the several kinds of Pulse, as is said: for which reason I question not, but that in some cases wherein Ciches are esteemed a good Medicine, a Decoction of
the better sort of Pease, especially that we call Sugar-Pease, may go beyond them. As doth also the flower of Beans that of the seeds of Foenugreek, even there where they are accounted excellent. So Tulips, Lillies, Crocuses, Jacynths, and Onions themselves, with many others in their several degrees, are all allied. If therefore Crocuses, Oni∣ons, Lillies agree in one or more faculties, then why may not all the rest? as in being anodyne; or in some other common Na∣ture, whereby in their Vegetation, their parts are governed and over-ruled to one common or analogous form. The Proportions likewise amongst the several parts of Vegetables, for the same reasons, deserve to be observed; the com∣parison being made both betwixt the parts of several Plants, and the several parts of one. And here again, either betwixt any two of the parts, or any one of them, and the whole besides, or all the rest put together. So some larger Seeds, produce a small Root; as those of Cucumer: and others smaller, produce one very great; as those of Briony. Some Plants, as the Me∣lon, though themselves but very slender, yet have a vast and bulky fruit; others again, as Thistles, and many yet more sub∣stantial, have no other fruit besides their
seed. So the seeds of all Pulse, and especi∣ally the Garden Bean, though very large, yet produce but a small Plant: but those of Foxglove, Mullen, Burdock, Sun-flower, &c. being themselves much less, do yet produce a far greater. And especially those seeds which are inclosed in the thicker sort of Cover, (analogous to that I have else∣where called the Secondine) as that of Peony; whose seed so called, is only the Nest wherein the true and real seed is lodged, no bigger than a little Pins head: which is also observable of the seeds of di∣vers other Plants. These and the like pro∣portions, as they lie betwixt the several parts, should be noted: and to what plants or parts especially, any of them may agree: comparing also in what other kind of pro∣perties an agreement betwixt the said parts may be found: that so doing, we may, if possible, amongst all their individual Na∣tures, be instructed to single out those com∣mon ones, which are concomitant to such agreeing properties. The several Seasons also of plants and of their parts should be considered. Observing at what particular times of the year any of them chiefly spring, early or late. The times wherein they germinate; whether for some space only, or all the year long.
Wherein they spring after sowing; or flow∣er after springing, sooner or flower. Which flower the first year, or not till the second. Which before the Leaves, or afterwards. The maturation of the fruit or seed, how long after the flower, and the like. All or some of which varieties being laid together, we may probably conjecture the causes thereof; and the Natures of the Plants in which they are seen; scil. as such a degree of heat may be necessary for the fermenta∣tion, or the better distribution of the sap of such a Plant, or the impregnation of the Air to be mixed therewith, or the due dis∣posing of the Soil to render the most con∣venient aliment thereunto. The proper Places also of Plants, or such wherein they have from their seeds or other way of propagation, a spontaneous growth, should be considered. And that as to the Climate, whether in one colder, temperate, or more hot. The Region, Continent, or Island. The seat, as Sea or Land, watry, boggy, or dry; Hills, Plains, or Vallies; open, in Woods, or under Hedges, and the like. From whence in like manner as from their seasons, their particular Natures may be directed unto: in that so far as we may conjecture the nature of such an Air, Soil, or Seat, we may also of such a Plant to which they are congenial.
So likewise, those many varieties obser∣vable in the Motions of Plants and of their parts, both kinds and degrees; Ascending, Descending, and Collateral; Rectilinear, and Spiral Motions, should be noted; to what Plants they agree, and wherein any of them may be analogous to those of Animals. And in a word, any other forensick properties of Plants. And then to compare them all together, both being necessary. For thoughts cannot work upon nothing, no more than hands; he that will build an house, must provide Materials. And on the contrary, the Materials will never become an house, unless by certain Rules he joyn them all to∣gether. So it is not simply the knowledge of many things, but a multifarious copula∣tion of them in the mind, that becomes pro∣lifick of further knowledge. And thus much for the first general Mean. The next which I propose, and that a most necessary one, is Anatomy. For when upon the dissection of Vegetables, we see so great a difference in them, that not only their outward figures, but also their inward structure is so elegant, and in all so various, it must needs lead us thus to think, That these inward varieties were either to no end; or if they were, we must assign to what. To imagine the first, were exceed∣ing
vain; as if Nature, the Handmaid of Divine Wisdom, should with her fine Needle and Thred, stitch up so many se∣veral Pieces, of so difficult, and yet so groundless a Work. But if for some end, then either only to be looked upon, or some other besides. If for this only, then this must be such as in respect whereof, her work is at no time, nor in any degree fru∣strate; the contrary thereunto is most ma∣nifest. For although men do every where with frequent pleasure behold the outward elegancies of Plants; yet the inward ones, which generally are as precise and various as the outward, we see how usual it is for the beholding of these to be omitted by them. And besides, when we have obser∣ved Natures work as well as we can, it may be no impediment to our best endea∣vours to believe, that somewhat of it will still remain behind unseen. So that if to be seen, were the only end of it, it must needs be wholly frustrate, as to the greater number of men, and in some part as to all. Wherefore we must suppose some other ends of the said varieties, which should have their effect, and so these not be in vain, whether men beheld them, or not; which are therefore such as have respect to Vege∣tation: that the Corn might grow so, and
the flower so, whether or no men had a mind, leisure, or ability to understand how. If then the Anatomy of Vegetables be so useful a Mean, we ought not to streighten it, but to force this as well as the rest to its utmost extent. And therefore first of all, to go through all the parts, with equal care examining the Root, Trunk, Branch, Leaf, Flower, Fruit, and Seed. Then to repeat or retrograde the Dissection from part to part: in that although the best Method of delivery, for clear discourse, can be but one, according to that of Nature, from the seed forward to the seed: yet can it not but be useful for that of Dissection to pro∣ceed to and fro; somewhat or other being more visible in each several part, from whence still an Item may be taken for the ushering in the observation of it in the other. To examine again, not only all the parts, but kinds of Vegetables, and com∣paratively to observe divers of the same size, shape, motion, age, sap, quality, pow∣er, or any other way the same, which may also agree in some one or more particulars as to their interior structure: and to make this comparison throughout all their parts and properties. To observe them likewise in several seasons of the year, and in seve∣ral
ages of the Vegetables, and of its parts; in both which divrs of them may be noted to change not only their dimensions, but their Natures also; as Vessels do into Li∣gaments, and Cartilages into ones some∣times in Animals. And to do all this by se∣veral ways of Section, oblique, perpendicu∣lar, and transverse; all three being requi∣site, if not to observe, yet the better to comprehend some things. And it will be convenient sometimes to break, tear, or otherwise divide without a Section. To∣gether with the Knife it will be necessary to joyn the Microscope, and to examine all the parts, and every way, in the use of that. As also, that both immediate and micro∣scopical Inspections be compared; since it is certain, that some things may be demon∣strated by reason and the eye conjunct, without the Glass, which cannot be disco∣vered by it; or else the discovery is so dark, as which alone may not be safely de∣pendd on. By these several ways of Inspection it will be rquisite to observe their compounding parts, as simply considerd and as variously proportioned, and disposed. As simply consi∣dered, to note their number, what, and whe∣ther the same in all: their kinds, wherein different in the same, or divers Vegetables:
Original, in part, or in whole: structure, as to their Contexture and their Cavities; their Contexture, within themselves severally, and as joyned together: their Cavities, as to their size, shape, and number; in which a great variety will be found. Next their Positions one amongst another, which are also various; as Anterior, Posterior, Colla∣teral, Surrounding, Mediate, Immediate, Near, Remote; both as they respect the several parts, and the several potions of one: And all these, as few or more, these or others of them may be diversly com∣pounded together. And then the propor∣tions they bear one to another, whether as to inority, equality, or exes; each pat compared with each, and that as to the se∣veral degrees appearing in the said propor∣tions; the varities whereof may be ex∣ceeding numrous. For if we should sup∣pose but four considrable parts generally constitutive of a Vegetable, these four pro∣duce a variety four ways; first, when one is unequal, and then it produceth only four varieties; and those two ways, scil. when one is greater, and the other three equal and less; or when one is less, and the other three equal and greater. Secondly, when two be unequal, and then they produce six varieties. Thirdly, when three be un∣equal,
which produceth twelve varieties. Or lastly, when all four be unequal, which produceth twenty four: which general va∣rieties may be further multiplied by their several degrees. From all which we may come to know, what the Communities of Vegetables are, as belonging to all; what their Distinctions to such a kind; their Properties, to such a Species; and their Peculiarities to such particular ones. And as in Metaphysical or other contemplative matters, when we have a distinct knowledge of the communities and differences of things, we may then be  to give their true Definitions: so may we  ble possibly hereto do likewise; not only to know that every Plant inwardly  another, but also wherein; so s not more surely to define by the out∣ward figure, than by the inward structure, what that is, or those things are, whereby any Plant or sort of Plants may be distin∣guished from all others. And having ob∣tained a knowledge of the Communities and Differences amongst the parts of Vege∣tables, it may conduct us through a Series of more facile and probable Conclusions of the ways of their causality, as to the Com∣munities and Differences of Vegetation. And thus much for the second general Mean.
Having thus far examined the organical and containing parts of Vegetables; it will be requisite more designedly to observe those also which are fluid, or any others contained in them: and that for our better understanding both of the Nature of Vege∣tation, and of the said contained parts. And to make inquiry, first of their kinds, as Spi∣rits; both such as agree in general in being vinous, and those that are special to parti∣cular Plants. Airs and Vapours; for the existence whereof in all Vegetables there are certain Arguments. And for the diffe∣rence of their natures, as they are existent in several parts, there are probable ones. Lymphas or clear Saps; Milks, Oyls, Gums, Sugars, Salts, or other concrete and fixed parts. Where by Salts I mean not such as are separated by Calcination, but are di∣stinctly existent in Plants in their natural estate, and in some of them, as in the Roots of Iris, are discoverable, even without the help of a Microscope. To which may be added such Mucilages, which though not so properly contained within the parts, yet are found lying over them; as over the first Spring-leaves of all kinds of Docks, betwixt the Leaves and the Veil wherein they are involved. Of all these should be observed, first their
Receptacles, some of them being proper to one, others common to two or more of them: since it is certain, that some of them do transmigrate from one into another Re∣ceptacle, or that the same Receptacle is fil∣led with bodies of a quite different nature, at the different seasons of the year, and ages of the Vegetable. And it is also very probable, that two of some of them may sometimes be contained in one Receptacle at the same time; as in Animals, the Lym∣pha in the D. Thoracicus, and that and the Chyle in the sanguineous Vessels. Then their Motions; both natural, and such as may be effected by Art: and those either by descent or ascent. And in ascen∣ding, through what different Chanels or parts of the Trunk; since it is certain, that there is a variety both in respect of the season and of Vegetables. Where it will fall in to observe the Tapping of Trees: As also their Bleeding: to what Trees it is proper to bleed: in those to which it is, with what difference of celerity: and when their peculiar season: for none will bleed at all times; neither will all bleed at the same. And then their collateral motion, together with the mode of their transition from one organical part to another. Next their Quantities, either of one; as
the comparison is made betwixt several Plants, or betwixt the parts of the same: So the true Seed of all Plants containeth more Oyl in proportion than any of the rest. Or else of divers as coexistent and bearing such a proportion one to another in the same part: of most of which it may be known by their respective Receptacles. Yet the computation must not be made from the number of the said Receptacles simply, but as that is in conjunction with their capacity, and as their capacity is proportioned to their surrounding sides; the sides of those of the least capacity being usually as thick as those of the greatest: so that suppose ten lesser, to lye within the compass of one greater; the content of these altogether would scarce be equal to half the content of that one. Also their Consistence; scil. of so many of them as are discriminable by touch; in being soft or hard, thin or thick, mucilagi∣nous, gummous, glutinous, friable, &c. And these in their several degrees, in which there is a variety, as in the Milks of some Plants, which are more dilute than that of others: in their Lympha's or clear Saps, that of most being thin, of Cumfry and some others mucilaginous. And by this to be compared in the same manner as by their Quantity.
Likewise their Colours, Smells, and Tastes: The general and particular kinds of all which should be noted. And to what contained parts, and in what variety, they appertain. So the Milks of some are paler, as in Burdock; of others whiter, as in Scor∣zonera; Citrine, in Angelica; Yellow, in Lovage. In some Plants odorous, as in Umbelliferous; in others not, as in Cicho∣raceous: and in most bitter, but with many diversities. And most Mucilages have little either Colour, Taste, or Smell, and the like. Here also the same Qualities are to be in∣quired into, as in general speaking they are said to be belonging to a Vegetable: since it is more than probable, that all Colours pting white, which is sometimes com∣ both to containing and contained  all Odours and Tastes which are more , and without a resolution of  Principles, perceptible in a Vegeble re not ascribable to the orga∣nical o  parts, but only to those contained in ; as from divers reasons hereafter may . And first th ; where, with respect to several  parts, they are more changeable,  in Flowers; or constant, as green in Lees. Which, with respect to several ages of one part, are
more fading, as green in Fruits; or dura∣ble, as yellow in Flowers. In wha parts more single, as always in the Seed; or more compounded, as in the Flower; and in what Plants more especially, as in Pancy. Which proper to Plants that have such a taste or smell, as both in white Flowers are usually less strong. To Plants that flower in such a season, as a yellow Flower, I think chief∣ly to Spring-plants. And to Plants that are natural to such a Soil or Seat, as to Water-plants more usually a white Flower. What, amongst all Colours, more common to Plants, as green; or more rare, as black. And what all these varieties of Colours are upon Cultivation, but chiefly in their natu∣ral Soil. To observe also with their super∣ficial Colours, those within: so the Roots of Docks are yellow, of Bistort red, of Avens purple, but of most white. Where the in∣ward and superficial Colours agree, as in the Leaves; or vary, as in the other parts frequently. And in what manner they are situated; some universally spreading, others running only along with the Vessels, as in the Leaves of red Dock, and the Flowers of Wood-Sorrel. Next their Odours; what may be their principal Seat; whether one or divers seats in the same Plant. What the chief matter
out of which they are continually bred. What similitude betwixt the smells of divers Vegetables, as betwixt Baume and a Limon, the green Leaves of Meadow-sweet and the green Pills of Walnuts. Or betwixt those of Plants and Animals, as the smell of green and well-grown Carduus is like to that rank scent ab axillis nonnullorum spiranti. Which have a more sensible smell, as most have; and which have less, as Corn. Where the green Leaf is the most fragrant part, as in Musk-Cranesbill; where the Flower, as in Roses; the Root, as in sweet Calamus. Where all the parts have some odour, where some, or one only; as in Scurvy∣grass only the flowers; and in Arum the Pestil only, for neither the Leaf nor Root hath any smell, but this is strong enough, not much unlike to humane excrements. But especially their Tastes, which it much importeth us more precisely to distinguish; first by their general kinds; for the number even of these may be computed greater than usually it is. I remember not that Heat and Acritude, with respect to Taste, are distin∣guished; yet Arum Root is very pungent without any proper heat, and Cloves are very hot without any proper pungency. So the white Roots of Yarrow have a Taste hardly any other way perceptible, than by
causing a gentle glowing and continuing warmth upon the tongue. Also their re∣spondencies one to another; as that of Ze∣doary, and of the lesser Cardamoms is somewhat like to Camphire. Likewise their degrees; in which there is a great latitude, and may be extended from one to ten, or with easie distinction from one to five; so the Root of Sorrel is bitter in the first, of Dock in the second, of Dog-Rose in the third, of Dandelyon in the fourth, of Gen∣tian in the fifth: observing them not only as they vary in several kinds, but the seve∣ral Species of one, as in Cichory, Hawk∣weed, Dandelyon. And then their Com∣positions; for Tastes are as truly conjunct in one part, as Colours: by which the la∣titude is still greater; in that all kinds of Tastes, in all their degrees, and in differing numbers may be variously compounded to∣gether: for the most part two, as in the Leaves of sharp-pointed Dock, astringent and sowre; in Sorrel Roots astringent and bitter; and in Aloes bitter and sweet, the one in the fifth, the other in the first de∣gree, as upon an unprejudiced tryal may be perceived: and yet more evidently in the Gall of any Land-Animal. Some∣times three, as in Agrimony bitter, rough, and sowrish; and in Agarick bitter, rough,
and sweet. And sometimes perhaps more: the sensible distinctions of all which may lye almost as wide as of Plants themselves. Wherefore although it were great rashness to take away the distinctions of Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, Thin, Gross, and other Quali∣ties, in their several degrees, which the Ancients have affixed to particular Plants; yet since they have done it to many of them with much uncertainty, and that withal they are more properly the effects and operations of Plants than their quali∣ties; practical observation may therefore approve it useful, to add these sensible ones of various Tastes, precisely distinguishing their Conjugations and Degrees. Lastly, their several varieties, and mutuations with respect to the subject wherein they reside, should also be noted. As, of all Tastes found in Plants, bitter and sowre are most common; sweet and salt most rare. How they vary with the age of the Plant or part, as the Roots of Radishes, growing up to seed, lose their strength; so most Fruits are first sowre, then sweet. What proper to the several parts of any one Plant; so the Leaves of Wormwood are extraordinary bitter, the Root scarcely so at all, of an hot, but quite different taste. What more common or rare to any part; so no Root,
that I ever tasted, is sowre. And how they alternate in several Plants; as the Root of Stock Gillow-flower is biting, not the Leaves; on the contrary, the Leaves of the smaller Arsmart are biting, but not the Root, and the like. To which we may add the difference of time wherein the tastes of Plants are perceived; as those of Arum and Rape-Crowfoot are both biting; but that of the first as it is slowly perceived, so it continues long; that of the other quickly comes and quickly goes. Amongst the other adjuncts of the con∣tained parts, though not of these only, the Faculties of Vegetables are to be reputed: for so the Rosin of Jalap, which is purga∣tive, is as truly contained in the organical parts of that Root, as blood is in Veins. It will be requisite therefore to make par∣ticular observation of these also. And first, what Faculties chiefly may reside in Vege∣tables above others: so there is none of known use in Salivation, except by holding in the mouth: although we may ask, why some amongst them may not (being taken inwardly) have a power to evacuate by this, as well as other violent ways? Where more universally spread over all the parts of a Vegetable, as in Asarum. Where be∣longing chiefly or wholly to any particular
parts or part; as chiefly to the Root of Rhubarb; and only to the true and pro∣per seed of Barbado Nuts. Whether such faculties may be proper to such parts espe∣cially. What conjunction they may have with tastes, or other qualities; so such as are purging and vomitory, though some of them have a strong taste, yet the greater part, and of those many of the stronger sort, have no taste, or not much; as Senna, Jalap, Scammony, Hellebore, Asarum, and others. So also those that are more sensi∣bly tasted, are, I think for the most part, more or less bitter; either simply, as Colo∣cynthis; or bitter and astringent, as Rhu∣barb; or bitter and sweet, as Aloe; or bitter, astringent, and sweet, as Agarick. Few are hot, as Iris. Or simply sweet, as Manna. And though some may be subacid that are mollifying or lenitive, yet no pro∣per Purge or Vomit is sowre. How like∣wise their faculties and qualities may vary their degrees either differently or together; so Aloe and Colocynthis are both bitter in the highest degree; yet Aloe, which is also sweet, purgeth more moderately; Colo∣cynthis, which is only bitter, most violent∣ly. How far the faculties of Vegetables, as well as their qualities, may be com∣pounded, where, and which chiefly; as
astrictive and purgative in Rhabarb. Wre this Question may be put, Whether divers other and yet more extreme faculties,  well as these of astrictive and purgative, may not somewhe or other be also sound, or made, to meet: whereby the same Plant, or preparation of it, may be most potent, and yet most innocent; the malignity thereof exerting its power, and the vertue its soveraignty at the same time. And last∣ly, what affinity there may be betwixt them, as most Plants that are strong Purgative, and especially Vomitories, I think are also Sternutatory, as white Hellebore, Jalap, Tabacco: and on the contrary, such as are Sternutatory, are some of the most proper and most potent Medicines for the Head, Brain, and Gnus Nervosum, taken inwardly, and the like. And thus far a particular ob∣servation of the Qualities and Faculties of the Contents of Vegetables may proceed, as they are existent in their natural estate. From which, although some probable con∣jectures may be made of their material and formal Essences, and of the Causes of their determinate Varieties, or the Modes of Ve∣getation necessary thereunto: yet will our conceptions hereof be more facile, clear, and comprehensive, if by all other ways of observation they be likewise examind,
according as Experiment may be applicable to any of them. As by Contusion; so some Plants give their smell not without rubbing, or not so well; as the green Leaves of Stramonium, Scurvygrass, and many more: others lose it by rubbing, as the flowers of Violets, Carnations, Borage, &c. others yield it both ways, as Rosemary, &c. So some Ap∣ples mend their taste by scoaping, and Pears by rowling, especially that called the Rowling Pear. By Agitation; which doth that some∣times by force, which Digestion doth by heat: so any cold Oyl and a Syrup being in a due manner agitated together, of two fluid bodies will become one consistent, as is known. By Frigifaction; how far the Juyces of Vegetables, either without or within them, may be any of them, or some more than others, subject to Cold: and thereby to be deprived of their motion or natural consi∣stence, or may suffer alteration in their Co∣lour, Taste, or Smell. By Infusion; where I mean Infusion only in simple water; and so to observe, which of them may be dissolved herein, and how far; for some may be wholly, some but in part, others not at all; or very little; which
is proper to some Milks as well as Gums. So what different Colours, Smells, or Tastes they hereupon yield; which are found various, and in some very unexpect∣ed; as the green Leaves of Bawm being duly infused in plain water, without any other body added, tincture it with a pure and deep red, near that of Claret Wine, as I have often tryed. By Digestion with Fermentation; either of the entire Vegetables, or of the Juyces or other Contents; and these by themselves or with simple Water. And hereby to note what difference may be in the strength, celerity, or continuance of the Fermentation. Like∣wise how their Qualities may thereby be altered; as the smell of Violet-flowers, from a most excellent fragrancy, may by Digestion be reduced to an odious and abominable stink, like that of the black Mud of Gutters, as I have tryed more than once. By Digestion with Calefaction; so the colour of the Juyce of Limons from trans∣parency (if that be a colour) may be turn∣ed to a perfect red. Whence it is that ma∣ny are deceived in the preparation called the Tincture of Corals; supposing the Co∣rals to give the Menstruum its colour; whereas the Menstruum will obtain it only
by Digestion without any Corals mixed with it. By Decoction; either of Vegetables themselves, or of their Liquors; and to ob∣serve what alterations follow. So Turpen∣tine boiled becometh friable; Sugar bitter and of a brown red. Turneps lose their biting taste, Onions their picquancy; yet neither of them convey those self same qua∣lities to the water. The same may be ob∣served in the Decoction of sweet Fennel-seeds, Aniseeds, and others, losing much of their tastes themselves, and yet conveying very little of them to the Liquors wherein they are boiled, the greater portion of their volatile parts, and their vertue and taste therewith, flying away: whereof therefore it is much better to make an Emulsion, than to decoct them, or to make an Emulsion from them with their own Decoction, espe∣cially if the Medicine be intended to be Carminative, as I have frequently obser∣ved. The Decoction should also be carried on throughout all degrees to that of an Ex∣tract; by which the qualities thereof some∣times are much altered; as in that of the green Leaves of Violets, which from a kind of yellow, deepens at last into a dark co∣lour as black as pitch, and that without the least Empyreuma.
By Distillations; both with the  Still, Alembick, Chappel, or open  and to note what Vegetables thus give the smell or taste, and in what degrees of strength either under or over their natural ones; as Mint, Pennyroyal, and the like, which are Aromatick and hot, give their tastes perfect: but Wormwood, which is Aromatick and bitter, gives it but by halfs, only as Aromatick, little as bitter. And Carduus, though also so exceeding bitter, yet not being Aromatick, scarce yieldeth any taste at all. Also what Vegetables yield Oyl most plentifully; and what difference may be in those Oyls as to their colour, weight, or otherwise, as that of Cloves is sometimes red, of Cinnamon lympid, both ponderous. So to distill Juices, Gums, or other Contents with an hot fire, and to see what bodies they yield, and of what quali∣ties; as Turpentine is known to yield be∣sides its Oyl a subacid Water, Vinegar an eager Spirit, as that part may be called, which Chymists are wont to call the Phlegm. By Arefaction; so Milks which are liquid and white in their natural estate, in standing grow gummous, yellow, and otherwise dif∣ferent, so doth that of Scorzonera; and that of Fenil into a balsamical, but limpid
Oyl. So the Roots of Arum upon drying lose much of the strength of their taste; but the contrary may be noted of many other Roots, which upon drying increase it. Some being cut and laid by, change their natural colours into red, purple, yellow, green, or white; as Liquorish into white in some places, and Peony into red; and some∣times into two, as Patience, into yellow and red. By Assation; thus Apples by roasting eat more sowre. The Root of Horse Ra∣dish toasted tasteth like a Turnep. Pota∣toes, Onions, and many other Roots and parts have their tastes either altered or re∣fracted; which chiefly and in what manner should be observed. There is one altera∣tion as remarkable as commonly known, and is that which followeth upon roasting or baking in one kind of the Waldensian Pears, which for a Walden we corruptly call a Warden. By Ustion; wherein some Vegetables lose their smell, as Roses; others keep it, as Rosemary; and others mend it, as Lig∣num Aloes. To note not only the altera∣tion of their qualities, but what they yield; as Turpentine, which in Distillation yield∣eth Oyl and Water both lympid, upon Usti∣on sheweth nothing but a black Soot. So
Benzonie by Distillation Oyl, by Ustion white Flowers, as is known. By Calcination; and here to obsrve wherein the Caput Mortuum of one  dif∣fer from or agree in nature with that of ano∣ther; and also to compare these with those of Animal bodies. As also in their quantitis. And to compare them with what they yield by Distillation and Ustion as to both. Thus far they have been tryed simply or by them∣selves. They should also be examined. By Composition; not only with Water, as in simple Infusions, &c. but with any o∣ther bodies which may have a power of acting upon them, or upon which these may have a power to act. And so to make In∣fusions, Destillations, Decoctions, Digesti∣ons in divers kinds of Liquors, as Vinegar, Urine, Spirit of H. H. Wine, Blood, Milk, or others. So in Infusions some red colours are heightned by acids, blews turned pur∣ple. So fetid Spirits may doubtless be ren∣dred much more grateful by being rectified once or twice with fresh Aromaticks. To observe also what follows upon mixing the Liquors or other parts of Plants togeter; as Oyl of Turpentine by Digestion with a Lixivial Salt extracteth thence a red Tin∣cture. Or with Salts, Earths, Metals, or any other bodies, as the Juyce of the green
Leaves of Rose, Raspberry, Primrose, and divers other Plants (I think principally such as are astringent) expressed upon Steel, as it drieth, becometh of a purple colour. Lastly, by Compounding the Experiment it self, or joyning two or more of them upon the same matter: as Fermentation and De∣stillation, as is used for some Waters. Infusion and Fermentation, as in making of Beer. Fermentation and Coction, or rather Assa∣tion, as in making of Bread. Arefaction and Destillation, as may be tryed upon some Herbs, and with what difference from what may be noted upon their being distil∣led moist. Having proceeded thus far by all the above particular ways of observation; a comparative prospect must be taken of them: by which at last the Communities and Dif∣ferences of the Contents of Vegetables may be discerned; the manner of their Causation and Original partly be judged of; and wherein it is that the Essence of their se∣veral Natures and Qualities doth consist, in some measure comprehended. And conse∣quently both from the knowledge of their particular Natures, and the Analogy found betwixt them, we may be able better to conjecture and try what any of them are or may be good for. For certainly, we shall
then know more readily to apply things un∣to, and more fitly to prepare them for their proper uses, when we first know what they are. Notwithstanding, since the fa∣culties of Plants do often lie more recluse; it is best therefore not wholly to acquiesce in such Conjectures as their tastes or other properties may suggest; but to subjoyn Experiment. In making which, and in passing a Judgment thereon, many cauti∣ons, both in respect of the Plant whereof, and the subject whereupon it is made, are requisite to be attended. Which yet, in regard they result not so directly from the matter at present in hand, I shall not there∣fore here insist upon. And thus much for the third general Mean. Together with the Contents of the Or∣ganical parts of Vegetables, it will be re∣quisite to examine their Principles also, or the Bodies which are not so properly con∣tained in the said Organical parts, as imme∣diately concurrent and essential to their Being. And of these we are to observe, first their Number; whether well reducible to five, six, seven, or more, or fewer: and the special differences observable under any one general; since there are many bodies of ve∣ry different natures confounded under one name. Next their Conjugation; which
they are that either under or over those observable in animal or other Bodies, are here joyned together in a Vegetable; How far common to the Organical parts of divers Vegetables; or to the several Organical parts of one; or how far different in them. Like∣wise their Proportions; which stand in the greatest, which in the least, or in the mea∣ner quantities, and in what degrees; both in divers Vegetables, and in the several or∣ganical parts of one. And then the Con∣centration and Union of them altogether; as to the degrees of their closeness or laxity; or the manner of their Implication and Co∣herency; or as to their Location, one be∣ing more central, another more exposed and rampant over the rest; or otherwise diffe∣rent. To examine these Principles by their Colour, Taste, Smell, Consistence, Fixed∣ness, Volatily, Weight, Figures, or other Accidents. And to these purposes, to go through the fore-mentioned ways of Expe∣riment, as Ustion, Calcination, Destillation, &c. as any of them may appear applicable hereunto. And to make Experiment not only upon the several organical parts di∣stinctly, but also upon the Principles them∣selves whereinto they are resolved, as by mixing them with one another, or with other bodies, or otherwise. I know it will
be difficult to make observations of this kind upon he organical parts of Vegeta∣bles severally. Yet I have thought of some ways whereby true and undeceivable ones may be made upon some of them; and pro∣bably on the rest also: which yet, in regard I have not made much tryal of them, I shall not now mention. The prosecution of what is here pro∣pounded will be requisite, to a fuller and clearer view, of the Modes of Vegetation, of the sensible Natures of Vegetables, and of their more recluse Faculties and Powers. First, of the Modes of Vegetation. For suppose we were speaking of a Root; from a due consideration of the properties of any part or parts thereof; 'tis true, that the real and genuine Causes may be rendred of di∣vers other dependent properties as spoken generally of the whole Root. But it will be asked again, What may be the Causes of those first and independent ones? Which if we will seek, we must do it by inquiring also, What are the Principles of those parts? For it is necessary that the Princi∣ples whereof a Body doth consist should be, if not all of them the active, yet the capa∣citating Causes, or such as are called Causae sine qua non of its beoming and eing, in all repects both as to Substnce and Acci∣dents,
what it is: otherwise, their existence in that body were altogether superfluous, since it might have been without them: which if so, it might then have been made of any other; there being no necessity of putting any difference, if neither those whereof it is made are thought necessary to its being. Wherefore if we will allow a Body, and so the organical parts of a Vegetable to have Principles; we must al∣so allow these Principles their necessary use, and that the shapes, or other properties of the said parts are as much dependent upon the Nature of these, as is the roundness of a drop of Ink upon the fluidity of water in∣gredient to it. Again, the Principles of the organical parts being known, we may from thence obtain a further knowledge of the Natures and Causation or Original of their Contents; snce hese are not only included in the said anical parts, but also created by them:  needs be so, whether we will  Principles of these Contents to be  to their reception thereinto, or  nor praeexistent, what can be clea∣rer than tha the said parts give them their existnce? And if praeexistnt, yet in regard they are distinuished, and such only of them admitted in such sort into an orga∣nical
part from amongst others, as are apt to combine and mix together in such a form, and so to constitute such a Liquor; it is as clear, that the existence, if not of those principles, yet of that Liquor, is depen∣dent on the said part. And if by means of the said parts it is that their Contents become such and such pecu∣liar Mixtures; it is hence also manifest, that by the same means they are of such distinct faculties and powers: Because the faculty or power of a Body lieth not in any of its principles apart, but is a resultance from them all, or from their being in such pecu∣liar sort and manner united and combined together. So the principles of the purgative parts of a Root, as of Rhubarb, although we should suppose them to be existent in the surrounding Earth, yet we cannot say that that Earth, or the principles therein contained are purgative; but only such as by being combined together in such a pe∣culiar way may become so. So the several parts of a Clock, although they are and must be all praeexistent to it, and it is their form by which they are what they are themselves; yet is it the setting together of such kind of parts, and in such a kind of way only, that makes them a Clock. And since we see that the mixture of two Bodies
of two different qualiies▪ as of two colours, will produce a third colour differing from them both, as blue and red do a murrey; why should not two or more bodies of dif∣ferent natures also, be so combined toge∣ther, as to produce a third nature? Or wherefore may not that be allowed to be performed by Nature, which by artificial compounding of Medicines or other Bodies is designed, and often times effcted? I'le give but one instance; Water, Grease, and an Alcalizate Salt may be easily so ordered as to be invested with new qualities, na∣ture, and powers; the Salt to lose its ex∣treme fiery pungent taste; the Tallow its smell; and being before unsociable with water, to mingle therewith; neither Tal∣low, Salt, nor Water alone will fetch out a spot of Grease, but all united easily do it; the same three parts united are, in some cases, as in the Jaundies, an excellent Me∣dicine, any of which given alone may ra∣ther prove prejudicial than a Cure: and all this done only by duly boiling them to∣gether into one body, which we call Sope. Whence again, if it be such an union and proportion of such a sort of principles which produceth such a faculty; and that we may by any means come to know what these are; we may possibly also attain to
the knowledge of such Rules as whereby any kind of Faculty may be made, as to compound such bodies which are neither purgative nor vomitory, so together as to be invested with these Faculties. And if to make them, then consequently to mend, exalt, strengthen, and ennoble them with greater ease and certainty. And thus much for the fourth general Mean. Hitherto we have considered the Mate∣rials of a Vegetable only as ingredient to it: there yet remains a fifth story to be ascended, which is to consider these Mate∣rials also as they are derived from abroad: or as after they are received and naturali∣zed, they may with others yet abroad have any kind of correspondence. And these are four in general, sil Earth, Water, Air, and Sun, all which in that they contribute so universally to Vegetation, and to what∣soever is contained in a Vegetable, it is therefore requisite, that of these likewise particular observation should be made. And first of the Earth, and of all solid Receptacles of Plants. Where we are to consider their several kinds, as Mellow, Sandy, Clayie, Chalky, and others. Their Ingredients, as rank and mellow Earth with Sand, or with Clay, or Sand with Clay, or altogether, and in what proportions. The
Principles whereinto any one of these In∣gredients separated from the rest, and put to the Test of Distillation, Ustion, Calcina∣tion, or other, either alone, or by mixture with other bodies, may be resolved. And by their qualities, as Colour, Smell, Taste, &c. both Ingredients and Principles to be examined. To make tryal of the growth of Plants in all kinds of simple Soils; either Earthy or Mineral, as Clay, Marl, Oker, Fullers Earth, Bole Armeniac, Vitriol, Al∣um, &c. or Vegetable, as roten Wood, Brans, Starch, or Flower, &c. or Animal, as Dungs, pounded Flesh, dried and pow∣dered Blood, and the like; that it may ap∣pear how far any of these may contribute to the growth of a Plant, or to one above another. Next of the Water, and of all liquid Re∣ceptacles. Where the several kinds of Wa∣ter from Wells, Springs, Rain, and Rivers are by their qualities and faculties to be examined, as these and by these their Prin∣ciples either in their natural state or upon digestion, or otherwise may be observable: since plain Water it self is undoubtedly compounded of several Principles; the simplicity thereof being argued, neither from its clearness and transparency, for a solution of Alum, though it containeth a
considerable quantity of Earth is yet very clear; nor from its seeming to have neither smell nor taste, for Water drinkers will tell you of the varieties of both in different Wa∣ters. Besides, if these qualities should be accounted rather phansie than sense, the difference of Waters is yet more manifest from their different effects, observed by Cooks, Laundresses, Brewers, and others that have occasion to use them: for not to mix with Sope without curdling, not to boil meat tender, or without colouring it red, and the like, are the vices of some Waters, not of others, which yet would seem in colour, taste, and smell to be the same. Tryal should also be made of the growth of Plants in all kind of liquid Re∣ceptacles, as common Water, Snow water, Sea water, Urine, Milk, Whey, Wine, Oyl, Ink, &c. Or any of these with a so∣lution of Salt, Nitre, Sal prunellae, Sope, or other body. And hereby to observe what follows either in the Liquor, or in the Plant it self: as if any fixed body being weighed before its dissolution in water, and if the Plant set herein groweth, the water being then evaporated, whether the quantity of that dissolved body continue the same, or is lessened. So whether any Vegetable will become Opiate by growing
a considerable time in a plain solution or Water-tincture of Opium, and the like. Which Experiments what event soever they have, yet at least for our further instruction in the Nature of Vegetation may be of use. Next of Air; where it will be requisite to inquire, what sort of bodies may be herein contained: It being probable, from the variety of Meteors formed herein, and of Vapours and Exhalations continually ad∣vanced hereinto, that some or other of them may bear an Analogy to all volatile bodies, whether Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral. And to consider the peculiar nature of that body which is strictly called Air. As also to try what different effects a diversity of Air may have upon a Vegetable; as by setting a Plant or Seed either exceeding low, as at the bottom of a deep Well; or exceeding high, as on the top of a Steeple. Or else by exposing some Soil to the Air, which is assuredly free from any Seed, and so as no Seed can light upon it, and to ob∣serve whether the Air hath a power of producing a Vegetable therein, or not: and the like. Lastly of the Sun; as to which it may be considered, what influence it may have upon the Plant it self, upon the Soil, or upon
the Air. Whether that influence is any thing else besides heat, or may differ from that of a fire otherwise than by being tem∣perate and more equal. Although it will be found very difficult here to make any sincere Experiments. As for that of the Collection of the Sun-beams by the help of Glasses in the form of a Magistery or of Flowers, and such like, I desire to suspend my thoughts of them till I see them. I will only say thus much at present, That I do not understand why the Sun should not have some influence upon bodies besides by heat, if it may be granted that the Moon hath, for which it should seem there are some good arguments. We have thus far examined the Princi∣ples necessary to Vegetation; the Question may be put once more, In what manner are these Principles so adapted as to be∣come capable of being assembled together in such a Number, Conjugation, Proporti∣on, and Union, as to make a Vegetable Bo∣dy? For the comprehension whereof, we must also know, what are the Principles of these Principles. Which although they lie in so great an abyss of obscurity, yet I think I have some reason to believe they are not altogether undiscoverable: How far they may be so, I am so far from deter∣mining,
that I shall not now conjecture. This is the Design, and these the Means I propound in order thereunto. To which I suppose they may all appear to be neces∣sary. For what we obtain of Nature, we must not do it by commanding, but by courting of her. Those that woo her may possibly have her for their Wife; but she is not so common as to prostitute her self to the best behaved Wit, which only pra∣ctiseth upon it self, and is not applied to Her. I mean, that where ever men will go beyond phansie and imagination, depending upon the conduct of Divine Wisdom, they must labour, hope, and persevere. And as the Means propounded are all necessary, so they may in some measure prove effectual. How far I promise not; the way is long and dark: and as Travellers sometimes amongst Mountains, by gaining the top of one, are so far from their Journies end, that they only come to see another lies be∣fore them: so the way of Nature is so im∣pervious, and, as I may say, down hill and up hill, that how far soever we go, yet the surmounting of one difficulty, is wont still to give us the prospect of another. We may therefore believe our attainments will be imperfect after we have done all: but be∣cause we cannot attain to all, that therefore
we should endeavour after nothing, is an inference which looks so much awry from the practical sense of men, that it ought not to be answered. Nor with better reason may we go about determining what may be done. The greatest designs that any men undertake, are of the greatest uncer∣tainty as to their success: which if they appear to be of good import, though we know not how far they are attainable, we are to propound the means, in the utmost use whereof only we can be able to judge: a War is not to be quitted for the hazards which attend it; nor the Councils of Prin∣ces broken up, because those that sit at them have not the Spirit of Prophecy, as well as of Wisdom. To conclude, Although but little should be effected, yet to design more can do us no harm: For although a man shall never be able to hit Stars by shooting at them, yet he shall come much nearer to them, than another that throws at Apples.
THE COMPARATIVE ANATOMY OF ROOTS PROSECUTED. THE SECOND PART. CHAP. I. BEing to speak of Roots, it is re∣quisite, for our better understand∣ing of what follows, that some things, as to their Figures, Moti∣ons, and Ages, be premised. Roots are generally distinguished, as to
their Figures, in being more Entire, as is Liquorish; or parted, as St. Johns wort. Parted either at the bottom, as most Roots; or at the top, as Dandelyon and some o∣thers. Parted again, are either Ramified, as Cumfry; or Manifold, as Crowfoot: both are parted, but the former, by the subdivi∣sion of greater branches into lesser; these, when divers Roots have all their distinct original from one head. Some are straight, as a Radish; others crooked, as Bistort. Smooth, as Bugloss; or stringy all round about, as Columbine. Thick, as Rhubarb; slender, as the Vine. Long, as Fenil; short, as a Turnep: which are distinct from great and little, in that these are so called with respect to several Roots; those with re∣spect to the several dimensions of one. Short are stubbed, as Iris tuberosa; or round, as Dracontium. Round are tuberous, as Rape Crowfoot; bulbous, as Onion. Where note, That all bulbous Roots are as it were Hermaphrodites, or Root and Trunk both together: for the strings only are absolute∣ly Roots; the Bulb actually containing those parts, which springing up, make the Leaves or Body; and is as it were, a great Bud under ground. Roots, again, are plain or uneven: Plain are Cylindrical, as Eryngo; or Pyramidal, as Borage▪ Grow∣ing
smaller downwards, as do most; or greater, as Skirrets. Uneven are pitted, as Potato's, where the eyes of the future Trunks lie inward; or knobbed, as Jerusa∣lem Artichoke, where they stand out. These differences are also compounded: so some Roots are both entire and smooth, as Peony; others entire, but stringy, as Clary. Some both plain and knobbed, as Filipen∣dula, Lilium non bulbosum, and others. And amongst them all there are several degrees: all which, with other differences, by those that undertake the Descriptions of Plants, are accurately to be noted: and in Draw∣ing these, and all the other parts, their sizes withal should be adjusted by a Scale. But the differences above mentioned will serve for our present purpose. The Motions of Roots are also divers. Sometimes level, as of Hops, and all such as properly creep: sometimes perpendicu∣lr, as of a Parsnep: which is diffrent from straightness, for some straight Roots are level. Both of them are either shallow, or deep: some run level, and near the Turfe, as wild Anemony; others lower, as Dogs-Grass: some strike down but a little way, as Stramonium; others grow deep, as Hors-Radish: which is different from being long; for any long Roots are level, as Hops.
Some again descend, as Tulips and other bulbous Roots: which differs from growing downwards; in that here the head of the Root is immoveable; but in descending, the whole Root doth locum mutare, running deeper time after time into the Earth. Some also ascend sometimes, and in some part ap∣pearing above ground, as Turneps. These Motions are also compounded, both in re∣spect of the several parts of the Root, and of several times. So the main Root of Primrose is level, the stringy are perpendi∣cular. The Roots of most Seedlings grow downward and upward at the same time. Those of Bistort, Iris, and some others, grow in part both downward and upward at several times: whence it is that Bistort is crooked; and that some parts of Iris Root appear oftentimes above the ground. And many are writhed or twisted without being moved out of their place; which motion cannot be observed but only by the oblique process of the Vessels, which we shall presently describe. The Motion of Descent hath as yet been observed of Bulbous Roots only. But it is common to many Roots besides, as those of Arum, Primrose, Ammi, Avens, Iris, and others. For of the Trunks of these and many other Plants it is observable, that
gradually and continually descending below the surface of the ground, and hiding them∣selves therein, they are thus both in nature, place, and office changed into true Roots, which, by the continuance of the said mo∣tion in the Trunk, also descend. This is more especially demonstrated by some, as by the level and knobed Roots of Wood-Sorrel, Primrose, &c. For the Leaves of these Plants rotting off successively, and their Trunk gradually descending into the Mould, each Basis of these Leaves is nou∣rished with a more copious Sap, and so swel∣led into so many knobs. The notice of this motion here, leadeth to the discovery of the like in other Plants, where the Leaves fall off close by the surface of the Trunk, as in Iris tuberosa, where only the seats of the perished Leaves and the ends of their Vessels are obscurely visible. The Cause of this Descent, so far as it is dependent on the inward conformation of the Root, I shall hereafter shew. But the immediate visible one, are the String-Roots which these kind of Trunks frequently put forth; which descending themselves direct∣ly into the ground, like so many Ropes, lug the Trunk after them. Hence the Tube∣rous Roots of Iris, upon the rotting or fa∣ding away of the String-Roots hanging at
them, sometimes a little re-ascend. Hence also the shape of some Roots is inverted; for whereas most are parted downwards in∣to several Legs, some are prted upwards into divers Necks, as Dandelyon and others. For these sending forth at the top several Trunk-buds, the said Buds successively put forth new and cast their old Leaves, and continually also making their descent, are at length formed into so many Necks of three, four, five, or more inches long under ground. Hence also we understand in what parti∣cular way some Roots become perennial. Some are wholly so, as those of Trees, Shrubs, and divers woody Plants. Others in part, or by a new Progenies of Roots, from the old head or body, in the room of those that die yearly, or after a certain time; as of Lilium non bulbosum, Jerusalem Artichoke, Potato, Dog-stones, Monks∣hood, little Celandine, and others: in which Plants, one or more of their Roots are firm, the other spongy and superannuated, and partly by the ravine of the Trunk and other younger Roots reduced to a consumption and death. With these Tulips and other Bulbous Roots consort: for the several Rindes and Shells, whereof chiefly the Bulb consists, successively perish and shrink up
into so many thin and dry skins: betwixt which, and in their centre, other Leaves and shells being successively formed, the Bulb is thus perpetuated. In the same man∣ner the String-Roots also succeed one ano∣ther annually. So that at the end of divers years, although it be still looked upon as the same individual Root, yet is it in truth another as to every particle thereof. Last∣ly, many other Roots are perpetuated by the aforesaid descent of the Trunk, out of which it is still annually repaired, as by the gradual perishing of its lower parts it is diminished; as the tuberous Roots of Arum, Iris, Strawberry, Avens, &c. the extreme and elder parts whereof first fade, and by degrees rot off. Whence also we see the reason of the rugged and blunt extremities of these and some other Roots, as of that Plant superstitiously called Devils-bit; which is not so originally, but part thereof rotting off, the living remainder becometh stumped or seemeth bitten. Thus far of the general Shapes, Motions, and Ages of Roots.
CHAP. II. I Next proceed to the several Parts where∣of a Root is compounded. The outer part of all is the skin; which is common to all Roots. 'Tis diversly coloured, whiter in Skirrets, yellow in Dock, red in Potato, brown in Lovage, black in Bugloss. Its surface sometimes smooth, as in Horsradish; rough, as in Scorzonera. 'Tis of various size; very thin in Parsnep, somewhat thick in Bugloss, very thick in Iris. Sometimes it is opacous, as in Thistle; and sometimes transparent, as in Madder. Every Root hath successively two kind of skins: the one coetaneous with the other parts; and hath its original from that which involveth the parts of the Seed it self. The other post∣nate, succeeding in the room of the former as the Root ageth; and is originated from the Bark. This skin is usually, if not always, com∣pounded of two kinds of bodies: which also is probable of the coetaneous. The one parenchymous, and frequently constru∣cted of exceeding little Cells or Bubles; which in some Roots, as of Asparagus, cut traverse, and viewed through a Microscope are plainly visible. See the Figure. These
Bubles are of different sizes, in Bugloss lar∣ger, in Asparagus less; and sometimes they coincide and disappear. But in these and all other Roots, even where these Bubles appear not, the Parenchyma of the skin is of the same substantial nature with that other more vivid and bulky one of the Bark: as is manifest from its being thence origina∣ted; and alike conformed, as shall be seen; and not only adjacent to it, as a Glove is to the Hand; but continuous therewith, as the parts of a piece of flesh are one with another. Of this parenchymous body the skin con∣sisteth chiefly, but not wholly; there being many tubulary Vessels mixed therewith: which though hardly by the Microscope, yet otherwise is demonstrable. For in tearing the skin, you shall do it more easily by the length than bredth; because by the first way, the continuity only of the Paren∣chyma is dissolved; but by the latter, both of this and of the Vessels, these being posi∣ted by the length of the Root: So that as by the smalness of the Bubles of the Paren∣chyma, the skin is dense; so by these Ves∣sels is it tough. Again, if you cut a Root traverse, and let it lie by for some time, all the parts, where there are no Vessels, shrink below the surface of the cut-end; but
where-ever these are posited, there is no shrinking; which oftentimes evidently ap∣pears also in the skin: because the said ves∣sels, though, as the Bubles, they may coin∣cide, yet they cannot visibly shorten or shrink up in length; no more than a Straw, whose sides may yet be easily crushed toge∣ther. Further, the Root being cut traverse, if near the cut-end you very gently press the side of the Root with the edge of your nail, the sap will thereupon arise sometimes from the skin; in the same manner, as from any other part of the Root where the like Vessels are posited. And although the sap may likewise be expressed from the pith and other parts where sometimes there are none of these Vessels; yet not without a solution of their continuity; which here doth not follow, as appears from the disap∣pearing of the sap, together with the inter∣mission of the pressure, the said Vessels then dilating themselves by a motion of restitu∣tion, and so sucking up the sap again. Here∣unto may be added the testimony of sight; the very Vessels themselves, in many Roots, coming under an apparent view, and stand∣ing in the utmost surface of the Root all round about, as in that of Liquorish, Co∣lumbine, Scorzonera, and others. [See the Figure of Scorzonera Root.] Which Expe∣riments
I have here once for all more par∣ticularly set down, because I shall have occasion hereafter to refer to them. CHAP. III. NExt within the skin lieth the Bark. 'Tis sometimes yellow, as in Dock; red, in Bistort; but usually, and in seedling Roots I think always, white. It is derived from the seed it self; being but the exten∣sion or prolongation of part of one of those bodies therein originally existent, and which I have elsewhere called the Radicle. It is variously sized; sometimes very thin, as in Jerusalem Artichoke, Goats beard, and most Trees; where it also retains the name of a Bark or Rinde. Sometimes 'tis more thick, and maketh up the far greatest part of the Root, as in the String-Roots of As∣paragus, Dandelyon, and others. The thinnest and the thickest are all analogous, and obtain the same general uses. The degrees of its size amongst all Roots may be well reckoned about twenty, and seen in the following examples, sc. Beet, Drop∣wort, Jerusalem Artichoke, Orpine, Vale∣rian, Goats-beard, Nettle, Brownwort,
Columbine, Celandine, Asparagus, Hors-Radish, Peony, Bryony, Eryngo, Borage, Lovage, Dandelyon, Parsnep, Carrot: in which the Bark is considered absolutely, and not in comparison with the other parts. See the Figures. It is compounded of two Bodies. The one parenchymous; continuous through∣out; yet somewhat pliable without a solu∣tion of its continuity. Exceeding porous; as appeareth from its so much shrinking up in drying. The pores hereof are extended much alike both by the length and bredth of the Root; therefore it shrinketh up by both those dimensions more equally. And they are very dilative; as is also manifest from its restorableness to its former bulk again, upon its infusion in water: that is to say, it is a most curious and exquisitely fine wrought Sponge. Thus much the eye and reason may discover. The Microscope confirms the truth here∣of, and more precisely shews, That these pores are all, in a manner, spherical, and this part nothing else but an infinite Mass of little Cells or fixed Bubles. The sides of none of them are visibly pervious from one into another, but each is bounded within it self: So that the Parenchyma of the Bark is much the same thing, as to conformation,
which the froth of Beer or Eggs is as a fluid, or a piece of fine Manchet as a fixed body. The sides also of these Bubles are as transparent as those of Water. [See any of the Microscopical Figures.] But their size is usually much smaller; and their posture more regular. In all Roots they are so small, as scarcely without the Microscope to be discerned: yet are they of different sizes both in the same and in divers Roots; the varieties whereof a∣mongst all Roots may be reduced to about ten or twelve, some of those in Dandelyon being of the smallest, and in Bugloss of the greatest. [See the Microscopical Figures.] They are posited for the most part at equal height; and piled even one over another: so that oftentimes they visibly run in ranks or trains both by the length and bredth of the Root, as in the Root of Bugloss or Dandelyon split through the middle may be seen. Although they are usually sphe∣rical, yet sometimes and in some places they are more oblong, as in the outward part of the Bark of Bugloss. [See the Microscopi∣cal Figure.] These Bubles are sometimes best seen, after the Root, being cut tra∣verse, hath layn by a while to dry. They are the Receptacles of Liquor; which is ever of a limpid colour; and I
think always more thin. They are in all Seed-Roots filled herewith; and usually in those also which are well grown, as of Bo∣rage, Radish, &c. This parenchymous part is, in many Roots, of one uniform contexture; as in Asparagus, Hors-Radish, Peony, Potato, and others. In many others it is as it were of a diversified woof; the Bubles being, though regular, yet either in shape, size, or situation different in some parts hereof from what they are in other intermediate ones. For these parts are like so many white Rays streaming, by the diameter of the Root, from the inward edge toward the circumference of the Bark; as in Lo∣vage, Melilot, Parsnep, &c. They are, though not in direct lines, continued also by the length of the Root; so that they are as it were so many Membranes by which the other parts of the Bark are distermina∣ted. Compare the Figures. The continuation of these diametral Rays or Portions is divers: sometimes but half through the Bark, or somewhat more or less, as in Melilot. Sometimes, and usually running quite through to the very skin, as in Parsley: wherewith the skin seems to have a closer communion, and in this and the like Roots, to be originated especially there
from. They usually stand at an equal di∣stance in the same Root; but with respect to divers, their distance varies; so less in Parsnep, greater in Angelica. They are commonly rectilinear, as in Lovage; but sometimes winding to and fro, as in Carrot, Burnet. See the Figures. They are not always of one size: in a Carrot exceeding slender, and scarcely dis∣cernable; in others thicker, as in the three greater ones of Melilot, common Chervil. Both by their distance and size they are also less or more numerous, some only as they are nearer, some as smaller, others as both. Sometimes they are of the same thickness through the Bark from edge to edge, as in Lovage. See the Figure. And sometimes are considerably spread or dila∣ted towards the skin, wherewith they are joyned, and whereinto they more visibly run, as in Parsley. See the Root it self. The Bubles of these diametral portions are some∣times greater than those of the other pa∣renchymous parts, as in Parsley; and I think, sometimes less. Yet as there so here variously sized; to about six or eight de∣grees; and those of Parsley about the third, fourth, and fifth. Their figure is sometimes more oblong; and their direction or respect more towards the centre of the Root.
As the other parenchymous parts of the Bark are the Receptacles of Liquor, so these (where they are) of Air. This is argued from their being more white, and not transparent, as such Roots and parts use to be, which are more copiously and equal∣ly filled up with liquor: as the pith of Elder, which in the old stalks is white, was once, and by being well soaked, will be∣come again transparent. And from their being more dry and void of liquor; where∣upon their bubles, which cannot be vacui∣ties, must be filled with more or less Air, mixed with the sap or the vaporous parts thereof. This is more observable in those diametral Portions which terminate upon and run into the skin. The Bark is not only of a divers woof, but, as is said, of a compounded substance; there being a certain number of Succiferous Vessels, fewer or more , in some place or other, mixed with the parenchymous part above described; and some way or other are demonstrable in all Roots: as by the toughness of the Bark in being broken by the bredth: by the visible continuation of the said Vessels through the length of the bark in the resemblance of small threds: and by the rising up of the sap in the tra∣verse cut of the Root, in such places of the
Bark, where these threds terminate: as the existence of those of the Skin was pro∣ved Chap. 2. These tubulary Threds run not through the bark in direct lines, but are frequently braced together in the form of Net-work; the parenchymous parts every where filling up the spaces betwixt the braced threds; as in Burnet, Scorzonera, &c. the bark being paired or striped off is apparent. See the Figures. They seem at first, where they are braced, to be inosculated, so as to be pervi∣ous one into another: but a more accurate view, especially assisted by a Microscope, discovers the contrary. Neither are they wond any way one about another, as threds are in a Rope: nor implicated, as in ravled Yarn or the knots of a Net: but only con∣tiguous or simply tangent, as the several Cords in the Braces of a Drum: being thus joyned together by the parenchymous parts, as in speaking of the Pith will be un∣derstood how. Yet do not always the same threds belong and keep entire to one brace; but are frequently parted into lesser threds transposed from brace to brace. Nor do they always, in whole or in part, pre∣sently after their contingence, mutually fall off again; but oftentimes run along collate∣rally joyned together for some space, as in
Jerusalem Artichoke. These braces are of various number in divers Roots; more fre∣quent in Jerusalem Artichoke, less in Scor∣zonera, more rare in Cumfry. The threds likewise are variously divaricated; some∣times more where the braces are frequent, as in Jerusalem Artichoke; and sometimes less where the braces are rare, as in Scorzo∣nera, Dandelyon: And in all Roots more frequent towards the inner Verge of the bark. See the Figures. By what is said it is partly implied, That these threds are not single Vessels; but a cluster of them, twenty, thirty, or more or fewer of them together. Yet as the threds are not in the braces; so neither are the Vessels, in the threds, inosculated. Nor yet twisted; but only stand collateral to∣gether; as the several twires of the Silk∣worm do in slieve-silk. Neither are these Vessels Pyramidal, so far as the Glass will discover, or from probable reason may be conjectured. Nor ramified, so as to be successively propagated one from another, after the manner of Veins: but Cylindri∣cal, and distinctly continued throughout the length of the Root, as the several fibres in a Tendon or Nerve. These Vessels are of divers kinds in di∣vers Roots: of the different natures where∣of,
of, although there may be other ways whereby to judge; yet so far as by inspe∣ction, we may do it chiefly by the diversity of those liquors which they severally con∣tain. Sometimes they yield a Lympha; and that thin, as they do in a Parsnep; especially those that make a Ring at the inward ex∣tremity of the bark. See the Root it self. That this clear sap ascendeth only from these Vessels, is certain; because no liquor will do so from any parenchymous part, as Chap. 2. hath been said. And because it is of a different nature from the sap contained in the bubles of the Parenchyma; although of the same colour, yet sensibly more sweet. Sometimes they yield a thick and muci∣laginous Lympha, as in Cumfry, as appeareth by its tenacity. From the mucilaginous Content of these Vessels it is, I suppose, that the sap contained in the bubles is ren∣dred of the like nature, so far as it ap∣proaches hereto; which sometimes is more, as in Marsh-mallow; and sometimes but little, as in Borage: For in pressing out the liquor of this Plant, and then heating it over an indifferent fire; the far greater part hereof remaineth thin; only some certain strings and little bits of a gellied substance re mixed herewith; which I suppose, were
originally the proper liquor of these Lym∣phaeducts. Oftentimes these succiferous Vessels yield a milky or white sap; and sometimes yel∣low, and of other colours; as in Sonchus, and most Cichoraceous Plants; in Angeli∣ca, and most Umbelliferous; in Burdock, and divers Thistles, to which that is 'akin: in Scorzonera, Common Bells, and many other Plants not commonly taken notice of to be milky. The milky saps of all which, although they differ in colour and other qualities, yet agree in being more oily; it being the mixture of the oily parts with some other limpid liquor, but of a different nature, which causeth that colour. In the same manner as common Oyl and a strong Liquamen Tartari shaked in a Bottle toge∣ther, presently mix into a white Liquor: and although they will for the greatest part separate again; yet some of their parts without any boiling, or so much as the least digestion with heat, by agitation only, or standing together for some time, incorpo∣rate in the form of a thin milky Sope, which will also dissolve in Water. I sup∣pose therefore that it is the volatile Salt chiefly of these Plants, which being mixed with their Oyl, renders this Liquor of a white or other colour. Sometimes the Oyl
will separate and discover it self: for if you cut a Fenil root traverse, after it hath layn some days out of the ground; the same Vessels, which in a fresh Root yields Milk, will now yield Oyl. All Gums and Balsams are likewise to be reputed the proper Contents of these Ves∣sels: for these and Milks are very near 'akin. So the Milk of Fenil, upon standing, turns to a clear Balsam; of Scorzonera, Dandelyon, and others to a Gum. And in the dried Root of Angelica, &c. being split, the Milk, according to the continua∣tion of these Vessels, appeareth, as blood clodders in the Veins, condensed to an hard and shining Rosin. See the Roots them∣selves. These succiferous Vessels are not only of divers kinds in divers Roots, but in the same. Whether in all, I doubt: but in some it is certain they are: For if you cut a Fenil root traverse, both milks and limpid sap will presently ascend, and upon accu∣rate inspection appear thereupon distinctly. [See both the Figure and the Root it self.] Whether all Roots have Lymphaeducts, it is also doubtful; but most probable that they have, more or fewer, standing for the most part in a Ring at the inner Verge of the Bark: the sap whereof may be so far off
common Nature in all Roots as to be clear and less oily. The Quantity of these Vessels is very dif∣ferent: In Borage, Peony, Bistort but few; in Asparagus fewer: in Parsnep, Celandine many; in Fenil, Marsh-mallow many more: and betwixt these extremes there are many degrees, as by comparing the Roots of Horsradish, Turnep, Briony, Skirrets, Par∣sley, Goats-beard, and as many more as you please, may be seen. See the Figures. There are two ways of judging of their number; either as their extremities are vi∣sible upon the traverse cut of the bark; or as the bark is diversly brittle or tough, be∣ing so from the various number of these Vessels therein, as Chap. 2. hath been said. The quantity of the ascending Sap, is a doubtful argument, whether of the number or size of these Vessels. For it is common to most milky Roots, for the Milk to ascend more copiously: yet in some of them, the Vessels seem not to be, in proportion with the parenchymous part, so numerous as in some other Roots, where the ascending sap is less; as by comparing the Lacteals of Dandelyon and the Lymphaeducts of Fenil together may appear: so that it should seem, that the bore of the lacteal Vessels is greater than that of the Lymphaeducts.
The Situation of these Vessels is various and elegant. Sometimes they are posited only at the inner edge of the bark, where they make a Ring, as in Asparagus. In which place and position they stand in most, if not in all, Roots, how variously soever otherwise they are posited. This Ring is either more entire, as in Eryngo, Brown∣wort, Valerian, &c. or it is a prick'd Ring, as in Butterbur. Sometimes they are chief∣ly posturd in a Prick-ring towards the out∣ward part of the bark, as in Peony: and some are pricked all over the bark, as in Melilot. In others they stand not so much in pricks, as portions or Columns, as in Cumfry. In others again they all stand in in more continued lines, either Rays or dia∣metral, as in Borage; or Peripherial, as in Celandine. The Rays are not equally extended in all Roots: in Parsnep towards the circumference of the bark; in Bugloss about half way. In Borage, the rays are more continuous; in a Carrot, more prick∣ed. Here also the pricks stand in even lines; in Lovage they are divaricated. Of which, and those of some other Roots, it is also observable, that they are not all pro∣perly pricks, but most of them very little circles, which, after the Milk hath been fre∣quently licked off, and ceaseth to ascend,
are visible. See the Figures. And note, that in observing all Milk-vessels, the Milk is to be taken off, not with the finger but the tongue, so often till it riseth no more, or but little. And some Roots may also be soaked in Water, whereby the position of the Milk-vessels will be visible by the dark∣er colour of the bark where they stand. The Rays sometimes run more parallel, and keep several, as in Monkshood; and sometimes towards the circumference of the bark they are occurrent, as in Eryngo: here in a termination more circular, and in Bryony angular, or in the form of a Glo∣ry; as also in Horsradish through a Micro∣scope. The peripherial lines are in some more entire Circles, as in Dandelyon; in others made up of shorter Chords, as in Po∣tato, Cumfry, and the smaller part of the Root of Monkshood. In some the pricks are so exceeding small, and stand so close, that, to the bare eye, they seem to be con∣tinous Rings, which yet through the Micro∣scope appear distinct, as in Marsh-mallow and Liquorish. See the Figures. Sometimes Columns and Chords are com∣pounded, as in Burnet; Pricks and Chords, in Potato; Rays and Rings, in Monkshood; where the Ring is single. In Fenil there is a double or treple order both of Rays and
Rings, the Lymphaeducts standing in Rays and the Lacteals in Rings. And in Marsh-mallow the Vessels are so posited as to make both those kinds of lines. In Ce∣landine they seem all, to the bare eye, to stand in numerous Rings lying even one within another. See the Figures. As also in Dandelyon; in which yet, being viewed through a Microscope, there is an appear∣ance of very many small Rays, which strea∣ming from the inner Verge of the Bark, cross three or four of the smaller Rings, and there terminate. See the Microscopical Figure. Whence it should seem, that Lym∣phatick Rays and milky Rings are so far mixed together; only the Lympha being confounded with the Milk cannot be dis∣cerned. And where the milky Vessels are evacuated, or at such seasons wherein they are less full, divers milky Roots will yield a clear Liquor at the inner Verge of the Bark, where, at other times, they seem to yield only Milk. And this is the Descri∣ption of the Bark.
CHAP. IV. THat Portion of the Root which stand∣eth next within the Bark, is also compounded of two bodies, Parenchymous and Lignous. The Parenchymous is of the same substantial Nature with that of the Bark: and is originated from it; being not only adjacent to it, but all round about continuous therewith, even as that is with the skin; the Parenchyma of the Bark be∣ing distributed, from time to time, partly outward into the skin, and partly inward into this. The position of the several parts hereof is different. For the most part they have a diametral continuation in several Porti∣ons, running betwixt as many more of the Lignous parts from the circumference to∣wards the Centre of the Root. In the Roots of some Plants they are more obser∣vable, as in Cumfry; which leadeth to the notice of them in all others both of Plants and Trees. See the Figure. Sometimes part of this parenchymous Body is disposed into Rings, as in Fenil. The number and size of which Rings differ; in Fenil they
are in some places broader, but fewer; in Beet they are narrower, but more. See the Figure. The diametral portions are in like manner much varied; in Cumfry, Ce∣landine larger; in Beet, Bugloss, meaner; in Borage, Parsnep more and lesser; and in most woody Roots, streaming betwixt the pith and the bark as so many small Rays. Their continuation is also different; in some Roots to the Centre, as in Colum∣bine; in others not, as in Parsnep. See the Figures. And sometimes different in the same Root, as in the Vine. See the Micro∣scopical Figure. The Contexture of these parenchymous Portions is sometimes uniform, as in Bugloss, Peony; and sometimes also, as it is in the bark, different; in part more sappy and transparent, in part more white, dry, and airy, as in Carrot, Lovage, Scorzonera, and others; which yet cannot be observed with∣out a wary view. See the Figures. But their general texture is the same being all made up of many small bubles: which are of different sizes, like those of the bark; but for the most part smaller. Their shape likewise is usually round; but sometimes oblong and oval, as in Borage; or oblong and square, as in the Vine. The Lignous part, if not always, yet
usually, is also compounded of two kinds of bodies, scil. Succiferous and Air-vessels. The Succiferous are, as far as discernable, of the same conformation and nature with those of the bark, and in the transverse cut of the Root, do oftentimes, as those, emit a Liquor. They are also Braced; and many of them run in distinct Threds or por∣tions collaterally together. The Air-ves∣sels I so call, because they contain no Li¦quor, but an airy Vapour. They are mor or less visible in all Roots. They may b distinguished to the bare eye from its pa∣renchymous parts by their whiter surface; and standing more prominent, while those shrink below the transverse level of the Root, upon drying. They are frequently conjugated divers of them together; some∣times fewer, and for the most part single, as in Asparagus; sometimes many, as in Hors-Radish. See the Microscopical Figures. And their Conjugations are also braced as the threds of the Succiferous Vessels. But they are no where Inosculated: nor twisted one about another; but only tangent or collateral. Neither are they Ramified, the greater into less; but are all distinctly con∣tinued from one end of the Root to the other. Their Braces, as those of the Succiferous
Vessels, are also of various number; in Cumfry, Scorzonera more rare; in Borage more frequent; as by stripping off the bark of such Roots where it is easily separable, may be seen. See the Figure of Scorzo∣nera. And they often vary in the same Root; so in Borage, Scorzonera, &c. they are more frequent in the Centre and next the bark than in the intermediate space, as by splitting those Roots down the middle doth appear. See the Figures. They also vary from those of the succiferous Vessels; those being usually more frequent, as in Je∣rusalem Artichoke, than these of the Aerial. See the Figures. Betwixt these braced Air-vessels run the parenchymous parts above described, as they do betwixt the succiferous in the bark. See the Figures. An agreeable structure hereto may be observed in the parts of a Muscle; wherein some, more membranous and white, are posited and knit together in the form of Lozenges or close Net∣work: others, more red, or soft, fill up all the interjacent spaces, and have a counter-process or continuation; the one by the bredth or thickness of the Muscle, the other by the length. The same structure is like∣wise visible in Tendons, but more diffi∣cultly
The position of both these kinds of Ves∣sels is various. The Succiferous are some∣times posited in diametral lines or portions, as in the Vine: Sometimes oppositely to the Aerial, as in Beet; each Ring herein being double, and made both of Sap and Ar-vessels. In Nettle the Succiferous run cross the Aerial in several, five, six, seven, or more Rings. In Bryony the several Con∣jugtions of the Aerial are surrounded with the Succiferous. In Patience the Succife∣rous are disposed, besides Rays, into many small Rings of different sizes sprinkled up and down, and not having one common Centre: within divers whereof Aerial are included: especially within those which are drawn not into Rings, but as it were strag∣ling Hedges. See the Figures. That also of the Air-vessels is various and elegant. In Ammi, ilium non bul∣bosm they make a Ring. In these a prick'd Ring; in Peony a Ring of Rays; in Valerian a Ring of Pricks and Rays. In others they make not Rings, but longer Rays, extended either towards the Centre, as in Scorzonera; or meeting in it, as in Columbine. In Beet they stand in several Rings, and every Ring made of Rays. In Cumfry the Rays and Rings are separate, those stand without, these next the Centre.
In Celandine they are of a parallel, in Monkshood of a wedged form. In Borage the position of many of them is spiral In Horse Radish, they stand more confused nei∣ther in Rings nor in Rays; yet their seve∣ral Conjugations are radiated: with very many other differences. See the Figures. Th Qantity of these Vessels, as to the space they take up in the Root, is to be computed two ways, by their Number or Sze. Their Number may, in some Roots, and in some measure, be judged of by the bare eye, having frequently a whiter sur∣face than the other parts. As also their Size; the bore of these Vessels being great∣er than that of the Succiferous in all Roots; especially some. For if you take the Roots of Vine, Fenil, Dandelyon, Plum-tree, Elder, Willow, &c. and lay them by for some time to dry; and then having cut off a very thin slice of each transversly, if you hold up those slices before your eye, so as the sight may be trajected through the said Vessels, they hereby become visible, as no∣tably different both in number and size. But undeceitful and accurate observation of both their Number and Size must be made by the Microscope; and so they will appear to be much more various. In Bi∣stort, Skirret, they are very few; in Beet
very many: betwixt which extremes there are all degrees; as in Orpine, Monkshood, Scorzonera, great Celandine, Peony, Bo∣rage, Fenil, &c. my be seen. So their Size in some is extreme small, as in Straw∣berry, Bistort, Valerian; in others very great, as in Asparagus, Bugloss, Vine. They are also of several sizes in the same Root; but in some are less varied, as in Lilium non bulbosum, Asparagus, Bugloss; in others more, as in Bryony, Lovage. Amongst all Roots they vary by about twenty degrees; as by comparing the Roots of Vine, Thorn, Apple, Bryony, Lovage, Fenil, wild Carrot, Saxifrage, Parsley, Peony, Horehound, Cinquefoyl, Strawberry, &c. together, may be seen. See the Figures of so many of them as are drawn. In some Roots they are small and few; as in Jerusalem Artichoke; in others small, but many, as in Horse-Radish: in Bugloss they are great, but few; in Vine great and many. So that the proportion which those of a Vine, their number and size being ta∣ken together, bear to those of Jerusalem Artichoke, may be at least s fifty to one. See the Microscopical Figures. Of the smallest kinds, as those of Cinquefoyl, Je∣rusalem Artichoke, and the like, it is to be noted, that they are scarce ever visible in the
fresh slices of these Roots, but after they have layn by a while, at last by a good Glass, clear light, and steddy view, are discernable. In some Roots the greater of these Ves∣sels stand in or next the Centre, as in Ta∣raxicum; in others next the circumference, as in Horse Radish. Somtimes each of them is from one end of the Root to the other, of a more equal size, or more Cylindrical, as in Marsh-mallow; but usually they wi∣den more or less from the top to the bot∣tom of the Root, as in Thorn-Apple; about the top whereof they are for the most part but of the sixth, seventh, and eighth mag∣nitude, some of the fifth, but none of the third; but about the bottom they are most of the third and fifth: whence it is mani∣fest▪ that some of them are, in the manner of Veins, somewhat pyramidal: yet their ampliation proceedeth not towards, but from their Original, as in Nrves. Of these Vessels the learned Mlpighius hath observed; Componuntur (saith he) expositae sistulae Zonâ tenui & pellucidâ, velut argentei coloris lminâ, prum lat; quae, sraliter locat, & extremis lterius unita, ubum, interius & exterius aliquantulum sprum, ffiit. To whose observation I further add,
That the Spiral Zone, which he so calls, is not one absolutely entire piece; but con∣sisting of two or more round and perfect Fibres standing collaterally together: and according as fewer or more of these Fibres happen to break off, from their spiral loca∣tion, together, the Zone is narrower or broader; usually narrower in the Trunk, and broader in the Root. Of these Fibres it is also observable, that they are not Inosculated side to side, but are knit or stitched together by other smallr ones; those being as it were the Warp, and these the Woof of these Vessels. Yet I think the several Fibres are not inter∣woven just as in a Web; but by a kind f wreath or stch, as the several plates of a Mat. A clear and elegant sight of these fibres, and of their interweftage, by split∣ting a Vine root, or a piece of Oak, may, in the sides of their greater Air-vessels, be obtained; having altogether the resem∣blance of close Needle-work. The Spiration of the Fibres of these Ves∣sels may be more easily observed in the Trunk than in the Root; and better in younger Plants; and not so well by cutting as splitting, or tearing off some small piece through which they run, their conformation being by this means not spoiled, Yet this
way they are seen chiefly unresolved. But in the Leaves and tender Stalks of all such Plan as sw upon breaking a kind of Doune or Wool, they may be seen resolved and drawn out, and that sometimes even to the naked eye, an inh or two in length; this Wool being nothing else but a number of Fibres resolved from their spiral position in these Vssels, and drawn out in length, and so cluster'd together as so many Threds or little Ropes; appearing thus in most Ve∣getables, but especially in some, as Vines, Scabious, Squills, and others. See the Plants themselves. The process of their spiration is not, so far as I have observed, accidental, but constantly the same; scil. in the Root by South from West to East; but in the Trunk contrarily, by South from East to West. The Content of these Vessels is, as hath already been intimated, more airy. The proof whereof is, that upon a transverse cut of the Root, the Sap never ascendeth there where these stand. Being also viewed through a Microscope, they are never ob∣served to be filled with liquor. Besides, a Root cut and immersed in water, till it is in some part got into these Vessels, and then taken out and crushed; the other parts wil yield liquor, but these only bu∣bles;
which bubles rise from some small quantity of Liquor mixed with the Air be∣fore contained in the said Vessels. To which other arguments will arise out of those things that follow. As also for this Content its not being a pure, but vaporous Air. Whether these Vessels may not, in some Vegetables, and at some times, con∣tain Liquor, is doubtful. Thus far of the Lignous Part. CHAP. V. WIthin the Lignous Part lyeth the Pith. This part is not common to all Roots, for some have none, as Nicotian, Stramonium, and others. Yet many which have none or little throughout all their lower parts, have one fair enough about their tops, as Mallow, Borage, Dandelyon, and the like. See the Roots. And in ma∣ny others there are Parenchymous parts, of the same substantial nature with the Pith, visible from the top to the bottom, as in Beet, Fenil, &c. See the Roots and Fi∣gures. The size of the Pith is varied by many degrees easily reckoned an hundred; in Fenil, Dandelyon, Asparagus but small;
in Horsradish, Valerian, Bistort great. See the Figures. The shape hereof in the low∣er parts of most Roots is pyramidal; but at the tops various, according to the diffe∣rent distribution of the Vessels, as in Car∣rot, Hyperbolical, in Parsley Oval; as ap∣peareth in cutting the Roots length-ways. See the Figures. The Pith, for the most part, especially in Trees, is a simple body: but sometimes it is, as the Bark, compounded, some cer∣tain number of Succiferous Vessels being mixed herewith; as in Jerusalem Artichoke, Horsradish, &c. upon a traverse cut, by a strict view, may be discerned. See the Fi∣gures. Their position is sometimes confu∣sed, as in Carrot; and sometimes regular, as in Parsley, appearing by the traverse cut in Rings, and in cutting by the length in Arches. See the Figure. As all the other parts of the Root are originated from the Seed; so sometimes is the Pith it self. But sometimes it hath its more immediate derivation from the Bark. Hence it is, that many Roots which have no Pith in their lower parts, have one at their top, as Columbine, Lovage, &c. See the Roots. For the parenchymous parts of the Bark being by degrees distributed into dia∣metral Portions, running betwixt those of the
Lignous body, and at length meeting and uniting in the Centre, thus constitute the Pith. In the same manner, at the top of some Roots, the Pith is either made or aug∣mented out of the Parenchymous Rings above described, these being gradually di∣stributed to and embodied in the Centre; as in Fenil and some other Roots, their lower and upper parts compared together, may be seen. From hence the Pith appears to be also of the same substantial nature with the Pa∣renchyma of the Bark, and with the dia∣metral Portions, and that they are all one body differing only in shape and place. As also from its being continuous with the dia∣metral Portions, in like manner as these are wth the said Parenchyma. And from its Contexture, which by a Microscope ap∣peareth to be the same in all; this being also made up of bubles: which the learned Mr. Hooke first shewed me of the Pith in the Trunk of Elder. And I haing before demonstrated that the Bark and diametral Portions were of one substantial nature with the Pith; (As also all the other Paren∣chymous parts of a Plant, in the Leaves, Fruit, &c. as I have elsewhere described them) I conjectured they wer  of the self same Contexture; and accrdigly,
having viewed them through a good Glass, I found they were. The Bubles of the Pith are of very diffe∣rent sizes: seldom less than in the bark, as in Asparagus; usually much bigger, as in Horsradish. They may be well reckoned to about fifteen or wenty degrees; those of Jerusalem Artichoke of the largest; of Valerian, Horsradish, of the meaner; in Bistort, Peony of he smallest. See the Fi∣gures. Their position is rarely varied, as it is oftentimes in the bark, but more uni∣form, and in the transverse out, equly re∣spective to all parts of the Root: yet being  one over another, in the long ut  o run in direct trains by the  the Root. Their shape also is ualy mre circulr; but sometimes some∣wha  the larger kinds, as in Je∣rusal choke. See the Microscopical Figure. Thus far the contexture of the Pith is well discoverable in the Root. In the Trunk farther and more easily. Yet since I am giving the Description hereof, I shall therefore further illustrate it by Examples from thence: And to what hath been ob∣served, I further add, That the sides by which the aforesaid Bubles of the Pith are circumscribed, are not meer paper skins,
but so many several ranks or piles of ex∣ceeding small Fibrous Threds, lying for the most part evenly one over another from the bottom to the top of every Buble, and run∣ning cross, as the Threds in the Weavers Warp, from one Buble to another; which is to say, That the Pith is nothing else but a Rete mirabile, or an infinite number of small Fibres admirably complicated together; as by cutting the Pith with a Razor may be seen. All Vegetables exhibit this spectable not alike distinctly, those best with the largest Bubles. Nor the same Pith in any condition, but best when dry; because then, the Sap being voided, the spaces betwixt the fibrous Threds, and so the Threds themselves are more distinctly discernable. Yet is it not to be dryed after cutting; because its several parts will thereupon coincide and become deformed; but to be chosen while the plant is yet growing, when it may be often found dry, yet undeformed, as in the Trunks of common Thistle, Jerusalem Artichoke, &c. These Threds, so far as I can observe, are not single Fibres, but usually consist of several. Nor are they simply collateral, but by the weftage of other single ones, in their natural estate, knit together; much
after the same manner as the Spiral Fibres of the Air-vessels. This connexion I have no where so well seen, as in the white bottoms of the Bubles of a Bulrush, being cut tra∣verse; wherein they have the appearance of very fine and close Needle work. The single fibres are seldom and scarcely visible, except by obliquely tearing the Pith; by which means they will appear, through the Glass, broken off sometimes a quarter or hlf an nch, or an nch in length; and exceeding smll beyond the Threds. In Bulrush they are sometimes dscernable in cutting by the length. These Fibres and the Threds composed of them, being for the most part so pellucid, and closely situate, they frequently seem to make one entire body, as a piece of Ice or a film of Water it self: or even as Animal Skins sometimes shew, which yet are known and commonly allowed to be Fibrous. The situation of these Threds, is contrary to that of the Vessels, as those by the length, so these chiefly by the bredth of the Root, or horizontally from one edge of the Pith to the other. They are continued circu∣larly; whereby as oft as they keep within the compass of the several Bubles, the said Bubles are round; but where they winde out of one Buble into another, they mutu∣ally
intersect a Chord of their several Cir∣cles, by which means the Bubles become angular. The Contexture likewise both of the Parenchymous part of the Bark, and of the diametral Portions inserted betwixt the Lignous, is the same with this of the Pith now described, that is Fibrous. Whence we understand, How the several Braces and Threds of the Vessels are made: For the Vessels running by the length of the Root, as the Warp, by the Parenchymous Fibres running cross or horizontally, as the Woof, are thus knit and as it were stitched up to∣gether. Yet their weftage seemeth not to be simple, as in Cloath; but that many of the fibrous Threds are wraped round about each Vessel, and in the same manner are continued from one to another; thereby knitting them altogether more closely into one tubulary Thred; and those Threds again into one Brace: much after the manner of the Needle-work called Back Stitch, or that used in quilting of Balls. Some obscure sight hereof may be taken in the threds of Cambrick in the use of a Microscope; but it is most visible in the Leaves and Flowers of some Plants. The Delineation of these things I shall therefore omit, till we come hereafter to speak of those parts.
From what hath been said, it may be con∣jectured; That the Air-vessels successively appearing in the Bark, are formed, not out of any fluid matter, as are the original ones, but of the Parenchymous Fibres; sc. by changing them from a spherical to a tu∣bulary, and from a circular to a spiral po∣sture. From the precedents it is also manifest, That all the Parenchymous parts of a Root are Fibrous. Whence it is probable, That all the parenchymous parts of Animals are likewise fibrous, even of the Glandules and of all the Viscera: which yet through the fineness of the work, and less consistency of the parts, may here be more difficult to observe. And lastly, That the whole body of a Root consisteth of Vessels and Fibres. And that these fibres themselves are tubulary or so many more Vessels, is most probable: There only wanteth a greater perfection of Microscopical Glasses to determine. Whence it is also probable, That all the parts of an Animal, even Bones themselves, upon the original formation of the Foetus, are com∣posed of Vessels; or at least of Vessels and Fibres. For which conjecture I have fur∣ther grounds which I shall not now men∣tion.
The Contents of the Pith are, sometimes Liquor, and sometimes a vaporous Air. The Liquor is always limpid, as that of the Parenchymous part of the Bark; and in nature not much differing from it. The Air is sometimes less, and sometimes more va∣porous than that of the Bark. By this Air I mean that which is contained in the Bubles. Within the Concaves of the Fibres  sup∣pose there is another different one: So that as in the Bubles is contained a more aque∣ous, and in the Vessels a more essential Li∣quor; so sometimes in the Bubles is con∣tained a more vaporous, and in the Fibres a more simple and essential Air.
An Account of the VEGETATION OF ROOTS Grounded chiefly upon the foregoing ANATOMY. THE THIRD PART. TO philosophize, is to render the Cau∣ses and Ends of Things. No man therefore that denieth God can do this truly: For the taking away of the first Cause maketh all things contingent. Now of that which is contingent, although there may be an Event, yet there can be no Reason
or End: so that men should then study that which is not. So the Causes of Things, if they are contingent they cannot be constant: for that which is the Cause of this now, if it be so contingently, it may not be the Cause hereafter; and no Physical Proposi∣tion grounded upon the Constancy and cer∣tainty of things could have any foundation. He therefore that philosophiseth, and de∣nieth God, playeth a childish game. Wherefore Nature and the Causes and Rea∣sons of things duly contemplated, naturally lead us unto God, and is one way of secu∣ring our veneration of Him; giving us not only a general demonstration of his Being; but a particular one of most of the several Qualifications thereof. For all Goodness, Righteousnes, Proportion, Order, Truth, or whatever else is excellent and amiable in the Creatures, it is the demonstration of the like in God: for it is impossible that God should ever make any thing not like himself in some degree or other: these things, and the very Notion which we have of them, are Conceptions issuing from the Womb of the Divine Nature. By the same means we have a greater assurance of the excellency of his Sacred Word; that he who hath done all things so transcendently well, must needs speak as
well as he hath done. That He who in so admirable a manner hath made man, cannot but know best what his true Principles and Faculties are, and what Actions are most agreeable thereunto; and that having ador∣ned him with such beauteous and lovely ones, it is impossible he should ever put him upon the exercise of those Faculties in any way deformd and unlovely. That he should do all things so well himself, and yet require his Creatures to do otherwise, is unconcei∣vable. And as we may come hereby to rectifie our apprehensions of his Laws, so also of his Mysteries. For there are many things of the manner of whose existence we have no certain knowledge, yet of their existence we are as sure as our senses can make us: but we may as well deny what God hath made, To be; as what he hath spoken, To be true, ecause we understand not how. And the knowledge of Things being gradu∣ally attained, we have occasion to reflect, That some things we can now well con∣ceive, which we once thought unintelligi∣ble: I know therefore what I understand not, but I know not what is unintelligible; what I know not now, I may hereafter; or if not I, another; or if no man, or other Creature, it is sufficient that God fully un∣derstandeth
himself. It is not therefore the knowledge of Nature, but the wanton phan∣sies of mens minds that dispose them either to forget God, or to think unduly of him. Nor have we reason to fear going too far in the Study of Nature, more than the entring into it; because the higher we rise in the true knowledge and due contempla∣tion of This, the nearer we come to the Divine Author hereof. Or to think, that there is any contradiction, when Philosophy teaches that to be done by Nature, which Religion and the Sacred Scriptures teach us to be done by God: no more than to say, that the Ballance of a Watch is moved by the next Wheel, is to deny that Wheel and the rest to be moved by the Spring, or that both the Spring and all the other parts are caused to move together by the Maker of them. So God may be truly the Cause of This ef∣fect, although a thousand other Causes should be supposed to intervene; for all Nature is as one great Engine made by and held in his hand. And as it is the Watch makers Art, that the Hand moves regularly from hour to hour, although he put not his sin∣ger still to it: so is it the demonstration of Divine Wisdom, that the Parts of Nature are so harmoniously contrived and set together as to conspire to all kind of natural moti∣ons
and effects without the extraordinary-immediate influence of the Author of it. Therefore as the Original Being of all things is the most proper demonstration of Gods Power, so are the successive Generations and Operations of Things the most proper demonstration of his Wisdom. For if we should suppose God did now make or do any thing by any thing, then no Effect would be produced by a natural Cause; and con∣sequently He would still be upon the Work of Creation, which yet Sacred Scripture as∣sureth us he resteth from; and we might expect the formation of a Child in an Egg, as well as in a Womb, or of a Chicken out of a Stone as an Egg; For Infinite Power maketh no difference in the things it useth. But in that these things are not only made, but so made as to produce their natural ef∣fects, here is the sensible and illustrious evi∣dence of his Wisdom: and the more com∣plicated and vastly numerous we allow the natural Causes of things to be, the more du∣ly we conceive of that Wisdom which thus disposeth of them all to those their Effects. As the Wisdom of the King is not seen by his inerposing himself in every Case; but in the conrivance of his Laws, and consti∣ution of his Ministers in such sort, that it shall be as effectually determined of, as if
he did so indeed. Thus all things are as Ministers in the hands of God, conspiring together a thousand ways towards a thou∣sand effects and ends at one time; and that with the same certainty as if he did pre∣pose that omnipotent Fiat which he used at the Creation of the World, to every one of them. This Vniversal Monarchy, as it is emi∣nently visible in all other particular Oeco∣nomies; so is it no less in that of Vegetables. Infinite occurrences and secret Intrigues 'tis made up of, of which we cannot skill but by the help of manifold Means, and those I suppose such as I have lately propounded. As yet I have prosecuted only one of them, scil. Anatomy, and that not throughly nei∣ther. So far therefore as Observations al∣ready made will conduct us, I shall endea∣vour to go. And if, for the better clearing of the way, I have intermixed some Con∣jectures, I think they are not meerly such, but for which I have some grounds, and which the Series of the following Discourse may be some proof of. Let us say then, that the Root of a Plant being lodged in some Soil for its more con∣venient growth; 'tis necessary the Soil should be duly prepared thereunto. Th Rain therefore falling and soaking into it▪
somewhat diluteth the dissoluble Principles therein contained, and renders them more easily communicable to the Root, being as a Menstruum which extracteth those Princi∣ples from the other greater and useless part of the Soil. And the warm Sun joyned with the mol∣lifying Rain, by both, as it were a Digesti∣on of the Soil, or a gntile Fermentation amongst its several parts, will follow: where∣by the dissoluble parts therein will rot and mellow; that is, those Principles which as yet remained more fixed, will now be fur∣ther resolved and unlocked, and more copi∣ously and equally spread themselves through the body of the Soil. These Principles being with the growth of Plants continually exhausted, and need∣ing a repair; the successions therefore of wet, wind, and other weather, beat down and rot the Leaves and other parts of Plants: whereby (as Weeds which are wont to be buried under ground) they become a natu∣ral Manure, and re-impregnate the Soil; being thus, in part, out of their own resol∣ved Principles, annually compounded a∣gain. Many of these Principles upon their reso∣lution being by the Sun more attenuated and volatilized, continually ascend into the
Air, and are mixed therewith. Where al∣though they lose not their vegetable Na∣ture, yet being amongst other purer Princi∣ples, these also, depositing their earthy fe∣culencies, become more subtile, simple and essential bodies. And the Air being of an Elastick or Springie Nature, pressing more or less upon all bodies; it thereby forceth and insinuat∣eth it self into the Soil through all its per∣meable pores. Upon its own entrance, it carries also many of the said Vegetable and essential Principles along with it, which to∣gether with the rest are spread all over the body of the Soil. By which means, though a less vehement, yet more subtile Fermen∣tation, and with the least advantage of warmth continuable, will be effected. The Principles being thus farther resol∣ved and subtilized, would presently exhale away, if the Rain again did not prevent: which therefore falling upon and soaking through the Soil, is as a fresh Menstruum saturate or impregnate with many of them, and as it still sinketh lower, carries them along with it from the superficial to the deeper parts of the Soil; thus not only ma∣turing those parts also, which otherwise would be more lean and cold; but therein likewise laying up and securing a store
more gradually and thriftily to be bestow∣ed upon the upper parts again as they need. And Autumn having laid up the store, Winter following thereupon, doth as it were lock the doors upon it. In which time some warmer intervals serve further and gradually to mature the stored Principles, without hazard of their being exhaled. And the Spring returning, sets the doors open again, with warmer and more constant Sun, gentle and frequent Rain fully resolves the said Principles, and so furnisheth a plen∣tiful diet for all kind of Vegetables; being a Composition of Water chiefly, wherein are resolved some portion of Earth, Salt, Acid, Oyl, Spirit, and Air; or other bodies of affinity herewith. The Root standing in the Soil thus pre∣pared, and being always surrounded with a Bark, which consisteth chiefly of a paren∣chymous and spongy body; it will thus, as Sponges do, naturally suck up the watry parts of the Soil impregnate with the said Principles. Which Principles notwithstand∣ing being in proportion with the watry parts but sew, and also more essential, and though mixed yet as yet little united; there∣fore in this parenchymous part, are they ne∣ver much discovered either by colour,
taste, or smell. As it is probable that some distilled Waters which discover nothing to sense of the Plants from which they are di∣stilled, may yet in part retain their Facul∣ties. And it is known that many bodies, as Crocus Metallorum, convey many of their parts into the Menstruum without any sen∣sible alteration thereof. So Frost and Snow have neither taste nor smell; yet from their Figures, 'tis evident that there are divers kinds of Saline Principles incorporated with them, or at least such as are common to them and divers kinds of Salts. The entrance of this impregnate Water or Sap is not without difference, but by the regulation of the intervening Skin; being thereby strained and rendred more pure: the Skin, according to the thickness or closeness thereof, becoming sometimes only as a brown paper, sometimes as a Cotton, and sometimes as a Bag of Leather to the transi∣ent Sap, as the nature of it doth require. By which it is also moderated, lest the Bark being spongy, should suck it up too fast, and so the Root be as it were surcharged by a Plethora. And divers of the succiferous Ves∣sels being mixed herewith, and because ly∣ing next the Soil, usually more or less mor∣tified, and so their Principles somewhat re∣solved; the Sap is hereby better specified,
and further tinctured, such parts of the Sap best entring as are most agreeable to those Principles, and carrying them off in some part as it passeth into the Bark. The Sap thus strained, though it be pure, and consisteth of Essential parts; yet being compounded of heterogeneous ones; and re∣ceived into the Parenchyma of the Bark a light and spongy body, they will now easi∣ly and mildly ferment. Hereby they will be yet further prepared. And also more easily insinuate themselves into all the Bu∣bles of the said Parenchyma; swelling and dilating it as far as the continuity of its parts will bear. Whereupon partly from the continued entrance of fresh Sap, and partly by a motion or pressure of restitution in the swollen and tensed Bubles of the Pa∣renchyma, the Sap is forced thence into the other parts of the Root. And because the Parenchyma is in no place openly and visibly pervious, but is every where composed of an infinite num∣ber of small Bubles; the Sap therefore is not only fermented therein, and fitted for separation; but, as it passeth through it, is every part of it strained an hundred times over from buble to buble. The Sap thus fermented and strained, is distributed to the Organical parts, accord∣ing
as the several Principles of this, are agreeable to those whereof the said Orga∣nical parts consist. As the Sap therefore passeth from buble to buble, such Principles as are agreeable to those of the Fibres of the said Bubles, will adhere to, and insinuate themselves into the body of the Fibres; sc. earthy and watry chiefly, next acid, then spirituous and oleous, and least of all airy. And the Sap by its continual appulse and percolation, as it leaveth some parts upon the said Fibres; so as it is squeezed betwixt them from buble to buble, it licks and carries off some others from them, in some union together with it; and so is impregnate herewith, as Water by passing through a Mineral Vein becomes tinctured with that Mineral. The Sap thus impregnate with some uni∣ted Principles of the parenchymous Fibres, passeth on to the succiferous Vessels, where∣into their correspondent Principles also en∣ter; scil. earthy, watry, saline, and oleous chiefly. And because the parenchymous Principles mixed with them are in some de∣gree united, and so more ready t fix: some of these therefore will likewise enter into the said Vessels. Whereupon, the Al∣kali oleosum of the one, and the Acidum spirituosum of the other meeting together,
these with the other Principles all concentre, and of divers fluids, become one fixed bo∣dy, and are gradually agglutinated to the Vessels, that is the Vessels are now nou∣rished. The supply of the Sap still continued, the Principles thereof will not only enter into the Body of these parts, but their Con∣caves. And the parenchymous Fibres being wrapped about the Vessels, as often as the said Fibres are more turgid with their own contained fluid, they will thereby be some∣what shortned, or contract in length; and so must needs bind upon the Vessels, and thereby as it were squeez some part of the fluid contained both within themselves and the Vessels back again into the Bubles. The Sap herein being thus tinctured with some of the united Principles of the Vessels, divers of them will now also insinuate them∣selves into the parenchymous Fibres, and be incorporated with them; whereby these which before were only relaxed and dila∣ted, are now also nourished, and not till now. Some portion of the united Princi∣ples of both parts being necessary to the true nutrition of each; as the confusion and joynt assistance of both the arterious and nervous Liquors is to the nourishment of the parts in Animals.
Some portion of the Sap thus doubly tin∣ctured, is at the same time transmitted to, and enters the body of the Air-vessels; con∣sisting chiefly of Earth, Water, Air, and Acid; and in like manner as in the other parts herein agglutinated. And the appulse and pressure of the Sap still continued, some parts hereof are also trajected into the Concaves of the said Vessels; existing there∣in as a most compounded fluid, partaking more or less both of the Principles and Tin∣ctures of the other Organical parts and of their own containing Vessels, and is, as it were, a mixed Resolution from them all. And the parenchymous Fibres being wrap∣ped about these as the other Vessels, and in like manner binding upon them, thus fre∣quently squeezeth part of their contained fluid out again, as necessary, though not to the immediate nourishment of the parts, yet the due qualification of the Sap; being a constant aerial Ferment successively stored up within the Air-vessels, and thence trans∣fused to the Sap and other parts. And that there may be a better transition of the Sap thus tinctured to the several Or∣ganical parts; therefore none of them are close set and compact within themselves se∣verally; for so they would be inaccessible to the Sap, and their inward portions want∣ing
a due supply of aliment would be star∣ved: but the Vessels both of Air and Sap being every where divided into braced portions, and other parenchymous, filling up the spaces betwixt them, intermixed; there is therefore a free and copious communi∣cation of the Sap, and of all the Tinctures successively transfused into it, from part to part, and to every portion of every one of them; the parenchymous portions run∣ning betwixt the Braces, as the smaller Ves∣sels do amongst the other parts in Animals; whereby none of them want that due mat∣ter which is necessary either for their nu∣trition, or the good estate of their Con∣tents. For the due distribution of the several parts of the Sap, Diametral portions of the parenchymous Body run sometimes directly through the Bark, as in Lovage, Parsley, &c. and so are all or most of them continuous betwixt both the succiferous and Air-vessels from the circumference to the centre; there∣by carrying off a more copious and aerial Ferment from the one, and communicating it unto the other. For as the Sap enters the Bark, the more liquid parts still pass into the succulent portions thereof; the more airy is separated into those white and dryer diametral ones; and in its passage
betwixt the portions of the Air-vessels, is all along communicated to them. Yet is it not a pure and simple Air, but such as carries a Tincture with it from the succiferous Vessels: and therefore when the diametral portions are more distant, the Vessels run not in a straight line betwixt them, but are recipro∣cally inclined so, as to touch upon them, as in Lovage is visible; thereby communica∣ting their Tincture to the Air as it passeth by them through the said diametral por∣tions. By the continual appulse of fresh Sap, some both of the airy and all the other parts thereof, are transmitted into the Pith; where finding more room, it will yet more kindly be digested. Especially having the advantage herein of some degree of warmth, being remoter from the Soil, and as it were tunn'd up within the Wood, or the Mass of surrounding Vessels. So that the Pith is as it were a Repository of better Aliment gra∣dually supplied to those succiferous Vessels which are frequently scattered up and down therein, and which ascend into the Trunk. But where no succiferous Vessels are mixed herewith, it usually becomes dryer, and is replenished with a more aerial and warmer Sap; whereby the growth of the Caulis is promoted as by an hot Bed set just under it.
And thus all the Parts have a fit Aliment provided for their nourishment. In this Nourishment the Principles of the Sap are, as is said, concentred, and locked up one within another: whence it is that the Organical parts, being cleansed of their Con∣tents, have none of them any taste or smell, as in the Piths of Plants, Paper and Linen Cloth is evident; because till by digestion, violent distillation or some other way they are resolved, they cannot act upon the Or∣gans of those senses. For the same reason they are never tinctured excepting by their Contents; and although to the bare eye they frequently shew white, yet viewed through a Microscope they all appear transparent. In like manner as the Serum of Blood, Whites of Eggs, Tendons, Hairs, and Horns them∣selves are transparent, and without much smell or taste, their Principles being in all of them more or less concentred; but being forcibly resolved, are ever variously invest∣ed with all those Qualities. And as from the Concentration of the Principles in every Organical part they all agree thus far; so from the Predominion of those of each part the rest are controuled, not only to a Concentration, but an Assimi∣lation also, and their respective properties are thus preserved. Hence the succiferous
Vessels are always tough and most pliable; for so are all Barks wherein these Vessels abound: so are the Twires of Flax, which are nothing else but the succiferous Vessels of that Plant. For Sal Alkali, Oyl, Water, and Earth are, as is said, the predominant Principles of these Vessels. Now it is the Oyl chiefly by which Bodies are tough: for being of it self viscous and tenacious, by taking hold of other Principles, marries them together; and the Sal Alkali and Earth con∣centred with it, addeth to it more strength. Hence the Caput Mortuum of most Bodies, especially those that abound with Oyl and Sal Alkali, are brittle and friable; those Principles, which were the Ligaments of the rest, being forced away from them. Hence also the parenchymous parts of a Root are brittle and friable; sc. because their earthy, and especially oleous and saline Principles are, as is said, so very few. Therefore all Piths and more simple Parenchyma's break short; so Corn, and the Roots of Potato's, and divers other Plants being dryed, will easily be rub'd to Meal; and many Apples after Frosts eat mealy; all which parts have the Analogy and Essence of one only Body. And as the Consistence of the several Organical parts is dependent on their Prin∣ciples,
so are their Figures. And first the Succiferous Vessels from their Sal Alkali grow in length; for by that dimension chiefly this Salt always shoots; and being a less moveable Principle than the rest, and so apt more speedily to fix or shoot; thus over∣rules them to its own Figure. And even as the shape of a Button dependeth on the Mould, the Silk and other Materials wrought upon it, being always conformable there∣unto: so here; the Salt is as it were the Mould, about which the other more passive Principles gathering themselves, they all consort and fashion to it. Hence also the Vessel are not pyramidal as Veins, but equally thick from end to end; the shoot∣ings of the said Salt being also figured by the like dimension. And as by the saline Principles the Vessels are long, so by the oleous they are every where round or pro∣perly Cylindrical; without some joynt effi∣cacy of which Principle the said Vessels would be flat, or some way edged and an∣gular, as all saline Shoots of themselves are, as those of Alum, Vitriol, Sal Armoniac, Sea Salt, Nitre, &c. And because the spi∣rituous and more fluid portion of the Prin∣ciples is least of all apt to fix; while there∣fore the other parts fix round about, this will reman moveable in the Centre; whence
every Vessel is formed, not into a solid but hollow Cylinder, that is, becomes a Tube. The Lactiferous Vessels are tubulary, as the Lymphaeducts, but of a somewht wider Con∣cave. For being their Principles are less earthy and oleous, and also more loosely concen∣tred; as from their easie corruption or reso∣lution by the Air, it appears they are; they are therefore more tender; & so more easily dilative and yielding to the said spirituous portion in the Centre. Whence also they are more adapted to the free motion of the mil∣ky Content; which being an oeous & thicer Body, and having no advantage of pulsation as the Blood in Animals, might sometimes be apt to stgnate▪ if the Vessels, through which it moves, were not somewhat wider. As the saline Principles are the Mould of the succiferous, so are the aerial of the Air-Tubes. Now the Particles of Air I suppose are all crooked, and many of them spiral; which from the Elastick Nature of the Air is probable; being capable both of dilata∣tion and angustation by force; which it could not be, if its Particles were  and not crooked, nor so well by  all of them simply crooked, as if some of them were also spiral. Wherefore the said spirl and other crooked Particles of the  shooting and setting together as the
the other Principles cling and fix confor∣mably round about them: so that as by force of the saline Principles the rest are made to shoot out in long continued Fibres; so by force of the Aerial, those Fibres are still disposed into spiral Lines, thus making up the Air-vessels. And according as fewer of these Aerial Particles are in proportion to the Saline, the Concave of the Air-vessels is variously wider, or the Fibres continue their shooting by wider Rings, as those that come nearer to a right Line, and so are more complient to the Figure and shooting of the said saline parts. And whereas the Succi∣ferous Vessels shooting out only in length are never sensibly amplified beyond their ori∣ginal size; these on the contrary, always more or less increase their Diameter, because their Fibres being disposed into spiral lines, must needs therefore, as they continue their growth, be still dilated into greater and greater Rings. And being at the bottom of the Root more remote from the Air, and so having somewhat fewer Particles purely Aerial their ingredient to them, then at the top, they fall more under the government of the saline, and so come nearer to a right Line, that is into greater Circles, and so the Air-vessels, made up of those Circles, are there generally wider.
By mediation of their Principles the Pa∣renchymous parts likewise of a Root have their proper Contexture. For from their acid Salt they are fibrous; from their Oyl the Fibres are round and in all parts even within themselves; and from their Spirit it is most probable that they are also hollow. But because the Spirit is here more copious than the Air; and the saline Principle a Saldacidum, and more under the govern∣ment of the Spirit than an Alkali; therefore are not the said Fibres continued in straight lines, as the Succiferous Vessels; or by one uniform motion into spiral lines, as the Fi∣bres in the Aerial; but winding in a circu∣lar manner to and fro a thousand ways, a∣greeable to the like motions of the Spirit, that most active, and here most predominant, Principle. And the spirituous parts being, as is said, here more copious and redundant, they will not only suffice to fill up the Concaves of the Fibres, but will gather together into innumerable little spaces up and down without them: whence the Fi∣bres cannot winde and wreath close toge∣ther, but are forced to keep at some di∣stance one parcel from another, and so are disposed, as Bread is in baking, into Bu∣bles. And the under Fibres being set first as
the Warp, the spirituous parts next adjacent will incline also to fix, and so govern an over-work of Fibres wrapping as the Woof in still smaller Circles round the other, whereby they are all knit together. For the same reason the Succiferous Vessels being first formed, the Parenchymous Fibres set and wrap about these also. And the Air-vessels being formed in the Centre, the suc∣ciferous run along those likewise; as vola∣tile Salts shoot along the sides of a Glass, or frost upon a Window; and so are as it were incrustate about them in a Ring. All the more aetherial and subtile parts of the Air, as they stream through the Root, it should seem do gradually dispose the Air-vessels where there are more of them, into Rays. Therefore in the inferiour parts of the Root they are less regular, because more remote from the Air. And in the upper parts of many Roots, as Cumfry, Borage, Parsnep, where those that are next the Cen∣tre are confused, or differently disposed; those next the Bark and so nearer the Air, are postured more regularly and always into Rays. For the same reason it may be; that the Succiferous Vessels in the Bark where the Air vessels are more numerous, are usually disposed into Rays; and that the Parenchyma of the Bark is disposed into
Diametral Portions; and that where the Air-vessels are fewer or smaller, these Por∣tions are likewise smaller or none, as in Chervil, Asparagus, Taraxium, Orpine, Bistort, Horse-Radish, Potato's, &c. The said aetherial parts of the Air have a power over the Air-vessels, not only thus to dispose them; but also to sollicite and spread them abroad from the Centre to∣wards the Circumference of the Root; which power, in speaking according to vul∣gar sense, I take leave to call Attraction. This Attraction or Magnetick power betwixt the Air and these Vessels may be argued, from the Nature of the Principles common to them both. From the Electral Nature of divers other Bodies, the Load stone being not the only one which is attractive. And from the spreading of these Vessels always more or less at the upper part of the Root where nearer to the Air: which is not meer∣ly the spreading of the whole Root, but a particular motion of these Vessels visibly en∣croaching farther upon the Bark. And from other Effects hereafter mentioned. The spreading of these Vessels is varied, not only according to the force the Air ath upon them, but their own aptitude to yield thereto. As oft therefore as they are slen∣derer, they will also be more pliable and
recessive from the Centre towards the Cir∣cumference: hence in such Roots where they are small they stand more distant, as in Turnep, Jerusalem Artichoke, Potato's, and others; and so their Braces are fewer; and in the same Root, where they are smaller, their distance is greater. Besides, in these smaller Air-vessels, the Rings being less, and the spiral Fibres whereof they are made continuing to shoot; the said Rings therefore must needs be so many more, as they are smaller, and so take up more space by the length of the Root; and so not being capa∣ble of being crowded in a right line, every Vessel will be forced to recede to a crooked or bowed one. The Succiferous Vessels, being by the pa∣renchymous Fibres knit to These, will like∣wise comply with their motion and spread abroad with them. Yet being still smaller and more pliable than the Air-vessels, and so more yielding to the intercurrent Fibres of the Parenchyma, their braced Threds will sometimes be much more divaricated, than these Air-vessels, as in Jerusalem Artichoke. And because the Succiferous Vessels, although they are joyned to the Aerial by the pa∣renchymous Fibres, yet are not continuous with them; neither fall under the like at∣tractive power of the Air as the Aerial do;
the Aerial therefore upon their spreading, do not always carry all the Succiferous a∣long with them, but often, if not always, leave many of them behind them sprinkled up and down the Pith; as in Parsley, Carrot, Jerusalem Artichoke, Turnep, &c. may be seen. The spreading of the Air-vessels still con¦tinued, several of them at length break forth beyond the circumference of the Root, and so are distributed, either in the lower parts into Branches and Strings, or at the top into Leaves. And least they should all spread themselves into Leaves, and none be left for the Caulis; as where they are very small, or the Succiferous Vessels to bound them are but few, they might; therefore divers of them are oftentimes more fre∣quently braced in the Centre; for which reason they cannot so easily separate and spread themselves from thence, but run more inwardly up into the Caulis, as in Borage. From the various Sizes, Proportions, and Dispositions of the Parts, Roots are variously sized, shaped, moved, and aged. Those that by annual growth are large, have fewer both Aerial and Succiferous Vessels, and a more copious Parenchyma. So that the Aerial Vessels, or rather the Airy Ferment
contained in them, volatilizing a smaller portion of the Sap; this therefore being less capable of advancement into the Trunk, must needs remain and fix more copiously in the Root, which is thereby more aug∣mented. So where the Succiferous Vessels are few, the Root is yet proportionably large; and where they are numerous, it is never so, as to its annual growth, in any proportion to their number; because their Tincture will go farther in setting the Paren∣chymous parts, than the Tincture of these will in setting them. When the Aerial Vessels are more pliable and sequent to the attraction of the Air, and so spread themselves, and the Succife∣rous together with them more abroad; in the manner as hath been said; the Root also will grow more in bredth; the nutrition of the Parenchymous parts, to which the Vessels are adjacent, being thus by the same dimension more augmented; as in Turnep, Jerusalem Artichoke, &c. But where these are not spread abroad, the Root is but slen∣der; as in Asparagus, Dandelyon, &c. The Vessels as they thus spread and move towards the circumference, because the Fibres of the Parenchyma are no where in∣osculated or continuous with them, but only wrapped about them, and their motion so
exquisitely slow; therefore they make not their passage through the said Parenchymae by tearing of it, or causing any rupture; but only by slipping themselves along its Fibres, as it were from Buble to Buble, (as we are wont the Rings of a Tarring Iron) and so as they move forward themselves, leave the said Fibres behind them all knit together in the Centre, thus either making or aug∣menting the Pith. If the Aerial Vessels be contracted, and somewhat large or numerous, and the Suc∣ciferous also more copious round about them; the Root grows very long, as those of Fenil, Vine, Liquorish, &c. For the Air-Vessels containing a more copious Ferment, it will well digest and mature the Sap; yet the Succiferous being over proportioned to them, it will not therefore be so far vola∣tilized as to ascend chiefly into the Trunk, but only to subserve a fuller growth of these Vessels: and these being more nume∣rous, and so more sturdy, and less sequent to the expansive motion of the Aerial; this their own growth, and consequently that of all the other parts, cannot be so much in bredth as length. Where the same Aerial Vessels are fewer, or more contracted, or sheathed in a thicker and closer Bark; the Root is smooth, and
less Ramified; as in Asparagus, Peony, Tara∣xicum. But where more numerous, sheathed in a thinner Bark, smaller, more dilated; the Root is more Ramified, or more Strin∣gy, as in Columbine, Clary, Beet, Nicotian. For being, as is said, by these means, more sequent to the Attraction of the Air, ap∣proaching still nearer the circumference of the Bark, they at last strike through it into the Moulds. And the parenchymous Fibres being wrapped about them, and the Succi∣ferous Vessels knit to them by those Fibres; therefore they never break forth naked, but always invested with some quantity of these parts as their Bark: where by what∣ever essential part is in the main Body of the Root, is also in every Branch or String. From the same expansion and pliability of the Air-vessels, the Root oftentimes put∣teth forth Root-buds; in the formation of which Buds they are pliable and recessive all kinds of ways; being not only invited outward toward the circumference of the Root, as in Root-strings; but spread more abroad every way in the Bud; whereas in the said Root-strings they are always more contracted; which, in respect of the dispo∣sition of the Parts, is the principal diffe∣rence betwixt the Root and the Trunk. Hence those Roots chiefly have Root Buds, which
have the smallest Air-vessels; these, as is said, being most pliable and expansive. But because the expansiveness of the Ves∣sels dependeth also in part upon the fewness of their Braces; therefore the Buds shoot forth differently in divers Roots. Where fewer, they shoot forth beyond the circum∣ference of the Root, as in Jerusalem Arti∣choke; where more close, as in Potato's, the Buds lie a little absconded beneath it, the Air-vessels being by their Braces somewhat checked and curbed in, while the Bark con∣tinueth to swell in a fuller growth. If the Aerial Vessels are all along more equally sized, the Root is so also, or Cylin∣drical; as those of Eryngo, Horse-Radish, Marsh-mallow, Liquorish, &c. But if un∣equal, growing still wider towards the bot∣tom of the Root; the Root is unequal also, but groweth, quite contrary to the Air-vessels, still smaller or pyramidally; and the more numerous and larger the Vessels are, the Bark is proportionably the less, and so the Root more sharp and spiring, as in Bo∣rage, Nettle, Patience, Thorn Apple, &c. For here where the said Air-vessels are wider, they contain a more copious Ferment, whereby the Sap is thereabout more vola∣tilized, and copiously advanced to the up∣per parts. Withal, thus receiving within
themselves, and transmitting to the upper parts a more plentiful Vapour, they hereby rob the parenchymous parts of their aliment, and so stint them in their growth. From the different proportion and situation of the parts, the Motions of the Root are also various. For where the Air vessels are spread abroad and invested with a thinner Bark, the Root runs or lyes level, as in the level Roots of Primrose, Ammi, Anemone, &c. may be seen. So that these Roots as by the perpendicular ones shooting from them into the Moulds they are plucked down; so by the Air-vessels, standing nearer the Air and more under its attractive power, they are invited upwards; whereby they have nei∣ther ascent nor descent, but keep level be∣twixt both. But if these Vessels are contracted stand∣ing either in or near the Centre, and are invested with a Bark proportionably thick; the Root striketh down perpendicularly, as Dandelyon, Bugloss, Parsnep, &c. Therefore the said Vessels, although they are spread abroad in the level, yet in the perpendicular Roots of the same Plant they are always con∣tracted; as by comparing the level and down right Roots of Ammi, Primrose, Jerusa∣lem Artichoke, Cowslip, and others, is mani∣fest.
If the Aerial Vessels are contracted and environed with a greater number of Suc∣ciferous, the Root grows deep, that is, per∣pendicular and long; perpendicular from the contraction of the Aerial, and long from the predominion of the Succiferous, which in their growth are extended only by that di∣mension, as in Liquorish, Eryngo, &c. If the Succiferous are over proportioned to the parenchymous parts, but under to the Aerial; the Root is perpendicular still, but groweth shallow; the Succiferous being sturdy enough to keep it perpendicular, and the Aerial having a predominion to keep it from growing deep; as in Stramonium, Ni∣cotian, Beet, &c. If on the contrary the parenchymous are predominant to the Aerial, and that both in the Root and Trunk; then the whole bo∣dy of the Root changeth place or descends: for the said Aerial Vessels haveing neither in the Trunk, nor in the Root a sufficient pow∣er to draw it upwards; it therefore gra∣dually yields to the motion of its String-Roots; which as they strike into the Soil pluck it down after them. And because the old Strings annually rot off, and new ones successively shoot down into the Soil; it therefore annually still descendeth lower, as in Tulip, Lily, &c. may be observed.
Where the Air-vessels are much spread abroad and also numerous, the Root often∣times, as to its several parts, descends and ascends both at once: so Radishes and Tur∣neps, at the same time their nether parts de∣scend, their upper ascend, where therefore the said Vessels are more loosely braced and spread much more abroad than in the lower parts. Hence also the upper part of the Roots of most Seedlings ascends; because the first Leaves being proportionably large, and standing in a free Air, the Air-vessels in them have a dominion over the young Root, and so yielding themselves to the sol∣licitation of the Air upwards, draw the Root in part after them. By the situation and proportions of the Parts, the Age of the Root is also varied. For if the Succiferous Vessels have the greatest proportion, the Root is perennial, and that to the farthest extent, as in Trees and Shrubs: because these Vessels containing a more co∣pious both Alkali and Oyl, and their several Principles being more closely concentred, they are less subject to a resolution, that is, a corruption or mortification by the Air. If the parenchymous parts have much the greatest, the Root seldom liveth beyond two years, but afterwards perisheth either in whole or in part, as do divers bulbous, tu∣berous,
and other Roots; whether they are more porous and succulent, or more close and dry. If porous, all the fluid Principles standing herein more abundantly, either by a stronger fermentation, or otherwise, ∣solve the fixed ones of the Organical Parts, whence the whole Root rots, as in Potato's. Hence also Parsneps, and some other Roots, which in a hard and barren Soil will ive several years, in another more rank, will quickly rot. But if the Parenchyma be close, then the Air chiefly entring in and filling it up, thus mortifies the Root, not by rotting the parts, but over drying them, as in Satyrion, Rape Crowfoot, Monks-hood, &c. But if the Air-vessels have the greatest, and especially if more large, and withal are spread more abroad; the Root is annual, as in Thorn Apple, Nicotian, &c. For hereby transfu∣sing into all the other parts a more copious Air, they are thus by degrees hardned and become sticky, and so impervious to the Sap, which should have a free and universal transition from part to part: as Bones by precipitations from the Blood at length cease to grow. Or the same more abundant Air so far volatilizeth the fluid parts, that they are wholly advanced into the Trunk, and so the Root is starved. Whence the Air-vssels
also of the Trunk, where numerous and over proportioned to the bulk of the Root, as in Corn, they so far promote the advance of the Sap, as to exhaust the Root, sucking it into a consumption and death. From the Principles of the Parts, their Contents and the several Qualities hereof are also various; the fluid of each Organical Part being made chiefly by Filtration through the sides thereof; such of the Prin∣ciples in the Sap being admitted into and transmitted through them, as are aptest thereto: in the same manner as when Oyl and Water being poured upon a Paper, the Water passeth through, the Oyl sticks: or as the Chyle is strained through the Coats of the Guts into the Lacteal Vessels: or as Wa∣ter in Purgations, is strained through the same Coats from the Mesenterical. The Principles therefore of the parenchy∣mous Fibres being spirituous, acid, and aerial, they will also admit the like into them; excluding those chiefly which are Alkalizale and Oleous. And as by the Con∣jugation of such Principles in the Fibres, the like are capable of admittance into them; so the proportion and union of the same Prin∣ciples regulates their transmission into their Concave: wherefore the Principles of the Fibres being chiefly acid, next spirituous,
and least aery; the more aery ones will be transmitted: for if more of them should fix, they must do so by similitude and adhesion; but where there are fewer similary parts to adhere to, fewer must adhere. The Fibres then contain so many parts of Air as to admit many more into their body; but not to fix them; which therefore must needs upon admission pass through into their Concave; where, together with some other more spi∣rituous parts, they make an aetherial fluid. And because some aqueous or vaporous parts will also strain through with them; hence it is, that as more and more of these en∣ter, they by degrees still thrust out the aery ones, which quitting the more succulent Fibres of the Parenchyma, are forced to be∣take themselves to the dryer ones, scil. all those whereof the diametral portions do consist. For the same reason the Aery parts being gradually excluded the succulent Fi∣bres of the Bark; they are forced to recede and transmigrate into those of the Pith: And the Fibres themselves being filled, and the Aery parts still forced into them; they at length also strain through the Fibres into the Bubles; whence while the Bark is suc∣culent, the Pith is often filled with Air. The Lymphaeducts being more earthy, s∣linous, oleous, and aqueous, will both admit
and copiously fix the like Principles; yet the Water being more perfluent than the rest, will therefore strain, with a lighter Tincture of them, into their Concave. Especially the oleous Principles hereof being rampant, and less apt to fix and seize the aqueous parts, upon their entrance, than the saline. But the Lactiferous being somewhat less earthy and oleous than the Lymphaeducts, and the oleous parts being herein less rampant; therefore the earthy and oleous parts will be both copiously transmitted hereinto. So that the Lymphaeducts being more oily, both admit, and fix the like Principles; the Lacteals being moderately oily, admit them, but fix them not, letting them pass through; but the parenchymous Fibres being scarce at all oily, do not so much as admit them. The fluid Ferment contained in the Air-vessels, is also in part dependent on the Principles of those Vessels, being in their per∣colation tinctured therewith. But because the percolation is not made through the body of the Fibres whereof the Vessels are com∣posed, but only betwixt them; therefore the transient Principles are not here distinguish∣ed so precisely as in all the aforesaid Orga∣nical parts, but more promiscuously pass into the Concaves of the said Vessels, and are therein all immersed in a body of Air; the
Fibres themselves in the mean time, as those of the Parenchyma, admitting and contain∣ing a more aery and aetherial Fluid. The Contents are varied, not only by the Nature, but also the proportion and situation of the Parts, whereby they are in different facility and quantity communicated to one another. Hence it is partly that a Vine, and that Corn hath so little Oyl; sc. because their Air-vessels in proportion with the other parts, are so great and numerous: in Corn the Stalk being also very hollow, and becoming as it were one great Air-vessel. For the oily parts of the Sap are so exceedingly at∣tenuated by the Aery ferment contained in these Vessels, that they are for the most part so far immersed in the Spirit, or mixed therewith, as not, by being collected in any considerable Body, to be distinguishable from it. And the affinity that is betwixt Spirits and Oyls, especially Essential, is ma∣nifest; both are inflammable per se; and burn all away; the Odors, which we call the Spirits of Plants, are lodged in their essential Oyl; both being duly Rectified, will mix as easily together as Water and Wine. So that although Oyl, by the separation of its earthy and saline parts, which give it its sensibly oleous Body, may not be so far at∣tenuated as to produce a Spirit; yet that it
may so far, and so be mixed with it, as not to be discerned from it, will be granted. Hence also the Lactiferous Vessels, because they stand more remote from the Aerial, and the Succiferous interpose; the Liquor therefore contained in them, is not so much under the government of the Aerial ferment, and is thence partly more oily. For the same reason, all Roots which are milkie, so far as I have observed, have an under pro∣portion of Air-vessels, these being either fewer or smaller. From the Precedents we may receive some information likewise of the Odours, Colours, and Tastes of Plants. And for O∣dours, I suppose that the chief matter of them is the Aerial ferment contained in the Air-vessels. Not but that the other parts do also yield their smell, but that these yield the strongest and the best, and immediately perceptible in fresh, undryed, and unbruised Plants. For the Air entring into, and pas∣sing through the Root, and carrying a Tin∣cture from the several Organical and Con∣tained Parts along with it, and at last en∣tring also the Concaves of the Air-vessels; it there exists the most compounded and volatile fluid, of all others in the Plant, and so the fittest matter of Odour; and such an Odour as answers to the smell of all the odorous
parts of the Plant. Wherefore the Organi∣cal parts smell not at all, because the Prin∣ciples are, as hath been said, so far fixed and concentred together. Hence also the Con∣tained themselves, or any other Bodies, as their Principles are any way more fixed, they are less odorous: So is Rosin less than Turpentine, and Pitch than Tar, and many the self same Bodies when they are coagula∣ted, than when they are melted: So also Musk, which is not so liquid as Civet, is not so strong; nor Ambergreece as Musk; for although it hath a more excellent smell than Musk, yet yieldeth it not so easily, since it is a more fixed Body, and requireth some Art to be opened. Hence also the Leaves of many Plants lose their Odour upon rub∣bing; because the Air-vessels being thereby all broken, all their contained odorous fluid vanisheth at once, which before only strain∣ed gradually through the Skin. Yet the fixed Parts themselves, upon drying, are so far altered by the Sun and Air, as to be∣come resoluble and odorous. So also of their Colours. As whence the Colours of the Skins are varied; for divers of the Succiferous Vessels together with the parenchymous Parts successively falling off from the Bark therein; by their proximity to the Earth and Air their Principles are
more or less resolved, and so produce divers Colours. So those Roots which turn purple any where within, have usually a blacker Skin; the one of those two Colours being by a resolution and corruption of parts easily convertible into the other, as in Cum∣fry, Thistle, &c. So the Milk of Scorzonera, contained in the Vessels of the Bark, upon drying turneth into a brown Colour; where∣fore the Skin, in which there are dives of those Vessels, is of the same. So both the Milk and Skin of Lovage is of a brownish yellow. But Parsnep hath a clearer Sap in all its Succiferous Vessels and a whiter Skin. So Potato's being cut traverse after some time out of ground, have divers red specks up and down where the Vessels stand, and their Skin is accordingly red. The reason, I say of these Colours, is the resolution or reseration of the Principles of the several Parts chiefly by the Air, and a lighter mixture of them consequent there∣upon; whereby the sulphurious or oily parts which were before concentred, are now more or less rampant, discovering themselves in divers Colours, according as they are di∣versly mixed with the other Principles. Hence these Colours are observable accord∣ing to the nature of the Parts wherein they are, or whereunto they are adjacent; so
where the Succiferous Vessels run, there red, or some other more saturate Colour; the oleous Principles being, as is said, more co∣pious in these Vessels; as in the Bark of Peo∣ny, the inward parts of Potato's, &c. may be seen. But the parenchymous Parts, where more remote from the said Vessels, they are usually white or but yellow, the sulphurious Principle hereof being, as was said, but spa∣ring. The same is seen in those Roots which shew both red and yellow; those parts prin∣cipally where the Succiferous Vessels run be∣ing red, and where the Aerial only mixed with the parenchymous being yellow, as in Patience. So the pithy part of a Carrot, where the Aerial have very few Succiferous mixed with them, is yellow, but the Bark where the Succiferous are very numerous, is red. For the same reason many Roots which are whiter in their upper parts, are purple or reddish in their inferiour, as Avens, Straw∣berry, &c. because those lower parts ha∣ving layn longer underground (these being descending Roots) their Principles are there∣by somewhat nearer to corruption or some∣what more resolved, and so the oleous ramp and spread all over the rest in that Colour. And that the resolution of the sulphurious and other Principles is partly effected by the Air, appears, in that where the Air hath
a better access to the Succiferous Vessels, the Colours are chiefly produced, or are more conspicuous. So in Potato's, where the Suc∣ciferous Vessels are either next to the exter∣nal Air, as in the Skin; or contiguous with the Air-vessels, as in the Ring within the Bark; there they produce a red: but where more remote from both, as in the middle of the Bark and Centre of the Root, there they produce none. Hence also it is, that the Leaves and Flowers of some Plants, as Bloodwort, Wood-Sorrel, Radish, Jacea, &c. although green or white in the greatest por∣tion of their parenchymous Part, yet where the Succiferous and Aerial Vessels run, they are of red, blue, and other Colours; the ole∣ous parts of the one being unlocked and ope∣ned by the aery of the other. And lastly of their Tastes. Where either the Succiferous Vessels are Lymphaeducts, or the diametral Portions in the Bark are want∣ing, or the Air-vessels numerous and large, the Root is of a weaker Taste; as that of Burnet, Melilot, Borage, Bugloss, Cumfry, Po∣tato, &c. For in that they are less oleous, and the Air more copiously mixed with the saline Principles, whereby these are either mollified or refracted; they are neither hot nor pungent, but become more mild. Whence also of the same kind of Roots, those which
have the smallest and sewest diametral por∣tions, as Skirrets, are the mildest; and those with the largest, the strongest, as Lovage. Most Roots which are acres or biting, have a very copious Parenchyma in propor∣tion with the Succiferous Vessels, as of Arum, Dragon, and others; because the saline and other Principles are not so much hot by any sufficient quantity of sulphurious from those Vessels, but rendred rather pungent from some Spirit and Air. But divers Vmbelliferous Roots, especially which abound with Lacti∣ferous Vessels, are hot; as Fenil, Lovage, An∣gelica, &c. Yet is it not their Oyl alone that makes them hot, but the combination thereof with the saline Parts; as is manifest from the nature of the Seed of these Plants, wherein the Oyl is most copious; and which being held to a Candle till they burn, con∣stantly spit; which cometh to pass by the eruption of the saline Parts; being the ve∣ry same effect with that which followeth upon burning of Serum or Blood. And therefore as the Seeds are more hot, they also spit the more, as in Cumine, &c. which though fulsom, yet not so hot, less; in Fenil and Dill more; scil. there being a greater quantity of volatile Salt contained therein. Hence all essential Oyls are hot, the Spirit and volatile Salt being incorporated here∣with.
And some of them will shoot, and crystallize as Salts do, as that of Anise, which argues a mixture of a considerable quantity of volatile Salt. As also from the nature of these Oyls, in being amicable to the Stomach, Carminative, and sometimes Anodyne; scil. as they kill some fetid, cor∣rosive, or fermenting Aid: and volatile Salts themselves will have the like operation in some cases as these Oyls. Many Lactiferous Roots, as Taraxicum and others of that kind, are not so much hot as bitter. For although by the Lactiferous Ves∣sels they are very oily; yet those Vessels be∣ing posited in Rings and not in Rays, and having no Diametral portions running through their Bark to the Air-vessels; the Acido-Aerial parts do hereby, although not mortifie, yet so far refract the saline, lightly binding up the oleous therewith, as to pro∣duce a bitter taste. Which bordereth upon astringent; wherein, I suppose, the saline and earthy are mean, the oleous least, and the acid most, and so more closely binding up the oleous and earthy with the saline. Hence many sweet Bodies upon burning be∣come bitter; the acid Parts, which before were more concentred, now becoming ram∣pant and more copiously mixed with the oleous.
The Roots or other parts of many Vmbel∣liferous Plants have a sweetish Taste, as both sweet and common Chervil, both Garden and wild Carrot, Parsnep, Fenil, &c. the saline Principles being concentred in the oily, and both of a moderate quantity with respect to the rest: for by the oily the saline is rendred more smooth and amicable, and both being moderate, they are not there∣fore hot, as in some other Vmbelliferous Roots, but by the predominion of the other Principles made mild. Hence it is, that Su∣gar it self is sweet, scil. because it is an ole∣ous Salt; as is manifest from its being highly inflammable; its easie dissolution by a mo∣derate Fire without the addition of Water; and in that being melted with Turpentine and other oily Bodies, it will mix together with them. And the Crystals in the Oyl of Aniseeds, may be called Saccharum Anisi. So also the acid parts of Vinegar being con∣centred in the Salino-sulphurious of Lead pro∣duce a Sugar. Hence Barley, which upon Distillation or Decoction yieldeth only an acid, being turned into Mault becomes sweet: scil. because being steeped, couched, and so fermented, the oleous parts are thereby un∣locked, and becoming rampant over the other Principles gives them that Taste. And the Bile it self, which, next to Water and Earth,
consisteth of most oily parts, and of many both saline and acid, is a bitter-sweet; the saline and acid being smoothed by the oleous, and the oleous gently bound up together with both those.
THE EXPLICATION OF THE FIGURES. TABLE I. FIG. I. A slice of the Root of Marsh-mal∣low cut traversly about the top. aaa. The Skin. aaa ccc. The Bark. acacac. Diametral Portions of the parenchy∣mous Body which run through the Bark to∣wards the Centre. The black Rings in the Bark represent the po∣sition of the Succiferous Vessels. The black Specks represent the position of the Air-vessels. The greater whereof are those in the Centre▪
and the utmost standing in a Ring adjacent to ccc or the inner Verge of the Bark. N. B. That in this, and all the other Figures generally, by every single Speck is not re∣presented a single Air-vessel, but a Conjuga∣tion of Air-vessels, sometimes fewer, and sometimes more together. Fig. 2. A slice of the same Root ut traversly about the bottom; wherein both the Succi∣ferous and Air-vessels still keep their gene∣ral position; but the former are not here represented. Fig. 3. A slice of the same Root ut travers∣ly about the middle. aaa ccc. The Bark; wherein the Diametral Portions and the Succiferous Vessels are both omitted. cccccc. Diametral Portions frequently run∣ning betwixt the Centre and the inner Verge of the Bark in just six Rays. Fig 4. A slice of the Root of Cumfry. aaa ccc. The Bark. eee. The position of the Succifrous Vessels; being from the utmost Verge of the Bark to the black Chords peripherial; and from these the inner Verge standing in Columns. ecec. The simply Parenchymous parts of the Bark.
cctt. The position of the utmost Air-vessels in double speck Rays. tte. The position of the inner Air-vessels in Rings. All the white spaces are simply Parenchymous parts of the same substantial nature with the Pith. Fig. 5. A slice of the Root of Fenil. aaaccc. The Bark, or all that prt of the Root which is analogous to it. cebceb. The position of the succiferous Vessels especially called the Lymphaeducts in a triple Order of Rays. eee bbb. The position of the Milk Vessels in speck Rings. The white Lines are Parenchymous portions running through the Bark. ccce. The Air-vessels, somewhat radiated. e. The Pith. Fig. 6. A slice of the Root of Parsnep. aaa eee. The Bark. eee. The position of the Succiferous Vessels in Rays. eee c. The Air-vessels, more plainly radiated about the circumference, and more confu∣sed about the Centre. Fig. 7. A slice of the Root of Beet.
aaa. The Skin. To the first Order of Specks may be accounted the Bark, and no further. cee ccc. The Succiferous Vessels postured in Ring, and those Rings made up of short Rays. The Specks are the Air-vessels, being all postu∣red from the Centre to the Circumference in speck Rings, and those Rings made up of short Rays; especially those betwixt aaa ttt. The white spaces are all Parenchymous parts. Fig. 8. A slice of the Root of Horse-Radish. aaa ccc. The Bark. The Specks therein represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels. ccc vvv. The Air-vessels, standing neither in Rays, nor Rings. e. The Pith. The Specks therein are a few of the succiferous Vessels. Fig. 9. A slice of the Root of Borage. aaa ccc. The Bark. The Succiferous Vessels are here omitted, but are postured in Rays like those in Fig. 30. ccce. The Air-vessels. cece. Their position more in Rays next the inner Verge of the Bark. eee. Their position in Spiral lines next the Centre.
The white Spaces are smply parenchymous parts. Fig. 10. A slice of the Root of Peony. aaa eee. The Bark. The Specks therein represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels. ee cc. The greater part of the Air-vessels po∣stured in a Ring next to the inner Verge of the Bark; and that Ring made up of short Rays; and most of the Vessels herein of a larger size. At the Centre also there are one or two Con∣jugations more of a larger size. The rest standing in Rays betwixt are smaller and more distant. All the white Spaces are simply Parenchymou parts. Fig. 11. A slice of the same Root cut tra∣versly about the thinner part. aaa ccc. The Bark. The Specks therein represent the Succiferous Vessels. ccc. The smaller Air-vessels postured in Rays. The greater standing here only next the Centre, and postured triangularly. Fig. 12. A slice of the thick level Root of Iris tuberosa.
aaa eee. The Bark. Vpon the inner Verge hereof stand the Succi∣ferous Vessels; but are here omitted. eee. The Air-vessels; somewhat closer here than they are in the Root it self. ccc. Other Air-vessels dispersed up and down in several Conjugations irregularly. The Air-vessels of every Conjugation are po∣stured in a little Ring, each Ring or Con∣jugation containing a part of the parenchy∣mous Body as a small Pith within it self, represented by the black Specks. Each one of these Conjugations shooting forth entire with its Pith within, and part of the Parenchyma without, becomes a perpendi∣cular String-Root, like that represented by Fig. 27. Fig. 13. A slice of the Root of Bistort. aaa ccc. The Bark. Vpon the inner Verge of the Bark stand the Succiferous Vessels in a Ring; but are here omitted. ccc eee. The Air-vessels all postured in a speck Ring next the inner Verge of the Bark. eee. The Pith. Fig. 14. A slice of the Root of great Celan∣dine. aaa ccc. The Bark.
The peripherial Lines or Chords, represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels. cece. The Air vessels postured all in Rays from the inner Verge of the Bark towards the Centre. About the Centre more confusedly. ee. The parenchymous or pithy parts. Fig. 15. A slice of the Root of Dandelyon. aaa ccc. The Bark; or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it. The peripherial Lines, or Rings and Chords represent the position of the Succiferous or Milk vessels. ccce. The Air-vessels postured confusedly. e. The Pith. Fig. 16. A slice of the Root of Columbine. aaa ccc. The Bark. The Succiferous Vessels herein postured rather in Rays; though the Graver hath represent∣ed them by Rings. eee. The Air vessels postured in Rays; some whereof are continued to the Centre, others half way, or less. The white Spaces represent the parenchymus parts. Fig. 17. A slice of the Root of Orpine u traversly at the tuberous part.
aaa cc. The Bark. The small Specks represent the position and quantity of the Succiferous Vessels therein. ccc eee. The Air-vessels. ccc. The utmost of them postured in a Ring. eee. Divers of them running from the Ring in Rays towards the Centre. The white Spaces analogous to the Pith. Fig. 18. A slice of the same Root cut tra∣versly at the slender part. Wherein the Air-vessels are postured in a dou∣ble Ring, the one next the Bark, the other next the Centre. Fig. 19. A slice of the Root of Goats beard. aaa ccc. The Bark. ccc. One part of the Succiferous or Milk Ves∣sels postured in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the Bark. And some of them which should have been re∣presented by pricks sprinkled up and down the Bark are omitted. ccce. The Air-vessels all postured in Rays, and running from the inner Verge of the Bark towards the Centre. And a Conjugation of them postured just in the Centre. Betwixt these Rays of Air-vessels run some exceeding small Diametral and more aery
portions of the parenchymous Body. Fig. 20. A slice of the Root of Valerian. aaa ccc. The Bark. ccc. The Succiferous Vessels postured in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the Bark. The Specks represent the Air-vessels postured likewise in a Ring next the inner Verge of the Bark; and some of them radiated to∣wards the Centre. ae. The Pith. Fig. 21. A slice of the thicker part of the level Root of Ammi. The smaller Specks represent the position and quantity of the Succiferous or Milk-vessels in the Bark. The larger Specks represent the Air-vessels po∣stured in a Ring adjacent to it; and usually made up of nine Conjugations. Within is contained the Pith. Fig. 22. A slice of the thinner part of the same level Root. The Succiferous Vessels in the Bark are omit∣ted. The Air-vessels postured in a Ring adjacent to it; and consisting of five Conjugations. Fig. 23. A slice of the perpendicular Root of Ammi.
The smaller Specks are the Succiferous Vessels in the Bark, or that part of the Root ana∣logous to it. The great black Spot representeth the Air-ves∣sels all conjugated or clustered in the Centre. Fig. 24. A slice of the upper part of the Root of Venus Looking-glass. aa cc. The Bark. ee. Some of the Succiferous Vessels postured therein in a Speck Ring. ee cc. And some of them postured in Rays. cc. The Air-vessels; some of them postured in single Conjugations next the Bark, but most in Rays meeting in the Centre. The white Spaces are parenchymous parts. Fig. 25. A slice of the thinner part of the same Root. Wherein the Succiferous Vessels are in part po∣stured into three Chords answerable to the former in a Circle. The rest should have been in short Rays. The Air-vessels are postured in three portions triangularly, and each portion also of a wedged or triangular Figure, the points of all three meeting in the Centre. Fig. 26. A slice of the Root of Sun Spurge. Wherein the Air-vessels are postured in four Conjugations quadrangularly.
Fig. 27. A slice of the perpendicular or String-Root of Aspragus. aaa. The Skin, which is very thick. ae. The Bark; or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it. The small black Rings represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels upon the inner Verge of the Bark; yet not in two Rings as here represented, but in one. The inner white Space representeth the position of the Air-vessels in a thick Ring. The black Spot representeth the small Pith within it. Fig. 28. A slice of the tuberous or thicker part of the Root of Lilium non bulbosum. aaa eee. The Bark; or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it. The Succiferous Vessels are postured in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the Bark, as in A∣sparagus, but here omitted. eee. The Air-vessels postured in a thin Speck Ring. c. The Pith. Fig. 29. A slice of the Root of Jerusalem Artichoke. aaa. The Skin. ccc. The Bark. The Succiferous Vessels therein dispersed up
and down chiefly in specks, and some in shorter Chords, but both are here omitted; and the rest in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the Bark. eeee. Divers other Succiferous Vessels disper∣sed abroad about the Centre; but the Con∣jugations are smaller and less discernable than is represented by these Specks. ddd. The Air-vessels postured in Rays of un∣equal length, and winding to and fro to∣wards the Centre. With each of these Rays other Succiferous Ves∣sels seem to be mixed. All the white Spaces are simply parenchymous and of the same nature with the Pith. Fig. 30. A slice of the Root of Bugloss. aaa eee. The Bark. eee ccc. The Succiferous Vessels therein postu∣red in Rays, and running from the inner Verge thereof towards the Circumference about half way. eee t. The Air-vessels postured in Rays, and running directly from the inner Verge of the Bark towards the Centre. c e t. Parenchymous Portions inserted betwixt all the Rays, and meeting in the Centre. Fig. 31. A slice of a younger Root of E∣ryngo.
aaa eee. The Bark; or all that part of the Root analogous to it. eee ccc. The Succiferous Vessels. eee. Those upon the inner Verge of the Bark posited in a Ring. ec ec ec. Others streaming in Rays towards the Circumference. ccc. The uniting and oval or arched termina∣tion of the Rays. eee v. The Air-vessels posited in a Ring adja∣cent to the inner Verge of the Bark. v. The Pith. Fig. 32. A slice of the Root of Brownwort. aaa eee. The Bark. eee. The Succiferous Vessels posited in a Ring upon the inner Verge thereof. ec ec. The Air-vessels postured in Rays from the inner Verge towards the Centre. ccc. The same Air-vessels standing thicker and altogether confusedly at the Centre. Fig. 33. A slice of the Root of Nettle. aaa ccc. The Bark. ccc. Those Succiferous Vessels that are therein posited in a Ring upon the inner Verge thereof. All the rest of the Succiferous Vessels are po∣sited in divers other Rings standing all one within another.
The Air-vessels are postured in Rays running directly cross the Succiferous Rings. Fig. 34. A slice of the tuberous or thicker part of the Root of Dropwort. aaa ccc. The Bark. ccc. The Succiferous Vessels postured in a Ring. cece. The Air-vessels postured some in single Conjugations adjacent to the inner Verge of the Bark; and some in Rays meeting in the Centre. Fig. 35. A slice of one of the thinner and rounder parts of the Root of Bryony. aaa eee. The Bark. ececec. The Succiferous Vessels posited therein in the form of a Glory, and extended about half way towards the Circumference of the Bark. eeee. The Air-vessels postured partly in Rays, but especially in Rings one within another from the inner Verge of the Bark to the Centre. Round about every Speck or Conjugation Suc∣ciferous Vessels also seem to stand. All the white Spaces are simply parenchymous parts. Fig. 23. A slice of the Root of Melilot. aaa ccc. The Bark. The Specks represent the position of the Succi∣ferous Vessels therein,
The Diametral Portions extended half way towards the Circumference of the Bark are here omitted. ccc. Three very thick Parenchymous or Dia∣metral Portions, postured triangularly, and meeting in the Centre. The Air-vessels are all postured in Rays repre∣sented by the Prick-lines. Both these and the smaller Diametral Portions running betwixt them should have been more numerous. Fig. 37. A slice of the Root of Burnet. aaa eee. The Bark. eee. The position of the Succiferous Vessels in Columns extended half way towards the Circumference. Divers other Succiferous Vessels postured in Chords represented by the black Lines. All the white Spaces are simply Parenchymous parts. The Air-vessels are posited in Rays from the inner Verge of the Bark to the Centre. Fig. 38. A slice of the upper part of the Root of Lovage. aaa ccc. The Bark. The black Lines are the Diametral Portions running through the same from the Cir∣cumference towards the Centre: within the
Bark very conspicuous, but out of it scarce discernable. The little Circles and Specks represent the Suc∣ciferous Vessels posited betwixt the Diame∣tral Portions, some of the Circles on both sides adjoyning to the said Portions. bbb. The more succulent Parenchymous parts of the Bark wherein all the Succiferous Ves∣sels stand. cee. The Air-vessels standing most of them in short Rays from the inner Verge of the Bark towards the Centre, and some of them meet∣ing therein. d. The Pith. Fig. 39. A slice of the smaller part of the same Root. aaa eee. The Bark; or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it. From eee to the Centre stand the Air-vessels all contracted together. Fig. 40. A slice of the Root of Patience. aaa eee. The Bark. ccc. The simply Parenchymous part of the Bark. eee. The Succiferous Vessels postured in Rays, and extended from the inner Verge of the Bark both towards the Circumference and towards the Centre; most of them in the
Bark uniting or arching together. III. Other Succiferous Vessels, many of them winding to and fro in extravagant lines, but most of them postured in little Circles of different sizes, all represented by the Specks. Within every Circle, and the larger white Spa∣ces, are contained the Air-vessels; but not here represented, because, being few, not discernable, except by Glasses. All the other parts of the white Spaces besides where the Air-vessels stand, are simply Pa∣renchymous. Fig. 41. A slice of a small Potato. aaa bbb. The Bark. The Succiferous Vessels are postured therein some in Rays and Specks upon the inner Verge, and others in Chords towards the cir∣cumference; whereof some of them should have been longer. bbb. And the other shorter Lines and Specks towards the Centre, are the Air-vessels. cccc. The simply Parenchymous parts. Fig. 42. A slice of a Carrot. aaa ccc. The Bark. The position of the Succiferous Vessels therein is represented both by the Lines and Specks. ccc. Their position in short Lines upon the inner Verge of the Bark.
cbcbcb. Their position in speck Rays extend∣ed towards the circumference. bbb. Their position in winding lines partly radiated, and partly peripherial: more of which should have been represented adjacent to the Skin, and running sharper and more directly upon the speck Rays. eee. The position of the Air-vessels in short Rays from the inner Verge of the Bark to∣wards the Centre. Divers other Air-vessels sprinkled up and down the pithy part of the Root, represent∣ed by the black Specks; and seeming to be environed with other Succiferous Vessels. NB. That besides the differences betwixt these Roots seen in their Descriptions here set down; divers others may be observed by comparing the Figures together: and many more in viewing them through a Microscope; especially as to the number and size of the Vssels, and of the Bubles of the Parenchy∣mous parts. Though most of the Figures come up to what is material, yet some of them fall short of that elegancy and preciseness visible in the Roots themselves, if cut and observed in a due manner.
TABLE II. Fig. 1. A piece of the Root of Scorzoner split down the middle. aaaa. The Skin or outside of the Bark; which is very rough. cece. The Conjugations of the Succiferous or Milk-vessels, by which partly the skin be∣comes rough. ccc. The Braces of the said Vessels. eee. The Parenchymous parts filling up the spaces betwixt the braced Vessels. aaa ttt. The Bark shewed in the transverse cut. The Specks represent the position of the said Milk-vessels therein. tdtdtd. The Air-vessels postured in Rays. d. A larger Conjugation of them in the Centre. Fig. 2. A piece of the Bark of the Root of Garden Burnet; which stripeth off much better than that of Scorzonera. aaaa. The inside thereof represented and laid flat. The black Lines represent the position of the Succiferous Vessels. At the white Spaces they are divaricated by their Braces.
Fig. 3. A piece of the same Scorzonera Root before in part described. aaa. Representeth the middle part or sub∣stance of the Bark, the outward part being pred off. ce ce ce. The above said Milk-vessels. cccc. Their Braces here towards the inner Verge of the Bark more numerous. eeee. The arenchymous parts filling up the spaces betwixt the braced Vessels. Fig. 4. A piece of the Root of Dandelyon split down the middle. ac ac. The thickness of the Bark, or all that part of the Root analogous to it. ssss. The Conjugations of the Milk-vessels running through it: which shuld not have been represented by Lines altogether conti∣nuous, but frequently broken off (as those in the Bark of Burnet) where they are diva∣ricated by their Braces. aeaded. The said Milk vessels as they appear postured in Chords and Rings upon the tra∣verse cut. ccc. The Air-vessels all clustered together in the Centre. Fig. 5. A piece of the same Scorzonera Root before in part described. aaaa. Representeth it with the Bark striped
off by half its circumference. eded. The Air-vessels adjacent to the inner Verge of the Bark. ddd. The Braces of the Air-vessels conforma∣ble to the utmost Braces of the Milk-vessels represented in Fig. 1. of this Table. eee. The Parenchymous parts filling up the spaces betwixt the braced Air-vessels. ccce. The Air-vessels appearing in the traverse cut, as in Fig. 1. of this Table. The Lines should have run directly upon the Specks; the Specks being the terminations of the said Lines or Air-vessels running through the length of the Root from the in∣ner Verge of the Bark to the Centre. Fig. 6. A piece of the same Scorzonera Root split down the middle, as the first. aaaa. Representeth the inside or the flat of the said piece. ded ded. The Air-vessels running through it betwixt the inner Verge of the Bark and the Centre. vvv. The breaking off of the said Vessls where they are divaricated by their Braces. eeee. A larger Conjugation or Cluster of the said Vessels at the Centre, and there more closely braced. ca ba. The Bark and the Milk-vessels therein appearing upon the transverse cut.
c c. The Air-vessels. Fig. 7. A slice of the Root of Borage cut down the middle. aa cc. The thickness of the Bark. cccc. The Air-vessels represented by all the broken Lines. cc. Most of the said Vessels more frequently braced towards the inner Verge of the Bark, being broken or cut off at every Brace. eeee. Some few of them braced more closely at the Centre; and many of the Braces ap∣pearing together unbroken. edc. The gradual approach of the said Vessels towards the circumference at the top of the Root. d. The Pith thereby made. Fig. 8. A slice of a Carrot cut down the middle. ad ad. The thickness of the Bark. dbb dbb. The Air-vessels running through the Root. db. Their closer position, more frequent Bra∣ces, and greater number next the inner Verge of the Bark. The rest about the middle and Centre repre∣sented by the smaller Lines: the greater should have been so many light shades re∣presenting the more sappy parts of the Pa∣renchymous
or pithy body where some sow of the Succiferous Vessels seem to run. One or two Conjugations should also have been drawn from d to e at the top, bounding the Pith in an Hyperbolical Figure. eeee. Some of the Succiferous Vessels gathered together more numerously at the top of the Root, without any Air-vessels mixed with them. cccc. The Side-leaves. ae. The Centre-leaves springing up either be∣fore or upon the Caulis. de. The Space wherein some both of the Suc∣ciferous and Air-vessels are, by degrees, collaterally distributed into the said Leaves cc a e. Fig. 9. A slice of the Root of Parsly cut down the middle. ad ad. The thickness of the Bark. vvv. The Air-vessels: but the Lines by which they are represented should not have been altogether continuous, as they are, below the oval, nor all out so numerous. ve ve. The Conjugations of the said Vessels running along the circumference, and meet∣ing at the Basis of the Caulis, and so bound∣ing the Pith in an oval Figure. ca ca. The Side-leaves. ee. The Centre-leaves.
s t l e. Some of the Succiferous Vessels stand∣ing in the Pith without any Air-vessels mix∣ed with them. s vv. Some of them more numerous and con∣fused. tt ll. Others of them arched. ll e. The Arches closer and more obtuse. In the traverse cut of the Root the same Suc∣ciferous Vessels appear postured in Rings. sss. The Parenchymous parts of the Pith. Fig. 10. A piece of the Root of Jerusalem Artichoke cut by the length. aaaa. As it appeareth with part of the Bark paired off. cece. The Air-vessels. cc. The Braces of the said Vessels, being very rare. eeee. The Succiferous Vessels with their Bra∣ces, which are exceeding numerous, and much divaricated. The white Spaces are Parenchymous parts. Fig. 11. The Root of Jerusalem Artichoke. aaa. As it appeareth with all the Bark paired off. bd. The Air-vessels. d. Their Braces. bcd. The Spaces betwixt them filled up with the Parenchymous body.
cc ee. The manner of the eruption of a Root-Bud, or of a Trunk from the Root. The Rings are made up chiefly of the Succife∣rous, and the Rays and Specks of the Air-vessels. e. The Pith in the Centre of the Bud. TABLE III. Fig. 1. A slice of one of the perpendicular or String-Roots of Asparagus cut trans∣versly. aaa. As it appeareth to the bare eye. The utmost black Ring is the Skin. eee. The Bark, or all that part of the Root which is analogous to it. The inner black Ring sheweth the position of the Succiferous Vessels upon the inner Verge of the Bark. Within which the Air-vessels stand, and should have been represented by another white Ring. And within this a very small Pith according to Fig. 27. (Tab. I.) above described. AA. One half of the same slice as it appear∣eth through the Microscope. bb. The Skin; composed throughout into Bubles. It should have been bounded by a Line from the rest of the Bark to the thickness of about one third of an Inch.
AA. GG. The Bark, or all that part of the Root analogous to it; composed throughout into Bubles. ee. The Bubles of the Bark; here more round. The Texture of the fibrous Threds whereof they are composed, is not here represented, be∣cause that will be more perspicuous in the draught of the Pith of the Root. DD. GG. The position of the Succiferous Vessels in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the Bark. GG. TT. The Air-vessels also postured in a Ring; and of a larger size. The white Rings shew the sides of the said Air-vessels. The black Spots within them shew their Con∣caves. The Spaces betwixt them filled up with a mix∣ed body, partly consisting of Succiferous Vessels, but chiefly Parenchymous. TT. The Pith, composed throughout into Bu∣bles. Fig. 2. A slice of the slender part of the Root of Jerusalem Artichoke cut trans∣versly. aaa. As it appeareth to the bare eye. ccc. The Bark. ce ce ce. Both the Succiferous and the Air-vessels represented by the black Lines, the
Succiferous being postured directly against the Air-vessels, upon the inner Verge of the Bark. But the Lines are too few. e. The Pith. AA. One half of the same slice as it appear∣eth through the Microscope. bb. The Skin. AA. EE. The Bark. The black Columns are the Succiferous Ves∣sels. SS. The younger and more succulent portion of the said Vessels postured in Chords. In the other parts of the Columns stand the elder and less succulent. Amongst them stand the Air-vessels, of a smaller size, and about four or six in eve∣ry Column. EL. EL. Other Columns betwixt them wholly Parenchymous. LL. The Pith. ee. The Bubles of the Pith, which are very large, and most of the largest by the Wef∣tage of their composing Fibres made an∣gular. TABLE IV. Fig. 1. A slice of a smaller Root of Dan∣delyon cut traversly. aa. As it appeareth to the bare eye, answera∣ble to Fig. 15. Tab. I.
AA. One half of the same slice as it appeareth through a Microscope. CC. The Skin. AA. GG. The Bark; or all that part of the Root analogous to it. DTG. The position of the Succiferous or Milk-vessels amongst the smaller Bubles, in Chord-Rings; the Chords being of diffe∣rent lengths in the same Ring. EE. The Parenchymous Rings betwixt them all from C. to G. wherein the Bubles are of a larger size; yet all of them small in re∣spect of those in many other Roots. GT. GT. The Bubles streaming in Rays cross three or four of the black Rings; in which space other Succiferous Vessels, scil. Lym∣phaeducts seem to be mixed with the La∣cteal. From GG. inward stand the Air-vessels, all contracted into a Cylinder in the Centre: The larger whereof about the Centre, the smaller next the Bark. And all of them small in comparison with those in many other Roots. The Spaces betwixt them filled up with a mix∣ed body, partly consisting of Succiferous Vessels, but chiefly Parenchymous. Fig. 2. A slice of the smaller part of the Root of Marsh-mallow cut traversly.
aa. As it appeareth to the bare eye according to the Description of Fig. 2. Tab. I. AA. One half of the same slice as it appear∣eth through a Microscope. bb. The Skin; not altogether so thick; and the Bubles rather postured in Rays. DA. DA. The Bark. GG. The Succiferous Vessels postured in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the Bark. SS. LL. The rest of the Succiferous Vessels standing in more distinct Conjugations throughout the Bark both in Rings and Rays represented by the black Spots. SL. SL. The Parenchymous parts of the Bark standing betwixt them. From DD. to the Centre stand the Air-ves∣sels. DT. DT. Some few of them postured in Rays: the parts betwixt which are wholly Parenchymous or pithy. From TT. inward the rest, and greater part of the Air-vessels standing together in the Centre. TABLE V. Fig. 1. A slice of the lower part of the Root of Bugloss cut traversly, as it appeareth to the bare eye. a. The Skin. a e. The Bark.
ccc. The Succiferous Vessels in a Ring. Within them the Air-vessels. Fig. 2. The same slice, as it appeareth through a Microscope. A. bbbb. The Skin; which should have been somewhat thicker. AA. LL. The Bark. bb. GG. The Bubles of the Bark postured ra∣ther circularly. GG. FF. The rest of the Bubles all radiated; amongst which 'tis probable some few of the Succiferous Vessels run. SS. The arching of the Buble-Rays. FF. LL. The Succiferous Vessels more visibly and numerously postured in a Ring upon the inner Verge of the Bark. Within stand the Air-vessels postured in Rays, most of them meeting in the Centre. ttt. A single Air-vessel. ll. A Conjugation of two in the peripherial posture. ff. A Conjugation of three in the Diametral posture. eee. Some of them more firmly contained to∣gether in the Centre by the Parenchymous Threds. dddd. Parenchymous parts. TABLE VI. Fig. 1. A slice of the lower part of the Root
of Horse-Radish cut traversly, as it appear∣eth to the bare eye. a. The Skin. ac. The Bark, with the Succiferous Vessels therein represented by the smaller Specks. Within stand the Air-vessels represented by the larger and blacker Specks. e. The Pith. Fig. 2. The same slice, as it appeareth through a Microscope. AA. The Skin. A. B. The Bark. B. L. The Succiferous Vessels therein postured in the form of a Glory. B.G. The Air-vessels postured in a thick Ring; the several Conjugations whereof are ra∣diated. G. E. Other Succiferous Vessels within the Air-vessels postured in a thin Ring. E. The Pith. ee. The Bubles of the Pith. TABLE VII. Fig. 1. Should have represented a slice of a small Root of a Vine cut traversly; but the Sculpture is utterly false. Fig. 2. The same slice, as it truly appeareth through a Microscope.
A. The Skin. A. B. The Bark. S. The Succiferous Vessels therein postured in more distinct Portions, the Figure of eah Portion coming near an half-oval. LLL. The woody part of the Root consisting of Vessels originally succiferous. Amongst them stand the Air-vessels of diffe∣rent sizes. eee. One of the largest. e. A Conjugation of three small ones. DD. Parenchymous or Diametral Portions inserted betwixt the aforesaid Vessels about a third part towards the Centre; the Bu∣bles whereof are quadrilateral. B. G. Other larger and longer Portions conti∣nuous with the Bark, and pointing near the Centre. B. L. Six others all meeting in the Centre, and crossing each other almost at equal An∣gles. FINIS.
Tab. 1
Tab. 2
Tab. 3
Tab. 4
Tab. 5
Tab. 6
Tab. 7
