G2159 12781800 93829
A SERMON, Preached before the King & Queen AT WHITEHALL. June the 1st. 1690. By Robert Grove, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to their MAJESTIES. Published by their Majesties special Command. LONDON, Printed for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1690.
1 John II. 15. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Fa∣ther is not in him. LOVE is the most powerful of all the Passions of the Soul; and that which does most ef∣fectually byass and incline the Mind unto any Object it happens to be placed upon. And there are two things in the general that do most earnestly court us, and one of them is always sure to win our Affections. God himself, out of his Infinite tenderness to the Sons of Men, is pleas'd so far to condescend,
as to woo and beseech us to be recon∣ciled unto him: And he enforces his suit by the real proposal of Peace and Honour, Glory and Immortality, and Everlasting Joys. And on the other side, the world too; that strives to gain the greatest in∣terest in our Hearts, and endeavours to work upon us by the vain promises of some transitory Pleasures; a little Wealth, and a certain kind of Happiness, which it pretends it can bestow upon us out of hand: And if we harken to the one of these, we shall become Sober, Good, and Holy Men, and shall be sure at the last not to lose our Reward: But if we give ear to the other, we shall grow vain and wicked in our imaginations, eager and rest∣less in the pursuit of shadows and trifles, and in the end we shall be most certain∣ly defeated of all our foolish hopes; so that our love, according as it is diversly plac'd, becomes the Original of all the Good and Evil in the world, and of that Happiness or Misery that is consequent up∣on
them; and the whole of Moral Divinity does in some sort depend upon the due ma∣nagement and regulation of this one Pas∣sion. And because the Vanities of this present world are very apt to insinuate themselves into our Affections, and get too great an interest in them, we may easily understand what Reason we have to be always mindful of the serious Caution and Exhortation of the holy Apostle, which I have read unto you; Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For the better Explication and Improvement of which words, I shall discourse something briefly upon these five general Heads: And shew, 1. First, What is here meant by the world, and the things that are in it. 2. Secondly, How far it may be lawful for us to love them. 3. Thirdly, What kind of love of them it is which is here forbidden.
4. Fourthly, That such a love of them is inconsistent with the love of God. 5. Fifthly, and lastly, I shall lay down some Directions how to avoid this ir∣regular and inordinate love of the world. I. First, What is here meant by the World, and the things that are in the World. And there can be no doubt, but that according to the usual phrase of the holy Scriptures, we are to understand this inferiour and sublunary world; the Earth which we do for the present inhabit; this place, where Labours and Sorrows have taken up their abode, ever since the fall of Man. And the things of the world are the various Objects of our Senses; the several Toys and Vanities that are wont to charm our deluded Fancies and Appe∣tites. They are very commonly, and well enough divided into Pleasures, Profits, and Honours; for this is the sum total of all earthly Enjoyments; this is the utmost
that the Carnal Man desires, and this is all that the world is able to give. St. John, in the words that immediately follow my Text, describes these things by the effects which they too often have upon us, when he calls them the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; and tells us that this is all that is in the world; that is, There is nothing else there, but what may occasionally excite and foment such inclinations as these: Nothing but what may either prompt us to Sensuallty and In∣temperance; or make us guilty of Cove∣tousness and Injustice; or swell us up with ambitious and aspiring thoughts. Such is the world, and such are all the things that are in it. II. Let us in the second place consider, how far it may be lawful for us to love these things: For they are not absolutely Evil in themselves, but may sometimes be made so unto us, by our abuse of them; but God created them all for good purpo∣ses; and therefore we may love them in
some measure without offence, if we be but careful to observe these and the like Cau∣tions: 1. First, we must love them but accord∣ing to the nature and usefulness of them. Every Creature of God is good; and eve∣ry degree of goodness does naturally re∣quire a sutable degree of love; and our love is then reasonable, and such as becomes wise and sober men, when we do, as much as may be, proportion our affections to the worth and dignity of the Object. God therefore being infinitely good, our love to him, as far as is possible, ought likewise to be boundless and immense, stretched out, and extended to the very utmost capacities of our Souls. And for other things, it is lawful for us to love them too, so far as they do participate of that Supreme and So∣veraign Goodness. The real Perfection of the Object ought to be the standing Mea∣sure whereby we should always limit and re∣gulate our love. And if we do but careful∣ly observe this Rule, there is nothing that
God has made which may not afford us some innocent delight or advantage. The very Pleasures of Sense, wherein men are ge∣nerally the most apt to offend, and run in∣to excess, yet these, if they be duly circum∣scribed, and kept within the bounds which the Laws of God and Nature have set them, may be harmless, and allowable. Riches may be lawfully desired by us, as they serve the necessities and conveniencies of this mortal life; as they may make our Charity more useful and beneficial unto others; and as they maintain that difference of Degrees and Quality amongst men, which is abso∣lutely necessary to the preservation of good Order and Government in the world. Ho∣nour is not wholly to be despised, as it is a Tribute which ought to be paid to great and virtuous Actions; as it confirms the testi∣monies of our own Consciences; and as it gives us many opportunities of doing good, which we could not have without the assi∣stance of a clear and spotless Reputation. And in such a manner as this we are not
forbidden to love the things of the world: and if any man will make it his choice, to rid his Soul wholly of all earthly concerns, to make the more room for the love of God, and the continual exercise of devotion; this indeed may be an act of heroical piety in him; but yet those that love these things, with that limitation which I have now laid down, are not therefore to be condemned. 2. Secondly, in our love to the world, and the things of it, we must have a regard to the duration and continuance of them. If they were of infinitely greater value than they are, yet we know that it is but a very little while that we can enjoy them. All things here below are perpetually in moti∣on, they are tossed to and fro like the waves of the Sea: They are exposed to ten thou∣sand casualties and disasters, that are ready every moment to snatch them out of our hands. Or if possibly we should be so for∣tunate as to escape all these, yet we are sure that we our selves are hasting continually towards the Grave, and that it cannot be
long before we must go away hence, and be seen no more. There is nothing here to be depended upon. However prosperous our condition may be for the present, the whole scene of Affairs may be suddenly changed. The clearest day may be presently overcast, and the brightest Sun may set in a Cloud. Our Estates may be lost, our Friends may forsake us, our Children may dye, our Plea∣sures will decay, our Credit and Esteem a∣mongst men may be quickly blasted by a slanderous tongue, and end in ignominy and disgrace: However, it cannot be avoided but that our Pomp and our Honour, and all that we have, must at last be laid down, and covered in the dust. And since then that the good things of this world are known to be so very transient and uncertain in their own nature, we may love them, provided our love be suited to the condition of the things themselves; it must not be a settled, fixed, and unmoveable love. We must consider that they are rather lent, than given us; and we should be as ready to restore,
as we were to receive them. We must chearfully deliver up all our earthly Con∣cerns to the wise and gracious disposal of Almighty God. A Stoical Apathy is more indeed than is required of us. The true Christian may be something delighted with temporal Blessings, and not altogether in∣sensible of worldly misfortunes; but then the pleasure he takes in the enjoyment of them is sober and temperate, and the grief he conceives at the parting with them is not excessive. He is a little delighted with the Gourd while it flourishes, but he does not fret and grow angry when it withers away. He enjoys the world with moderation, and lets it go without any anxious and despond∣ing thoughts. 3. Thirdly, We must be careful that the love of any thing in the world be never more prevalent with us than the love of God. The most incomprehensible Excellencies of his Divine Nature do command us to reve∣rence and admire him; and the unspeakable Benefits he has already bestowed, and the
many Blessings which he is continually heap∣ing up on us, and the glorious Promises which he has made us of Life and Salvation, are the strongest obligations imaginable for us to return unto him the greatest vigour and intenseness of our Affections. And when such a love of our Maker has gotten the su∣preme power and soveraignty in our Hearts, so that our minds are effectually swayed and inclined as they are directed by that, then some lower degree of complacency may be allow'd to these inferiour things without of∣fence. Our love of the world is not sinful when it is kept within the just bounda∣ries that I have now prescribed; when we love it but according to the nature and du∣ration of it, and always with submission to the love of God. III. And from these things which I have now briefly discours'd, it may plainly ap∣pear, What kind of love of the world it is which is here forbidden, which was the third general thing that I laid down. 1. And, First, Therefore our love of the
world is unlawful, when we love it beyond the natural worth and value of it. And this does manifestly discover it self, when our desires after it are violent and impetuous; when we are impatient in the pursuit, and intemperate in the enjoyment; when we are so passionately bent upon our pleasures, as if these sordid and muddy delights were the only or the chiefest happiness we did ex∣pect; when we are so extremely fond of be∣ing rich and great, that we are restless and uneasie with a competent Estate, and a mo∣derate Fortune seems a burden unto us; when we are so transported with any de∣gree of Honour and Eminency we may chance to attain, that we are presently fill'd with lofty and foolish imaginations; when we envy our Superiors, despise our Equals, and look down with scorn and disdain upon our Inferiors. When we find our selves to be thus disposed in any of these or the like instances, it is a sign that our Affections for the world are irregular and extravagant, a great deal bigger than the things deserve.
And when they are so, they become the immediate and necessary causes of all the miseries and mischiefs that ever do or can befal us. They are these that push Men forward to all the acts of wickedness and folly, and hurry them on to their own de∣struction. They are these that tempt the licentious Epicure to all his Debaucheries; that make him run with greediness into all manner of excess; that provoke him to break down the inclosures that God has made, and lye in wait to defile his Neigh∣bour's Bed. They are these that besot the Covetous Wretch with a different sort of sensuality, and make him drunk with the tears of Widows and Orphans; that turn him into a kind of moral Cannibal, that even tears and devours the flesh of the Poor. They are these that are the real occasions of all the Murder, and Rapine, and Desolati∣on that we daily see or hear of in the world; the most furious and bloody Wars and mi∣litary executions, in which so many inno∣cent Mens lives are thrown away, and so
many thousand Families most miserably ru∣ined, are frequently nothing else but the tragical effects of a mind swollen and di∣stemper'd with Cruelty and Ambition. Such are the lamentable consequences that do na∣turally follow the immoderate love of any worldly thing. For our earthly Passions are like a River; while they keep themselves with∣in their proper Channel, they slide along gently, and observe a regular course, and may make our lives both pleasant and fruit∣ful; but when they begin to swell and grow turbulent, and overflow their Banks, there is nothing then to be expected but a flood and inundation of all manner of sin. 2. Secondly, Our love of the world is faul∣ty again, when we do not consider the short continuance of it, and how little a while it is that we can possibly enjoy it. And in this the strange inadvertency of the gene∣rality of Men is much to be admited. In their prosperity they are apt to think that they shall never be moved; and live as if they were not Strangers and Pilgrims, but
that they had a sure and settled dwelling here upon Earth. The experience of every day is enough to convince them how ridicu∣lously they are mistaken: they should there∣fore restrain their love to these fading Vani∣ties, and make it as temporary as the Objects of it are; for it is absurd and unreasonable to have permanent and immortal affections for transient and perishable things. The Branches should wither and die when the Root is decayed from whence they did spring. It lays a certain foundation for per∣petual disquietude and anguish of mind, to have vigorous desires remaining in us, when every thing that should give them any satis∣faction is irreparably lost. St. John tells us, v. 17. that the world passeth away: and there∣fore our love for it should pass away with it; or else in stead of giving us any content∣ment and delight, as we might vainly hope, it will serve for nothing but to gall and tor∣ment us. 3. Thirdly, The love of the world is for∣bidden when it has a greater power upon us
than the love of our Maker has. And we may certainly judge that the case is thus, when ever we are tempted and prevailed up∣on to sin against God, by the proposal of any present Pleasure or Advantage. As when we shall dare to be guilty of Injustice or Op∣pression, to encrease our Fortunes, and ad∣vance our selves to some farther degree of Wealth or Honour; when we will venture to run into excess of Wine, to gratifie a brutish appetite, or please an unreasonable and senseless humour. This is an infallible argument that the love of worldly things has got the dominion in our hearts, when we do thus prefer them before our eternal Concerns, and chuse rather to offend a gra∣cious God, than to disoblige an unruly Lust. 'Tis exceeding strange that the love of any thing else should have a more forceable in∣fluence upon our Affections, and move us more powerfully than the love of infinite Goodness can. But, alas! we find it very often too true: The lesser Magnet draws the Iron from the embraces of the greater:
We forsake our God, and stick close to our Vanities; we let go the hope we might have in the Almighty, and cling fast to every tri∣fle. Scarce an impotent Passion can start up in our hearts, but it shall be more readily obey'd than the Great Majesty of Heaven and Earth. And this must needs provoke him to the highest degree of displeasure; not to see us take some delight in the good things of this life which he has given us; for this we may lawfully do, as has been said before; but to observe that our minds are so engaged upon them, that we neglect his Commandments for their sakes, and pay that homage and obedience unto them that can be due only to Him. And therefore those lewd persons that are describ'd by the holy Apostle, Rom. 1. are said, v. 25. to have served the creature more than the Creator. And those upon whom that black Character is fix'd in the beginning of 2 Tim. 3. you shall find, v. 4. that they were lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God. And thus may
you see what kind of love of the world it is which is here forbidden. IV. I come, Fourthly, to shew, but very briefly, that such a love of it is inconsistent with the love of God. This will stand in need of no further proof, but only to con∣sider that God and the world are in them∣selves of a very different Nature, and do command us clean contrary things; and we can no more love these two in the same eminent degree, than we can bear allegiance to several Princes, whose Interests are con∣tinually clashing, and that are frequently in open hostility one with the other. For God commands us to abstain from fleshly Lusts, and to taste of worldly Delights with great caution and sobriety; Sensuality perswades us to give the reins to our Appetites, to take our fill, and even cloy our selves with car∣nal Pleasures: God commands us to be li∣beral and open-handed to those that are in want, and especially to be sure that we do no wrong nor injustice to our Neighbour;
Covetousness advises us by any means to hold our own; not to be moved with the cries and groans of the needy, and if we can but increase our store, never matter how we do it, tho it should be with the utter ruine of many a poor, distressed, helpless Creature: God commands us to submit our selves to be dispos'd of by him, and to be contented with the Portion his Provi∣dence has allotted us; Pride will be still aspiring, and egging us on to seek after greater Honours; it is querulous and im∣patient, always dissatisfi'd with the state it is in. These are a few short instances of some of those things which God and the world do severally require of us; and which of these two we love the best, his Com∣mands we shall be sure the most readily to obey: For both we cannot, unless we had the art of reconciling Contradictions, un∣less we could be sober and intemperate, kind and hard-hearted, upright and unjust, hum∣ble and proud, both at once. Light and Darkness may sooner agree, than such oppo∣site
dispositions can be entertain'd together in the same Breast, at the same time. This repugnancy is plainly declared, Jam. 4. 4. know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God. And of this too we are to understand those expressions of our blessed Saviour, Mat. 6. 24. No Man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. It is im∣possible to hold the Scale so even, and bal∣lance our affections so very equally betwixt God and the world, but that one side will always preponderate; and how much weight soever we add unto that, so much of neces∣sity must be taken from the other. The love of God will decay and grow less, in the same proportion that the love of the world encreases in us: And again, as our minds are more strongly bent upon divine and heavenly Objects, the less careful and soli∣citous shall we be about temporal things.
And thus have we seen what is meant by the world; what love of it may be lawful, and what is here forbidden, and that this is in∣consistent with the love of God. V. I come now to the Fifth and last thing, to lay down some Directions how to avoid this irregular and inordinate love of the world. And to this end, 1. First, We should labour to get a true notion and estimate of things: For we are commonly mistaken; the world imposes upon our Imaginations, it cheats us into an unreasonable fondness, before we can tell what it is with which we are so strangely enamoured. It makes early impressions up∣on our tender years, and insinuates into us besore we arrive at any ripeness of Judg∣ment: It is always present with us, and per∣petually beating upon our senses, making a noise in our ears, and displaying all its gaudery before our eyes. It possesses our minds in such a manner that it will not give
us leisure to consider seriously of any thing else. And no wonder then, that they that know nothing of the substance, should be mightily taken with such a shadow of hap∣piness. But we should be of another mind, if we were truly sensible of the wonderful excellency of that blessed state which God has prepared for those that love him; and how empty and insignificant all things are which we can ever hope to enjoy here. For our love of any thing is always measured by the opinion we have of the goodness of it. And we should never love the world much, if we did but rightly understand what it were. 2. Secondly, When we have gotten right apprehensions of these things, we should be often rowling them over in our thoughts, and meditate upon them, till our hearts be affected with a due sense of them, and then compare them together, and judge impar∣tially what it is that does really deserve the greatest share of our love. It is the want of
this that causes so many to rush heedlesly in∣to destruction. For if the miserable World∣ling did but sit down and compute how little he is like to gain at the last by the treasures of unrighteousness; if the idle Sensualist did but think with himself how dearly he must pay for his stoln pleasures; if the proud and ambitious man would be pleas'd to con∣sider that he pawns his soul for a puff of air; they might all possibly be inclin'd to more so∣ber thoughts, and moderate desires. For 'tis altogether incredible that any one that is not under the power of a perfect frenzie, should deliberately make such a foolish exchange, and cast away the hopes of a blessed Eternity for the unsatisfactory pursuit of some fading impertinencies, which shall be certainly con∣cluded with everlasting Miseries. 3. Thirdly, We should firmly resolve to act agreeably to the judgment we have made. This is the greatest security we have; with∣out this it is not sufficient to have right ap∣prehensions, and some good inclinations
We may know well enough that the world is nothing but a grand Impostor, a great Ma∣gician that inchants our minds, and deludes our senses with false appearances; and we may have some faint wishes that we might be delivered from the power of these Charms: but this notwithstanding we may be born down by the stream, and hurried away by the violence of temptation, or allured by the importunity of some pleasing passion. To these dangers therefore we must oppose our greatest strength, and arm our minds with a steddy resolution to act conformably to the determinations of our Conscience. This may preserve us upright and intire in the midst of all assaults: For when it is assisted by the grace of God, there is nothing able to over∣power the will of a man. 4. Fourthly, We should herein exercise a kind of self denial, and abridge our selves sometimes of some delights we might have innocently taken. We should not always go to the extreme point of our liberty, nor
use the utmost freedom that might be given us, even in lawful things. This will keep our Appetites within compass, and bring them into better obedience.: For when they have been used to be constantly gratifi'd, they grow the more craving; they run after their several Objects with the greater impa∣tience, and will be very apt to transgress their bounds: But when they are curb'd and restrain'd, they become gentle and tractable, and resign themselves quietly to the conduct of our Reason; and they can∣not be in such danger of being carried in∣to any extravagance, when they are not suffered to go to the extremity of what is lawful. Some voluntary abstinencies are a good guard upon the Soul: He that would love the world no more than he should, must not always use it so much as he might. V. Lastly We should address our selves frequently to Almighty God by Supplication
and Prayer. This is the only way to pro∣cure that Grace, which is absolutely neces∣sary to enable us to overcome the world; and besides that, it will likewise acquaint us with Heavenly things, and make them more familiar and pleasant to our thoughts. And when, by this holy entercourse with our Maker, we shall have attained any relish for Spiritual Joys, we shall quickly despise all those fulsom and unmanly Plea∣sures we admired before. We shall soon perceive that there is no comparison be∣twixt Earth and Heaven; and that the Crowns of Glory which we expect, do infinitely outshine all the glittering Vani∣ties of the world. And we shall love God above all, and all things else for him; or rather we shall love him in them, by loving them only as the Effects and Ema∣nations of his Goodness and Wisdom, ac∣knowledging his Bounty, and praising his Name for whatever we enjoy: And so shall the love of the world be lost and
swallowed up in the love of God, till at length it be compleat, and consummated in his Heavenly Kingdom: Of which God of his Infinite Mercy make us all partakers, through Jesus Christ our Lord: Amen. FINIS.
