G665 26984901 109902
An Invitation to Mr. John Garlick's House at the Sign of the George in Love-Lane near Billingsgate, to the Eating of a Dish of Meat, called, a SPANISH OLEO. COME to the George you Epicurean Crew That love good Eating, there's a Dish that's New; No Friggecy, Randula, or Reguse, No Gallick, Kickshaw, vulgarly ye use At Gambles, Lambs, and Lockets for to eat; No, 'tis an OLEO, a more Spermatick Meat, Not fit for every Son of Truckle Bed, Incipit, Dull, Illiterate Logerhead; That knows no difference high or low Between Cow Heel, and Pigs Pettito: No, 'tis an OLEO for Doctors to advise, Medicinally to be eaten by the Wise, It is Compos'd of all Delicious things That might create an Appetite in Kings. 'Twas brought from Spain a Rarity, To be admir'd for its Variety; And now in practice put, as I will tell, By one that does in Cookery excel, To Dress an OLEO in which is Natures Treasure, To please the Sense with extasy of pleasure. Of Heavens Bounty we collect the chief Of every thing, to give Mankind relief. The best part of the Ox, the Sheep, the Lamb, the Kid, Nay Venison you'l find in OLEO hid. The Cock, the Hen, the Duck, sometimes the Phesant, All sorts of Foul to make OLEO pleasant. Of Forreign Dainties I could many reckon, Polonia Sassage and Westphalia Bacon. The Pulse of Peas, Mushromes, and Anchovis, Not understood by every Fool and Novis. Of numerous Plants that grow we pick and cull, Of luscious Roots we fill the Caldron full. From India we have Spice to cheer the Heart, OLEO is made with cost and curious Art, To diffuse and quicken each Benummed Part. Should I the Vertues write of this same OLEO, It could not be contained but in Folio; In Vigorous Youth it operates with wonder, Each Hour with strong desires to lay asunder; As you may guess in old Decrepit Age, It warms the Blood with tickling Amorous Rage, And by its subtle Magick does command To make the Thing that has no Legs to stand; It nourish the Concoctors, fills the Veins, Inliv'n Nature, Coroborates the Reins; And in nine Months by Chymick Art brings forth Not only one, but two or three at Birth. And therefore OLEO may in Truth be said To be twin Broth, to delight the Lustful Maid. There's nothing better to make fit the Bride, And make the Groom a Gallop for to Ride.
The Marri'd Woman, that loves to have her Fill▪ Intreats her Husband to eat of OLEO still; The afflicted Widow that has but cold desire, Let her eat OLEO 'twill set her Nerves on fire. It dissipates the Serum of the Blood, And for the Stomack it is very good. If th' Head be out of order it giveth ease, And Cures the Hungry Passion, a Disease That's many times the Original of Strife, And maketh difference between Man and Wife. Is Colon angry? go to the George I pray, I'le hold a Guinney you come pleas'd away. It pacifies the Gut when it has bin For want condemn'd to be a Chitterlin▪ The Strength of OLEO keeps the World alive, And for a Cordial th' best Restorative. Now for Accommodations you will find The Master of the House to be very kind. But to oblige him, this remember ever, After you've eat, wash OLEO from the Liver. He has most curious Mum, Beer and Ale, Syder, Tobacco, Brandy to prevail To please his Guest, the Stomack that require A Glass of Wine shall have to his desire: There's nothing wanting, if you'l a Shilling spend, You may with OLEO treat your Self and Friend. Women it Sportful make, and Men Warlick, And no where to be had, but at the George with Garlick. Olla Podrida. OLLA del Nombre Latino Olla, es un vaso de Cosina en qu se cueze principalmente la carne y todas las demas cosas. Po la figura Metonimia se toma Olla por lo que esta dentro della: Pro¦verbio: Pense que no tenia Marido, y comime la olla: Sessenta oll al mes es el Govierno de un Hidalgo provido, por que la olla a ala Comida como alla Cena, satisfaze ala gente con la carne, y l demas que se echa en ella y con una escudilla de sopas. Olla podrida es la que es muy grande y contiene en si varias sas como Tocino Carnero, Vaca, Gallinas, Capones, Longanissa, pie de puerco, Apos, Cebollas, &c. Puedese desir podrida en quanto s cueze muy despacio, que casi lo questiene dentro viene a desazer y por esta razon se dize podrida como la fruta que se madura dema siado, Pero aquelle podrido es lo que da el gusto y punto. Andreas Bacio Medico Romano en el libro que hizo de Natur Vinorum dize que olla podrida es lo mismo que poderida, convicn assaber, poderosa porsei tan grande, y porque da tanta sustancia, Nutrimento al Cuerpo humano. Es la Ollasin Tocino, qual Sermo sin Augustino. Richard Gibbs. London, Printed by J. R. for the Author. 1683.
