G510A 99827987 32413
A General sale of Rebellious Houshold-stuff. To the Tune of, Old Simon the King. REbellion hath broken up House, and hath left me old lumbar to sell, Come hither and take your choice, I'le promise to use you well. Will you buy the Old Speakers Chair, which is warm and easie to sit in, And oftentimes has been made clean when as it was fouler than fitting. Says old Symon the King, says old Symon the King, With his thread-bare clothes, and his mamsey nose, sing hey ding, ding, a ding, ding. Will you buy any Bacon-Flitches, they'r the fattest that ever was spent, They'r the sides of the old Committees fed up with the long Parliament. Here's a pair of Bellows and Tongs, and for a small Matter I'le sell 'em, They'r made of the Presbyters Lungs, to blow up the Coals of Rebellion. Says old &c. I had thought to have given them once to some Black-smith for his Forge, But now I have consider'd on't, they'r consecrated to th' Church: For i'le give them to some Choir, to make the Organs to roar, And the little Pipes squeak higher than ever they did before. Says old &c. Here's a couple of Stools for sale, the one square, and tother is round, Betwixt them both the Tail of the RUMP fell unto the ground, Will you buy the States-Council-table, which was made of the good Wain-Scot, The Frame was a tottering Bable, to uphold the Independent Plot, Says old &c. Heres the Beesom of Reformation, which should have made clean the floor But it swept the wealth out of the Nation, and left us Dirt good store. Will you buy the States spinning-wheel, which spun for the Ropers trade? But better it had stood still, for now it has spun a fair thread. says old &c. Here's a very good Clyster-Pipe, which was made of a Butchers stump, And oft-times it hath been us'd to cure the Colds of the RUMP. Here's a Lump of Pilgrim-Salve, which once was a Justice of Peace, Who Nol and the Devil did serve, but now it is come to this. says old &c. Here's a Roll of States Tobacco, if any good fellow will take it, Its neither Virginia nor spanish, but Ile tell you how they do make it: Tis Covenant mixt with Engagement, with an Abjuration Oath; And many of those that do take it, complain it is foul in the Mouth. says old &c. Yet the Ashes may Happily serve to cure the scab of the Nation, When they have an Itch to serve Rebellion by Innovation. A Lanthorn here is to be bought, the like was scarce e're begotten. For many a Plot't has found out before they ever were thought on. says old &c. Will you buy the RUMP's great saddle, which once did carry the Nation, And Here's the Bit and the Bridle, and Curb of Dissimulation, Heres the Breeches of the RUMP, with a fair dissembling Cloak, And a Presbyterian Jump, and an Independent smock. says old &c. Heres Olivers Brewing Vessels, and heres his Dray and his Slings; Heres Hewsons Aul and his Bristles, with divers other odd things. And what doth the price belong to all these Matters before ye, I'le sell them all for an old song, and so I do end my story. Says old Symon the King, says old Symon the King, With his thread-bare clothes and his mamsey Nose, sing hey ding, ding, a ding, ding. London, Printed for Allen Banks, 1688.
