G794 19526815 109000
A RELATION of an Unfortunate VOYAGE to the Kingdom of BENGALA. DESCRIBING The deplorable condition, and dismal accidents, attending those therein concerned. How that after the loss of their Ship, they were forced to abide in a Desart, and Barren Island; to eat Leaves, Toads, Serpents, &c. and reduced to that extremity, as to digg open Graves, to feed on Human Bodies. As also, the manner of their deliverance out of that place; and what befel them afterwards, in the Service of the great Mogol. Together with choice Observations, touching that Mo∣narch's Government, Laws, Customs, and Ar∣mies; and especially his late War against the Kings of Azo, and Assam, with several other remarkable particulars. By Mr. Glanius. LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwick at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1682.
VOYAGE to BENGALA LONDON Printed for Henry Bonwick at the Red Lyon in St. Pauls Church yard 1682
PREFACE. ALthough this fol∣lowing Narrative discovers no State, or Love intrigues, (the main entertainment of the times) Yet will it gra∣tifie our curiosity, with a Relation of such Acci∣dents, which (being new and singular, though Tragical and Serious)
cannot but produce in us several delightful, as well as profitable Reflexions. To see a Ship tossed, and threatned every Moment, by the merciless Waves, (says Lucretius) is a spectacle, which those that stand safe at shore, cannot hut behold with pleasure, as well as compassion. Non quia vexari (says he) quemquam est jucunda voluptas: Sed, quibus ipse malis careas, quia cernere suav' est. In
short, (for I would not e more impertinent than ther folks, though some∣thing must be said (it seems) by way of Preface) he Book will answer (I ope) the Title, and Rea∣er's expectation; being n extract from the Ori∣inal Copy, Printed at Amsterdam, in 1681. And this is all I know, need say of it.
A RELATION of an unfortunate Voyage To the KINGDOM OF Bengala. WE parted from Batavia, with the Vessels named Wesop, Brouwers-haven, and Nieuwen-hove, the 3d. of September, in the year One thousand six hundred sixty one; and set Sail towards Ongueli, in the Kingdom of Bengala. Our Vessel (called Ter Schelling) carry'd a∣bout 8 pieces of Cannon, and four score and five men; our freight consisting chiefly of pieces of Sil∣ver-Coin,
and Copper-Plates. On the 23d. our Masters Mate, whose name was Hillebrant, going down into the Hold, to fetch thence some Ropes he needed; saw or thought he beheld, through the Port-holes, Persons swimming, pale and spent, and some, that were dead, floating on the Sea. At his coming up he appear'd troubled; and when his heaviness was somewhat alle∣viated, he told us the cause of it. Whether his vision were real, or a pure effect of his melancholy hu∣mour, yet several persons lookt upon it as a bad Omen, and began to ex∣pect the worst. As for his part, from that very moment he still continued sad and pensive, where∣as before no man was of a more gay and jolly humour. Such was his seriousness, that he could not endure to hear any idle discourses, nor refrain from exhorting us to fervent prayer, for the averting the dangers threatning us. There wan∣ted
not some who derided his vi∣sions, and made a sport of them; wherefore he often besought God to give these Libertins a sight of what he had seen, or something like it; as a means to check their licentiousness and reduce them to sobriety. On the 8th. of October we were in sight of the Coast of Bengala, but knew it not. In this uncer∣tainty we steer'd towards it, and cast Anchor within two leagues off the shore, where our Master Ja∣cob Janz-Stroom (born at Amster∣dam) sent out the Long-boat, and dispatch'd the Pilot to the Inhabi∣tants, with Seven or Eight Sea-men and the Steward, who had some skill in the Language of that Coun∣try, to enquire into the Nature, and Name of that Coast we saw. We knew that of Bengala was full of rocks and dangerous shelves, whereon several Vessels had been cast away, but had not that neces∣sary
knowledge whereabouts they lay, without which we could not avoid them: Three days past since our men went on shoar, and we in continual expectation of their return. But at length suspected, they were detained captive, or de∣stroyed by some other misfortune; whereupon we weighed Anchor, and sought a Port where we might inquire farther after them. After a long search, we descryed 3 small Barks that made towards us, from the Land side. At which we re∣joyc'd, hoping by their means to hear news of those we sought, and that they would help us out of this perplexity. These Barks stopt a∣bout a stones cast from our Ship, (as it were,) to consult, whether they had best come on board her, being a Man of War: After about a quarter of an hours deliberation, their Commander, whom they cal∣led Orangkai, drew near with his Bark, and made signs to us, that
the other two were laden with Fowl, and Fish, and several fruits of their Country. We gave him to understand, in the best manner we could, that he had no reason to fear; and our signs encouraged him. As soon as he was on board our Ship, he cau∣sed the other Barks to come up, and unlade their provisions, which came to us very seasonably: Our Master led him into his Cabbin, where he entertained him with all imaginable kindness. As they be∣gan to discourse about the Coun∣try, (having first made enquiries for our people) our Vessel touched upon a shelf, which put all our Men in an Alarm. The course we took to clear our selves could not be without noise, whereat Orangkai was frighted, and believed 'twas a signal to betray him. In this ima∣gination he thought of nothing but how to escape, which he did, so dexterously, that none of us were
aware of it, till he had gotten a great distance from us. He ever and anon stopt his course, and we expected his return, but when we saw he forgot to take the money with him, which we paid him, we no longer doubted but his fear was excessive; in effect he did not re∣turn; and when our Vessel was on float, we found our selves as far ad∣vanced as we were before. In this extremity, the greatest part of our Ship were of opinion to expect here our Men, which we did for 8 days together, but to no pur∣pose; wherefore having cleared our selves off this place, we hoisted Sail in search of the Ships that set out with us. After a tedious search, we ran upon a long shole, whence getting clear, we fell upon another, more dangerous than the former. This obliged us to let down our Boat in∣to the Sea, as well to sound the depth of the Water, as to under∣stand
the nature and quality of the place. We could find nothing far and near, but shallows and flats; and every where so little Water, that we knew not which way to pass. Then we gave our selves for lost, and were all in a maze, except the Seamen, who in the greatest danger ran to their bot∣tles, and drank one anothers healths. In the mean time, we cast Anchor behind and before, and the Sea growing rough, and Wind high, we could not hinder our Vessel from having a great breach made in it, and sinking, had we not cut down our Boltsplit. As to the Boat it was swallow'd up in the Sand, and one Man that was in it saved, by the assistance we gave him. Thus were we without our Small-boat, or Shalope, out of sight of Land, and in an unknown Sea. These misfortunes were great, and sufficient to o'rewhelm us, but
these were not all, for a while after we found our selves in a worse condition. Whilst we were Stu∣dying to remedy our present mi∣series, a fierce blast of Wind snapt both our Cables. We immediate∣ly threw out two others, which could not hinder the Vessel from striking against a Sandy hill, where∣fore we cut them with Hatchets, leaving our Anchors in the Sea. And as to the Sails, besides that the Wind carry'd away our Foretop, we were forced to clear the Vessel of Water, and let them all down. Moreover the Wind so swelled the Waves, that the Ship let in Water through the Port-holes, and we ex∣pected every moment when she would dash against a Rock. Great was our fear, but not general; for whilst the greatest part were con∣fessing their sins, and imploring God's pardon, before whom they were now going to appear; the Sea-men were making merry, and
singing with their full Cups in their hands; that though the Sea were rough and terrible, yet would they hinder it from possessing that part, into which they pow'red down their liquor. Thus did these wretches defie all danger, and out∣brave Death it self, which they called the Scare-crow of vulgar Souls, and the scorn of those that knew it in it self. Whilst they were drinking on one hand, and we praying on the other, a sud∣den blast of Wind drove our Ship from between the sholes, and set it on float again: We began to be in hopes, when, immediately, the Water sprang in from all sides: Whereupon we fell to work with our Pumps, but to little purpose, the Water coming in so fast upon us; yet perhaps had all our Men (who were to the number of 70) used their utmost endeavours, they might have been successful, but most of 'em were so weak, that they could scarcely stand.
This misfortune was attended by another, to compleat our misery; for none of us knew what course to Steer; nor the Master, or Pilots what to determine. After several contests, they were found to be of contrary judgments; these were for going on one side, and the Ma∣ster another, and his opinion was followed. We went not far before we found which was the best, for that of the Sea-men would have carry'd us far from the Coast. Al∣though we were well enough satis∣fied in that particular, yet had we several other perplexities to en∣counter with, for the Water still gained upon us, and we had been a great while out of the sight of Land, and in the want of provision. Moreover we were all so overcome with sleep, and weariness, that we were not able to stand. In this condition were we, when he that was upon the Watch cryed out, Land, Land, and that 'twas near
us. This good news put us all in heart again; and made us fall to work afresh: But this hope did not last long, for 3 or 4 hours af∣ter we had the Tide against us, which hindred us from advancing, so that at night we were forced to cast Anchor at 3 Leagues distance from Land, about 4 fathom deep. This last misfortune compleated our sorrow, for we could Pump no longer; and the Water apparently still gained upon us: Yet did the most able among us (seeing them∣selves ready to perish in sight of Land) use their utmost endeavours, and encouraged one another, re∣solving to cut the Cable the next Morning, to advance with the Floud, as near as we could to Shore. But scarcely had we spent 6 hours, in this undertaking; when we per∣ceived, that of one Bucket of Wa∣ter, half of it was Sand, with which we had ballasted our Ship, which broke all our measures.
Since this unhappy accident, we thought of nothing, but yielding up our selves to the Divine Pro∣vidence; and all means failing us, some gave way to sleep, others re∣sisted it, being not able to resolve upon shutting their eyes against that light, which they were now upon the point of ever losing; and some again whom hunger more terrified than either sleep or death, so earnestly demanded meat; that the Master ordered, every Man his share of strong Waters, and smoakt Beef. The Steward obeyed with much difficulty; but seeing himself sorced to it, distributed such a small quantity of both, that 'twould have made a Man apt to think, we had still a long Voyage to make. In the mean time these watch∣ings and fatigues had so exhausted our Mens spirits, that several be∣came frantick, and shewed such ex∣travagancies, as would have forced laughter at another time. The
Cook ran up the scuttles and came down again in a great heat, occa∣sioned by the pains he had taken, in fishing for Duckers; with which he vaunted he would make a Ra∣goo, that should quicken the dead. Others could not comprehend the danger we were in, and forgetting what had passed, were continually talking of the profits and advanta∣ges they would make of this Voy∣age. As soon as we left Pumping, we saw our Main-yard, and that before, which we let down, were full of Duckers, which were easily taken. Several of those that had the right use of their Sences, caused a parcel of Beans to be dressed (cal∣led Kitseri) which were found ly∣ing at the bottom of a Sea-man's Chest, that lay asleep; we eat them with a great deal of pleasure, al∣though deem'd this would be our last Repast. A while after there entred so much Water through the
Port-hole of the Cooks Cabbin, where the violence of the Waves had made a breach, that we were for∣ced to make holes in the Deck, to let the Water run down into the Hold; which we stopt with much difficulty, with plates of Lead wrapt about with Tow. After this, the lustiest amongst us were forced to repose themselves, not being able to resist the desire of sleeping: As for my own part (who had hitherto made a shift to bear up) I laid me down on a Chest, that was fastened to the Deck, not giving my self the liberty of an easi∣er Couch, in a time, wherein I belie∣ved I was so near to Death. Scarcely had I rested thereon an hour, but the screeks of those that first perceived the Vessel to incline on one side, awakened us, and shewed us the danger we were in: Then it was that our confusions encreased, and every Man endea∣voured to withdraw out of the
press, to seek alone some means to save himself. It was observed that 3 of our Sea-men were wanting, whom we supposed to be drowned at the bottom of the Hold, where they had laid themselves down to rest. We were 2 hours in this con∣dition, most of us half dead, and hopeless, when the Vessel rai∣sed it self up again. This change so surprized us, that we could scarce∣ly believe it; but when we were well assured of it, our hearts retur∣ned, and sorrow gave place to joy. Several ran to their Chests putting on their best Cloaths, and deman∣ded Strong-water, which was not refused them, and had immediately a pleasant effect upon 'em: O∣thers dealt out their melancholly thoughts, imagining themselves great personages, and talkt only of Millions. These whimseys were tolerable, in comparison of the Sea-mens excesses, who continued
in their outbravings of Death, and its Consequences. Some of them that had taken such pains to dress themselves, went along with the Saylers into the great Cabbin; whence ever and anon coming out with their Caps on one side their Heads, and their Glasses in their Hands, they invited the rest to imitate them in Singing Bawdy Songs, and Dancing. There were some that seemed more solid, yet were clearly for drinking, to make themselves (as they said) less sen∣sible of the fears Men feel in such extremities. These kept some mea∣sure, but others more bruitish, glut∣ted themselves like Swine, till they lost wholly their reason. In the mean time Death drew still nearer us, and our only reme∣dy, was to make a Machine where∣in to save our selves, when the Ves∣sel sunk. The Carpenter offered to make one, and with the assist∣ance of some others took down the
Sail-yards, Masts, and other neces∣saries; with which he made imme∣diately a kind of Vessel, that might hold 40 Men: We were more in number, but the Libertins scoft at our pre-caution, and would not as∣sist us, so that for want of help we could not make it larger nor stron∣ger: So great was the hard hear∣tedness of several of our Men that they would not so much as lend us the Knifes or Hatchets we need∣ed. The Cooks Mate was one of 'em: This Man named William Ysbrants had good store by him, and so far was he from parting with them, that he withheld others from doing it, by his perswasions, saying he knew a shorter and better way to save them that would be ruled by him. In fine, maugre this hard hearted Wretch, and the Sea-mens gang, who continued on their Ri∣ot, we finished our Float-boat, which we fastned to the Vessel, till we made Oars to guide it. When
every thing was ready, each Man that was willing to go in it had given him 10 pieces of currant Mo∣ney in the Kingdom of Bengala, for his relief when at shore. Be∣fore we went off we must drink a parting Cup, of which most drank so deep, that they made themselves drunk. I designed to have been one of those that left the Vessel, but a friend hindred me, he told me I must not leave him, for he lookt upon that Machine to be extream dangerous, especially considering the condition of those Persons that took upon 'em to guide it, being most of 'em drunk, and ready to quarrel; the Machine ly∣ing, moreover, level with the Wa∣ter, and over laden. So I staid in the Vessel with the Master, and some others, whose number was far inferiour to those that left us. Scarcely were they gotten a stones cast, but several of them repented they forsook us, and swam back
again, so that upon their return we found we were 32 Men; according to which reckoning there must be a∣bout some 40 in the Machine, where they endeavoured to use the Sail of the Shalope; but besides that it was too heavy, the Wind cea∣sed about half an hour after, so that they advanced very little. When we lost sight of them, we besought God to preserve 'em; to the end, that according to their promise, the inhabitants might come out to help us. Then the Master of the Vessel, caused a Sack of Dutch Biscuit to be brought him, and a small quantity of smoaked Beef, which we soon devoured. In the mean while we spyed our people again a great way off, but this was but for a moment, for we never could set sight on 'em after∣wards; which made us suspect their Machine failed them, and was sunk by some unexpected disaster, which was very probable, seeing we could
not hear the least news of them. The strong conjectures we had of their loss, dispossessing us of our hope (for we laid great stress on the good offices they promised to render us, when at land) put us up∣on resolves to make another Boat; which, when finished, could not hold above 10 or 12 Men. There∣fore were we forced to take other measures, and began to cut down the Scuttles of the Main-mast, which had been already cut, and stript from its tackle. We after∣wards wanted the Sail-yard, but it being far in the Water, entangled with its Ropes and Sail, we could not get it out thence, believing it to be a thing impossible; at length, my friend before mention'd, (whose name was William Bastians) cau∣sed a Rope to be fast'ned about his middle, and so was let down into the Sea, to cut all these entangle∣ments which hindred us from fini∣shing our undertaking. In the
mean while, the Night and Waves e∣qually incommodated us, the first by its obscurity, and the others by their violence: Thus were we every mo∣ment ready to perish. Whilst the greatest part were busied in cutting down the Fore-mast, which was the only one that stood; six of our Men plotted to∣gether, to slip away privately in our Machine, without caring what might become of their Compani∣ons; they were just ready to exe∣cute their treacherous design, ha∣ving already cut the 2 Ropes by which it was fastned, and began to put off from the Ship; when the Mast, which we cut, fell down in∣to the Sea before it, and by its fall discovered, and forced 'em back. Had not this hapned, without doubt we had perished that Night, for the foul weather encreased, the Waves became boysterous, and the Vessel unable to resist them. We hastned then to accommodate to
our Boat, the Mast we had fell'd, which rendred it fit to carry 20 Men, and we were in all 32. A∣bout midnight the Tide being half spent, we would willingly staid its return, and embarkt our selves by Day light, but the danger was too pressing to use delays. We then began to prepare for our departure out of the Vessel, taking along with us but a small quantity of Provision, 2 Compas∣ses, 2 Cutlasses, a Sword, a Pole∣ax, some Oars made in haste, a Lanthorn, and Candles for the night. Thus sorrily furnished, did we forsake the Vessel, and put our selves into the Boat, where each of us, with his Oar in his hand, made towards the shore. 'Tis impossible to express what we underwent; but it may be easily imagin'd, that being in the Water up to the middle, in a cold Season, and dark Night, we could not be much at
ease. As soon as the day appear∣ed, we had the Tide against us, and being not able to resist it, were carried by it so far, that we lost sight of Land. An hour after we descryed it, and used our utmost endeavours to reach it; but the Currants which were swift made all attempts fruitless. This mishap was attended by another; the grea∣test part of us fell into deliriums, and in this condition became ex∣ceeding troublesome to the rest: Some of 'em would needs go to their Chests, to take thence the Linnen they wanted. Others were searching for the Kitchin, to warm themselves. But he that gave us most trouble, was my friend Wil∣liam Bastians, who supposing, as well as the rest, that he was still on Board the Ship; demanded where we carried him; and rowing a quite contrary course to the rest, cryed out; Pray let me alone, I'll carry you where we should be, I see
Hellevoutslus Castle; courage, we are at it. A coxcomb, cryed ano∣ther, he sees a Castle, ay, we are at it as much as I am at Rome. 'Tis a Church, says the Carpenter, a stately Fabrick indeed, how it gli∣stens against the Sun! What ails these Fools, cried another, to take the Mast of a Ship for a Church, and a Castle? These poor wretches have lost their sences. I laughed some time at their extravagancies, and within a while (as I was told) fell into the same condition. O griev∣ous, said I, they are making merry at the Bear, yonder, and I may not be with 'em: I will make one amongst 'em. The Master who sat nearest with-held me; but I fiercely flung away from him, and ran into the water. Whence I was quickly ta∣ken up, but neither the cold, nor apprehension of the danger I esca∣ped, could make me come to my self: Yet I felt I was extream cold, and would had the Master pull off
his Cloaths to accommodate me with 'em; thus continuing, I took a Barrel for the Kitchin, and sat my self down by it to dry and warm me. This imaginary fire did me, perhaps, as much good as if it had been real; for methoughts I felt it mighty comfortable, so that I fell asleep, and at waking returned to my right sences. In the mean time the Tide car∣ried us so far, that we lost all hope; we earnestly besought God to put an end to our miseries by death, or shew us how to avoid them. Some time after we thought we saw Land, and Cows feeding; believing it to be an effect of our Prayers, we continued them, say∣ing one to another, that seeing what we had already done, procu∣red us the sight of Land, without doubt the continuation of our Pray∣ers would bring us to it: It is im∣possible to express the joy this Vi∣sion gave us, for 'twas no better;
being only a sandy Bank cast up by the violence of the Sea. This sad mistake struck us all in amaze, especially considering, moreover, that our Machine which began to sink, could not carry us far. The most resolute amongst us, seeing the danger encreasing, determined for the lightning of the Boat, to push in the Night, as many as they could of their Companions into the Sea. Heaven would not suf∣fer 'em to execute their cruel de∣sign; for the Carpenter bethought himself we had to a considerable weight in Money, which might serve us instead of an Anchor, or Counter-poise; that would be ne∣cessary in two respects. For besides that, the Machine would not by this means be oppressed with it; this Counter-poise would stand us in good stead in a contrary Tide. His advice was taken, and every Man freely parted with his Mony, which was put into a pair of close-kneed-breeches,
tied with a Cord; and then into another pair, which we tyed fast; and so into a 3d. which we let down to the bottom, fastn∣ed to a Rope, when minded to stop. We made another packet of this Money, which we used instead of a Plummet, to find on what side the Tides cast us. Both one and the other of these were so useful to us, that in a short time we found our selves so near Land, as not to fear any more the losing it. About 2 in the After-noon, we took up our Anchor, to give eve∣ry Man his own again, which they took without counting, so great∣ly were they possessed with joy to see themselves out of danger: So that some who contributed most, were content with least; and those that gave least, found them∣selves greatest sharers. So greatly indifferent were we in this matter, that a considerable sum remained without any Owner, which was
distributed to those that had none, being certain that of all the seve∣ral Coyns we brought, there were not one but would pass in the King∣dom of Bengala. After this di∣stribution there was found a Sack in a Barrel, full of Biscuit, which no body regarded, and had been left behind, had not the Master ta∣ken charge of it. We came at length so near the shoar, that we thought we saw Fisher-men stretching out their Nets to dry 'em. Coming nearer, we spyed other persons, that seem'd to wear the same habits as we, whom we supposed to be those that left us. They had all the same Cloaths, Hats, and Caps, except some that wore Canvass, taken out of a Sail; and others that were only in their Drawers. Thus did they appear to us through our Spying-Glass, and every one that made use of it, believed they saw very distinctly with it, what they saw but imper∣fectly
without it. The Tide car∣ried us not to that side, neither brought us so soon to shoar, as we desired. This slowness made us still fear, and there was one so im∣patient as to throw himself in the Water, to try whether he could not swim to Land, but his heart failed him, and he was glad to re∣turn. In the mean time we called to mind, that the inhabitants of Bengala, had a deadly antipathy a∣gainst Swines flesh, some of which we kept still by us; whereupon 'twas agreed to throw it into the Sea. But that which most trou∣bled us, was to see 'em rashly cast over-board a Barrel of Biscuit which might stood us in good stead, be∣ing distributed amongst us, who were almost dead with hunger. Se∣veral opposed the doing it, but were answered, we should have bet∣ter food at Land. So we came to shoar, and left our Machine at the disposal of the
Sea. As soon as ever we were Landed, our Master, and 10 or 12 more, that were the best able a∣mongst us, ran immediately upon the discovery, the rest slowly fol∣lowing after; intreating 'em to ha∣sten, and find 'em a convenient place to dry themselves, being e∣qually pressed with cold and hun∣ger. In our march we entertain∣ed one another with Relations of our particular sufferings, and hap∣piness in being thus delivered from them. We went on thus, discour∣sing with as much freedom and se∣curity, as if we had already seen the inhabitants, striving to outvy one another in our kind reception: Some said that those we saw when on the Sea, whether Dutch-men or Moors, could not be far from us. Others alledged that those Moors being out a Fishing for their Masters, had met our people, and carried 'em to their Huts; and that we might find them in a thicket directly be∣fore
us. Talking thus, we went on jocundly to this Grove, where we doubted not but the Inhabitants would receive us, to our content: But our opinion was ill grounded, for being come to it, we found nei∣ther Man nor Beast; nor any Path, or Track to guide us; or the least sign it were ever inhabited. Some that were most tired relying on the refreshments they expected to meet here, could not believe what they saw; and calling out as loud as they were able, imagined they must be answer'd, but were decei∣ved; so that we must continue on our march through a melancholly, thick Wood, and which was, per∣haps, full of wild Beasts. This imagi∣nation, together with the present un∣expected disappointment and past fa∣tigues, compleated our sorrows: As we went on, our hearts being ready to burst with grief; and demanding of one another, what could befall'n our Master, and those that accom∣panied
him, we found them lying in a profound sleep; and the need we had to do the same, made us willingly imitate them. At our waking, all our discourse was about the Moors, and Dutch∣men, which we imagined we saw near the shoar; whom, not finding in that place, we no longer doubted, but this Vision was an illusion. The day being far spent, we re∣solved to pass over the night in the same place we lay; spending some time in providing Wood, of which we made 3 Piles in form of a Triangle, which we set on fire with the Candle we brought with us in the Lanthorn. We placed a Sentinel near each fire, to assure us against the surprizes of the wild Beasts, and by this means warmed our selves in greater tranquility. The nights were so cold, and we so ill Cloathed, that we could not rest; and when we could, our Chaplin was so full of ravings, that
he would have put us all into dis∣order; whatsoever we could do to pacifie him, he kept still in a rage; furiously demanding what meant this change at Batavia, and how it came to pass we were thus used; at some he threw his Slip∣pers, at others his Hat, and threat∣ned to extirpate these Slaves from off the face of the Earth, that thus served him. Thus did we sorrowfully pass o∣ver the Night, and at break of Day began to think of discamping, to find a more commodious retreat. One of the last that waked was our Chirurgion, who starting up in a maze, cryed out, we had robbed him, and that he would have us before a Justice of Peace. The noise he made, disturbed our poor Chaplain; who supposing him to have been some Slave, that made resistance, cried out, Murder, Help, Help, these Slaves have taken Arms. The Chirurgion that knew not he
was distracted (for he had slept very quietly) believed what he said, and was for putting himself in a posture of defence, till we shew∣ed him the others folly. Well, says he, though he be a fool, yet I am not one; for 'tis too true, that of 6 Bags of Money I had, I have been robbed of 3 this Night. We thought him at first in the same case as the other, but at length found him otherwise; and whether his loss were real or imaginary, he still continued to demand satisfacti∣on, but had little notice taken of him, for we were for changing our ground, and moving forward, lea∣ving the poor Chaplain, in a distra∣cted condition behind us, for no body would take charge of him. We drew near then to the shoar, in hopes of finding either the Fisher-men, or other People, for our re∣dress. The first object we met, was a great Tortoise without a head; and immediately after a Buffle
stretcht out on the ground, whose head was half rotten, and full of maggots. Several Animals, which the inhabitants called Leganes, were about this Creature, which smelt so strong, that we could not en∣dure to come near it. But some days after we had not the same a∣version, nor were so delicate, for hunger so sorely prest us, that the stink could not hinder us from gnawing it to the very bones. About a quarter of a League from that place, we found our selves near a River; on the other side of which, we spyed 8 Moors, whom we took for Bengaloises. We im∣mediately endeavoured to pass o∣ver it, but found it too deep for us. An hour after, it appeared to us more Fordable, and we passed over it, in effect, with as much joy as if certain of a happy success. When we had gotten on the other side, these Moors ran to meet us, cast∣ing themselves down at our feet,
and kissed them; and thus remain∣ed a long time, lifting up their eyes to Heaven, and pronouncing some words, whereby we supposed they designed to declare their innocen∣cy, and the injustice done 'em. These People being 8 in number; to wit 4 Men, 2 Women, and 2 Children, seemed to us much af∣flicted, but we could not understand them; and all that we could com∣prehend, in feeing a certain kind of Boat on float which had brought them thither, was that they were some poor Slaves, whom their Ma∣sters cruelty had obliged to run a∣way. These people then being not the persons we wanted, we passed o∣ver again the River; where having made a good fire, we went in search of the Tortoise we saw, whom we roasted in his shell: Each of us took our part of him (which could not be great, for we were Thirty of us) and greedily devoured it. And
being still prest with hunger, we regretted the Provisions that were thrown over Board, saying one to another, we were justly punished for our foolish prodigality. These lamentations were followed by a pensive silence, and in fine, by pray∣ers, which ended, we betook our selves (as well as we could) to rest. The next Morning before we took our march, our Master gave each of us a slice of Cheese, from one that weighed about 3 pound, which he brought from the Ship; and by the Chirurgions order, who was also our Physician, we drank thereupon a Cup of Water half salt, and found our selves in good plight. After about 5 or 6 hours march, we came at the Lands end, which gave us to understand that this place was an Island, and distant from main Land about 8 or 9 Leagues. These conjectures extreamly dis∣mayed
us; and we began to pre∣pare our selves for the worst, ex∣pecting to dye with hunger in that barren and desert place. We could see nothing but Trees, some of which were dry and withered, and others green, laden only with leaves; a sad and bitter nourish∣ment, yet with which we were forced to be contented. We stood upon this point, till we came to a determination, and a∣greed, that 'twas our surest course to return to the place where we past over the first Night. And in our way came to the place where we had eaten the Tortoise, in hopes to find those aforementioned Le∣ganes. For fear of making 'em wild, 2 of our Men, armed with a Hatchet and Cutlass, marched be∣fore, and we followed 'em at a di∣stance. They returned soon after with one of these Animals, which we carried to the place we intend∣ed. Having left our Chaplain
here, we searcht about, and called him, but could neither see nor hear him. We sought afterwards a commo∣dious place wherein to fix, during our stay in this Island, and judged it were better to settle near the Shoar, than the Wood, where we could not expect any succour from the Sea; our only hope of getting out of this dolesom place, consisting in our expectation of some Vessels passing by. We gathered Wood, which ha∣ving lighted, we cut the Legane with his skin, into as many pieces as we were Men. Every one took his share, and drest it as best liked him; those that were most hun∣gry, scarcely at all, least the fire should diminish it, and the others very little, for the same reason, it being small enough already; this Animal not exceeding the bigness of a Cat. The flesh of it is very unsavory and unpleasant, but our
extream hunger gave it a good re∣lish, and likewise the Water, notwith∣standing its brinyness. Half an hour after we took our Bibles (ha∣ving 2 with us) and the Pilot read Prayers, which ended, we reposed our selves round the fire by turns, for we could not all of us be at it together. The next Morning we began the day, with our requests to Almigh∣ty God, to compassionate, and de∣liver us from our miseries, which seemed already greater then we could bear; then every one went his way. The Chirurgion bethought himself, as he walkt along to taste the Leaves of the Trees: Which having done, and finding 'em good, all the rest followed his example. We chewed 'em, at first, a great while, before we swallowed 'em; but at length found 'em so delicate, that we never tasted bread in our lives, that relisht half so well.
Although thefe Leaves seem'd most delicious meats, yet were we not so much in love with 'em, but could willingly left them for o∣thers; and had the Boars, Staggs, and Buffles, that haunted the Woods, and came down and bathed them∣selves in the Marshes, been willing to be taken, (for we had no Guns to shoot 'em) I do not doubt but we could have well dispensed with them, but these Animals had good leggs, and ran too fast for us. One day marching along the shoar, we spied 2 great Serpents, that put us in amaze. We moved from 'em, but being extream hungry, and judging a good repast might be made of them, we gathered round about 'em, with each of us a stick in our hands, and soon conquer'd 'em: We cut off their Heads and Tails, and having flead, and washt them, gave each Man his share, which we greedily devoured; and yet none of us were thereby incom∣modated.
At the end of each repast, we were as much troubled for more; and went in small companies, some on one side, and some on the o∣ther; whence for the most part re∣turning empty, we fell upon the Leaves, which we could eat well enough, but they contain'd little nourishment. We went, my friend and I, several times to the Sea side, to see whether the Sea had not cast up something on the shoar, that might stand us in some stead, but all in vain: And one day a∣mongst the rest, being more than ordinary hungry, we all met to∣gether, bemoaning our selves in a more piteous manner, then can be expressed. We were a little com∣forted at the fight of some Beans, which certain of our Company found. Never was any thing ea∣ten with a better appetite, nor found to be of a better taste: Where∣upon our hearts returned again, and having smoakt a Pipe or 2 of the
Leaves of Trees, instead of Tobac∣co, we exhorted one another to re∣pose our selves under the Divine Providence. The joy, for having made so good a meal, endured not long, for an hour after we had eaten them, we felt such pangs, as made us believe they were mortal. Our greatest pain was to fetch breath, for we seemed every mo∣ment at the point of death. Ha∣ving lain in this condition near 3 hours, we breathed more freely, and began to get up, but were so weak, that we could scarcely stand. From that time our strength whol∣ly fail'd us, and whether 'twas an effect of those Beans, or the little nourishment we received since so long a time, we were not able to carry sticks to make a fire. This mishap was attended by a disgust to the Leaves which we hereto∣fore found so good, but now could eat no longer of 'em, so great was our aversation to 'em, because when
we had eaten them, we felt in our mouths a strong stink, like unto that of Buggs, which became in∣supportable to us. Instead of these Leaves, I tried often to eat Grass, but found that worse, it being im∣possible for me to swallow it. Our strength every day decay∣ing, and seeing no likelihood of getting out of this dolesom place, we consulted together touching the making of some kind of Boat, wherein to transport our selves else∣where; whereupon we cut down several small Trees that grew along the Water side, from which we took off the Peel, which served to fasten the several parts of it. This Boat could not contain above 5 Men, and every person pretended to be of that number, for although the order ran, that they should return with all possible haste, to help the rest with what provision they could find, yet this was an advantage to them, who before
they returned would be sure to refresh themselves first. To adjust this difference, we all agreed to re∣fer our selves to the Master, who chose whom he thought best, and counselled them to Coast along the Isle, till they came to the point where we were; and then suffering themselves to be guided by the Tide, it would carry them towards 2 Islands, above which they might find firm Land, which he judged to be not above 8 or 9 Leagues distant from the point we stood upon. Besides these instructions, he gave them a Compass to Steer by: And having taken some Leaves along with them for their susten∣ance, they parted the 13th. day af∣ter our arrival in this Island, with solemn protestations, that if Hea∣ven prospered their design, they would not fail to return with ne∣cessaries for the delivering us out of this Desart. They had each of 'em an Oar, but neither Anchor,
or any thing else to stop their Boat in a contrary Tide; Yet they par∣ted bigg with hope of an happy success, which we wished 'em in be∣seeching 'em to make a speedy re∣turn. As soon as they left us, we be∣took our selves to the Woods, where searching for food in vain, we were constrained to content our selves with the Leaves of Trees, which we could scarcely swallow without something else to allay their bit∣terness. Thus were we pinched with hunger, when we believed we could not do better, than to seek the Corps of our Chaplain, whom we infallibly suspected to be dead, and were troubled we could not find it; for having ea∣ten 2 Serpents without hurt, we supposed humane flesh could not much harm us. The desire of eating something more solid than the Leaves of Trees, continuing to press us, 'twas pro∣posed
to kill one of the Boys that were with us; but Heavens so or∣dered it, that this was not long in∣sisted on, which hapned well for all the rest, for had once a beginning been made, 'tis certain 'twould been continued, and we should ei∣ther by secret fraud, or open vio∣lence fall'n upon one another. Al∣though the design was rejected by the most part, yet did we mistrust one another, and from that time slept in fear, every Man dreading the rest conspired against him, and appointed the time of his rest for that of cutting his Throat. About Evening we understood, that 2 of our Company, who fol∣lowed by Land, those that parted in the Morning by Water, had o∣vertaken 'em at Night, at the I∣slands point, where they begged so earnestly to be taken along with 'em, that they could not deny them, having first fast'ned to their Boat some Trees.
In the mean time one of our companions came and inform'd us, that he saw a Serpent of a prodigi∣ous size; that he dar'd not attack him alone, but 'twere no hard mat∣ter for all of us to conquer him. Each of us immediately then hast∣ned joyfully to the place with his stick in his hand. Where by the way we killed a Legane, that fell off a Tree at our feet, and over∣joyed we had wherewithal to mix with our Leaves, we kept on our course. But by mishap the Serpent was gone; and we had the vexati∣on of searching him a great while in vain, This being a sore disap∣pointment, we needed some happy adventure to make us amends, and desired no better, than to meet with the Corps of our Chaplain. We sought it with the same ear∣nestness as we did the Serpent, but all our endeavours proving fruit∣less; we divided the Legane a∣mongst us, the portions of which
were so small that had it not been for the Leaves we eat with it, 'twere impossible for us to sleep that Night. A long time were we, after this repast without finding any thing; being exceeding faint and weak, when the Carpenter brought to us his Cap full of Snails. These little insects had neither Horns nor Shels, and we took 'em for Snails, for want of a more proper name to give 'em. But without troubling our selves much about their name, or quality, we caused the Carpenter to bring us to the place where he found 'em, and took all that remained. At our return, laying 'em down upon the ground, they appeared to us to be of a Blewish colour; which made us believe they were veno∣mous Creatures, and that 'twas dan∣gerous eating them. This was the opinion of some; but the greatest part, argued on the contrary, al∣ledging that several Beasts past for
venomous, that were so only in o∣pinion: Witness, the Serpents we had eaten, whose venom is said to be sharp and dangerous, and yet did them no harm. That, having made this experiment with success, they might with as much reason try another; and supposing 'em to be venomous, yet the fire would clarifie them. This reasoning prevailed, where∣upon we agreed, all of us to eat of 'em, and made a great fire to roast them, putting 'em under the Cin∣dars; and when they were ready, eat 'em, and found 'em good; and to compleat our Banquet, drank Salt-water, and then began to think of reposing our selves. An hour or two after, the Carpenter found himself ill, and fell immediately in∣to Fits. As soon as we saw him in this condition, we imagined 'twould not be long before we fell into the same extremity, and in the mean time consulted together,
touching the several sorts of Coun∣ter-poisons we ever heard mention∣ed: But all to no purpose, seeing we wanted them, as well as other necessaries, wherefore we prepared our selves for the patient suffering whatsoever might befall us. Half an hour after, we became affected in the same manner as the Carpenter. For two hours we felt most sharp pains in our Bowels, ac∣companied with shortness of breath, with which we were so oppressed, that all hope of recovery forsook us. Yet by degrees our pangs ceased, but our weakness continu∣ed; and as soon as we were able to go, hunger pinching us, as be∣fore, we were forced to glut our selves with Leaves. Ever since we used them, we were never free from the gripes in our Bowels; suffer∣ing such dolorous pangs, that there are no torments, we would not willingly chosen before them. Ha∣ving done all we could to comfort
us, we committed our selves to the Divine Providence, to which we recommended our selves without ceasing. Our misery every day encrea∣sing, and strength diminishing, we consulted together touching the means of our deliverance. After every Man had communicated his thoughts, it plainly appeared to us all, that unless we made a Machine, wherein to transport our selves to the other side, we must undoubt∣edly perish. All were agreed, that this was the only remedy left us; especially since we no longer ex∣pected the return of our compani∣ons. Those that observed them, assured us, they were carried off from the Coast by the force of the Tide, and so perished with hunger before they could come to Land. And upon this opinion was groun∣ded the design of making another Boat; but the undertaking was difficult, and upon consultation of
our strength, we found our selves unable to do it. Therefore we were forced to yield to necessity, and be still patient for a time, seeing the remedy proposed was none of the safest. Every Man having given his o∣pinion, our Master shew'd us, that Fires in the Night were seen a great way off, and therefore judg∣ed it not amiss to make such a one on the shoar, as may be beheld 10 or 12 Leagues distance. We chose for this purpose a convenient place, surrounded with dry Trees, where∣on we heapt others, and set them on fire; which according to our computation might be seen at the forementioned distance. We con∣tinued 'em for about 4 days, at the end of which, our hopes in that matter failed us; or rather strength, to carry on so laborious a work. The Master of our Ship, who was of a very strong and sound consti∣tution, heard our complaints, but
took no notice of them; for mea∣suring our strength by his, he made us still continue to bring Wood, with extream toyl and pain. To encourage us, he alledged several examples of those, whose endeav∣ours proved successful in the like accidents, exhorting us to persist in our undertakings; forasmuch as there was no other remedy left us. We took courage then afresh, continually supplying the Fire with Wood; but at length became tired, and ceased our work, seeing it had not the effect we expected. From that time, nothing was heard but wailings and lamentati∣ons amongst us; our faintness was general, several of us being not able to walk without help. My friend was of this number, being so weak and dejected, that he could nei∣ther speak nor hold up his Head. So strict was our friendship, that I endured at the same time, both my own, and his afflictions, in behold∣ing
a true friend thus languishing for want of relief. In those inter∣vals of the abatement of his Fits, I sat by him, and although could not do any thing to ease him, yet told him all I knew to comfort him, and he acknowledged to me afterwards, that my discourses strengthened him. Entertaining one another, one day for some hours, touching the miserable condition we laboured under, since so long a time; he briskly rose up, telling me, he would go upon the search, whence he ho∣ped not to return empty. His hope was not in vain, for he brought along with him a Toad, of an Immense size, which we boil∣ed in a Pot, which the aforemen∣tioned Negroes gave us. When 'twas dressed, he invited me to it, I thankt him, but told him, that what we suffered by eating the Beans, discouraged me from ven∣turing upon this; yet when I saw
these reflexions would not prevail with him to abstain, I determined to bear him company; so we eat it together with Leaves. We past over One hour in fear; but in fine, found no more hut by the Toad, than the Serpents we eat, which extreamly pleased us, considering we might find more of 'em. The next morning it came in the Carpenter's head to go in quest of our Chaplain's Corse; and sought so narrowly, that he found in a bush one of the defunct's shoes, which he struck down with his Hat; and shewing us it, cried out, Courage my Lads, I am much mi∣staken if he be far hence, by what I have already found. At this news we all ran like so many Bloud hounds, prying in every corner for half a mile round; but to as little purpose as heretofore; after near two or three hours search, we returned so full of melancholly, and sorrow, that we were ready to burst.
The miseries and vexations we suffered, made us so waspish, and fretful, that we could scarcely de∣sist a minute from quarreling with one another; the rest earnestly wishing our jarrs might proceed to blows, and death it self, that they might feed on him that was slain. But by good hap, it never came to that. Being one day very atten∣tive, at one of these kind of quar∣rels, the Chirurgion came and told us, he found the Leaves of Trees, of far better taste than those we had hitherto eaten. They were good raw; but being roasted un∣der the ashes, wrapt up in little Balls, became far better. When we tasted them, we desired him to shew us the Tree whereon they grew: To which he replied God forbid, saying, should I shew it you (there being no more of that kind as I know of) you would not leave one Leaf on it. We were not very importunate with him, intend∣ing
to watch him so narrowly, that we would find out his treasure in spight of his Teeth. But we were deceived, for he was too cunning for us, and notwithstanding all our diligence, kept his Tree to him∣self. We betook our selves then to our common remedy, which was patience. My friend, and I, were exhorting one another to it, in walking on the shoar; which we held out so long, that we came to the place where the Buffle lay; which we found dead the first day after our arrival in the Island. The stink of that Carcass was so strong, that we stept a little back to get from it, but our hunger being stronger, we askt one another where we ran, and whether 'twere not foolishly done of Men in our con∣dition. Let us return, said I, to my friend, and make up to this Carrion, and learn to vanquish our selves in all things. I pretended
to have no aversion for it, when in truth, 'twas quite otherwise. Hunger drew me toward this Buf∣fle, being willing to try whether in seeing it, I dared venture on it. Whereupon we returned, and look∣ing on the Carcass; what think you of it, said I, smiling? the scent is very strong, but do you believe the taste to be so bad? As for my part, continued I, I am apt to think that had it passed over the Fire, 'twould do us no hurt. At first, he thought I was not in earnest, but discoursing further of it, he used so many arguments to disswade me from it, that I became obliged to talk no more of it. We left then this place, and in seeking more wholesom Food, came up to the Isles point. Our pains were fruit∣less, for we could find nothing to satisfie us; and for want of more sollid meat, we entertained one a∣nother with consolatory discour∣ses.
Having spent all our arguments, we felt our selves as feeble, and ill disposed to suffer hunger, as before. So that we gave over this cold exercise, and betook our selves to the search afresh, but being over∣taken by the Night, we returned fasting to our Company, who were busied in making one of those great Fires we spake of. It was in this project the Master of our Ship placed all his hopes, this being the only sign that could give notice we were there. Therefore did he bestow indefatigable pains in it, he alone carrying more Wood at a time than four others. He was so strong, and kept up so well his flesh, that it could scarcely be perceived he had fasted as well as we. When the Fire was as big as we would have it, each Man made his Sup∣per on the Leaves of Trees he ga∣thered; and having said our pray∣ers, endeavoured to sleep better than we had eaten.
The next Morning 2 of our Company brought us a small Le∣gane, which they found half dead. Without informing our selves whence proceeded its distemper, 'twas delivered to the Master, for they that took it, durst do no o∣therwise: Having made an order, that whatsoever was found should be equally divided. Hitherto this rule had been well enough obser∣ved; but in this occasion 'twas be∣gun to be broken: Those that took the Animal, alledging the small∣ness of it, ought to be considered, which being divided into twenty four portions, each of 'em would be no bigger than a Nut: That so small a matter could only sharpen the Appetite, which was already but too violent, and therefore 'twere bet∣ter to divide it into sive or six parts, for so many particular persons, whom they then named, to whom they were distributed. Amongst these 6 Favourits the Chirurgion
was one, who being afraid of the ill consequences of this injustice, gave half of his portion to those that most needed it. Who being excessively hungry, and vexed at the wrong done 'em, first calmly complained, and afterwards fell all to reproaching the Master; who, provided he was well dealt with himself, matter'd not what became of the rest: That having been the first promoter of that Law; he ought to blush in being one of the first that broke it. To quiet 'em, he caused the skin to be thrown amongst 'em, which they earnest∣ly begged. Yet was this done contrary to their minds that had eaten the flesh. He, who had the charge of dividing it, was going fairly about it, when those that were most sharp fell upon him, and took it away by force. O∣thers that no less needed it, consi∣dering this violence fell upon these last, and being the strongest, car∣ried
away the greatest pieces. For the better preserving of their boo∣ty, they rusht into the midst of the Wood, where they eat it in quiet. Those that took least heed, and re∣lyed most on their own strength, saw themselves soon assaulted by others, who snatcht from them what they had. They began to grow hot, and their quarrelsom words had been attended with blows, had not those that snatcht a small piece of this skin soon de∣voured it. When we saw nothing could be more expected hence, every Man betook himself elsewhere; and one of the best amongst us at the search, found the remains of two Serpents, whom we eat soon after our ar∣rival in this place. The entrails of those Animals were become blew, and clammy, and so corrupted, that a Man could not look upon them without horrour. The least of these circumstances disgusted at
first the most hunger starved a∣mongst us: But this disgust did not hold long; for beholding one of the company eating thereof with∣out hurt, or using any other pre∣caution, than the laying them a while on the coals; we ran to see whether he that came from ma∣king so good a repast, had taken all; and found an infinite number of Maggots that covered what we sought for. We dispersed these Squadrons, and found their pasture was blew like Azure. Some said this colour was a mark of deadly poyson, and therefore would choose rather to dye with hunger than to eat of it. Another replied they argued like Fools, that knew not, that Poison has no particular co∣lour. That that which they saw was an impression of the Air, which wrought different effects, accord∣ing to the Nature of those subjects it met with. But to say no more, continued he, how can Poyson
which is mortal in it felf, give life to so many Animals, who have no other nourishment than what you see. Be ruled by me, says he, eat of it, and I'le answer for what shall happen. Whereupon he falls up∣on these wretched relicks with such eagerness, as made us fear he would leave none behind him. We found his reasons so good, or ra∣ther hunger made us think 'em such, that we shared with him this heap of Ordure, and carried it to the place where we lay. Some of those that had seen with horrour, what the first had eaten; seeing us return laden with the same provi∣sion, demanded whether we left none behind us, and without ex∣pecting our answer, ran to the place to ascertain themselves. In the mean time we broyled this filth, which we found excellent, and eat it with such an Appetite, that those who before could not behold it, but with an extream
aversion, were exceedingly trou∣bled they had not a share with us. There was one amongst those on whom our good hap made impres∣sion; who forgetting that he was broyling on the Coals, a small piece of the skin of a Legane, ran to search for some of our Ragoo. He went not far before he be∣thought himself, and returned, in∣treating one of the Company to take charge of it; then betook him∣self again in haste, to search whe∣ther he might not find still some remains; but returned empty han∣ded, because those that came im∣mediately after us, took all with 'em. This disappointment was at∣tended by another, that rendred him fully disconsolate: For the Friend with whom he entrusted his morsel, gave way to the temp∣tation, and devoured it. He to whom it belonged, demanded it at his return; and when 'twas an∣swered
him, the Coals had consu∣med it, he became so enraged, that it lackt little, but he had beat out the others Brains. This disturbance being over, e∣very Man went his way upon the search, to find something to eat with his Leaves of Trees, which could hardly be digested of them∣selves. As for my own part, when I saw my self alone, I got down into the Marshes, where by good hap, I found little Snails, with which I fill'd my Cap, Pockets, and Shirt-sleeves. My Compani∣ons spying me laden with this pre∣cious booty, demanded, where I got it: I satisfied them, and they flew to the place; whilst my Friend, and I, roasted under the Cindars, part of these little Animals, which we eat, and found extraordinary good. We sought nothing else, whilst they lasted; but we were so hungry, that these lasted us not above a day.
The next Morning my Friend, and I, went in search of more, and found some in another place. We took only our Pockets full, because not only the night approached, but we were so Faint, that it required a considerable time before we could joyn our Company: To whom we no sooner came, but our Master enquired what we brought. Which shewing him, he demanded what we intended to do with that trash? We were so surprized to hear him speak thus, that we imagined he had lost his Sences. But he taking no notice of our astonishment; come, come, said he, my Lads, I have that which is better for you. Whereupon he shew'd us certain Fish, which he gave us, bidding us eat 'em without enquiring whence they came. That's not to the pur∣pose, replied I, whencesoever they come, they are welcome; and I in∣tend to make as good a Meal of them, as ever I made in my life.
We ran at the same time to the Trees, and gathered Leaves, which served us for Bread; and chose the biggest to wrap our Fish in, which we roasted under the Cindars. 'Tis needless to say how excellent they thus were; and that without any other Sauce, than that of a good Stomach, which we never wanted, we found this Repast the most de∣licious in all our lives. In the mean time, my Companion, and I, re∣solved to find out, whence we came by this Fish; and thereupon de∣sired the Master to shew us how he caught them: Which he did not refuse, telling us he made a hole on the Sea-side, which being fil∣led with Water, at the return of the Tide he drew out these Fish thence. 'Tis impossible to express the joy this news gave us; suppo∣sing, because this Invention once succeeded, the same means would always be attended with the same success: Thus did we flatter our
selves, hoping the future would make amends for what had past. In effect, we did all we could, but in twenty holes we made, there was not taken so much as one Fish. This misfortune reduced us again, to our first distress, for having pla∣ced our desires on a more substan∣tial Meat than Leaves, we could not return unto 'em, but with a most extream regret. The small sustenance these yiel∣ded, made us seek something else, and that with such care and dili∣gence, that we found (my Friend, and I) a great Toad, the sight of which rejoyced us. Hunger is a strange thing; it makes pleasant, and agreeable, the most horrid Ob∣jects: As soon as we saw it, we sei∣zed on't, without the least scru∣ple; and better Husbands now than heretofore, laid it on the Coals whole, and immediately after de∣voured it. This was excellent Meat with
us, nor was the eating it attended by any ill accident, but 'twas so little in quantity, that it tarried but a small time in our Stomachs. Within a quarter of an hour after, hunger again overtook us; and fin∣ding no other remedy, but that of getting out of this doleful place, we resolved to gather as many dry Trees as we could, and with them make a Boat, that might carry us to firm Land. The Master hea∣ring of our design, was not with∣out difficulty brought to consent to it. He set before us the danger we exposed our selves to; seeing our Comrades, who tryed the same fortune, miscarried: That we could not expect any better success, see∣ing they set out with the same, or greater advantages; whereas, per∣haps, in a short time, we might see some Fisher-boats pass by, that would take us in. These conside∣rations made us pause a while, yet at length resolved to quit this wret∣ched
place; and the Master left us at our liberty. As soon as we had his consent, we cut down several Trees, and made of their Rind small Ropes, which served to tye them together. We had not wrought above three or four hours on this design, when we began to find the Work to ex∣ceed the strength of four or five Sceletons, (such as we were) who were ready to sink under the weight of it every Moment; and the rest would not help us, alledg∣ing their weakness to be no less than ours; and that they had gi∣ven their service already in vain to others, and being void of all hope, they would trouble themselves a∣bout nothing. Their refusal did not so greatly discourage us, as to hinder us from continuing our design, and the more our strength diminished, the more we hastned in our Work. Yet do I verily believe, we should
never been able to finish it, had not the two youngest, and strong∣est of the Company joyned them∣selves to us. Their assistance so greatly forwarded us, that we had almost ended it, when the Tide came, and made us desist. In expecting the ebbing of the Sea, we sat all of us smoaking Leaves of Trees about a small fire; and in the interim I called to mind, that our Men often saw Leganes, hankering after the Buffle, and that if there were any there still, I might possibly take one of 'em. Where∣upon I immediately went and hid my self behind a Tree, where I long waited in vain; and in the mean time, considered, that if the Buffle were such a dainty to those Ani∣mals, its flesh must not certainly be so bad for us as we imagined. From these reflexions I came to their effects, and cut out a great piece, in a place which I judged the least corrupted, and then re∣turned
to my Companions. They wondred to see my pro∣vision, and hastily demanded what flesh it was; whence I had it; and whether there was no more left? And seemed a little surprized, when I told 'em 'twas the flesh of the Buffle; for notwithstanding our extremity, no Body had as yet ven∣tured upon it, but when they saw this flesh, which scented so ill, did not much offend the sight; seve∣ral ran (after my example) and took as much as they could. Be∣fore they returned, I laid my por∣tion on the Coals, whence intend∣ing to take it up with a stick, I made for that purpose; I found it all wasted, except a little Glewy matter of no substance. This experience made me leave all, to run to our People, whom I advised to leave the Fat, and cut only the Lean. And at the same time fell all to work, and cut at least fourty pound of it, which was
put under dry Trees, being proper (as we imagined) to make it lose part of its ill scent. We roasted a piece, and equally distributed it: Which smelt so strong, that some were sick with the scent of it, yet eat it, and found 'twas not so bad as it smelt. Our whole Company being not at the Feast, we carried a good part to the place of Rendevouz, (and kept the rest concealed;) which we presented to the Master, being about to tell him what it was: You may spare your pains, says he, the scent shews what 'tis; pray carry your present elsewhere. As soon as he had ended these words, I would came near, to tell him, 'twas not so bad as he ima∣gined; but he told me my Breath stunk so, that he could not suffer me to approach him, infecting the very Air he breathed, and was al∣ready sick with it. In saying this, he left me, and sought another place for his abode.
Others that were less nice, came and prayed us to give them part. Which we did, and they eat it; these first Morsels so sharpening their Appetites, that they were still craving for more. When those that were most eager after it, de∣voured their portion, they would have th'others: Which they with∣standing, this denyal raised such a quarrel, as set us all in an uproar. To appease 'em, we gave them part of that we kept for our selves, but this served only to inflame their desires; so that although 'twas Night, they would needs go to the place where the Carcass lay, to eat their Bellies full. We desired 'em to consider the Night was dark, and, moreover, 'twas about this time, the Crocodils, and Kaimans, lay sculking on the shoar. They yielded to this reason, but could not sleep, and we felt the effects of their greedy desires, being forced to purchase our quiet at the cost of
what remained. Having eaten all that was left, some of 'em betook themselves to rest; whilst others affirm'd, hunger tormented 'em more now than before; there was one especially, cryed out, the Night seemed to him a year; that 'twas impossible for him to rest, believ∣ing (as he said) there was no tor∣ment comparable to that of hun∣ger: Yet had he eaten above three pound of this Carrion; and some hours before Night, half of a great Fish, which he found lying (knaw∣ed) on the shoar. The Fish was so big, that he first intended to make it serve him two Days, but when once begun upon it, he could not leave, till he made an end of it, and assured us he could eaten four times as much. With this discourse did this fellow disturb the rest of the whole company; so that at break of Day we all rose; those that were most hungry, ran again to the Buffle, and we betook
our selves to work on our Boat. How bad and corrupt soever the Food was, we eat the day before, yet did it yield us that strength, we never received from the Leaves. And therefore an hour after we had been at our work, we left it to broyl some more, which much added to our strength. We fini∣shed our Boat some hours before Night, and having fetcht a walk or two, return'd to our Compani∣ons, whom we found busied, some in laying their pieces of Meat in the Air, others in turning it, and some again in roasting, and eating it with such an Appetite, as would made a Man that knew no other∣wise, believe 'twas some rare dain∣ty. When the Master understood our Vessel was ready, he shew'd us (as before) the greatness of the danger, to which we were expo∣sing our selves, seeing we could not get to Land without Sails, nor
resist the Tides without an Anchor. We answered, there could not be any thing more dangerous to us, than this Island, wherein 'twas too probable we must dye with hun∣ger, when our buffle was spent; that although we had neither An∣chor, nor Sail, yet did we find our selves strong enough to bear up against the Tides, and hoped to meet with some Bengaloises, that would receive us on Board them. After some further discourse, he wished us a good Voyage, and gave leave to take with us a young Man of the Company, that spoke Por∣tugaise. This Language being much used in the Kingdoms of Ben∣gala and Aracan; we promised our selves hence a great advantage, and thought only of parting. In the mean time, one of our Men offer∣ed to make a Wooden Anchor, al∣ledging he wanted only for this design, four crooked pieces of Wood, which he would so fasten together
with the Rinds of young Trees, as should answer our occasions. This, replyed I, may be done, provided we had wherewithal to make it sink to the bottom, but you know ve∣ry well, there's not one stone in this Island. 'Tis no matter, an∣swered he, for we will fill two or three of our Shirt-sleeves with Sand, and fasten them to the Anchor; and you'l see 'twill do us the same service as one of Iron. This ap∣peared so probable, that we went immediately, some to peel Trees, and the rest to seek crooked boughs, by which means, in less than two hours our Anchor was finished to our content. Having proceeded thus far, we wanted twenty fathom of ground tackle, and knew not where to get ten. Whilst we were studying what to do in this matter, we saw two of our Crue coming towards us, laden with Ivy, and the Rind of young Trees. They twisted one
with the other, and made thereof such a Rope as we wanted. The next Morning we took our leave of those that were designed to stay behind, with an intent to return speedily to 'em, if we met with success. They wisht us good luck, and attended us to the Sea∣side; where, after mutual embra∣ces, we Embarkt eight of us, and gained the Isles point, which lies directly over against the Main Land. There we stood still, and pau∣sed a while, having kindled a Fire, and taken our Repast. We then weighed Anchor, and with much rowing, found our selves far enough from the Island. The Weather hapned to be calm, which gave us opportunity to make use of a Bagg of Sand, instead of a Plummet. By which means, having found the Tide against us, we cast Anchor on a Bank, where our Boat could take no harm. In the mean time, hun∣ger
pinching us, we agreed to eat; but 'twas Decreed before hand, the provisions should be equally divi∣ded, to the end every Man might Husband his share, lest the Voy∣age should prove longer than we expected. We began then our Re∣past, with intentions of being mode∣rate; but being once entred, 'twas im∣possible to disswade most of us from making an end of all: Wherefore being reduced to feed upon Leaves alone, they heartily besought God the Rope might break, and by this means return to the Island, from whence we were not as yet above a Leagues distance. Their prayers were heard, for there arose a Storm which broke our poor Cable, and the Waves wa∣shed away our provision, which consisted in some few Leaves, and forced us back to the same place, whence we parted in the Morn∣ing. We committed our Boat to the
care of the two youngest in our Company, whilst the rest went on Shoar. We immediately ran to the Fire we left at parting, and found one of the Negroes Wives (we spake of) by it. As soon as this Woman saw us, she threw her self at our Feet; her Body was grievously bat∣ter'd, and wounded, and we un∣derstood by her Signs, that 'twas her own people that had thus used her. This wretched Creature was no∣thing but Skin and Bone, where∣upon we judged her condition to be the same as ours. We made signs to her to sit down, and ha∣ving warmed our selves, with an intention to repose; within an hour, hunger tormented us in such a manner, that 'twas impossible to rest. To compleat our misery, one of our Company (maugre the tem∣pest) had saved part of his meat, which he eat in our sight, without imparting the least morsel of it, though never so much intreated.
We went then in quest of Leaves, but none of us could swallow 'em, whatsoever Sauce we put them in. The Buffles flesh made us too dain∣ty, and since we eat of it, the Leaves of Trees became insipid meat. In the mean time, hunger so extreamly prevailed on us, that we became all of us like Men despe∣rate, staring one upon another, like persons that intended to devour each other. Others ran to and fro like Mad-men, crying out, ever and anon, they felt the pains of the Damned. Whilst they thus ra∣ved, one of the most distempered amongst us told the rest, he had an inspiration. But before, says he, I tell you the contents thereof, you must acknowledge it to be one: And without waiting our an∣swer; admire, continued he, the strange effects of Providence; God, says he, who pitties our miseries, does so apparently provide a re∣medy
against 'em, that we can no longer doubt of it; our Sins have all this while blinded our eyes, and hindred us from finding the reme∣dy he has sent us. This Mans dis∣courses, whom we respected as Senceless, did so weary us, that we could not forbear interrupting, and telling him, that he was a Fool, to take his Whimseys for Divine Re∣velations. Supposing, replyed he, I were so, what reason have you to believe your selves in a better condition? My Distemper would be the effect of overmuch fasting, which you have suffered as well as I, how comes you Brains, then, to be better settled than mine? But to use no more words, do you see yonder poor Woman? Think you chance has brought her hither? Jonas his Whale, young Toby's Fish.—Pray, cryed out one, more im∣patient than the rest, what have we to do with Jonas and Toby? these are digressions that are not
to our purpose; we are an hungry, can you tell us, how we shall be satisfied? Have I not told you, replyed the other: Do you believe this Woman to be here only to warm her self? This indeed is her intention, but God has used this as a means to deliver her into our hands. In good truth, replyed one (called Charles Dobbel;) the more I examine the circumstances of this Rencounter, the less I doubt this to be an effect of the Divine Pro∣vidence, for I believe this Woman came not here of her self; come on, continued he, (in rising up,) I will be the Fates Executioner; ha∣ving eaten all manner of filthiness, let's try whether Human Flesh be not good, and make no scruple, seeing 'tis the intention of Heaven, whose Decrees must be obeyed. When I perceived he was in ear∣nest, I desired him to sit down a while, intreating him to think a little on the consequences of his
enterprize; that these kind of fan∣cies, were rather the suggestion of the Devil, than Divine Inspirati∣ons; that this Woman was of the same make as we, and if 'twas from a Revelation, they undertook to eat her, 'twas one of the most wretched, and leanest Revelations I ever heard of. Pray observe, said I, this Woman is a meer Sceleton, covered only with skin, which, as you may perceive, has not the Mine of any delicacy; but suppo∣sing 'twere otherwise, think you to stop here? No, without doubt you'l desire still the same meat; and God knows what little securi∣ty every Man may promise to him∣self after this rate. Whereunto I added, that in two hours time we may come to the Buffle, and per∣haps find enough left, to satisfie us, if not, bad 'em use their pleasure, either in sparing, or massacring this wretched Woman. Whereupon, partly for shame,
and some remains of detestation for this action, they told me, they would think no more of it, and endeavour to sleep. At break of Day they rose, and charged me with my promise. I was so weak, that I could scarcely stir, it being above three Miles to the place where the Buffle lay. I prayed 'em then to excuse me, for this once, and go without me, but they would ad∣mit no denyal, wherefore I was for∣ced to go along with 'em. The four weakest lay behind, and pro∣mised us, in the mean time, to work a new Cord, for the Anchor we in∣tended to make in the Room of that we lost. We had not went a quarter of a Mile, before Charles Dobbel retur∣ned, and charged the four that stay∣ed behind to take care of the Wo∣man, being resolved at his return to kill her, in case the Buffle were all eaten. We then hastned to the place
where the Buffle lay, and found a great deal of Flesh still remaining, but so greatly corrupted, that we were scarce able to come near it. Having sought out the best place, and seen 'twas all alike, we cut two or three pieces of it, which we laid on the Coals, and devoured half drest. During our repast, came two of our Masters Company; who shew∣ed immediately by their counten∣ances, what was their Errand. This exceedingly troubled us, being a∣fraid they would take away all with them. Having observed 'em about an hour, we drew near, and saw nothing remaining but bones; whereupon our eyes ran down with Tears, saying to one another, we deserved to dye with hunger, for having staid so long time without hindring them. 'Tis too late, re∣plyed Charles Dobbel, to expect a∣ny Flesh, seeing they have left none, yet still there remains part
of the hide, let's try to get that, ei∣ther by sair means or foul. Where∣upon he made up to 'em and de∣sired 'em to be contented with what they had, and leave us the rest. Hah! cryed one amongst them (in a deriding tone) these Gentlemen are very civil in their demands; we have taken the rotten flesh, and they would have the skin, that is sound, and consequently the best part. Do you imagine, said he to us, we have taken all this pains for you? 'Tis true, I do not desire you should want, but we will serve our selves first, and if we must pe∣rish here in this dolesom confine∣ment, I freely declare, I'le use my utmost endeavours to dye the last. This prating fellow's discourse enraged us, especially Charles Dob∣bel, who would needs come to blows, but I shew'd him, passion ought ever to be estemed a bad Counsellor, and that 'twere better
to be angry as late as we could. I told them, then, that our request was neither unjust, nor ridiculous; that we were all Companions in the same fortune; and that they ought to consider, we were going to hazard our lives, as well upon their account, as our own. These ar∣guments were slighted, and Charles Dobbel, vexed at this proceeding, cryed out to us, come on Com∣rades, let us fall to work, as well as they, we need not their leave: Whereupon each of us drew out his Knife, and took away their prey. They being inferiour to us in number, lookt upon one another the while, to encourage (as it were) one another. Demanding of us, whether 'twere just they should labour all this while for us, in say∣ing which, one of 'em lifted up an Hatchet, and another a Knife, to strike at us. We, on our parts, put our selves in a posture of defence;
and he that had the Hatchet, ha∣ving vowed he'd cleave the Scul of them that dared come near him; I told him, if he were wise, he'd hearken to reason, and not be thus transported with passion. What reason, reply'd he, can a Man ex∣pect from persons that have none? you would have us give away our right, can we do less than defend our own? But in fine, we came to an agreement, which was, they should carry away what they had already, and leave us the rest. When we had taken out almost all of it without a Knife, (so great was its corruption) we washed it in several waters, and drest a great part of it, keeping the rest for our Companions. Then we began to think of making another Anchor, to serve instead of that we lost, and for this purpose dispatched two of our Men, to borrow of the Ma∣ster his Hatchet. Which he im∣mediately sent us. And having by
the help of it finished our Anchor, we resolved to go all four to thank him. About half way, one of those that borrowed the Hatchet, told us, he had seen in going, the Ma∣sters Linnen, lying a drying under the Trees, and that both himself, and his Companion (who were half naked) were tempted to take each of 'em a Shirt, and Wast-coat, but dared not do it without ac∣quainting us. We scrupled at first the suffering it, but the great need they had, made us shut our Eyes against all consideration. And be∣cause this thievish exploit could not be carried on in the Day, we there∣fore tarried till Night, and found them, by good hap, asleep, when we came at their quarters. Those that needed Linnen, having taken what they wanted, came and told us, there lay near the same place, a considerable quantity of the flesh, and skin of the Buffle, which we should do also well to seize on.
We were a great while determin∣ing the point, because, that had they taken us in the Fact, we knew not how to excuse our selves, and they were better Armed, and more in number than we. But hunger mastering these considerations, we took away part of their provision, and speedily withdrew. I went not far, before it repented me of this Theft, and was ready to carry back again that which I had taken, when Charles Dobbel represented to me, that should they awake, notwithstanding whatsoever we al∣ledged to justifie our selves, they will never believe (seeing us out at so late an hour,) but that we came with some ill design. I took, then, his advice, and so much the rather, being inclined thereun∣to by hunger. Having rested our selves some time, we continued on our march to our Companions, whom we found on the other side of the River, where we left them.
The Water was, then, so high, that we were forced to pass over it in swimming with our booty at our backs. Three of those that expected our coming, had eaten nothing since we left them, and were so faint, that they were not able to stand. The fourth, who made a reserve, feasted in their presence, and was so hard hearted to refuse them any part with him. We could not without a just resentment, hear the complaint of these hunger-starved wretches; and sharply rebuked him they complained against, telling him he deserved the same measure, but we were more tender-hearted. Having equally divided to each one his portion, we judged it meet, to watch by turns against the sur∣prises of our Enemies, reckoning them to be of that number, whom we robbed; and for a stronger tye, made a solemn Oath, to assist one another, in case of Invasion, to the
last breath. We demanded after∣wards, what became of the Wo∣man we left in their keeping, and were inform'd, that soon after our departure, she slipt away so cun∣ningly, that we could never after set sight on her. We would wil∣lingly have found her, fully inten∣ding then to eat her, altho so little toothsom. As soon as 'twas night, we set one upon the watch, whilst the o∣ther seven slept. Scarce had we rested two hours, but our Sentinel spyed a Negro stealing softly to∣wards him, with a thick Cudgel. As soon as he came within the reach of his Oar, he broke it on his Head, and the wretch fell down as dead. The disturbance awaken∣ed us; and inform'd of the mat∣ter, we pursued the other Negroes, who seeing their Companion fall, fled into the thickest of the Wood. As soon as they perceived we fol∣low'd 'em, they set out such a cry
in flying, as would have made a Man judge it to be of twenty pur∣sons, although they were but se∣ven or eight. After a fruitless per∣suit of them, we return'd to the place where their Companion fell, whom we supposed to lye dead on the place; but our conjectures de∣ceived us, for this wretch made shift to escape, and that with such haste, that he left his stick behind him. We conferred together touching this adventure, and doubted not but the Woman that warmed her self at our fire, had given them no∣tice of what passed among us. She had observed that at our parting, we left only four behind, who might be easily worsted, if set upon in the Night. And without questi∣on 'twas upon this intent they came, but by good hap, instead of four Men, they found eight, one of which watched for the security of the rest.
As soon as 'twas Day, we made a Rope for our Anchor, like unto the first, and when ready to depart, we found our Boat was not in case to carry above six Men. We were forced then to send away two, and the Lot fell upon the youngest, to whom we promised, for their comfort, to return, as soon as we came to main Land. In expectation of the Tides be∣ing for us, we placed our selves round a little fire; where, an hour after, we heard such reiterated Screeks, and Cries, as made our hearts tremble. Notwithstanding our fear, yet would we answer, and immediate∣ly spied the two young Men retur∣ning, we lately dismist. They were so dismayed, that they quaked still, in telling us they▪ found neither the Master, nor any of his Com∣pany: That they not only sought 'em, where they were wont to pass over the Night; but, moreover, in
several other places, and that que∣stionless, some Vessel, in passing by, had received them on Board. Their unwillingness to tarry in the Island, made us suspect this to be a device; we question'd 'em, therefore, apart, and found their answer to be ex∣actly the same. Which made us resolve to tarry till next Morning, and go our selves to the place, and not leave the Island, till we were further satisfied. About midnight the floud fa∣vouring our design, we weighed Anchor, to go to the dry Trees, some of which we wanted, to re∣pair our Boat. And within half an hour perceived the Tide fierce∣ly carried us towards a great Tree, with extent Branches; which, mau∣gre all our endeavours, 'twas im∣possible to avoid; so that the Boat ran against it with such violence, that some of us fell into the Water, others were left hanging on the Branches, and I the only person,
that remain'd untoucht. This shock was so fierce, that each of us belie∣ved the rest were drowned, and I for my part, did not doubt of it; when Charles Dobbel appeared, cal∣ling upon the rest, and was trans∣ported with joy, to see me again upon the Boat: At last we all found out one another. 'Twas extream cold, and they were very wet; and therefore endeavoured to make a fire to dry themselves. In this ill accident, we lost our Anchor, and half of the Rope, and wanted wherewithal to repair this double loss. Neither did we know whether we could make to the shoar, the force of the Streams car∣rying uf off with such violence. After tryal, we found our conje∣ctures true. Whereupon two of our Men, took the rest of the Rope, and swam to shoar, where they drew the Boat after 'em, without any trouble. 'Twas Night, and we were rea∣dy
to starve, both with hunger and cold, and had neither Food nor Fire. And besides, 'twas near half a League off the place where we warmed our selves the day before. Yet so far must we go, if we in∣tended to have Fire, and none of us were willing to go so far. Whilst we were grieving under this vexa∣tion, Charles Dobbel, (who was one of the most lively and coura∣gious of us all) took with him the two youngest of our Company, and went in search of what we wanted. In tarrying for them, we entertained one another with the misfortunes that oppressed us, and the little likelihood of a delive∣rance from them, all things conti∣nually crossing, and forcing us to tarry in a Desolate and Barbarous Island, where it seem'd Heaven had cast us, to make us underto the pu∣nishments due for our offences. From these discourses we fell in∣to a melancholly Fit of silence, and
verily believe we had pined away, had not our Companions returned soon after. The fire they brought did us as much good, in dispersing the darkness, whose horrour also contributed to afflict us, as in dri∣ving away the cold, that was ex∣tream sharp upon us. These poor people told us at their return, that they trod all along upon Bryars, and Thorns; that they lost their way, and having at length found the Fire we left, they fell with it into Boggs, and Ditches, full of Water, which put it out, and forced 'em to fetch more; how that in seek∣ing a better way back, they hap∣ned into a worse, whence they were a long time getting out. Their Feet ran down with blood, and their Bodies were bruised and bat∣ter'd; which, together with their other sad circumstances, rendered them so disconsolate, as 'tis im∣possible to express. We comfor∣ted 'em the best we could, and
then endeavoured to rest. The next Morning, we sent two of our Company, to the Master's Quarters, and places thereabouts, to know whether they were certain∣ly gone; and in the mean time sought wherewithal to make us another Anchor and Cord. To∣wards Evening, our people brought us word, they were not to be found in the Island, and that they could meet only with a piece of stinking Fish; a small piece of the Buffles skin, and four heads of Garlick in a Pot. By these Tokens we knew they were gone, and began to hope they would remember us. In the mean time, our two Deputies told us, they found in their way a Grave, which one of 'em, moved only by curiosity (as he said) had uncover∣ed; but the sequel shew'd he had another design, for as soon as he saw a Corps which the Worms were gnawing, he cried out, the
condition of these Insects was bet∣ter than his; he being ready to pe∣rish with hunger, whilst they were Feasting. Having stood a while considering this object, at last, he says, he had a great mind to de∣prive these Animals of their prey, and wanting other means where∣by to avoid Death, he thought no Man could justly blame him for using this. Which said, he gave way to the temptation, laying hold on the Carcass, and had cut, and eaten of it, had not his Companion shew∣ed him the enormity of this acti∣on. He had much difficulty to disswade him from it, but at length prevailed, and both of 'em let down together the Corps into the Grave, and hastned from the place, lest hunger should get the better of 'em, and make 'em close with the temptation. As soon as we had the Pot, we boyled that which was left of the Fish we mentioned, together with
store of minced Leaves. After the repast, we fell to considering, whe∣ther 'twere best tarry in the Island, or venture out again. The first opinion was grounded on the diffi∣culty we found in resisting the Tide, which was very high; on the loss of our two Anchors, and the impossibility of making a fourth, in case we should lose this. 'Twas added, That our Companions be∣ing safely arrived, would take care of us; and questionless, omit no opportunity, to deliver us out of this place. Those that were for parting, alledged, that the assist∣ance which the others spake of, was uncertain; that on this groundless hope, we should eat that little which remained; and that having staid in vain, we should be at length, forced to expose our selves to the danger, which we thought to shun. After a dispute, which lasted near an hour, 'twas agreed to refer our selves to the eldest of
the Company; who declared, that a longer stay in this fatal place, would certainly destroy us, there needing only three or four Days to make us incapable of mannaging our Boat; whereupon, he conclu∣ded, we must use no longer delays. His opinion was followed, and the rest of the Day spent in fitting out our Boat; and the next Morning, (having broken our Fast, on the remains of the skin of the Buffle, and provided good store of Leaves) we embarkt our selves. We had made a little Sail of a Shirt, with the help of which, and a gentle Wind, we got past the false Tides, in less than half an hour. A while after the Wind ceased, and our Sail becoming useless, we ply∣ed our Oars. We had not went far, before we needed meat; where∣fore we cast our Anchor, which stood us in as much stead as one of Iron. When we judged the Tide could not incommodate us, we
weighed it, and set Sail, and thus were carried from the Island, till we lost sight of it. The next Morning, we discove∣red the two Islands, of which the Master spake to us; and profiting by the instructions he gave us, got so far, that we passed by 'em. Six or seven hours after, we believed we saw main Land, and were in∣deed, not mistaken, but were at a great distance from it; and as soon as we discovered it, the Tide tur∣ned against us. We cast Anchor, then, with exceeding great fear, lest its Rope should break, for 'twas on it lay all our hopes; and during this time, one of the most hungry amongst us, proposed the augmenting our allowance, seeing we were so near Land. Although the others were as weak as he, yet were they not of his mind, alledg∣ing there needed only one blast of Wind, to snap the Rope, that held the Anchor, and we were gone a∣gain;
it being better to be con∣tented with a small allowance, and patiently expect the success of our enterprise. Having no compass; The Sun, and Stars, served us for guide, and by their means, distinguished, where∣abouts we lay. The next Morning, the Wind and Tide being for us, from Morning to Night, we drew very near the shoar, but could not Land. We were forced, then, to cast Anchor, and pass over another Night, in great distress, and fear; the currents running very swift. The next Day we gained early the shoar. We left the Boat at An∣chor, with intent to return to it, in case the Country we were in, were not that we lookt sor. Ha∣ving marcht a while, we found two ways, one along the shoar, and the other along the River of Sondiep; which two were opposite. We were so little acquainted with ei∣ther of them, that we knew not
which to take; and after much ar∣guing to little purpose, we struck out at all adventure towards the River, and found our selves in a good way. Hunger, cold, and o∣ther pressures, so greatly weakned us, that we could scarcely go six steps, without resting, so that we advanced but slowly, and in three hours time, met no living Soul. A while after we saw Trees, whose Branches seem'd to have been late∣ly lopt. About twenty paces di∣stance from thence, we beheld a Bark, towards which we drew near; and as soon as those that were in it perceived us, they came towards us. This facility troubled us, for we could not imagine, beholding 'em coming without being called, but that they meant us harm. Our fear encreased, when we perceived 'em to be six in number, armed each of 'em with a long knife in his hand. When they were near enough to behold we were not in
a condition or humour to hurt them, we shewed 'em our fleshless and wasted Arms, and some small remains of the skin of the Buffle: Which, though small in quantity, yet were enough to poison the least delicate amongst them; and there∣fore these people (howsoever gross and bruitish) drew back six or se∣ven paces, stopping their Noses, and threatning us with their knives. Whereupon we comprehended, they suspected us to be treacherous and faithless persons. And therefore hastned to shew them our Leaves of Trees, endeavouring, to make 'em comprehend by signs, that these had been our Food. They at length understood us; and mov'd with compassion, smote their Breasts, with Eyes lift up to Heaven. Be∣ing satisfied of our sincerity, we signified to 'em (as well as we could) the need we had of them, to bring us to the next Village. They readily offer'd us their assist∣ance,
provided we payed them. I could not but ruminate in my mind, upon this occasion; how un∣kind, and selfish, most Men are; and how little like their Creatour, the Giver of all things. These Barbarians saw, that we were in a manner naked, being only tyed a∣bout with some tatter'd Raggs; mere Anatomys, and Shadows. And, moreover, pittied by 'em, as being strangers, in a Forlorn con∣dition, and destitute of all succour. Yet without Money, we plainly perceived, this main Land would be no better to us than the wretch∣ed Island, wherein we so long suf∣fer'd. We agreed, then, to give them something, and Deputed the Eldest amongst us to make the bargain. He offer'd them a piece, to the value of a Crown, in our Money. The Bengaloises gave us to understand, they must have ten of 'em; for less than which, they would not leave their work. We
thereupon gave them another, and afterwards a third piece; all which not prevailing with them, our old Man, shew'd them his empty poc∣kets, thereby insinuating, they had all. This pretence effected our business, but in a miserable man∣ner. When we were on board their Bark, we made signs to 'em to give us something to eat; they answe∣red, they could not, without Mo∣ney; we gave them another Crown; and for this, they gave us, in a cloth, about an handful of Rice, and a Pisang, as big as a Man's fin∣ger. Every one of us stretcht forth his hand with such earnestness, as made our distributer fear his hand∣ful of Rice, would occasion some disorder. He withdrew himself, then, and made eight equal porti∣ons. He did the same with the Pisang, (which is an indifferent good fruit;) and although this was but a small repast, yet inestimably to be
preferred before that filth we had eaten for a Month together; so that we wished the Bark were full of this provision; although we could hardly imagine such a quan∣tity would satisfie us. The Ne∣groes, perceiving we had still Mo∣ney, took advantage thereby; and ceasing to row, made signs we had not yet given them enough; and that if we expected to go forward, they must have more pieces. We gave them, then, another; where∣upon they rowed about some twelve stroaks, and then gave over. Where∣upon we gave them a third piece, and they did as before, so that this was still to begin again; they con∣tinuing still to demand, and we to give, so great a desire had we to come to Land. In the mean time we saw two other Barks, which came and joy∣ned themselves with us. Their gestures plainly shewed, their whole discourse was of us, which lasted a
great space. Within a while they Landed, to consult (as it were, more conveniently) what to do with us. They counted the Money they received, looking upon us in such a manner, as made us fear the suc∣cess of their conference. Having tarried about an hour in the Bark, two of our Company went out to pray 'em to shew them some fresh Water. As soon as the Negroes perceived 'em, one of them took 'em by the Arms, and made them enter the Bark again. This hard usage fully perswaded us, they were there only to determine the means, to cut our Throats, and get our Money; and in this imaginati∣on, began to prepare our selves for Death. Yet not without repinings against Providence, which so ob∣stinately persecuted us. From the time we believed they formed the design of Murthering us, we were impatient till they Executed it; for hunger had rendred the pains
of death less affrightful. In fine, having suffered during the space of two or three hours, what they suffer that expect Men to come and cut their Throats; the three Barks parted, and our Masters re∣turned, pursued their course, and for a Crown more gave us a Pot full of fresh Water. Which we drank with the greater delight, it being a Month since we had tasted any other than Salt Water. As soon as we had filled our Bellies with Water, our hunger in some mea∣sure abated, and our Stomachs be∣gan to let us rest. In the mean time, the Negroes inform'd us, that twenty of our Companions were in the next Vil∣lage; and for this good news, we gave 'em another Crown. Where∣upon they hastened to bring us where they were, and in entering the Village, two of them came with us to the Goverour, at whose Feet they laid down the three Crowns
we agreed to give 'em for our pas∣sage, having thrice touched the Earth with their Heads, and Hands, in saying, Salamabéta, (that is to say) Peace be with you. The Go∣vernour gave us a kind reception, making Signs to take the Money again, that lay at his Feet. But we gave him to understand (as well as we could) his Men had well earned it, and that we would not deprive them of their Sallery. In fine, he ordered two or three of his Servants to conduct us to our Com∣panions; who perceiving us at a distance, came and met us, expres∣sing their joy to see us. Those we left in the Island, arrived five days before us, in this Village; and the five that went off first, in their Ma∣chine, came some days before them; under the guidance of certain Fisher-men. As soon as they saw us, they en∣deavoured to out-vy one another in welcoming us; and perhaps
would have done better in not gi∣ving persons that fasted so long, so many sorts, and such great quan∣tities of Meat; for without the Pisang and Honey, which served us for a Medicine, and Digesture, I believe we should have bursted. Their operation was so happy, that all these meats did us no hurt, and that which was most strange, was, that although we eat much, and often, yet were still as hungry as before. Two Days after we were here, the Governour thought fitting, to send those that came first, to the Factory; that so the Company might be informed of the loss of their Vessel. Advising them, by his Interpreter, to stock themselves well with provisions; being to Voy∣age above two hundred Leagues; and, moreover, travel five Days in a barren Countrey; and that which they were to come into af∣wards, being not much more fruit∣ful,
and inhabited. This bad news allarm'd our poor people, who had not, as yet, well refreshed them∣selves, nor satisfied their desires af∣ter meat; for the more they eat, the more they coveted. Yet part they must, for the reasons afore∣mentioned. As to our selves, who were those that came last, having rested four or five Days; I inform∣ed my self, by what adventure our Companions left the unfortunate Island, and was told as follows. After they had taken their leaves of us, they wilthdrew to their or∣dinary place of abode; and it be∣ing late, endeavoured to rest. The next Morning, perceiving their pro∣vision was stol'n, they became ex∣ceedingly troubled. In the midst of their Affliction, they instantly besought God to deliver them from their misery. Each one, after∣wards, betaking himself to Leaves, but with-extream sorrow, to find themselves reduced to such insipid Food.
Towards the Evening, there were two, who discoursing toge∣ther, touching their sad condition, found themselves, insensibly, at the point of the Isle, whence they dis∣covered Fisher-men. As soon as they imagined they were seen, one of 'em broke off a bough from a Tree, fastening to it a piece of Linnen; which he wavered, to give notice there were persons in the Island. The Fisher-men drew near within a stones cast off the shoar. After a quarter of an hours consul∣tation, they came nearer, and de∣manded in Portugaise what we were. We answered 'em in the same Lan∣guage; and being fully satisfied, they came on shoar. They were all Armed, some with Darts, and Javelins, and others with Bows, and Arrows; and although they saw well enough, our people were not in a capacity to molest them, yet they anxiously demanded their Arms. Our Men having only
their Knives, immediately threw them down on the ground, and one of the Negroes gathered them up. Whereupon they drew nearer us, and required to see the rest, de∣manding how many we were in all? Lest our number should af∣fright them, 'twas answered, we were not above seven, whom they should now see. Those that gui∣ded them, ravished with joy to see themselves upon the point of their deliverance, could not forbear shou∣ting, and hollowing, at the entrance of the Wood. Which being heard by their Companions, they ima∣gined some Beast was wounded, and their assistance required. Where∣upon every Man, at this noise, Ar∣med himself with a good Cudgel, and ran with all speed, towards the place where the noise was heard. When the Negroes saw 'em coming with such fierceness, they imagined themselves betrayed, and imme∣diately let fly their Arrows, yet
hurt none of our Men. Who see∣ing they were attcked by persons, whom they supposed to be the wretched Slaves, they saw on the other side, two days after they Landed in the Island; imagined, that hunger drove them to this extremity, and that taking our Men at a disadvantage, they would have slain them. In this imagina∣tion, they so Animated themselves, that they resolved to cry quittance with them, when their stock of Arrows were spent. The two that were near the Negroes, perceiving their Companions mistake, cryed out to 'em, they were deceived, and bad 'em throw away their Cud∣gels, and come boldly up to them. To which, they obeyed; and in ap∣proaching, demanded by signs of the Negroes, whether they had a∣ny thing to eat; and that they would hasten to give them some∣thing. One of them answered in Dutch, that their wants were ap∣parent,
and should be supplied, but they must first deliver up their Staves, and Knives, which was done without the least hesitation. The Negroes now fearing no∣thing, gave our people a small quan∣tity of Sod Rice, which was so greedily devoured, that they stood like Men amazed, beholding how they eat it. In the mean time our Men, being impatient to get out of this place, demanded of the Negroes whether they would carry 'em thence, which they con∣sented to, upon consideration of a reward; alledging they were but poor, and consequently could not afford to do it for nothing. Our Men having Money, soon agreed about the price, which was four Crowns a Man; and the Fisher∣men spent the next Day in repair∣ing their Barks. As to provision, they said they were stored with Rice, sufficient for themselves, and us; and hoped to take Fish enough
to satisfie the most hungry among us. This discourse extreamly re∣joyced our people, who immediately demanded a Hat-full of Rice, which they obtain'd for half a Crown. Whilst the Negroes were Fishing, our people boyled the Rice, they had given them; and before 'twas ready, they brought them Fish like∣wise, together with necessaries to dress it. At Night, when 'twas time to rest, the Master ordered our Men privately to watch, one after another, to prevent the Ne∣groes from using any treachery to∣wards us; and they on their side, used the same pre-caution. Two Days after, they gave us notice to make ready for our de∣parture the Night following; and as soon as we were imbarked, they rowed so lustily, that we soon came to their Village. Being Lan∣ded, they led our people to the Governour, who gave them a kind Reception, and dispatched two or
three Barks, with Provision to∣wards those that set out on their Boat from the Island. Having gi∣ven this order, he made them sit down about him, on a great Matt; and caused the Fisher-men to come before him, and return the Money given for their passage. But they alledged 'twas not just to defraud these poor Men of their Sallary. As soon as they were sat down, an Eunuch brought word, that the Governours Women had a desire to see some of the young Dutch∣men, who were sent them. The place where they entred, is a great space distinguished by several Appart∣ments; in the midst of which is a Court, through which the Eunuch made them enter. Where imme∣diately these Women Flockt about 'em, some of them taking 'em by the Nose, others pinched their Cheeks: Some, again, unbuttoned 'em, to see and touch their Breasts, others stroakt them over the Face
with languishing looks; there be∣ing not one of them, but desired these two young Men might re∣main with them for some hours; but the surly Eunuch departed, and made signs to them, to follow him. Being joyned to their Companions, they were led altogether to a House of Entertainment for strangers. The next Morning, which was Market-day, the Governour came to 'em, and changed their Money into lit∣tle Shels, (which is the Money of that Country) and helpt them to buy what they wanted, to prevent their being cheated. The rest of the Day was spent, in making merry; and towards Evening, the Book-keeper looking out at the Door, received a blow with a stone, that much injured him. Of which, having complained to the Governour, he caused the offender to be sought, and found him to be one of his Domesticks. Having sharply reprehended him,
he caused an Arrow to be run through his Nostrils; and having a Drum tied behind his Shoulders, was thus led before the Lodging of the Person hurt; where having been severely whipt, he was con∣demned to perpetual banishment. And this was the adventure of the five Men that remain'd in the Isle after us: Here follows that of the seven, who made use of a Boat, in the same manner as we did. Having no Anchor, for the space of five Days, and as many Nights, they struggled against the force of the Tides, which cast them upon a Bank of Sand. This Bank was of great extent, where they ima∣gined, at first, they might find some∣thing for their refreshment; the Provision they took with 'em, being spent. But after a long search, could find nothing but a small quantity of a Buffles dung, which they carefully gathered up. They had lived two Days upon the Moss,
which the Floods from the Sea had made, on the Trees it dashed a∣gainst. And their Stomachs being thus accustomed to filth, this last appeared very good to 'em, and they only complained they had not enough of it. This sorry Food lasted them a∣bout three Days, at the end of which, they found themselves so weak; that they could neither Row, nor without difficulty stand upright. One of the Company reflecting upon the necessity there was of dying, in this disconsolate place: What think you of it, said he, to the four rest, that accompa∣nied him, must we all dye with hun∣ger? Is it not just, that some lose their Lives, for the preservation of the rest? It is true, the Divine Law enjoyns us, to love our. Neigh∣bour, and forbids Murther: But is there any thing more near to us, than our selves; and does not this precept of Prohibition seem to insinuate, that
every thing is permitted us, in or∣der to the conserving of that Being, which Nature has given us? We have the example of whatsoever has Life; the great Fish devour the small; and the least. Insect, flies by a Natural instinct, the approaches of its Enemy. Death treads upon our Heels; says he, of all Enemies the most dreadful, and cruel. Why do we not, then, use against it, the only remedy left us? Kill we therefore, the weakest amongst us, Nature for∣ces us to it, and I cannot see what you can oppose against my Argu∣ment. No marvel, replyed one of those to whom he directed his discourse, if your Argument be wrong, being grounded on a false Principle; the Prohibition to Kill, is so express in the Law, that no reason is sufficient to exempt us from it. Be it known to you therefore, in short, that if you continue in this pernicious design, you thereby render your self an E∣nemy
both to God and Man. This honest Man's discourse (whose name was Adrian Raas) could not prevail with them, be∣ing answered, Necessity knew no Law. The three others, who were present at this Harangue, resolved with the first, to execute their de∣sign. Adrian Raas, well assured of their intent, went to give notice thereof to the two Victims. Who, at the news, fell into such Lamen∣tations, that their friend, moved with compassion, promised to as∣sist them. Whereupon he led 'em to a by place, where he helpt 'em to make two holes, wherein to hide themselves at Night; which was the time appointed, for this bloudy Sacrifice. By which means, failing of their design, they were forced to take other measures, and did as follows. Three of the accompli∣ces, considering the trouble they had, to surprize those whom they intended, cast their Eyes upon one
amongst them, a Corpulent Man, and in whom they believed to find, what they could not meet with in the two others. He was no Fool, and therefore well perceived their designs were upon him. From that time he stood upon his guard, and without taking notice of any thing, flattered, and exhorted 'em to hope the best; saying, he doubt∣ed not, but some Barks would pass by, and then the Tongue of that Countrey, which he learnt at Co∣romandel (where he had been a Sol∣dier) would stand them in stead. This wheedle took effect; and they thought it behooved 'em to preserve him, for his ability in that kind. Adrian Raas helpt to car∣ry on the Story, although he knew 'twas false; affirming, a Man of his parts, was better than a Treasure in a strange Countrey. One of the most hunger-starved, seeing no∣thing done; and all his contri∣vances rendred ineffectual: Well,
said he, is this the fruit of all our projects? Will no Body dye? Let the rest argue how they will, I must feed upon some Flesh, or o∣ther, before I sleep. To which, the three others consenting, Adri∣an Raas shewed 'em into what an abominable enormity they were rushing, through their impatiency; and therefore earnestly advised them, to weigh the consequences of what they were a going about. We have thought enough, and tar∣ried but too long already, replyed one of the resolutest of them, and the two we would begin withal, are so little deserving of their lives, that 'tis a sin not to kill them. A∣drian Raas seeing his Remonstran∣ces would do no good, proposed to 'em the drawing of Lots; by which means, that person whom Heaven judged worthy of death, should have it. But his proposal was rejected, and another expedi∣ent being sought after, there were
two that offered to go in quest of Land; whence they promised to send help to the others, with all possible expedition. This propo∣sal liked us all; and to facilitate their enterprize, those that remai∣ned, gave to the two adventurers almost all their Money, with which these last parted, and arrived un∣expectedly at a Village of Bengala. They being ignorant of the Coun∣trey, and being not able to make themselves understood, could not indicate the place, where their Com∣panions were. Yet their own particular wants being apparent, they were well treated for two Days, and then put on Board a Ves∣sel, wherein they Sailed near three hundred Leagues to be presented to the great Mogol. Eight days after they were gone, the five wretches that tarried ex∣pecting them, spied Fisher-men pass by the place where they were; and coming within call, they ur∣ged
him amongst them, who preten∣ded skill in their Language, to speak to 'em; and he cried out, pai, pai, but those two words signifying nothing, the Fisher-men could not tell what to make of them; where∣upon the rest repented, they had not eaten him. After a thousand reproaches, and invectives against him, for his abusing them; at length they made a shift by signs to make 'emselves understood; and the Fi∣sher-men, in approaching them, required 'em to lay down their knives, before they came on Board them: Where they had no sooner been, but they fell immediately to fighting, who should have a dead Fish, which they saw lying in the Boat, and in this bustle, dropt a Bagg of Money; which being ta∣ken notice of by the Fisher-men, they immediately seized upon their wretched Passengers; and having spoiled them of all, turned them out again, in the same place where
they took them in. These poor people, thus handled, destitute of all succour, and void of all hope, to get out of this wretched place, laid themselves down on the Sand, where they impatiently expected death, to put an end to their mi∣series. Having lain near four and twenty hours in this distress, there passed by other Boats; who spy∣ing them, drew near of their own accord, and made signs to 'em, to come on Board. Where immediately they had a Barrel of Honey set before 'em. They were ravisht to find themselves thus un∣expectedly treated, and for fear the Fisher-men would not take them along with 'em, they filled in the Night, their Hats full of it, which they intended to reserve in store. Yet was their fear need∣less, for the next Morning they were carried to Sondiep; where the Master, and those that accompa∣nied him, had arrived the same
day. The Governour of the Town gave them a kind Reception, libe∣rally provided for them; and after five Days refreshment advised them to go carry the news of their wrack to the Factory. As to our selves, who came last, we minded nothing but rest, or rather eating, for Night and Day we devoured all that came before us. Having been here about five Days we desired the Governour's permission to go to Bolwa, where our companions were gone before us. He scrupled at first the mat∣ter, supposing we were not yet a∣ble to endure so long a Voyage; but finding us determined, he cau∣sed three Barks to be made ready, one to carry us, and the two others for our Convoy. The Night following we arrived at Anam, a poor and despicable place, that afforded not any thing. Here we sent back our three Barks,
and hired another as far as Bolwa. At two Leagues distance from this Village, our Guides set us on shoar, and made us walk on Foot, the rest of the way. Whilst they went to the Governour, to give notice of our arrival, we bought Milk and Rice, which we drest in a Pot, that was lent us by Moors that spake Portugaise. It was near ready, when our guides came and told us, we must come immediately to the Prince, who sent for us. This news displeased us, for we had a Canine Appetite; and were not willing to leave to strangers, what we so dearly prized. We took the Pot, then, and carried it by turns to the Prince's Palace-Gate, where we Eat what was in it, before we entred. We were afterwards led to the place, where our twenty Companions were, who parted long before us; and within half an hour, into a great Hall, where our Mo∣ney was counted; to the end we
might be satisfied, in case we had been Robbed by the way. We were at length brought to our Lodging, and by the Prince's order, served with an excellent kind of Meat (called Brensie) seen only on great Mens Tables. 'Tis made of choice Rice, a fat Goose, and two Pullets, squeezed together in a Cloth, after about two or three hours boiling; To the juyce of which, there is ad∣ded several sorts of spices; especially Nutmegs, Cloves, Saffron, Cina∣mon, and Sugar. This was such a nourishing Food, that in less than three or fours days, we recovered again our full strength. Yet were not our Stomachs fully satisfied with it; for we were more for a less juicy meat, such as dry Rice, and boiled Fish. Five days after we had been here, the States of the Kingdom, whom the Prince called, met before his Palace; where, as fast as they came, we saw 'em take their pla∣ces,
and sit down after the manner of the Eastern people. When all the Members had taken their pla∣ces, the Prince came out of the Pa∣lace, invironed with his Guards; some with Bows and Arrows, o∣thers with Sword and Buckler; and he seated himself in the same manner as the rest. They kept in this posture, from Morning till Night; and that which they deter∣mined, was so little secret, that an hour after, 'twas the talk of the common people. I desired to know the reason of it, and was told, that here were no Mysteries of State transacted, nothing being done but what came to the publick notice. And the reason is, that the Prince's Guard consists wholly of Christi∣ans, which are there in great e∣steem; and although, perhaps, they are only Christians in name, being Negroes born; Subjects to the King of Portugal: Yet are they counted such brave fellows, that they have
a particular respect shew'd them; and therefore the Grandees of the Court so highly prize their Fami∣liarity, that they relate to them, whatsoever passes in Council. The next Morning, the Prince sent us word, that we might go when we pleased, the Barks being ready. This being our earnest de∣sire, we parted an hour after and happily Arrived at Decka. The Factory received us very kindly. We related to 'em our Adven∣tures, and they inform'd us that the Ship called the Wesop, was cast away near the Isles of Anaans. The Governor, caused a Bark to be made ready, to Transport us to Ongueli, where the Dutch have also a considerable Factory. But an hour before we parted, he receiv'd a Letter from the great Mogols Ge∣neral, in which he enjoyned him to send us to him: This being an express order, we were forced to obey, seeing this General
threatned, in case of refusal, to seize upon all the Dutch in his Master's Kingdom, and make them Slaves. We were forced, then, to yield, and in preparing our selves for a longer Voyage, than the first; were told, that this General, named Nabab, was a person very fortu∣nate, having never lost a Battel, nor raised his Siege from any place, before he had carried it away; that he had taken several Cities, defea∣ted whole Armies, and made seve∣ral Kingdoms tributary to the great Mogul. These prosperous suc∣cesses made us imbark with the better courage in following our Guides who were ordered to bring us to the Army. We travelled thirty days toge∣ther, sometimes by Land, and some∣times by Sea; passing by several Cities, made desolate; the inhabi∣tants of the Countrey being wont, in time of War to leave their
Houses, to follow the Army, where∣soever it marches. They are a sort of people, that are very just in their dealings, of an Affable Conversation, content∣ing themselves with few things; naturally Enemies to covetousness and ambition, yet quarrelsom and injurious; but in their greatest heats, never mention the Name of the Devil. As to oaths, they seldom use 'em, unless in matters of great concernment; and then so strictly observe 'em, that no consideration in the World can prevail with them, to violate 'em. On the thirty fifth day, we went on Board one of the Vessels belong∣ing to Nabab; where we found four English-men, some few Portu∣gaises, and two Men of our Com∣pany, whom we already mention∣ed. From thence we went, and cast Anchor, near the City of Ren∣guemati; from whence, within a small time we came, and were en∣tertained
in the Army of the great Mogol. The General, whom we saluted in his Tent, seemed glad to see us, and immediately order∣ed us a large Cup-full of Arak, to drink his health. The Cup was so closed, that 'twas a difficult matter for us to open it, and therefore the General gave it us on purpose, to divert himself with the humour of it. We took it each of us, one after another, in our hands, to no purpose; and were ready to give it over, when it came into my mind, that the Cup being only of Wood might be easily pierced: Whereupon I took it again, and made a hole in it, with the point of my knife. Being full to the brim, the Arak sprung out abun∣dantly, and by this means we all drank of it, and used the liberty Nabab had given us, in saying, We must drink well, and fight well. This Liquour was so strong, that we soon felt the effects of it, ma∣king
us jolly, and confident with the General; who told us that at six Months end, he would send us to those of our own Nation. He granted us the full enjoyment of all the booty we could take from the Enemy; and fifty Roupies for every Head we brought him; and an hundred for each Prisoner. In fine, he told the Master of our Ship, he would send him to the Facto∣ry, to inform them of the loss of their Vessel; and that he might take our Chirurgion with him, and our three Boys, which were too young to serve in the Army. In the mean time the Arak made us so bold, that we had like to fall'n together by the Ears for Oranges, which were given us, because all had not a like share, without con∣sidering we were in the General's Tent. He winkt at our rudeness, and commanded his Chirurgion to carry us to his Tent, and drink there more moderately.
The next Morning the General sent us three hundred Roupies, and assign'd us certain Vessels, called Gourapes, one of which carried four∣teen Guns, and about fifty or six∣ty Men. Each Gourape was atten∣ded by four Kosses; which are Boats with Oars, to tow great Ves∣sels. There were also several great Flat-bottom Boats, that carried no Mast, yet were well furnished with Guns. The greatest part of the Officers were Portugaises; and the General had so good an opinion of the Christians, that if a Moor could speak but a little of that Language, he commonly preferred him to some considerable Office. There were several other Vessels, laden only with Provision, and War-like Ammunition. We saw likewise, several Barges set forth with Strea∣mers, wherein were the Wives of Persons of Quality, that followed the Army. The General had five hundred for his share. These Wo∣men
were kept by Eunuchs, made so in their tender years, who were in great credit with their Ma∣sters. As soon as we were ordered to march, we sought the Vessel as∣sign'd us, but I had the unhappi∣ness to lose my self in that vast multitude of people, together with one of my Companions, and were eight days, before we could know where to betake our selves. This small mishap gave me the oppor∣tunity of an exact observation of the Army, which consisted of near three hundred thousand Horse, and five hundred thousand Foot. The General rode in the midst of the Cavalry; and before him marched several Trumpeters, and Kettle-Drummers, mounted on Elephants. He was followed by twenty of these Animals, each of them car∣rying two small pieces of Cannon, two Gunners, with as many char∣gers. After these came three or
four thousand Moscovites, all ex∣traordinarily well mounted. Several thousands of Cammels, laden with the Baggage, were fol∣lowed by all sorts of Merchants, Artisans, Curtisans; some mounted on Cammels, others on Horses. 'Twas told us, that this great Bo∣dy stood the Mogol, in every day, above five Millions; the greatest part of which, were paid by the Curtisans, and Merchants, that followed the Army. Which is no hard matter to believe, because I knew in that Countrey, the Cities were destitute of all Trade in time of War, and therefore the Inhabi∣tants were forced to follow the Ar∣my; by which means, it abounded with all necessaries, except strong drinks, the use of which was on∣ly permitted to the Christians, be∣cause the Moors in drinking never so small a quantity, became cruel, and bloody minded. After a long march, we entred
into Kosbia, a Country lying be∣tween the Kingdoms of Bengala, and Azo, of which the General ea∣sily became Master. The King of Azo imagined the Walls of his Ca∣pital City, were proof against our Cannon; and believed himself se∣cure; but soon found the con∣trary, for we took his City by as∣sault, and made him Prisoner. He had an Iron Collar, fastned about his Neck, whence hung two great Chains, which were fixt also to his Legs, and in this manner was ser∣ved by four Pages. A while after the King was taken Prisoner, the General was shewed several Caves made into rocks, wherein was hid his Treasure, the rest became the Souldiers booty, and we thought all to enrich our selves, but were mistaken; for besides that; these people wear no other Cloathing, than a piece of Linnen, which reaches from their Waste; down to their Knees; they had so well hid
every thing of value, that we could find nothing but a Pot of Rice, and a Box full of Tow, and some Leaves, which they chew continu∣ally, to cleanse their mouths. We were troubled to find our expecta∣tions thus frustrated, especially considering the smallness of our Wages, which were not sufficient to maintain us, being no more than ten Crowns a Month, and Provi∣sion was very dear. The reason why we had no more, was, because we served by constraint, whereas the English and Portugaises that went voluntiers, received monthly twenty five Crowns a Man. Some days after, the General required our two Carpenters assist∣ance, in the building him a stately Vessel, from a model he shewed them. Which finished, he promi∣sed 'em their liberty. They accep∣ted the proposal, and were sent to Decka, where they finished their undertaking, to the General's con∣tent,
who kept his word with them. It was demanded of us, at the same time, whether either of us, was willing to accept the Go∣vernment of the Castle of Agra, and for our encouragement, there were several advantagious offers made us; but they could not pre∣vail with us, especially considering we were to live amongst Moors; and that such an employ, perhaps, would so fix us in that Countrey, that we should never get out of it. The General being a Man of dispatch, immediately after the o∣verthrow of the King of Azo, ha∣stened towards the Countrys be∣longing to the King of Assam, who was one of the Mogols chiefest E∣nemies. 'Twas said, that this King having notice of his march, deri∣ded his discretion, wondering, that with eight hundred thousand Men only, he should undertake that,
which two Millions of Men could not atchieve. In effect, it seemed to be a rash Enterprize, and that the Example of so prodigious an Army, which lately perished in the same Parts where we went, should have deterred our General. But so far was he from being dis∣couraged by this consideration, that the greatness of the danger served only to heighten his courage; and lest the Flood, which every six Months overflowed the greatest part of this Kingdom, should hin∣der his project, he advanced with great expedition, and arrived be∣fore that time, at the place he in∣tended. As soon as we were in the Enemies Countrey, a general consternation seized upon them; and the fame of Nabab's Fortune, caused infinite numbers of the E∣nemy's Subjects to come over to his side, as the surest. In the mean time, the English, and we, having observed all the
signs of an approaching tempest, carefully viewed, and repaired our Vessels; but all our pre-cautions could not hinder its sinking: For not being Ballasted, the Currents overturned it, and that which ha∣stened our loss, was the Sottish, and Extravagant curiosity of a Marri∣ner, that had the management of it. This Man, to try experiments, would needs have all the Sails hoisted up, which was no sooner done, but our Vessel sunk. There were Boats e∣nough to help us, had custom per∣mitted it; but in like accidents, the Moors help no Body, not their near Kindred, or intimate Friends, Yet by good hap, there was a lu∣sty well-shaped Woman, who see∣ing five Hollanders upon the point of drowning, rowed up to them, and maugre two Men that with∣stood her, received them into her Boat. The River Ganges is of very un∣equal breadth, being in some places
a League, in others a League and an half wide; so that when the Wind is high, this River abounds with Waves and Billows, no ways inferiour to those of the Sea. There were lost by this accident four Dutch-men, and twenty four Moors; and I had ran the same Fate, had not I (after four hours swimming towards the Land) met with a Ves∣sel, Commanded by English-men. As soon as I made my self known to them, they sent forth above six∣ty Men to my assistance, who took me into their Boat, where they gave me what was necessary. In fine, they carried me on Board their Vessel, where I found one of my Countrey-men, on whom the English had shew'd the same com∣passion. The next Morning we thankt our Benefactors, and went to the Army, where we sought an occasion of admittance to the Ge∣neral. The loss of his Vessel was but
bad news to carry him, yet we could not but make it known to him, for we knew not where to bestow our selves. As soon as he heard it, he fell into such a Fit of passion, that we believed we should be both hanged or worse. At length he commanded us to with∣draw, and choose what Vessel we had a mind to, the Enemy's Fleet being expected every moment. We were heartily glad we came off so well; four of our Compani∣ons went on board a Gourape; and two others, and my self, chose a Bark, that carried six pieces of Cannon. Two days after, our Admiral set Sail, in search of the Enemy, attended by the whole Fleet. We immediately heard a continual roar∣ing of Guns, whence we inserred, the Land Army was engaged; but as to our parts, we could not so soon joyn the Enemy, being (as it was thought) at a great distance
from us. When the Admiral had set his Fleet in order, the General's Chirurgion, who was of our Nati∣on, and a Lover of his Countrey, exhorted us to behave our selves, answerable to the good opinion they had of our Countrey-men. Representing to us, that when we come to engage, the whole Fleet will take notice of the Christians, and especially of us, who were greatly esteemed by the Moors. That 'twas the Companies interest, we should keep up our Reputation, and that we might have a great share in the glory of that days actions. Although the Wind was little favourable to us, yet we followed on our course; and three or four hours after dasht against a Rock, which struck off our Helm. At length we recovered it, and ha∣ving fixt it in its right place, held on our course. Not long after we discovered the Enemy's Fleet, con∣sisting of six hundred Sail. Al∣though
we were in search of them, yet were greatly surprized to see those so near us, whom we be∣lieved to be farther off. As soon as the Enemy perceived us, they advanced towards us, and we tar∣ried expecting them, as well out of necessity, as bravery, the contrary Wind hindering us from retreat∣ing. Whilst they made up towards us, we sat down at Table, which we had no sooner done, but a dish of Meat that was set thereon, was carried away by a Cannon Bullet, which did us no other harm, but that of depriving us of our allow∣ance. Whereupon we betook our selves to our Guns, and from that time, till midnight, ceased not Firing on our side, and were an∣swered in the same manner by the Enemy. An hour after the Ene∣my withdrew; there came another Vessel to our assistance, which was commanded by a Moorish Prince, called Menorcan, who had set out
thirty Vessels at his own charge, for the service of the great Mogol. This Prince observing our post to be dangerous, assisted us in such a manner, that we got the Wind of the Enemy. As soon as we had cast Anchor, he left us, promising to return the next Morning, with the whole Fleet. He had not got∣ten far, before we perceived six Sail making towards us. Five of which, could not surmount the force of the Currents, but the sixth came so near, as to give us a broad side. But as soon as a fair opportunity of∣fered, we boarded her, & quickly be∣came Masters of her. So that we took the first prize on the Enemy. Having taken out of this Vessel, whatever was of any value, to avoid farther trouble, we set her on fire. Half an hour after, eight or nine of the Enemy's Vessels made towards us, and this number daunted us, where∣fore we weighed Anchor, and shel∣tered our selves under the Dutch and
Portugaise Vessels, which made 'em cease pursuing us. At day-break we found our Admiral was still a League off of us. The whole Fleet (of which the Dutch and Portugaise led the Van) were in good order, and advanced towards the Enemy, as fast as the little Wind which then blew would permit 'em. As to our parts, the Currents were a∣gainst us, wherefore we were for∣ced to be towed by Moors, that went on shoar for that purpose. In the mean time, a Trumpet, ac∣companied with Ten or Twelve Horse, coming from the General, who believed, upon a false report, we were lost, called out to us se∣veral times from the shoar, Sauwas Hollanders. The word Sauwas sig∣nifies Courage. Being near, they inform'd us, how greatly the Ge∣neral was troubled, at the false re∣port of a Moor, who brought him word, that the Vessels comman∣ded by the English, Dutch, and Por∣tugaise
were lost. They returned then towards their Master; who better informed of the matter, cau∣sed the tongue of the Moor (who brought him that false news) to be cut out, and he to be whipt with a Whip, which they call Chamboe, every lash of which cuts as deep as a Razor. Notwithstanding the force of the Currents, and the great advantages the Enemy had over us, we got the Wind of them; and from that time, never ceased Firing upon em; and at length, were seconded by our whole Fleet. When the Ene∣my saw it approaching, they set forth such great shouts, as wou'd made a Man think all was already lost. Yet did they couragiously defend themselves, and for three hours to∣gether, the Victory inclined to nei∣ther side. From that time their heat abated, and they began to shift their station, and were so closely plyed, that they left their Vessels,
and ran to shoar, where finding they were pursued, they endeavour∣ed, but in vain, to possess them∣selves of a high Bank, for we fol∣lowed 'em so close, that we slew almost all of them, being ordered to give no quarter. We took three hundred of their Vessels, the least of which, carried seventy Men; and of this whole number, there escaped not above fifty, whom the King (enraged his orders were no better observed) condemned to suffer the most grievous punish∣ment. Those that had still some Life remaining in them, were tyed to Stakes, where the Soldiers put an end to their Lives, with their Ar∣rows. Thus perished this nume∣rous, and mighty Army; of which, very few escaped, to carry the news of the loss of the rest. The Admi∣ral having disguised himself, was notwithstanding, taken Prisoner, and released at the intercession of
some of the General's principal Of¦ficers. As to the booty, 'twas not considerable, consisting only in Powder, Lead, and some pieces of Cannon. It was discoursed, that the fault of this Admiral was the less excu∣sable, inasmuch as he had neglected the orders of his Prince; who com∣manded him to go with six hun∣dred Sail, to expect us above the City of Goaëti. Which was a very advantagious post, as well to hin∣der us from taking in any Provi∣sion, as to block us up in the Coun∣trey; but he chose rather to be guided by his own fancy, imagin∣ing the shouts of his Fleet would dismay us. The three hundred Vessels that escaped, unhappily cast Anchor at about a quarter of a Leagues di∣stance from the General, who ad∣vanced up the Countrey with all possible expedition. As soon as he knew where they were, he brought
two or three hundred pieces of Cannon, and planted 'em against them, and sunk the greatest part of them; the rest past over to the other side of the River, where our Vessels pursued them with success. Some of 'em wheeled about, thro by ways, where the Moors found, and slew them. The Enemy's Fleet being thus routed, we passed by the Foot of a steep Rock, where was built a Fortress of difficult access. Yet was it abandoned, but 'twas to draw us farther into the Countrey. From thence we came to the City of Gueragan, whence the King fled; and our Admiral cast Anchor be∣fore the City of Lokwa, situated about six Leagues from thence. Some time after, the General Com∣manded the chief of the Fleet, to send him Money, and Provisions for the Army. Whereupon our Commanders sent him six Boats, two laden with Gold, and four
with Silver, but the six Boats un∣fortunately fell into the Enemy's hand, who in the heat of the sur∣prisal, slew the greatest part of the Men. They reserved some Christians for their pleasure, under whose Arms, they fastned several wisps of Straw, stuft with Powder; and when these wisps were consu∣med, they fastned others in like man∣ner in their places, till such time as they expired. The pleasure of these Barbarians, was to hear the screeks of these poor wretches, who, the louder they cryed, the more they rejoyced these cruel Monsters. Those that escaped into the Woods, came at Night to the Army, which was in great distress, the Water be∣ing already so high, that 'twas im∣possible to return back. The Army lay Encamped in a place full of fruitful Trees, and sow∣ed with excellent Rice. The Moun∣tains yield Pepper, Agra-wood, San∣ders, and Simples, that are sold for
their weight in Gold. As to this met∣tal 'tis not scarce; & Elephants are so common, that the country, as fruitful as 'tis, is not sufficient to feed them; therefore they are always lean. We chose in this pleasant Coun∣trey, a proper place to Intrench our selves, and cut down, to prevent surprisals, all the Trees round about us. We sent out scouts every day to observe the Enemy's motions. Those that fell into the hands of our party, were cruelly scour∣ged, and then had their Heads cut off, which were hung up in Bas∣kets upon the boughs of Trees. When they were too numerous to be all made Prisoners, they cut off the Heads of the greatest part, and hung about the Necks of every one of the rest, two of these Heads, which they were made to carry in∣to the Camp; where they were cruelly whipt; and when 'twas jud∣ged they were near expiring, they had likewise, their Heads severed
from their Bodies; which were hanged, like the rest, in Panniers, upon the boughs of Trees. Some had stakes drove through them a∣live. Others had four double hooks thrust down their Bellies, which tore their Bowels; and in this con∣dition, were carried to the places the Enemy frequented; to the end the horrour of the Torment they endured, might move them to for∣sake the weakest side. If these punishments were cruel, those of the Enemy were no less, for they made their Prisoners lan∣guish so long in their Torments, as would have moved the most obdurate to pity. Having made 'em expire by their cruel usage, they fastned them, standing bolt upright, to stakes, upon flat-bot∣tom Boats, and sent them thus down the River, either towards the Army, or the Fleet; where they became such a sad spectacle, that they could not be beheld without dread and horrour.
As to those that rendred them∣selves, they were received with great expressions of kindness. There came likewise to our Camp, Am∣bassadours from the King of the Antropophages, or Man-eaters; of∣fering the assistance of his Army, against the King of Assam's Sub∣jects; but the small sincerity of these people being known, their offers were not accepted, yet were they sent away, with assurances of the great Mogol's Friendship, pro∣vided they assisted not his Ene∣mies. These people had fierce looks, a rough carriage, and the Mine of persons that eat others alive. In effect, they fed on Human Flesh, scru∣pling to Interr their Dead, whom they design'd for a better use. Those that are sick amongst them, and in a languishing condition, are knockt on the Head, and eaten; and this is all the charity they have one for another. They possess all things
in Common, carrying what they steal from strangers, to the Com∣mon Heap, where they have all an equal portion. When we told them, their way of living was con∣trary to the rest of Mankind, it be∣ing unnatural to eat their fellow Creatures; they replyed, Opinion, and Custom, made all these things either good or bad; and that a Man cannot do ill in following those he found established. There were in our Army certain Soldiers, whose Maxim was, Never to give back; and to dye, rather than abandon the Post assigned them. Those that dye thus, are sure of Salvation; whereas, those that behaved themselves cowardly, and were slain, were certainly Dam∣ned. This opinion renders 'em valiant, which is not such a Barba∣rous one as we are apt to imagine, seeing many in the most civilized Nations have asserted it, extreamly meritorious, to dye for one's Coun∣try.
The General had honoured us, with a high Character of our Valour, so that the only report of our name, stood him in as much stead as an Army. Those on the Enemy's side, who fled over to us, had such a great esteem for us, that they made room for us, wheresoever we went. The Moors shewed us the same respect; but those dreadless fellows I now mention'd, kept their gravity with us, claiming precedency in all ren∣counters, which for quietness sake we granted them. Next after the Dutch, certain Armenian Horse-men, were in grea∣test esteem; as well for that they were Christians, as that they con∣tinually kept good Horses, and ob∣served good order. Our Reputa∣tion thus up, the Admiral judged us the most fitting persons to take charge of the Artillery. For which purpose, he made us very advan∣tagious proffers; but we liked nei∣ther
the Country, nor Manners of its People; and therefore intreated him to pitch upon some others, to whom this employ would be more agreeable, than to us, who were not so well versed in the Tongue, as to make our selves obeyed, which reason satisfied him. Every New Moon is a Festival with the Moors, which day begins with the discharge of all the great Guns; after which, the Soldiers are paid, and this payment consists of fifty Roupies, or 25 Crowns, for e∣very Horse-man, some have a hun∣dred paid them, others thirty, twen∣ty, and others again, only ten. The Foot Soldiers pay is but small, be∣ing not above five or six Roupies a Month. As to the Slaves, who work almost both day and night, they have scarcely any thing, or that which is given them, is so in∣considerable, that the greatest part of them dye with hunger. These Slaves are Indians, who eat no∣thing
endued with lise; and their superstition is such, that how great soever their hunger may be, they choose rather to dye, than to eat either Fish or Flesh. Their Food consists chiefly of Rice, and when they are destitute of it (which hap∣pens not seldom) they dye willing∣ly; not doubting but this kind of death, procures them Eternal Life. These poor Wretches Discourses were continually concerning the contempt of abundance, and the ex∣cellency of want. They could not comprehend, how those that live in plenty in this World, can be hap∣py in the next; and in this ima∣gination, take their misery for a mark of their Election. The Inhabitants of the Country of Assam, are another sort of super∣stitious people, who worship a Cow, and consequently never kill any of that kind. Their Temples are full of the Images of these Crea∣tures, the greatest part made of
Gold and Silver, and some few of Brass. About three Leagues distance from the place where our Vessel lay, stood a Temple, which we pil∣laged, and carried away one of these Golden Cows, which was di∣vided amongst us. It was no small grief to these poor Pagans, to see their Divinity thus taken from them, and yet they sold us Cows at a cheap rate, for we did not pay above two shillings for the best. What sottishness, said I, within my self, are these people guilty of, to sell their Gods; 'tis true, we were forced to promise, we would not kill 'em, but they knew the con∣trary; and when we blamed their silly humour, they demanded of us, whether the Christians had none, and whether their actions answer'd the Religion they professed. Our Vessel lying at a great di∣stance from the Army, we knew but one part of what hapned there,
and although we understood, they were in ill circumstances, yet we could never have believed there dyed so many thousands of Men, had not the River brought them to us. The Water became so infe∣cted, by the prodigious quantity of dead Bodies thrown therein, that several persons perished by that means; wherefore, at length, we boyled the Water, before we used it. After three Months stay, the Water having been continually at that height, that 'twas impossible to come out of our Trenches, the Enemy believed we were starved, and consequently, that we might be easily defeated. In truth, hun∣ger pressed us very sorely, and the greatest part of the Army were forced to kill the Camels, and Ele∣phants, for their sustenance. The Enemy, then, coming down, al∣most certain of the Victory; our General commanded, to let them
draw near, as if the whole Army had been dead; and in the mean time, made the Horse to fetch a round, to hem them in: his stra∣tagem took effect, for as soon as they began to attack us, they were charged by our Horse, and wholly defeated, leaving near twenty thou∣sand dead in the place. There were not above ten Men wounded on our side, and since this skirmish, the Waters fell insensibly, so that we had order to be ready to give battel. Whilst we were preparing, our General caused several Waggons to be laden with provision, and sent them to the King of Assam, char∣ging his Messengers to tell him, he sent him this present for his supply, in case he wanted it. For as for his own part, he had more than he needed for his Armys sub∣sistance this six Months. Our Ge∣neral's drift was to Allarm the King of Assam, who design'd at that
time to retire to the Mountains, having lost all hope of being able to resist. This Prince understood the General's design; and saw well, this was a kind of Summons, to render himself at discretion; but he knew too well his Enemy, to expect any favour from him; and therefore chose rather to send him word, that he loved himself too well to entrust his person with a∣ny one, but was willing to yield to any reasonable terms. This an∣swer discovered the Enemy's weak∣ness, and the General who was en∣raged, that he had insulted over him, within his Trenches, resolved to make him repent it. He told his chief Officers then his resoluti∣ons to give Battel, which they all readily agreed to. Amongst o∣thers, there was one that spake thus, My Lord, says he, to the General, when we came into these parts first, we had four Armies, all in good or∣der, and disposition, whereas now we
have not one that deserves that name. The greatest part of the Sol∣diers of these four Armies, being either dead, or in a sick and langui∣shing condition. Why then do we not immediately march up to the Enemy? Shall we tarry till all our forces are spent? And will it not be more glo∣rious for our Monarch, and honoura∣ble for such a Captain as you, to go and insult over the Enemy, than to lye languishing here, where a longer stay cannot but be most shameful. The freedom with which this per∣son spake, had a good effect; for the General resolved to follow his advice, in case the King of Assam refused to accept of the following conditions: To wit, that this Prince should give the General half of his Kingdom, and the youngest of his Daughters for his Concubine; two thousand Elephants, some Millions of ready Money, and his richest Vessels full of excellent roots, with which that Countrey abounded,
and which are of inestimable value. Although the General's Army was in very great distress, yet his Ene∣my accepted these conditions; and this unexpected Peace came very seasonably, for 'tis certain that ne∣ver any Army was in a worse con∣dition. As soon as the Waters were suf∣ficiently fall'n, we hastned to pack up our Baggage, being glad to leave this wretched post, for 'tis certain we were so tired, that had the Ene∣my set upon us, we could scarce been able to make resistance. As for riches we wanted them not, having found good store in Graves. It being this peoples cu∣stom, to Interr with their Dead, their best Apparel, Money, and greatest part of their Servants; whom they bury alive, to bear their Masters company. So far are these poor wretches from bemoaning their condition in this respect, that they are on the contrary, exceed∣ingly
joyous, to follow their Masters into a Countrey, where they hope in three days time to become great Personages, and enjoy certain plea∣sures, which are not to be had here. Our General caused several of these Tombs to be opened, where∣in were found vast Treasures, which he carried away with him, but which he enjoyed but a small time, for he died soon after; and accor∣ding to the custom of the great Mogol's Empire, which is, that this Prince becomes Heir to all those that dye in his Countreys, the Ac∣quests of the General, which were to the value of four Millions, fell to this Monarch. And thus have I given you a Relation of what I saw in this War against the King of Assam; all which was written by a Physician of Montpellier, who was then in the service of the great Mo∣gol. Prince Jemla, or the Emir (for
'tis thus they called our General) having signaliz'd himself in several Rencounters, and driven out Sul∣tan Sujah (Brother to Auren Zeb) from the Kingdom of Bengala, he entreated the Mogol to send him his Wife and Children, to live with them, in a place he had chosen, re∣mote from noise, and business, of which his great age rendred him uncapable. He imagined that this Prince (whose Throne he came now from settling, in subduing his Bre∣thren, who disturbed him in the possession of the Empire) could not well refuse him his demands. But he was mistaken, for Auren Zeb was of a piercing judgment, and knew Jemla to be the Soldiers dar∣ling, and the Peoples Favourite. That he was a great Politician, a Wise and Valiant Captain, and the wealthiest in all the Empire. He was sensible of his ambitious designs, and that he aspired to set up his Son Mahomet Emirkin, on the Throne of Bengala.
On the other side, he considered, 'twas dangerous to displease such a powerful Man; so that he not on∣ly granted him what he demanded, but created him also Mir-Ʋl-Omrag, a dignity belonging only to the se∣cond Person in the Empire. Andas to his Son, he made him Bacchis, or Ge∣neral of the Horse, a place of great consequence, but which, requires him that possesses, never to stir out of the Court. No project could be more ef∣fectual for the hindering the designs of Prince Jemlar, for by this means he was parted from his Son, who could not be separated from his Fa∣ther under a fairer pretence, than by being tyed to the Court by so splendid an Office. Jemla well per∣ceived Auren-Zeb's design, and be∣ing not able to devise a way pre∣sently to avoid it, yielded to neces∣sity, expecting the change of af∣fairs would furnish him with means, to have that by force which he could not obtain by subtilty. These
two great Men were jealous of one another, and being in a manner e∣qually powerful, they mutually plyed each other with kindnesses, whilst both secretly endeavoured to strengthen their parties. The year being passed over in Recipro∣cal dissimulations, Auren-Zeb plain∣ly perceived the Emir was not a Man to lye still. He judged then, 'twere better to employ him abroad, than to give him time to trouble his Government; and therefore proposed to the Emir, the under∣taking of that great expedition of which this latter had sometime heretofore discoursed to him. Which was, to march against the Raja or King of Assam, whose Countrey lyes Northward off the Kingdom of Deka, which is near the Gulf of Bengala. 'Tis true, the Emir had formerly mention'd it, to Auren-Zeb, who foreseeing the honour, which would redound to him from his Conquests, objected, at first, se∣veral
difficulties, but afterwards, thought requisit to embrace the motion, that he might thereby be rid of the Emir, and keep him em∣ployed. Although the Emir doub∣ted not his design, yet he obeyed without hesitating, and joyfully prepared himself for an underta∣king, by which, he was sure to e∣stablish, and encrease his Reputati∣on. He imbarked, then, with his Army, on a River, whose source a∣rises in that same Country, and af∣ter about some sixty Leagues Sai∣ling, arrived at the Castle of Azo, which the Raja of Acham had long since taken from the King of Ben∣gala. The Emir attackt this place, and took it in fifteen days. He afterwards marched towards Chamdara, lying near the Country of Assam, where within a Month, he gave Battel to the King of As∣sam, and worsted him. This Prince being vanquished, withdrew into his chief City, called Guerguon) where
being followed by the Emir some five days after, he secured himself in the Mountains of Lassa; and to render his escape more easie, left his treasures behind him, with which the Emir augmented his: These Mountains being unaccessible to an Army, the Emir could not follow his Enemy; and whilst he studyed how to surprize him, the Season of Rains came; during which, the whole Countrey is overflowed, ex∣cepting the Villages, which stand upon Hills. This Season, which lasted three Months, hindered the Emir's designs, the Waters keeping him from marching either back∣wards or forwards. Moreover, the Raja had carried away all kinds of Provision, and reduced by this means the Emir into a strange ex∣tremity. This Weather, and the incommodiousness of the place, ha∣ving near ruined his whole Army. He thought of nothing, then, but how to get away, and in his re∣treat,
was ever and anon, set upon by his Enemies, who taking their advantage, enclosed whose Troops, in plains full of Mire, and slew them. Notwithstanding these dif∣ficulties, the Emir returned home in Triumph, laden with glory and spoils. His design was to return, and finish in the following year, the Conquest of this Kingdom, which the Castle of Azo (which they had caused to be well for∣tified) retained, as it were, in a Bridle, and which was able to hold out a long time against the Forces of the Raja. But no sooner was he returned to Bengala, but a Dy∣sentery destroyed the rest of his Army, and himself also. And by this means Auren-Zeb had nothing to fear; who, as great a dissembler as he was, could not forbear ex∣pressing his joy thereat. He told one day, the Son of the Deceased, in the presence of his whole Court, that he had lost a Father, and he
for his part, a most dreadful friend. Having been fifteen Months in the great Mogol's Army, our Con∣sul obtained at length our discharge; whereupon we parted without At∣tendants, for all our Servants were dead. We came in fifteen days to Decka, where we saw the Vessel our two Carpenters had built for the General. It carried 30 Guns, and they had order to begin ano∣ther, far larger. From thence we betook our selves to a House of En∣tertainment for Strangers, where we were well accommodated with all things necessary; from whence we soon took Shipping for Ongueli. Having Sailed about 120 Leagues, along the River, we made some stay at Cazimabahar, a place Famous for Silks. From thence we went to Ongueli, where the Dutch that Trade to the Indies, have a con∣siderable Factory. Each of us be∣took himself to different Employs, and mine obliged me so strictly in
that Company's Service, that I could not conveniently return to my Native Country, till the Year 1673. FINIS. Lately Printed, A Now Digester, or Engine for softn∣ing Bones; Containing the Description of its Make and Use in these particulars, viz. Cookery Voyages at Sea, Confe∣ctionary, making of Drinks, Chymistry, and Dving. With an account of the Price a good big Engine will cost, and of the profit it will afford. Publisht by Order of the Royal Society. By Denis Papin M. D Fellow of the Royal Socie∣ty. Sold by Henry Bonwick at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's Church-yard.
