G712 11309859 47410
THE FLORISTS VADE-MECUM. Being a Choice Compendium of whatever worthy Notice hath been Extant FOR THE Propagation, Raising, Planting, Encrea∣sing and Preserving the rarest FLOWERS and PLANTS THAT Our Climate and Skill (in mixing, making and meliorating apted Soils to each Species,) will perswade to live with us. WITH Several NEW EXPERIMENTS for raising NEW VARIETIES, and for their most advantagious management. In a more particular Method than ever yet publish'd: Together with the Gardiners Almanack, remembring and directing him what to do, each Month throughout the year, in both Or∣chard and Flower-Garden. By Samuel Gilbert, Phileremus. London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms in Ludgate-street, 1682.
TO THE Reverend Father in God JAMES Lord Bishop of WORCESTER. THE slying of this small piece to your Lordships feet for protecti∣on (against this Ages sharp set Hawks, the common terrour of Doves that are still preying upon Truth and Innocence;
which hath too commonly the weakest defence) hath had in∣couragement by the honour your Lordship hath confer'd upon its Author in your obliging Converse with him upon the subject it treats on; and in some particulars made him new discoveries, for the more speedy producing new Faces to some species of Flora's War∣drope: as Apriles pandunt Imbres Mineralia Maij. Down April drops a moist Key To open the rich Mines of May. So Your Lordships skill, like April show'rs, Produce the choicest of May Tulips flow'rs. Also Your Lordships love to, as
well as skill in Plants and Flowers, makes me presume of your favourable construction hereof; and that as your Lord∣ship is exemplarily charitable to all other sutable objects, this cannot (humbly begging it) but find that current still free and running in its natu∣ral Channel. And if your Lordship condescend (being the greatest Florist amongst the chiefest Pillars of cur Church) to water the Flowers in this Book with a gentle Approbation, or cast a Benign Aspect upon them, I shall not then question their flourishing, tho not in equality to that
rare Collection in your Pallace Garden: nor fear its accep∣tance by all good men (for only such are delighted in this Innocent Recreation) over whom your Lordship hath a powerful influence, by your sublime and Florid-parts, dig∣nity of place, noble dispositi∣on, and generous hospitality. I must not here (if being super∣fluous) insist on what the most part of the World is so well acquainted with (that the Sun is a glorious Planet; whose comfortable Beams and Heat, as a secondary means, gives life and maintains all Creatures as well as
Plants and Flowers in the vi∣gorous process of nature) but implore a pardon for doing a∣ny thing to divert your Lord∣ship from your accustomed di∣ligence in that high Calling God hath placed you; which yet may afford some divertise∣ment from that in this so inno∣cent imploy; when the result thereof (beside's bodily health) is the admiration of Gods power and providence (tho but) in the Creation, production and preservation of the many diffe∣rent Plants and Flowers that so chequer the Ʋniverse. But whilst I am begging absolution for a Crime, I am still persisting
in it; therefore with all humili∣ty I leave this small Book, where I first laid it, as knowing none will more favourably, nor can with more ability Correct its Errors; and by such example abate the rigorous Censures from the less knowing, that may her rayes be reflected on Your Lordships Most humble obedient and devoted Servant. Samuel Gilbert.
To the most accomplish'd and excellent Lady MARGARET PACKINGTON, worthy Consort to the Honoured Sir JOHN PACKINGTON of Westwood, near Worcester, Knight and Baronet. WIth reverence, like th' Indians to their Sun, These verses humble Feet presume to run, And lay this Book within your milder Raies, Whose taking charms so powerfully swayes The judgements of admiring Mortals, while You please to Deign the favour of a smile. Let one unto this flow'ry tract be shown It neither cares nor fears a Common-frown. Your Birth, your breeding, beauty, famous parts, Do Crown you here, Queen regent of all Hearts, Thus Qualified, and Goddess of my flow'rs,
By your Command, let no inferiour pow'rs With their ill Breath infect what is all yours: That with advanced heads, in transports stand. Proud, if accepted by so fair a Hand; All in their Orders rankt, as they appear In your rich Livery, they yearly wear. And therefore bound to wait you in your Bow'rs, To be divertisement for vacant hours: And first present themselves (as thinking meet) Each flower doing pennance in a sheet For thus presuming, with a pride too heady, To have as Amulets 'gianst censures ready A Reverend Bishop, and a virtuous Lady. Thus this Compendium ventures, out it came T' appear in sunshine of so bright a name; Let your beams Madam, then propitious be, How fortunate my book, how proud S. G.
TO THE READER. TIS a piece of Morosness I am seldom guilty of, when a civil stranger is at the door, not to invite him to par∣take what entertainment the House affords. Those of acquaintance stay not for that needless Ceremony, but use the same freedom they allow their receiver, and such as I presume the Courteous Reader (being only to such that I now write) affords me; and
therefore without A-la-mode Pream∣bles, he is welcome to enter, that is the least lover of Flowers; but those that think the Divertisement too easie or effeminate, preferring a piece of Bacon or Cabbage before na∣tures Choicest dishes, advantag'd by Art; or a Clove July-flower because 'tis good to make Syrrup off, be∣fore all the rest of its dainty kinds, is welcomer (if possible) to stay out; and indeed is forbid Reading or Censuring what he understands not, or hath no affection for. The following old Latin, being in all Ages verifi'd, Pauci intelligunt, multi reprehen∣dant, Et sicut canes, ignotos semper al∣latrant, 'Tis not for these, but those that have some understanding in or love to Flowers, that I took this pains in
collecting whatever is worth notice on this subject, being able to Judge what was Legendary, and impos'd falsities on the belief of the igno∣rant, and what was truth from my own experience; being inform'd by my long converse with the best Flo∣rist of his time, Mr. John Rea my Father-in-law, whose skill and col∣lection were alike famous, and since his death most of each in my posses∣sion, newer Flowers and wayes of their management and production, I have since attain'd: And indeed should condemn that capacity and ingenuity to be but shallow and dull that having the skill of another, e∣specially such an one as before men∣tioned, and not add something to it If Jackanapes on Giants shoulders be. He hath no Eies or else can far∣ther see.
I follow not the method, most Authors have, in Writing of all Bul∣bous rooted flowers by themselves, and all Tuberous and Grumous rooted flowers so too, &c. but as more natural, you will find the flowers treated on successively as they blow one after another, and as they appear in each month, under the Titles of which, you will find their names, brief di∣scriptions and wayes of their ma∣nagement both for their preservation, encrease and procuring new faces to each kind, the last being the greatest skill as well as satisfaction to a Florist; wherein I leave out many obsolete and overdated flowers, to make room for many new ones, that yearly grow into our acquaintance: and also all, or any Bumbastick words that our last Author in Octavo, de∣claims against, yet uses, tho other∣wayes very ingenious, this Tract be∣ing really designed for the benefit of  meanest Florist, that perhaps
understands not how, or hath not the conveniency of searching a Dicti∣onary to know the meaning of Escu∣lent, Horti culture, Sterilize, edi∣ble, irrigate, &c. when plain Eng∣lish had been as easie to Write, more useful and less pedantick: avoiding also all useless notions and Airy fancies, becoming only a Romance, not a book wholly design'd for pra∣ctice, as this is, to put the best in mind what each Month to do, and instructing most, how in many particulars not hitherto printed or di∣vulged; each direction from the be∣ginning to the end being an experi∣mented truth, and the whole fitted for a pocket companion to all Lo∣vers of Flowers and their propaga∣tion. A divertisement more healthful to our bodies, by often stirring in the earth, beneficial to our souls by our daily converse with the matter whence we were at first creat∣ed,
and to what we must return, each flower showing, the Providence of Almighty God, and that we may read him in these his beautiful han∣dy works, that so diaper our Gar∣dens. Each Plant's Engravened with a heavenly name, Like th' Hyacinthea stamp'd with Ajax name. VVhilst Nature sporteth in such va∣riations, Guided by God, to raise our con∣templations. VVe Rabbin like, misteriously should spell VVho gives us light, by each dark syllable. And if to earth such glorious Car∣pets given, Hence raise our Admirations up to Heaven.
Being attended with much more (nay all) innocency, fewer (nay no) evil circumstances, than either that time which is too much lavished away in Hunting, Hawking, Bowling, Drink∣ing, Drabbing, Dicing, &c. wherein is as much pain taken, if not more, with∣out refunding pleasure (rather, nay certain evil effects) remaining, than there is or can be trouble in the other; there being delight in the management, but much more proceeding the preceded labour in the enjoyment, in the various encrease of those rich ornaments that more than recompence our industry therein, without putting us to the charge (as many useless things do) of either meat or drink: these considerations well weighed, who would not consider his greatest Grand fathers employ, A∣dams, King Solomons study and no doubt practice in this Art? for the pleasure of which, many Kings have retired themselves and become their own Operators, and not only consi∣der
it, but spend some time and pains in it, for the pleasure and profit of it. But some Gentlemen say they have found neither in it, and I must an∣swer them, for the ensuing Reason; few Gentlemen understanding it themselves, either hire ill Gardiners, or if they light of a good one, but for a year, who not sure of his stay hath no encouragement, does not, or if he endeavour'd, could not in that time bring his designs to perfection; so that either by ill ones long stay, or a good ones too short abode, this Art is abused, and undervalued: There∣fore my advice is to those that un∣derstand not this Art in themselves in the hiring of a Gardiner, take Counsel of them that do, and give him assurance of his stay for five or six years, and then if the suc∣cess of his labours answer not his Masters, both pleasure and profit, let me bear the blame; provided he hath allowed him sufficient help
and expences he must be at in his Collections both for Flowers, Wall-fruit and Standards: I meddle not at present with Fruit Trees, it being well done by Mr. Langford in a pocket Volumn of easie price: If what done here about Flowers, be as acceptable, as it may be profita∣ble to those that love them, I shall be well paid in making this Com∣pendium; and in it publishing what my own Experience hath found out, to the advantage of the subject now teated on and it's true Lovers, tho to the disadvantage of the Merce∣nary Flower Catchers about Lon∣don, or some that are of the same Stamp scatter'd up and down the Countrey, Fathering new names on Old Flowers to enhanse their price; and if a Plant of value and a ra∣rity, tho you pay dear for it, un∣less you receive it in Flower, you shall to your cost and disappointment
Experience, their unfaithfulness, this I thought a necessary Caution for my Courteous Reader, e're I Writ to him my VALE.
The necessary Tools and Instruments for Garden∣ing. A Skreen for fining A Wyer Riddle for sifting earth. Spades two, a bigger and a less. Shovels two, a bigger and a less. Howes of several sizes Pruning Hook and Knife. Grifting Knives, Saw, Chissel and Mallet, Penknife, Sizers, Line and Rule, Trowels, broad, narrow, and hollow, Garden Sheers, a Hammer, Iron Rakes two, a bigger and longer in the head, a shorter with teeth thicker set. A Rake with a broad head, without teeth for smoothing the earth in a Bed. Several twig Baskets or Whiskets, and Birch Besomes, Watering Pots, one with a head full of small holes: another only with a pipe: another
with a small neck, the bottom full of holes The first is to water Plants in Summer. The second to water pots with rank water wherein the Dung of Sheep, Poultrey, &c. hath been steeped, that it may be put to the roots without staining the leaves. The third being put into water, will fill from the bottom, which will stay in so long, a you stop out the air with your Thumb a the top; this serves to water young and tender seedlings of Auricula Gilliflower and such like, without washing the eart from them, for by the motion of you thumb, you may cause the water to fal gently upon them, more or less as y shall desire.
THE FLORISTS VADE-MECUM. A Gardens Situation, Soil, and apted Composts for the same: With Gravel Walks, Borders, and Plots. THE Situation of a Garden ought to be in free and open Air to the East and South, but South East is to be preferred, and the North defended by the House or tall Trees. The soil ought to be good deep and light, which if dry and warm, then level is most commodious; if cold and moist, the declining or shelving
towards the Sun is best; a loamy Land the sadder the colour the better, and best with a sandy mixture, but it must be mellow withal. If your Land be not so naturally, it must be made so by Art, As for your Claiy Land, make Chan∣nels to draw the water from it, which such Land long contains, and if it conti∣nues stiff cold and moist, then dig it often, throwing it on heaps or ridges, the Sun and Frosts will meliorate it: Mix with it a great deal of Sea sand, if it be to be had, for want whereof River or Brook sand, on the sand that the Land flouds have left, according to the quantity of your Ridges, filling the Gutters 'twixt the heaps or rows with old Thatch ei∣ther of Straw, Broom, Fern, or Heath, mixing it with the earth in those Trench∣es you intend for beds for your flow∣ers. Your Allies or Walks need not that trouble, for the barrener they are the better. Had you peat or turf ashes, 'twere excellent for mixing with this kind of soil, in want whereof any ashes may be used, but in greater quantity. Lime is good also, the bottom of wood piles sawdust, all sorts of rotten wood, or all
these mention'd, if to be had, often turn∣ed over, will make the best improve∣ment, not forgetting a considerable quan∣tity of old Cow dung. Chalky Land, being also naturally cold, is to be improved by warm and light composts, and to be dealt with all as your Claiy ground, but more mode∣rately. Marly Land, is cold and heavy, yet rich and deep, turning it up; often expo∣sing it to the Air turns it to good earth, but mix it with warm and light compo∣sitions. Sandy Land is the best for your use of the four last mention'd, and best improved, mixing marle, the mud of ponds, lakes or standing waters, a supply of which it often requires; but mix not with it hot dungs, but make use of the most cool∣ing. Towards some of these will you find your ground related, and accordingly must you use means to improve it, and sutable to the Plants or Flowers you in∣tend to bestow therein; and because dung is used in all, you must know, That Horse dung is best for Plants of quick digestion and growth, for Trees or
Plants that shoot much in a year, for it yields a great fume, and they cannot di∣spose of it. Cow dung is excellent for most sorts of rare flowers, if first it be thorow rotten, then dried and beaten to dust, and some fine fresh earth mixed with it. Dears dung, is much of the nature of Cows or Oxen, but more proper for ten∣der and smallest Plants. Sheeps dung, of the same nature; which put into water so much that by stirring may turn it to a pap, and when dissolv'd, mix with it fine sifted earth four or five times more in quantity than the Sheeps dung, this is an excellent compost for most fibrous rooted flowers, the tuberous also affect this mixture; such a mixture of Neats dung is good for the same uses, and better if you are forced to transplant a good flower in the Summer out of its sea∣son; for planted in it, the liquid matter so adheres to it so cooling and moist, that it will cause the plant to thrive as well as if it had been planted in its proper season. Swines dung by their trampling where they feed, and by their often urining,
which by that means trod into the earth, 'tis so improved into such a compost, it allaies that rankness of some light and rich soils that breed Canker worms, o∣ther vermine, and insects that destroy your choicest plants, and is a rich fat and cooling manure succesfully used in Flow∣er or Kitchen Gardens, but most excelling for fruit Trees. Asses dung comes near the nature of Deers or Sheeps dung, &c. but not so rich. Pigeons, nay of all Corn fed Fowl, is primarily very hot, especially Pigeons, their dung laid in a heap in the air and moistned till its heat is over, makes a rich improver of your Gardens. Mud of ponds, if your ground light, use stiff mud, if your soil stiff or cold use light or sandy mud: there is no Garden grounds but one of these is good for. Saw-dust, after it hath lain in a moist place till rotten, having its sharpness a∣bated, hath the nature of Rotten wood, or wood pile dust, but the chiefest is rot∣ten Willow or Willow earth, to make a light soil for fibrous rooted flowers and cheifly for Auricula's.
Ashes are good, unless they have been buckt withal, then they are hurtful; but cheifly the Ashes of any vegetables burn∣ed are most advantagious, the Ashes of like vegetables you intend to set in the earth mixt with them. Rotten straw mixed with earth makes it light and a pleasing bed for best Anemo∣nies, as well as other flowers with fibrous roots. Green slime of standing waters dried and beaten small in fine dust, and then mixed with good fresh earth is very suc∣cesfully used in raising several sorts of flower seeds. Of these several sorts of compost, as you shall stand in need of, ought you yearly to make provision, that you may have them ready when occasion to use them, as you will find in the following tract directed. Walks. Thus for the earth in the beds of your Garden, for your Walks therein: First take away all good soil in them below the roots of any Grass or Weeds: fill them two or three inches with course Gravel
unskreen'd, laying it round and higher, in the middle, then role it well after∣wards with skreened Gravel, lay it two inches more thick upon it, keeping it in the same proportion as before-mention'd, roling it oft and well, but the sides next your-beds should be laid a foot and half or two foot according to the breadth of your Walk, with good Turf, from whence the heat of the Sun cannot be reflected as from the Gravel to the prejudice of the neighbouring flowers, making them much sooner lose their beauty and leaves. Borders and Beds. If your Borders and beds be set with stone, which is the noblest and most chargeable, if well workt and moulded let it be such that will not moulder pil and crack, as I have seen many. If set with bricks, which is next, let them be well burnt. If with sawed rail, Inch and half thick at least, and five inches broad, if not well season'd, or new sawed, throw them in a pit of water for a fortnight, then take them out and dry them a day or two gently on a Kill, which will make them
ready for planing, and cyphering of the outward upper Edges, which when eve∣ry piece fitted to the lengths of work they are intended for, let them be well drenched in Linseed Oil with a Swines brizle brush, both the in and outside, if you grind some red Lead with the Oil, it will bind the faster and the sooner dry, which done you may put them into what colour you will, but the best is a light stone colour, by painting them over with white Lead and Umber, ground together on a Painters stone with Linseed Oil, it will not only look fine, but very dura∣ble when dry set together and firmly placed in the ground by being fastned to pieces of strong wood, set at such distances in the ground, that the Sun may not warp them; the rail three inches about the Gravel Walk, which cannot be quite finisht till that done, then fill them up with good skreened earth or such as hath been sifted through a Wire Rid∣dle, laying the earth round and higher in the middle than the top of the rail: For the forms of your plots, you have here inserted two new fashion'd draughts, the one for a square, the other a long piece of ground, out of which may
you make draughts either for round, or Oval wall Gardens of what size soe∣ver, which will by degrees come most in fashion, having the Sun-beams cast once a day on each part of such Walls, either outward or inward side, a great advantage to fruit planted a∣gainst them.
A is Gravelwalks. B is Grass. C is rail'd Borders fill'd with good earth for flowers. This for a square Garden, you may make the middle there of a Circle unbroken, with a Statue in the middle thereof, if not a foun∣tain, and other Statues, one at each corner, or as your fancy shall guide you, but then you must cut off the innermost corners of the square as the prick lines direct you.
A is Grass, the rest gravelwalks, but the narrow borders rail'd and fill'd with
good sifted earth for flowers, if the middle be an oval undivided, it will look as well. This plot serves well for an oblong. Were I employ'd a Garden to contrive, Wherein to plant each beauteous Vegetive; First then my Wall so fashioned should be, Each side and part the Sun each day should see: So that the Fruits within▪ or outside set An equal share of's ripening beams should get. A Fountain in the midst should so be plac'd, By which the Plot should not be only grac'd, But that one spring should force the water out In seeming show'rs of Rain, each part about Farther or shorter distance, more or less, Water to big, or smaller drops shall press, As the inclosed Plants or Flowers require; Gentle or fiercer rain, to your desire. Invented shades to keep out Sol's South flames, And apt reflections to inforce his beams, As Nature of each Plant shall want his aid, Or those that by his heat may be dismaid, Assisting Nature by industrious Art; To perfect every Plant in everypart, But not like some, whose crimes do rise so high Boldly to pull down Heavens Deity I hate that so sordid ignrance doth dispence With making Nature God, slight Providence,
But let each Vegetive best ordred prove Such Letters, so may spel the God above, That men may read him thence, and make each Clod Speak God of Nature, make not Nature God: But Blaz'ner of's wise providence and power, First made, then so preserves each Plant and Flower. JANƲARY, towards the latter end. Violets. LƲcoium Bulbosum praecox minus. The lesser early bulbous Violet, cometh into view, on a small stalk about seven or eight inches high, from between two pale green narrow leaves, being a small pendulous flower, with three pointed milk white leaves on the out side, with three shorter, edged or tipt with green, fashioned like a Cup, their inside green, from a bulbous root, round like that of a Daffadil; a common flower, yet not to be wanted, because when none other appears that does, though in the Snow, whence called Snow-flower, or Snow∣drops,
they increase by roots, indeed too fast, therefore their pods are to be pull'd off when going to seed: So hardy that they may be moved at any time. Acenite. Aconitum Hyemale. The Winter Wolf∣bane rises in this month, having round, though cut, green leaves, each having a stalk from the root, and on some part of them the flower, which is but small and yellow, of five leaves, with yellow threds in the middle, the root thick and tube∣rous, like the common Anemony, but round, losing its fibres every year: There is another sort like this in form, but of a paler yellow, both great increasers, yet fit to be sprinkled here and there, because so early, and so hardy as to be removed at any time. But this Plant in any inward use is to be avoided, as poyso∣nous and deadly. FEBRƲARY. MEzerion. The Dwarf Bay, rising according to its Age from one to two, three or four foot high, in a bush full
of branches, a whitish gray tough bark inclosing a soft consistence for wood, bea∣ring whitish round pointed green leaves, which appear not till the flowers past, which are small, consisting of four leaves growing on clusters, or thirk and close together on the new shoots, one sort of a deep peech colour, near red, another a paler peach colour, a third milk white, each so sweet in savour, as to be sinelt at a distance, but the most odoriferous is the pale peach colour'd, but the white the most rare. The Flowers past are suc∣ceeded by many small Berries, when ripe of a delicatered, but the Berries of the White, of a pure clear amber colour, by which they are raised pleasant and beautiful Plants like the Parents, or else produ∣cing Children of a different complexion, which is the more rare; but these Ber∣ries and Seeds are to be sowed in good light earth in Boxes, as soon as they are ripe, or else such Earth laid under these fine shrubs, for the Seeds as they ripen to fall into, and afterwards cover'd with the same mould, but not too thick. Crocus. Crocus, or Saffron of divers Sorts, that flower in this month, others in Autumn.
The Spring Crocus's, that are most valued, are Crocus albus major: The great white Crocus, rising up With narrow long green leaves with a white line in the middle of them; from these cometh up, cover'd with a white skin, small low white flow∣ers, of six leaves, a long saffron pointel in the middle, with some Chives about it: Not opening but when the Sun shines. Crocus Maesiacus: The white Crocus of Maesia, like the last, but bigger and more flowers from a root, but not so pure white, one of this kind hath the bottom of the flower, and part of the Stalk of a bright blew. Crocus plumatus pallidus: The pale∣feather'd Crocus, somewhat like the last, but larger and sharper pointed, bottom and stalk blew; the three outward leaves on the outsides, all white, the insides striped with bigger and lesser streaks of pale blewish purple, the three minor leaves striped with the same colour on both sides thereof. This is one of the ra∣rest we have: next to these, for the cold, is the Bishops Crocus, of bigger roots and leaves than the former; longer and shar∣per
pointed flowers variable in Colours, sometimes white, striped with blew, sometimes three leaves white and three blew. Crocus Imperialis, the Imperial Crocus, many flowers from one root, silver co∣lour'd, striped on the backs of the leaves with purple, when opened are seen through, but encreases so fast, 'tis grown too common. Crocus Regalis, the Royal Crocus, is like the last but better striped on the backs of the outward leaves. These are flow∣ers that the white hath the Mastery, the next the purple rides Admiral: As in the Crocus purpureus minor, the small pur∣plè Crocus hath narrow green leaves, small low purple flowers round pointed, dark bottoms, near black Crocus purpureus major, the greater purple Crocus, sharper pointed, of the same colour, but in leaves and flowers bigger and taller than the former. Crocus purpureus maximus, the greatest purple Crocus, the largest of all the Cro∣cus's, bleaker purple and rounder pointed than the former: one of this kind hath leaves edged about with white Crocus Neapolitanus Caeruleus, the blew
Neapolitan Crocus differs only from the greatest purple in the flowers, are of a deep sky colour'd, with a darker bot∣tom: but the Crocus plumatus purpureus, the purl feather'd Crocus like the great purple, but a little bigger and rounder pointed, the three outward leaves of the flower of the same colour but feather'd with white on both sides, the inner leaves thick striped with white on a paler purple on each side, the best of all other sorts yet known to us. Crocus purpureus striatus minor. The lesser and greater purple striped Crocus. Crocus purpureus striatus major. The lesser of a Reddish purple co∣lour, veined through every leaf on both sides with a deeper purple. The great∣er, like the greater purple: with three great stripes down the backs of the three utmost leaves of a deeper purple, and something lighter on the inside, as are the three inner-leaves also, but stri∣ped on the backs near the bottom. Crocus purpureus flammeus major, the great purple flam'd Crocus, hath fresh∣er green leaves than the other purples,
middle siz'd flowers, whitest pale purple on the outside, and deeper on the in∣side, striped and flamed throughout each leaf. Keep the seeds of this sort, which gives good seed, and those sown good varieties: then there is Crocus Luteus sive Maesiachus: The yel∣low Crocus common. Crocus Luteus maximus: The greatest yellow Crocus. Crocus flavius striatus: The yellow striped Crocus. Which have been valuable, but not now therefore not worth the description; but Crocus Luteus versicolor, The Cloth of Gold Crocus is not so common as to be rejected, it being of a different colour from the rest, and fit for mixing with them, having short whitish green leaves, fair yellow flowers, with three purple stripes on the backs of the three out∣most leaves, the rest are all yellow, bear∣ing two or three flowers from one root, their roots differing from others in their being cover'd with a hard netted peeling or shell, these are to be planted intermix∣ed on the edges of your borders round your Garden, and make a pleasant shew before other flowers appear: and are the
choicest of the spring Crocus's, for those that blow in Autumnsh all in their season be described; after these flowers are gone the seeds succeed, being small and round, in a three square, some more roundish husk, of a yellowish red colour, just a∣bove ground, which when found ripe, ga∣ther and keep in the husks to sow in September in light and rich ground, trans∣planting them the year after into such like soil as before sowed, but place them not too thick, 'twill encourage their bet∣ter marking: their roots are small round and flat, cover'd with a Russet Coat, all the aforemention'd Crocus's my Garden is plentifully stored with, as well as with the Mezertons. MARCH. Primroses. PRimula veris, Primrose, viz. the dou∣ble pale yellow, a pretty flower tho too common: Double green Primrose, a∣nother the outward leaves green, with a small pale yellow flower in the midst: A single yellow Primrose with the hose divi∣ded into fine long narrow points or spurs,
which I but lately had, and find no where described, only valuable for the rarity of the hose. The red Primrose of the shape of the field Primrose, of which very many di∣versities in colours, some deeper, others lighter, from blood red to pale Pink co∣lour, some of a blewish Rose colour sad∣der and paler; some of a Brick colour, Dove colour, Buff and Hair colour, which have been raised from seeds; as also The fair red Primrose a pleasant flow∣er, of a beautiful rich shining Velvet red colour, with a yellow star in the bottom as all the rest have. The scarlet Primrose, amongst the sin∣gle ones the most esteemable, being of a bright scarlet colour. Red Primrose hose in hose, that is up∣on every stalk two flowers ingeminated, or growing one within the other, several sorts, some deeper some paler, differing either in size fashion or colour. The best of these sorts are some that I have, and never saw elsewhere, large flowers of a deeper and lighter purple, fine yel∣low Eie, each Leaf of the lowermost flow∣er having a large stripe of Cream co∣lour through the middle.
Double red Primrose, of which I have only heard the name, but think there is no such thing: as supposing, some last Winter bestowed on me by a great lover of Rarities in this kind (Mr. John Wood of Shrewsbury) the Root bearing many flowers very double, seldom blowing out well, and the colour but of a dull horse-flesh hue, which though a rarity, wants the accomplishment of the colour of the fair red Primrose, had it but that addition, and of blowing well, 'twould be the only Flower for esteem expected from these kinds, and give ample satis∣faction for sowing their Seeds. Cowslips hose in hose many of a stalk of the common colour Double Cowslip is bigger than the common kind, thick and double. Double green Cowslip, very double, and rarest of the three. There is the single green one, the tufted one, and Cowslip with jagged hose, but not valuable. Red Cowslip, or Oxslip, of several sorts, shap't like those in the Field, but of several colours, deeper and lighter. There is the Orenge colour'd Cow∣slips, the leaves edged with Cinnamon
Colour, somewhat redder on the outside Some of a fine Scarlet colour, but the. cheifest of them is the deep Scarlet, very double, to vie with which is the Red Cowslip hose in hose, and as many flow∣ers on a stalk as the rest, large flowers, and large yellow starry eyes, of these se∣veral varieties in deeper and lighter co∣lours, some like to velvet. Many sorts of these were raised lately from seeds, and given me by that Industrious rare Florist, my truly worthy to be esteemed ingeni∣ous. Friend Peter Egerton, Esq of Bough∣ton near Chester. These flowers last nam∣ed must often change their Earth or they will degenerate and come single, sow your seeds in September, in a bed of good Earth, they will come up at Spring. Hepatica's. Hepatica nobilis, Noble Liverwort, of two sorts, single and double, of each lighter and darker, blew and white. Single Hepatica's, as also the double, their flowers come up before their leaves amongst their old stalks and leaves upon stalk an hand's breadth high, but small and weak, composed of about seven small pointed leavs of Deeper. i. e. redder and paler Peach colour. Another of the same
shape of a light blew watchet. Another milk white, the leaves rise at first folded, but after opening themselves are divided at the edges in three parts, each standing on a particular stalk, as high as the flow∣ers, a black stringy root. The Double Hepatcia's, these small flowers differ from the single ones, not in colour but only the double blew is of a more lu∣strous and deeper die. The double white hath fresher and smaller green leaves than the rest, snow white, and as thick and double as the Peach or blew colour∣ed, but more rarely met withal, and therefore more regarded, yet all of them the prettiest beauties the Spring at her first approach exposes to our veiw. The single sort of them valued for the seeds they bear; from which being sown va∣rieties are expected; they must be plan∣ted in rich well dunged Soil, they are in∣creased by parting their roots, when grown into several heads. Their seeds to be sowed in August in Cases, or least exposed beds to the cold winds and frosts. Fail not when the single kinds have near lost their beauty to tie up the stalks bearing flowers to a small stick thrust in
the ground; to prevent the seed Vessels falling to the ground, and so either rotting the little pods before the seed ripen, or your loosing the seed out of them when ripe, at least the best of it be∣fore you are aware. These are the prettiest beauties of the Spring Cloath'd in red-white Ʋltramarine mantling. MARCH, APRIL. Hyacinths, are bulbous rooted, with many fat fibres under them, from whence spring five or six leaves of a light green, tho at first reddish, they are gutter'd on the upper side: Of these there are the Hyacinthus Muscari flore flavo, they el∣low Muscary or Musk grape flower, with a long round root, from whence a weakish stalk headed with many flow∣ers like little bottles, of a fair yellow colour, and muskish scent. Muscari flore Cineritio, like the last, but lesser and paler leaves, the flowers of a faint Ash colour, as sweet if not sweeter than the former. Muscari flore rubro, the red Muscari with flowers of a pale bleak white, and of a strong Musky scent.
Hyacinthus comosus ra∣mosus, purpureus elegantior fair hair'd▪ branch'd, fair curl'd hair'd, the first hath broader leaves than any of the former, standing up but hollow, like the rest, the stalk near half yard high, branched on every side with many tufts at the ends ends of a dark murry purple. The second, like the other, only the flower consists of a bush of many branches, divided into divers long curled threds or hairs, whence its name, the flower and top of the stalk of a fine bright murrey purple, a fine strange flower. Hyacinthus stellatus major Peruanus, flore albo flore carneo. The great starry Hyacinth of Peru, like the Muscarini root and leaves, whence a short stalk, from the middle whereof to the top upon long foot stalks, many blew flowers star-like with some blew threds hung with yellow pendants, standing about middle head. The white, lesser than the former, leaves lighter green. The flowers white with a shew of blush at the bottom. The blush, like the other, but the flower, of a fine purplish blush colour. Hyacinthus stellatus Lilifolio, & radice
cerulea. The blew lilly-leav'd starry Hy∣acinth, the root like that of the white Lilly, but smaller and longer, thence leaves broad and short, the stalk foot high, bearing many star-like flowers of a light blew colour, with six short leaves in the middle, standing like a Cup: Of this kind two other sorts, differing only from the former in that the one is white the other blush, but flowers not till May, the o∣thers sooner. The roots of these lose not their fibres, therefore not endure long out of the earth, nor to have their fibres broken when removed, and this is to be done in August, but the most rare is Hyacinthus Indicus tuberosa radice: The great Indian tuberose rooted Hya∣cinth, a thick knobbed root, fashion'd into several heads, with many fibres underneath it, hence rise several strong stalks and tall, set with several fair, long and broad green leaves, joined at the bot∣tom close to the stalk, where they are biggest, diminishing even to the top gra∣dually, where stand many flowers fair and large of six white leaves, spreading open like those of the white Daffodil, with some short threds in the middle
strong, and sweetly scented: there is a smaller kind and differs only in that, but this Hyacinth is yearly to be taken up in April, and the roots carefully parted, lest the great fibres be bruised or broken, and thus replanted, let the bottom of the Pot be rich earth, the middle natural fresh earth, in which place your Root and distended fibres, covering them with some of the same earth, then fill up the Pot with the same rank earth as laid at the bottom to nourish the fibres, sink the Pot into a hot bed that begins to lan∣guish in its heat, let it there abide with∣out watering till the roots spring, then take it out and place it under a South Wall, watering it in dry weather, house it in September, and preserve it from wet and cold, the fresh leaner earth about the root makes it the apter to bear, and rank earth to of set, plant your Muscari in a warm place and defend it from Winters cold. Hyacin∣thus Bo∣troides caeruleus a∣maenus flore albo sky white grape-flower blush branched flore rubente ramosus The first of these, the sky coloured grape-flower cometh up with three
green leaves, sometimes four, and gut∣tur'd like the former, from a round white root, a stalk about half a foot high, bea∣ring many flowers, set together like a small bunch of grapes; in form like the Muscary, but lesser, of a fine pale blew or sky colour, of a soft sweet scent. The white like the former: The blush bigger in all its parts, with flowers of a pale bleak blush colour. The branched differs in that the flow∣ers grow along the stalk in branches, of a blew colour, and bigger in flowers, stalks, leavs and roots. But I shall next speak of the more to be preferred Orien∣tal Hyacinths, As first Zumbul Indi: The great Oriental Hy∣acinth, that cometh up with a spled stalk, broad long green leavs, bearing on a strong stalk, many fair long blewish pur∣ple flowers opening into six small leaves turning back again, as all the Orientals do, the root big, round, covered with a reddish purple Coat: Of this kind one beareth double flowers, and many that I shall not insist on, some but name, cheifly differing in the colour of the flowers: Some of a pale deeper blew with stripes down the backs of the leaves of the flow∣ers:
Some wholly white, others of a fine blush, their roots losing their fibres, may as the Tulips be taken up and kept dry, causing them to be more respected, hav∣ing all a sweetish scent. The Caelestial Hyacinth of a pale sky or blew color like the Zumbul Indi, but bigger in all its parts, often coming up with two stalks, each bearing many large flowers. Hyacinthus Orientalis brumalis, white early Hyacinth. Hyacinthus Orientalis flore pleno caeruleo, fair double blew Hyacinth. Hyacinthus Orientalis candidus flore ple∣no, pure white double Ori. Hyacinthus stellatus flore cinereo, Ash co∣lour starry Hyacinth. Hyacinthus stellatus vulgaris, common blew starry Hyacinth. Hyacinthus stellatus flore albo, the white starry Hyacinth. Hyacinthus stellatus precox, the early blew starry Hyacinth. There is one of the last kind that beareth white flowers, another much ra∣rer than any of this kind, the flowers being as large as of the first blew, strong lusty flowers, of a fine blush colour, these sorts of flowers in the beginning of March.
The great Oriental Hyacinth, betimes in March, the purple early Winter Hya∣cinths beginning of February, the other Oriental Hyacinths single and double flower in the end of March or beginning of April, the starry Hyacinth that is Ash colour'd or light blew in April, the other starry Hyacinths in the beginning of March, the Grape Hyacinths flower in April, but all of them earlier or later as the Winters severities deter or Springs forwardness invite to shew their faces: Most of these flowers are hardy and re∣quire but small attendance, most of them bear seeds, which being sown in Sep∣tember, like as you will find directions for Tulips, will produce new diversities: The choicest of these named and that a Florist may not be without, are The fair double blew, double white Oriental: The Caelestial, white and blush starry Hyacinths, tho the others are pretty di∣versions, not much valued. Apollo's Zephirus's beloved Boy. Fair Hyacinthus subject of their Toy By an unlucky-chance Apollo slew And Zeph'rus breath, into this flower blew, As lov'd by many, so many colours have,
Some blew caus'd by the Crush Apollo gave, Some white declaring of its innocence, Some blushing that its change proceeded thence, Each smelling sweet of Zephirus last kiss: Nothing gainst fate sufficient armour is. Thus moralizing mortals here below. By Divine strokes we all should sweeter grow. NARCISSUS. Next to the Hyacinths appear the Daffodils, some of which deserve enter∣tainment in your Garden to be placed in your borders next your Walls or un∣der Pales, and tho in shady places pro∣sper well, being hardy plants, and great encreasers, most of them blowing early, of great variety, some single some dou∣ble, some bearing many flowers on a stalk, some white, some straw colour, some lighter and darker yellow, those fit for a Florist are those that follow, having round roots enclosed in brown skins (for to yellow faces seldom better colour'd appertain) whence rise sometimes two three or four long, but narrowish leaves of greyish green colour with stalkes,
sometimes one foot and half, or two foot high at the top, whereof out of a thin husk comes flowers, all having their heads, either single, double, two, three, four, five or more. Narcissus non parel, the incomparable Daffodil, with a single flower of six pale yellow large leaves, roundish points, with a deeper yellow cup in the middle, its edges indented. Narcissus non parel flore, sive chalice ple∣no, with a double flower, or Cup, the out leaves like the last, but the middle very large thick and double, of longer pale yel∣low leaves, the shorter and deeper yel∣low Cup broken and mixed amongst them, forming a large and beautiful flower, it being pitty 'tis so great an en∣creaser. Narcissus Gallicus major flore pleno, the great double french Daffodil, hath short∣er leaves, and stalks than the former, bearing one fair double flower, of point∣ed leaves, crouded so confusedly toge∣ther and so thin, that rainy weather makes them stick one to another and ne∣ver open, but come a fair flower if not so prejudiced by wet, of a pale yellow colour almost white.
Narcissus Gallicus minor flore pleno, the lesser double French Daffodil, bears on a weak stalk one fine double flower of sharp pointed leaves, lying over one another shorter by degrees to the middle, like a star with six points, of a yellower co∣lour than the former, yet pale and opens finely. Narcissus albus flore pleno virginianus, the double white Daffodil of Virginia, rises from between two small green leaves, a stalk half foot high, bearing a fair double white flower, formed like the last, but from the middle comes a small long white fork, and adds to its beauty: This endures not the Winters severities, but must be set in a warm place. Narcissus albus multiplex, the double white Daffodil needs no description be∣ing so common. These are the best kinds of legiti∣mate Daffodils, bearing one flower on a stalk, flowring in March and April: the next following are those that bear ma∣ny flowers on a stalk but the flowers single. Narcissus Africanus aureus major: the great yellow Daffodil of Affrica, the best of all single ones with many flowers on
a stalk, greener and longer leaves than the others, on a stalk shorter than the leaves (if the root old) ten or twelve large fair shining yellow coloured flowers with large Cups of deeper yellow, very sweet scented, a noble plant. Nircissus Sulphureus major, the great Brimstone colour Daffodil, narrower leaves but as long as the last, bearing four or five flowers on a stalk of bright Lemmon coloured, at the first opening a round Saffron coloured Cup, but after blown a while the flower turns to a sul∣en brimstone colour; the Cup paler, sweet like the former, worth a Florists choice. Narcissus Narbonensis sive medio Luteus, the French Daffodil white leaves and yel∣low Cup, softer scented bearing eight or ten flowers on one stalk. Narcissus natus albus polianthos, all white Daffodil with many flowers, like the last but flower and cup all white, of those there's a lesser and a greater, the greetest of most value. Next follows the many flowr'd Daffs that are double, as Narcissus Ciprius flore pleno polianthus. The double yellow Daffodil of Cyprus
with many flowers, bearing four or five small double pale yellower flowers, strong scented, this is tender, and must be de∣fended from Winter frost. Narcissus medio luteus corana duplici, the Turky Daffodils with a double Crown, bearing four or five small milk white flowers, with a double yellow Cup, of many small short yellow leaves, exceeding sweet, but not so tender as the last. Narcis. Chalcidonicus flore plenopolianthus, the double Daffodil of Constantinople, with many flowers, like the last in leaf and stalk, bearing four or five double white flowers their leaves standing disorderly, having many pieces of a yellow Cups amongst them; there's another whose Cup leaves are edged with purple, both fine flowers. The Junquils or rush Daffodil come next in course, being true Daffodils. Narcissus juncifolius Albus, the white Junquil, hath a small round blackish root, whence springs three or four small long rush-like green leaves, stalk foot high, bearing three or four little flowers of six white leaves, round Cup in the middle of the same colour: There is another like this but the leaves turn back again: A∣nother
of the same fashion but of gold yellow colour: A third turning back, the flower pale yellow, Cup white: A fourth having the flower white, the Cup yellow. Narcissus juncifolius Luteus magno cha∣lice, the Qinquillia or rush Daffodil with a great Cup, is bigger in all the parts than any of the former, seldom more flowers than three on a stalk, therefore larger than in any of the rush Daffs, outer leaves yellow, turning some∣thing towards the Cup which is big pro∣portionable to the leaves of the flower, but of a deeper yellow colour. Narcissus juncifolius Luteus flore pleno, the double Junq. or rush Daffodil, in all parts like the common one, only the flower of these are thick and double, of several rowes of leaves with the pieces of their Cups betwixt every row of bigger leaves, all of a fair yellow colour. There are some Indian Daffodils, with many Lilly like reddish flowers on a stalk, some blush flowers, another scarlet root and flower, others purplish, but shall be no farther noticed, since not to be court∣ed to abide on too Northern climate. I shall next mention the great Sea Daffodil, and then pass to the bastard Daffodils.
Narcissus Marinus, five tertius Mathiolis the great Sea Daffodil, or Mathiolus his third Daffodil, hath a root far bigger than any of the rest, leaves generally six, of a whitish green, as thick and broad again as any other, but not so long as some of them: from their middle and sides comes up one, sometimes two or three great stalks, foot high at shortest, bearing at the Top ten or twelve, sometimes more flowers on a stalk, each of six spread white leaves with a white short Cup or Crown in the mid∣dle, lying flat on the leaves, divided into six corners; thence cometh forth white threds, turning up the ends, and some other white threds in the middle, tipt with yellow pendents, seldome spring∣ing till April flowers, not till May ends, or the beginning of June, this ought to be planted under a South Wall and needs not removing of twenty years, if at any time set again present∣ly. Pseudo Narcissus aureus Hispanicus maximus, the great yellow Spanish ba∣stard Daffodil, the root affects to be set deep in the ground, whence springs many thick leaves and stiff, of a gray∣ish green colour, stalk three foot high
bearing one large yellow flower stand∣ing forth from the stalk, of six short, yet something broad leaves, and a great trunk in the middle, a little crumpled, wide open at the mouth turning up the brims. Pseudo Narcissus Hispanicus flore albo major, the great white Spanish Bastard Daffodil, less in all its parts than the former yellow one, bearing one Milk white flower hanging down the head of the fashion of the former, there are two white Spanish ones of this kind more but are lesser. Pseudo Narcissus Maximus flore pleno, the greatest double bastard Daffodil, or Trades∣kens double Daffodil, holding the pre∣emince of all of this kind, being the big∣gest, doubtless best formed of all the double Daffodils, a great round root with a brown coat that throws up four or five pretty large leaves, but not ve∣ry long, of a whitish green stalk a∣bout foot high, bearing a fair great flower largely spread open, containing a multitude of small pale yellow leaves, and near as many larger, of a deep yellow colour, growing in rowes one under another shorter and shorter by
degrees to the middle of the flow∣er. Pseudo Narcissus Major flore pleno, Tuggees great double bastard Daffodil, in all parts like the last, but not so well spread open, nor the Cups brok∣en into such good partings, fashion'd like Pseudo Narcissus Minor flore pleno, the les∣ser double bastard Daffodil, known chiefly by the name of Wilmots Daffodil, of a longer shape, tho lesser flower, seldom opening alike, having a great double trunk, in some unbroken, in others half broken, and throwing it self among the other leaves, there's Pseudo Narcissus flore pleno minimus, the least double bastard Daffodil, or Perkinsons double Daffodil, like the last, but lesser, and of a greenish yel∣low. Pseudo Narcissus Anglicus flore pleno, the double English bastard Daffodil, the flower double, of pale yellow outer leaves, parts of the trunk deeper yellow, divid∣ed in several rowes one within ano∣ther, sometimes the trunk only double, and some parts or sides of the flower of a greenish yellow.
Pseudo Narcissus angusti folii aureus multiplex, the golden double narrow leav'd Daffodil, bears one double flower, of six yellow outer leaves, and many smaller of a deeper yellow, thick set together in the middle, pointing forth, different from all the rest, as rare and prizable as any. Pseudo Narcissus Junci folii albus, white bastard Junquilia, or rush Daffo∣dil, from two or three large green leaves not so round as those formerly menti∣on'd, rises a stalk about a foot high, bearing one small white flower of six small and short leaves, standing about the trunk which is long, and very wide open at the brims, the utmost small leaves a little greenish, the great trunks milk white. Pseudo Narcissus Luteus Major, the great yellow bastard rush Daffodil differs only in that it is every way bigger trunk longer and of a yellow colour, there is two or three of this kind but differ on∣ly in their bigness, and one flowring a month later than the rest. Daffodils in general are hardy, great increasers, tho some of them are tend∣er as mention'd in their discription, and
ought to be planted in good earth and warm place, as much as may be freed from the Winters annoyance, most of them to be taken up in June, and kept dry till September, and then to be set as Mr. Wolricks advises, or under out hedges of your Gardens in borders or Banks made for them: To make new varieties, you must sow the seeds of the best single ones (for the double bear none) in Septem∣ber, in such places that they may stand two or three years ere removed, and then in June taken up, but presently set again in good ground, at convenient distances till they offer to your Eye which deserve to abide or be thrown away: For if but two or three, may but one variety, your pains not lost. The Daffodils are by the curious (Whether Legitimate or spurious) Accounted beauties in their time, Deserving notice in our Rhime. But since▪ 'tis here so poorly done, They hang their heads, asham'd to own What so much flats their reputation; Such Limping-languide commendation: Lest Honour loose; with yellow Jealousie Fretting fall to the earth and mourning die.
In this month of March flowers the double Peach of three or more rowes of leaves of a reddish blush colour, sel∣dome succeeded by any fruit. AƲRICƲLA'S. Bears ears, flowers so much now in esteem (and well deserve it) for their diversity of Colour and different faces, each adding a new grace to its kind, nature sporting her self so in their va∣rious complexions, that we are at a loss, to sute names to the several dies they offer to our description, either in their self colours, strip'd or double flow'rs, some of which are striped also and de∣clare their worth by the prizes given for them from one to two, three, four or five pounds, &c. a root, each year producing new faces from the Seeds sow∣ed of well chosen flowers, the best way of performing thereof, not till now made publick, shall be faithfully shew'd after the descriptions of these five plants, as they as flowers offer themselves to our view, dividing them into these sorts; single, self colours, single striped, dou∣ble
self colour'd, and double striped flow∣ers: And first of the Single self colours, which as the rest have green thick leaves and broad, some longer some shorter, some of a grass green, others lighter and mealy, some smooth and plain on the edges, others downy and jagged or purled edges; from the middle or sides of the leavs spring up the stalks, from four inches to a shafual in height, round and co∣loured like the leaves, bearing at the top many flowers shaped as the Cow∣slips, consisting of five small leaves, parted at the ends with a white circle or eye in the middle, hallow down to the small caps they stand in, wherein when the flower's fallen appear small round heads with a prick in the mid∣dle, which contain the seeds, that are small and brown, having a long, white, stringy root, like that of the Primrose or Cowslip, that Original of these deli∣cate springs. Auricula flore. Luteo: The yellow Auricula, of which those only are esteemed, that bear the biggest Trusses of the deep∣est yellow, largest and whitest eyes, the rest not worth a farthing, hence
came the leather-coats still esteem∣ed, as Liver colour with a gray eye. Hair colour, good truss and eye, several sorts. Clove colour, great truss, indiffe∣rent eye, of the last there are lar∣ger and bigger flowers. Willow colour, small eye. Mouse colour, yellowish eye. Cinnamon large flower fine white eye. Hair colour, lighter edges, good, truss, and eye, of this sort several lighter and darker. Greenish hair colour or like Corn blossomes, large flower and truss, great white eye. Light Tawney, fine white eye, ma∣ny flowers in the Truss, a pretty variety. Albo, the white, of small esteem, only the Virgins milk with a large truss of white flowers, and whiter eye. Auricula flore purpureo: The purple Au∣ricula, of which several sorts, some deep∣er, some lighter, some bigger, some lesser, some good white eyes, others indifferent.
Auricula flore One The fair Downam (rais'd by a Divine of that Name) bearing ma∣ny flowers, of a bright murrey or reddish purple colour with a white eye. Tutor Goods purple, bearing a great Truss of many fair, rich, pur∣ple flowers, with a delicate white eye, that will not wash with rain, but abide so to the last, which ma∣ny others will not do. Mrs. Bugs fine purple, like the last, but that the great head of flowers stand more upright, of a deeper pur∣ple and broader white eye. Mr. Whitmores purple, fair and large great Truss of flowers, of a lighter purple than the former, with fine white eyes. Mr. Rea's purple, like in colour brighter, bearing more flowers, good eye. Purple Fransway, a good flower, bear∣ing a great Truss of rich shining purple Flowers with a larger white eye than a∣ny of the rest. The black Imperial and the black Em∣peror are such dark purples, that little difference them from black, with deli∣cate
snow white eyes, the only diffe∣rence of these two is, that the last is the bigger in all its parts, and of other pur∣ples there is more diversities than I need name, nor should, but that the Blazing Star just now appears in view the largest leaf Flower of them all by much, of a very deep murrish liver colour, with a snowy white eye, as big as the whole of another Flower. Auricula flore Rubro sive coccineo, The red or Scarlet colour'd Auricula. Mrs. Austins Scarlet, bears a great Truss of fine Scarlet Flowers, with Snow white eyes, yet the best of that kind. There are some of Mr. Ja∣cob Roberts raising, that are good Flowers, who keeps the Physick Garden in Oxford, there are others that are raised from seeds of a bloud red, as Mr. Reo's deep scarlet, or rather bloud red Auricula, bearing a great Truss of Flowers, with fair white eyes. Some that are Crimson, o∣thers Carnation, Rose colour and blushes, with several other colours, the stranger the colour, if with good white eyes that will not wash, are of most value.
Come we now to the more enobled Auricula's, inriched by their stripes, and begin with the eldest of them. The Purple striped Auricula, small in all parts, on a weak low stalk, bears a head of four or five (seldom more) purple Flowers striped with white. The Purple and Lemmon colour, bigger and stronger than the last, on a stiff, tho low stalk, bears a good Truss of Flowers, but hath no good eye, yet well marked with Purple and Lemmon, but sometimes all yellow. Deep purple and Straw-colour white eye, fine Flower. Dul flesh colour and Lemmon. Liver colour and yellow broad stripes. Bloud colour streakt with yellow good eye. Dark and Gold colour indifferent eye. Dark and Gold colour with the fair eye. Fine Violet and white. Sky colour and white finely striped, large Truss. Scarlet and Gold colour finely strip∣ed, good eye large Truss, pert, upright dainty Flower.
Buffe and Lemmon coloured striped bad eye. Hair colour and Lemmon rarely strip∣ed, fine white eye, large truss and up∣right, but sometimes come all yellow. Philomot some stripes of leather co∣lour bad eye. Dark hair colour streaked with a lighter. Needle work pale peach and white in small streaks, weak-stalk, and small head, there are some more varieties, but let these suffice at present. Arrive we at last to the richest of these curious flowers the double self coloured, and the double striped, of the double self colours. The double white bearing but one flower on a stalk. The double yellow a large flower. The double Leather-coat. The double dark hair colour. The double Chesnut colour, large flower and leaves well spread. The double deep Philomot, lightning towards the bottom into Lemmon colour to the white of the eye, large flower and indeed a fine one. To close with the best last, there are
two rare striped Auriculas, their price bespeakes them, the one at four, the o∣ther nearer five pound, and have been sold for twenty pound, as I have been informed, they may now be cheaper, and are in the hands of my truly wor∣thy friend Peter Egerton of Boughton near Chester, Esq viz. The double striped, Crimson and white. The double very large and full of leaves, purple and yellow, the two choi∣cest rarities in Flora's Cabinet. These several sorts of Auricula's flow∣er some few the later end of March, the rest in April, and some of them again in the opposite months to those mentioned, but the then flowers more weak and not so glorious. They must be so planted as to be sha∣ded from the mid-day scorchings of the Sun, in a rich soil; the best composition is well rootted neats dung, flood-sands, or brooks-sand, and willow earth, that is the rotten dust of a mouldered old wil∣low Tree, these mixed and sifted to a fine composition of mold which they most delight in, and which the choicest of Auricula's may be allowed for their lod∣ging:
Courser beds of Earth may serve the commoner sorts, which must be set a foot asunder, because of their sprea∣ding, and will endure all weathers, but your best set in pots or boxes, that they may be shifted in the Summer into the shade, in the Winter into the Sun, and either transplanted into fresh mould e∣very year, or in August when you di∣vide the roots, take away some of the old and put new mould to them: When you set them, open a wide hole, leaving a ri∣sing in the middle, place the root there∣on, and spread every fibril round about it as not to crush one another, they will the better draw their nourishment and flourish accordingly; then cover them with earth and soundly doust them with water, which will save you much pains afterwards, needing no more unless in a very dry time; preserve them as much as you may from winters wet, if cold they endure well enough: But house them not, for they are better pleas'd with the open air or the raising of new varie∣ties; after the flowers past, when the stalks begin to turn yellow, the seed at the top will be near ripe, therefore carfully observe the round seed vessel, if you
find in it a small hole and black, gather it lest the seeds fall out and be lost be∣fore you are aware: As soon as you see it thus ready, cut the stalks gently that you flirt not out the seed, the best being at the top and will fly away first, keep∣ing the tops upright for that reason, tie them in that position together, with a paper loose about them, but fastned with the stalks at the bottome, that a∣ny seeds coming out may be saved there∣in, an ounce of which being worth a pound of what is forced out: Set them up against a sunny window; tying them for security to the bars thereof and what are not, the Sun will there ripen. About the first day of September, hav∣ing boxes of eight or ten inches deep, what square or length you please, pro∣portion'd to the quantity of seed you have, fill them half full of fine fifted rich and light earth, rotted Cow dung and sandy earth, proportionably mixed, which gently prest down with a broad Truel, leaving its surface smooth, on which sift through a fine five willow earth a finger and half or more thick, as equal as you can, leaving it light and unpres∣sed, then having separated your seeds
from their husks or crumbebs with a Sive that seeds will but just pass through you may, wait for a drizling or small rain, sow your seeds in your prepared boxes or cases, or pots, and set them out in such rain, without covering them with any earth, for the rain will drive the seeds as far as necessary into the fine sif∣ted light mould, always observing in what seeds soever, the smaller it is the finer the earth must be that it is sowed in, and that they may be rather choaked or buried by too much covering than re∣ceive prejudice by none at all, which caut on none yet have publisht in Auri∣cula's, a fault by which many as well as my self have lost both our time, seeds, pains and expectations. After you have thus sown your Auricula seeds let them stand all Winter in a free air and Sun, at the beginning of April remove them into the shades, for then they will begin to spring and peep, at which time one hot Glem of the Sun destroys them; let them continue so posited, give them some gentle waterings till they arrive to some considerable bigness, then trans∣plant those of them that grow too thick, but dextrously into a prepared bed for
them half a foot a funder or eight inches, where they ought to remain till they come to bear flowers, the rest may con∣tinue in your boxes till the time you intend to sow more in their places; after the former directions, some will bear by that time they rest the Spring follow∣ing; be sure the ground you transplant them in be rich and good, and that your expectations may not be frustra∣ted let your seeds sown be gathered from good flowers, such that have good white eyes that will not wash (let the other colours be what they will except the yellow) and your hopes may be the higher; if in their flowring any new faces appear your pains are rewar∣ded, the rest that derogate are only fit for pleasing small friends or perhaps as good throw away. See how the Bears Eares in their several dresses, (That yet no Poets pen to hight expresses.) Each head adorned with such rich attire, Which Fools and Clowns may slight, whilst skil'd admire. Their gold, their purples, scarlets, crimson dies,
Their dark and lighter hair'd diversities. With all their pretty shades and Ornaments, Their parti-colour'd coats and pleasing scents. Gold laid on scarlet, silver on the blew With sparkling eyes to take the eyes of you. Mixt colours, many more to please that sense, Other with rich and great magnificence, In double Ruffs, with gold and silver laced, On purple crimson and so neatly placed. Ransack Flora's wardrobes, none sure can bring More taking Ornaments t' adorn the spring. Dens Caninus Dogs Tooth, or Dogs tooths violet, its spotted roots and leaves manifest it a kind of Satyrian, but of more beauty and rarity, the stalk half a foot high, bearing one flower hanging down the head, with six narrow long leaves, which like the Cyclamen turn up again to the stalks, shewing a three forked stile of white colours, beset with six chives, tipt with purple pendents, rooted long and white like a dogs tooth, whence so named, of which there is these sorts. Dens Caninus Flore albo, Dogs tooth with a white flower.
Dens Caninus Flore purpurescente, with a purple flower. Dens Caninus Flore rubro, Dogs tooth with a red flower. Dens Caninus Flore luteo, Dogs tooth with a yellow flower and deserves our entertainment, flowering in the end of Maroh or beginning of April: They affect not a dunged soil, but good fresh earth, and therein to be planted in August ere they put forth new fibres, for tho they lose the old they quickly recover new ones; therefore keep them not long out of the ground, and when set defend them from rain for a fortnight, for much will rot and moil them; they are very slow encreasers, and but seldome with us.
APRIL. Auricula flore coeruleo folio Boraginis. THe Burrage-leav'd blew Auricula hath rough hairy leaves, spread on the ground like Burrage, but much lesser, and rent in the sides in some places, among which rises up one, two, or more brown hairy stalks, five or six inches high, each bearing at the top three or four flowers of five leaves, large, sharp pointed, of a fair, rich, blew colour, some small yellow threads in the middle, the root long and brown∣ish with many small fibres. 'Tis a ten∣der Plant, impatient of Cold, must be planted in a pot, and handled as the Flos Cardinalis is directed to be orde∣red in the latter end of what is describ∣ed under the Title June. Cortusa Matthioli, Bears Ear Sanicle springs up with folded leaves, openings are fair and broad, cut in divisions, nicked about the edges, a little hairy, dark green on the upper, but whiter on the other side, whence rises one or two naked stalks five or six inches
high, bearing at the tops divers smal flowers like Auricula's, but hang their heads, of a dark purple with a smal white eye and some threds in the middle, seeding like Auricula's, the root a thick tuft of small whitish strings fastned to a head, the leaves perish, and renew at spring, tis raised by feed, set in a pot and ordered in the winter as the last. Corona-Imperialis, The Crown Im∣perial, of which tho Mr. Woldridge gives his opinion in these words, they are but dull flowers. There is no sound Florist of his Judg∣ment, it being the most stately majesti∣cally graceful of any plant in being. It hath a large round yellow root (scent∣ing like a Fox) from whence springs a strong tall stalk adorned up to the middle thereof with long shining green leaves, from thence to the top (Scepter like) is naked, bearing there a tuft of smaller green leaves, under them seven, eight, nine or ten flowers, according to the age of the root, hanging down round about the stalk, each flower fashioned like a Lilly, consisting of six leaves on the dark stalk, of an Orange colour, with deeper coloured veins on the out∣side,
on that part next the stalk are e∣minences or bunches, each leaf one, containing in the inside of them drops of sweet tasted clear water, pearl like, each flower in the middle having a stile compassed with six white chives and tipt with yellow pendents, upon a stalk of the same colour. Corona Imperialis. Flore multiplici, The double Crown Imperial differing only in the doubleness of the flower from the last, having constantly fifteen or more leaves in a flower, as ma∣ny flowers in the head and longer lasting than the single, the tuft on the top bigger, the single one is common, yet no dull flower; this is of more esteem and a gallant plant deserving it; a good en∣creaser. Flore luteo, The yellow Crown Imperial, differing only from the first described single one, in its flowers, being of a fair yellow co∣lour, on a stalk green as its leaves, by which tis known in its coming up; this is a tenderer plant than the other and more rare and e∣steemable, a very slow encreaser, I
have one as double of this kind, as the double Orange coloured one, which must be the rarest of its species. Tho this year from an old root that bore constantly single Orange coloured flowers, came some of them double and others striped with yellow, from the seed of which I doubt not but to raise some fine variety. These flower in the end of March and beginning of April; they are en∣creased by offsets that yearly come from the old roots, which lose their fibres as often and may be taken up after the stalks are dryed down, which will be in June, and kept out of the ground till August, at which time they must be set again; the double Orange coloured and the yellow shew finely intermixed, and very well become the middle of a flower-pot. The double bear seeds, and from the common single one small hopes, the seeds of the yellow when attainable (for 'tis a nice plant seldome offsetting and as seldome seeding) give the grea∣test expectations when sown of new va∣rieties.
Great stately plant of most Majestick form, The Gardens of the ingenious dost adorne. That King-like stands superiour to the rest, Esteemed right, by a right knowing breast. Crowned with thy own worth as well as flowers Detracting pens nere pierce thy regal Tow∣ers. But their discretion, whilst they are speak∣ing things, Are mean, of Crowned flowers as well as Kings. In this month of April appears the double flowered Cherry in blossom, graft this and the Flanders cluster Cherry on the same block, to which set and spread against a wall, each mixed will shew well, and create wonder in some. Syringa laciniatis foliis, sive gelsiminum persecum. The blew Syringa with cut leaves, or Persian Jasmine in this sea∣son flowers, it comes up with many small woody branches, beset with fine green leaves, small, long, cut in and divided almost to the middle rib, some into three small leaves on a side, and a larger at the point, others into two,
some but one on each side, and the big∣ger at the end; at the end of the bran∣ches come forth the flowers, many to∣gether, fashion'd like those of the or∣dinary blew Syringa or Lilac, but smal∣ler, and of a finer purplish blew colour and better scented, and is encreased by laying down the branches, or by cuttings apt enough to root and thrive. Lylac five Syringa Flore caeruleo, The blew Syringa or Pipe tree is too com∣mon to describe it, but there are other kinds of it that are worth our notice and collection, viz. that which is snow white; another silver colour i. e. white with a light wash of blew; the last with fair purple coloured flowers, growing more upright, bearing more, and fairer flowers on one branch than any of the former, all flowring in this month, they must yearly be discharged of their suckers, lest they choake the Tree and kill it, or cause it not to bring forth flowers; they are all hardy plants ex∣cept the white which is more tender and would be planted against a Wall. Hypericum frutex, Woody Saint Johns woort hath two hundred and three or more woody stalks rising about a yard
high, beset at certain distances with tufts of small green leaves, and amongst them in the end of this month many small flowers, white and a little purple in the middle, a pretty plant, endures the Winter and is encreased by lay∣ers. Laurus Tinus, The wild bay spread on a Wall grows five or six foot high, full of branches, at every joynt two smooth longish dark green coloured leaves, at the top of the branches come forth great tufts of small white flow∣ers with blush edges, succeeded by small blew berries, wherein the seeds are contained, there's another called Lau∣rus Tinus Folio glabro, differs only from the other in that the leaves are larger, of a brighter green, fairer flowers, big∣ger and whiter than the former. Laurus Tinus Lusitanica, The wild Bay of Portugal, hath leaves harder, ful∣ler of veins, of a brown green colour, the flowers inclining to purple, the ber∣ries like but smaller than the former, I place these in this Month 'cause now in their greatest beauty, tho they flower not till winter. Ornithogalum Luteum, The yellow
Starr of Bethlehem, rises at first with one long round greenish leaf, which open∣ning a little above the ground, yeildeth another small leaf shorter than the first, whence rises a stalk four or five inches high, bearing at the top four or five small leaves, and among them four or five small yellow starlike flowers, a small greenish line down the backs of the leaves, and some small reddish threds in the middle; small, round, white and clear root, tho each year lo∣ses it fibres, yet will not abide but lit∣tle time out of the ground; this may be set amongst other tender roots that require covering and defence from frosts in winter, but not so tender as the Ara∣bian or Ethiopian. Caltha Palustris Flore pleno, The dou∣ble Marsh Marigold, is that is called Water-boot, plentiful in wet grounds, only the flowers of this are thick and double, of an excellent Gold yellow colour, stringy roots and prospers well in Gardens, flowering in this month.
APRIL, MAY. Tulipa, the Tulip, of which so many diversities that it were an endless piece of worke to recite and describe them all, I shall therefore give you (that I may come in as small a volume as pos∣sible) but the names and descriptions of some few of the best (having an hundred sorts) beginning with the precoces or early blowing Tulips, leav∣ing cut the Edgers, which are of least note. Florisante, Low flower, pale Horse-flesh colour marked with some crimson and pale yellow, which at length turns white, the bottom and Tamis blew, e∣very one knows the shapes of a Tulip which saves me the labour of giving the form. Blindenburg, middle siz'd, tops of the leaves of a pease blossome colour, the sides white, yellow Tamis. General Molswilck, well marked with Coronation and white pale yellow Tamis. Morillion Cramosine, a delicate flow∣er, of a bright Crimson or rather scar∣let
and pure white, rarely striped and well parted, bottom and Tamis pale yellow. Perishot, of a fair shinning blewish red colour and often well marked with white, but inconstant, the bottom white, Tamis pale yellow. Fair Ann, round pointed leaves of Claret Wine colour, marked with great flakes of white bottoms and Ta∣mis as the Perishot. Omen, Fair large and well formed flower of pale Rose colour, many veins of Crimson, guarding great stripes of white, bottom and Tamis blew. Galatea, bright Gredeline and white striped, bottom and Tamis pale yel∣low. Superintendant, Fair and large flow∣er well marked with violet purple and good white, pale yellow bottom and Tamis. Aurora, red and white variably mar∣ked, the bottom and Tamis pale yellow, good flower. Gilden blooms, pale red marked with some stripes of Gold colour through the leaves, bottom and Tamis yel∣low.
Alcetus, narrow leaves, good pur∣ple, well striped with good white bottom and Tamis of blew purple. Medias. Of the middle flowering Tulips on∣ly some of the best, viz. General Essex, Orange colour strip∣ed with yellow bottom and Tamis dark purple. Pluto, Of a sooty Orange colour, variably marked with lighter and dar∣ker yellow, bottom, sad green, blewish Tamis. Agot Robine, Paragon, of a sullen red, well marked with dun colour Crimson and white, bottom whitish black Tamis. Royal Tudaet, of a sad red colour, whipt about the edges with crimson and striped with pale yellow bottom and Tamis black. Cardinal Flambiant, pale scarlet, well marked with white, bottom and Tamis blew. Morillionde Anvers, pale scarlet and pale yellow. Bel Brune, dark brown crimson, well
marked and striped with white, bot∣tom pale yellow, and large dusty Ta∣mis. Susanna, bright Carnation and snow white finely divided, bottom white, pale greenish Tamis. Passe Belline, Carnation, some gred∣deline and much white, well parted and placed bottom and Tamis blew. Camusetta, large flower, Carnation, grediline and white, the well marking of this flower makes the bottom white, tho the Tamis blew. Paragon black burn, tall flower, broad yet sharp pointed leaves of a light Car∣nation colour, marked with deeper red, and striped with white bottom and Tamis blew. Passe Rosie, pale rose colour, well mar∣ked with crimson and some veins of straw colour, bottom and Tamis pale yellow. Chimny Sweeper, of a dark blackish red colour with a larger round whitish bottom, from whence it often comes striped, pale yellow Tamis. The Witch, as near as may be to black, being of so sullen a dark red, the bottom large, of a perfect black
satten colour, encompassed with a small circle of yellow, the Tamis party per pale black and yellow. Cedonulli, of a deep blewish Carna∣tion, marked with Crimson some gre∣deline and white bottom and Tamis blew. Lanscot Bole, bright Carnation, rarely agotted and striped with gredeline, and white bottom and Tamis blew. Parrot, half folded leaves with gree∣nish middles and whitish Edges, yellow bottom whitish Tamis, this as all the Parrots grow tall and strong. Rich Parrot, formed like the last, but rent in the sides, and with spurs, the middle of the leaf of a whitish green, growing by degrees to a dark brown colour, at the edges bottom and Tamis yellow. The Royal Parrot, the strangest yet in being for form and colours, being in its leaves half folded, long, rent in the sides with long spurrs, at first greenish and only tipt on the top of the leaves with rich scarlet, which as it opens spends it self up and down the leaves in small streaks, the three outmost leaves seathered up the back with green, the
rest not, all hook'd or Crumpt back'd and of a deep yellow or gold colour, standing in a strange form, the bottom and Tamis brown, no Tulip hav∣ing scarlet green and yellow but this. Agot Rampard, heavy sad Isabella colour, with some marks of Crim∣son, and great stripes of yellow, dark bottom, large black Tamis. Royal Shuttlemaker, sharp pointed leaves, a little twining, curiously mar∣ked with bright flesh colour, deep scarlet, and pale yellow, bottom and Tamis black, encreased by an offset coming out above the lowermost leaf. Eagle, a fair flower, peach-colour, pale gredeline, some deep Crimson and pure white purple bottom and Ta∣mis. Paragon Florison, Sharp pointed leaves sinely striped and marked with Isabella, peach colour, and Milke white. Diana, of a bright blewish Car∣nation, striped and well marked with deep red and pure white, blew bottom and purple Tamis.
Dianea raised from the seeds of the Diana by Mr. Rea, differing from it in that the leaves being pure white, are edged and whipt about, and the mid∣dle feather'd with a deep brown pur∣ple; the Tamis dark blew. Princess Turgiana, well marked with two purples and much white, bottom blew, Tamis purple. Ariana, of my Father-in-law Mr. Rea's raising from the seeds of the last: Of purer white from the first o∣pening, and well marked with bigger and lesser stripes, and drops of bright crimson bottom and Tamis as the last. Brown Duke of Brabant, marked with a brown and lighter purple; and strip∣ed with white blew bottom and purple Tamis. General Bole, agotted and variably marked with a darker and lighter reddish purple and good white, blew bottom and purple Tamis. Dorothea, of a deep brown purple, finely whipt about the edges, and well striped and marked with a red∣er and lighter purple and purer white bottom, and Tamis purple, an excellent flower.
Carolus, curiously marked and striped with shades of murrey purple and pure white through every leaf thereof, blew bottom, purple Tamis. Brown purple de marris of a rich shin∣ing brown purple, and pure white, mar∣ked with great stripes up the middle of the leaves, blew bottom, and purple Tamis. Minerva, delicately striped through each leaf with lighter and darker Lea∣ther colour, divided with equal stripes of Liver colour. Bacchus Bole, not tall, yet lusty and ve∣ry large broad leav'd Flower, of sadder and lighter purple and good white, e∣qually divided, the three outmost leaves only edged with Crimson; blewish bot∣tom dark purple Tamis, these two last the newest if not the best I have, tho the Agot Hammer is a beautifuller Flow∣er, of three fine setting off colours pale gredeline, rich scarlet and pure white, most times well parted, striped and a▪ gotted, never running, bottom and Ta∣mis blew. Agustina Estoil, fine violet and white, Tremontane, flesh, pale yellow,
and Isabella colour. Proteus, deeper and lighter Crimson with pale yellow. Amidore, pale yellow and Cinnamon. Brown George, sadder and lighter Cin∣namon and pale yellow. Clitus, dark yellow, Crimson and hair colour. Agot Bezar, deep Orange, light flesh co∣lour and pale yellow. Memorables, of pale tan'd Leather, sad purple, and bright yellow: These seven last and many others came from Modes or Self colours. Serotines, or late flow'ring Tulips. Prince de la More, well marked with a deeper and lighter Cinnamon and pale yellow blew, bottom as black Tamis. Serotine Zeabloom, low, weak stalked, Flower deep red, feather'd and mark∣ed with some gredeline, at the first pale yellow, which after turns white, bottom and Tamis dark blew. Gresound low small flower, dark red, striped and feather'd with pale yellow; bottom dark greenish, Tamis almost black.
Star of Venus, Carnation, marked with pale yellow, which after turns white, bottom and Tamis blew. Paragon Mullen, bright Carnation, stri∣ped with white, bottom and Tamis blew. Tenebres, strong Flower, deep red, vein'd with peach colour, pale yellow bottom, Tamis dark brown. Those that are desirous of more de∣scriptions of Tulips, I refer to Mr. Reas Flora: wherein he is ample enough and had the largest collection of any man in England, some of which I lost by being beyond Sea at his death, hav∣ing added but three new ones since, though in July Flowers and Auricula's Ratnum culus and Anemonies: many di∣versities chiefly by the free Community of Peter Egerton, Esquire, of Bougbton near Chester: yet have as many more diver∣sities of faces as here named: but will not promise you as good. The Title of the Book bespeaks brevity, which I hope I shall use. The later end of March, April, and May, the times of the flowring of these beauties, which to continue them the longer over the heads of the best
of them I stick pretty strong hazle Rods into the Allies bended Archwise of such a height that the Flow∣ers may not reach them, about a foot distance, over which I lay a Tilt made of Cap Paper, so starched together that it may be wide enough to reach the middle of each side, not above two yards long, with rods parted along the sides of this Paper Tilt, as in Maps to role it up, to each rod a string in the middle to tie to the bowes over your Flowers to keep the wind from raising or blowing it off; rather have many of them than one too long for it will be be troublesome: the charge is as little as the trouble in placing and unplacing it is, being so light; and is sufficient a remove for them 'gainst the hot salutes of the Sun, or showers of rain that are both prejudicial to such their different, yet admirable complections, and will preserve them in the height of their beauty, which without, their Lustre, would too to soon varnish, and they be forced by the Suns violence to run from their colours. But to bring them to this perfe∣ction: First, having obtain'd your roots,
make your beds to lodge them in, of fresh light sandy sifted Earth, foot deep is sufficient, a yard square will contain thirty roots; distance them in their set∣ting accordingly, placing them in the Earth about three or four inches deep (unless such as are designed to seed) sink them two inches lower, lest their stalks dry before their seed ripe; set not two flowers of the same colours together, keeping an account of your flowers names in their numbred places, as in your Bed so in your Book, thus or after this manner
Sattin. 10 Peliam. 20 Prince of Waels. 30 Turban. 40 Parot. 50 Pearl. 9 Bienvenu. 19 Susanna. 29 Omen. 39 Marquess. 49 Eagle. 8 Maria. 18 Black∣wich. 28. Envis. 38 Pluto. 48 Camuset. 7 Rich pa∣rot. 17. Dorothea. 27 Holoferne 37 Perishot. 47 Nosre. 6 Diana. 16 Minerva. 26 Agot St. Dennis. 36 Carolus. 46 Dorile. 5 Prince de la more. 15 Grand purple. 25 Agot Epa∣cat. 35 Aurora. 45 Brabason. 4 Phena. 14 Royal parot. 24 General Bob. 34 Amidore. 44 Gresound. 3 Prelate. 13 Agot han∣me. 23 Pallas. 33. Tenebris. 43. Clitus. 2 Pompeza. 12 Cedanole. 22 Artaban. 32 Galatea. 42 Morillon crimsone. 1 Bacchus Bole. 11 Turgiana. 21 Paragon thuson. 31 Areana. 41
Then may you know what flower to expect in such or such a place, and when they are past flower, know what roots you take up, and dispose them accordingly; when they put forth their leaves, if any of them appear not, or their leaves fade, open the earth to the bottom to find its distemper, if the root moist and squashy tis past hopes of reme∣dy, but if hard, recoverable by apply∣ing dry sand and soot to it, but not to blow that year; and when you take it up, which you must as soon as the fibres are gone, be sure to keep it in some∣thing free from moisture till the sea∣son require it to be set again. Your Tulip Rocts set, being bulb roots need no watering, as all stringy roots do, nor any attendance but what before exprest; but when they begin to flower, on with your Tilts, especially in the night, to keep of the sharpness of the frosts that may curdle the buds and spoil the beautiful form of the flower, taking them off in the mornings, you will find the effect worth your pains; what flowers hang their heads tie them up to small rods stuck under them that will just reach the flower, and when
full blown, keep your paper Tilts on constantly, but when you would please your own or others eyes with a full sight of their lustrous glories. When they fall their leaves, break off the pods of all but what you intend shall seed, and those must be clean and three square podded (you may correct the word but an apter does not quickly offer it self) and of such flowers as are strong and lusty, good bottoms and Tamis i. e. blew, dark, or purple of well and con∣stant marked flowers such that will not run, i. e. one colour slubbering into a∣nother, these must stand longer than the rest, because of the seeds ripening; as soon as the stalks of all your other Tulips are dryed down and withered, the roots will have lost their fibres, and then they must be taken up yearly, those especially of any value, and every sort put by themselves, that you may know how again to set them without confusi∣on, which your account in your book will direct you; lay them upon distinct papers in the Sun to dry, with their names writ on the papers, that you mi∣stake not in their lapping up, and by that means abuse your friends or self,
put them in boxes in a dry room, once in a fortnight or three weeks look o∣ver them, lest they moulder, which if not gently whiped and aired in the Sun will spoil the root; if any of them are rivel'd or crumpled on the outside, and feel soft, it is a sign of its consumption, and as my Father-in-law directed, wrap it up in wool dipt in Sallet Oyl, and place it where the warmth of the fire may but just reach it; about the end of August set it in the ground, mixing wood-fire-soot and sand to∣gether and place about it; cover it with a pot that no wet may hurt it till the fibres are put forth, which will be at the end of September (or not at all) about which time you must set your other roots in that form and manner as before directed, taking no∣tice that your earth if any dung be in it, let it be Neats dung that hath lain long enough to be sufficiently rotted and digested, for want of which ma∣ny fine flower hath been spoil'd; the best composition for them, if your fresh earth be not naturally light enough, (for they cannot endure a stiff soyl) is one part of well rotted Neats dung,
two parts of fresh earth, next under the turf, and two of Sea sand, instead of which brook sand may serve, and this too should have lain mixt a while before made into a Bed to lodge your Tulips in, that the rawness of the Earth and Sand by sometimes stirring it might be by that means taken a∣way. Now for raising new varieties of Tulips, there is but one sure way, and that is by seeds sown; you may wait many years before a mode changes, perhaps never, and off-sets they will quickly bear Flowers, and at the first be better marked, and like chil∣dren shew prettier faces than their Pa∣rents, which youthful beauty soon de∣cayes and too often degenerates, as from their Parents stability so from their lineaments too, and become not worth the looking on: and therefore not to be cheated by fair shews is to have natures product by seeds sown with that advantage, that by years shortens the time which Mr. Woldridge sayes, is only sit for a dull Florist (it seems too mercurial a Gentleman to have patience) and a way that most I
am sure have not cused, and sew know, and my self lately received it from a ve∣nerable Prelate, every way ingenious and ingenuous, as well as an excellent Florist, whose name I have not leave (and therefore with Reverence forbear) to mention it in such a trifle as this Book. The way then and secret is this, After you find that your seed Vessels of your best Flowers (left for that purpose) are ripe, which may be no∣ticed by the Pods opening at the top, and the stalks being withered, cut them all off: Keeping their heads up∣right, (as directed in Auricula's) which will fall out to be in July, sooner or later, as the heat and mildness of the season sutes, tying the Pods of your best Flowers by themselves, and up to the Bar of a Sunny Window, which will perfect the ripeness of the seed; let them so remain till about the end of September; and then separate the Flat or Parsnip-like seed from the chaff, by gently blowing it away with your mouth. Still preferring the best by it self, &c. in your boxes of about six inches deep; fill them four inches full of the finest sifted Mould you can
get; let it be light and rich, not too sandy for this use, or rather ridled in and not pressed down, but as equally thick as you can, upon which sow your best seeds not too thick, but that they may be half an inch asunder; then riddle more of the same earth over them not above half an inch thick, and you have done as yet with that in Boxes. If you sow in Beds, let them be thus prepared; empty your Beds four inches deep of their old Earth, laying Tiles flat all over on the rest, then fill them up again upon the Tiles with the finest Sifted earth, as in your▪ Boxes, no higher than before; let the earth lie light and even, and thereon sow your seeds, and cover them as directed, when sown in Cases or Boxes; these sown in Beds by reason of the earth under the Tiles will be apt enough to keep that above moist, but a little watering now and then, when March approaches, will be convenient for those seeds sown in Boxes or Cases: But where is this rare secret all this while? any Florists reason may tell him in the shallowesness of the soil the seeds are sowed in; for from their first
rooting, from each root runs a string of a considerable length into the ground drawing that little bulb, it proceeds from, after it, in which it spends it self till it meets with opposition, leav∣ing for that year a root no bigger than an ordinary big pins head; now were that stringy substance prevented, which is more than three or four times the quantity of the root, nature would throw that into the substance of the root, and by that means leave you a root as big the first year, as other∣ways in three, which must necessarily, by so much time hasten the flowring of the seeds sown, and no way to do that, but by checking its progress by a close opposition, which the evenness of the soil in Boxes or Cases, and the nearness of the Tiles in Beds, is available in: Let not the easiness of its performance make it slighted, for all secrets are so, when once shown; as the way to make an Egg stand on one end, on a bare Table, that made the Country-man so angry for loosing his Wager, when afterwards, he could have done it himself. Thus mannaged seeds, the roots from
them each year, till they flower, may be taken up, assoon as the single leaves they produce are dried down or wi∣ther'd, and kept choicely free from moisture or too much driness, till the later end of August, and then set a∣gain at wider distances; three years may make them produce two leaves, and that year they flower: but after the first year you may set them in a deeper soil, but not barren; for a rich one to thrive in is best, tho a barrener and sandish one to flower in, and that not constantly neither, for a rich one, one year, and a barrener another is the best for trying experiments on such flowring roots as Tulips: Yet have I tried the richest earth for one Bed of Tulips several years, and have found them come constantly well marked: Modes, that is, self colours, I would set them in as barren Earth one year as would but keep them alive, and in the other extream the next, to force to va∣rigate: As for Tulips, so for other flowers, be provided a year before∣hand for apted soils to their natures, making new compositions every year, that may by concocting and often turn∣ed
over till you use it: this you will find no small advantage to other flow∣ers as well as Tulips, of which let me thus take my fancy in versifying. Of all the plants that Tellus Bosome yeilds In Cyprian Gardens or Thessalian Feilds; None with the Noble Tulip may compare For numerous distinctions, colours rare. These are those Lillies such a dress put on, Excel'd the Royal Robes of Solomon. And Eastern Queens did in their pride confess, At sight of these their bravery to be less. Yet there are some, who think themselves as wise, Their Innocence and beauty both despise. And rate the Jewels both of Earth and Skies Just as the Cock the pretious stone did prize. Such are their eyes and such their Judg∣ment too, They see and know as common Brutes now do. But wise Natures Servant, more knowing Man, These rarer objects best distinguish can.
Whose clearer judgment guides his choice in all, The glories that adorne this Earthly Ball; And he concludes, who likest is to know, These are the Flowers that make the richest show. And that there's nothing offered to our eyes, That nature sheweth more or richer dies. Presuming Painters find their skil out-done At sight of these, so pensil'd by the Sun. That Paterzeger, doth himself confess, He colours wants their glories to express. When Poets strive their braveries to re∣herse, In towering strains, of emulating verse, The want of words soon makes their Muse dispair, Not reach their worth, or speaking them less fair. I'le then conclude as reason bids me do; The Sun's best Poet and best Painter too. And offer up to him my humble praise, Who first this Painter made, then gilds his raies. Raising by influences and kindly glems, These flowers in prime stand vying with his beams, Till by his powerful heat are forc'd to hide,
In earthy Beds (whence sprang) their heads and pride, Bids him good night, and dares no more to peep, Till the next year, he rouzes them from sleep. Frittillaria, the Frittillaries flowring with Tulips, must next be mention'd, having small round roots and white, made of two pieces, as if joined to∣gether or cleft in the midst, whence springs a stalk foot high or more, with some few long leaves, here and there dispersed; at the top thereof out from amongst three or four green, hollow, long sharp pointed leaves, cometh the flower, hanging like the ordinary Crown Imperial, of six leaves of several co∣lours; as Frittillaria. Vulgaris, the common chequer'd Frittillary, of a sullen reddish, pur∣ple colour, checquer'd, with a deep∣er, the inside lighter than either, with a stile, and six chives tipt with yellow pendents, when the roots are old they will bear two or three flowers on a stalk. Flore duplici albicante: The dou∣ble
blush Frittillary, fashioned like the former, but double, consisting of twelve leaves or more, of a pale purple or blush colour, spotted as the other. Alba, the white Frittillary, like the last, but out and inside of a per∣fect yellow. Flore Luteo, yellow Frittillary, the dark red Frittillary, dusky red on the out, and blood red on the inside. Maxima rubra, the great red Frittillary, bigger than the last in all it parts, and better flower, but as the rest, soon decaying: These are the sorts with small roots, sharp pointed, green leaves, and large flowers. There is another sort, with bigger roots, whiter green leaves and round pointed, and different fashion'd, small flowers, viz. Frittillaria Flore Luteo major, the great yel∣low Frittillary, hath a bigger and broader root than any of the for∣mer, leaves broader, shorter and round pointed, stalk above two foot high, of a whiter green, the
flower long, small and of a faint yel∣low colour. Flore luteo punctato, The spot∣ted yellow Frittilary, leaves like the last flower, bigger and longer, of a pale yellow, diversly spotted and checquer'd. Lutea Maxima Italica, The great yellow Italian Frittillary, hath darker green leaves, longer flow∣er, of a dark yellowish purple, spotted or Checquered with red. Angusti folia exotica viridi albi∣cante multiplex, The exotick nar∣row leav'd Frittillary, with a whi∣tish green double flower. Lutea junci folia Lusitanica, The small yellow Frittillary of Portu∣gal, a small yellow flower, but more Checquered than any of the yellow ones. Pyrenaea, The black Frittillary, like the yellowish green, but that the stalk and flowers are shorter, and of a dark sullen blackish green colour. Hispanica umbellifera, The Spa∣nish black Frittillary, differs only
from the last, it being bigger and bea∣ring four or five flowers, hanging round about the stalk, like those of the Crown Imperial. These flowers like Tulips lose their fibres as soon as their stalks withered down, and may then be taken up, or any time before August, but must not be taken up too soon, or kept too long out of the ground, take them up therefore not before July, nor keep them up longer than August, lest there∣by the roots perish, or be much weak∣end by it; the seeds of the best sorts of these flowers, sown after the manner directed for Tulips give great hopes of new diversities; these mentioned are considerable ones, and would be more taking, but that they flower when grea∣ter beauties shew their faces, viz. Tu∣lips. But why should any thing int's kind be scornd, Shall none go plain cause others more a∣dorn'd? Those that han't heard the Parrots pratling words, Think the Jack-daw or Mag-py pretty birds.
Or have not seen the Alamodes of France, Swear none so gay, as at a Morrice dance. And they that cannot judge rich Tulips worth, For choicest Flower shall pick the Fools▪ Coat forth. Any thing that's Checquer'd with several dies, Doth soonest take and please the vulgar eyes. Then Frittillaries raise those heads hang down, The Skilful knows your worth, tho not the Clown. Let Tulips vant it in their glittering show You near akin, cal'd checquer'd Tulips too. Lucoium majus Bulbosum serotinum▪ The great late flowering Bulbous Vio∣let, this might have been mentioned at the beginning with its lesser kind that flowers in January, but then I should not have followed my proposed method in treating of them as they flow∣er, which this does in May, bearing upon a two foot stalk in height, six or seaven flowers hanging their heads, containing
six small white leaves, each end tipt with green, the flowers withered leave a small pod or seed vessel, when ripe yeild many round shining black seeds as big as small Fetches, which soon may produce varieties; the root like a Daffodil's, and apt to offset, losing its fibres, may therefore be taken up, and ordered as others that have the same quality in this Months flowers. Oleaster exoticus, The strange wild Olive, having woody shoots, of a dark or yellowish colour, set with long nar∣row whitish green leaves, bearing along the branches small greenish yellow co∣loured flowers, succeded by green ber∣ries like small Olives, which when ripe are of a reddish colour, the whole plant of a sweet and pleasant scent, and is in∣creased by layers or cuttings.
MAY, Lucoium. THE Stock-Gilliflower, The best sorts thereof being grateful, both to the smell and sight, as well as affecti∣on of every Florist; and as it flowers it claims the next noticeing; leaving Anemonies and Ranuncula's for the next Chapter. Stock-Gilliflowers, are too well known to take up time in describing their form; the single ones only valuable for their bearing seeds, whence the double ones are raised, the double are. Leucojum flore pleno: Diversorum Colorum, Double Stock-Gilliflowers of divers colours, of a sadder or lighter purple colour, of a paler or deeper reddish murry, one that is pure white, each hav∣ing single ones of the same kind, whence by their seeds the double are raised. Variegatum, The double stri∣ped Stock-Gilliflowers, have the the same diversities of colours, dif∣fering only in this, that the flow∣ers
of these are all striped with more or less white, which raiseth their beauty to esteem; there are some striped single ones of the same colours whence they are produ∣ced. Alterum, The other double Stock-Gilliflower, that is not raised from seeds, the flower smaller, but as thick and double, and sometimes better marked and striped with white, than the other kinds. Luteum, The yellow Stock-Gi∣liflower, of which there is the single yellow, whose seeds produce the double yellow kind of a pale yel∣low, very double and the rarest of its species. These plants have many branches on a stalk, and bear many flowers on a branch, begin to flower in April and flourish in May, and so continue till the nipping frosts check their pride: To raise them, get good seeds of right kinds, as of the striped single ones, for the double never yield you any, nor be so curious to any purpose, as chusing only that seed for bearing double flowers which comes from the single ones of
five leaves, for the expectations of ma∣ny have not been answered in this; but sow your well ripened seeds, at the full of the moon in April, be sure not too thick, in good light earth; when grown three or four inches high, re∣move them about the full moon into barren earth, or you may set them a∣gain in the same earth, after you have turned it and and mixed sand with it to barren it, which must be done spee∣dily upon their taking up, that they may presently be set again at convenienter distances; after some time to prevent growing high, so serve them again; let this be about a full moon too; by this means they will be more hardy, grow low, and spread in branches, have strength to endure the winter, and be better to remove all spring than such as run up with long stalks; which seldome escape the winters frost; and you will have more with double flow∣ers among them than if you follow not this rule; you may indeed and with good success remove them three times ere winter, but then let it be the three full moons successively; it will retard their spring and makes them spread
the more, which makes them the more beautiful; in the spring you may see by the buds which will be double and which single, for the double flowers will have their buds rounder and big∣ger than the rest; then remove with care, not breaking their roots, but ta∣king up a clod of earth with them, and set them in your flower Garden, where they shall abide all Summer in good earth, which being shaded and well watered will grow and bear flow∣ers, as well as if not removed at all; those that are single must stand to bear seed, which must be yearly sowed, to pre∣serve the kinds; for after they have borne flowers they are apt to die, but may be preserved by slips or cuttings which will grow and bear the next Spring following: If this rule be your method in setting them, viz. In March you must chuse such branches as do not bear flow∣ers, which cut off some distance from the stock, that it be not too long; then slit down the backs at the ends of the slip about half an inch, in three or four places equally distant from each other, as the bigness of the slip will allow, which peel as far as it is slit, and turn
up the bark; then cut off the naked woody stalk close to the rind turned up, which must be so set three inches in the ground, by making a ound hole of that deepness and putting the slip in it, with the bark spread out on each side or end thereof, which cover'd up, shaded and water'd for some time, the ground being good, will grow, and bear very well: thus may you have yearly bearers without the trouble of sowing or two years patience: Thus may the best Wall-flowers be propagat∣ed, or you may lay them as directed for Gilli-flowers. KEIRI. Keiri-flores. Wall-flowers, their form too common to be described, some common kinds in most Country Gardens, but these following not so: Simplex majus, the great sim∣ple Wall flower like the com∣mon ones, but much larger darker shining green leaves; the flowers many, growing on a long Pike: Of a deep Gold colour yellow.
Majus pleno, the great double Wall-flower like the last, but thick and double. Simplex albo, the single white Wall-flower. Pleno albo, the double white Wall-flower. Majus pleno ferrugineo, the double red Wall-flower, which indeed, is double yellow, but that the outer leaves are dash'd over with a darker red co∣lour. Luteo pallido, the pale yel∣low Wall-flower, this is thick∣er and doubler, and of more esteem than the common dou∣ble Wall-flower: All these flow∣er at the later end of March, in April, part of May. They are encreased or continued by slips set in March, as the stock Gilli-flowers, and are to be planted against a South Wall, to which they must be fastned, and defended from frosts and hard weather, especially the double white, the great single and double yel∣low: And one vulgarly called the bloody Wall-flower, each to be encreased by lay∣ers.
April and May. ANEMONE. THE wind flower, or Anemone, marked with two distinctions, as single and double, so Anemonie Latifo∣lia, the Anemone with broad and hard leaves, or Anemone Tenuifolia, the Ane∣mony with narrow and soft leaves: I begin with the first, leaving out the most vulgar ones, Anemone latifolio flore Pleno Coccineo, the broad leav∣ed Anemone, with a double scar∣let flower, hath somewhat broad green leaves, cut in on the sides and folding the edges, seldom lying smooth and plain; the flowers of these stand on stalks about a shafnal high, and con∣sist of many round pointed; narrow long leaves, of a rich scarlet colour, thick and double. Pleno Coccineo variegata, the broad leav'd double scarlet va∣riegated Anemony, hath small
and something brownish green leaves, a tall stalk, bearing a large double flower, of a rich scarlet, and every leaf finely stri∣ped with white. Pleno Rubro, the double broad leav'd red Anemony, darker leaves, smaller flower, of a blood red. Pleno purpureo, double purple Anemony, broader leafed than the last, brownish green, flower larger, its leaves not so many but broader, of a murrey pur∣ple colour; there is another of this kind that hath every leaf listed about with white, shewing very glorious. The single ones of this kind, are of divers sorts and colours, some bigger, others lesser, consisting of one row of leaves, with a hairy head in the mid∣dle, of a different colour from the leaves; these flowers of divers reds, purples, scarlets, pinks, peach, white, silver or Ash-colour, some siriped; the best are kept for seed; whence new varieties of single and double are produced, of the small leav'd Anemonies, I will menti∣on,
as of the broad a few of the best, the leaves of which are green, divided into several branches, each leaf cut and parted, in some flowers like the leaves of Parsly; in others like Carrets, the roots of all Tuberous. Anemone tenuifolia flore pleno, the dou∣ble narrow leav'd Anemony. Coccineo scarlet. Coccineo variegata, scarlet variegated with white. Coma scarlata, the outer broad leaves white, Thrum scarlet. Sulphureo, outer leaves Brimstonish, Thrum green. Viridante, outer leaves Orange tawny, Thrum yellowish green. Albo maxima, the white of Burdeaux, greatest white. Roseo, lively rose colour. Roseo variegata, like the last, but strip∣ed with white. Rubicante maculato, spotted blush, with red. Purpureo purple, or a dark sullen Vio∣let colour. Lavendulae colore, Lavender co∣lour'd, Caeruleo, of a fine bright blew.
Coma purpureo, outer leaves white, purple Thrum. Coma amarantina, outer leaves red, Thrum dark murrey. Another sort of this, variegated with white. Quinque coloris, of five colours, outer leaves red, thrum purple, whence come leaves half way yellow, the rest to the end light Crimson, the small tuft in the middle of them silver colour'd, but this flower is uncertain, and seldome cometh well. Dicta Bel Lizwaice, of a dark pur∣plish colour, finely striped with white, a noble flower: but very tender and must be dealt with accordingly. These already named are the best of old, tho not common ones: There are a newer Fleece of flowers, near a hundred sorts, of fine varieties, of two, three, and four colours, strange∣ly placed: About twenty whereof, I have now in my Garden, many of the rest not yet seen in England: Some of them having been rais'd at Rome, whose flowers (tho not Religion) are price and praise worthy with us here. The single flowers of this sort, viz.
narrow leav'd or soft Anemonies, are more valued than the broad or hard leaved ones, being of greater variety, of divers colours, whether plain, edg∣ed, marked or striped: which on tall stalks bear fair and long flowers of one row of broad leaves, with a hairy head in the middle, which after the flowers are past, grows big and long, yielding store of flat brown seeds, wrapped in down, which must be care∣fully gather'd as the down rises, else they will be blown away. The Soil where Anemonies are to be set, is a rich sandy loamy Earth, wherewith some Neats dung and a lit∣tle lime, that hath lain long together and fully rotted, shall be mixed: and the whole sifted through a wyre Rid∣dle for that purpose, and made into a bed foot deep, rather shady, than too much in the face of the Sun; therein about the end of September, place your broad leav'd Anemonies roots, half a foot asunder and quarter deep, setting that side uppermost, where you see the small Eminences that put forth leaves, those with small leaves must beset after the same manner, but not at
the same time, for being tenderer Plants ought not to be lodged in the ground till the end of October at soonest, lest they rise too early and the Frosts de∣stroy them, from which they must be defended, by Mats, Tilts, or Pease Straw, which must daily or once in two days (a fair season permitting) be taken off, for an hour, two or three, as the weather is, to air them and prevent mouldiness, which will destroy them: the broad leaves will come up before Winter, the narrow about the end of February, or as the mildness of the Winter invites, and its severity forbids: if March and April prove dry seasons, they will require often and gentle watring, to make them thrive the better and show fairer flowers than if that pains neglected: if they like the Earth they grow in, having fair flowers, strong stalks and prosper well, take them not up till July, but if their green leaves few, small flowers and short stalks, it argues they like not the quarters, and that they are fa∣mished by the soil being too cold and poor, or surfeited by its over heat and rankness, the last being most dange∣rous
to them; if these signs of distaste appear, take them up as soon as the green leaves turn yellow, put them into sand, and in some dry place for a month, and afterwards taken out and kept in Papers in some dry but cool place, till their time of planting; for should the roots lie in the ground after their fibres be gone, if the Earth was too barren, they would languish, not having received sufficient nourishment from it; if too rank, or over hot by undigested muck in it, they would most of them rot and consume away, espe∣cially if a rainy season follow. For raising new varieties, experi∣ence yearly acquaints us, that some double Latifolia's bear seeds, as the double Orange Tawney, which sown, yield pretty varieties, but the pur∣ples, reds, or Crimsons, very few, or such as draw too near their Original, to be call'd new faces, only a little deeper or lighter, &c. but the light colours are preferable, as white Ash colour, Blush or Carnation, light O∣range, Skie colour, and Pink, whether single or double, if bearing seed; so al∣so in the Tenuifolia's.
The seeds of these flowers will be ready to gather in May earlier or la∣ter, as they flowr'd, which must be done as soon as ripe, and not till then, which is known by the seed with its woolliness, beginning a little to rise of it self at the lower end of the head, then must it presently be gathered, lest as before hinted, the wind carry it all away, which a little will do. All your seed obtain'd, lay it to dry for a week or more, then in a Bason or Earthen Vessel, rub it with a little sand or dry earth gently, to separate the seed from the wool or down that encompass it: let the Earth be fine and proportionable to your seed, with which you part it from its down, which must be stirred or rub∣bed till there none appears; about the Full Moon in July next ensuing, let it be sown, (and so gain a year in its growth) on a smooth bed of fine sift∣ed Earth, or rather in Pots, Boxes or Tubs not too thin, for all will not come up, then gently sift some fine fresh earth over them, half a finger
thick is full sufficient for this first co∣vering, a month after they are come up, Riddle over them again fine light earth to the same thickness; in the in∣terim, should the Season be dry, often gently watering them; thus doing you shall have them spring up and grow able before Winter, to abide its sharp∣ness of frosts or cold, if in their no∣nage, you use some little care to cover them with Pease Straw or such like, supported by sticks that it lies not too near, or far from them: The next year in Autumn, they ought to be taken up and set in fine loose and fresh mould, as rich as may be, but beware of too much muck, at such distance as bearing roots, which many will prove the year following, all of them the third year, tho some have affirm'd from seeds so sown, they have had Anemonies in flower within ten months from their time of sowing. You may do well to put a thin layer of rotten sally Wood or Wil∣low earth, under your young Anemo∣ny roots, at their first transplanting, it will cause them the sooner to put
forth fibres and gain the more strength against Winter, neither is it amiss (if to be had) to do as much by the old roots of the best kinds, for their beauti∣ful flowers will very well reward your pains. On Anemonies. In vain we greet the Mirtle Grove Expecting there the Queen of love; In closer shades, she now doth bide Since that her dear Adonis dy'd. This was the place, where he was slain; And this the Earth his blood did stain, This is the flower which then did rise From that lov'd lovely Sacrisice Hither each morn did Venus come, And with her Tears bedew'd his Tomb, Till she perceiv'd him still alive And now a beauteous Vegetive, Then stooping down to kiss his flow∣er,
Hear breath and beauty had the pow∣er To change that fatal purple quite, Into more splendid red and white: The cheering leaves shot from her eye Soon made this flower to multiply, And each fair infant that was born A diff'rent tincture to adorn, Which is the cause we now espie Such colours in th' Anemony; Each to declare, should I but strive 'Twould look like dead lines to the life, And so Adonis once being slain In's Vegetive be kill'd again.
APRIL and MAY. RANUNCULUS. THe Crow-foot, the best sorts of which carry such a lustre and richness in the colour of their flow∣ers, that therein they exceed all others, much resembling the Anemonies, and in all things are to be order'd alike, only requiring a richer soil; they come up with leaves something broad, in∣dent about the edges, some more cut and divided than others, of a pale green, and some deeper, the stalk ri∣sing some under others, above a shafnal in height and have grumous or kernelly roots. Ranunculus creticus Albus, the double white Crow-foot, of Candy, the stalk part∣ed into two or three branches, each bearing a fair white double flower. Flore argenteo, the cloth of sil∣ver Crow-foot, beareth lesser flower than the last, and single,
of seven or eight round point∣ed leaves, of a pale yellowish blush colour on the insides, a little striped, but more on the outside with Crimson, the root as the former grumous. Ranunculus Asiaticus Flore pleno luteo, the double yellow Crow-foot or Ranunculus of Asia, the leaves of this more divided like a Carret, whence rise many small stalkes, each bearing at the Top one small dou∣ble flower, of a shining yellow colour. Flore pleno rubro, the double red Ranunculus of Asia, hath the lower leaves plain and not cut, but a little indented at the Edges, the rest of the leaves parted into three or five divi∣sions, and notched about the stalk foot high, bearing a fair and something large double flower, of a fair yellow and red. These have been Flowers noticed in the last Age, this produces more noble sorts, as
Sang de Beuf, seemingly striped at first with yellow, but full blown, of the colour of Bulls blood, very dou∣ble. Monster of Rome, very thick and dou∣ble, a rich scarlet flower, there is also The Monster striped, with yellow but a lesser flower. Puvoin of Rome, a large flower, its leaves round pointed and standing out in the middle, of a deep scarlet, there is another Puvoin of Rome, striped, or rather each leaf of the flower listed about with yellow, the rest deep scarlet. Marvelia a less flower, but marbled with a deeper and lighter scarlet. Fericus, hath greener leaves and larg∣er than the rest, stalk rising higher, di∣viding into several branches, each bear∣ing a large double flower of a rich scarlet. Fericus Trashe or striped, is a lesser, Flower and commonly well striped with yellow. Ranunculus of Aleppo, a fine Flower Orange tawney colour'd, very double and round, well striped with yellow.
There are others under differing names, but so little in the flowers as not worth paper room in mentioning, but these last named, a Florist's pains are well bestowed in collecting. The following single ones will also be acceptable objects in the season: The Gold yellow striped through the leaves with scarlet. Rosa frize, white within, rose colour without. Roman is shammey, marked with red without. African, yellow within, scarlet and yellow without. Besanson, yellow within, pale yellow, and red without. Melidore, pale Isabella within, Crim∣son border'd with Isabella without. Parmisan, yellow within, gold colour border'd with Crimson without. Satine, white within, white marked with red without. Didonian is Shammey colour within, and marked with red without. There are several others that have been, and more may be raised from seeds, which must be managed, as those of Anemonies.
Their roots must be planted in rich sandy and ranker Earth than Anemo∣nies, and as them must about Mid-Sum∣mer be taken up, and kept dry in Pa∣pers, or Boxes, till they are set again, which must be in December, lest if done earlier they come up too soon, and frosts destroy them unless pre∣vented by daily attendance in cover∣ing and airing them; in March and A∣pril when come up and rise to flower (as Anemonies) ought to be often and well water'd. Their leaves once snipt or snerpt by the frost, which appears by their brown colour, will soon dy down to the root, and that perish too: I had some this year, thus caught, I clapt drinking Glasses over them, taking them off once a day, and each day gently watering them, and by that means not only sav'd their lives, but brought them to flower, without which I am certain they had been lost. That their roots may the better encrease, they may be set in such an Earth that hath been made by long
lying of old Thatch or straw, but with your other Earth prepared for them above, and below it, with which lodging, I have found them to have been very well pleased, by their mul∣tiplying and chearful countenances. 'Tis said far Countreys they have gilded Crows, And if each Crow-foot hath such glori∣ous show, It must be true, in Semetry no doubt, Hercules stature may be known by's foot; And so Ranuncuius by these weak lines, In water you may see how the Sun shines.
MAY. PAeonia, the Peony, is of two Sexes, Male and Female: The Male is single and known by its leaves coming constantly whole without a∣ny division, long roots and round, the flower of a purplish red, of which there is but one sort: of the Females many, some bearing single, others double flowers, of the shape of the common red one, therefore needs no description; the leaves of all of them divided on the Edges, the roots more tuberous, growing in clogs, with many round pieces fast∣ned to the head, with smaller strings, I shall only name the best double ones. Paeonia faemina flore pleno— Purpureo, the double purple Peony smaller in all its parts than the common red one, the leaves of a whiter green, those of the flower of a bright shining purple, and soon fall.
Rubescente, the double Carnation Peony, of a bright shining Carnati∣on colour at the first opening, but daily waxing paler till almost white, but never falls the leaves, but wi∣ther on the stalk, a great perfection. Albicante, the double blush or white Peony, large flower, at first o∣pening tinctured with a light blush, but in few daies turns to perfect white, and continues so long before it decays, and then withers on the stalk, and is the best yet come to our knowledge. Variegata, smaller than the last in all its parts, the flower of a fine red, striped with white, lasts long and falls no leaf. These all flower in May, and are hardy plants, and endure long in the ground, without stirring; October the only time of removing them, and none of those roots will grow but what have Sprouts or Buds at the end, or rather top of them, except of the double purple each piece thereof will grow: so apt to encrease. Some years the double ones bring seeds to
perfection, which sowed very thin in September, where they may stand un∣removed in the ground two years, may produce new varieties. I must a little insist on the Ho∣ny Suckles, and Columbines now in flower, tho they are so generally known, as to seem needless: Of Woodbines the red Italian and the double are the best, the first blows in June, the double Hony Suckle, in this month of May, both easily en∣creased by laying their branches in the ground, for if they but fall on the ground of themselves they are apt to root there, Aquilegia Columbines, the double are of four colours, blew, white, pur∣ple and red, any of these alone not valued, those that are variegated ac∣cepted: also, the double inverted Co∣lumbines, i. e. with the heels inward va∣rious in their colours. Double Rose Columbines, that have no heels, but stand on their stalks like little double Roses. The degenerate Columbine, like the last, but that the leaves which are outermost are much larger than any of'∣the
rest, commonly of a greenish pur∣ple colour. The Virginian Columbine, hath small single flowers, withlong heels of a yellowish colour, shaddowed with red, with deeper red spots in the hollow parts of the flower: each flow'ring in the end of May, when few other flowers shew themselves, and therefore entertain'd, all bearing seeds; those flowers that come of a self colour ought to be nipt off, and only variegated ones left for seed, which sown in April in the Nursery, will bear the second year, the best whereof remove into your▪ Garden, the rest throw away before they drop their seed to in∣cumber your ground with, but self co∣loured or single flowers, which will last being but such flowers too many years. In this Month also blows the great Cyanus or blew Bottle, that is lasting; those Annuals shall find another place with the Annuals for description; 'tis like the Corn flower, but much larger and pleasanter, the long blew flowers many on a head making a pretty shew, not so common, as I find some speak it: In this Month also blows
Os in Thogalum Arabicum, the Star∣flower of Arabia, leav'd like the Oriental Hyacinth, on a round green stalk, two foot high: on long foot-stalks grow di∣vers. Orchis, sive Satyrium, the fly Orchis, or Bee-flower-Satyrions, grow wild in Mea∣dows and other places; yet for their pretty form and beauty, acceptable in some parts of a Garden, especially the under named. Mellita, sive apifera, the Bee-flower, growing about six inches high, with three or four narrow green leaves; the stalk bears three or four flowers one a∣bove another, each contains four leaves, three small and sharp pointed, of a blush colour, turning up towards the top of the stalk; the fourth is round in form, and colour like a Bee that were sucking a flower, so as to deceive many that were ignorant in the flower: the Roots round, two joyned together, one of them perishing when the flowers past, the other remaining hard and sound. Orches Spegodes, Gnats Satyrion, dif∣fers from the last in larger leaves and higher stalks, and that the lower or fourth leave of the flower is like a Gnat,
or long great fly, rooted like the Bee-flower. Orchis Myodes, fly Orchis, like the last, but lesser, having the lower leaf like a fly with legs, a list of Ash-clour crossing the back, and the lower part black. There is also the Butter-fly Orchis, the snow-white, the all-red, the yellow, and divers spotted, flowring about the mid∣dle of May, and found wild in many pla∣ces, thence transplanted with a Turf a∣bout them into a shady barren place of the Garden, for they will not live in a hot good Soil: or, take a large Turf whence they naturally grow, set the herb in your garden shady, cut Roundles therein, and put in your Orches Roots fill'd up with the same earth, in June or July; at Spring clip the grass low with Sizzers, leaving the flowers, which will thus used prosper well. Springa, sive Gelsiminum Arabicum, the double white Pipe-tree, or Arabian Jas∣mine, in this Month begins to flower, and continues flowering till September be spent, and is a rare and tender shrub, ha∣ving many long slender, yet stiff woody branches, set with fair green leaves, and large, two standing at each joynt against
each other; at the end of the branches come forth divers flowers, standing on foot-stalks, each in a hole like the com∣mon white Jasmine, containing fair double flowers of round pointed white leaves, the middle hollow and yellowish, of a strong sweet scent, like Orange∣flowers; 'tis a nice Plant, requires hou∣sing and observance in the Spring. Citisus Maranthe, Horned-Trefoil, its fine Blossoms shew themselves in this sea∣son: this Tree rises four or five foot high, the body seldom bigger than a Mans Thumb, covered with a whitish Bark, the branches more white; the leaves stand three together, being less rounder and whiter than the ordinary Laburnums its flowers like Broom, of a gold yellow∣colour, coming forth three or four toge∣ther at the ends of the branches, follow∣ed by crooked, flat, and thin Cods, like half-moons: it is a tender Plant, and so set as to be housed with Greens in the winter, not to be increased by Seeds or Layers, but by taking off some new slips in June, setting them in the shade, keep∣ing the earth moist by frequent and gen∣tle waterings. Solanum fruticosa, Shrub night-shade,
hath a woody stock and branches, about a yard high, of a dark Brown colour, set with leaves of a sad green, the flow∣ers like those of the common night-shade, in one white, in another of a blew co∣lour; one of this kind hath the green leaves variegated with white: this is al∣so increased by Layers and Flowers the end of this Month. Amomum Plinii, Tree-night-shade ri∣ses a yard high, with a woody stem, and many green branches, with small long green leaves, uneven at the edges, at the joynts of the branches putting forth two or three flowers together of a starlike form, turning back the leaves; of a white colour, with a yellow pointel in the middle; when faln away, are succed∣ed by small green Berries, that in De∣cember will be of a fine red colour, like little red Cherries, wherein are small flat white seeds. For the berries sake is this Plant respected, abiding in the win∣ter, at which time set amongst Mirtles, or other greens, are a taking sight. It is raised by sowing the Seeds in March, which are apt to come up and grow, es∣pecially sowed in a pot, and housed in winter.
Spartum Hispanicum, Spanish-broom groweth like our common broom, but bigger and higher; its flowers of the same fashion and colour, but bigger, and in my opinion onely worth the naming; but there is one more rare, that beareth white flowers. Sambucus Rosea, the Gelder Rose, ri∣ses two yards high, spreading into ma∣ny branches, with broad leaves, divided into three Sections; at the top of the young branches comes out a round ball of many single white flowers, close set toge∣ther: this Plant is hardy, long lasting, and increased by Suckers, which are too apt to put forth. Nux Vesicaria, the Bladder-Nut, grows but low, if not pruned up and kept from suckers; its bark whitish, leaves like Elder-flowers, white and sweet; many in this Month hanging on a stalk; after them greenish bladders, each containing one small Nut, and is too apt to send forth Suckers, by which it is increased. Laurocerasus, the Bay-Cherry, is a stately Ever-green, growing sometimes ten or twelve foot high, flowring in this Month, succeeded by small Cherries, black when ripe, but so apt to increase, hath
made it so common, by the name of the Laurel, and hath made me so short in its description; nor do I at all describe the Bay-tree. But there is a Laurel having its leaves delicately variegated, with large stripes of fine green and white, which I saw in my worthy friends Garden, Peter E∣gerton of Boughton near Chester, Esquire. May & June. IRis, the Flower-de-luce, of which there are two sorts, Bulbous and Tuberous rooted ones; of the Bulbous there are two distinctions, Latifolia and Tenufolia's, broad and narrow leav'd; of the last there is more diversities than in the broad leaves, though many pretty ones of that kind: as, Iris Bulbosa major flore— Caeruleo Elegantior: The great Bul∣bous Iris, with a rich blew flower, is like the old English blew flower-de-luce, (so common, that it needs no description) ex∣cept the colour of the flower, which in this is a rich shining blew colour, having that spot which is in the lower leaves
of all these flower-de-luces, of a deep yellow, towards Orange. Caeruleo Variegata, the blew striped flower-de-luce, being diversly marked through every leaf with a dark violet purple-colour. Purpurea, the great purple bulbous flower-de-luce, the whole flower except the yellow spot, of a reddish murrey purple. Purpureo versicolor, the great purple variable bulbous flower-de-luce, of a rich murrey purple, a small yellow spot in the falling leaves, marked with deeper brown purple, almost black, upon a ligh∣ter purple. Cinereo. The great ash-coloured flow∣er-de-luce, hath sometimes two flowers on a stalk, very large, of an Ash or La∣vender colour, with a yellow spot in their falling leaves. Cinereo Striata, The great Ash-colour'd striped Bulbous Iris, like the last, one∣ly the flower is striped and veined all o∣ver with small lines of purple. Versicolor, The great variable coloured bulbous flower-de-luce, hath the three falling leaves of the flower of a pale sil∣ver colour, with a circle of Ash-colour
about the yellow spot; the arches are of the same colour, viz. Silver ridged with Ash-colour, the top-leaves striped with blew. Rubente, The great pale red, or Peach-colour'd bulbous flower-de-luce, is more rare than any of the former, having a small yellow spot in each of the three falling leaves. Albo, The great White; there is this and the greatest white flower-de-luce, which will come sometimes, the three top leaves striped and spotted with a faint purple; several diversities the Seed of this flower hath produced. There is another that is of a pure White, finely striped, and marked with veins and drops of a shining watchet or blew colour through every leaf. There is another that is striped with purple through eve∣ry leaf, the Seeds of which produce good varieties. Luteo, The great yellow bulbous flow∣er-de-luce, of a fine bright gold-colour, with the spot in the middle of the three falling leaves, of a deeper yellow, almost Orange. There are more diversities of this kind in other Countries, and raised in
ours by sowing their Seeds, which must be performed as those of Tulips. They flower some in May, most in June; the blews first, than whites, and last the pur∣ples. Their Roots yearly loose their Fibres, and must be taken up as soon as they are dryed down, if not a little before; for stay they longer, they will shoot forth new Fibres, and then not to be stir∣red; therefore rather before than after they are wither'd, take them up and keep them dry till August, at which time set them again in beds of good fresh sifted earth, not too poor, nor over-rank or hot, for that will rot and consume them; nor too much in the Sun, that will scorch and spoil their flowers: chuse the East-part of your Garden for their abode; experience forbids either South or West, as not agreeing with them. Next comes to be mention'd JƲNE. IRis bulbosa minor, Flore albo, The lesser white bulbous flower-de-luce, rising out of the ground before winter. Ano∣ther
white, that is bigger, another whose falling leaves have a little shew of yel∣lowness; as also have the middle ridges of the arched leaves; another very small, but the yellow spot larger in the lower leaves, that in this flower stand outright. There is one called the Spanish yel∣low, a lower flower, of an excellent deep gold yellow throughout the whole flow∣er. Another, with pale yellow flowers, with a deep yellow spot: of this many diversities, some bigger, some lesser; some paler, some deeper, yellow colour, and one with the falling leaves white, except the yellow spot, common to all the bul∣bous flower-de-luces. There is the party-colour'd Spanish flower-de-luce, whose falling leaves are white, the arched leaves silver-colour, and the top-leaves of a blewish purple; ano∣ther hath the falling leaves circled with blew, the arched leaves pale blew, and top-leaves purple. Some fair blewish purple, others of a reddish purple. A∣nother hath yellow falling leaves, sky-colour'd arches, and top-leaves of a mur∣rey purple. Another falling leaves yel∣low, arches and top-leaves of a black co∣lour. Another of a sadder and duller
brown colour. Another larger than any of the rest, with falling leaves of a duskie yellow, with veins and borders about the edges, of a dun colour, the arches of a dull purplish yellow, and the top-leaves of a sullen blewish purple, with many more, which would be but too tedious here to mention, therefore end I these sorts with two more rare than the rest. Iris bulbosa Augusti folia, Elegantissi∣ma Persico flore, The most Elegant nar∣row-leav'd bulbous Iris, with a Peach-colour'd flower, large and long falling leaves, with a yellow spot in the midst of them, arched leaves also large, and the divided ends long and turning up, the top-leaves sutably long and large, the whole flower except the yellow spot, of a fine reddish Peach-colour. Iris bulbosa Augusti folia Serpentaria∣caule, The narrow-leav'd bulbous Iris, with a spotted stalk; the flower stands round and neat, and of a reddish murrey∣purple, except the spot in the falling leaves, which is of a deep yellow, round at the head, and with a small list running under the arched leaves; thus the green leaves coming up before winter, may be known, in that the bottoms of them for
an Inch above ground, are of a reddish colour full of dark Purple Spots. If any wet falls upon these flowers, presently after shake it off, or the leaves of the flower will soon be spoiled; their Roots, as the rest, loose their Fibres, and must be managed after the same manner; the Seeds of the best sorts become a Flo∣rists pains in sowing for producing varie∣ties; the commoner sorts increase fast enough by off-sets; the two last are the most tender, as they are the best, and re∣quire to be planted in good fresh earth, that is not hot with dung, and where they may have the benefit of the Morn∣ing Sun onely. I forgot to mention the Iris Persica, with a Bulbose root, a fine flower, and known to most florists; as also Clusius flower-de-luce, both of esteem, though old flowers; nor shall I give you the Ca∣talogue of Morines (a French Florist) long since painted, of many strange-colour'd Iris, which you may find in Mr. Rea's flora, indeed worthy the perusal of the curious. But come to the flag-leav'd flower-de∣luce, with Tuberous roots, which also are of two sorts, Iris Major, & Iris mi∣nor,
or tall and dwarf, or else broad and narrow leav'd flag or sedg flower-de-luce. Of these, many varieties, but I will men∣tion but two or three of the best of each. Iris Chalcedonica major, the great Chal∣cedonian Iris, or Turkey flower-de-luce, by som called the Toad-flag; (so dark a marbled flower.) The form is like the rest of the flower-de-luces, but that the leaves are broad, of a yellowish green, folded one within the other at the bot∣tom, opening at the top; out of the middle whereof rises a stiff stalk, near two foot high, bearing at the top there∣of a large and gallant flower, of nine leaves, as the rest do; the three lower leaves large and broad, of a sad purple-colour, almost black, diversly spotted, straked and marked with grayish white colour, with a great black freez in the middle of each of them; the three ar∣ched leaves that cover the small part of these, of the same colour and making, but a little paler, especially towards the sides and ends; the three upper leaves al∣so very large, marbled like the other, but of a brighter colour, the roots tu∣berous, thick and long, but of a yellower
brown colour than the other flag flower∣de-luces, with great long fibres. Iris Chalcedonica minor, The lesser Chal∣cedonian Iris, or flag-flower, &c. differs onely from the former in being lesser in all its parts, the leaves of a yellow green, the flower darker, and not so well mar∣ked, each flowering in May, and are the best kinds of flag-flowers; their roots sometimes loose their fibres, and then the green leaves die to the ground; such as do, must be taken up and kept out of the ground till October. The best time to transplant them is in August, or early in September, in fresh soil, mixed with well-rotted wood-pile earth, but not as some advise, under a south-wall, for in two days the hot reflexion of the Sun from thence will destroy their flowers; but so as to have the morning, but not the mid-day scorching Sun. Some take them up in June, and keep them dry till late in October, which, as they say, makes them the apter to bear flowers. There is the flower-de-luce of Asia and of Dalmatia, that bear many flowers on a head, the first of a deep, the last a lighter blew, both very sweet scent∣ed.
Iris Lusitanica biflora, The twice∣flowring Portugal flower-de-luce, flowers in Spring, and commonly the same year in Autumn, and sweeter in scent than any of the former. Iris Camerarii purpurea versicolor, The variable purple flower-de-luce of Came∣rarius, the three lower leaves of a reddish purple, the arched leaves of a bleak yel∣low, shaddowed with purple, the three top-leaves of a dull smoaky yellowish purple-colour. Iris caerulea versicolor, The blew parti∣coloured, falls blew at the edges, the rest white, arched leaves whitish yellow, top-leaves pale sky with yellow edges. Iris alba versicolor, the white variable flower-de-luce, rises near yard-high, bear∣ing four or five flowers one above ano∣ther, of a silver colour, listed with blew∣ish purple down the backs of the top-leaves, the lower leaves whipt about the edges with blew; the arched leaves of a pale sky-colour, more blew towards the ridge. Iris Aurea angusti folia Tripolitata, The yellow flower-de-luce of Tripoli, grows about four foot high, bearing two or three long narrow-leav'd gold yellow flowers.
Clusius narrow-leav'd variable flower∣de-luce, bears four or five small flowers, the lower leaves markt with white and blew, arched leaves of a light blew. There is great blew, bearing many flow∣ers on a stalk; also the double narrow-leav'd flower-de-luce blew and white. The blush-colour'd dwarf flower-de∣luce, falling leaves of a reddish purple, with blew thrums, the arched and top-leaves of a fine pale red, or blush-colour. Some of these flower in April, others in May, and some bring forth their flow∣ers not till June; they are hardy Plants, grow and increase in most places, but the better the soil, the more they will flourish, and are too roomy for a flower-garden, fitter for the borders of a fruit∣apartment: the beginning of September the best time for their Transplanting; part their Roots, set them neither too thick nor too deep. Iris, like Rainbow, several Colours show, With ease perswaded to increase and grow; Such different faces, and complections too, None but the matchless Tulip can out-do. If Rainbow called Juno's Messenger, Then these her flow'rs, that of such feature are
To please the Goddess 'mongst them never fail To shew more Colours than her Peacocks Tail. As the Rainbow succeeding show'rs declare, And Peacocks cryes that they are drawing near; Iris or flower-de-luce the same descry, By drawing in their leaves, and closer lye. So Peacock, Rainbow, Iris, Flower-de∣luce, As like in Colours, so alike in use. And by their different Tinctures, colours gay, From most of Flowers bear the flag away. ROSA. THe Rose, the divers and excellent kinds thereof, are one of the chiefest ornaments that enrich our Gar∣dens; of which there are the following sorts. Rosa rubra Anglica, The English red∣rose; this all persons are so well acquaint∣ed with, that it needs no description; from this came Rosa Mundi, the Rose of the World for Scent and form like the common red
one, but their colours differ to admirati∣on, were it not by its great increasing grown too common, and are in this flower for the most part of a pale blush-colour, diversly spotted, and finely mark∣ed, with great flakes of the same red, as in the common red Rose, making it through the whole double flower, the loreliest thing to eye of its Species. Rosa Hungaria, The Hungarian Rose, differs from the common red one in the green shoots, the flower of a paler red, having faint spots spread over the leaves of the whole double flower, but of no great value. Rosa Provincialis, flore rubro, The red Province-rose, is greener and bigger than the common red, the flowers large and thick, spreading very broad, and laid o∣pen, of a paler red, and sweeter than the red one; there is one of this kind con∣stantly spotted and marbled, with deeper and paler red. Rosa Belgica, flore rubro, The red Bel∣gick Rose, the flowers exceeding thick and double, full of small leaves in the middle, and bigger on the outside of the flowers, which when full-blown, turn towards the stalk; of a fine deep red co∣lour,
as lovely a flower as any Rose of one colour. Rosa rubra humiles, the dwarf red Rose, grows lower, and fewer thorns than the red one, flower smaller, yet thick and double, standing round and even when blown, and of a pleasant Carnation, scented like the ordinary red Rose. Rosa holoserica multiplex, The double Velvet Rose, its young shoots of a sad reddish green colour, few thorns, leaves of a sadder green than the common red, the flowers of two or three rowes of leaves, of a dark red velvet-colour, with some marks of lighter red in them, seldom bearing many Roses, nor so well scented as some of the rest. Rosa Marmorea, The Marbled Rose, like the Velvet Rose in growth, but lar∣ger; very double, and of a light red, marbled with a deeper and lighter blew∣ish Gray-de-line, well scented, better, though like that of the red Province Rose. Rosa sine Spinis, The Rose without Thorns, or Virgin-Rose, in shoots and leaves like the last, but greener and smoo∣ther, without any Thorns. The flowers
not so thick, spreading leaves standing forward from each other, of a pale red, streaked on the faces of the leaves, of a pale blush, the back-sides are all of a pale or whitish colour, blowing most times fair and very sweet. Rosa Francofurtensis, The Francford-Rose, hath the Button under it, bigger than any other, the flowers thick and double, of a blewish red colour, and sweet scent, but seldom opens fair, but curl'd and crumpled. Rosa Cinnamomia, The Cinnamon-Rose, blows in May, bearing many small double flowers, of a pale red, and faint scent, a little like to Cinnamon, from whence its name. So far of red Roses, the next are paler colour'd: As, Rosa Damscena vulgaris, The com∣mon Damask Rose, too well known to need describing. Rosa Damascena versicolor, The party∣coloured Damask Rose; or, as once com∣monly termed; the York and Lancaster, dif∣fering onely from the last, in that some∣times half the flowers, sometimes half in some of the leaves, are parted or marked with a pale blush, almost white upon the Damask rose-colour.
Rosa Crystallina, The Crystal Rose, like the last, onely differing in the making of the flowers, being commonly striped, and marked throughout every leaf, with pale white upon the Damask Rose co∣lour. Rosa Damascena variegata elegantior, The Elegant variegate Damask Rose, hath leaves smaller, shoots shorter and redder, the flowers more double than the last, and much better marked than either of those before-mentioned, and by ma∣ny known by the name of Mrs. Harts Rose. Rosa Damascena Provincialis, The Da∣mask Province-Rose, too generally know to need description, being but too com∣mon; were it as scarce as some others, it would be as valuable as any. Rosa Mensalis, The Monthly Rose, in all parts like the Damask, but bears in England but in June, August, and Sep∣tember, though reported in Italy to bear seven Months in the year. Rosa Belgica, sive vitrea, flore rubicante, The blush Belgick Rose, hath bigger branches, fuller of Thorns, of a whitish green colour, many flowers growing to∣gether on the ends of the branches, a∣bout
the bigness of an ordinary Damask Rose, but very thick and double; of a fine pleasant pale blush-colour, and sweet Scent, the greatest bearer. So many diversities of the Damask or paler colour'd Roses have we; and proceed next to the yellow Roses, and conclude with the white. Rosa lutea simplex, The single yellow Rose grows as high as the Damask, the young shoots full of small hairy prickles, of a dark reddish colour, small leaves, single flowers, but five leaves apiece; of a pale yellow colour, being naturally a wild Rose, and entertained for variety. Rosa Austriaca flore Phoeniciae, The Scar∣let Rose of Austria, in all parts like the last, the chiefest difference in the colour of the flowers; the inside of the leaves of this, of a fine Scarlet, and the out∣side of a pale Brimstone colour; for which reason worthy esteem. Rosa Lutea, flore pleno, The double yellow Rose, smaller shoots and leaves, of a paler yellowish green than the single kind, the flowers very thick and double, the best kind, like that of the Damask Rose, of a pale yellow; another that comes with a multitude of small pale
yellow leaves, often with a great thrum in the middle, neither of any conside∣rable Scent; the first coming well and smooth, of chiefest value, the last of little worth, coming broken and ragged; the best, its glory consists in its form and co∣lour; we have these mentioned, and know of no other yellow Roses, and therefore come to the Diversities of white ones; the common ones I shall but men∣tion, and but briefly insist on the rest. Rosa alba vulgaris, The common White Rose. Rosa incarnata, The blush Rose, onely differs from the last, in opening at first, with a fine pleasant blush-colour, which afterwards grows whiter. Rosa moschata, flore pleno, The Double Musk Rose, rises high with many green branches, and dark green shining leaves, armed with great sharp Thorns; the flowers many together in a tuft come forth on long-foot stalks at the ends of the branches, of a whitish or cream co∣lour, not very double, the first row of leaves being much bigger than the rest, which are small, and stand loose. There is another of this kind that bears single flowers, therefore of less esteem, both
chiefly valued for their Scent, smelling like Musk, whence they had their name; as also for their use in Physick: they commonly flower in August, after the rest of Roses, but their usual time Sep∣tember. Rosa Moschata altera, The other Musk Rose, some call it the Damask-musk-rose, some the white Cinnamon Rose, in leaves and branches like the other, but grows not so high, larger leaves, whiter green colour, more double than the for∣mer, but not so sweet; flowring before the other, in the end or presently after other Roses. Rosa Canina flore pleno, The double Dog-Rose, in leaves and branches like the lesser white Rose, or wild kind there∣of; the flowers double, of a faint whitish blush-colour, and weak scent, esteemed onely cause double. Rosa semper virens, The ever-green Rose, grows like the wild Eglentine, the leaves fall not in the winter as other Roses, which occasioned the name, but stay on till thrust off at spring by new ones: the flowers stand four or five to∣gether at the end of the branches, which are single, but of five leaves, of a pure
white colour, and some thing resembling the Musk-Rose in scent. Rosa Hispanica Moschata, The Spanish Musk-Rose, rises as high as the last, with greater green branches, and bigger green leaves; the flowers single, of five large white leaves, with an eye of blush in them, scented like the last. Rosa Pomifera major, The great Apple-Rose, hath a great stock, many reddish branches, with green sharp Thorns; the leaves like the common White Rose, the flowers small and single, standing on prickly buttons, bearded like other Ro∣ses, which after the flower faln, grow great, red, and of the fashion of a Pear, which are the only ornament of this Kingdom. Rosa Eglenteria, flore duplici, The dou∣ble Eglentine, differs only from the wild one in that the flowers are double, of two sometimes three rows of leaves, of a pretty reddish colour, leaves and flowers scented like the wild and single kind. All these Roses I have, more or less of a kind, which bring forth their fair flowers in June, and continue flowring all that Month, and most of July, except those onely expressed in their description; up∣on
the best of these sweet and profitable flowers you will find this *; and such no florist ought to be without. Roses are increased by inoculating the buds of them in other stocks, or by laying down the branches in the earth; the best stocks to inoculate upon, which must be done about Midsummer, are the Damask, White, Francford, the wild Eg∣lentine. All stocks of budded roses must be kept from suckers, and the buds inoculated as near the ground as may be, that after one years growth, the budded lance may be laid in earth to root; first prick about a joynt that will lye in the earth many holes with an awl, and then cover it with good Mould: this done in the Spring, and so pegged down that it rise not again, if water'd now and then in dry seasons, by Autumn will be so rooted as to be re∣moved, and cut from its other part be∣hind the roots, and becomes a natural Tree, one whereof is worth ten others that are onely budded or grafted, for that every Sucker that comes from them will be of the same kind. But since all Roses are not apt to yield Suckers, therefore the surest way to in∣crease
any, is gently to bend down part of the Tree, or the whole in the Spring, as before exprest, and lay all the bran∣ches as before directed in the ground, and apply to them old and well-rotted dung, about the places where they are laid, 'twill make them root the sooner, and you by Autumn have as many root∣ed Trees of the same kind as Branches laid in the earth, without prejudice to the old one, which when the new ones cut off, may be easily brought to its place again, and the next year bear as plenti∣fully as ever; nor does this hinder the bearing of flowers, for the branches laid will be as plentifully stored as if the Tree erect and not laid, so that they loose nei∣ther the profit nor pleasure of that year, and Trees bearing Roses. The double yellow Rose bears not so well when thus natural as others, nor in the Sun as other Roses, but must be pla∣ced in the shade, and for its better bea∣ring and fairest flowers, first in the stock of a Francford Rose (as my Father-in∣law Mr. Rea well advis'd) put in the Bud of a single yellow Rose near the ground, which will quickly shoot to a good length: about a foot higher in that sprout,
put into it a bud of the double yellow Rose, the best kind, which growing, keep Suckers from the root, (as in all other Roses inoculated) and rub off all buds, but of that kind desired, when big e∣nough to bear: the preceding winter prune it very near, cutting off all the small shoots, and only leave the bigger, cut∣ting off the tops of them also as far as they are small; in the Spring when it buds for leaves, rub off the smallest of them, and when it buds for flowers, if too many, let the smallest be wiped off, leaving so many of the fairest as you think the strength of the Tree may bring to perfection, which should be a standard then up to a wall, and rather shaded than in too much heat of the Sun, and in dry weather sometimes water'd; by which means you may expect fair and beautiful flowers, such that will re∣compence your pains in their propagati∣on. For the making Roses come earlier then ordinary, as some advise, by placing them in a declining house against the Sun, and watering with water inriched with hottest dung dissolved therein, or shavings of Horn and Lime steeped in it,
or watering with warm water, to acce∣lerate their blowing earlier than they na∣turally do; I truly think it not worth the while, because other beautiful flowers would be in being, and diminish some∣what of their glory, which is the more, blowing in a season when none others to vie with them; and if such means as before exprest used, I have reason to sus∣pect the killing of Trees thereby, a de∣served loss for following irrational and unexperimented impositions. But for retarding the blowing of Ro∣ses, that is more acceptable, especially when no more pains than sheering off the buds when they new put forth, and then when others are quitting their lovely or∣naments they will be putting on theirs; and I suppose a second sheering them off, may cause them to be as much more la∣ter, and so have Roses when no other flowers in being; but then be sure to serve the whole Tree so, for if you sheer but one part of it, the part unsheer'd will spend that strength and sap that you expected should put forth new buds in the places of those cut off, and so fru∣strate your defign.
As soon as your Roses done blowing, cut them with your shears pretty close to the old wood; and near the Spring each branch ought to be cut again with a pru∣ning knife, close to a leaf, bud and all dead parts taken away, or any that is su∣perfluous, to bring your Tree in hand∣some form; they are all hardy, and en∣dure the severest winters well enough; they may be disposed up and down your Garden in Bushes, or to the walls a∣mongst your Fruit, or set in rows and hedges, intermixing the several colours so, as to have no two of like colours toge∣ther; the well-placing them much ad∣vances their prospect to the eye, and com∣mends the disposer of them. Let none of your Rose-trees grow high, which is disgraceful, rather lower than above yard and half, except your Musk-Roses, which bear not well except against a wall, pale, or house-side, and suffered to grow to their full height, which usually is eight or nine foot high. These Dew-empearled, Muskie, fra∣grant perfuming flowers, deserve the most principal place among all others whatsoever, being not only esteemed for its beauty, vertues, and odoriferous scents,
but because it is the honour and orna∣ment of our English Scepter, as by the conjunction in the uniting of those two most Royal Houses of York and Lanca∣ster appears, and claim the chiefest pla∣ces in Crowns and Garlands; witness Anacreon a Greek Poet, whom Henricus Stephanus thus rendred in Latine verse. Rosa honos decusque florum, Rosa, cura amorque Veris. Rosa Caelitum voluptas, Roseis puer Cithereis. Caput implicat Coronis, Charitum Choros frequentans. The Rose is the Honour and Beauty of flowers, The Care and Love of the Spring (it devours) Of (the Poets) Heavenly Powers the plea∣sure, Cytherea's Boy (eke Cupid) his Treasure, Circling with Garland of Roses his Head, When he to Dances of Graces doth tread. You may mislike my thus Translating them, and perhaps my own following fancie worse; however, they shall run the venture, though hopping pen-fea∣ther'd out of their nest.
Venus upon a Bed of Roses laid, Dul'd Ascanius, so long with her he plaid, Reposing on a soft as sweet a Bed, As that whereon she cropt his Maiden-head. They both invited sleep, and there he lay, Till rest enabled him for farther play. Thus Sight, Touch, Scent of Roses in their uses, Refreshes Nature, and new strength infuses. Who would not then these sweet-leav'd flow'rs esteem So rare, when either felt, or smelt, or seen; And wish this greater, than hath yet oretane us, Double, nay Treble blessing of Ascanius? JƲNE. IN this Month the Lillies are in their full flower, before the Martagons, and first to be mentioned; to wit, Lilium Rubrum, The Red Lilly; the flower so vulgar, every Countrey-wo∣man can form an Idea of it in a stran∣gers head, by their Rustick descriptions, and several other sorts thereof which are here regardless. There are three sorts
that are mentionable; the Red, Yellow, and White: as, Lilium Cruentum bulbi ferum, The fiery red bulby Lily, bearing on a high stalk many fair flowers, containing six broad thick leaves, of a fiery red at the tops, declining towards the bottom to an Orange-colour, with small black specks. Lilium Rubrum flore pleno, The dou∣ble red Lily, beareth many Orange-co∣lour'd single flowers on a stalk, with small brown specks on the insides, sometimes but one fair double flower, as if all the rest were there concatenated. Lilium Luteum, The yellow Lily, of all the kinds most esteemable, like the other, but taller and bigger, many flow∣ers on a stalk, of a fine gold-colour. Lilium Album vulgare, The common white, like the common red, needs no farther noticing. Lilium album Bizantium, The white Lily of Constantinople, is smaller in all its parts than the common white, but bears more flowers, twenty or thirty on a stalk: sometimes the stalk comes flat and broad, with one hundred or more flowers on it.
Lilium album flore pleno, The double white Lily, in all things like the com∣mon kind, the flowers excepted, which are five or six on a stalk, each constant∣ly double, the leaves long green ere they turn white and open, seldom opening at all but in a fair season; more a rarity for the double flowers, than beautiful, There is Lilium Persicum, The Persian Lily, rooted like the Crown Imperial, but longer, smaller, and whiter, from whence springeth up a round whitish green stalk, beset with many long whitish green leaves from the bottom to the middle thereof, from thence to the top with many small flowers hanging their heads, containing six leaves apiece, of a dead or over-worn purple-colour, with a Pointil and Chives in the middle, tipt with yellow Pendents: but this flower is in May, a flower of small beauty, and onely entertained for variety, its heavy colour setting off others that are more brisker. Next come the Martagons, a rambling flower onely fit for flower-pots, or Chim∣neys, and to be planted in by-borders or under hedges, but the blossoms of many and pretty varieties: as,
Martagon Imperiale, The Martagon Imperial, sealy Root of a pale yellow, stalk above a yard high, brownish co∣lour, at some distances beset with single rounds of broad green leaves, and naked betwixt: at the top of the stalk come forth, in an old Plant, sometimes one hundred flowers, each on a several foot-stalk, hanging down their heads, and turning the leaves back again, which are thick and fleshy, of a pale purple-colour, with brown spots on the inside, a stile in the middle, with six yellow Chives tipt with Vermilion Pendants. Martagon flore albo, the White Marta∣gon differs from the last in a greener stalk, fewer flowers; and white flower. Martagon flore albo maculato, The White Martagon spotted, differs from the for∣mer in the stalk, being brown, flowers inclining to a blush-colour▪ with many red spots on the inside. Martagon Canadense maculatum, The spotted Martagon of Canada, this bears four or five flowers on long foot-stalks, in form like a Red Lily, having the head of a fair yellow, with many black spots on the inside, Chived and Pointil'd like the rest, the root smaller, and stalk lower.
Martagon Constantinopolitanum, The Martagon of Constantinople, yellowish scaly root, brownish stalk, large round-pointed green leaves confusedly placed thereon, on the top whereof come forth four or five more, or fewer flowers on long foot-stalks, hanging their head, the leaves turning back again, of a fair O∣range colour, with a Pointel and six Chives tipt with yellow Pendants; this is very common; but those follow are not, as, Martagon Constantinopolitanum macula∣tum, The red spotted Martagon of Con∣stantinople, like the last, but larger flow∣ers, more on a head, of a deeper Orange-colour, thick speckled on the inside, with small black spots. Martagon Pannonicum, The Martagon of Hungary, than the last larger leaves, thinner set, flowers bigger, of a bright pale Orange colour, the best and rarest of all the Martagons. Martagon Virginianum, The Virginian Martagon, pale yellow scaly root, the stalk rises yard-high, beset with sharp∣pointed whitish green leaves in rundles, the head bearing three or four, or more, somewhat large flowers turning back, of
a gold yellow colour, with many brown spots about the bottom of the flowers, the points or ends of the leaves that turn up, of a red or scarlet colour, without spots: a very tender Plant, and must be defended from winters frosts. Martagon Pomponion, The Martagon of Pompony, yellowish brown scaly root, stalk yard-high, set promiscuously with many small long green leaves, almost to the top, where stand many flowers, ac∣cording to the age of the Plant: some standing long unremoved, have born a hundred flowers of a yellowish Orange-colour, with small black specks on the inside, fashion'd like the red Martagon of Constantinople, but smaller. There is also the yellow Martagon without spots, and the yellow spotted Martagon, but of no great esteem, and onely for variety admitted, as some of the others are; your choicest is that of Canada and Virginia, and must be plan∣ted in the richest and hottest earth you can get, in boxes or pots, to be so hou∣sed as to be kept from freezing in the winter. The Lilies, and most of the Martagons flower in June, but the Martagon of
Pompony first, in the end of May; that of Constantinople about the beginning of July; the Virginian last, in August. All, except what before-mentioned, very hardy Plants, increase but too fast by the roots; which hold their fibres, and therefore like not often removing, but when occasion fer it, the best time when their stalks dryed down, for then the roots have fewest fibres; the roots ought to be set five inches deep in the Earth that should be every year uncover'd t the bottoms, that without stirring the fibres of the old roots, the young ones may be parted from them, and they only remain with new rich earth put to them and cover'd, which will much ad∣vantage the fairness and number of their flowers; your young roots disposed in some other place convenient, (considering the height they grow to, and great in∣creasing) not keeping them out of the ground. The Moly in this season is in flower, from the beginning to the end of the Month chiefly. Moly Homericum, The great Moly of Homer, that riseth up with two or three great thick long hollow leaves▪ of a whi∣tish
green colour, like the Tulip-leaves, from amongst which the stalk rises a∣bove a yard-high, naked, round and smooth, bearing on the top a great Um∣bel or Tuft, of small star-like purplish∣flowers, upon equal-footed stalks, which continue long before the decay, the root big and white, and of the smell of Gar∣lick. Moly Indicum, The Indian Moly hath shorter, though broader leaves than the former, the stalk not so high as its leaves, without any flowers, bearing a cluster of reddish scaly bulbs, each as big as an Acorn, standing on foot-stalks, which set, will bring Plants of the same kind, great white Root covered with a dark-colour'd Coat, little increasing un∣der ground. Moly Montanum Pannonicum, The Mo∣ly of Hungary, of two sorts, the first hath three or four long and broad green leaves, carried up with the stalk, a foot high one above another, beset at the top with some reddish bulbs, with long foot-stalks, with flowers of a pale purple, fa∣shioned like Homers Moly, the root small and apt to increase; the second like the first, but the green leaves smaller, the
stalk bearing a greater cluster of dark green bulbs, flowers alike in fashion, co∣lour, and in a manner of growing, the root wearing a dark purple-coat. Moly Serpentinum, Serpents Moly, like the former, but more beautiful, the bulbs on the head of a lower stalk, are redder, the small green leaves twine and crawl like a Serpent, therefore so named; the root small and round, increasing into many smaller ones, no bigger than pease. Moly Montanum flore luteo, The yellow Moly when it flowers, hath two long and broad leaves, otherwise but one, near the bigness of a Tulip, between which cometh up a slender stalk, bearing at the top a tuft of yellow star-like flowers, greenish on the back, with yellow threds in the middle, whitish Root, apt to in∣crease, smelling strong, as the flowers and leaves do of Garlick. Moly Montanum latifolium Hispanicum, The Spanish purple Moly, hath two long broad leaves, betwixt which rises the stalk two foot high, bearing at the top many star-like flowers, of a decayed purple-colour, with threds of the same, tipt with yellow, yielding near the ground bulbs by which they are increa∣sed,
having no scent of Garlick in any part. Moly Pyxidatum argenteum Hispanicum, The silver-cupped Spanish Moly, with two or three long rushlike leaves, passing away when the stalk at its height, which is a yard or more, bearing a great head of flowers, which at length spread much open, and grow long on foot-stalks, of a silver-colour, with lines on both sides the leaves, fashioned small and hollow, like a Cup, white and clear root, apt to in∣crease, without any ill scent in any part. Moly Dioscorideum, Dioscorides his Moly, from a transparent root, covered with a thick yellow skin, springs up three or four narrow grassy leaves, with a stalk foot and half high, bearing at the top a tuft of milk-white flowers, like those of Ramsons, with a little scent of Garlick; there is another lesser, the flower-leaves rounder pointed; these last and the yellow are too common for a good Florists Collection. Moly Muscatum Monspeliense, The sweet Moly of Montpelier, hath four or five small leaves no bigger than Bents-stalks, foot high, bearing many star-like sweet flowers, which if the season hot, smell
like Musk; small root and tender, re∣quiring defence from winter-frosts; this last flower not till September. They all loose their fibres, and may be taken up when the stalk dryed down, thriving well in any Soil, great increasers, standing long unremoved; they will last long in flower-pots, if the water renew∣ed, and are preserved more for variety than for their smell or beauties-sake. Asphodelus, The Asphodil also bears star-like flowers, as the great white bran∣ched, the white unbranched, the blush-colour'd, the great white striped, the lit∣tle hollow white Asphodil, and the small yellow, flowers of small worth, therefore only named; as another kind called the Lilly Asphodil, having sedgy leaves and roots, many of which not the least va∣luable, except the Lilly Asphodil, with a white flower, and the blush Lilly As∣phodil, which may be entertained: As also Phalangium, Spider-wort: the Savoy and Italian are onely fit for your choice, which flower about the beginning of June, and are hardy Plants, live and thrive in any Soil, but best in that which is moist; as the Lilly-Asphodils,
their time of transplanting in August, parting the Roots, and presently setting them again. More ado about them not worth while. Gladiolus, Corn-flag, fit for by or out∣borders, because of their rambling, with broad, long, stiff, green leaves, full of Ribs coming out by the side of the other, and joyned at the bottom; the Stalk rising from among them, bearing many Flowers one above another, standing all one way like the Fox-gloves: As, Gladiolus Bizantius, the Corn-flag of Constantinople, with Flowers of a deep red, with two white spots within the mouth of every Flower, round and flat Root netted over; gives many off-sets, if long unremoved. Gladiolus flore suave rubente, The Corn-flag with a bright red Flower. Gladiolus flore albo, The Corn-flag with a white Flower. There are seve∣ral others; but one that's fit to be re∣tain'd amongst the before-mention'd, because of its colour, and that is the French Ash-colour'd Corn-flag. These several coloured ones set thick, and in∣termixed when the blow makes a pret∣ty show, which is the beginning of July,
and loose their fibres as soon as stalks dry, and may then be taken up and kept out of the ground, freed from their ma∣ny off-sets, and in September set again. They prosper in any place, increase too much. Lychnis, Champions, the best whereof Lychnis Coronaria rubra multiplex, The double Red-rose-champion, like the single kind, so well known, needs no description, onely the Flowers of this thick and double, of the same delicate Velvet red-colour which is in the com∣mon single kind. Lychnis Coronaria alba multiplex, The double White-rose-champion, like the last, but that the Flowers are more thick and double, and rarer than the Red. There is Lychnis Chalcedonica flore simplici, The single Non-such, Flower of Constantino∣ple, or as more commonly known by the name of the Flower of Bristow, bearing a great head of many single Scarlet∣flowers: Another differing in the colour of the Flowers, which is at first of a red∣dish blush-colour, growing paler by de∣grees, so that in one head there will be several shades of blushes: Another with
Flowers Snow-white. But the most va∣luable, is the Lychnis Chalcedonica flore pleno miniato, The double rich Scarlet Non-such, or Flower of Bristow, a lusty, strong, great, double-headed Flower, of the richest Scarlet imaginable. The Champions flower the end of June, and continues till September; the several Non-suches, the latter end of the same month also. The Champions must be planted of slips taken from the old Roots in the end of August, that they may root be∣fore Winter; for if set at Spring, they run up to flower and die at Winter, as the old Plants are apt to do; therefore set Slips every year, lest you lose the kind. The Non-such are more hardy, and prosper worst in a Soil over-hot or too rank; they continue long, and are in∣creased by taking young Plants from the old Roots. Do this in the end of March, when they come up with many heads; each then divided with some share of the Root, will grow, and soon come to bear Flowers. No doubt but the Seeds of the single kinds, sowed as Auricula-seeds,
being as small, may produce new Va∣rieties. In this month appears Hesperis, sive Viola Matronales, Dames Violet, or Queens Gilliflower, by Coun∣try-women call'd Close Sciences; two sorts of them common in their Gardens, both single, one pale-blush, the other white; the Flower but of four Leaves. But the nobler sorts are, Hesperis flore pleno alba, The double white Queens Gilliflower, like the single kinds, but that in this there are many Flowers on a branch, and on stalks ma∣ny branches standing thick together in a long spike, each Flower thick and double, of a pure white colour and sweet scent, chiefly in the Evening; therefore called Hesperis. Hesperis flore pleno purpurascente, The double Purplish Queens Gilliflower dif∣fers onely from the last in the colour of the Flowers, which are of a fine, pleasant, light, reddish, purple colour; more rare than the double white. Hesperis flore pleno variegata, The dou∣ble striped Queens Gilliflower, like the last, but that the Flowers are finely stri∣ped with white, and most esteemed.
There is one that beareth single Flowers thus striped, respected for its bearing Seeds, which sowed, produce Vari∣eties. They flower the beginning of June, and blow till the end of July, easily rai∣sed from any slip or branch; which set in the ground at Spring, shaded and wa∣tered, will grow: but neglect not to nip off the Buds (of your under-set Plants) as soon as they appear for Flow∣ers, otherways they will blow, and assu∣redly die. Armerius, Sweet Williams. Of these and Sweet Johns, are several sorts; their form too well known to be here descri∣bed: and of each, onely the double Sweet Johns, and the Velvet Sweet Williams, worthy esteem. Every slip of them set in the Spring, will grow; they flower in June; and if you keep their Seeds and sow them, other Varieties may be gained; but let it be done in A∣pril: they flower not till the second year. Speculum Veneris, or Venus Looking-glass, a pretty Seedling; the branches low and tender, divided into many parts, commonly lying on the ground; little
leaves slightly nicked on the edges; small flowers of a bright Purple-colour tending to blueness, with wide mouths, having a white chive in the middle that adds much to its beauty; the roots very slender, and perish when they have perfected their small seeds; which sow in April: afterwards they will sow themselves, and yearly pay you tribute for your first pains in sowing them. Hedysarum clypiatum, The Red Sat∣ten-flower, called the French Honey∣suckle, hath many stalks, set with winged green leaves; at the joynts come out smaller stalks, set with many flowers of a shining red colour, in some white, which is the rarer. After the Flowers past, the Seeds are contain'd in flat round Husks, three or four standing one above another. The second year after their sowing, they flower this and the next month, and die the Winter following. In the beginning of April sow their Seeds. Papaver multiplex, Double Poppies, need no description they are so common, some red, purple, scarlet, lead-colour, white, blush, &c. Another, each leaf of the Flower is half scarlet and half white:
Another, striped with the same colours: But the chiefest, and of most esteem, is that of a younger date, of a fine gold∣yellow, and double, flowering in June, yield much seed, and either sowed or falling of themselves, will come up and prosper in any place. The latter end of this month flowers also Nigella, the Fennel-flower, the Spa∣nish single of a bleak blue, and a double of the same colour; but of like worth either. Fraxinella flore rubente, Bastard-Dittany with a reddish flower, grows about two foot high, with divers woody brownish stalks, the lower part set with many winged-leaves like those of a young Ash, seven, nine, or eleven together, some∣what large and long, purled about the edges, of a sad green colour, and strong resinous scent; on the upper part of the stalks in this month blow many flowers, growing in a spike at distances one a∣bove another, each containing five long leaves, four whereof stand on the two sides bending upwards, the fifth hanging down, turning the end up again, of a pale red colour, striped through every leaf with a deeper red, a tassel in the
middle of five or six long purplish threads that bow down with the lower leaf, and turn up the ends again with a little freeze at the end of each; when these gone, succeed hard & clammy husks pointed at the ends, wherein is contain∣ed round shining black seeds, the root white, large, and spreading under ground; the whole Plant of a strong resinous scent, more delighting to the Eye than Nose. Fraxinella flore rubro, Bastard-Dittany with a red flower, differs from the o∣ther, in that it is bigger in all its parts, leaves dark-green, longer spike of flow∣ers, and deeper red; another raised from the seeds of this, thicker of flowers, and of a deep bloudy red colour. Fraxinella flore albo, Bastard-Dittany with a white flower; its stalk and leaves of a fresher green, the flowers white, and not so big as the other. There is two other sorts, the one Ash-colour, the other raised from the seeds of this, of a bleak blue colour, striped with a deeper, less in all its parts than any of the other; all of them continue in flower from this month till the end of July; the seed ready to gather the end
of August; which will be all lost, with∣out care taken to prevent it by the spring of the Pods. 'Tis a hardy Plant, endures long without removing, yields many new ones, which ought to be ta∣ken from the old root the beginning of March; they are raised with Varieties, by their seeds sowed in rich Earth as soon as they are ripe, especially of the deep red, white, and Ash-colour. Cistus Mas, The Male Cistus, a small shrubby Plant about yard high, with ma∣ny brittle, slender, woody branches, co∣ver'd with a whitish bark, on which many long whitish green leaves, hardish in handling, two at every joynt, with flowers in this month coming forth at the end of the branches, three or four together upon slender foot-stalks, each of five small round leaves like a small sin∣gle Rose, of a fine reddish purple, with many yellow threads in the middle, that soon fall away, and are succeeded by round hard hairy heads, containing small brown seeds. Cistus Ledon, The Gum Cistus rises higher, spreads more than the former, with many blackish woody branches, set with long, narrow, dark, green leaves,
whiter on the back-sides, two at each point, the whole dewed with a clammy sweet moisture, but more in hotter Coun∣tries than in ours (which artificially taken off, is the black sweet Gum call'd Ladanum); at the top of the branches stand single white flowers larger than those of the former, like single Roses with five leaves, having at the bottom a dark purple spot, broad below, and poin∣ted upwards, with yellow threads in the middle; which past, corner'd heads suc∣ceed, containing like the former, small brownish seeds. These Plants continue flowering from May to September; are raised from seeds: the Plants endure not cold, but must be housed in winter. Ficus Indica minor, The Indian Fig consists of leaves springing one out of a∣nother from one leaf put half into the Earth, which takes root and puts out o∣thers; these leaves are a finger thick, flat, and round-pointed, of a pale green colour, which shews at first of brown prickles on the upper side; at the tops of the leaves in this month break out the flowers set with two rows of pale yellow leaves, with a yellow thrum tipt with red in the middle: after the flow∣er's
past, the head they stood on grows bigger in form of a Fig, but never comes with us to perfection. This is planted in pots, and housed in Winter, or else the frosts will rot and destroy it. There is also Canna Indica, The Indian flowering Reed, with fair large green leaves, co∣ming from the joynts of the stalks, which is above yard high, bearing at the top one above another divers flowers like in shape to the Corn-flag, of a bright crim∣son colour, succeeded by three square heads, containing seeds which are round and black, about a Pease bigness; it hath a white tuberous root, whereby it is apt∣ly increased. There is another of this kind, with flowers yellow with reddish spots. These Plants must be set in large boxes in good earth, often water'd, and housed in Winter, for one nights frost destroys them. Helleborus albus, The white Hellebore comes up with a great round head, of a whitish green colour, opening into many beautiful large green leaves, eminently plaited throughout, and compassing each other at the bottom; out of them the
stalk riseth a yard high, with small leaves to the middle thereof, whence divided into many branches, bearing a multitude of small Star-like, yellowish, green-co∣lour'd flowers; the roots thick and big at the head, with divers great white strings running deep in the ground. Helleborus albus flore atro rubente, The white Hellebore with a dark red flower, differs from the last, in that it comes up a month before the other, larger leaves, smaller and finer plaited, flowers less, of a dark red, and is a fine Plant; the roots of both these and the black that flowers at Christmas, are hardy, abide long unremoved, therefore at first ought to be set in good ground. There is the Ladies Slipper, small, white, and purple Hellebore, but onely the two white and the black worth our collecting. Trachelium Americanum, sive planta Cardinalis, The Cardinals flower hath many leaves, like Canterbury-bells, but lesser, of a yellowish green colour, from whence rises tall hollow stalks, set with leaves smaller by degrees to the top, from the bosoms whereof come forth the flow∣ers, made of five long narrow leaves, three of them standing close together,
hanging downright, the other two are turned up, with an umbone betwixt them, of a paler colour than the leaves, which are of an excellent rich crimson colour; the root is compacted of very many white strings, and well looked to, abides many years. There is another with blue flowers lately come from Vir∣ginia. This must be planted in a Pot in good rich light Earth; and when Winter be∣gins to grow sharp, set the Pot in the ground under a South-wall, three inches deeper than the top, and clothe it about on the top with dry Moss, covered with a glass, which take off in warm days and gentle showers, to refresh it; which must be observ'd in April: at which time you may take out the Pots and expose them safely. JƲLY. CAryophyllus hortensis, called July-flowers from the month they blow in, and are indeed the Summers glory, as Tulips the pride of Spring, deserving a Flowerists care in their propagation and
preservation, especially the nobler sorts, which are called Dutch July-flowers, or more vulgarly Carnations, raised from seeds in the Netherlands, and other parts adjoyning to the Sea, and thence con∣veyed to us. Our inland endeavours to raise them seldom countervail our trou∣ble, none or very few raising good ones, that have not the neighbourhood of the Sea, which annually produce new mix∣tures, though seldom new colours; and though their dyes not many, as red, pur∣ple, scarlet, tawny, and white, and of those deeper or paler, yet so recompen∣sing that defect in their delicate variega∣tions, various mixtures, and pleasing scents, as to vie with any species whatso∣ever, considering the usefulness of some of them as the best Cordials, extreamly comforting the noblest part of man, the heart, either in the Conserve of the Cloves made with Sugar, or in Syrups: the single colours as flowers little esteem∣ed, in comparison of those striped, flaked, or powder'd upon white or blush, with darker or lighter red, crimson or carna∣tion, sadder or brighter, purple, deeper or paler scarlet; so that the chief July-flowers may be brought under these
four sorts: Red and White, Crimson and White, Purple and White, and Scar∣let and White; some whereof shall be named, that those unacquainted may the better know how to collect them, being such sorts as a Flowerist ought not to want, viz. Red and White. Crown of Bohemia. Emperour, the largest flower in being, and well marked with broad flakes, King Charles the second. Queen Katherine. Red and Blush. William the Conquerour, a sullen flower. Crimson and White. Empress, the largest but Countess, the rounder and neater flower. Teages delight. Phisbe. Purple and White. King Solomon, a neat flower finely mar∣ked on Snow-white. Purple Imperial. Musidorus.
Prince William. Oilinans. Glory of Worcester, little purple and white. Fair. Hellena, onely edged with purple. Scarlet and White. Mayor of London, the best. The Giant. Romulus. Florida. Flambosa. Fair Rosanna. Paramour. Deep Clove-colour and Black. Pluto, striped with black through each leaf. Scarlets. The Golden Fleece. Golden Grove. Prince of Orange. Princess of Orange. Blush and White. Mayor of York.
Blush. Aurora, a very brisk colour. Morning-star. Purple. The Wiggon, a Self-colour. Cloves. Giant-clove. Astragon. Birtha. Another intermixt with Purplish Leaves and Stripes. I have heard but of two kinds that are of three colours; the one is, Bedford-Tawny, Tawny, Scarlet, and white. These are the best of each sort now in request, and to be had as my Gardens furniture may declare; there flowering from the middle (sometimes beginning) of July, till the same time in August. A chief thing to be considered, for their producing fair and gallant flowers, and many Layers, is the Soil wherein
they ought to be planted, which must be neither too stiff, nor over-light; the best course is to provide a quantity of good fresh earth, that which the Mole casts out of good ground, that is not stiff nor over-sandy, that hath lain long untill'd, or taken four or five inches deep from under the Sward; but I prefer the Mole-hills best, that have not been long cast up, and mix the same with a third part of Ox, Cow, or sheep-dung, that hath been long made, intermingling a little lime; leave your heap high and round, that it take not too much wet; let it lie by so long till well digested, which will be the sooner effected, if often tur∣ned over and well stir'd together; and be sure this Earth be well mellowed ere you put it in pots or beds for planting your Layers in, and your success in flow∣ers will be the more prosperous, taking off your Layers either in September, or in March, which I account always best; from your Layers cut off all dead leaves, and the tops of all that are too long, and then take them up, with earth about the roots, and set them in your pots, filled with the before-mentioned prepared earth, which set in the shade, and gently
watered, will grow well, and then they may be removed into the morning-sun, which is the onely Sun these flowers willingly admit of; never over-glut any with water, and moisten them not with any out of Well or Pump, till it hath stood two days at least in some vessel sun∣ning, for raw water too much chills, and rather backs tender Plants, than advan∣tages their growth and flourishing, nay, often destroys many. In winter till A∣pril, water in the morning, otherways your moistned earth about tender roots, may so freeze, as to kill them; and after that time, the Sun growing more vigo∣rous in heat, water in the evening, and your pots as soon as the Sun off them; otherwise the Suns heat exhales the moi∣sture before it can have time to give due refreshment to the Plants. Another sort of earth for July-flowers I was acquainted with by one Mr. Fid∣kin, Gardiner to the worthy Sir John Packington of Westwood in Worcestershire, in which I saw his flowers flourish and mark beyond expectation; it was thus compounded. Rotten Tan, i. e. the relicks or rub∣bish of a Tanners pit, that by long lying, is
converted to earth, this layn on a heap for a quarter of a year to sweeten, for in its own nature 'tis too sour for such uses; to one barrow-full of which, four of good rotten wood-pile earth, and the rubbish of old-walls, for want of which a little old decayed lime, a quarter of a peck at most, mixed well together, and let lie a fortnight ere you put it in your pots for your July-flower-layers to be transplanted in, is a secret few know. When your flowers begin to spindle, nip off all but one or two at the most of the biggest at each root, leaving them only to bear flowers; and when they come to bud for flowering, nip off all those too, but three or four that are best placed, by this means will your flowers be the fairer, and more layers gained; by which your kinds are continued and in∣creased. Remember to be often tying up their spindles, as they grow in height, to small rods, set by them on purpose for their support, lest by their bending down they break off, and you loose the pleasure of their flowers. From the middle of June, till the same time in July, is the prime time of laying July-flowers: which is thus performed.
Make choice of such slips as are stron∣gest, having joynts sufficient for laying; prune off the side and end of the top-leaves, cut the undermost part of the middlemost joynt half through, from thence slit the stalk through the middle upwards to the next joynt; open the earth underneath to receive it, then gently bend it down therein, with a small hook-stick stuck in the earth to keep it down, keeping up the head of the slip, that the slit may be open, and so pressed down and earthed up, which as soon as performed, must be sure to be water'd, which must be often reiterated, especially if the season dry, it will make them root the sooner, and shoot forth fi∣bres sufficient to be removed with earth about them the beginning of September following, into pots or beds of the afore∣mentioned prepared Earth, which must be shaded and gently watered; but take heed of too much moisture, lest it rot their young and tender fibres; therefore for preventing great rains, shelter them under boards supported by forks and sticks laid on them, but not too near them, lest on the other hand they perish for want of Air, in a freedom of which
they chiefly delight, many having been suffocated for want thereof, as too close housing in winter hath shewed the ex∣perience, and in transplanting your lay∣ers, set them not too deep, for that hath rotted and spoiled many. Some July-flowers in Summer shoot up but with one stem or stalk, without any layer; if you suffer it to blow, the root dies, therefore if you have no more of that kind, suffer it not to flower, but timely cut off the spindle that it may sprout anew, which preserves the root. When any July-flowers in your pots die, empty it of its old earth, and put in new before you plant another July-flow∣er in it, otherwise the proper nourish∣ment being drawn out, and spent by the first flower, will visibly appear in the ill thriving of this second. When your roots produce too many layers, if in good flowers, covet not a∣bove three or four to be laid, for they draw so much nourishment from the root, as not enough to ascend to the flower, so hindring both fairness and bigness; but in May or June (not too far in the last Month neither) seek out from the stems such shoots onely, as are reaso∣nable
strong, that run not up to spindle: cut these off close to the stem, and throw them in a pail of water for twenty four hours, then in a bed of rich and fine mould, that hath been sifted through a wire riddle, cutting off your slip close at a joynt, trimming away the lower leaves close to the stalk, and cut off the upper∣most even at the top, make a hole in the earth with a little stick, and put your slip therein so deep, that the upper leaf may be wholly above ground; then close the ground to the stem of the Plants; and lastly water them, remembring to do it often, unless rain saves you that labour, and that this bed be as much as may be in the shade. Ferrarius, lib. 2. cap. 15. avers, from the month of February to the middle of March (in the time of their germina∣tion) is the best time to slip this flower; nor will he have the slip, nor twisted in the bottom, nor Barley put under them to raise adulterous fibres, but onely ad∣vises that they be cut off at a joynt: In∣deed both Spring and Autumn are good Seasons for making out Roots; the latter requires that the slip be so early set, as that it may have time enough to
take root before the coldness of Winter; the former, that the Plant set in the Spring may have taken root before the Sun rises to that strength to emit violent and parching heats. General Rules for Vernal and Autumnal Settings. As your July-flowers blow, if you ob∣serve any to break the pod, with a Pen∣knife or Lancet open it as much at each division thereof, then bind it about with a small slang, or narrow list of the thin Film of a Gold-beaters old Mould, which moistened with your tongue, will stick together; keep pour flower round, and scarcely be perceived: If any come all of one colour, the Layers from that stem will continue so, and be a new kind. Keep your first flowers for seeds, let∣ting their pods stand as long as you may for danger of frosts, kept as much as may be from wet; then cut the stems off with the pods on them, and dry them so as not to lose the seeds. The driness of the cods, and blackness of the seeds, ar∣gues their ripeness. Ferrarius, lib. 3. chap. 15. says, the bottom of every cod or pod brings the best seeds, and the largest flowers. The
seeds producing most varieties, are the striped tawnies. The most variety of double flowers are raised from the seeds of double flowers, though many times the seeds of single ones will produce double. The best time to sow them, is the beginning of April, or full Moon, near that time before or after, on indif∣ferent good ground, mixed with the ashes of too old rotted and superfluous slips and stems of July-flowers burnt, in a place so shaded, as to have only the morning and evening Sun; sow them not too thick, and sift the same com∣pound over them a quarter of an inch thick: when the Plant is grown to a considerable strength, which will be in August or September following, remove them into beds of a very good soil, a∣bout the full Moon, where they must stand till they flower; these seedling come up sometimes with three, some∣times with four leaves, though they most have but two, and by some obser∣ved that those with but two leaves prove single, those with more prove double flowers; if you mark such, you will the year after their sowing find its verity by their flowers, the best of which set in
pots, that they may be so placed each season, as to have the morning Sun on∣ly; not up against a south wall, for they love not intemperate heat. The several sorts of Primroses appear, The blustring Virgin Beauties of the year, Till the Bears Ears with more numerous dies, Do take the field, but much more take our Eyes, Or the Ranunculus, Anemonies So richly dy'd in grain, challenge the prize; Till Tulips in their glorious dress come forth, Scorning all Rivals dare compare in worth, Which Roses offer at, yet sweetly yield, To July-flowers that next do crown the field, And will the honour wear, or loose each head, With looks like fair-skin'd Thisbe when she bled, Or when a sadder purple-stream had been Trickling all over her sweet Lilly skin. Others did seem, and some of kin did show, Like to the blushes on her face did flow; Whilst one to steal her breath, to mouth did skip, So wears the Scent and Scarlet of her lip. Nay, the deep Clove its darker hue doth hold From her once-brighter blood, congeal'd and cold
But dead change looks, and similize her thus, Hanging their heads as she on Pyramus. Their Pens may write, or Pencils draw their story, Living the Eyes best witness of their glory. Clematis peregrina flore rubro, Red Vir∣gins-bower, hath many limber weak woody branches, covered with a thin brown outer bark, and green underneath, winding about any thing it can take hold of; the leaves stand at the joynts, con∣sisting of three parts, some notched on one side, some on both: the flowers the latter end of this Month begin to ap∣pear from the joints on long foot-stalks, made of four leaves, standing like a Cross of sullen dark red, the roots a bundle of brown strong strings, fastned to a head, running deep in the ground. Clem. &c. purpureo, Purple Virgins bower, of a sad heavy blewish purple. Clematis, &c. pleno purpureo, The dou∣ble purple Virgins bower, like the for∣mer, but bigger and stronger, colour'd alike in the flower, which is very thick and double; the outward leaves broad as the others are, but the inward nar∣row folded close together, like a big but∣ton
in the middle of the flower, which open so slowly, that the outward leaves fall off before the others spread them∣selves, and continue flowering the next month; these must be supported against a wall: the young and small branches that are apt to die in winter, pruned off in March; the nearer cut, the fairer the flowers. Geranium nocte olens, This is the onely Cranes-bill worth our notice, and so called, because it smelleth sweet onely in the night; it hath a great root like a Paeony, with large jagged leaves; the flowers come forth in this Month, with small and round-pointed leaves, of a pur∣ple colour, listed about with yellow; these stand on smooth stalks eight or ten on a head, which by night are as sweet in the night, as beautiful in the day; the Plant is tender, and therefore set in a pot; and govern'd in winter as the Cardinals flow∣er, or housed and kept dry in winter, for any moisture rots the root. Jucca Indica, The Indian Jucca, hath a large Tuberous root and fibres, thence springs a great round tuft of hard long hollow green leaves, with points as sharp as thorns, always remaining, but
some of the outward ones which are supplyed by those that spring in the middle: from an old Plant well kept sometimes springs a strong round stalk, divided into several branches, which bear divers flowers, something like the Fri∣tilaria's, but narrower at the bottom, containing six leaves, the three out∣ward veined on the backs, from the bot∣tom to the middle, with a reddish blush upon white, coming forth in this Month, and soon fall away without seeding with us. This Plant must be set in a large square box, wide and deep, fill'd with good rich earth, housed in winter, and defended from Frosts; it never here in∣creases, that I yet know of, but are brought from the West-Indies. Periptoca Virginiana, Virginian silk, rises with one or more round stalks, near four foot high, at several joynts set with two long, broad vein'd, round pointed green leaves; on the top of the stalk, out of a skinny-hose, a great tuft of flowers come forth, thirty or forty hanging down on long foot-stalks, each consisting of five small hollow leaves, of a purplish colour; which past, come long crooked Cods standing upwards, containing flat
brown seeds, wrapped within a great deal of fine soft whitish brown silk, the root big and white, running far un∣der-ground, and springing up in many places; it flowers in July, bringeth Seeds and silks in August; it hath been raised from seeds brought from Virginia; the stalks die to the ground every win∣ter, but springs again at Spring, if the place where it stands be covered with horse-dung in winter to defend it from frosts. Jasminum album, White Jasmine: from the bigger boughs that come from the root, proceed divers green flexible branches, set with winged leaves of a dark green colour, standing two together at the joynts, made of many small poin∣ted leaves, set on each side of a middle rib, commonly three on a side, one big∣ger and more pointed at the end; at the tops of the young branches, divers flow∣ers come forth together in a tuft, each on a long foot-stalk, which are small, long, and hollow, opening into five white pointed leaves, of a strong sweet scent, falling away here with us without seed∣ing.
Jasminum Catilonicum, the Catilonian or Spanish Jasmine, like the last in grow∣ing, differs only in the flowers, which be∣fore open in a blush, after white with blewish edges, the branch and green leaves larger but shorter, the whole not rising half so high, the flowers sweeter than the other. Jasminum Hispanicum mutiplex, the double Spanish Jasmine grows like the last, the flowers white but bigger and double, containing two rowes of leaves, with some smaller coming forth of the middle of the flowers which are as sweet as the former. Jasminum Luteum, the yellow Jasmine, hath many long slender branches, set at distances with three small dark green leaves together, the middle or end leaf being the biggest; at the joints where the leaves come forth, stand long stalks, bear∣ing small long hollow flowers, ending in five, sometimes six yellow leaves: the flowers past, round, black shining berries succeed them, the roots are tough and white, creeping in the ground, coming up in divers places, much increas∣ing. Jasminum Indicum flore Phaenico, the
Indian scarlet Jasmine, cometh up from a large spread root, with one, two or more flexible branches, which must have some∣what to support them, putting forth at every joint small and short tendrils, by which it fastens to any woody substance; at the same place comes forth two wing∣ed leaves, large almost as Rose leaves, full of veins and finely nicked on the edges, standing usually three on a side, and one at the end, which are reddish at first, after of a fair yellowish green colour; at the end of the branches comes forth the flowers, many together, long like a Fox glove, at the ends opening into five fair broad leaves, with a stile and small threds, in the middle of a Saffron colour, some Plants have on the inside the flowers small, red leaves, others of a deep scarlet, vein'd with small yellow lines. These Jasmines flower from July to the middle of August, the first white and common yellow are hardy and endure our Winter colds, encreasing fast enough by suckers; but the Indian yellow and the Spanish, must be planted in pots or boxes, that they may be housed in Winter, encreased usually, by grafting them late in the Spring on the common white Jas∣mine,
the approach way, they may also be encreased by layers. Laurus Rosea, sive Oleander, the Rose Bay-tree is of two sorts, one breaking red the other white flowers, in nothing else differing, its stem growing to the bigness of a mans thumb, divided into three branches, at each joint bearing long, hard, thick, dark green leaves; at the end of the branches come forth the flowers, of a deep blush in the one and white in the other, consisting of four narrower long yet round pointed leaves, which here fall away without seed. Laurus Indica, the Indian Bay thrives with us but slowly, rising not above four foot high, the branches cover'd with a yellowish green bark, thick set with leaves, which are betwixt those of the Cherry-Bay and the common kind, the flowers grow in a long spike, of a greenish white colour, succeeded by Berries like small O∣lives; this plant must be defended from frosts in Winter and is encreased by layers.
AƲGƲST. CYclamen or Sowbread now appears without leaves on small naked stalks, the flowers coming up folded in the leaves, hanging down their heads and turning up their leaves again, which are in all but five, some of a bright shining reddish purple, as the vernal one, another that flowers in the Spring is of a pale purple, there are also vernal whites ones single and double. The small purple Cyclamen, another larger of a reddish purple, both Summer flowers. But the most are those that in this Month of August begin to flower and continue so in September, and some in October, viz. The Ivie-leaved Cyclamen of Autumn, of the palest purple colour. The narrow leaved Cyclamen, whereof one purple, another white. The double purplish colour'd Cyclamen having about a dozen leaves in a flower. There is another as double, that is white. The spring Cyclamens are preferable
before the rest, but the double ones most of all and hardest to be got. Some few dayes after the flowers come up, their leaves fashion'd almost like Colts-foot leaves, but have some indenting on the edges, some more, other sorts less, some longer some rounder, all of them strangely variegated, spotted and circled with white green, about the middle of the leaves on the upper side, but that side underneath is red. These flowers and leaves spring from a round flat Turnip root; black on the outside not loosing their fibres, there∣fore seldome removed, but their time for Transplanting is a little before they put forth buds or flowers: They seldom en∣crease by roots; therefore raised by seeds, the head or Vessel that contains them, af∣ter the flowers are past, shrinketh down, winding the stalk in a scroul about it, and lieth on the ground hid under the leaves, where it groweth great and round, con∣taining some small seeds, which must be sown as soon as ripe in good light earth in Pots or Boxes and cover'd near a fing∣er thick; after they are sprung up and the small leaves dried down, put some more of the same earth upon them, and after the second year, remove them to
convenient distances abou Nine inches a∣sunder, where they may stand and bear flowers, and probably may yield you some variety, either in flower, shape or marking of their Leaves. Thlaspi Creticum or Candy Tufts, an Annual, are now in their prime, and be∣gin to blow in July; they are small plants about a foot high, their stalks set with long, narrow, notched whitish green leaves; at the top stand many small single flowers set close together, in some all white, some have a purplish spot in the middle, others are all of a pale purple colour, the seeds are small and reddish (their roots yearly perishing) and must be yearly sowed in April, almost any ground will serve their turn. Lathirus Latifolius, the everlasting Pease now flourishes, bearing many large Pease like Blossoms of a purplish red co∣lour, standing on long foot stalks, the Haum rises high, and must be so planted as to be born up; it dies to the ground in Winter, and rises again at Spring; in Sep∣tember its Cods will be ripe, filled with small Pease which must be sowed or set at Spring, and allowed two or three years ere they grow strong enough to bear flowers.
There is a blew one that is more rare, and continues as long. Flos Africanus, the African, and by some called the French Marigold. There are several varieties thereof, the best whereof are, Flos Africanus maximus multiplex: The greatest double African, or French Mari∣gold, having many winged leaves, purled about the edges, of a dark green colour, the stalk rising about a yard high, divided towards the top into many Branches, each branch bearing one large double flower, of a fair gold yellow colour on the up∣perside, and paler underneath; there are diversities sometimes comes from the seeds of the same flower, some paler than others, rising out of a large Pod, wherein after the flowers past, are contain'd long narrow black seeds, from which the several varieties are raised, some coming with large single flowers with a thrum in the middle, tho they seed from double ones. Flos Africanus fistuloso flore multiplex, the hollow leav'd African Marigold, the flowers thick and double, composed of many hollow leaves, opening at the end, in some of a deep in others of a paler yel∣low colour.
Flos Africanus minor flore pleno: The lesser double French Marigold smaller than either of the former, the stalks not so strong, but twining several ways, the outward leaves sometimes bigger than the rest, and of a deeper and sadder co∣lour: they flower in August, the roots pe∣rishing with the first frosts, and are year∣ly renewed by seeds sowed in April in a Hot Bed; but sow not any seeds fom single flowers, but from the first of the double ones: after they are come up to some strength remove them into a rich soil that lieth to the Sun, where being water'd, they prosper and bear large and stately Flowers; as broad as the palm of any hand; or as big thick and double and shaped like the red Belgick Rose. Nasturtium Indicum, Indian Cresses, or yellow Larks heel, spread into many long trailing branches, four or five foot long, which unless supported, lie on the ground and take up a great deal of room, smooth leaves and round, the Flowers of a fair yellow colour, shaped something like a single Larks heel, but the leaves stand plainer and some of them streaked with red, the seeds rough and uneven, falling off themselves, and are to be ga∣ther'd
off the ground, the root dying in Winter; sow them in April, on a hot Bed or otherways, which may be removed into good Earth, having the advantage of the Sun, and craggy poles or sticks of a yard and half high to lead up their wie∣ry Branches, which guided up by your hand to the top, when in flower make a glorious shew: The Blossoms gather'd before the Winter, and pickled up with Vinegar and Sugar, is an excellent and rare Sallet. Mirabilia Peruviana, the Marvel of Pe∣ru, hath a big stalk bunched at the joints, spreading into many branches, set at the joints with fair green leaves, betwixt which and the stalk, come forth the flow∣ers on short foot stalks, fashion'd like those of the lesser blew Bindweed, nar∣row at the bottoms, and wide open at the brims, of which several kinds, white, red, or yellow, but the rarest are those with variegated Flowers, red and white, or red and yellow; all but the white kind flowr'd plentifully with me this year: and these (like the Bindweed) open in the Night, and as soon as the Sun shines upon them, the brims shrink inward and wither away and seldom thefore seen,
but late in the Evenings or Mornings, for which reason by some called the Flowers of the Night, after the blossoms are past, they are succeded each by one seed, about the bigness and colour of a black Pease, the roots long like a Reddish, black on the outside, commonly perishing in the Win∣ter. They Flower from the beginning of August, till Winter; Frosts destroy them: The seeds are set the begin∣ning of April in a Hot Bed, and thence removed into rich earth, where they may have the benefit of the Sun: if any flower not the first year, lay Horse Litter or Dung on them before the Frosts, and so cover'd all Winter, they will flower the sooner the year following, and the roots of your best kinds when done Flowering, taken up and dried, and each wrapped in Woollen rags and kept from moisture all Winter, being set in the earth the beginning of March will in their due seasons bear Flowers. Amaranthus, Flower gentle, by some called Princes Feather, of which the greater and the lesser, and of each diver∣sity. Amaranthus purpureus major, the great
purple Flower Gentle, hath a thick and tall stalk, with many large green leaves, the stalk divided into many branches, bearing long spikes of round hairy Tufts, of a reddish purple colour, divided into several parts, wherein are contained a great many, when full ripe, of small white seeds; of this there are many kinds big∣ger and lesser, some purple mixed with green, some all whitish green co∣lour, &c. Amaranthus purpureus minor, The lesser purple Flower Gentle, hath yellowish green leaves a little reddish, broad at the stalk, and sharp pointed, set with these leaves, the stalk rises two foot high, branched at the top, bearing long soft and gentle tufts of hairs, standing like a Pyramis, of a deep shining murrey pur∣ple, lasting so many months after it is gather'd; the seeds are small black and shining. Amaranthus diversorun coloum Flower Gentle of divers colours, differ little ei∣ther in leaves or stalks or seeds, only their flowers are of deeper or lighter co∣lours, of Purple, Scarlet and Gold co∣lour: I have had this year some Scarlet and Purple, Lemon and Orange, some
straw colour and crimson, &c. these mix∣ed in a Pot with African Marigolds shew finely. There are Amaranths of three colours, their beauty consisting not in the Flow∣ers, but leaves; in hot years are parted in∣to green red and yellow colours, the seeds of all being black, small and shining, ex∣cepting the first, and ought to be sowed as the Africanus on a hot bed, in April, and when grown to any strength may be removed, where they may have no interception from the Sun beams, and this yearly, because the first frosts destroy them: their soil must be light and rank; if you covet to have good seeds, sow them in a hot Bed in the middle of March, when grown up to any strength, remove them into another new hot Bed, taking them up with earth about them, so set∣ting them the beginning of May, trans∣plant them, where they may stand to bear Flowers, which this way you will have the sooner, as also their seeds, and better ripened, which you may reserve for two or three years following, for so long will they last good. These four last being the best of seed∣lings, a Garden ought not to be unfurnish∣ed
with, (besides their beauty) to sup∣ply their vacancy of other Flowers in your emptied Beds of Tulips, Ranunculus and Anemonies, till their time of replant∣ing. There is your Garden Mallows, dou∣ble Holy Hocks, Snap Dragons, Toad flax, Fox Gloves, Thistles, Scabious, Mullen, Fennel Flower, Bindweed, Larks heels, Canterbury Bells, Thorn Apples, Apples of Love, Garden Lupines, Scar∣let Bean, Snails, Cater-Pillers, Oak of Je∣rusalem, and of Cappadocia, triflles ador∣ed amongst Countrey women in their Gardens, but of no esteem to a Florist, who is taken up with things of more value. But of little more value is your sensi∣ble Plant, your humble Plant, and Noli me tangere, considering their trouble in the raising, and want of Beauty: the first, the leaves being toucht shrink from you; the second when handled fall down; the lasts their Pods being taken betwixt your fingers before they are ripe, fly in pieces with a suddain snap; being all annuals and raised from seeds, and only propagated for those qualities, and pe∣rish with the first frosts, especially the two first.
Then for your sweet Herbs, Basil, Mar∣jerom, Mastick, Sage, Peny-royal, La∣vender, Time, Rosemary, Gold and Sil∣ver, and double flowr'd, the Kitchen-Made so well understands as to excuse any more but their bear names. There is also double Pellitory, double Feather-few, double Cammomil, double Dog Fennel, double Lady Smocks, dou∣ble Dazy, &c. which most women are acquainted with and know how to order. In this month flowers, Ormithogalum Aethiopicum, the Star Flower of Aethiopia, having green leaves a foot long, Inch broad, woolly when broken, stalk cubit high, bearing from the middle to the top many large white Starlike Flowers, with some yel∣lowness in the bottom of them, with a three square head, compassed with white threds, tipt with yellow thick root, round and white, as tender as that which blows in May; the Star Flower of Arabia, and must be used accordingly; these two and that which blows in April, the yellow one which is less tender, only worth a Florists collection and care in preserving. Hyacinthus Indicus tuberosa radice; the great Indian tuberous Hyacinth, the best
and most desired of all its kinds, hath a thick tuberous Knobbed Root, formed into several heads, with many thick fi∣bres at the bottoms of them; from whence rise up several strong and tall stalks, set with divers fair, long and broad green leaves, joined at the bottom close to the stalk, where they are biggest, growing by degrees smaller to the top, where in this month stand many fair large Flowers, composed of six white leaves, spread open, like those of a white Daffo∣dil, with some short threds in the middle, and of so strong a sweet scent, that a pot of them set in a lower room, the doors open, it shall be smelt all the house over; there is another in this kind, but lesser in all parts. This is yearly to be taken up in April (tho you may do it in September and keep the roots dry in Sand, or when dry in Papers in a warm Clo∣set till April) and then carefully part the roots, not breaking the great fibres, and to replant them presently thus, put rich earth in the bottom of the pot up to the middle, then some natural fresh earth, placing the root therein, but so that the fibres may have nourishment from that below, then cover the whole root with the same fresh earth, and fill up the rest
of the pot, with the rank rich earth that you put in the bottom, then plunge your pot in a hot Bed, let it there remain; if that Bed make it not spring, remove it to a second, till it spring grass high or two inches, then set it under a South wall, whole in the hot Bed, not water it, but afterwards in dry weather water it gently; in August it will shew its rich and fragrant Flowers; about the middle of September house it, for it will not endure cold or wet; if you would have it, of-set, then set the root naked in rich earth, but probably it rises not to flower that year. Althaea Fruticosa, shrub Mallow, with woody branches, with a whitish bark and soft woolly whitish green leaves like the Curran trees, large Flowers like single Holly hock; some deep reddish or pur∣ple; others lighter with the bottom of a deeper purple running into the leaves in small veins: another fresher green leaves and white Flowers with a large purple spot in the bottom; of this sort another with its flowers striped with blush lines, these shrubs that grow to a mans height and sometimes higher are ncreased by laying down the branches in the earth, and sometimes by their seeds which seldom come to maturity here, or
you may graff them by approach one up∣on another, and on one of these shrubs have all the varieties. Balaustium, or double blossom'd wild Pomegranate Tree, Flowers the end of this month, and is the rarest of all the flowering shrubs, if pruned grows up high, otherwise in a thick bush full of small branches with some Thorns there∣on, and many small shining green leaves, which fall away in Winter, and are re∣newed in the Spring; at the sides and ends of the branches come out many hard and coral coloured Cups, and out of them beautiful flowers, as big and double as a province Rose, of an excellent bright crimson colour; there is another that is less in all its parts, sadder green leaves, the flowers inclining more to O∣range colour. I have read of another, with double striped flowers, but have not seen it nor spoke with any that have: but if you will have the Balaustium here descri∣bed bare with you, you must plant it in a Box or Case made of wood, that it may be housed in the Winter, and in Spring the young sprouts sheer'd off, that it spend it self not too much in them, and this done two or three times, this
plant is easily encreased by its suckers or by laying. Spirea frutex, the shrub Spirea flowers this month, and rises up more than yard high, with divers woody stalks set with leaves, like those of sally, but lesser, and nicked on the edges; on the top of the stalks come forth many small pale peach colour'd flowers, set thick together in a long spike, lessening by degrees like a Py∣ramis, the root woody and lasting, endures the Winter and is encreased by layers. Maracoc▪ sive Climatis Virginiana, the Virginian Climer, come out of the ground in May, with long round win∣ding stalks, more or less, and in height ac∣cording to the age, liking of the plant; it grows with us five or six foot or more high; from the joints come forth the leaves, at each one from the middle to the top, a clasper like a Vine, and a flower also; the leaves broad at the bot∣tom, about the middle divided into three parts, nickt about the edges, the bud of the flower before it opens, like the seed Vessel of the common single Vigella, but long∣er, having at the top five crooked horns, opening the bud, divideth it self into ten parts, sustaining the leaves of the flow∣er,
which are many, long, sharp pointed, narrow, well spread one by another, some streight and others crooked; these leaves are of a whitish colour, thick spot∣ted with a peach colour, having towards the bottom a ring of a perfect peach co∣lour, and above and beneath it a white Circle, adding much to the beauty of the flower; but the most strange is the Umbrane, which riseth in the middle, parting it self into four or five crooked spotted horns; from the midst of these rises another roundish head, which car∣ries three nails or horns, biggest above, and small at the lower end: but never with us, that I have heard on is this flow∣er succeeded by any fruit, but in the West-Indies, (where 'tis a native) it bear∣eth fruit like a Pomgranate, containing a whitish pulp, and many corner'd rough black seeds, about the bigness of Pear Kernels, long roots thicker then the Sarsa Parilla's, which run far in the earth, putting up heads in several places, by which means encreased, its beautiful flowers shew themselves in August, the stalk dying to the ground every Winter, springing again from the roots in May, which may be cover'd and defended from
hard frosts in Winter, it ought to be planted in a large pot to hinder the roots running, and for housing in the Winter, and setting in the hot Sun in Summer, the hottest place that may be, or it will not bear at all; we set the pots in the spring in hots Beds to bring them for∣ward. In this month blossoms that curious pleasant, fragrant, and ever green plant The Mirtle, of which is, Mirtus Latifolia, the broad leav'd Myr∣tle; In thick bush, full of branches, grow∣ing four or five foot high, set with bright shining and ever green leaves, of a sweet scent, somewhat broad and long; at the joints of the branches come forth the flowers, of five small white leaves, with some white threds in the middle, and ve∣ry sweet, the roots consisting of many strings and fibres as all shrubs do. Mirtus minore folio, the lesser leav'd Myrtle grows like the former, but not so high, the leaves thicker on the branch∣es, smaller pointed at the ends, of a deeper green colour, in little else differ∣ing. Mirtus Rotundiore folio, the Box leav'd Mirtle differs from the last, the leaves
being round, pointed like Box, there is a∣nother call'd the upright Mirtle, having sharp pointed leaves and branches grow∣ing erect; another call'd the Birds nest Mirtle, thick set with narrow leaves and close compacted branches. Mirtus Latifolia flore pleno, the double flowr'd Mirtle grows like the first, but being more tender, grows not so large nor high, its flowers being like the o∣ther, white, but very thick and double, of a delicate sweet scent. Mirtus Boetica Latifolia, the great Spa∣nish, or Lawrel leafed Myrtle, in all parts bigger than the former, rises near two yards high, the leaves are like those of the Bay, but a whiter green, set in a double row on both sides, the branches sweet in scent, in flowers and fruits differs little from the first; all but the last are pre∣served in Cases, and diligently housed in Winter, but that is more hardy and with any care will endure the violence of Win∣ter tho planted at large, about the same time flowers; Gelsimenum Indicum flavum odoratissi∣mum, the sweet yellow Indian Jasmine, a beautiful green, and rises about two
foot high, dividing into branches, co∣ver'd with a purplish colour'd Bark, deckt with many fair shining dark e∣vergreen leaves, shaped like the Pome∣granates, but longer and broader; the flowers like the common white Jasmine, but bigger and of a fair yellow and sweet scent: where they grow naturally, they are succeeded by fruits like small Olives, but flowering so late with us, never come to perfection. Phillirea variegata, the striped Phillirea, most beautiful of all its kinds, deserving a Case with the best▪ greens; this Plant if suffer'd, rises to the height of a man, thick set with small branches, and those with small evergreen leaves, edged and striped with white, yet hardy e∣nough to be planted at large, if you de∣defend it a little from snows and frosts. Marum Herb Mastick, unless a back∣ward Summer, flowers in this month, o∣therwayes later, and rises about foot high, with stiff hard stalks divided in∣to many branches, but thinly set with small green leaves, two at a joint, at the tops of the stalks and branches come
forth small white flowers, among a tuft of white downy threds; the whole plant is of sweet and pleasant scent; this is encreased by setting slips in A∣pril. Marum Siriacum, Assyrian Mastick, not so tall as the former, smaller leaves, whiter and thicker set on the branches, like the Mirtle; at the tops of the stalks stand many green Knaps or Heads, like those of sweet Marjerom, but bigger and greener; a woody root, the whole plant of a delicate scent, very tender and im∣patient of cold, and therefore must be set in a pot, and not housed in Winter, but order'd as the Flos Cardinalis, and unless defended from Cats by sharp thorns, 'twill be destroyed by them.
SEPTEMBER. CRocus verus The true Saffron comes up with many narrow long leaves, and after them the flowers in form like the former mention'd in the Spring, of a reddish purple colour; in the middle are some unprofitable small yellow chives, standing upright, as all other kinds have, but in this flower there is also three or four longer chives, hanging down on or between the leaves, of a fiery red co∣lour, the true blades of Saffron, which picked thence and pressed between two papers, and so dried is the Saffron, that is Sold in Shops; the roots are big∣ger than any other kind and cover'd with a hairy skin, distinguishing them from the rest. Crocus pirenaeus purpureus, the purple mountain Crocus riseth like a Colchicum before the leaves, with one, sometimes two flowers one after the other, standing on long foot stalks, of a violet purple colour, near as large as the biggest pur∣ple of the spring, with yellow chives, and long feather'd top, pointed in the
middle; the green leaves succeed the flow∣ers, sometimes before Winter, but most usually not till the Spring, the Root small and white. Crocus Byzantinus Argenteus: The Sil∣ver colour'd Autumn Crocus, with the three outward leaves silver colour, the other three more white and lesser. Crocus Montanus Autumnalis: The Au∣tumn Mountain Crocus of a pale bleak blew colour standing on short foot stalks, scarcely appearing above ground at the first, but afterwards grows a little high∣er; These two last flower not till the next month. Colchicum: The Meadow Saffron, of which there are several sorts worth col∣lecting. Colchicum versicolor: The party co∣lour'd Meadow Saffron, like the Cro∣cus's, composed of six leaves, some whereof are white, others of a pale pur∣ple, some half white and half purple, with some threds or chieves in the mid∣dle like Spring Crocus. The flowers ap∣pear before the leaves that are of a dark brown colour at first, rising about the end of February, but at Spring are large, long, and green, from the middle of
which the seed Vessel appears, contain∣ing round brown seeds, the root like a Tulips, but larger, having a long emi∣nence at the bottom, whence its fibres shoot into the ground, Colchicum variegatum: The variegated Meadow Saffron, in every leaf pale blush and deep purple, another of this kind of a sadder purple and blush. Colchicum variegatum dictum Aggrippina: A newer flower, white and red striped like a Tulip. Colchicum frittillaricum Neapolitanum: Checkered Meadow Saffron of Naples, deep purplish red flowers, checquered like a frittillary. Colchicum frittilaricum Chiense: The Checquered Meadow Saffron of Chio, of a pale purple colour, thick spotted and checquer'd with blewish purple, small but beautiful flowers, the root small and tender. Colchicum flore pleno: The double Mea∣dow Saffron, like the common one in colour, but very double, and of a pale purplish colour: There is another double one of a deeper purple. Colchicum variegatum flore pleno: The double variegated Meadow Saffron, some
of the leaves whereof are striped and garded with white upon the pale blush. Colchicum maximum: flore pleno: The greatest double Meadow Saffron of a pale purplish blush colour, spreading o∣pen, and transcending any of the dou∣ble kinds. These are to be set about the end of August, and will flower some in Septem∣ber, the rest the month following, and after their green leaves having appear'd and dryed down, the roots are to be ta∣ken up, and order'd as other bulbous roots; by sowing their seeds, may you raise other rarities. OCTOBER. BEcause I find no Plant in this month begins to flower that is worth our notice, its room shall be taken up in de∣scribing a Plant, that is alwayes in flow∣er, and how to order that and its nice attendants, viz. Mala Arantia: The Orange-tree, which in Spain and other hot Countries grow to tall and fair Trees, but with us the highest to a Mans height, (that I have
seen or heard of.) The bark of the El∣der boughs is brown, and the younger green, with some thorns, large leaves of a fresh shining green colour, twining a little like Ivy, with many small holes in them, of a strong sweet scent, and ne∣ver falling till new thrusts them off; the flowers are of a whitish colour and very sweet, followed by small round green fruit, which in time grows to be some∣what large, and of a yellowish red co∣lour, as most know, though not the Tree. The Orange Tree being one of the finest greens, and as tender as any: I shall here name the most tender that must be housed, with care in Winter, and how to order them, after I have mention'd our common greens that grow without that care. With the least care Yew The Fir Tree of Life Cypress Stone crop Tree Evergreen Oak Holly Laurel Bayes Holy Holly Box, and Gilded Evergreen Hathorn Staffe Tree Privet Phillirea Spanish broom English broom Gosse.
With more Care Phillirea striped. Laurus Tinus of several sorts. Mirtles of divers sorts. Yellow Indian Gessimine. The Rose Bay, or Oleander. The Indian Bay. With most Care. Lemons and Oranges. To save room, we will here name o∣ther nice Plants, that must have the like care: the same directions for some will serve them all, viz. The bloody double Wall Flower. Amomum plinii. Geranium nocte olens. Tuberose Hyacinth. Blew Borage leav'd Auricula. Bears Ear Sanicle. Marum. Marum Syriacum, &c. These plants are set in Cases and with Oranges, and other tender Plants housed in Winter, and encreased by layers; the best time to Transplant the hardier
ones, is about the tenth of March, for the more tender, to be set in Cases the end of April; the earth fit for them, is the digested Earth of a Melon Bed, e∣qually mixed with fine loamy earth, ly∣ing and often turned the foregoing Win∣ter, and sifted through a wyre Sieve e're put in your Cases, for want of which Neats dung rotted and mixed as before filling the bottoms of your pots and Cases, with any kind of rubbidge, that will ly hollow to draw the wet from the earth above them, that will else rot their roots, and if ye mix the whole earth with little sticks to make it lie light and hollow, it will be the better; then tak∣ing your plant, cut the roots a little, e∣specially at the bottom, spreading the roots, set it not too deep, rather let some of the root appear; and lastly, settle it with Temperate water (not too much) set them in the shade for twelve days, and afterwards expose them to the Sun. The last April, I had sent me several sorts of cuttings of Mirtles, I prepared my Pots to receive them thus, Old Neats dung beaten small and an equal share of good loamy earth with a little
Willow earth and Sun water, mixed to the consistence of that is call'd a stir pudding, three parts of the Pots, the forth the same mixture without water, and with a dipper run them almost to the top therein; by September following I found most of them had well rooted just betwixt the moist and dry mixtures, this Experiment I tried, tho never heard of before, and thought good here to men∣tion it. The beginning of May, give all your housed Plants fresh earth, taking out of the tops of your Pots and Cases the old earth three or four fingers deep, and loosening the rest with a Fork or some fit Instrument, so as not to hurt or pre∣judice the roots, then fill them up with your best and richest soil, half Neats dung well rotted, consumed, and mix∣ed, that hath been preserved for such uses, that the Virtue may be washed down into the rest of the earth to nou∣rish and comfort your plants: water them as the driness of the season requires with discretion: Sprinkling your greens all over with your water Pots of clear water, 'twill make them have the more delicate lustre.
Your Mirtles will shew finely inter∣mixed with your Posts of Julie flowers. About the middle of Agust is your se∣cure season, for removing and laying your Perennial greens, Oranges, Lemons, Mirtles, Phillireas, Oleanders, Jessemines, Arbutes, and other rare shrubs, as Pome∣granates, best Roses, &c. by taking the shoots and branches of the last Spring, and pegging them down with a hook-stick, in very rich earth (but it must be perfectly consumed, watering them on all occasions in Summer; that time twelve Month, they will be prepared for a remov∣al, which must be in fit earth, and set in the shade, kept moderately moist, not over wet, lest ye rot the young fibres; within three weeks after expose them to some more airy place, and a little of the morning Sun but not a full Sun till a fortnight after. About Mihacelmas (according as the season admonishes) in a fair and clear day your rarest greens and plants being dry, lodge them in their Winter quarters, your green house; recruiting them with fresh earth (as in May) to nourish them all Winter, leaving at first your Doors and Windows open, giving them all the air you can, unless the Winds be sharp, and
Foggy weather; enclose them by degrees, unless the Frosts force you to do it soon∣er, and enclose them by shutting up Win∣dows and Doors together; Mirtles are more hardy and will endure out till the next month after. When the cold comes on, set such plants that will not endure housing, in∣to holes made in the earth two or three inches lower than the surface thereof, under some South wall or pale, cover∣ing them with sweet and dry moss, and then putting Glasses over them, in all warm and Sun-shine dayes or in gen∣tle and sweet showers, give them air by wholly uncovering them; thus may you preserve your precious Marum Siriacum, Cistus's, Geranium nocte Olens, Flor Cardi∣nalis, Maracocs seedling, Arbutus, choicest Ranunculus and Anemonies, &c. Thus go∣verning them till April, and then about again as before taught, unless you have or do find out better wayes which I should be glad to be informed of; but remember that in November you so seclude out all cold, you can out of your green house or conservatory, by close stopping all chinks by laying Straw and Mats, where cold may enter, for if it
freez in your Conservatory (for which you must set a bole of water on purpose to know) kindle some Charcoal, and put them in a hole sunk a little into the floor about the middle of it; if the Plants be exceeding dry, and it do not freez, re∣fresh them sparingly with qualified wa∣ter, i. e. mingled with a little Sheeps or Cow dung, but then take heed of wetting the leaves therewith: at all times when the air is warmed by the beams of the Sun, in a fine day the Sun darting on the house, open your Windows and Doors that way, but shut them again before the Sun be off; observe also that it is better to give housed plants too little water than too much, and that Aloes or Sedums must∣have none at all.
NOVEMBER. In this Month is, ARbutus, the Strawbury Tree in its greatest glory; the body hath a rough but the branches a smooth Bark, with leaves alternately green like the Bayes, finely purled about the edges, long yet round pointed, the flowers grow on the ends of the branches, with long stalks and are small little white bottles, like those of the Lilly of the Valley, which are of little beauty, but succeeded by red berries like to Straw-berries, harsh in taste, containing small and many seeds: the whole rises not here to two yards high, its usual height in its native Countrey Ire∣land; the berries are its beauty, ripe in this Month: and therefore herein placed, which being mixed with its fine green leaves, are very delightful to the eye; young Plants are raised from seeds, and some by layers, but long e're they root, and when removed, the earth must be ta∣ken up with them and carefully planted, being nice whilest young, but elder are hardy, and will prosper under any warm Wall.
DECEMBER. HElleborus niger verus, the true black Hellebor, from a root of many long brown strings, running deep in the ground, and fastned to a big head, springeth up many green leaves, standing on big stiff foot stalks, divided into eight or nine parts, nicked about the edges, the flowers come forth in this month upon short foot stalks, shaped like single white Roses, at first white, at last turn to a blush colour with a pale yellow thrum, and a green head in the middle; by many called the Christmas Rose. Of watering Plants. Now for the watering all the forego∣ing Plants and Flowers observe with me. If you fear dry weather, do not defer too long before you water, but do it gently before the earth is too dry, con∣sideration had to the depth of your roots and those that are deepest water most; and when you begin to water continue it as long as you find occasion. Use not Well water, for tender Plants,
for it is so strained thorough the earth or rather barren Sands or Rocks, and for want of the Sun so chill and cold, that having no nourishment, rather the con∣trary, doth more hurt than good; Rivers that run quick and long on sharp gravel are little better, but if you are forced to use such, let it stand sometime in Tubs in the Sun mixed with Dung. Let the quantity and quality of the Dung mixed with the water, be accord∣ing to the nature of your plants; if your Plants be great growers and require heat, then put Horse-dung in your water: If your water be bad, then put dung into it to help it; Let it stand in the Sun and o∣pen Air uncovered: If your Plants be fine and tender; then put Sheep or Cowes dung, Deer or Asses dung in to the wa∣ter; the worse the ground and more bar∣ren, be sure to put in the more Dung. Take care you water no Plants with standing stinching Ditch water, nor no water that stinketh; for sweet water, (not too clear) and fresh mould (not musty or tainted by stinking weeds) is as proper for tender Plants, as sweet and good food, warm and clean lodging, for tender and fine bred persons.
Rain water is very good if not too long kept, but if your Vessel be large, the oftner you stir it the longer it will keep sweet. Large and Navigable Rivers, that re∣ceive much soil by washing streets, and the many sinks that run into it, and which by its own motion doth cleanse it self from that which is noxious, both to man and plants, is an excellent water for all sorts of plants. The larger the Ponds be, the better the water is for Plants, the opener to the Sun the better, the more motion they have, by horses washing in them, or Geese and Ducks swimming, 'tis so much the bet∣ter. Water all seeds with the smallest or rain-like drops you can, and not too much at a time or to fiercely, lest you discover them. For Flowers and Plants whose leaves lie on the ground, water them at some distance, by making a hollow Circle a∣bout the plant and pouring water into it, by which means you avoid annoying the leaves by discolouring water, or chilling the roots by too suddain coldness. Use not any Liquors, for watering ei∣ther
naturally hot as Spirits, or artifici∣ally made so by heating over the Fire. In Summer time or all warm Seasons, the Evening is best for watring, because the Water will have time to sink into the Earth, and the Plant attract it, before the Suns heat exhales it; But in Winter or cold Weather, the Morning is the most proper time, that the superfluous moisture may be evaporated ere the cold Night overtake you, and Chill perhaps kill a tender Plant. A Plant that delights in moisture, or a drooping Plant that you think water will preserve, may be watred by filtra∣tion, i. e. set an earthen, or wooden Vessel on a Brick full of Water near your Plant, that all the Water may be higher than the Earth; wet a thick woollen List, put one end with a Stone or bit of Lead to it into the Water, that it may keep to the bottom; lay the other end on the Ground near the Root of the Plant, and the Water will distil out of the Boul or Pot through the List, because that part of it out of the Pot of Wa∣ter, hangs lower than that within, &c.
All sorts of fibrous Roots are assured in their growth by convenient watring; but for bulbous and tuberous Roots, the Gardiners hand ought to be more spa∣ring. To know the particular Flowers that will al∣ter for the best. Experience gives us this Truth, that such Flowers as differ in number of leaves, in shape, in colours; the Seeds of such will produce Flowers much dif∣ferent from the ordinary kind of Flowers, tho produced all of one Flower but a year or two before: Nay, a particular Flo∣wer among many other of one Plant, shall bring more double ones, than twen∣ty others that are not qualified as it; and is, or ought to be known to all that raise Flowers; as for Example, the Stock-Gilly flower that hath five, six or more leaves, the Seed of such a particular Flower or Flowers, will produce more double ones, than those Plants that bring forth but four leaves, quantity for quan∣tity of Seed, twenty for one. This Flower indeed shews it more than any o∣ther I know; for having no Thrum in
the middle as many others have, Na∣ture hath given it this sign to inform us, that those that have a leaf or leaves ad∣ded to it more than its usual kind, will bring forth those with many leaves, and make a fine double Flower; which when it hath attain'd to, it then is come to the bounds of Nature, it neaver beareth Seeds more, but by endeavouring, blows it self to death. If you be curious, as Florists ought to be, you may observe the same Rule in several other Flowers that have no Thrum in the middle; as Auricula's, Primroses, Wall-flowers, Campians, &c. When you find one or more leaves than your ordinary number, you may conclude, there Nature hath set one step forward in altering from the ordinary kind; There a Lover of Plants should be diligent, and whensoever you see your Mistress Nature, (for Florists are her Servants) step out of door, (like Gentle∣man-Usher) wait upon her to her jour∣neys end; For 'tis on the diligent she bestows her favours. Those Flowers also which bear Seeds when double, as the Gillyflower, Affrican, &c. sowing the Seeds of such double Flowers, they
will bring you more and better flowers, a hundred to one than single ones; and in sowing the Seed of such, you shall have several varieties, but most marked with the colour of the Mother-Plant; and some of these will run as it were be∣yond the limits of Nature, and then they will break, or have Pods in the middle, and then never bear seed more. July∣flowers have also their sign, which will bear Seed and which will not: Those that will bring seed (if weather and other accidents hinder not) have their Horns in the middle of the Flower: It is observed also in the marking of flowers, that the seed of those that be striped, shall bring the most striped ones, and some of different colours and stripes their seed all alike. There's Places of sowing and setting. Now care must be had in sowing seed, or at least in setting, where you intend that they shall thrive; that the ground bear the best proportion that may be to the places, and the particular Minera, Vein or Nature, or quality of the places, where such Plants in other parts used to
grow; not to put mountainous Plants in low and moist grounds, &c. For Bogg-Plants require when they be transplanted into Gardens, either a natural or artificial Bogg, or to be placed near some water by which there is great improvement of all sorts of Flaggs, and particularly Calamus Aromaticus, the Aromatical Reed. The Artificial Bog is made by digging a hole in any stiff clay ground; or there may be Clay brought in, and laid to bind the Hole or Pit, in the bottom or floor, and the fides likewise; so thick, that the moisture may not be able to get through; and fill'd with such Earth and water, (tho I would have the Earth richer) as may make a like consistence to the Bogg where the Plants you set in it did at first and naturally grow. Requisites for the manner of laying. 1. To laying, 'tis necessary that in its due season, you cut the thing you lay, after the manner you cut July flowers, in laying them, unless in some Plants that take any way as Vines; and it is so much the better, if in Roses and other Layers
of a woody substance, with an Aul you prick the Stock at the place laid, as it is done by circumposition, that is the Mould is born up to the Bough, which is to be taken off; which is done in the Spring before the Saprises, in February, or beginning of March. 2. During the time of Drought, wa∣ter continually, i. e. every day, other∣wise they will make no exact Roots, on∣ly a Knob or Button, full of fresh Sap upon the Tongue of the Cut in the Branch laid down; yet those Branches cut off, with watering in the Summer, have grown well enough after their transplantation. 3. The Seasons most fit for this ope∣ration are in the beginning of Spring, or declension of the torrid or greaer heat of Summer, that they may enjoy the moisture of such Seasons most pro∣per for the enticing forth of Roots, and most safe from excessive heat or cold. Of making of Sets by Art. Nature usually provides this way of propagation, without the Wit or Indu∣stry
of Man called to her assistance; but that not generally in all Plants, nor al∣ways in any one; therefore well worth learning of those that delight in Gar∣dens, to know any means to enlarge this way of propagation beyond the bounds it is carried to by Nature's course. And it is done by baring the Roots of Plants of woody substance, and then making a Cut of the same fashion with that which is made in Layings, not towards but fromwards the Plant: Into this Clift a Stone must be put, or some∣thing that will make the Root gape and the part cut stand upwards: Then cover the Root over three Inches with light Mould, and the Lip that was lifted up will sprout into Branches, the Root of the old Tree nourishing it: When the Branches are grown, cut off this Plant with its Roots to live of its self; if you can, leave an Eye on the Lip of your Root, which you after the incision lift up, and the Branches will the more speedily and certainly issue out of the Root so cut: This is called starting a a Root, In Bulbous Roots, Ferarius makes Off▪ sets thus; if (says he) a Bul∣bous Root is barren of Offsets, with
your Nail lightly cut it upon the bottom in the Crown of the Root whence the Fibres spring, and sprinkle some dry Dust upon it as Medicine to the Wound, and the effect he affirms to be this, that so many Wounds as you shall make, in so many Offsets shall the genital Vertue dispose it self; but of this have I not yet made any tryal, tho one may build upon the Authors Authority. To change the Colours of several Flowers whilst in the blosom. Burn Brimstone under Roses, you shall according to the time you apply this Fume to them, find the Tips or most of their Leaves change colour. To any Flower of a purple colour as Tulips, Crocus, Hyacinth, Iris, &c. If a Pencil dipt in Spirit of Vitriol, and stroakt along the leaves of such colour'd Flowers, or that part where the Flowers are so coloured, where the Vitriol re∣mains shall presently be turned to a deli∣cate and rich Scarlet, to the admiration of those that understand it not, passing by a Flower, and at their return, to find it thus richly marked contrary to their
first Observation: but take notice leaves so served next day shall wither. The only necessary thing, left un∣taught, that I at present think on, is the making of your Hot Beds. Waving the new inventions of Mr. Ev'lins and others, there is none found so good for all conveniences, as the old way of raising them above ground, and making them in such a place, that when they grow cold they may be heated again by fresh muck, thrown up to every side. Directions for making a hot Bed. THe Hot-Bed is thus made, in some convenient place in your Nursery, open to the Sun, and so as that fresh dung may be laid up to every side when grown cold to heat it again. Let your Horse dung, be thrown up in one Cor∣ner of your stable, till you have a quan∣tity sufficient and proportionable to the length and bigness of your Bed, in∣tended to be made; which must be suta∣ble to the quantity of seeds you have to sow on it. Let stakes be knocked into the ground
four foot asunder, at each end in bredth, the length at your pleasure and occasion, fill up both ends and sides with stakes a yard above ground, about a foot asunder, and wind them round with Rods or ropes made of Hay or Straw, then fill it with Horse dung and wet Litter two foot high sutably, and tread it equally close and hard down, then raise it two foot higher with the same kind of new Horse dung, which tread as the former, the whole of an equal hardness; thus do till its yard high at least; after well trod, let some boards or board Laths be laid round on the top edgewise, to keep in the rich sifted earth, that is to be laid over your bed four inches thick, that of an old hot bed well rotted, or the best mould you can get; put small Poles or Hazel rods, archwise over it, the ends stuck in on each side, for the supporting of Mats, Haircloth, or Canvas, that must be laid over it, that will cause it heat the soo∣ner; when the violence thereof is over, which you may feel with your finger, it being to be little more than bare warm; then sow and set your seeds: as Amaranths Flos africanus, Nasturtium Indicum; Mirabi∣lia peruviana, sensible and humble Plants,
Melons, Cucumbers, &c. and when they come up, be sure to give them air, or else they will presently turn yellow and spoil, your choicest seeds, cover them with glasses from the Sun, a little from the earth to give them air, and some part of the day take raise them off to acquaint them with the Sun by degrees, which grown strong, remove them into rich earth, in your Garden, keeping them from the midday Sun, till well setled and rooted, by often, but gentle watering. There ought to be a Summer house so scituated in your Garden that the beauties thereof may be in view. Here may we sit, and each his time purloin, And see our Art, vvith Madam Nature joyn; And hovv the Jewels that adorn the skies, Or what shines brighter, Ladies beateous Eies Can't be compar'd to Flora's Mantle, that She throwes on earth, and Mortals wonder at; Embroider'd Tellus doth her Glory sing As vvell as Birds at the approach of Spring, And vve vvith ravisht eies, see Flora smile, Whilst chirping Musick doth our Ears beguile: Feel sofiest dovvn, in tender buds of Roses,
Arabian smells in her perfumed posies. To exercise our taste, Pompona she Sends us the Juicy Off-springs of each Tree: But when this sensual-banquet we have done, On winged thoughts sore higher than the Sun; And then contemplate how the three in One All mortal actions view from his bright throne: And thence resolve, our Selves as Gardens keep; Pluck up the weeds of sin, 'soon as they peep. His Graces be our flowers; for wat'ring pots Our Eie, oft letting fall repentant drops; That cause those flow'rs encrease, and give occasion For our removal to a new Plantation. Each day concluding, with account made even, To have no Walks, but those that lead to Hea∣ven; Such as in Gardens innocence employ, That vertues raise, so vices must destroy. Then Gard'ner of Ʋniverse, his powers Pluck not as weeds, but take us up as Flowers.
AN APPENDIX To the Treatise of Auricula's, partly an Advertisement to the Reader. HAving in the forgoing Tract men∣tion'd a rare Florist, and as rarely qualified with all other acquir'd and natural parts, becoming a compleat gen∣tleman, viz. Peter Egerton of Boughton near Chester, Esquire: I cannot but let every Lover of Flowers know his re∣mov'd abode, to his estate at the Hall of Shaw near Manchester in Lancashire, where he will keep up (and increase as new faces appear) his choice Collection of Plants and Flowers. The last April I
waited on him, before he removed from Boughton, and there found many Auricu∣la's, that were not mention'd in this compendium, and also three or four that I afterwards saw in the Pallace Garden at Worcester, belonging to Mr. Thomas Newton, Gentleman to my very Good Lord, the Right Reverend Father in God James Lord Bishop of Worcester. So that from Mr. Egertons Collection, who was the best Florist in Cheshire, and hath the same pre-eminence in Lancashire, and Mr. Newton, who may challenge the same, for skill in Worstershire, and my self in Shropshire, and consequently from the choicest Collections in these nations, I desire you accept the ensuing, Catalogue of the best single striped, double, and double striped Auricula's: Mr. Egerton hath them all, except the liver colour'd and how double, and my self the same excepting the last men∣tionin'd, three double one, and the last double striped one, most by his free and generous community, yet made him what return I could, being better stockt in o∣ther species than he was.
Single striped Auricula's. 1. Purple and Lemmon colour, an old flower well striped small eye and quickly washes. 2. Fine violet and white. 3. Fine skie and white. 5. Philemot some stripes of yellow, bad Eie. 5. Hair colour with some stripes of a lighter. 6. Needle work, pale peach and white in small streaks. 7. Hair colour and Lemmon, well marked, good Truss flowers large, and white Eie, but sometimes come all yel∣low. 8. Hair colour and Lemmon well marked and good eye, but every way less than the former. 9. Dark murrish Crimson and Gold colour, well marked and good Truss. 10. Deep Crimson and Gold colour, rarely marked, with a large sparkling snow white Eie. 11. Deep purple and straw colour, good Eie. 12. Scarlet and Gold colour, large
Truss well mark'd and fine white Eie. 13. Winsor Auricula, Crimson and Gold colour. 14. Brick colour and yellow, well marked, large Truss and good Eie. 15. Crimson and yellow very large flower, and large white Eie, good Truss, well marked. 16. Dull flesh colour and pale Lem∣mon. Raised the last Year by himself. 17. Mr. Egertons darling, purple and yellow a large flower. 18.——His delight, differs only in the purple, being murrish purple and Lemmon. 19. His flesh and straw colour. 20. Buff Lemon and green. Double Auricula's. 1. Double yellow. 2. Double Buff. 3. Double Crimson. 4. Double hair colour. 5. Double yellowish green. 6. Double reddish liver colour.
7. Double Liver colour. 8. Double blewish purple, which I saw Mr. Egerton measure by a new half Crown, without the least pressing the leaves, and it proved near a straw breadth broader round the half Crown. 9. Double Pease blossom colour, but little less than the former. 10. Double murrish red, a fine flow∣er. Double striped Auricula's. 1. Double Liver colour and yellow, a good flower, large. 2. Double Crimson and yellow, a deli∣cate flower. 3. Double purple and yellow, the best and dearest. Let me advise those that can obtain it to mix Sea Sand with their sally earth, and rotted with Neats dung, in equal proportions for their composition, for to set their Auricula's in, and put in large Boxes yard and half long, something a∣bove half yard wide and one foot high, they will thrive the better, having more liberty to draw nourishment than earthen
pots, or little square Boxes; and to set but three in a row for the breadth, and so proportionably for the length. The scarlet double Cowslip, or Oxslip, Peagle or Polyander, take it by what name you please, I found with Mr. New∣ton, and obtained it of him; it is large, very double, opens well, and of a deep scarlet. Several Oxslips or Polianthus's I have very large hose in hose, of deeper and lighter reds, one fine crimson one, the lowermost flower hath the leaves striped through with white, others of lighter colours striped with Cream co∣lour, another of the common colour hose in hose edged round each leaf with scarlet, the lowest flower striped through with white, all these I had of the gene∣rous Mr. Egerton, whose sweet conditi∣on'd Lady, I must here remember.
To the incomparable vertu∣ous and discreetly obliging, Ma∣dam, Mary Egerton, worthy Con∣sort to the truly Honour'd Peter Egerton of Shaw-Hall near Man∣chester in Lancashire, Esquire. As Heliotrope all day turns to the Sun In gratitude oblig'd that course to run, Rais'd to a stately height, by's influence Bows head to him shews it's obligement thence; So this small book of flow'rs, the choice of which Your free dispose it's Author did enrich Who, tho but poor in thanks, yet not inur'd To let them lie in Mudwal breast obscur'd; Nature in this spring time, throws through the Clay, Which to some sprouts of gratitude give way: My Heart as flow'rs, their Top-sails lower to you, Commandress over both; I therefore Sue, Before I close, to fix your Name, of power To raise the heads and beauty of each flow'r: And if the only name, such wonders shew, What must the thing, the lovely person do?
So mild, so sweet, that doth all vertues share? Why? Qualifie in temperate and harsh Air, Of those that breath out nought, but scorn and slight Ʋpon the harmless subject that I write. You, Madam, lay'd the Scene, first act your part, With such pure innocence, such pretty Art, Though Egerton your head; you lead the way, His were the other four Acts of the Play; By such a fair example as was yours, He rose to his great Mastery in Flowers; As with pleas'd Flora, hath such favour won That she adopts you Daughter, he her Son. And blush not, Madam, that you here are plac'd, Nor think your fam'd repute one jot defac'd: For all men know, at ev'ry gentile Feast, The Last Course is the choicest and the best: To leave the better taste, I've boldness ta'n, As perfum'd sweetmeats, to serve in your Name: Then with rais'd confidence and doubts supprest I bid my Readers welcome to the Feast. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE. A A Conite vide Wolfsbane. African Marigold. Page 209 Alaternus. 207 Althea fruticosa. 218 Amaranths. 212 Amomum plinii. 231 Anemonies. single self colours, 100 single striped, 101 double self colours, ibid. double striped. 102 Arbutus. 237 Arbor vitae. 212 Asses dung 5 Asphodils: 172
Auricula's, single self colours, 43, 44, 57 single striped, 46 double self colours, 49 double striped. 50 B Balaustium, vide Pomegranate. Bay Tree. 203 Rose Bay. 205 Rean Trefoil. 26 Bears ears vide Auricula's. Bears ear Sanicle. 57 Bee flowers. 131 Bell flowers▪ 37 Bindweed. 45 Blew Bottles. 54 Double Virgins Bower. 199 Single Virgins Bower. ib. Box and Gilded. 130 Flower of Bristow. 174 Brcom Spanish. 230 C Caceolus Mariae, Ladies Slipper. Campions. 110 Candy Tuffs. 108
Celastrus, the Cardinals Flower. 184 Chalkie Land to improve. 3 Cherry double blossom'd 61 Cistus Mas. 181 Cistus Ledon. ib. Claiy Land to improve. 3 Colchicum vide Meadow Saffron. Columbines. 120 Corn flag. 173 Convolunlus. 154 Cortusa Mathiole vide Bears Ear Saniclé. Cowslips, single self colours, 22 hose in hose self coloured, ib. Double several sort. ib. Indian Cresses. 210 Crocus. 15, 226 Crown Imperial, common 58 common striped, ib. yellow, 59 double yellow. 60 Cyclamen, vide Sow bread. Cypress. 230 Cytisus, vide Bean Trefoyl. Cytisus Lunatus. 131 D Daffodils. 32
Daizies double. 74 Deers dung. 4 Dittany. 179 Dog tooth violet. 55 Dog fennel double. 83 E Earth to enrich by mixtures. 8 Eugh Tree. 145 Experiments. 158, 232 F Indian Fig. 182 Fir Tree. 230 Corn Flag. 173 Flower-de-luce. 136 Fraxinella vide Dittany Frittilary. 88 G Garden Scituation. 1 Form 8 contrivance. 9 Gelder Rose. 135 Gentianella. 123 Geranicum. 200
Gilliflowers. 185 Stock Gilliflowers. 94 Queen Gilliflowers. 176 Gladicolus vide Cornflag. Gnat flowerr. 131 Goats dung. 4 Grape flowers. 28 H Hellebor, 183 black, ibid. white. 184 Hepatica, vide Liverwort. 23 Hony Suckle. 119 Holly. striped with yellow, 230 with white ibid. Horse dung. 3 Hot Beds. 249 Humble plant. 215 Hyacinths. 25, 216 Tuberous. 216 Hypericum frutex. 62 I Jasmines. 202 Indian, 223, 231
Spanish. ibid. Ilex vide Evergreen Oak. Sweet Johns. Iris. 139 Chalcedonica. 143 Jucca. 200 Junquils. 36 L Laburnum vide Bean Trefoil. Ladies Slipper. 130 Lady Smocks. 211 Lark spurs. 210 Lawrel. 230 Laurus Tinus. 63 Laurus Indica. 205 Lucoium vide Bulbous Violet and Stock Gilliflower. Lilac. 62 Lillies. 162 Liverwort vide Hepatica, 23 Loamy Land. 4 M Shrub Mallow 96 Maracoc 220 Marly Lands improvement. 3
Martagons. 164 Marsh Marigold. 64 Marvail of Peru. 211 Marum Syriacum, Or Assyrian Mastick. 225 Mastick Thime. 135 Meadew Flower. 227 Mezereon. 14 Moly. 168 Mud of Ponds. 5 Muscaries, vide Grape flowers. Mirtles. 222 N Narcissus, vide Daffodils. Nasturtium Indicum, 210 Neats dung. 5 Nigella Fennel flower. 179 Night shade. 68 Noli me tangere. 215 Non such, flower of Bristol. 174 O Oleander, vide Rose Bay. Orange Tree. 229. Ornathogalon, vide Star flower.
P Paliurus. 157 Peach tree, double blossom. 168 Pease everlasting. 108 Peony. 117 Periploca. 201 Periwinckle gilded. 65 Phyllirea. 224 gilded. Pigeons dung. 5 Pipe Tree. 132 Platanus. 95 Pomegranates. 219 Poppies. 178 Primroses, 20 single self coloured, ibid. hose in hose self coloured, 21 hose in hose striped, ib. double several sorts. 22 Princes feather, vide Amaranth. R Ranunculus. 111 Reed Indian. 183 Roses, and their varieties, 147 their ordering. 150, &c.
S Saffron Flower or Meadow Saffron. 227 Sandy Land it's improvement. 3 Sattin flower. 46 Sawdust. 5 Satyrious. 131 Scarlet beams. 36 Sensible plant. 215 Sheeps dung. 4 Snow drops, vide Bulbous Violet. Sowbread. 206 Spider wort. 172 Spiraea frutex. 220 Star flower of Arabia. 131, 216 of Ethiopia 216 Stock Gilliflowers. 94 Strawberry Tree 237 Sultans flower, vide Musk Scabious. Swines Dung. 4 Syringa, vide Lilac. T Mastick Thime. 47 Tulips, 65 their several varieties, 10. how to order
and sow. 75 V Violet Bulbous. 13, 92 Virginian silk. 201 W Walks of Gravel to make. 6. 10. Wall flowers. 98 Waters, 238, 239 and watering 241 by filtration. ib. Watering pots. Sweet William, 177 Winter Greens. 230 Rotten wood. 5 Woodbinds, vide Honisuckles. Wolfs-bane. 14
A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed for, and sold by Thomas Simmons, at the Princes Arms in Ludgate-street. A Synopsis of Heraldry, or the most plain, short and easie way, for the perfect attaining of that Art; containg all ne∣cessary directions, in order thereunto, there being about 300 Coats of Arms, and about 50 Crests engraven upon Copper Plates, &c. the Atchievements of the Kings of England, since King Egbart of the Sax∣on Race. The Paternal Coats of the No∣bility of England (with a list of the Knights of the Garter) the Arms of the Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Sees, and of the two Ʋniversities, and the several Col∣ledges in them; and of the Inns of Court. and other houses of Law in London; with some hundreds of Gentlemens Coats, all truly Blazoned. To which is added an Alpha∣betical Table, for the ready finding any name whose Coat is herein Blazoned, in Octavo, price bound, 3s. 6d. A Genealogy of the Successions of the Kings of England, from William the Conqueror unto our King, Charls the Second, Printed upon a large sheet of Imperial Paper, and adorned with all the Royal Atchivements, Crowns, Arms, &c. Supporters, all which
are truly Blazoned for their sakes, who are Lovers of Heraldry, a work highly useful for the Reader of our English History, be∣ing so contrived, that by the particular directing lines he will easily see how each King hath laid claim to this Crown; it's curiously Engraven'd; and nothing omitted that might render it very ornamental; first Collected and then Revised by Edward Cook of the Middle Temple, Esquire, Price 1s. 6d. An Historical account of the wonderful Cures wrought by Scarborough Spaw, on se∣veral persons afflicted with Scurvy, Stone, Jaundice, Dropsie, &c. Together with an account of many Strang Rarities of nature found at Scarborough, Price 1s. An account of the late Reverend and wor∣thy Doctor George Senior, Fellow of Tri∣nity Colledge in Cambridge, in remarks on the material passages of his Life and Death, written by James Fawket, M. A. Price 8d. in Twelves. Englands improvement by Sea and Land, the second part, containing, first an account of its Situation and the Growths and Ma∣nufactures thereof: Secondly, the benefit and necessity of a voluntary Register: Third∣ly, a method for improving the Royal Navy,
lessening the growing power of France, and obtaining the fishery: 4. Proposals for for∣tifying and securing Tangier, so that no E∣nemy shall be able to attaque it. 5. Ad∣vantageous Proposals for the City of Lon∣don, for the preventing of Fires and Mas∣sacres therein, and for the lessening the great charge occasioned by the keeping up of the Trained Band. 6. The way to make a new Haven in Sussex, fit to receive Ships of Burthen. 7. Seasonable discourses, of the Tin, Iron, Linnen and Woollen Trades, with advantagious proposals for the im∣proving them; all illustrated with several large Copper Plates, by Andrw Yarran, Price 4s. in Quarto. Patriarcha non Monarcha, the Patriarch unmonarch'd, being observations on a late Treatise, and other Miscellanies, Pub∣lished under the name of Sir Robert Filmer Baronet, in which the falseness of those opinions, that would prove Monarchy Jure divino, are laid open: and the true prin∣ciples of Government, and property e∣specially in our Kingdom asserted, by a Lover of Truth and of his Country, Price 2s. 8d. in Octavo. Memorabilia, or the most remarkable pas∣sages and Counsels Collected out of several de∣clarations
and speeches that have been made by the King, his Lord Chancellors and Keep∣ers, and the Speakers of the Honourable House of Commons in Parliament, since his Majesties happy Restoration Anno 1660. till the end of the last Parliament 1680, Produced under four Heads, viz. 1. of Pro∣testant Religion, 2. Of Popery, 3. Of Li∣berty and Property, &c. 4. Of Parliaments, by Edward Cook Esquire, Price 3s. in Folio The Samaritan, shewing that many and unnecessary Impositions are not the Oyl that must heal the Church, together with the way or means to do it: by a Country Gen∣tleman who goes to Common Prayer, and not to meetings. A modest answer to Dr. Stillingfleets Ire∣nicum by a Learned Pen, in Octavo, Price bound 2s. A Peaceable Resolution of Conscience touching our present Impositions: wherein Loyalty and Obedience are proposed and setled, upon their true founda∣tion in Scripture, Reason, and the Constitution of this Kingdom, against all resistance of the present powers, and for compliance with the Laws so far as may be in order, to union, with a draught, or specimen of a Bill for accomodation, in Octavo, Price bound 2s. FINIS.
THE GARDENERS ALMANACK For Five Years. Beginning with the year. of our Lord 1683. Ending with the year. of our Lord 1687. SHEWING The Day of the Month and Week. The Sun and Moons Place each day in the Signe. Break of Day. Sun rise and set. Length of Day and Night. The Eclipses of the Luminaries every year. The Moons Quarters, her Change and Full. With Monthly Directions What ought to be done in either Kitchin or Flower-Garden for ever, &c. By Samuel Gilbert, . LONDON: Printed for Tho. Simmons, at the Princes Arms on Ludgate-street. 1682.
The REASONS of inser∣ting this ALMANACK, are, First, THat the Gardener or young Flowerist may do all things in due and fit Seasons, and the more knowing be each month minded of what he otherwise may forget, and so be prejudiced in Sow∣ing, Setting, or Removing Plants or Flowers unseasonably: for the wise Solomon (who was best skill'd in all Plants) avers, That to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the hea∣vens; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted. And as to Seasons of the year, so, Secondly, To sutable Aspects and influences of the Planets, the Moon in chief, as nearest, and under whose influence are the successful growth of most Plants and Flowers, and their managing to be suited as she is placed in the Signes, or to her
increase, viz. the first quarter, her being in full; her decrease, viz. the last quarter, new or change; for which reason you are informed of each in the ensuing Kalendar: As for example, in some few particu∣lars following. 1. If you prune your Vines the Moon in full, and posited in Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, or Sagittary, neither Worms nor Birds will infest your Grapes. 2. Trees are not to be grafted, the Moon wayning or not to be seen. 3. Cut what Trees you would have quickly grow again, when the Moon is above the Earth, in the first quarter; and if it may be, joyn'd to Jupiter or Venus. 4. Sow or plant when the Moon is in Taurus, Virgo, or Scorpio, and in good Aspect of Saturn. 5. Set or sow all kind of Pulse the Moon in Cancer. 6. Dress your Gardens, and trim your small Trees and Shrubs, when the Moon is in Libra or Capricorn.
7. Set or cut any Tree or Shrub that you would have its growth re∣tarded, in the decrease of the Moon in Cancer. 8. Set, cut, or sow what you would have speedily shoot out again, or spring and grow, in the increase of the Moon. 9. When you sow to have double Flowers, do it in the full of the Moon; and when the Plant's grown to a bigness fit to be removed, do it also in a full Moon, and as often as you transplant them. 10. Neither graft, set, sow, or plant any thing that day whereon there happeneth an Eclipse either of Sun or Moon, or when the Moon is afflicted by either of the Infortunes Saturn or Mars. I might have given you ma∣ny more; but these may be sufficient at present. The Explanation of the Kalendar, and what more concerns it, you will find in brief at the end thereof; scarcity of room forbid∣ding me here any farther demonstra∣tions.
JANUARY hath xxxi days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 9 N. ☽ 17 Fir. q. 25 New ☽ 2 Fir. q. 14 Fu. ☽ 22 Last q. 28 Fir. q. 2 Fu ☽ 10 La. q. 17 N. ☽ 24 Lastq. 7 N. ☽ 14 Fir. q 21 Fu ☽ 29 N. ☽ 3 Fir. q. 10 Fu ☽ 18 La. q. 26 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day long 1 a ♊ 21 ♏ 8 8 ♈ 3 52 ♌ 5 54 ♐ 8 0 2 b ♋ 22 ♐ 8 6   3 54     ♑   3 c   23   8 4 ♉ 3 56 ♍       4 d ♌ 24   8 3   3 57     ♒   5 e   25 ♑ 8 2   3 58 ♎       6 f ♍ 26   8 0 ♊ 4 0   5 39 ♓ 8 14 7 g   27 ♒ 7 59   4 1         8 a ♎ 28   7 57 ♋ 4 3 ♏   ♈   9 b   29 ♓ 7 55   4 5         10 c ♏ ♒   7 54   4 6 ♐   ♉   11 d   1   7 52 ♌ 4 8   5 42   8 20 12 e ♐ 2 ♈ 7 51   4 9 ♑       13 f   3   7 49 ♍ 4 11     ♊   14 g ♑ 4 ♉ 7 48   4 14 ♒       15 a   5   7 46 ♎ 4 14     ♋   16 b   6   7 45   4 15 ♓ 5 4 ☉   8 42 17 c ♒ 7 ♊ 7 43 ♏ 4 17         18 d   8   7 41   4 19 ♈   ♌   19 e ♓ 9 ♋ 7 39 ♐ 4 21         20 f   10   7 38   4 22 ♉   ♍   21 g   11 ♌ 7 36 ♑ 4 24   5 35   9 0 22 a ♈ 12   7 35   4 25         23 b   13 ♍ 7 33   4 27 ♊   ♎   24 c ♉ 14   7 31 ♒ 4 29         25 d   15 ♎ 7 29   4 31 ♋   ♏   26 e   16   7 27 ♓ 4 33   5 27   9 16 27 f ♊ 17   7 25   4 35         28 g   18 ♏ 7 24 ♈ 4 36 ♌   ♐   29 a ♋ 19   7 22   4 38         30 b   20 ♐ 7 20 ♉ 4 40 ♍   ♑   31 c ♌ 21   7 18   4 42        
In your Orchard and Kitchin-Garden. Lay bare the roots of your Fruit-trees, and if the weather open, lay well-digested Muck to them: transplant young Trees, prune the rest, and nail up your Wall-fruit; cut your Vines close, cleanse your Trees of Moss, by findging it off with handfuls of bolting Wheat or Rye-straw held flaming to the Bows, first gathering your Cions for Grafts: turn over your before-mucked ground in your Kitchin-Garden, also your heaps of mixed Earth and Cow-dung for Flower-Garden: Set Beans and Pease in open weather to have early; sow Lettice, Radish, Chervil, Spinage, and other Sala∣ting-plants in Hot Beds, which you are taught to make in the end of the Vade mecum. In your Flower Garden. Preserve your best Gilliflowers and Auricula's from too much Wet or Snow, by laying down the Pots they are planted in; or if in Beds, by sup∣ported coverings at a distance a foot or more: Also what Ranunculus or Anemonies are appea∣ring; but give them as often as you can in suita∣ble weather, airings, by taking off their coverings, but when Sun sets, on with them again. Keep your Conservatory close where the Greens and nice Plants are housed: if it freeze very hard, put some clear lighted Charcoal in the middle of the Room, a little let into the ground; and if the Sun shine clear on the windows or doors thereof, open them to let in his Noon-beams, but be sure to shut them close again as soon as he declines the door.
FEBRUARY hath xxviii or xxix days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 8 N. ☽ 16 Fir. q. 24 New ☽ 5 Fir. q. 13 Fu. ☽ 20 Last q. 27 Fir. q. 1 Fu ☽ 9 La. q. 16 N. ☽ 23 Last q. 5 N. ☽ 12 Fir. q 20 Fu ☽ 28 N. ☽ 2 Fir. q. 9 Fu ☽ 17 La. q. 25 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day long 1 d ♌ 22 ♑ 7 16 ♉ 4 44 ♍ 5 15 ♒ 9 36 2 e ♍ 23   7 14 ♊ 4 46 ♎       3 f   24 ♒ 7 12   4 48     ♓   4 g ♎ 25   7 10   4 50 ♏       5 a   26   7 8 ♋ 4 52     ♈   6 b ♏ 27 ♓ 7 6   4 54 ♐ 5 8   9 56 7 c   28   7 4 ♌ 4 56     ♉   8 d ♐ 29 ♈ 7 2   4 58 ♑       9 e   ♓   7 0 ♍ 5 0     ♊   10 f   1   6 58   5 2 ♒       11 g ♑ 2 ♉ 6 56 ♎ 5 4   5 0   10 14 12 a   3   6 54   5 6 ♓   ♋   13 b ♒ 4 ♊ 6 52 ♏ 5 8         14 c   5   6 50   5 10 ♈   ♌   15 d   6   6 48   5 12         16 e ♓ 7 ♋ 6 46 ♐ 5 14   4 51   10 34 17 f   8   6 44   5 16 ♉   ♍   18 g ♈ 9 ♌ 6 42 ♑ 5 18         19 a   10   6 40   5 20 ♊   ♎   20 b   11 ♍ 6 38 ♒ 5 22         21 c ♉ 12   6 36   5 24   4 48 ♏ 10 54 22 d   13 ♎ 6 34 ♓ 5 26 ♋       23 e ♊ 14   6 32   5 28         24 f   15 ♏ 6 30 ♈ 5 30 ♌   ♐   25 g ♋ 16   6 28   5 32         26 a   17 ♐ 6 26   5 34   4 30 ♑ 11 12 27 b ♌ 18   6 24 ♉ 5 36 ♍       28 c   19 ♑ 6 22   5 38     ♒   29                      
In the Orchard or Kitchin-Garden. Cover the roots of your Fruit-trees that were before bared, and yet plant those Trees you could not the last Month; and still be cleansing Trees from Moss, and the Webs of Caterpillars from the tops of twigs. Begin to graft Apples, some Pears, Plums, Cherries, &c. The best way of grafting old Stocks, known by few: Cut the body of the Tree off four or five foot above the ground; when the head pared, take a small Gouge, such as Joyners use, with which strike out a small scollop out of the stake where you intend to place each Graft; then with a suita∣ble Wnimble bore a hole in every Scollop into the wood of the Stock; then mark your Grafts with the same Gouge through the Rind, and fit the lower parts of them to the holes, so as that your Scollops of the Grafts and Stock may joyn together; then clay them according to the rule of grafting. Stocks thus grafted shall be cover'd in three years, and bear plentifully: the Cions will grow most in∣ward, therefore prune the inward parts, leaving the outmost sprouts, for spreaders. This way preserves old moil Trees the longer in being, that otherwise would have decayed: place Earth a foot length about boughs for circumposition. Sow and set Beans, Pease, Asparagus, Radish, Parsnips, Car∣rots, Onions, Garlick. Piant Cabbage-plants, Potatoes, Par∣sly, Spinage, and other hardy Pot-herbs. Transplant your Winter Colliflowers, to have early, into rih Soil. Now be making Hot-beds to sow your Musmellon-seeds, and Cucumbers, at the full Moon in this Month, which must first be stecped in new Cows-milk twenty four hours; then placed three in a hole, and the Bed covered, bended or ar∣ched Rods over it to support the covering, which must be Canvas, Hair-cloath, or Mats, &c. till they peep, which they will in seven days; then uncovered in the Sun-shine or clear Air, but cover'd again at night. Still keep close your Conservatory, water Orange-trees, Lemons, &c. with water wherein Sheeps dung hath been steeped two or three days in the Air or Sun, but let it not touch the leaves of your Plants, for it will destroy them. In the Flower-garden. Sow Auricula-seeds in mellow Earth, and but sow the same one thick, place best Auricula in Pots in the Sun; secure your choice Flowers in Beds with Tiles, if they ap∣pear above ground; and plant some Anemonies the wea∣ther open for later Flowers; place your Boxes, sown with choice Seeds, free from sharp winds, and secured from too much wet.
MARCH hath XXXI days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Full ☽ 2 Last q. 9 N. ☽ 18 Fir. q. 25 N. ☽ 6 Fir. q. 14 Fu ☽ 21 La. q. 27 Fir. q. 3 Fu ☽ 10 La. q. 17 N. ☽ 24 Last q. 7 N. ☽ 14 Fir. q. 22 Fu ☽ 29 N. ☽ 3 Fir. q. 10 Fu ☽ 18 La. q. 26 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day on g 1 d ♌ 21 6 19 ♊ 5 41 ♎ 5 20 ♒ 11 21 2 e ♍ 22 ♒ 6 17   5 43     ♓   3 f   23   6 15   5 45 ♏       4 g ♎ 24 ♓ 6 13 ♋ 5 47     ♈   5 a   25   6 11   5 49 ♐       6 b ♏ 26 ♈ 6 9 ♌ 5 51   5 9 ♉ 11 44 7 c   27   6 6   5 54 ♑       8 d ♐ 28   6 4   5 56     ♊   9 e   29 ♉ 6 2 ♍ 5 58         10 f ♑ ♈   6 0   6 0 ♒       11 g   1 ♊ 5 58 ♎ 6 2   5 59 ♋ 12 2 12 a ♒ 2   5 56   6 4 ♓       13 b   3   5 53 ♏ 6 7     ♌   14 c   4 ♋ 5 51   6 9 ♈       15 d ♓ 5   5 49 ♐ 6 11         16 e   6 ♌ 5 47   6 13 ♉ 4 54 ♍ 12 24 17 f   7   5 45 ♑ 6 15         18 g ♈ 8 ♍ 5 43   6 17 ♊   ♎   19 a   9   5 41 ♒ 6 19         20 b ♉ 10 ♎ 5 39   6 21         21 c   11   5 37 ♓ 6 23 ♋ 4 34 ♏ 12 44 22 d ♊ 12 ♏ 5 35   6 25         23 e   13   5 33   6 27     ♐   24 f   14 ♐ 5 31 ♈ 6 29 ♌       25 g ♋ 15   5 28   6 32     ♑   26 a   16 ♑ 5 26 ♉ 6 34 ♍ 4 21   12 58 27 b ♌ 17   5 24   6 36     ♒   28 c   18   5 22   6 38 ♎       29 d ♍ 19 ♒ 5 20 ♊ 6 40     ♓   30 e   20   5 18   6 42 ♏       31 f ♎ 21 ♓ 5 16 ♋ 6 44        
In the Orchard or Kitchin-garden. Bestir your self now in grafting; and early on good Plum-stocks graft Apricocks, Nectorines, and Peaches; many may miss, but never all yet with me: raise up Pots of Earth to convenient branches, which peg down therein, first slitting the under∣side where you lay them; they shall by October following, being often water'd, put forth knobs or roots, and both grow when cut off and well set in rich Earth; and one Tree so taking, is worth ten others, because each sprout or shoot from the root is the same kind, when those of inoculated or grafted, are onely the Plumbs grafted or inocula∣ted. Stake and bind up weak Shrubs and Plants; slip and set Sage, Rosemary, Lavender, Time (ex∣cept Mastick, being too early); sow Endive, Suc∣cory, Leeks, Radish, Beets, Parsnips, Skirrets, Par∣sly, Sorrel, Buglos, Burrage, Chervils, &c. Sow Let∣tuce, Onions, Garlick, Purslain, Turnips, Pease, Car∣rots, Cabages, Cresses, Fennel, Marjoram, &c. Transplant Medicinal Plants; string your Straw∣berry-beds; cover your Musmelon-plants on your Hot-bed with Beer-glasses till you remove them. In your Flower-garden. Sow Auricula-seeds as directed, at Michaelmas; also Sweet Williams, Wall-flower, Stock-July-flowers, Venus Looking-glass, Candy Tuffs, French Honisuckles, Primrose and Cowslip-seeds, Lark∣spurs, Rose-Campions, Lichnis, Campanula, Indian Scabious, &c. also Pinks, or rather July-flower∣seeds; on your Hot-beds sow flos Africanus or French Marygolds, Amaranths, Narsturtium Indi∣cum, or Indian Cresses, Mirabilia Peruviana, or Marvail of the World, &c. Sensible and humble Plants. Transplant July-flowers, Auricula's if oc∣casion, and all other fibrous rooted Plants, new earthing up your unremoved Auricula's, July-flow∣ers, &c. pluck up weeds whilst young, after a gen∣tle shower.
APRIL hath XXX days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 9 N. ☽ 16 Fir. q. 24 Fu ☽ 30 N. ☽ 4 Fir. q. 12 Fu ☽ 19 La. q. 26 Fir. q. 2 Fu ☽ 9 La. q. 15 N. ☽ 23 Last q. 5 N. ☽ 12 Fir. q. 20 Fu ☽ 28 N. ☽ 2 Fir. q. 9 Fu ☽ 17 La. q. 24 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day long 1 g ♎ 22 ♓ 5 14 ♋ 6 46 ♏ 3 5 ♈ 13 12 2 a ♏ 23   5 12   6 48 ♐       3 d   24 ♈ 5 10 ♌ 6 50     ♉   4 c ♐ 25   5 8   6 52 ♑       5 d   26 ♉ 5 6 ♍ 6 54     ♊   6 e ♑ 27   5 4   6 56 ♒ 2 50   13 42 7 f   28   5 2 ♎ 6 58     ♋   8 g   29 ♊ 5 0   7 0 ♓       9 a ♒ 30   4 58 ♏ 7 2         10 b   ♉ ♋ 4 56   7 4 ♈   ♌   11 c ♓ 1   4 54 ♐ 7 6   2 38   14 0 12 d   2   4 52   7 8 ♉   ♍   13 e   3 ♌ 4 50 ♑ 7 10         14 f ♈ 4   4 49   7 11         15 g   5 ♍ 4 47 ♒ 7 13 ♊   ♎   16 a ♉ 6   4 45   7 15   2 28   14. 18 17 b   7 ♎ 4 43   7 17 ♋   ♏   18 c   8   4 41 ♓ 7 19         19 d ♊ 9 ♏ 4 39   7 21     ♐   20 e   10   4 38 ♈ 7 22 ♌       21 f ♋ 11 ♐ 4 36   7 24   2 2 ♑ 14 36 22 g   12   4 34 ♉ 7 26 ♍       23 a ♌ 13 ♑ 4 32   7 28         24 b   14   4 30   7 30     ♒   25 c ♍ 15 ♒ 4 28 ♊ 7 32 ♎       26 d   16   4 27   7 33   1 50 ♓ 14 50 27 e ♎ 17 ♓ 4 25 ♋ 7 35 ♏       28 f   18   4 23   7 37     ♈   29 g ♏ 19   4 22   7 38 ♐       30 a   20 ♈ 4 20 ♌ 7 40     ♉  
In the Orchard or Kitchin-garden. Sow Marjoram, Hysop, Basil, Time, Winter-savo∣ry, Scurvigrass, Lettice, Purslan, Radish, Marigolds, Carnations, &c. Set slips of Artichoaks, Lavender, Time, Rosemary; set French Beans, remove ten∣der Shrubs, slip them after showets. In your Flower-garden, or for it. Continue Hot-beds for Exoticks that arrive not to perfection without them, and remove them into them, till the Air and common Earth be qualified with sufficient warmth to preserve them abroad. Take out your Indian Tuberoses, parting their off-sets (not breaking their fangs) and put them in natural Earth (not forced) in a Pot; a larger of rich Mould beneath, and about it to nourish the fibres, but not touch the bulbs: then plunge your Pots in a Hot-bed temperately warm, giving them no water till they spring, and then put them under a South-wall; in dry weather water them freely, and expect in August a rare Flower. Thus treat the Narcissus of Japan, or Garnsey-Lilly for a later Flower. Put Tilts over your best Tulips, which are commonly set together to be so served. Begin to open the doors and windows of your Green house, and use the Inhabitants by degrees to the Air. Shelter your young seedling Auricula's from hot gleams of the Sun, or expect them all to be kill'd: What Auricula's that are striped, that any part of them come of a self-colour, so mark that it may, if not presently, be parted from the rest: for otherwise 'twill infect the whole, and after come all of a self-colour, and never return again. Let not Weeding be forborn.
MAY hath XXXI days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 8 N. ☽ 16 Fir. q. 23 Fu ☽ 30 N. ☽ 4 Fir. q. 12 Fu ☽ 18 La. q. 26 First q. 1 Fu. ☽ 8 La. q. 15 N. ☽ 23 Last q. 4 N. ☽ 12 Fir. q. 20 Fu ☽ 27 N. ☽ 1 First q. 9 Fu ☽ 17 La. q. 23 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day long 1 b ♐ 21 ♈ 4 18 ♌ 7 42 ♑ 1 30 ♉ 15 10 2 c   22 ♉ 4 17 ♍ 7 43     ♊   3 d   23   4 15   7 45 ♒       4 e ♑ 24   4 14   7 46         5 f   25 ♊ 4 12 ♎ 7 48 ♓   ♋   6 g ♒ 26   4 11   7 49   1 0   15 18 7 a   27 ♋ 4 10 ♏ 7 50 ♈   ♌   8 b   28   4 8   7 52         9 c ♓ 29   4 7 ♐ 7 53     ♍   10 d   30 ♌ 4 6   7 54 ♉       11 e ♈ ♊   4 4 ♑ 7 56   0 30   15 36 12 f   1 ♍ 4 3   7 57 ♊   ♎   13 g   2   4 2 ♒ 7 58         14 a ♉ 3 ♎ 4 0   8 0     ♏   15 b   4   3 59 ♓ 8 1 ♋       16 c ♊ 5 ♏ 3 58   8 2       15 48 17 d   6   3 57 ♈ 8 3 ♌   ♐   18 e ♋ 7 ♐ 3 56   8 4         19 f   8   3 55   8 5     ♑   20 g ♌ 9 ♑ 3 53 ♉ 8 7 ♍       21 a   10   3 52   8 8   No Night. ♒ 15 58 22 b ♍ 11 ♒ 3 51 ♊ 8 9 ♎       23 c   12   3 50   8 10     ♓   24 d   13   3 49   8 11 ♏       25 e ♎ 14 ♓ 3 48 ♋ 8 12     ♈   26 f   15   3 47   8 13 ♐     16 6 27 g ♏ 16 ♈ 3 46 ♌ 8 14         28 a   17   3 45   8 15 ♑   ♉   29 b ♐ 18   3 45   8 15         30 c   19 ♉ 3 44 ♍ 8 16 ♒   ♊   31 d ♑ 20   3 43   8 17        
In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden. You may in this month begin to inoculate ac∣cording as you find your buds ready, which take off the middle of your sprouts. In your Flower-garden. Transplant Amaranths, Flos Africanus, Nastur∣tium Indicum, Mirabilia Peruviana, &c. from off your Hot-beds into good and rich soil, as much as may be in the Sun, where they may stand and bear flowers. Bring out your Oranges, Lemons, and other greens, out of the Conservatory, and you may now transplant and remove them into boxes fill'd with good natural Earth taken from under the Turff in good Pasture-ground, and mixed with one part of rotted Cow-dung, putting Sticks, Brickbats, Shells, or any Rubbish that will make the Earth lie light, and make passage for the water at the bottom; cut the bottom-roots especially a little; set your Plant therein, but not too deep, rather let some of the roots appear above ground; then settle them with temperate water, but not too much, and set them in the shade for ten or twelve days, then expose them to the Sun. Give all your housed Plants fresh Earth at the top, in place of some of the old, a hand depth taken away; with a Fork loosen the rest, without hurting or wounding the roots; let what you adde be excel∣lent Soil, well consumed, and well sifted, that the vertue thereof may wash in and comfort the Plant: when you unhouse them, cleanse them from their contracted dust. Gather the seeds of your Ane∣monies as the dew rises, or you will lose it by the wind: sow Hot and Aromatick Herbs, and in the full Moon plant Stock-Gilliflowers in beds; pluck up Weeds before they seed.
JUNE hath xxx days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 7 N. ☽ 14 Fir. q. 21 Fu ☽ 28 N. ☽ 3 Fir. q. 10 Fu. ☽ 17 La. q. 24 Fu. ☽ 6 La. q. 13 N. ☽ 21 Fir. q. 25 Last q. 3 N. ☽ 10 Fir. q. 18 Fu ☽ 25 First q. 8 Fu ☽ 15 La. q. 22 N. ☽ 29 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day long 1 e ♑ 21 ♊ 3 49 ♎ 8 11 ♓   ♋ 16 10 2 f ♒ 22   3 49   8 11   No Night.     3 g   23   3 49 ♏ 8 11     ♌   4 a   24 ♋ 3 48   8 12 ♈       5 b ♓ 25   3 48 ♐ 8 12   Night.     6     26 ♌ 3 48   8 12 ♉   ♍ 16 20 7 d ♈ 27   3 47 ♑ 8 13         8 e   28 ♍ 3 47   8 13 ♊   ♎   9 f   29   3 47 ♒ 8 13         10 g ♉ ♋ ♎ 3 47   8 13         11 a   1   3 47 ♓ 8 13 ♋   ♏ 16 24 12 b ♊ 2   3 47   8 13         13 c   3 ♏ 3 47 ♈ 8 13 ♌       14 d   4   3 47   8 13     ♐   15 e ♋ 5 ♐ 3 47   8 13         16 f   6   3 48 ♉ 8 12 ♍   ♑ 16 24 17 g ♌ 7 ♑ 3 48   8 12   No Night, but Twi-light.     18 a   8   3 48 ♊ 8 12 ♎   ♒   19 b ♍ 9 ♒ 3 49   8 11         20 c   10   3 49   8 11     ♓   21 d ♎ 11 ♓ 3 50 ♋ 8 10 ♏     16 18 22 e   12   3 50   8 10     ♈   23 f ♏ 13   3 51 ♌ 8 9 ♐       24 g   14 ♈ 3 51   8 9         25 a ♐ 15   3 52   8 8 ♑   ♉   26 b   16 ♉ 3 52 ♍ 8 8       16 10 27 c   17   3 53   8 7 ♒   ♊   28 d ♑ 18   3 54 ♎ 8 6         29 e   19 ♊ 3 55   8 5 ♓   ♋   30 f ♒ 20   3 56 ♏ 8 4        
In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden. Inoculate Apricocks, Peaches, Nectorines, Cherries, Plums, Apples, and Pears. Gather Herbs to keep, in the full Moon, and dry them in the Sun. Water new planted Trees, and put Fern half rotted about their stems. Take off exube∣rant or needless branches from your Vines, stop∣ping the joynt. Sow Lettice, Chervil, Radish, &c. Distil Aromatick Plants. Let neither Limbeck nor Still lie idle. In the Flower-garden. Transplant Autumnal Cyclamens. Gather the ripe seeds of choice Flowers. Inoculate Jase∣mines, Roses, and Rose-shrubs. Take up Anemo∣nies, Ranunculus, Tulip-roots, keeping them so as they do not mouldy, till you plant them again. Lay July-flowers, which will strike root in six weeks, and be ready for transplanting into a light loamy Earth mixt with excellent rotten soil, and sifted; plant six or eight in a Pot, to save room in Winter, and keep them well from too much Rain. What July-flowers are now blown, of good kinds, keep for seed, letting them have but few Layers to give nourishment to, and but few Buds; you will find the Seed-pod to be fill'd with the fairer seed, and to hold the more certainly. Preserve not any for this purpose that break their pods; be sure to keep your earliest Flowers for this end, that the seed may have Sun enough to ripen them, preserving them as much as may be from wet.
JULY hath xxxi days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 6 N. ☽ 14 Fir. q. 20 Fu ☽ 28 N. ☽ 2 First q. 9 Fu ☽ 16 La. q. 24 Full ☽ 5 La. q. 13 N. ☽ 21 Fir. q. 28 Last q. 2 N. ☽ 10 Fir. q. 18 Fu ☽ 25 First q. 7 Fu ☽ 14 La. q. 21 N. ☽ 29 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day long 1 g ♒ 19 3 ♋ 3 57 ♏ 8 3 ♈   ♌ 10 0 2 a ♓ 20 2   3 58 ♐ 8 2         3 b   21 2 ♌ 3 59   8 1 ♉   ♍   4 c   21 1   4 0 ♑ 8 0   Twi-light.     5 d ♈ 23 1 ♍ 4 1   7 59         6 e   24 1   4 3 ♒ 7 57 ♊   ♎ 15 46 7 f ♉ 25 0   4 4   7 56         8 g   26 0 ♎ 4 5   7 55 ♋   ♏   9 a   26 9   4 6 ♓ 7 54         10 b ♊ 27 9 ♏ 4 7   7 53     ♐   11 c   28 8   4 9 ♈ 7 51 ♌ 0 42   15 40 12 d ♋ 29 8 ♐ 4 10   7 50         13 e   0♌ 7   4 11 ♉ 7 49 ♍   ♑   14 f ♌ 1 7 ♑ 4 13   7 47         15 g   2 6   4 14   7 46     ♒   16 a ♍ 3 6 ♒ 4 16 ♊ 7 44 ♎ 1 0   15 18 17 b   4 6   4 17   7 43     ♓   18 c ♎ 5 5   4 19 ♋ 7 41 ♏       19 d   6 5 ♓ 4 20   7 40     ♈   20 e ♏ 7 4   4 21   7 39 ♐       21 f   8 4 ♈ 4 23 ♌ 7 37   1 22 ♉ 15 0 22 g ♐ 9 3   4 24   7 36 ♑       23 a   10 3 ♉ 4 26 ♍ 7 34     ♊   24 b   11 3   4 27   7 33 ♒       25 c ♑ 12 2   4 29 ♎ 7 31     ♋   26 d   13 2 ♊ 4 30   7 30 ♓ 1 40   14 44 27 e ♒ 14 1   4 32   7 28         28 f   15 1 ♋ 4 33 ♏ 7 27 ♈   ♌   29 g   16 0   4 35   7 25         30 a ♓ 17 0   4 36 ♐ 7 24     ♍   31 b   18 0 ♌ 4 38   7 22 ♉      
In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden. Water young planted Trees and Layers; prune Apricocks and Peaches, leaving the most likely Shoots well placed; stop the exorbitant Shoots of Vines at the second joynt above the fruit: let Ola∣tory Herbs that you would save, run to seed; sow Lettice, Radish, Chervil, &c. for young Salleting. In your Flower-garden. Slip stocks and other lignous Plants and Flow∣ers; lay Mirtles, Jasemines, and other greens: make tryal of the same by Orange-trees; if they take, they will certainly be the more hardy. Lay also July-flowers that were not fit to lay before, and cut off withered stalks of Flowers. Clip Box out of order after rain. Sow Anemony-seeds in fine sifted rich Earth in Bed or Boxes. Take up early Autumnal Cyclamens, and transplant them as soon as may be; gather early Cyclamen-seeds, and sow it in Pots presently. The end of this Month sift your Beds of Off-sets of Tulips, and for Ane∣monies, Rarnuculus, &c. it will prepare it for replanting with such things as you have ready in Pots, or to set in naked ground till the next Sea∣son; as Amaranths, Mirabilia Peruviana, Nastur∣tium Indicum, &c. that the Beds may not lie bare and naked, or unfurnished.
AUGUST hath xxxi days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 5 N. ☽ 12 Fir. q. 19 Fu ☽ 26 First q. 6 Fu ☽ 15 La. q. 23 N. ☽ 30 Full ☽ 4 La. q. 11 N. ☽ 17 Fir. q. 26 N. ☽ 9 Fir. q. 16 Fu ☽ 23 La. q. 30 First q. 6 Fu ☽ 13 La. q. 19 N. ☽ 27 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day long 1 c ♈ 18 9 ♌ 4 39 ♑ 7 21 ♉ 2 0 ♍ 14 24 2 d   19 9 ♍ 4 41   7 19 ♊   ♎   3 e   20 9   4 43 ♒ 7 17         4 f ♉ 21 8 ♎ 4 45   7 15 ♋   ♏   5 g   22 8   4 47 ♓ 7 13         6 a ♊ 23 7 ♏ 4 49   7 11   2 14   14 4 7 b   24 7   4 50 ♈ 7 10 ♌   ♐   8 c ♋ 25 7 ♐ 4 52   7 8         9 d   26 6   4 54   7 6 ♍   ♑   10 e ♌ 27 6 ♑ 4 56 ♉ 7 4         11 f   28 6   4 58   7 2   2 21 ♒ 13 46 12 g ♍ 29 5   5 0 ♊ 7 0 ♎       13 a   0 ♍ 5 ♒ 5 2   6 58     ♓   14 b ♎ 1 0   5 4   6 56 ♏       15 c   2 4 ♓ 5 5 ♋ 6 55     ♈   16 d ♏ 3 4   5 7   6 53 ♐ 2 49   13 26 17 e   4 4 ♈ 5 8 ♌ 6 52         18 f   5 3   5 11   6 49     ♉   19 g ♐ 6 3   5 13 ♍ 6 47 ♑       20 a   7 3 ♉ 5 15   6 45     ♊   21 b ♑ 8 2   5 17   6 43 ♒ 3 0   13 6 22 c   9 2 ♊ 5 19 ♎ 6 41         23 d ♒ 10 2   5 21   6 39 ♓   ♋   24 e   11 1   5 23 ♏ 6 37         25 f   12 1 ♋ 5 25   6 35 ♈   ♌   26 g ♓ 13 1   5 27 ♐ 6 33   3 8   12 48 27 a   14 1 ♌ 5 28   6 31 ♉   ♍   28 b ♈ 15 0   5 29 ♑ 6 30         29 c   16 0 ♍ 5 30   6 28 ♊   ♎   30 d   17 0   5 34 ♒ 6 26         31 e ♉ 18 0 ♎ 5 36   6. 24        
In your Orchard or Kitchin garden. Prune off superfluous branches and shoots of the second Spring. Pluck up suckers. Inoculate early, if at all, in this Month. Sow Colliflowers and Cabbages for Winter-Plants. Sow Corn∣sallet, Marygolds, Lettice, Carrets, Parsnips, Spi∣nage, Onions, curled Endive, Angelica, Scurvigrass, Larks-heel, Columbines, Iron-colour'd Fox-gloves, Holihocks, and such Plants as endure Winter. Transplant such Lettice you would have abide all Winter; pull up ripe Onions, Garlick, &c. gather Olitory-seeds; clip such Herbs before the full Moon an handful high. Sow Purslain, Chervil, &c. Make Summer-Sydar and Perry. Gather seeds of Shrubs, being ripe. In the Flower-garden. Take up bulb roots of Lillies, &c. Bartholo∣mewtide, the onely secure season for removing and laying Perennial Greens, Oranges, Lemons, Mirtles, Phylareas, Oleanders, Jesemine, Arbutus, and o∣ther rare Shrubs, as Pomegranets, Roses, and whatever is most obnoxious to Frosts, taking the shoots and branches of the last Spring, and peg∣ging them down with a hook-stick in very rich Earth and Soil, perfectly consumed; water them on all occasions in Summer; by this time twelve∣month they will be ready to remove into good Earth set in the shade, kept moderately moist; three weeks past, set them in some more airy place, but not in the Sun till fifteen days more. Now new earth your Pots of Auricula's, transplant and divide their roots into a light rich Earth: Also your best Primeroses and Oxlips: Also your Campions, or Lychnis Calcidonices. Transplant seedling Anemonies; set Colchicums, Spiderworts, Frittilaries, &c.
SEPTEMBER hath xxx days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 3 N. ☽ 10 Fir. q. 17 Fu ☽ 25 First q. 6 Fu ☽ 13 La. q. 21 N. ☽ 28 Full ☽ 4 La. q. 11 N. ☽ 19 Fir. q. 26 N. ☽ 7 Fir. q. 14 Fu ☽ 21 La. q. 29 First q. 4 Fu ☽ 11 La. q. 18 N. ☽ 26 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day long 1 f ♉ 18 9 ♎ 5 38 ♑ 6 22 ♋ 3 30 ♏ 12 3 2 g ♊ 19 9 ♏ 5 40   6 20         3 a   20 9   5 42 ♒ 6 18 ♌   ♐   4 b   21 9 ♐ 5 44   6 16         5 c ♋ 22 8   5 46 ♓ 6 14     ♑   6 d   23 8   5 48   6 12 ♍ 3 52   12 16 7 e ♌ 24 8 ♑ 5 50 ♈ 6 10     ♒   8 f   25 8   5 51   6 9 ♎       9 g ♍ 26 7 ♒ 5 53   6 7         10 a   27 7   5 55 ♉ 6 5 ♏   ♓   11 b ♎ 28 7 ♓ 5 57   6 3   3 59   11 58 12 c   29 7   5 59 ♊ 6 1     ♈   13 d ♏ 0 ♎ 7   6 1   5 59 ♐       14 e   1 7 ♈ 6 3   5 57     ♉   15 f ♐ 2 6   6 5 ♋ 5 55 ♑       16 g   3 6 ♉ 6 7   5 53   4 7 ♊ 11 36 17 a ♑ 4 6   6 9 ♌ 5 51 ♒       18 b   5 6   6 11   5 49     ♋   19 c   6 6 ♊ 6 13 ♍ 5 47 ♓       20 d ♒ 7 6   6 15   5 45     ♌   21 e   8 5 ♋ 6 17   5 43 ♈ 4 18   11 16 22 f ♓ 9 5   6 19 ♎ 5 41     ♍   23 g   10 5 ♌ 6 21   5 39 ♉       24 a   11 5   6 23 ♏ 5 37         25 b ♈ 12 5   6 25   5 35     ♎   26 c   13 5 ♍ 6 26 ♐ 5 34 ♊ 4 32   11 2 27 d ♉ 14 5   6 28   5 32         28 e   15 5 ♎ 6 30 ♑ 5 30 ♋   ♏   29 f   16 5   6 32   5 28         30 g ♊ 17 5 ♏ 6 34 ♒ 5 26     ♐  
In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden. Gather your ripe Winter-fruit be sure in dry weather. You may yet sow Lettice, Radish, Spi∣nage, &c. and Winter-herbs. Transplant most part of eating and Physical Herbs, Artichoaks, and Sparagrass-roots, and Strawberries, &c. In the Flower-garden. As the weather directs, about Michaelmas in fair weather, be sure avoid a foggy day, retire your choice Greens and rarest Plants (being dry) into the Conservatory; as Oranges, Lemons, Indian and Spanish Jesmins, Oleanders, Barba Jovis, Amo∣mum Plinii, Citisus Lunatus, Chamaelea Tricoccos, Cistus Ledan Clusii, Dates, Aloes, Sedums, &c. or∣dering them with fresh Mould, as taught in May, to nourish them all the Winter, leaving as yet the doors and windows open, giving them much air, so the wind's not sharp, nor weather foggy, till the weather's more cold and sharp; and as that in∣creases, the more enclose them, till wholly shut up as the weather gives occasion: Mirtles will endure abroad near a month longer. The cold coming on, set such Plants as will not endure the house, in∣to the Earth, the Pots two or three inches lower than the surface of the Earth, under a Southern exposure, covering them with Glasses cloath'd with sweet and dry Moss; but upon all fair days, and in sunny and sweet showers, take them off. Thus preserve your Marum Syriacum, Cystus's, Gerani∣cum, Nocte olens, Flos Cardinalis, Maracocs, seed∣ling Arbutus, choice Ranunculus, and Anemonies; and thus covering them till April. Plant Tulips, and all bulbous roots; but your choice of each defer till the latter end of the next month. Sow Auricula's, Crocus, Primrose and Cowstip-seeds, Frittary and Tulip-seeds, &c.
OCTOBER hath xxxi days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 3 N. ☽ 10 Fir. q. 17 Fu ☽ 25 First q. 5 Fu ☽ 13 La. q. 21 N. ☽ 28 Full ☽ 2 La. q. 10 N. ☽ 17 Fir. q. 24 N. ☽ 7 Fir. q. 14 Fu ☽ 21 La. q. 29 First q. 4 Fu ☽ 10 La. q. 18 N. ☽ 26 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl. Day long 1 a ♊ 18 4 ♏ 6 36 ♈ 5 24 ♌ 4 41 ♐ 10 38 2 b ♋ 19 4 ♐ 6 38   5 22         3 c   20 4   6 40 ♉ 5 20 ♍   ♑   4 d ♌ 21 4 ♑ 6 42   5 18         5 e   22 4   6 44 ♊ 5 16 ♎   ♒   6 f ♍ 23 4 ♒ 6 46   5 14   4 55   10 18 7 g   24 4   6 48 ♋ 5 12     ♓   8 a ♎ 24 4 ♓ 6 50   5 10 ♏       9 b   26 4   6 52   5 8     ♈   10 c ♏ 27 4   6 54 ♌ 5 6 ♐       11 d   28 4 ♈ 6 56   5 4   5 0   10 0 12 e ♐ 29 4   6 58 ♍ 5 2 ♑   ♉   13 f   0 ♏ 4 ♉ 7 0   5 0         14 g   1 4   7 1 ♎ 4 59 ♒   ♊   15 a ♑ 2 4   7 3   4 57         16 b   3 4 ♊ 7 5   4 55 ♓ 5 8 ♋ 9 42 17 c ♒ 4 4   7 7 ♏ 4 53         18 d   5 4 ♋ 7 9   4 51 ♈       19 e ♓ 6 4   7 10 ♐ 4 50     ♌   20 f   7 4   7 12   4 48         21 g   8 4 ♌ 7 14 ♑ 4 46 ♉ 5 18 ♍ 9 24 22 a ♈ 9 4   7 16   4 44         23 b   10 4 ♍ 7 18   4 42 ♊       24 c ♉ 11 4   7 20 ♒ 4 40     ♎   25 d   12 4 ♎ 7 22   4 38 ♋       26 e   13 4   7 24 ♓ 4 36   5 27 ♏ 9 10 27 f ♊ 14 4 ♏ 7 25   4 35         28 g   15 5   7 27 ♈ 4 33 ♌   ♐   29 a ♋ 16 5 ♐ 7 29   4 31         30 b   17 5   7 30   4 30 ♍   ♑   31 c ♌ 18 5 ♑ 7 32 ♉ 4 28        
In your Orchard or Kitchen-garden. Trench ground for both; plant or transplant all sorts of Fruit-trees, having lost their leaves; Wall-trees above a years grafting; lay bare the roots of old unthriving or over-hasty blooming Trees; gather Fruit dry, the Moon decreasing. Now is the time for setting Fruit-stores; which if the Fruit soon ripe, keep them in sand till now; set them three inches deep, the sharp end upper∣most, and cover them with Fern or Straw to keep them warm in the Winter; but at Spring take it off. You may yet sow Lettice, &c. for tender Salating. In your Flower-garden. Set your choice Tulips; you may now also sow their seeds. Plant some Anemonies and Ranun∣culus's in prepared Earth, as directed in the Vade mecum; but they must be covered, when they ap∣pear, from the Frosts, that will otherwise kill them all: therefore your best, set not till December: Remove your best and nicest July-flowers to shel∣ter from much Rain or Wet, and where Snow may not be apt to fall on them, and brush it off gently, when fallen on those that are not capable of shel∣ter. And this Month trim them all up with fresh Mould:
NOVEMBER hath xxx days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     Last q. 1 N. ☽ 8 Fir. q. 15 Fu ☽ 24 First q. 4 Fu ☽ 12 La. q. 19 N. ☽ 26 Full ☽ 1 Last q. 9 N. ☽ 16 Fir. q. 22 N. ☽ 5 Fir. q. 12 Fu ☽ 19 La. q. 28 First q. 2 Full ☽ 9 La. q. 16 N. ☽ 24 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl. ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brak ☽ pl. Day long 1 d ♌ 19 5 ♑ 7 34   4 26 ♍ 5 37 ♒ 8 50 2 e   20 5 ♒ 7 35 ♊ 4 25 ♎       3 f ♍ 21 5   7 37   4 23     ♓   4 g   22 5   7 39   4 21 ♏       5 a ♎ 23 5 ♓ 7 40 ♋ 4 20     ♈   6 b   24 5   7 42   4 18 ♐ 5 40   8 42 7 c ♏ 25 5 ♈ 7 43 ♌ 4 17     ♉   8 d   26 6   7 44   4 16 ♑       9 e ♐ 27 6   7 46   4 14     ♊   10 f   28 6 ♉ 7 47 ♍ 4 13 ♒       11 g ♑ 29 6   7 49   4 11   5 43   8 24 12 a   0 ♐ 6 ♊ 7 52 ♎ 4 10     ♋   13 b ♒ 1 6   7 51   4 9 ♓       14 c   2 6   7 53 ♏ 4 7     ♌   15 d   3 7 ♋ 7 54   4 6 ♈       16 e ♓ 4 7   7 56 ♐ 4 4   5 48   8 12 17 f   5 7 ♌ 7 57   4 3 ♉   ♍   18 g ♈ 6 7   7 59 ♑ 4 1         19 a   7 7 ♍ 8 0   4 0 ♊   ♎   20 b   8 7   8 1 ♒ 3 59         21 c ♉ 9 8   8 2   3 58   5 54   8 2 22 d   10 8 ♎ 8 3 ♓ 3 57 ♋   ♏   23 e ♊ 11 8   8 4   3 56         24 f   12 8 ♏ 8 5 ♈ 3 55 ♌   ♐   25 g ♋ 13 8   8 6   3 54         26 a   14 8 ♐ 8 7   3 53   5 58 ♑ 7 54 27 b   15 9   8 7 ♉ 3 53 ♍       28 c ♌ 16 9 ♑ 8 8   3 52     ♒   29 d   17 9   8 9 ♊ 3 51 ♎       30 e ♍ 18 9 ♒ 8 9   3 51     ♓  
In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden. Furnish your Nursery with stocks for gra turn your Melon-ground, and mix it with  richest Earth, that of a last years Hot-bed, and lay it in ridges for the Spring. Trench and fit ground for Artichoaks. Set and plant Trees that are standards, or for the wall. Crop Asparagus, and cover it with long Dung, and make Beds to plant in the Spring. Sow and set for early Beans and Pease. Lay in Cellars to be transplanted in Spring, for seed, Carrots, Parsnips, Turnips, Cabages, and Colliflowers. In the Flower-garden. Sow Auricula-seeds; cover peeping Ranunculus, &c. Plant fibrous Roots, Roses, Althea frutex, Li∣lax, Syringa's, Peonies, &c. If the weather re∣quire it, quite enclose your tender Plants, and Perennial Greens, Shrubs, &c. in your Conserva∣tory, stopping all entrance of cold, especially sharp winds: if the Plant's exceeding dry, and it do not freeze, refresh them sparingly with qualified water (i. e.) mingled with a little Sheeps-dung, or Cow-dung. If it freeze in your Green-house, which you may know by a dish of water standing there, kindle some Charcoal, and put them in a hole sunk a little in the floor, the middle thereof: At all other times, the Air warm'd by the Sun-beams, if a fair day, and darting full on the house, shew them the light, but enclose them again before the Sun be quite gone off. Give not a drop of water to your Sedums or Aloes all Winter.
DECEMBER hath xxxi days.     1683 1684 1685 1686 1687     N. ☽ 8 Fir. q. 15 Fu ☽ 23 La q. 30 First q. 3 Fu ☽ 11 La. q. 19 N. ☽ 26 Full ☽ 1 Last q. 9 N. ☽ 15 Fir. q. 22 N. ☽ 5 Fir. q. 12 Fu ☽ 19 La. q. 27 First q. 1 Fu ☽ 8 La. q. 16 N. ☽ 24 Month-days. Week-days. ☽ pl ☉ place ☽ pl. ☉ rise ☽ pl. ☉ set ☽ pl. Day brek ☽ pl Day long 1 f ♍ 21 9 ♒ 8 10 ♊ 3 50 ♎ 5 57 ♓ 7 42 2 g ♎ 21 0 ♓ 8 10 ♋ 3 50 ♏       3 a   22 0   8 11   3 49     ♈   4 b ♏ 23 0 ♈ 8 11 ♌ 3 49 ♐       5     24 0   8 12   3 43     ♉   6 d ♐ 25 0   8 12   3 48 ♑ 5 59   7 49 7 e   26 0 ♉ 8 12 ♍ 3 48     ♊   8 f ♑ 27 1   8 13   3 47 ♒       9 g   28 1 ♊ 8 13 ♎ 3 47     ♋   10 a   29 1   8 13   3 47 ♓       11 b ♒ 0 ♑ 1   8 13 ♏ 3 47   6 0 ♌ 7 36 12 c   1 2 ♋ 8 13   3 47 ♈       13 d ♓ 2 2   8 13 ♐ 3 47         14 e   3 2 ♌ 8 13   3 47 ♉   ♍   15 f   4 2   8 12 ♑ 3 48         16 g ♈ 5 2   8 12   3 48   5 59 ♎ 7 36 17 a   6 3 ♍ 8 12 ♒ 3 48 ♊       18 b ♉ 7 3   8 11   3 49         19 c   8 3 ♎ 8 11 ♓ 3 49 ♋   ♏   20 d ♊ 9 3   8 10   3 50         21 e   10 3 ♏ 8 10   3 50   5 57 ♐ 7 42 22 f   11 4   8 9 ♈ 3 51 ♌       23 g ♋ 12 4 ♐ 8 8   3 52         24 a   13 4   8 8 ♉ 3 52 ♍   ♑   25 b ♌ 14 4 ♑ 8 7   3 53         26 c   15 4   8 6   3 54   5 56 ♒ 7 50 27 d ♍ 16 5 ♒ 8 6 ♊ 3 54 ♎       28 e   17 5   8 5   3 55     ♓   29 f ♎ 18 5 ♓ 8 4 ♋ 3 56 ♏       30 g   19 5   8 3   3 57     ♈   31 a ♏ 20 5   8 2   3 58 ♐      
In your Orchard or Kitchin-garden. Plant Vines and Stocks for grafting. Prune Standard-trees; prune and nail Wall-fruit. Set early Beans and Pease. Trench ground, and dung it for Borders, planting Fruit-trees, &c. In your Flower-garden. Preserve Anemonies, and Ranunculus, and best July-flowers, from great Rain, sharp Winds, and Frost. Let the doors and windows of your Green-house be well matted, and guarded against cold. Now set in open weather, your best Ranunculus, in a bed of old rotten Thatch or Straw that is neer turned to Earth, with good Mould above and below them: Also your best Anemonies in a light yet rich loamy Earth, sifted through a wyer Rid∣dle: Those now set give you no other trouble, being out of danger of the Frosts, they being past ere, they come up. Mr. Evelin gives good advice in this month, viz. Look to your Fountain-pipes, and cover them with fresh and warm Litter out of the Stable, a good thickness, lest the Frosts crack them. Do it in time.
THE Preceding Almanack EXPLAINED. IN the first column on the left hand, the Numerical Figures, numbering the days of the Month. In the second Column, the seven Al∣phabetical Letters for the Days of the Weeks. And to know which is the Sun∣day or Dominical Letter, the Golden Number, Epact, Shrove-Sunday, Easter-Sunday, Whit-Sunday, Advent-Sunday, the following Table tells you for the Five years. Year of our LORD. Gold. Nu. Epact. Sunday-Letter. Shrove-Sunday. Easter-Sunday. Whit-Sunday. Advent Sunday. 1683 12 12 G Feb. 18 April 8 May 27 Dec. 2 1684 13 23 F E 9 Mar. 30 18 Nov. 30 1685 14 4 D Mar. 1 Apr. 19 June 7 29 1686 15 15 E Feb. 14 4 May 23 28 1687 16 26 6 Mar. 27 15 27 Thus you see looking against your Year, as 1683, on the right hand of it you find 12 the Golden Number that year, and 12
for the Epact; G the Sunday-letter, which mark through the Kalendar with a dash of your Pen, by which you may know it to stand for Sunday; and when the year is out, cross it with another Dash. Do like∣wise by the next year 1684, which is Leap-year, and therefore F is used till Matthias-day, and the remaining part of the years E for the Sunday-letter. In the next Column you find Feb. 18. for Shrove-Sunday; then onwards, April 8. for Ea∣ster-day; and May 27. for Whit-Sunday; and Dec. 2. for Advent-Sunday: Trinity-Sunday is always next to Whit-Sunday. And thus are all your Movable Feasts found with much ease. The days on which the Immovable Feasts are Celebrated, are, Circumcision of Christ, Jan. 1. Epiphany, or Twelfth-day, Jan. 6. Conversion of St. Paul, Jan. 25. Martyrdom of King Charles I. Jan. 30. Purification of B. Virgin Mary, Feb. 2. Valentine's day, Feb. 14. St. Matthias Apostle, Feb. 24. Annuntiation of Virgin Mary, or Lady∣day, March 25.
St. George his day, April 23. St. Mark Evangelist, April 25. Philip and Jacob, Apostles, May 1. King Charles II's Birth-day, May 29. St. Barnabas or Barnaby, June 11. St. John Baptist, June 24. St. Peter and Paul, June 29. St. James Apostle, July 25. Lammas-day, August 1. St. Bartholomew Apostle, Aug. 24. St. Matthew Apostle, Sept. 21. St. Michael Archangel, Sept. 29. St. Luke Evangelist, Octob. 18. St. Simon and Jude Apostles, Octob. 28. All Saints, Nov. 1. Gunpowder-Treason, Nov. 5. St. Andrew Apostle, Nov. 30. St. Thomas Apostle, Decem. 21. Nativity of Christ, Decem. 25. St. Stephen Martyr, Decem. 26. St. John Evangelist, Decem. 27. Innocents, Decem. 28.
The Eclipses of both Luminaries, for Five Years. In 1683. Three. 1. OF the Sun, Jan. 17. near three a clock after noon, in 8 deg. of A∣quarius, the Suns body obscured near, 9 digits; Visible, if clear Air. 2. Of the Moon, Feb. 1. about three in the afternoon, in 23 deg. of Leo; Invi∣sible. 3. Of the Moon, July 28. at eight a clock beforenoon; Invisible. In 1684. Four. 1. Of the Sun, Jan. 6. at six at night, in 26 deg. of Capricorn; Invisible here. 2. Of the Moon, June 17. at three in the morn, in 6 deg. of Capricorn; Visible. 3. Of the Sun, July 2. at three after noon, in 22 deg. of Cancer; Visible. 4. Of the Moon, Dec. 11. at eleven at night, in 1 deg. of Cancer; Visible. In 1685. Three. 1. Of the Moon, June 6. at six at night, in 26 deg. of Sagittary; Invisible.
2. Of the Sun, June 21. at eight at night, in 10 deg. of Cancer; scarce Visible. 3. Of the Moon, Nov. 30. at eleven at night, in 19 deg. of Gemini; totally Vi∣sible. In 1686. One. Of the Moon, Nov. 19. at eleven at night, in 8 deg. of Gemini; neer Oculus Tauri. God bless the City of London. In 1687. Two. 1. Of the Sun, May 1. past noon, in 21 deg. of Taurus; Visible. 2. Of the Sun, Oct. 6. at six in the morning, in 13 deg. of Scorpio; Invisible.
Of the KALENDAR. UNder the Number at the top, 1683. you have the Quarters, Change and Full of the Moon; and under that, the Moons and Suns places in the Signes, for that year, entitled ☽ pl. ☉ place. Under the number 1684. you have the Moons place in the Signes, and time of Sun rise; and the Moons Quarters, Full, and New, over them, as in the other. Under 1685. what Signe the Moon is in, and Sun setting. Under 1686. Moons place and Break of Day, for every fifth day of the month. And in 1687. Moons place, and the Length of the Day for every fifth day of the month. Now for Length of Day and Night, if it be not the same as set down that you would know, take that of them that is nearest to it: So in that for Break of Day; or if you will be so exact, you may pro∣portion the time betwixt them. Any of these in each month, serves the said month in every year. Thus much said, there needs no more for the rest.
And so have you all that is necessary for a Kalendar: And in the Book, all that is requisite for a Flowerists knowledge, so far as the Experiments hitherto made, will with verity allow. It would be a grateful and satisfactory Return, and the most acceptable one, if any person knows more to the advantage of a Flowerists management, raising, in∣creasing, or preserving Plants or Flowers, and will inform the Author of the particu∣lars, by Letter to him, At his house in Kinlet-Parish, near Bewdly in Worcester-shire. FINIS.
