H132B R215854 99827616 32038
AN EXACT SURVEY OF THE AFFAIRES Of the United NETHERLANDS. Comprehending more fully than any thing yet extant, all the Particulars of that Subject. In Twelve HEADS, mentioned in the Address to the READER. Ictus Piscator sapit. LONDON, Printed by Tho Mabb, for Thomas John∣son, at the Golden Key in Cannon-Alley, over against the great North-door of Saint Pauls Church, Anno 1665.
The Preface to the READER. THese discourses now in hand, are published with no further care of their reception and entertainment, than the consequence of them may deserve; (whereof the Readers not the Publishers must be Judges.) And we need not be moved with the common Passions of such as make Epi∣stles and Prefaces, conceiving our trust very well discharged, when we have gi∣ven the Reader the usefull Contents of the Book; which contains I. An exact History of the Dutch, since they inhabited that Countrey, An. 700, to this present year 1665, with a continued and close succession, p. 1. II. A very particular account of their Revolt from the King of Spain's subjection, and their being declared a Free-state at the Hague 1608, and confirmed so at Munster 1648.
III. An impartial view of the assi∣stances by Councils, countenance, 60000 men, and 3 mllions of Money afforded by Q Elizabeth, K. James, K. Charles the first, of Famous memory, upon their humble Petition when the Distressed States, that they might live under our Protection. IV. A faithful Narration of such affronts and injuries as they have of∣fered us in Europe, Asia, Affrica, and America; particularlarly in Amboyna. V. A compleat Recapitulation of the seven Advantages they make of our Fishing, and Royal favours of his most Sacred Majestie; 1. In their shipping. and their Mariners. 2. In Trade. 3. In Towns and Fortifications. 4. In their Power abroad. 5. In publick Re∣venue. 6. In private wealth. 7. In all manner of Provisions, and store of things necessary, amounting to 24 Mil∣lions yearly, by His Majesties gracious permission at home and abroad. VI. How unable they are, in that
and 16 other respects to engage with England; and that point made out. VII. In a very punctual relation of the last Dutch War, from its rise when it began, 1650, 1651, throughout its whole management, to the years 1652, 1653, when it was ended; with the vir∣tues of that Peace. VIII. A prudential survey of the present State of the united Nether∣lands, in regard of the Siuation of their Countrey, and in respect of their Neighbours. IX. A satisfactory consideration of their present State, in point of Interest throughout the World, and their deal∣ings with every Prince particularly. X. Very curious reflections on their present State in point of Government, and that not only in the States. General, but in every one of the 7 Provinces, and the Towns belonging to them apart. XI. Choice Observations on the pre∣sent state of the Dutch, 1. In point of Government▪ 2. In matters of Religion.
3. In the particulars of their strength by Sea and Land. XII. An exact account of the state of the present▪ Controversie between England and the Ʋnited Netherlands in the three great points; 1. Of Trade. 2. Of Fshing. 3. Of Pretensions, Claims, affronts, and Wrongs. And all this directed to no other end, than the framing of right, and clear Apprehensi∣os touching the present affairs in those mens minds [who are very many] that are therein concerned in point of Interest; or in those [who are almost all] who concern themselves therein in point of Discourse, Consideration, and Observation; for whose accommodation these Discourses are contrived Close, and not Tedious; Real, and not Wordy; justly entred in the List of those Writings that express more than they promise, and Intimate more, than they do Express.
Books lately Printed. A Disswasive from Popery: By the Right Revereud Father in God, Jeremy Tay∣lor, L. Bishop of Down and onner. A Vindication of the Lords Prayer, as a formal Prayer, to be used by Christians as a Prayer: By Meric Casaubon, D. D. The History of the French Academie, erect∣ed at Paris: By Card▪ Richleiu, consisting of the most refined Wits of that Nation. The lives of the two most Illustrious Princes, Henry Duke of Glocester, and Mary, Prin∣cess of Orange. Sir Walter Raleigh's Maxims and A∣phorisms of State; published by John Milton Esquire. The Mystery and Iniquity of Non-coafor∣mity;—In an Historical account of the De∣signes and Practises of the Non-conformists against Church and State. Instructions for Jury-men on the Com∣mission of Sewers: Delivered in threee se∣veral Charges, at several essions of Sewers, at Spalding in Lincolnshire. A Treatise of Spiritual Infatuations, the
Present visible distemper of the English Nati∣on: By Dr. William Stamp. Trigonometr, or the Doctrine of Tri∣angles;—y the Famous Mr. William Oughtred, both in Latine and English, either with the Tables of Logarithms, or with∣out. And there is now in the Press ready to be published, n ingenuous Discourse, written by a Pers of quality, Intituled, Europae Modernae Speculum: Or a view of the Empires, Kingdoms, Principa∣lities, Seigniories, and ommon wealths of EUROPE; in their Present State, their Go∣vernment, Policy, different Interest, and mu∣tual Aspect one towards another, from the Treaty at Munster, Anno 1648. to this pre∣sent 1665. All to be sold by Thomas Johnson at the Golden▪ Key in Cannon-Alley, over against the great North door of Saint Pauls Church.
The Original, and whole History of the Hollanders: In an exact Succession, from the year 700, to this present year 1665. CHAP. I. SECT. 1. THE Hollanders being a People that seemed born to fill the last Age of the World with Disturbance, and this with Noise. I was as restless as they are, till I could find the Original of those Bustlers Power, whereof, as old as I am, I am likely to see an end. The men are the old Hirmodures, that were lodged by Nature in no more be∣nign an Habitation, than the dreadful
distance between the Hercyian-Forest, nd Sythia; and they retain this of their Wilderness, that they would have still all things in Common; whence upon a quarrel about the Salt-pits of Sala, (as unreasonable as that since about the salt waters of the Ocean) the Caths, Ceru∣sies, and Ligiens chased those troublesom Neighbours to Cat senel boggen, a Port of Fessen (an Earldom which the House of Nassau claims, but that of Fessen enjoy∣eth,) and thence Battus, and Zelandus, the two Principals of the Nation falling out,  came with his Train to Hol∣land, called from him Batavia, and Zea∣land to Zealand, called so from him; (Holland and Zealand it seems were divi∣ded in their Founders,) the one building Bata v∣durum, or Wychterduyrstede, a fa∣mous Town 800 years ago, of three miles compass, some three Leagues from Ʋtrecht, now a small Village, and the other Arm Ʋiden and Gumpuere; but both subject to the Gaules or French, who thereupon have a Right to Holland. §. 2. For Charles the bald King of France 863, at a general Assembly of his Princes and Barons at Bladell in Brabant,
of Champeigni, upon some Lords motion, bestowed upon Thierry Duke of Aquitain, Holland, and that part of East-Friezland from Dockum to Lavin, to defend and protect them from the Invasions and De∣vastations of the Danes and Normans, who notwithstanding their general oppositi∣on at his entrance (for they were then impatient of Government) their joynt Conspiracy against him six years after his settlement, when the Pope intimating how he should govern them, by cutting the top of his Garden-Plants, as he walked there with his Embassadors, be∣stowed that Country upon him a second time by a breve; as Lewis of Germany did Zealand, by a Royal constitution, left it to his son Thierry the Second, who sub∣dued the Frizons after two rebellions in behalf of their Liberties, granted them as they pretended, by Charti magni, to entire obedience in such sort, as he con∣strained them to make their doors and entries so low, that they must bend their backs, and stoop very much in sign of humility before they could enter, and committed them upon his death to his second Son Arnold, as he did Holland and
Zealand to his eldest Son Egbert: having entred to a Monestery at Triars, by whom a Revolt was made from his bounden duty to the French to a submission to the Empire; of whom he would needs hold his Earldom in Fee, which lost him his life in a Battel against the Friezlanders, who opposed that dishonourable submis∣sion, and with the assistance of the French, and the conduct of their Protestat, or Governor, defeated him in open field; whose Son and Successor, Thiery the 3d, dissembling the affront a while, until he had conquered the stout Bishop of Ʋ∣trecht, who would needs maintain that Holland belonged to his Bishoprick (his Ʋtrecht being in old time as he urged, what with his Army, and what with his Reason, the Capital City of Holland:) and relieved the German Auxilianies, re∣venged his Fathers death, and settled the Countrey on his younger son Floris; who his elder Brother Thiery being slain at a Tournament at Leige say some 1048, or as others, by the Marquesse of Braden∣burgh's Forces, who came to revenge the Germans disgrace at that Tournament as far as Dort, which by Treason, or a Po∣pular
Tumult he surprized and kept, till Earl Floris hearing of the League between the Marquesse of Bradenburgh, Count Al∣bert of Lovain, Wickard Advocate Gene∣ral of Gelders, and Hermar Earl of Curike, gathered the whole Countrey to Dort to make Ditches, and Pit-falls along South-Holland, wherein the Enemies fell in heaps, submitting at last to his mercy, whose Family yet he leaving, an Infant behind him was dispoyled of the Earl∣dom of Holland by the Bishop of Dort's application to the Emperour H. 4, who resenting the late Onslaught of the Ger∣mans, gave the Reverend Father his claimed Earldom, which he colluted on Godfrey the 9th Earl thereof; who yet lost it to Thierry the 5th, whom the Friez∣landers helped to his Predecessors honour in Holland, as he did afterwards himself, when they would neither acknolwedge him, nor obey the Bishop to be Seigneo∣ry over them, as his Heir Thoris the Se∣cond and the Earl did, when they would needs bid him Battel, to try, as they said, for their Liberties; to whose Son and Successor Thierry the 6th, Lothi∣ar the Emperour restored Oastergoe, and
Westergoe in Friezland, formerly given 1080. by H. 4: to Conrade Bishop of Ʋ∣trecht, notwithstanding the rebellious attempts of the Frizons against it, and the fatal Divisions made by that unhappy people between him and his Brother; whom at last, after six bloody Battels, the Emperour reconciled, settling Friezland and Holland anew upon his Son Floris the 3d, who married Ada, Daughter to the King of Scotland, and had the Isle of Wal∣rin, where they built Dur by accord, with Philip Earl of Flanders, for the Land of Waes; in whose Reign the Hollanders set up the first Herring-fishing in the Mase, and the Brittish-Seas along the Coast of Holland, Zealand, and Friezland, in small Barkes called Subards, those of Zerexes being the first that did fish and pack them up in Barrels. Those of Bieruliel, a small Isle on the Coast of Flanders, the better to preserve them, being salted, invented the way to Gill them, and pull out the Garbage. Thierry the 7th his Son succeeded him, and brought the Flemmings to an accord about Trade, and the Frizons to Reason, when they were in the mood to acknow∣ledge
no Soveraign but the Emperour; and being reconciled to the Earl of Gel∣ders, joyned with him against the trou∣blesom Bishop of Ʋtrech; and his Brother William, Earl of Friezland succeeded him likewise, deposing his Daughter from Holland, and reducing the Zealanders; both which Provinces he left to his Son Floris the 4th, whose Daughter Margaret Countess of Hennebergh, had 365 Chil∣dren at a Birth, that is to say, for so ma∣ny dayes in the year. After him was William the Second Earl of Holland of that name, and King of the Romans, who enlarged his Earldom to∣wards landers, in a Quarrel with Mar∣garet Counss of Flanders, who in vain sought the Pope and St. Lewis of France his aid, while Earl William was alive, who died unfortunately in Ice, in an onset upon his restless Subjects of Friezland, which was reduced by Flori 5th; who after the allaying of the Factions raised in Holland during his minority, built four Castles that utterly subdued that Coun∣trey, made a League with Flanders, that brought within his Earldom Amstel and Worden, threatned a War with Scotland,
in right of his Grandmother Ada, that with King Edward of England mediation was accorded, in a marriage between his son Iohn, and Elizabeth the Daughter of that Kingdom; whence arose a great friendship between England, Scotland, and Holland: And the Flemings suddenly breaking their League, by a Surprize of Zealand, by the Isle of Welchrin, he sub∣dued them so farr, with the loss of so many Knights, that he made 40 to pos∣sess and maintain his Conquests; which yet prospered not, when he for deflou∣ring Count Gerund's Lady, was murthe∣red in a Ditch, and the Frizons sent to the King of Denmark to be their Prote∣ctor; especially when upon Count Iohn's absence in England (Floris his son, and now the 20th Earl of Holland reigning) the Government of Holland was divided between the Faction of Count Hedier of Clevis, who governed North-Holland; of Guy, the Earl of Henaul's Brother, who possessed South-Holland; and of Berfold, Surrogate to Zirich, Bishop of Ʋtrich, who revived the old Quarrel about Holland, till King Iohn with a mighty Fleet of his Father in Laws, the King of Englands
1297, defeated the Frizons twice with the Bishop, that had preached a 1000 years Pardon to every Person, that could kill a Hollander, rased Mour Mount, and settled the Faction at Dort: But dying sudden∣ly 1300, and leaving his Wife childless, who returned to England, and married the Earl of Oxford, Gillis Brecht of Amstel seized and fortified Amsherdam: The Fa∣ctions of Scheirlingen, and Ven Coopen brake out in▪ Friezland, and both main∣tained their Franckises and Liberties a∣gainst the Emperours Lieutenant, Albert, D. of Saxony, who came to compose their differences, and in the Inter regnum to settle their Government, the Male Line of Thierry of Aquitane failing in Floris the fifth's son Iohn, the Government fell to Iohn Earl of Henaut, Nephew to William King of the Romans, and Earl of Holland by Alix his Sister; who now the 2 d Earl of Holland gave to his Brother Guy the Seigniories of Amsterdam, upon which he conferred many Freedoms, Rights, and Priviledges, with design to reduce Seig∣nior Rhenez of Zealand to Reason with its assistance and (this is the first time that Amsterdam gave Law to Zealand;)
who presumed upon the Flemish and Im∣perial assistance so far, as to overrun Hol∣land; till William the 22th, Earl of Hol∣land, Iohn of Henault's son, with the Lord of Humpstead's assistance reduced them, and with 320 Ships of France, confined Guy of Flanders to his own Bruges. This good Earl William, as they called him, having married Charles de valois his Daughters Neece, to Philip the Fair of France, settled his Brother Iohn of Beau∣mont in Goud and Schoonborn, and streng∣thened his Uncle Guy Bishop of Ʋtrech, by a Fort he raised at Skellingwerf, to bri∣dle the unquiet Frizons; adding to Hol∣land the Seigniories of Amstel and Woer∣den (while Charles the Fair of France was buie with the Flemish, and the Emperour Lewis of Bavaria as busie with the Pope) which he left to his son William the 23th Earl of Holland and Zealand; who being allyed to Edward the 3d King of Eng∣land, troubled France, and brought the troublesome West-Frizons 1345 to Rea∣son; and dying without lawful Issue, returned his Government to his Sister Margaret, then Empress and Wife to Lewis of avaria; who being confirmed
in the Earldom by her Husband, in a full Diet solemnly taking the Earldoms Ho∣mage, depute her son William under her Governour of Holland; who being de∣feated by the Bishop of Ʋtrech, and insti∣gated by the Holland Faction of Cabillaux and Hoecks, falls out with his Mother, who (her Husband being dead) returned to the Government; and after various successes in four Battels with her son, gave it him, upon condition he should reduce Ʋtrech and its Bishoprick, which had troubled Holland with its pretensions for 260 years together as he did; but dying childless, left all to his Brother Albert of Bavaria, who put the Towns and Castles in good hands, reduced Delf and Gelders, built Gildenburgh-Castle to secure the Sluices: Weakned the Frizons, reduced Ʋtrech, defeated the Frizons again, brought the Groeningeois to do Homage and Fealty: Forced the rebellious Lord of Arleche to an accord, married his 3d Daughter Margaret, to Iohn Duke of Bur∣gundy, Earl of Flanders and Artois, by whom she had Philip, the good Duke of Burgundy, Earl of Holland and Flanders; and among many other children, Joane,
Dutchess of Austria, by whom came these Earldoms to the Emperour and the King of Spain After his death, William af Bavaria his son, and the 27th Earl of Holland and Zealand succeeded, who was much trou∣bled with the Lords of Arguel father and son, and the Duke of Gelders, to whom they had resigned their Interest, until the Lord of Arguel being taken, discover∣ed all the Conspirators, and particularly Count Egmond, who thereupon yielded up his strong Fort Iselstein, and retired, till Jaqueline of Bavaria succeeded her fa∣ther Albert, the Factions called home Eg∣mond, contrived to displace Jaqueline, and put in Iohn of Bavaria, and Bishop of Leige in her place, till the Pope dispen∣sing with it, she is married to Iohn Duke of Brabant; by whose assistance she reco∣vereth Gornchom of Count Egmond, per∣swades the Hollanders and Zealanders to refuse Iohn of Bavaria, and his pretended Grant from the (Emperour; (insomuch that he was glad to come to termes with her Husband, to hold some Lordships in Fee, and quit all his Titles and Preten∣sions;) who after his death, is declared
Earl of Holland, in right of his Wife; in whose right he subdueth the old Faction of Cabillans and Hoeckins, strengthneth Harlem, takes Schoonhooen, and brings the unhappy woman (who had married now four times) to declare Philip Duke of Burgundy Governour of Holland; and af∣ter her death Earl; which Earldom she resigned to him in her life time, to ran∣som her 5th well-beloved Husband, the Lord of Borselle from his hand. Philip the first, Duke of Burgundy, and 20th Earl of Holland, succeeding as right Heir by father and mother to the Go∣vernment of Holland, helped the Hollan∣ders and Zealanders to chase the Easter∣lings, now Lords at Sea; in sign whereof they bear to this day, a little Besom atop of their Main-mast, to shew they had swept the Sea of all competitors 1431; and with much adoe, composed the Tu∣mults raised in Amsterdam, Harlem, and Leyden, upon an intollerable imposition, by the Faction of the Hooks and Cabellans, whom at last he reconciled and awed, by the institution of a first President (the Earl of Nassau,) by promoting his Bastard David to the Bishoprick of Ʋtrech, by
suppressing the factious Family of Brede∣rode: By his League with the English, and seasonable Resignation of his Govern∣ment to his discontented son, the Earl of Charolois, during his sickness, who sub∣dued the Ligeois, razed Dirvant, succeed∣ed his Father and Margaret, Sister to Edward the 4th, King of England (in whose time printing was first invented at Harlem:) and as he had the name of war∣like, so he goes on, bringing the tumultu∣ous Ganthois to his mercy, the mutinous Town of Macklyn to a Ransom, the Leige∣oix to a submission, notwithstanding that it was the French Kings Embassadour that had incited them to rebel, upon a promise of 30000 men at a mouths warning; for which neighbourly part, he was even with that King, by assisting the Duke of Brittain against him, and ta∣king him Prisoner. He resolves to ruine the House of Brederode, to which purpose he brings ma∣ny of them to the Rack: He makes the sullen Frizons bring him white Paper, wherein he should write his own termes: He refuseth to answer King Lewis the 11th of France his Citation, 1470 to
Paris: He brings that King to a Truce gets the Dukedom of Gelders resigned to him, defies the Emperour Sigismond at Nevis, and brought hm to an advanta∣geous Peace, prospering in all his under∣taking; but that against the pitiful Swi, whose whole Countrey he said, was not worth the Bits of his Bridle, nor the spurs of his Army. After which he was slain at Nantes, lea∣ving all his Dukedoms, Earldoms, and Lordships to his Daughter Mary, who, the King of France neglecting the marriage of the Dalphin to her, was Contracted according to former Treaties in her Fa∣thers life time to Maximilian of Austria, the Emperour Frederick's Son; by whom she had Phillip, Arch-Duke of Austria; who undertaking the Government in her Right, after an Assembly held at Bruges reduced the revolted Gelders, settled such Governours in Harlem, Rotterdam, Ley∣den, and elswhere, as might over-awe Egmond, and the ancient Factions of Hoecks and Cabillaux, subdued Ʋtrech; and the trajectings as Guardian to his son, Philip of Austria; with whom he go∣eth, being chosen King of the Romans to
Hungary 1411; leaving Engelbert Earl of Nassau, 4th Governour of the Netherlands, whom the Emperour assists in the settle∣ment of the Government, the Pope se∣conding his Temporal Power, with his own Spiritual; who being hired by the distractions between Holland and Flan∣ders about the Sea, resigned his Charge to Albert Duke of Saxony; who with his Master Maximilian, the K. of the Romans went into Holland, settling the Towns as they passed, making a Peace between them and the Flemins, and punishing the Mutiniers at Harlem, and Almar,: Ru∣ining the Factions by their own fears and jealousies, keeping under the Fri∣zons and Gelders by a new Protestate, sent thither by the Emperour Maximilian, un∣till Philip the 2d Arch-Duke of Austria, was by his Father Maximilian possessed of the Netherlands 1494, under whom the Duke of Saxony defeated the Factions of Friezland by pretended kindnesses; whereby he set them one against the o∣ther, while both delivered to him their strong Holds, which he made so good use of, that they appeal from him and his Son George, to the Emperour; who yet
stood by his Governour, who in return for his Masters kindness, brought them of Friezland (after some redress of grievan∣ces, by their Commissioners) to pay his Master the 21th penny of all their E∣states, putting 6 men to govern there, while he reduced the Groningois, notwith∣standing the Protection of the Earl of Embden, and the followers of Col. Vyll (about which time a child spake in Hol∣land in the Mothers belly) and Philip of Austria being now King of Castile, dyed, and left Charles the 2d of that name the 35th Earl of Holland and Zealand, Lord of Friezland, Duke of Burgundy and Lem∣burgh Luxemburgh, Shiia, Corinthia, Earl of Flanders, Artois, with many other Mar∣quisates and Principalities; to which he added Millain, Overyssel, Gruningen, Cam∣bray, and Cambresis: his Grandfather Maximilian, the Emperour being his Guardian, and his Aunt Margaret Dow∣ager of Savoy his Governess; under whom Ann of Burgundy, that had recovered and walled in many lost Islands in Zea∣land dying; Budwyen was taken, and ra∣zed, the Geldrois, Groeningois, with the Earl of Embden, are conquered: Prince
Charles taking the Netherlands into his own hands from the Dutchess of Savoy, and the Duke of Saxony, by the assistance of the Lord of Iselsteen; under whom he constituted 7 Governours of Justice in Friezland, when he went to Spain for that Crown upon Ferdinand, of Arragon his Grandfather, by his Mother side death, and to Germany, for that Empire upon his Grandfather Maximilians de∣cease; settling Margaret of Austria, Wi∣dow of Castile, and Dowager of Savoy the 37th Governess of the Low Countries; whose Hrring-busses being seized by the Danes, they mutiny; seize Newport di∣stract Friezland, pretend Religion, and fly to the Duke of Gelders, until the Im∣perial Forces came down and awed them; insomuch that Groningen yeelds to the Emperour, as did Dam, Weddra, Coeuoelden, Huttem; Megen, Ʋtrecht, and most other places, the Gelders being not able to hold out against the Power of Spain and Germany. Upon the Dowager of Savoy's death, Mary, Dowager of Hungary, and Sister to Charles the 5th, is the 40th Governess of the Low-Countries; under whom the
new Chanel was made between Brussels and Antwerp: the Anabaptists were disco∣vered and banished; the War betwixt the Lubeckers and the Hollanders was ma∣naged by Vander-burch van Comper; and the new Haven at Middleburgh was begun 1536; and the notable surprize upon the French ships was acted in this man∣ner: There being a War between the Hol∣landers and the French, some French ships rid along their shore, snapping up their Vessels, and themselves somtimes in bed; whereupon 50 tall Dutchmen well Arm∣ed, hearing of these ships, went in a Hoy, lying under Hatches, and covered with Sacks of Wool out of the Mase towards them, who boarded it; but when they were busie about the Sacks of Wooll, they were entertained so rudely by those 50 men, with Fire-works and Granadoes, that they all fled, and left 6 ships Prizes to one Hoy, to be carried to Delph and sold. Now likewise the Emperour brought the Geldrois to a muteny, that dismantled their Towns, razed their Forts, and laid the Faction open to their Soveraigns Po∣wer;
who spoiled the Abetters Abeters of their Conspiracies, the French at Sea, and brought this unquiet People that rebel∣led every year for 527 years together to so good a temper, that they presented him at Genoa with 15000 Florens of Gold a Province, and quietly submitted to the Resignation he made of those Provinces to his Son at Brussels; who now by the name of Philip the 2d of Spain, and Lord of Austria, by Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy his Viceroy, demanded of the Ne∣therlands Supplies, for the payment of his Fathers debts; who would allow him none, unless forsooth he allowed a Con∣vocation of their general States; and then but a moyety neither of what he de∣manded, and was necessary for his set∣tlement. And not onely so, but notwithstand∣ing that he honoured their chief Nobi∣lity; as the Lord Horn, William of Nassau, the Earl of Egmont, with the order of the Golden Fleece at Brussels, they created such fears and jealousies between the King and the Noblemen, that it was re∣ported who were upon the refusal of the Tax designed for the Block, who for the
Rack, and who for perpetual Imprison∣ment; insomuch as that there was a per∣petual Feud between the Court and the Nobility, till the Government was dis∣solved, all things being represented to the worst; especially the Earls of Egmont, and Lornes carriage at the Truce between France and Spain, at Bruges, and at the Treaty between the same two Crowns at Cambray Their King was yet so intent upon ob∣liging them, that he appointed them a Council of State for matters of impor∣tance, as Peace, War, and Treaties with forreign Princes: A Privy-Council for Lawes, Pardons, Justice, &c. and a third Council for the Treasury; of which Councils they themselves were the major part, their most eminent Nobility being advanced, as the Earl of Egmo, Gover∣nour of Flanders, and Artois: The Prince of Orange, Governour of Holland Zealand, Ʋtrech; and afterwards of Burgundy, Jo. de ligni Earl of Arenbergh, Governour of Friezland, Overyssel, Groning, and Lea∣gen; Charles de Bunen, Governour of Gel∣derland; and Zuphten the Mmorencies, and Hornes of their respective Provinces;
all subject to Margaret of Austria, Dutch∣ess of Parma, and Sister to the King of Spain; when the very first instance of the ungrateful mens Power, is a Petition to their Soveraign a Spaniard, himself to remove all Spaniards from the Nether∣lands. A Petition the good King easily grant∣ed, though to the displeasure of many of his Courtiers, that had quitted their whole fortunes for employments, there diverting his very Army, which should have kept them in better obedience to his War in Barbary. And when they had prevailed in that, they give out that the Spanish Courtiers would be revenged of them, and that the chief Nobility of the Netherlands, the Sub∣scribers to that Petition, were designed to ruine a Counselor of Spain (it should seem a Pensioner of Holland) coming in great hast to the Earl of Egmont, th Lord Horn, and others at Chest in Gaunt, with news, that all those that consented to the Petition, for the removal of the Spaniard, the great Patron of the peo∣ples Liberty, should be put to Death; when yet his Majesty parted from them
friendly, 26 Aug. 1357. recommending to them the maintenance of Religion, that general stay of Government; the fi∣nishing of the new River from Antwerp to Brussels, for the conveniency of Trade; the erection of Doway University, for the propagation of Orthodox Learning; and the impression of the Complutensian Bi∣ble, for the dvancement of Religion; four excellent Designes; but so far en∣vyed by these undutiful people, that they suspected▪ the last as a Plot (as if the Printing of the Bible were a stratagem against Religion,) and cryed out against the third, as a breach of their Liber∣ties. CHAP. II. The Revolt of the Hollanders from their natural Allegiance 1564, and the management of that Revolt, till they became a Free State. FOr you must know, that about this time these good People weary of their ancient Government, began to search
for their old Charters, Priviledges, Bulls of favour, Customs; of which they pre∣tended one was, That no Popish Semi∣naries, such as Doway was, should be built upon their Frontiers; another, That they should suffer no violence, for∣sooth their Kings must wear a Sword in vain; a third, That no persons should be admitted to Office, unless he swore to be faithful to the Prince and people; and a fourth, That they might meet and act without their King, but he could do nothing without them; and that if he presumed to do any thing otherwise, they were discharged of their Alleigance. These, and other Moth-eaten Liberties belonging to the Dutchy of rabant, if to any at all since the Contract with Maximilian, May 16. An. 1488, together with the jealousies about Religion, and the murmurings about the tenth Peny, when their King was onely intent upon the settling of their Government by that Tax, and the prevention of Anabaptistical outrages, such as that in Munster, by his Proclamation against turbulent Inno∣vaters, were alledged first against the In∣quisition, which yet Mary, Dowager of
Hungary, lately regent graciously suspen∣ded upon their Petition at Antwerp, That she should not spoil their Trade, by her over∣much zeal for Religion. And now they had got that surmize of the Inquisition into the multitudes heads, every thing the King did, was termed the introducing it; for his Ma∣jesty no sooner (observing that the four Bishops of Cambrey, Arras, Tournay, and Ʋtrecht were unable to oversee effectually the 17 large Provinces of Belgium:) set up 14 new Bishops by the Pope (Paul the Fourth's) Order, and Cardinal Granvill's solicitations, than they declaim against them as so many new Inquisitors, and their respective Prebends, as so many as∣sistants in Persecutions; insomuch that the Earl of Egmont their Admiral, finds out another Charter, wherein it was de∣clared, That the Ecclesiastical estate could not be enlarged without their consent, and dispatcheth some Burgemasters, with complaints against dead Trade, and new Bishops to Spain; where observing the Kings resolution to assert his Govern∣ment against these popular surmizes, they remonstrate that his Majesty did ill to act
without the concurrence of the Lords, the States; and at their return home rais∣ed such Tumults and discontents, as might give opportunity to the Lords to meet; an opportunity they imbraced, wherein they unanimously agreed to a manifesto of the state of the Countrey, to be delivered to Margaret Dutchess of Parma their Governess, containing first, That the King was misled by ill Coun∣cellors. Secondly, That Cardinal Gran∣vill the principal Person the King relyed on, should be removed; as their Decla∣rations sent by Montigni and others, Aug. 16. 1562. March 11. 1563. into Spain: out of their Assemblies, which the Tu∣mults made necessary for the good Go∣verness to call too frequently; out of which some Lords, to palliate their Am∣bition, desired to be dismist; to which his Majesty returns gracious Answers, whereat they pretended dutiful submis∣sion, while they made their combination effectual; which they had no sooner done, than they tyre the Governess with her Assistant the Cardinal, with their de∣bates and divisions in all Meetings, that he retyres to Spain; and they raise Tu∣mults
at Harlem, stop the Courts of Ju∣stice at Antwerp, make a breach with England 1564, that made to the great prejudice of their poor people, who im∣proved the Commotions, for a whole year together. In a word, such was the apprehensions and fears that were wrought in the peo∣ple, that Groningen, Leeur-warden, Duen∣ter, and Ruremond, do violence to their Bishops and Clergy; Ourwexgen Abbey is robbed; all the Clergies Power and Ju∣risdiction is questioned; matters are ag∣gravated on both sides to dangerous de∣bates, notwithstanding the gracious An∣swer his Majesty vouchsafed Count Eg∣mont, Count Horne, the Lord of Brederode, and others upon their respective addres∣ses to the Court of Spain, in behalf of that unquiet people. Whereupon his Majesty thought good to settle Religion, as he did by his own and the Dutchess of Parmaes Letters; which the Grandees opposed, with the bare consideration of the present Com∣motions, though all the World knew they were the Authors of those Commo∣tions; as appeared upon the very first
publication of the Kings Letters, touch∣ing the Council of Trent; when there were Libels (the fore-runners of Sediti∣on) contrived by a great Lord, contain∣ing Complaints and Exhortations, in the name of the people to the Noblemen, about their Priviledge; and the Kings breach of promise scattered up and down in three or four streets of Antwerp. where∣in (amongst other things) they directed the Grandees, to cite the King to the Im∣perial Chamber about breach of Promise, and the infringement of their Liber∣ties. This bold Libel, and other false re∣ports (of which this one, to incense and injealous the Nobility was most malici∣ous, viz.: That the King of Spain should say, that it was but folly to busie them∣selves with Frogs, they must first fish for the great Salmos; meaning Horne and Egmont) brought the Netherlanders to an expostulation with their Soveraign, why he should decree any thing concerning them, without their consent. And a popular Tumult against these four Points, The Inquisition, The new Bi∣shops, The entertainment of the Council
of Trent, and The decay of Trade: Inso∣much that most of the chief Noblemen, the Prince of Orange, the Marquess of Bergen, the Earles of Egmont, Horne, Hock∣strate, the Lord of Brederode, met with the Male-content Princes of France and Ger∣many, under the pretence of an enter∣tainment at Breda and Hockstrate, where they heightned one anothers animosities to that degree of discontent, as produ∣ced a private League among themselves, and a Publick Manifesto of the state of the Provinces, by Francis Baldwyn an Out∣lawed, but cunning Person; they sent for (and consulted) out of France: wherein, among other matters, it was ex∣pressed, 1. That the Mind could not be for∣ced, and that the Conscience should be free. 2. That Religion consisted not in out∣ward Ceremony, but in the inward Per∣swasion. 3. That the King should hear every mans perswasion, and endeavour to con∣vince them. 4. That the Scripture should decide Controversies.
5. That every peaceable man should be allowed free exercise of Religion, whatsoever might be his perswasion; because all the World could not hinder a Religion that is of God. 6. That several abuses in the Church, whereat the people were offended, should be reformed. 7. That the King should think none could be true to him, that was not faithful to God. 8. That the Masters of the most useful Trades, and most large Stocks in the Na∣tion, would desert it upon the first set∣tlement of the Ecclesiastical Govern∣ment, to enjoy the Liberty of their Con∣sciences; and go to Embden, France, and England, with whom likewise the best Souldiers and Gentlemen would take this occasion to withdraw. 9. That the strength of Kings, is the love of their Subjects; whereof the most considerable are they of the Religion, for Birth, Interest, Parts, Estates, Pru∣dence, and Learning. 10. That it is no new thing to tole∣rate divers Religions, the danger of a Countrey proceeding not from private
Opinions, but from secret Passions and Interests; which together with the noise made of trouble and War, which they pretended most to fear, who most pro∣moted them, put the discontented No∣bility assembled at the Prince of Par∣mai's marriage at Brussels: And afterward at St. Tradon, after a Declaration how much pity it was, that so populous a Countrey should be ruined by evil Counsellors, upon a resolution to Peti∣tion his Majesty, in the name of the peo∣ple, for their ancient Rights and Liber∣ties, and for the further prosecution of the affairs; to enter to mutual Oaths, to stand by one another, that what wrong was done to any one, should be done un∣to all; a Confederacy that gratified the Hopes of many, improved the Fears of more, and disturbed the Minds of all men, altering the very Face of the Go∣vernment, the King and Church being awaked to a resolution and Rigour on the one hand, and the People to a Fury and Madness on the other; it being a∣mong other matters bruited abroad, that the Duke of Brunswich should Levy 10000 German Horse, to reduce them to sub∣jection;
which, together with the French suggestion of their approaching desola∣tion, and the German Princes aggravati∣on of their Slavery, when all their neigh∣bour Countreys were free, and they were themselves Members of the Empire, and so should enjoy the priviledges of the Pacification at Passau; adding, that their Kingdom was Elective, and that upon six such Articles as their King had bro∣ken: That by the Feodau Law, that King, their Lord, had forfeited his Right to his Fee, by fellonious actings on their goods and lives, and many more unseemly alle∣gations in Private discourse, and Publick Pasquils, encouraged the Contrivers of this disturbance, to Commissionate A∣gents to remonstrate the case of the Pro∣vinces in the Imperial Diet, then at Aus∣burch, before Maximilian the Emperour; and when the Governess had offered so much reasonable moderation, as pre∣vailed with the more modest part of the Knights of the Order, and other Noble∣men; interceding likewise very zea∣lously with his Majesty of Spain, for the confirmation of it, the People are taught to protest against their Governours pro∣ceedings,
as to compliance with the Go∣verness and his Majesty, in their four se∣ditious Petitions to the King and State▪ which were no more than so many saw∣cy Menaces what would follow, if they were not gratified in their Propositions, that were not so much vouchsafed the honour of a perusal; as were not the o∣ther unmannerly Remonstrances of Gaunt, Bruges, Ypre, Hondschoon, about the decay of Trades and Handicrafts; and those of Flanders about Liberty of Reli∣gion, carried on in a most Tumultuous and Riotous manner, by a Rabble of Geux or Beggars, as my Lord Barlement called them; upon which appellation they coyned Meddals with the Kings Pi∣cture, on the one hand a Wallet, and a Dish on the other, with this Inscription, Faithful to God and the King, even to bear the Wallet; and presented a rebellious Peti∣tion by the Lord of Brederode, to which the unquiet people would take no an∣swer, but an allowance for all their facti∣ous Assemblies for the time past, and a full Liberty to their Consciences for the time to come; with ecurity that all mat∣ters should be hereafter transcted, with
the consent of the Estates. Yea, and notwithstanding as can did and satisfa∣ctory a return as could be expected; the Gentlemen of the Confederacy, as they were called, fearful of the consequences of their Seditions and Mutinies, exaspe∣rated the people with strange Letters, bearing Date An. 1615, which they disco∣vered; threatning them and their Adhe∣rents with extremities, intimating the mighty Sea and Land preparations; which enflamed the Countrey into a ge∣neral sedition and combustion, that pro∣voked the Government to Rigour on the one hand, and incensed the Populacy to Tumults on the other: The chief Con∣spirators judge the humour so high, that they might work upon it; and to that purpose order an Assembly amongst themselves for the Government: An As∣sembly, I know not whether more redi∣culous, as wherein some were attired in Fryars Gray, others carried Foxes-tailes in their Hats, others carried Dishes and goods like Beggars, their servants crying God save the Beggars: Or more dreadful, all being rude and unruly; which yet the Princess invited civilly to Arschor
and Duffel, the one 6 Leagues, the other 3 from Antwerp; where a daring Petition is delivered to the Earl of Egmont and other Grandees; who under pretence of acting for the Governess, betrayed her, insisting on the very same things in their Hranges, that the Rabble did in their Petitions; yea and enrolling underhand formidable Levies, under pretence of their securities about Villevoord, while Antwerp was in a Combustion, by the Faction of Brederode; who raised Forces for the Liberty of the Subject, on the one hand, as the Earls of Megen and Arem∣bergh drew up Forces for the Kings Pre∣rogative on the other: The Prince of Orange taking this opportunity to seize the Government of the Place, as Sediti∣ous Preachers did to usurp the Pulpits of it; the Magistrates being jealous and di∣strustful of the Populacy, and the Popu∣lacy of the Magistracy; and all afraid of the 1200 newly levyed there. Which general distemper, being not a little improved, by the approaches of the Duke of Brunswick's Army to the Borders; they rescue some Prisoners in a Mutiny, and create such fears and jea∣lousies
touching the Confederate Gen∣tlemen (as they were termed,) that they insist upon Assurance and Security: The Ministers dissenions and disputes come to Tumults, the Sectaries (under which name all discontents were shrowd∣ed) preach and hear in Armes, upon pretence of Letters intercepted, that the Droissard had 3000 men inrolled, with Cartloads of Arms, to Massacre all those of the Reformation, upon the Ringing of a Bell: A suggestion that enraged the Multitude to cast off the Princes and the Earl of Egmont's Government (who in∣deed underhand encouraged them) to break Images, and all Church Utensils to counterfeit, and act the Preachers; to disturb all Church-meetings with their Tumultuous cry Vive le Gueux; which so lighted the Governess to deal plainly with his Majesty, That the Prince of O∣range, the Earls of Egmont, Horne, and Hoochstrate, had betrayed the Govern∣ment, which nothing but his Presence, and an Army could settle: Though in the mean time she was so much a woman, as to dissemble her fears, and enter to a emn promise of Protection of the
Conederates; which had accorded the differences for the present, but that the Prince of Conde, Admiral Coligni, and o∣ther noble Protestants of France interpo∣sed their jealousies of that accord, with fair overtures of assistance: Whereupon the Seditious keep in, and engage some of the Kings Forces; whom the Earl of Egmont sent on purpose to widen the dif∣ference to an irreconcilableness, to pro∣voke them upon pretence of secret In∣structions, they said were given to the Kings Officers, to murther them at the League, and turn the Provinces to an ab∣solute Monarchy, in two most bitter Let∣ters of Francisco de Allanas the Spanish Agent in the Court of France, to the La∣dy Governess; directing the cutting off of the Kings leaders of the Sedition; meaning Orange, Egmont, &c. one by one very privately, and so examplarily, that the Rebellion it self may be odious to all Christendom: And concluding that the Riot could not be without the Intelligence and Supports of some Great men, and namely of those three that carries so good a shew, meaning Orange, Egmont, and Horne.
Passages da ed Aug. 1566; which with the intimation of seizing the Marquess of Berghes, and the Baron of Montigny in Spain, of chusing De Alva Governour; and many more sent to Egmont from his Brother Montigny then in Spain, ama∣zed the Nobility into an Assembly Oct. 3. at Duremond, where the Resolutions were so high for a Defensive War, and the natural way of opposing Force with Force, that they break up in discontent, Arm themselves, seize several strong Holds, and upon assurance of the War∣like Preparations in Spain, Alarm the ex∣cellent Governess to Arms. CHAP. III The Hollanders War against their own Sovereign begins. VAlenciens of Henault, a place very Zealous for the free exercise of Religion, Cambresa, Haysel, Ma∣stricht, and many other Towns, refused the Kings Garisons; till forced by a grea∣ter Power, after the Decollation of the
Herlins Father and Son, with other Ring∣leaders of the Revolt, the reducing whereof, staggered the Faction to hum∣ble supplications to his Majesty; who by the mediation of some Princes of Ger∣many for liberty of Conscience, for which, fears and jealousies upon their late de∣feats having divided their Leaders they offered three Millions of Florens, an osten∣tation of their riches, as the Spanish Council judged it, rather than an Ar∣gument of their submission: But in vain, the Dutchess forbidding the Confede∣rates any approach to her Court, and at∣taching all Passes, Forts, strong Holds, while the Reformers spend 6 Months in Petitions, Remonstrances, Replies, and Protestations, watching a fair opportu∣nity to appear; (especially against the new Oath upon that occasion introdu∣ced) which they had upon the Edict; That the Confederates, and all their Ad∣herents, should appear before the Go∣verness within 0 dayes, upon pain of being declared Rebels: when those that fled not to England, took the Field in Troops, now desperate, under the Seig∣niour of Tholouse, who hovered about
Antwerp; but disowned by the Prince of Orange, till he was surprized at Au∣sterweel; where 1590 were slain, and ex∣cluded the Town of Antwerp, being it self in an uproar for two days; but with so▪ little success, that the Confederacy seemed to be broken; the Lord of Brede∣rode and his followers, being command∣ed 5 miles out of Amsterdam, with a se∣vere injunction to behave himself there so, as to give the Governess or his Ma∣jesty no further cause of discontent; an injunction the Burgemasters of Amster∣dam took so ill, that they guarded their dear Lord by Hundreds, protested a∣gainst the present proceedings; especi∣ally when the Prince of Orange, with a formidable retinue of Gentlemen, re∣tyred in discontent; first to besiege his Town of Breda, and then to his County of Nassau, advertising the confederate Gentlemen, to prepare themselves for light or resistance; and leaving this with the Earl of Egmont, who met him to take his leave at Willebrouke; viz: That seeing he would not resolve with him and o∣thers, to stop the entry of the Duke of Alva into the Netherlands, as it had been
propounded in their Assembly at Drure∣mond, he should be the Bridge whereon the Spaniards would first march, to plant their Tiranny in these parts. With which words, Brederode, whose word was, God save my soul and my Ho∣nour, with the other Confederates rety∣red into forreign Parts, save that a Party made Head at Vianen two or three days; where they, and all their Confe∣derates were defeated, Antwerp, Amster∣dam, and all other places yeelding to Mansfield and his Walloons, who Level∣led their Gates, and reduced them to an absolute subjection to the King of Spain, and Ferdinando de Alvarez, Duke of Alva; not a Confederate appearing, but either in Prison, on the Scaffold, or in Beggars habit, truly Geux now: so dreadful a thing it is to meddle with them that are given to change, for sud∣dain is the rune of them both. He that is of a rebellious spirit, a cru∣el Messenger shall be sent to him: And such was the Duke of Alva, with 8638 Foot, and 1200 Horse, mustered June 2. 1567, at a place called Rhethees in Pie∣mont, between Germany, France, and
Spain, and Marched in three Squadrons into Holland; where the report of them no sooner arrived, than the French, the Switz, and the Genevians, were by the Confederates allarmed to a dreadful posture of defence: Especially consider∣ing that the Duke advanced his Power and his March both together, improving his 8000 to 32000 men and as the Con∣federates gave out, looked sternly on all, even moderate Persons, saying (upon the approach of Egmont) as they report∣ed, Behold that great Lutheran: A word that was laid hold of to enjealous the whole Nation, quartering his Souldiers round about him, as one that designed that disorder: a fair occasion to make the Netherlands an absolute Monarchy: setting up a Council of Twelve, instead of the Council of State, and acting with a full power to dispose of all places, Ci∣vil, and Military; to judge of all Cases, Publick, or Private; no respect being had to the Priviledges, Customs, Lawes, Jurisdictions, or Appeals of that Coun∣trey in former times; which he managed so severely, that Executions and Banish∣ments swept away half the Countrey;
the Keys of most Towns were taken, the Gates of several Cities were taken down, the Earls of Egmont and Horne (the most eminent subscribers of the late unduti∣ful Petition) were Imprisoned, Count Charles of Mansfield, and many others escaped, the former Garrisons were dis∣placed. New Citadels were built, whereof the most eminent at Antwerp, on the one side of the Suburb called Kiel, along the Ri∣ver, compassed in with five mighty Bul∣warks, and every one defended by a Ca∣valier or Mount; and all things were set∣led so well, that there was a Monument set up for the Duke with this Inscripti∣on, Ferdinando Alvarez de Toledo, Albae Duci Philippi di, Hispan regis apud Belgas Praefecto, quod extinctâ seditione, rebellibus pulsis, Religione procuratâ, justitiâ cultâ, Provincias pace firmavit, Regis optimi fide∣lissimo ministro politum—Iongelingi opus ex aere Captivo. That the Duke spared half his Forces under the Earl of Aremberge, for the Guises assistance against the Refor∣mers, that e seized the Prince of Orange, his eldest son; the Earl of Herren at Lo∣Lovain;
whence he was sent to Spain, till 1575. He cited the Prince himself, who an∣swered his Citation at large. He sentenced the Netherlands in the Inquisition for seditious Heresies 1568, and had his Sentence confirmed in Spain the same year he razed the place of Culenberge, where the Council of State used to meet; setting up a Pillar in the middest of the Ruine with this Inscripti∣on, Regnante Philippo 2do, Cath. Hisp. Rege in his suis inferioribus Germaniae regionibus, Gubernanti Vero Ferdinando Alvar. de Tole∣do Albae Duce, &c. Florenti, de Palant quondam domum solo aequaris, sancitum est, ob execrandam memoriam repetitae, in eâ conju∣rationis adversus Religionem Eccl▪ Cath. Rom. regiam Majestatem, & ipsas regiones Anno 1568. 5. Cal. Junii. He proceeded in the Process against the Prince of Orange; in the midst of which great actions, some fugitive Gen∣tlemen that had taken refuge in Cloy∣sters, designed with some Horse and Foot, they corresponded with, to surprize the Duke at his devotion, between Brussels, and the Cloyster of Groenendale in So∣men
wood: The Prince of Orange Prints his Justification against Slanderers, The Earl of Hoochstraten produced Five Arti∣cles, drawn out of the Priviledges of Brabant, either belonging to the Golden∣fleece, or contained in the Joyous entry, to impeach the proceedings against him and the Prince of Orange. The Elector Palatine of the Rhine stops the Duke of Alvarez's money, under pre∣tence, that the Merchants that convey∣ed it, payed not the accustomed duties. The Emperour and the Princes inter∣pose in the behalf of Orange a Prince of the Empire. That Prince, and his Brother, Lodo∣wick of Nassau, arm with this Motto, Re∣cuperari aut mori; resolving to distract the Duke de Alva, with several attempts up∣on many places at once; but unsucces∣fully; the Lord of Villers, with his 3000 French Protestants being defeated in their design upon Ruremond in Gelderland, up∣on the Mase, as Seigneour Coquevil with his 1100 Fugitives was at St Valiers, in the mouth of the River Some; onely Count Lodowick vanquished, Count Aremberge, with the overthrow of 3000 men, May 24,
1568, whom the Governour revenged on the best Gentlemen of the Revolt that came to his hands, not sparing the Earls of Horn and Egmont; who after a due Process against them, were beheaded June 5th, 1568. The Barons, Montigni and Berghen, who died in Spain, attainted for their lives and goods in the Netherlands; a severity imparallel'd, yet not able to repress the Insolencies of the Factious Dutch, who now pretend themselves desparate, and cry, No man was safe, and so madly joyn with Count Lodowick of Nassau's, Germans, (till they were becalmed with the Impe∣rial Interdict) to besiege Groningen; whence De Alva quickly forced them, with their shattered Colours: in some of whom, they carried Pelicanes, in others, the Roses of England; from whose Queen they looked for all their succour: In o∣thers this device, Pro Lege, Rege, & Gre∣ge, along the Mase; about which they took in some small Garisons, and might have taken more; yea, and overthrown Don Fred. the Dukes sons, 4000 Harque∣buiers, had not the Landtskneghts (as be∣fore) when they should fight cried Ghelt,
Ghelt: till the Duke himself (who was strongly intrenched every night) pursu∣ed them by day into France; where (the French King promises failing, and the Rebels mutyning among themselves; now they were already weary of the war) they resolve for Germany now out of or∣der too; the discontented French Nobili∣ty joyning with them, and the Prince of Orange, declaring, That such undutiful persons as set on any Designs, save the Liberty of the Countrey, and their Con∣sciences, of what perswasion soever they were, should be enrolled among his mor∣tal Enemies. In Germany they lodge themselves, till the Queen of England being disobliged by the Duke of Alva, about money she had taken of some Merchants (though the Duke pretended it his,) for her pri∣vate use upon Interest, interdicted all trade with Holland, making Hamburgh the Staple for Cloth; when the Prince of Orange, with his unquiet followers, as∣sisted the French Protestants, as De Alva (with his well disciplined Regiments) did the French King; both Parties so translating the Wars out of their own
Countrey: The Garison at Valencianes mutiny against the Earl of Lodron, an Ita∣lian; but being drawn out by fair words and pay, are cut off by two Regiments of Spanish Horse, that surrounded them at their Muster in Bourgethout near Ant∣werp. Such as could not escape out of the Netherlands, drew together in the Woods by Land; and those that did, took to Pyracies at Sea: Both these took Briel a convenient Harbour on the Hollanders side, and agreed for Dover, as fit a place on the English, and improved themselves incredibly upon the discontents in the Countrey, at the New-floud on All Saints day 1570, that swept away their Towns: And the new Taxes (the 10th, 20th, and 100th peny levyed by Soldiers upon the very Clergy themselves) that carried away their Estates, especially at Ʋtrecht, where many Orders, Answers, Replies, Duplies, and Writings passed; but all decided by a Garison of Veteranes, sent thither, that made a shift to perswade the troublesome Town, that they had forfeited all their Estates, by their con∣nivance at the Image-breakers, with
other Incendiaries and their Adherents; and at Brussels, where neither Bakers, nor Brewers would either bake or brew upon the new Impost; insomuch, that all Hol∣landers turning Pyrates under Will. Earl vander Alarch, and forbidden Harbour on the English Coast, with 40 Sail, most Fly-boats, sailed from Dover towards North-Holland: In their way whither, they took 2 rich Ships, the one of Antwerp, the other of Bis∣cay; and spoiled other men of War before Amsterd. Enchuesen, and in the Mase; drow∣ning Boslules Forces before the Briel, who came to encoūter them: they deal under∣hand with the Flushingers, inhabiting the next Sea Town to Briel (notwithstand∣ing the Dukes Agents cunning, who made a Breach in their Wall, under pre∣tence of fortifying it, cloyed their Can∣non, opened their Sluices, and counter∣feited their Keys) to keep out the Spaniards, as they did with the Villages of Coukirke, the Inhabitants of Daventer; and that not unsuccesfully, since Zealand prospered in its Pyracies so well, that their Captain Worst, with seven ships, had beaten the Spaniards with 30; and being
assisted from England and France, entred Lavere, chased 7 Spanish ships thence to Tergoes, and with one ship, kept 6 Middle∣burgh Boyers (or little ships) in their Harbour; Count Lodowick of Oraney prospering no less with his French Male∣contents by Land, surprizing many in Henault (in this manner: Twelve of his men as Merchants lodging in Town, and finding that the Porter would open the Gates for money at any time of Night, went out at 1. a Clock in the Morning, killed the Porter, seized the Keys, let the Prince (who attended without) into Town, crying out Liberty, liberty is given you by the P. of Orange, to free you from the 10th peny, and from all the D of Al∣va's exactions;) shutting up Middleburgh; taking 30 Boats at Broome-Creek; forcing the Island Zuytbeacland; attempting most of the great Towns of Flanders; seizing all ships whatever: Especially the Duke of Medina Celie's great Navy, wherein he came to assist and succeed the Duke De Alva, working upon the humours of the Sea-faring men of Enchuese (a well∣peopled, and a conveniently scituated Town, belonging to West-Friezland up∣on
the South Sea) to withstand the Spa∣niards, and defend their Town by their own Burgers; where Johnson and Peter∣son were so stubborn and troublesom, that they said it should cost them their black heads, before any Spaniard (there become a hated name) should enter there with his Ten peny Order; and one Bieri∣che a Brewer did the feat, beating a Drum so long in the King of Spain's name, that they had got strength enough to exclude him, the pretence of opposing Spanish Garrisons, took in the Towns of Almor, Horne, Edam, and Medembly, and in a manner all Holland possessed by the Earl of March, Dotkom, Dousburgh, and all Zuphten, by the Earl of Sheerenbergh, with Hardrwicke, Elbruch, and Hattem in Gelders, Goot, Oldeel, and Campen in Over∣ysel, Speuke, Bolswort, and Franeker in Friezland; and the jealouses raised be∣tween De Alva, and the Duke of Medina Coeli weakned all undertakings, onely the Government had this advantage, that the Seditious were raw and undis∣ciplined, the Multitude fickle and un∣settled, the French succours heady and in controllable, Mons, and other places
were untenable; wherefore notwith∣standing the Prince of Orange his plau∣sible Declaration for the natural necessi∣ty of self-defence, in the preservation of their Religion and Liberty. His Army mouldereth away in discon∣tent. 1200 Landtskneghts, 500 Reisters, 2500 Burgers onely resolving to stand by him, in the defence of Mechlin, the Prince being afraid every minute of be∣ing delivered up by his Followers. Mons yeelds upon Articles, Maklyn is sacked, and ransomed, as was Zuphten, Nairden, Parendam, and Harlem; all de∣serted by the Confederates, now ama∣zed, and retyring to Germany and other places, upon the Duke D' Alvae's success at Mons, and his severity in other places; onely at Sea they did great mischief, burning ships in Middleburgh, and most other Havens, and blocking up the Spa∣nish Power within their Land; his Sea-Forces being so battered, that he was forced to lie at Anchor before Antwerp most part of the year 1573, and look on his undutiful Subjects, Lording no less at Sea, than he himself at Land; spoiling many passages with sunk Boats full of
Stones; building strong Holds upon the Mear of Harlem; whereabout sailed an 100 sail of ships, borrowed by the Prince of Orange from England, France, Sweden, and Holland, to three and thirty men of War; and three Galliasses, the Amsterdam men had equipped for the King of Spain: Which going to strengthen Middleburgh, were sorely battered between the Ram∣kins and Flushing, at the same time that the Zealanders made 1300 men to sur∣prize and burn the Castle of Sabergh, be∣tween Flushing and Middleburgh, with the Island and Town of Tolon, by the intelli∣gence conveyed by two ame Pigeons: A success that lased not long, the Prin∣ces mixed Fleet being defeated the 28th of May, with the loss of one and twenty ships; and the Sluce, Mase, Harlem, Meer▪ and all the Coast being so entirely sub∣ject to the Spanish Navy, that it gave Law to all English, French, and Dutch ships on that Coast. Till free Trade being Proclaimed by the Prince of Orange, for French, English, Scottish, Germanes, and Easterling Mer∣chants; and the Flushingers being told that they must fetch their pay out of the
Spanish Prizes in the Road of Armuyden, several Biscay ships and Convoys between Amsterdam and Ʋtrech were seized; the Artillery on the Dike of Ramekins was surprized; and the Dike it self between Flushing and Ramekins (being of great conveniency) was fortified; while alass Ramekins likewise being taken, in the  time the Prince his long-promised  are , and the Harlo, after 31 weeks hardship, yeeld to the mercy of their Besiegers; against whom, these Watermen were most fortunate at Sea, being better acquainted with those untoward Coasts than their Enemies; and likewise more vigilant, active, and industrious, and much assisted from Ger∣many, France, and England, and the Mer∣chants of Holland; whence the Proverb, That the Duke of Alva, during his Go∣vernment, had made the Merchants and Mariners of Holland Soldiers; The Neat∣heards of Spain, Hidalgos, i. e. Gentlemen; The German Soldiers, Bribers; The Wal∣loons Theeves; (who were wont to be good men) Gentlewomen, and honest Virgins, Strumpets, and Whores; and Bawds, Ladies and Gentlewomen.
Insomuch, that refusing the Empe∣rours mediation for peace, they surprized Geertruydenbergh, Rally the ships of West-Friezland, Enchuysen, Monykindam, and the Waterlands; to defeat the thirty ships of Amsterdam, and lodge some French and English▪ between Delph, otterdam, the Hague, and Leyden, to succour those pla∣ces and the Maseland sluice; to counte∣nance the erection of a Fort at the Head of the Chanel of Middleburgh, and take in Komerswael. Which Particulars, with the Mutinies (begot by the Hollanders, the best at it in the World) in his Army, forced the D. Alva and his Son to Spain; Do Lewis de Requiescens succeeding in his charge and misfortunes: and seeing Middle∣burgh and the great Fleet appointed to relieve it, vanquished before his eyes; being then upon the great Dike of Ber∣ghen, by the miscarriage of his Letters and directions; which yet was recompen∣ced with the overthrow of Count Lodo∣wick of Nassau, and his motley Troops of English, French, and German male∣contents; among whom was Christopher the Elector Palatine's Son at Monkerbeyd,
after they had raised the Siege of Ley∣den. Which was no sooner over, than Champigni, with some other Dutchmen, raised a muteny among the Spaniards, which neither Priests nor Jesuites could pacifie; they crying, as the Landtskneghts used to do, That they would have Ghelt, Ghelt, and no Preachment upon the Ele∣ctors Interest; and Todo, Todo Dineros, y non Pulabras, That is, Money (they meant their Arrears for the dead and living) and no words. And Dineros Todo, i. e. Money, and at a Mutiny, that cost Antwerp 400000 Gil∣ders; while the Zealanders took 15 men of War before their very faces, while the Spaniards were intent upon the two Forts they designed upon either Bank of the River Mase, beneath Gorrechom; and lost in the Watry and Marsh-Countrey, about After, Delf, Wormer, Ryp, Graft, Purmerend, and Ʋlpendam in West-Friez∣land, and Waterland; insomuch that the Spaniards seemed very inclinable to a peace; as seemed by their overtures to the Prince of Orange. Which yet the States refused, as ap∣pears
by their sawcy Petition, becoming Subjects that submitted only with their swords in their hands; and their cutting the Dike, and raising all the Sluices, say∣ing that they had rather have a spoiled Countrey, than have lost one, to pre∣vent the taking of Leyden; after which, many other Towns had followed, with their resolution to live and die with the Prince of Orange. With which resolution, they kept Ley∣den (in so great extremity, as to coyn Paper-money; upon which was inscribed, Haec Libertatis ergo) for 11 months, de∣feating the Spaniards ships about Leyde with stratagems and wiles, and keeping the Passages open for Supplies, till Octob 3d. It was after a months famine strangely relieved, and quitted by the Spanirds; and the Prince coming thither himself to see it fortified, charitably recruited it by the Neighbours collections, as a place that had cost the Hollanders a Million of Gold, the Prince of Orange's two Bro∣thers, and a Cosin, all three Princes of the Empire. Whereupon their Soveraign offered
(with the intercession of the Emperour Maximilian) very gracious Propositions of peace, which could not be accepted; in regard (as the Earl of Switzenburgh observed at Breda where they traded) the Rebls could not trust their Sove∣raign; as indeed no security can satisfie men guilty of Treason against their Prince; and therefore he that draweth his sword against his Prince, must throw away the scabbard, and never be recon∣ciled to him; it being reasonable that a disloyal Person, should not think his So∣veraign would be true to him, when he hath been so peridious to his Sove∣raign. But the Treaty at Breda 1575, was not a little reputation to the men of the Re∣volt; who being hitherto esteemed but turbulent Boulfeus, are now respected as just Enemies; in which capacity, to preserve their Lives, Wives, Children, Goods, and what was dearer than all these, their Religion (they are their own words;) they bethink themselves of a Protector, and 1. They propound the Empire, which they laid aside as too much divided in it self.
2. France, which yet they waved as perfidious to them of the Religion, in the Massacre at Paris, and exhausted by their own civil Wars. In this extreamity the distressed States by five Commissioners humbly submit them∣selves unto the Q of Englands Protection: Or if necessity so required, to acknowledge her for their Princess and Soveraign; issued from the Earls of Holland and Zealand, by the Lady Philippa, Daughter to William the third of that name, Earl of Henault and Holland, &c. Which the wise Queen entertained not immediately, to prevent the jea∣lousies of Neighbour Princes; but 1. Received their Exiles to her Har∣bour and Countrey. 2. Mediated for peace, with a Prote∣station, that upon refusal she would succour them. 3. Gave them leave to leavy men, and buy Ammunition in England. And 4. Supplyed them with money upon security, while the Spaniards mutiny for want of it. The King of Spain breaks in the Mer∣chants debts 14 Millions of Duckets, the
Pope dispensing with, and nulling all his Bonds and Obligations. The chief Commander, Don Lewis, with his Marshal Vitells, dye. All the Countrey is up against the King of Spains intollerable Impositions surprizing the Council of State, he erect∣ed upon his Governours death, the ha∣tred of the Spaniards being by the Dutch Artifices become universal, and all pla∣ces petitioning against strangers, mean∣ing Spaniards. The Queen of England being somwhat cold and indifferent, the Provinces in∣vite the Duke of Anjou, the King of France his only Brother to their Protection; who dealing in the late mentioned Mutinies, surprized the Cittadel of Cambray; and upon Don John of Austria, the next Go∣vernours unpleasing carriage, made up of statagems and threats, joyned Brabat in a strict League with Holland and Zea∣land against the Spaniards and their Ty∣ranny; joyning his Interest with the Prince of Orange for leavies in Germany, and assistance from England. From the last of which, upon their promise to maintain their Religion and
Allegiance, they are assured of men and money by their Orator the Lord of Swe∣venghen, and Captain Horsley (it being her Interest rather to engage the Papists there, than in her own Dominions;) with whom Secretary Wilson, and Mr Wendebank went and payed the money, receiving the States Obligation, with the security of Brussels Gaunt, Bruges, Dun∣kirk, Newport, and Middleburgh; where (with free passages were made by raising the Sluices according to the Queens di∣rection, in several places of the Country, for fear the Spaniards might prevail at Sea. And the union was effected (upon the Mutinies of Groninghen and Zuphten) be∣tween the States, for the expulsion of Spaniards; with an acknowledgment of their Allegiance to the King of Spain: By virtue of which, Colonel Balour, and his Englsh, having brushed the Spa∣niards, the States capitulated with Don of Austria; whose vain conceits of Con∣quering England, lost the Netherland, and would have agreed with him, could they have had any assurances for performance of Articles, at the great conferences be∣tween
his Deputies and the Prince of O∣range at Gertrudenbergh May 22, 1577; which failing, his practises were discover∣ed in setting the Provinces at variance among themselves, that he might go∣vern them all; by his Letters to Spain intercepted, and his vain attempt upon Antwerp. Which made all the Provinces revolt from Don John, some to the States-Ge∣neral at Brussels, that declared onely for Liberty and Priviledges, and others to the Prince of Orange, with the States of Holland and Friezland, that declared also for Religion. CHAP. IV. How the English assisted the Hollan∣ders, and made them a Free State. ESpecially, when her Majesty the Queen of England, the onely suc∣cour of the distressed States, decla∣red for them by Mr Wilkes; whereupon Leeuwarden mutined, and yeelded to
them: Antwerp is dismantled, Germany sends in Aides, reda is delivered up, Groninghen is Tumultuous, the Prince of Orange is invited to be Rovard, or Go∣vernour of Flanders, Don John of Austria is declared Enemy to the States, not∣withstanding his Army of 16000 Foot, and 2000 Horse. The Nobility revolt, Amsterdam asserts its Liberty, the pacification at Gaunt so much insisted on by the Queen, is con∣firmed, the Duke of Anjou offereth his as∣sistance, and marcheth to distresse He∣nault. The case of the afflicted Netherlands, is taken into consideration, upon St. Alde∣gon's motion, at the Imperial Assembly at Wormes, whence the Duke of Anjou had 12000 men towards his relief of the Low-Countreys, under the notion of the Defenders of the Liberty of the Provin∣ces against the Spaniards and their Ad∣herents. Colonell Norris, Stuart; Captain Bing∣ham, and Candish, saved the States whole Army, by a brave Retreat they main∣tained for four miles, with three Regi∣ments in their shirts, by Rymenant: The
Queen seasonably assisted them with 30000l, when their Army was so likely to moulder away for want of pay, that she thought fit to intercede for the di∣stressed States with his Majesty of Spain and Don John, by the Lord Cobham, and Sir Fracis Walsingham; and when that failed, a Religious Peace (as they called it) which the States-General consented to, was settled; which bred great jealou∣sies in the Provinces; where many were still stiff for Popery, especially at Gaunt, till the Queen of England declared a∣gainst them, and promised notwith∣standing that Duke Casimer, and the D. of Anjou retired in discontent, to stand by the Protestant States to the utmost, as she did effectually; having brought the Estates first to stricter Union and Alliance at Ʋtrech 1579, than that be∣fore at Gaunt; and afterwards to erect a Council of State, for the management of affairs: whose very first debate, was a Consultation about the alteration of Go∣vernment, to shorten the War, and en∣gage some Person in their defence. The next, was the taking and demo∣lishing of several strong Holds, that had
been too serviceable to the King of Spain But their affairs not prospering, they resolve upon the Duke of Anjou as their Soveraign, upon 27 Articles signed on both sides, with Medals coyned, where∣on were these devices; Leonem loris mus li erat: Liber revinciri Leo pernegat: Pro Christo grege & lege: Religione & justitià reduce vocato ex Gulliâ pacatâ duce Andega∣riensi, elgiae Libertatis vindice vos terrâ go excubo ponto 1580: Si non nobis saltem posteris. And that being dispatched, they a∣gree upon Martial Discipline, and relieve Steenwich, under the conduct of Sir John Norris; who victualled it, and raised the Siege; having given notice of it in Let∣ters, which he shot in his Bullets: The States-General in the mean time an∣swering the King of Spain's Proscripti∣on against the Prince of Orange, and pro∣viding against the insolences of the Pa∣pists, by a restraint upon the exercise of their Religion at Brussels and Antwerp de∣clare thus, The States General of the United Provinces, Guelders, Holland, Zealand,
Zuphten, Friezland, Overysel, and roenin∣ghen, having declared Prince Philip of Austria, second of that name, King of Spain, fallen from the Sigioy of the said Provinces, by reason of his extraor∣dinary and too violent Government a∣gainst their Freedom and Priviledges solemnly sworn by him; having by the way of Right and Armes taken upon us the Government of the publick State, and of the Religion in the said Provinces, An 1581; having by an Edict renounced the Government of the K. of Spain, breaking his Seals, Counter-seals, Privy-signets, for new ones made by them in their stead; and entertaining the Duke of Anjou, no∣bly attended from England by the Lord Willoughby, Sheffield, Windsor, Sir Philip Sidney, Shirley, Parrat, Drury, and the Lord Howard's son, and recommended by the Queen; who avowed, That what service was done him, she esteemed as done to her self, and commended to him this one good Rule, to be sure of the hearts of the People, who invested him Duke of Brabant, and Earl of Flanders; wherein Dunkirke did import him much to keep a Passage open from Flanders into
France, as the refusal his Brother made of succour, and his entertainment of French Nobility, to the discouragement of the Netherlands did him much harm; especially since most of his Followers were either men of Spoil, or secret Pen∣sioners to the King of Spain, and he by their advice, lost himself in his Enter∣prize upon Antwerp so far, that had not her Majesties Authority reconciled them, the States and he had broken irrecove∣rably; though indeed they never after peiced. For the Duke thereupon delivers all the Towns he had taken to the States, retyring himself to Dunkirke, while the Ganthoes, and other troublesom men of the Innovation declared against him, and for Duke Casimir And all the Estates humbly beseech∣ed the Queen of England, by General Norris, to have mercy upon them in this woful juncture; especially when the wise Prince of Orange was murthered (by a fellow recommended to him by Count Mansfield, and serving him three years to await this opportunity,) having time to say no more, but Lord have mercy upon my
soul, and this poor People. And the Spani∣ards, during the States differences, and the youth of Grave Maurice of Nassau, who succeeded his Father, carrying all before them; insomuch that the King of France was so afraid to take the Nether∣lands into his Protection, that he sent Embassadors to the Duke of Parma, to remove the very suspition of it. Especially when the Guisian League brake out upon him, and the poor States had now none to trust to but the Queen of England; who during their Treaty with France, had made them gracious promises by Secretary Davison by whom, by the Respective Deputies of their Pro∣vinces, June 9. 1585, they absolutely re∣signed the Government to her Majesty; who upon sundry great considerations of State, refused that; yet graciously sent them 4000 men under General Norris 184600 Guilders, upon the security of either Ostend, or Sluce, and promised 5000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, under a Ge∣neral and other Officers of her own with pay: For which the States stood bound, giving Flushing, Ramekins, Briel, and the
two Sconces thereunto belonging, into her hand for security, and taking in her Commander in chief, with two persons of Quality more of her Subjects, by her appointment into their Council of State. According to which Contract, Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, is made Gover∣nour of the Low-Countreys for the High and Mighty Princess Elizabeth, Queen of England; to whom the whole Countrey did Homage, receiving him as their ab∣solute Governour (though the Queen disavowed that, as being likely to en∣gage her too farr in the Quarrel, and the States humbly submitted to her ple∣sure) in which capacity he set out Edicts for Discipline, for the Treaty, and Traf∣fique: which these troublesom people, upon pretence of Liberty and Priviledg, mutinied against, to the great hinde∣rance of the Earls proceedings; inso∣much that after he had born up their Interest as his entrance into the Govern∣ment, just ready to sink; and taken Da∣venter, Zuphten, and other places; he re∣signed his Government to the Council of State, leaving a Meddal behind him
on the one side whereof was engraven his Picture with these words, Robertus omes Leicestriae, & in Belgia Gubernator, 1587. And on the other side, a flock of sheep scattered, and before them an English Dogg, with these words; Non gregem, sed Ingratos invitus desero. Whereupon Deputies of Estates at∣tended him with a Present, a Cup as big as a Man, and an humble supplication to the Queens most Excellent Majesty, not to forsake them now in their low Estate, so low, that the King of Denmark thought fit to intercede for them to their own Leige, the King of Spain; while they in extremity devolve their affairs upon young Grave Maurice: and decla∣ring against the Earl of Leicesser's pro∣ceedings, incensed the Queen so far, that she called home General Norr is; though yet Sluce had ben lost, had not Sr William Russel supplyed it with Provision, when all the seven Provinces could not do it. Being now intent upon the settlement of their State-General, out of the Parti∣cular Deputies of the several Provinces;
the Earl of Leicester being called home, and they hearing of a Spanish Armado, knowing not what to do, but to impor∣tune her Majesty of England, that she should make no peace without them. Now she was in treaty with the Prince of Parma, which she waves, though pri∣vately willing enough to reconcile their private differences, which was the great∣est Motive she had to abandon them: It being not likely they should do any good themselves, especially since there was such jealousies and mistrusts among their chief Officers, who could never have been united, but by the vast Armado of the common Enemy; which awed both sides to so much moderation, that they settle the Government in the States, re∣duce all Parties into one Oath and sub∣mission, reconcile Ʋtrech to Holland, pay their Souldiers very punctually, establish Prince Maurice in the Admiralty, and Prince William in the Government of Friezland. They defeat the Marquess of Varum∣bon with Sir Francis Vere's assistance, take the Antwerp Convoy, raise jealousies be∣tween the Inhabitants of Groening and
their Governour, maintain Liberty of Conscience, nourish the French diffe∣rences, get 125 26l. a month of the Queen of England. They surprize Breda, engage the Ele∣ctors, and get the Prince of Parma off to the siege of Paris: Blackinbergh, Collenbergh, the Fort before Zuphten, Holt, Nymighen, Grumbergh, Geertrudenbergh, Seenwye, and other places are recovered by the Va∣lour and Conduct of the English; parti∣cularly, Sir John Norris, Sir Roger Willi∣ams, and Sir Henry Vere. An Edict is made concerning Print∣ing, a War is contrived between France and Spain, the United Provinces and the Estates under the King of Spain treat for peace. Philip William, eldest son to William Prince of Orange, is released from his 35 years Imprisonment; whereto he was confined since he was taken in Leyden, as we have formerly intimated. Prince Maurice, and Sir Francis Vere Sir Robert Sidney's overthrow, Cardinal Albertus his Army, Wan. 1577; where∣upon Embassadours are sent to the States from the Empire from Peland, and from
other parts, whom they remitted to the Queen of England, as being able to do no∣thing without her. In the mean time, they prevailing un∣der her protection, set up the India trade, assisting their Merchants with Artillery and Ammunition so as four ships were set forth to destroy the Countrey, and bring away some Inhabitants against another Voyage; where 8 ships ventured that way from Amsterdam, as did many more from other places in the East and West Indies, to Guine, besides others to Syria and Greece, 1578. But the poor States being left out of the peace between France and Spain, are at a loss; till the Queen of England sends to them, that if they resolved for a War, they should inform her what provisions they had towards it, and rest assured of her utmost assistance. So they forbade Traffique with Spain, and entertained some overture afresh in order to an offensive war; towards which, she sent 2000 souldiers more under Sr Th. Knowles, besides 6000 men she procured from the Circles of the Empire; several Forts are set up by her directiōs, the Con∣tributions
are mitigated in Zealand, now ready to mutiny; by her Order the offen∣sive War in Flanders began by her inti∣mation; 2800 sail of ships Rendesvouzed in the the Sea-towns of Holland, Zealand, and Friezland; Grave, Oastend, and New∣port are besieged, and the Arch-Dukes Army is defeated; Chimney-money and Excise is imposed; the United States, and the States-General Treat: In the mean time the Arch Duke Al∣bertus his Forces mutiny, and are enter∣tained by the United Provinces. The Hollanders and the English engage the Spaniards at Sea, the King of England that succeeded the Queen, March 24. 1603. promising them fair in general termes; whereupon Oastend and Sluce are taken, and the States refuse all interces∣sions for peace; especially since they de∣feated Spinola by Land, and the Spanish Gallies by Sea. After which, the Arch-Duke Albert, and his Wife Isabella, in the name of the King of Spain, declared them Free-states, and in that capacity offered to Treat with them upon peace; all the Princes of Christendom offering their Mediation,
onely the King of Spain's Aggreation (as they call it) was not clear, and the 62 Articles containing their Priviledges, were not moderate enough to be the ground either of a Treaty of peace, or a Truce. In fine, These people being very intent upon the preservation of their Liberties, and most prone to jealousie, motion, and surprizes, being agitated by others pas∣sion and their own, for those two great Dianaes, Priviledges, and Liberty of Consci∣ence, high-flown upon the Battel of New∣port, gotten by Sir Francis Vere, refused Reason. Notwithstanding the peace at Verven, between the King of France and Spain, which cut off half their assistance; the difference between Embden and the Go∣vernour of Friezland, that disturbed their Union; the taking of Oastend, Rhainbergh Grelen, after three years siege, and Sir Francis Vere's great endeavours to preserve it; that weakned their Inte∣rest; being grown great with the private Alliance of France, and that more open of England; their Trade to the Indies, and their Piracies upon Spain, until Spi∣nola
humbled; John May the Provincial of the Franciscans perswaded; and what is more then all this, the King of Eng∣lands inclination to a good understand∣ing with Spain, frighted them into a twelve years Truce, in a Treaty begun at Antwerp, 1607. No sooner are they at peace without, but having recovered the Cautionary Towns from the English, by old Barna∣vel's cunning, who (as King Henry the 4th said) was the ablest Statesman in Eu∣rope as far as his money went; but their humours began to work among them∣selves (Rebels are as troublesom to themselves, when they have defeated their Soveraign, as they were to him be∣fore;) their Predestination Points, and the nicities of Priviledges engaging them, to the great danger of the whole Government; had not King James by his Embassadour, Sir Ralph Wenwood very effectually interposed. The King of Spain finding the obser∣vation of a great Lord upon the Truce true, That assoon as the common Ene∣my was over, they would fall by them∣selves; set the Arch-Duke upon offering
them the confirmation of the Truce in∣to a Peace, in case they would accept of his Soveraignty. An overture they scorned so far, that the Embassador in his way through Delph was almost stoned by the dregs of the people; and assoon as the Truce was o∣ver, utterly denying the prolongation of it, they besieged Gulicke, spoiled Brabant, invited Mantsfield into East-Friezland, and shrouded themselves in a League a∣gainst the house of Austria, with France, England, and Denmark, &c. (making the Interest of Europe their security) in de∣fence of the lower Circle of the Empire, took the Plate-fleet, and what promised Wonders, (there being men in it that could dive under water, and flie in the Air) the Fleet of Shallops, 1631. And now Gustavus Adolphus held the house of Austria in play, and Cardinal Richlieu set all Europe together by the ears; especially engaged Spain their Ene∣my, with the power of France. Now Catalonia and Portugal begin to revolt, and the French fall into Flan∣ders; notwithstanding the loss of Crun and Schenke: and their defeat of Hulst
being healed by the taking of Breda, and the success at Lentz, never hearkned to peace, till they were acknowledged a Free-state at Munster, 1648, where the peace was concluded, Jan 8. which was confirmed at the Hague, March 26, and published throughout this Republick, June 5. 1648. CHAP. V. Their dealings towards the English. BUt assoon as these ungrateful people had made an end of their War, by the Truce 1607, and Commenced their Soveraignty, they forgot their Prote∣ctors, and did so much wrong to the English in the Indies (where yet they had never traded, had not we assisted them against the power of Spain (then Lord of that Countrey in right of the first Disco∣verers of it) amounted in the estimate of English Parliament 1606, to 1500000l. sterling) and had drawn out King James
his sword; which they painted nailed to a scabbard, and provoke that Parlia∣ments Resolve and Vote for a War or a Reprizal, had not the High and Mighty humbled themselves, and by all their Allies begged a Treaty, that began to no other purpose, but to busle and elude us at London, 1613, ending a year after to as little purpose, as it was begun; had not their humble Petition renewed it 1615 at Londn, 1616 at the Hague, 1619 at London; where it was concluded with a general amnesty, upon equal bal∣lance of allowance for what was past, and an exact Method of Trade for the time to come. But how sincerely they observed ei∣ther these Terms, or their former Obli∣gations to us, is too evident from their Hostile attempts on Lantore, Polleroon, and other places in our possession, by accord which they took, razing our Forts there, and behaving themselves Barba∣rously towards our people there, both living and dead; over whom they usur∣ped Authority in all Controversies, which they exercised most cruelly, in Whipping, Fining, Imprisoning, Seque∣string,
and torturing them: Besides that, they forced them in Partnerships, to be contented with their Accounts; laying to their Bills, what had been dis∣bursed upon their private occasions; it being indeed their business (while we as the Subjects of a Noble Monarck, con∣tented with his own Dominions, traded fairly there) to invade Islands, take and build Forts, acquire Dominion, and ex∣clude all Partners. Especially at Amboyna, an Island fourty Leagues round, near Surat; where we traded for Cloves, maintaining five Fa∣ctors. But these people setting up there four Forts, with four Bulwarks belonging to each Fort, and six great pieces of Ordi∣nances mounted upon each Bulwark, guarded by Dutch ships, in the Sea round it did what they pleased a great while; and at last torturing the poor Natives, to allure the English of a pretended Plot, and the English to charge the Natives; (where its not probable either would at∣tempt so strong a place and people) in∣somuch that—
CHAP. VI. Their Cruelty at Amboyna, and the Judgement of God upon it. FIrst, The Tortures at Amboyna. They hoysed them up by the hands with Cords over a large Door made fast with two Staples of Iron, at the top of the Door-posts, as wide as they could stretch; as they did their Legs too: then binding a cloth about their necks, and faces so close, that little or no water could go by, they poured the water soft∣ly on their heads, till the cloth was full to the mouth and nostrils: Insomuch that in drawing their breath, they must of necessity suck in the water; which with long continuance, forced all their in∣ward parts out of their Nose, Ears, and Eyes, till they were almost stifled and choaked; then would they take them down till they vomited the water, and hoyse them up again, till their bodies swelled, to double their own proportion,
their eyes stand out of their heads, setting burning Candles in the bottom of ther Feet, while they thus hung, till many times the fat dropped out the Candles; as also under their Elbows, in the palms of their Hands, and under their Arm∣pits, till their very Inwards might be seen; making the English believe the Ja∣pouers had accused them, and the Ja∣poners, that the English had testified a∣gainst them; the poor Heathens crying, O English, where did we see you? The En∣glish answered, Why then did you accuse us? And they replyed, If a Stone were thus burnt, would it not change its Nature? How much more we, who are but flesh and blood A cruelty unparalleld among Christi∣ans, or indeed among men; which there∣fore the God of both pursued with ven∣geance. 1. In that King James and King Charles excepted the murders from the Indemnities that passed in their time be∣tween us and the Hollanders. 2. In that a sudden Hurricano almost destroyed the Dutch ships in the Haven of Ambayna, at the very hour of this orrid execution.
3. In that the first Informer against the English, fell down dead upon the very place where these men are buried, rising again distrcted; in which condi∣tion he continued to his dying day. 4. In that An. 1630, 18 Dutchmen (whereof three were guilty of the Massa∣cre at Amboyna) supping at Frankford, in their way to Strasburgh, boasted how they served our Nation in this place (glorying in their shame;) which one in the Company noting, and relating to two English Captains, then in the Ger∣mane Wars, whose Kindred had suffered there: These two way-laying the Hol∣landers in a Wood, with a Troop of Horse, bid them stand, willing them to prepare for death, for they must dye. The Dutch answered, They hoped not so, for all their money was at their dispose. We seek not your money said the Captains, but your lives, for our Coun∣trey men and Allies you murthered at Amboyna: And so hanging up Johnson, the chief Amboynist, and giving the rest leave to throw Dice which of them should escape to bring the news of this
to Holland; they trussed up all but Jobs Messenger, the odd man sent home to tell his Countrey-men, that Doubtless there is a God that judgeth in the Earth. Cruelty not to be paralleld among the Barbarous, much less among Chri∣stians; and especially between the Ne∣therlanders and the English: who when newly recovered from Popery, and un∣settled, when engaged in Ireland and the Countreys about, when governed by a Woman; when threatned from Spain, relieved the distressed Estates, espoused their quarrel, spent their lives and for∣tunes in their behalf. So dear were those poor people to us, that they seemed to be one Nation with us, and their Cause and quarrel the same with ours; being entertained by us with the affection of Brethren, the love of Friends, and the respects of Neighbours and Allies. For which, though they promised it before the year 1625, they never made any suitable satisfaction, nor returned to us any of those Islands of Spices that they had taken from us; but added to their Insolencies there, their strict Or∣ders
against all free Trade to Flanders, which they Monopolized to themselves, even during their War in that Coun∣trey; and indeed, where ever they have seen any advantage, as by Cunning, Force, or Fraud they have been able, no consideration of Right, Friendship, Leagues, Humanity, or Religion have held them from endeavouring the ac∣complishing of the same. CHAP. VII. Their Perfidiousness to all Nations. FOr they are observed by all Nations to be a wretched sort of people, not to be trusted in any Leagues or Treaties; they being the sad souls that entred in∣to a League Offensive, and Defensive with Lewis the 13th of France, 1630; upon condition he made no peace with Spain without them: notwithstanding which, they endeavoured a Peace or Truce with Spain, without either his ad∣vice
or consent; as appeared by several passages of under hand dealngs of the Dutch with the Spaniards, in a com∣plaint made by the French Embassador to the States. Yea, when another League Offensive and Defensive was concluded, Feb. 8. 1635 between France and Holland, and a War with Spain commenced thereup∣on, these Posterity of Judas (that will sell their God for three pieces of Silver, denying their Religion as familiarly in Heathen Countrey for Trade, as they do their words in their own for Inte∣rest;) went so far underhand in their overtures of Peace with the Spaniards, that their Attorney General Musch was dispatched to Don Martine Axpe the King of Spain, Secretary about them, though they denyed it to the King of France, who told my Lord Paw their Embassa∣dour, that these secret proceedings did contradict their solemn Treaty, and dif∣fered much from the justice his Majesty had used towards them. The same League being continued from 1636, to 1642, in the year 1640, they treat again with the Spaniard against
the French Declaration; that intimated their Non-ability to Treat with pain, without the concurence of his Majesty of France Yea, a peace was negotiated by seve∣ral Letters intercepted, to the Cond Pinneranda, and shewed the States by the French Embassadour at the Hague, at the very same time, when 12000 French ventured their lives and fortunes for them against Dunkirk and Flanders: which peace was concluded at Munster, though confessed by Her van Nederhurst, one of the Plenipotentiaries there, to be contrary to the agreement between France and them, and declared so by a Manifesto of the King of France. They that durst deal thus with the French deal worse with the Portugals; with whom, when they revolted from Spain, as they had done before; they entred in∣to a firm League at Lisbone, and the Hague 1640, with mutual clearness (as to out∣ward appearance) on both sides. But see the craft of these people! They insert in their Articles of peace, that it should not begin beyond the Line, till a year after: In the mean time, ad∣sing
their men at Brazile and elswhere, to take all they could get from the Portu∣goze, as they did Agola, Mallacca, and Brazile. Embassadours were sent from Por∣tugal to demand these places: the Hol∣landers produced the said clause of the Truce, which was all the Portugez could get of the Hollander; for said they, There is no wrong done, in regard that in that clause its said, That each side should hold and keep what he can take, and in such a time. Whereupou the Portugal Embassadour said to them very well, That that must be understood Bonâfide, viz: That which should be taken, without having any knowledge of the Truce. Neither have they been more faithful to the wede, whom they engaged to assist them against the Dane; and in the middest of that service deserted him, making conditions of peace for them∣selves, and retyring. Not much unlike their dealing with the King of Great Brittain, 1664, whose ayd they craved against the Algier men; which was no sooner granted, Sr John
Lawson attending their service, and the Interest of Christendom; then they di∣serted him, without any notice of their departure, and made as fast as they can to Guinny, to fight against His Majesties Subjects there, while His Subjects assisted them in the Streights. CHAP. VIII. How unable they are to deal with us. A Man would think that these Hogens had a vast Power, that durst indulge themselves these practises against great Monarchies and Kingdoms; when alas, if we consider their humours, how mu∣tinous are they, and uncertain! If we reflect upon their Countrey, A little Marsh, consisting of 7 Provinces, viz: The Dutchy of Gelderland, the Countreys of Holland and Zealand, the Lordships of Ʋtrecht, Friezland, Overystel, and Gronin∣ghen, threatened every day from Germa∣ny Eastward, alarmed by the ea North∣ward,
and watched by Brabant, Flan∣ders, and the other 10 Provinces South∣ward. If we regard the Scituation of it, it may be drowned by 2000 men (as Count Mansfield offered) in a wet Win∣ter; so easie a thing it is to overthrow their Earth, Ramports, and Banks, which are but 25 Ells broad, and 10 long, in the most remarkable places, and yeelds very often to the strength of the Sea it self; it may be overrun by 6000 men in a frosty Winter, the great frost, 1607, being the great reason they would hearken to a Truce that year. If we look upon their Rivers: 1. The Mase, running from Lorrain to Bred. 2 The Sheld flowing from Picardy, a little above Antwerp. And the Rhine, arising in the Alps, and falling to Amsterdam, also easily blocked up, and so usually frozen. If we observe their Taxes upon every thing that a man eats, drinks, or enjoy∣eth, so burthensom to the Commonal∣ty. If we weigh their Interest abroad, which through their ungratefulness, in∣fidelity
with Spain, Portugal, France, Ger∣many, and Sweden, and usurpations, is so inconsiderable. If we respect their people, so diminish∣ed by a sad Plague, that they are not a∣ble to inhabit and people their Country. If we cast our eye on their Trade, all Nations having learned their Methods and Inventions now dead. If we mind their shipping, upon their misunderstanding with the Northern Kingdoms that supplyed them with Timber and Cordage now decayed. If we animdvert the condition of Eriel, Flushing, and other Port Towns, that command the passage to Delph, Rot∣terdam, Dort, Gertenburgh, and the capa∣cious Bay of the Texel, now weak. If we survey their Government (their Stat-holder mistrusting them, and they him, the Provinces being all absolute and Independant, one drawing one way, and another another, and every one for∣getting the Publick good in pursuit of a Private Interest; Holland being ambitious over the rest and the rest envious at it: Their Military Power invested in the Prince of Orange, being disobliged by
the Civil; and their Civil Power afraid of the Military:) now much shattered, nothing more unseasonable than a War with England; especially if we add to all this their Fortune in the last War: Viz: Holland was united by its own Interest and His Majesties, and Eng∣land was nothing else but the poor remainders of a Civil War and a Faction; when the Dutch were flush with a Ten years free Trade, and we spent with as many years Rebellion; when we were the dium of Mankind, and they at least (upon the account of that Quarrel) the Darlings of Europe, a handful of our meanst and most inconsiderable of our People durst Vote, That no Goods should be Iported, or Exported into, or out of England, but in English Bot∣toms: And when the Lords States for∣sooth took that in Dudgeon, our bold fellows (the King, Lords, and Commons standing by and not concerned) Vote their Embassador the Lord Joachim a∣way out of England, Octob 6. 1650, with∣in a month at his peril; at whose return, the High and Mighty draw in their Mo∣ney,
sink their Bank, mistrust one ano∣ther, break all to pieces, raise Fortifica∣tions, cast Ordinances, provide new Ar∣tilleries, Yards, Rendezvouz Militiaes, and withdraw 200 Families at least to Hamburgh, and the other Hans-Towns of Germany. Yet so much Courage they had left, as to scorn the pretended Embassadours our Mock-Governours sent thither; insomuch that one Dorisla by name, lost his life there, and another Strickland was weary of it; & strike to his Majesties con∣cerns, as he was King of Great Brittain, in most of their Treaties with France, Portugal, Denmark, Sweden, &c. though yet in their General Meetings, Jan. 20. 1651. they Voted our Tom Thombs a free State forsooth, and Common-wealth, and that they would transact with their new-coyn'd Honours about a Truce, and that too by old Joachim, who was sent packing (but two Months before) the Province of Holland, having cast the char∣ges of a War; and considered that half the money might advance it to a Seigno∣ry over its Sister Provinces. And all the Provinces being amazed
at the Tempest that broke the two Dikes, St. Anthonies, and the Harlem-Dike, to the ruine almost of Gelders, Zuph∣ten, Overystel, Friezland, and Holland. Upon the least suspicion of War, up came Chimney-money, Poll-money, Excise on Salt, Beer, Vinegar, Wines, Butter, Oyl, Candles; all Grains, Seeds, Turff, Coals, Lead, Brick, Stone, Wood, Linnen and Woollen, Clothes, Silks, Silver, Gilt; Wagons, Coaches, Ships, and other Vessels; Lands, Pastures, Gar∣dens, Nurseries; Houses, Servants, Im∣movable Goods, all Seals. They forbid all affronts to their Lordships forsooth, Strickland and St. John They drink (and that was a great Ar∣gument of the High and Mighty States good affection) in continuationem & pro∣speritatem Reip: Angliae. Notwithstanding all which comply∣ance, the paltery thing called Our Parli∣ament, stayed a Fleet of theirs in the Downs forsooth, till further Pleasure; be∣cause there was Cordage, Powder, and Ammunition in them under the Corn. Whereupon His Majesty prospering in
Scotland, and a Peace being made with France, the Mighty make bold to tell Sir John, That they cannot answer his Pro∣position, touching a League Offensive and Defensive, under four Months; for that they must send to all the Provinces for their advise and consent in a busi∣ness of so high a concernment; and our High and Mighties take snuff, and call their Messengers home, to the no little trouble of their Brethen, who beseech and intreat their stay; but to no pur∣pose, the young Usurpers being intol∣lerable, when ever intreated to be kind; and when that would not do, pass this Vote: The States General of the Nether∣lands, having heard the Report of their Commissioners, having had a Confe∣rence the day before with the Lords Embassadors of the Common-wealth of England, do Declare, That for their better satisfaction, they do wholly and fully condescend and agree unto the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 Propositions of the Lords Embassadors; as also to the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 8 Articles of the year 1575, made between H. 7th, and Philip Duke
of Burgundy: Therefore the States do expect in the same manner as full and clear an Answer from the Lords Em∣bassadors, upon the 36 Articles deli∣vered by their Commissioners, 24th of June, 1651. And not only so, But they nominate the Heer Bever of Dort, and the Heer Vell of Zealand, with old Joachimi for Agents to the Common-wealth (forsooth) of England remembring the old Motto in Queen Elizabeths time, Si Colidimur fran∣gimur. Especially when the men at Westmin∣ster gave Letters of Mart to several Mer∣chants, to make themselves satisfaction for the losses they had suffered by Picke∣roons, belonging to the Netherlands. Whereupon they filled up their Em∣bassy with min Heer Schaep, delaying the matter till the Kings Majesties business was decided. Their 11 East-India ships worth a Mil∣lion, were put to sale; an 160 sail arrived from Bourdeaux; Mounsier Borreel could not prevail in France; and the bold ones at Westminster make an Act (as they called it) for Increase of shipping, the
improvement of Trade, the encourage∣ment of Fishing and Navigation, so pre∣judicial to the Cities of the Rine; which together with the surprize of so many Amsterdamers, awaked them so farr, that Van Tromp with 36 sail in three Squa∣drons, was ordered to Sea, first to the Straights, and then to the Downs, to se∣cure their Monopoly of Wine and Cur∣rans, and Agents dispatcht to Denmark, Sweden, Portugal and France, to strengthen the War in behalf of it, altering their Embassadors for England; whither they send the cunning Head-pieces, mine Heer Catz, and min Heer Scaep; the last whereof in the mean time treats with France about Dunkirk, and with Sweden about Neutrality. The English men discourse of 100000 for Amboyna, the Herring-fishing, free passage through the Sheell, and the cau∣tionary Towns frighting them to a reso∣lution with 152 sail, to commence a War; eight Dutch ships being taken by the English, as they came from New found∣land; and the Swedish Embassador Spee∣ring, dealing under-hand with the Eng∣lish; insomuch that they forbid any ship
to stir from either the Mase or Texel; and Amsterdam offereth an no sail, as Zealand doth 40, on condition its Petiti∣on be granted about Letters of Mart, the States fortifying Briel and Flushing, prohibiting the Exportation of any War∣like Provisions, and making a stay of all English ships. In the mean time a certain Faction crept in, that disturbed their Publick Peace at Middleburgh and Dort, because they mentioned not the Prince of Orange in levying Souldiers; till Trump departed in July, with resolution to find out the English: Yet espying Sir George Aiscue in the Downs with a Squadron, was not able to bear up with him, because of a Calm; wherefore he addresseth himself against Blake in the North, attending some Indian Vessels, and taking the Dutch Herring-Busses; from whom a Tempest parted him to his loss, as the night did De Ruyter from Aiscue; onely he met with Captain Badileyes 4 ships in the Straights, and took the Phaenix, which was re-gained by Captain Cox in Porto∣logn, upon a Dutch festival night; when during the heat of the Holland Carouses,
he stole upon it in a Boat, in the habit of a Dutchman; which success was indeed allayed by Captain Appleton's weighing Anchor out of Legorn Mole sooner than he should, and so falling into the hands of 22 Dutchmen of War, before Captain Badiley could come at him. A while after, General Blake discover∣ed the Dutch Fleet on the backside of Godwyn-sands, being about 60 men of War, under Vice Admiral Witti Wittison; against whom (Captain Young, Reynolds, and Chapman having humbled the Legorn Merchants, and their Convoy) he bore up, and notwithstanding he was on a dangerous Sand, called Kentish Knocke, where the water was not three fathoms deep, assuring his Souldiers vast encou∣ragements, he staid by the Dutch Fleet till night parted them. And next day, though the wind was low bore North and by West up to them, being then two eagues North-east of the English; who coming with much adoe within shot of them, made them so afraid they should get within them, that they run for it, 10 Frigats chasing them till 6 a clock at night, June 18; excusing
themselves to Captain Bourn, that cross Winds had blown them upon our Coasts against their wills. Yet having with fair words collogued with our Dons so farr, that they laid up half their Fleet in Harbour, upon the loss of their Plate-Fleet, which they pre∣tended was the King of Spains, but real∣ly was theirs, they appear before Dover with 70 men of War, and 10 Fire-ships, forcing Blake with but 42 men of War, and them ill manned, and worse com∣manded, to engage to an unavoidable loss. Which yet was quickly recompensed, when withdrawing to the Harbour, and in spight of the Hollanders industry to hinder all Nations from bringing any Tar, Pitch, or Masts into England; equip∣ping 80 sail against the 18th day of Feb. 1653; upon which day, the Dutch Fleet, in number about 80 sail, with an 150 Merchant ships from Rovan, Nants, and Bourdeaux were discovered between the Isle of Wight and Portland, and about 8 in the morning, the Headmost of the En∣lish Fleet came up and engaged them, I mean the Triumph (wherein Blake and
Dean were) with 3 or 4 more (the rest not being able to get up) holding 30 Dutch ships in play till two a clock in the after∣noon, when half the Fleet came up and fought the Hollanders till night. And next morning Feb. 17, chased them to the Leeward, having 60 Mer∣chants, and 9 men of War in our hands, and 2000 men dead on the shore; inso∣much that the Hogens intreat a Peace by a new Embassador, the Lord Paw, and their Merchants are forced the long and perillous Voyage round the North by Ireland and Scotland, and before Norway; as did the Rochel and East-India Fleet, that belonged to the Baltick Sea, not daring else to stir out of the Flye. For though the Spanish, the Italian, the Levant and Indian Merchants, 145 sail in number, attended by 90 men of War for their Convoy; yet the English Fleet, consisting only of 65 men of War, being at Anchor on the South side of the Gober, discovering them about two Leagues to Leeward, being about 100 sail together, weighed, and bore sail to them, with so furious a charge that night and next morning, that they tore quite
away as fast as they could, only the wind freshing Westward. The English bore in so hard among them, that 12 of our men of War sunk 6 of theirs; and had done the whole Fleet, had not night surprized them, so near the Godwyn-sands, where the Dutch de∣coyed them, that they were forced to weigh Anchor, while the shattered Dutch got into the Texel, the Wieling, and the Flye; the English resolving to pursue them to their own Coast as near as they durst, where they took Prizes in a man∣ner every day, and as it were blocked them up. Till beating up Drums first in their own name, and (when the people fell to a Tumult at Enchuysen because it was not in the Princes name) in the young Prince of Orange his name, they reinfor∣ced another Fleet pro aris & for is, to re∣lieve their Coasts and themselves, both imprisoned by an English Power, quar∣tering a great Body of Horse in the mean time for fear they should land, and send∣ing four Commissioners to England, with most humble Propositions of Peace. During which Treaty, July 27, the
English Scouts discovered a Dutch Fleet from the Wilings, of about 75 men of War: Upon notice whereof, the English Fleet made what sail they could after them; which the Dutch discerning, stood away; yet by five a clock that evening, were Engaged by 30 English Frigats so resolutely, that they sent away some torn ships in the night, and stole them∣selves too undiscerned by the English, into a designed conjunction with 25 sail of stout men they expected out of the Texel; with whom they fell furiously on the English next morning. When after some success against the Garland, the Triumph, and the Andrew by their Fire ships, they observing the de∣clining of their fortune, bore away to∣wards the Texel, whither the English durst not follow them, for fear a cross wind should meet with them at that shore; where they saw the Dutch led to Harbour, having lost their Admiral Va Tromp, thirty men of War, and 6000 men. A defeat, that set the Hague, Alchmuer, and many other places in Holland in an
up roar; and being added to their loss of seven Braziel ships on Calice Road, taken by Captain Reynolds, Moullon, and Cranley, and of Braziel it self recovered, du∣ring this War, by the Portugez. The taking of 9 ships upon the coast of France, by Captain Pack, Wright, and Jordan, in spight of the French Prote∣ction. The jealousies between Van Tromp and De Witt, since the first knock on the Godwyn-sands, after their ranting in one Pamphlet of their Lyon and his Prey; in another, of Englands being possessed with a Devil; and in a third, That Hollanders are Angels (a Dutch man in his double Jugg proportion, with a box of Butter in the one hand, and a pickled Herring in the other, is a Pretty Cherubim) and English men Devils. Notwithstanding their Threats of combining with the World against us, that brought them on their knees in re∣iterated Messages of Peace, not scrupling the perliminary Points of satisfaction formerly so much boggled at in former Treaties. And shall these unhappy people, that
were baffled by a poor Remnant of a Rebellion, undertake the Generous, Ho∣nest, and full Power of a Monarchy? That they, who withstood not the di∣stracted ambition of a few Out-lawes, that were almost lost in the pursuit of other mens Estates and Powers, presume against the settled authority of a Prince, whose onely business is to preserve his own; who frights none, and is afraid of none; having no Enemies, because own∣ing no undoing thought against any, but such, for whose ruine a true and satisfa∣ctory Reason may be given to the World. In vain do they vapour against a Nati∣on, whose Government is fixed; since they fell before it, when it was loose; altera∣tion of Interests was their Hope, then the sixedness of it must be their Fear now: Then they had to do with many Factions, now with one Interest: Then with a Power that mistrusted it self, whence they knew how to jole the Council of State against a Parliament, as they called it, and a General with his Army against both; now the Military Power is all one with the Civil, the
Council with the Parliament, the Lords with the Commons, the Temporality with the Spirituality, because all influ∣enced by one Head, and acted by one Interest, the Honour of His Majestly, the freedom of Trade, together with the Rghts and Priviledges of three great Nations, to be generously asseed against all Usurpations whatsoever. Did they stoop to a self-seeking Rab∣ble, and dare they look in the face of a Publick-spirited Prince? Did they yeeld to oppressed and cross Crest-fallen, and will they ingage a Free-born and Magna∣nimous People? Did they submit to a dissolute Faction, and will they contest with a well-regulated Power? Will they Conquer us, fighting against our Free∣doms and Liberties, when they were Conquered by us in fighting for them? Were they humbled when the Vote of the most and best of the Nation was for them, and do they now swell, when the Universal Vote is against them? And we can scarce agree so well in the ac∣knowledgment of a God, as in an incli∣nation to a Dutch War; the onely Point to which there are no Non conformists.
Its to little purpose to attempt a Na∣tion restored to its Virtues, Severities, Orders, and Lawes, since they failed a∣gainst it, when sunk in Licentiousness and Barbarisms; will they venture a War that is the Peoples own act and choice, after that unsuccesful one, which was but their necessity and Fate? Were the English so valliant in serving others Lusts, and will they be less in carrying on their own Interest? Did they Wonders when ruined with ten years woful War, and can they do less when refreshed with five years bles∣sed Peace? Did the English prosper when they ingaged for other mens Ambition, and will they not succeed, when obliged by their own Countrey? Did they Conquer when they dreaded their Victory, as likely to be overcome themselves, as soon as they overcame their Enemies; and can they be Con∣quered, when they passionately wish it, as the security of their livelihood and and liberty, and where Defeats raise not Despair, Tumults, and Riots, as in pre∣tended Free-States, where the people
think their Governours are accountable to them, but just resentments and reso∣lutions, as in Monarchies, where Princes are accountable onely to their Reason and Honour. The Dutch would do well to consider that they have not to do now with the confusion of Levellers, but the Order of Government; not with the Raw un∣dertakings of Mechanicks, but with the staid and sage Experience of Statesmen; nor with the Tumultuous Discontents and Divisions surviving a Civil War; but the calm sedateness, and tranquillity at∣tending a well settled Peace: Not with those Free-State jealousies that made it dangerous for any man to be Eminent, but with those Royal magnificent con∣fidences, that make it shameful to be mean. England is not now a Wilderness of wilde, unconstant, and ungrateful Crea∣tures, but a Kingdom of Sober men.
The Advantages that the Dutch make, by Fishing on the Coasts of Great Brittain, which by the War they are like to lose. THe Brittish Seas, especially towards our own Coasts, are so exceedingly productive of Multitudes, or great sholes of good, substantial, and useful Fish, as Ling, od, Herrings, Pilchers, &c as that it would seem incredible, should I relate what vast quantities of them are yearly taken by the Dutch, and som∣times with what ease and speed: But the continual experience and testimony of Eye-witnesses, is ground sufficient to confirm the truth thereof. And hereby they not onely supply themselves with the greatest part of their subsistance and food, but reap such o∣ther General and National advantages, as are equal to the Revenue of a Crown; and may Rationally be assigned as the chief and principal Cause (next to the favour and assistance of the English in
their Infancy) of their present strength and Mightiness Which the better to evince, I shall both use the Authority, and follow the Method of that knowing and curious Observer, Sir John Burroughs; who in a small Tract of his, written 1633, hath judiciously disposed those fore-said Ad∣vantages into seven Heads or Particu∣lars; viz: 1. Increase of Shipping and Seamen. 2. Traffique. 3. Strong Holds, and Forti∣fications. 4. Power abroad. 5. Publick Revenue. 6. Private, or particular E∣states. 7. Provisions, and store of all things conducing either to their Subsistance or Great∣ness. 1. Increase of hipping and Seamen ANd here this ingenious Gentleman hath by clear evidence demonstra∣ted, That Holland, which is not above 28 Dutch miles long, and three broad (nothing so large as one single County of England;) a Countrey, that hath of its own growth, and within it self nothing considerable, either of Materials, Victu∣als, or Merchandize; for setting forth of
ships, doth yearly imploy and maintain by Fishing upon our Coasts (besides 3000 Vessels imployed in fishing on their own Coasts) 7 or 8 thousand ships, Herring∣busses, and other Fishing-boats, wherein are set at work above 140000 Fishermen and Mariners; who are hereby bred and inured to the Sea, and fitted for man∣ning and sailing their other shipping in∣to remote Parts, and other services; besides the many thousands of Trades∣men, Women, and Children, which have their dependance on, and subsistance from this Trade: and all this by the in∣dulgence, favour, and sufferance of the English. 2. The increase of Trade. The Dutch being by this Fishing∣trade (as it were) born and bred upon the Sea, cannot (or hardly do) live else∣where; but disperse themselves in tra∣ding Voyages throughout the whole World: And our Fish, especially our Herring, being approved, and of gene∣ral use for food throughout Europe, is the onely Commodity whereby they furnish themselves with the richest Merchandi∣zes (yea and Coyn to boot) of all other
Countreys. Nay tis no small summe of money that they yearly carry out of England it self, for this its own Commo∣dity; a thing shameful to the English Nation, and not to be excued. That when God and Nature hath offered them so great a Treasure, even at their own door, they notwithstanding, for want of Industry (to say no worse) neg∣lect the benefit thereof; and by paying money to strangers for the Fish of their own Seas, impoverish themselves to make them rich, and so the more dangerous Neighbours. 3. Strong Holds and Fortifications. By this their greatness of Trade, and the dependency of the whole people up∣on that onely, their Cities and Towns (which are for the most part Maritine, and conveniently seated for Commerce) are by a continual Concourse exceed∣ingly populated, and (which is conse∣quent) much enlarged, and beautified in their Buildings, and (as all great mo∣neyed mens houses) strongly fortifyed, for the defence of themselves, and sub∣stance
from the violence of Neighbours. This we find confirmed by the late en∣largment of Leyden, Middleburgh, and Amsterdam, by the Strength, Convenien∣cy, and Costliness of their Ports and Ha∣vens, by the strong and regular Fortifi∣cations of all their Towns; but especi∣ally by the late Magnificent and Sump∣tuous Piles at Amsterdam. 4. Increase of Power abroad. Nor is it onely at home that they thus streng hen themselves, but being by their largness of Traffique (as it were) Citi∣zens of the World, and having so great number both of Ships and Mariners, they Plant and strongly Fortifie them∣selves in other more remote parts of the World. Nay they have by this means extended their Power so far in the East-Indies, as that in many places they keep both King and People at their devotion: And tis by some conceived, that they are in that part of the World as considera∣ble as they are at home, both for their own defence, and for offending their Enemies.
5. Publich Revenue. What enlargement of the Publick Re∣venue by their Fishing trade, may easily be calculated, by the quantity of the Fish by them taken: and it appears up∣on Records for that end kept, that they have taken in one year between 40 and 50 thousand last of Herrings onely, (besides Ling, od, and other Fish;) which after the usual Rate they are sold at, comes to 10000000l. the Custom and other Duties arising from them to the State in their Exportations, amounting to between 500 and 600 Thousand pounds; besides the Revenue arising from the Merchandizes Imported in ex∣change of these Fish. 6. Private Estates. And it must necessarily follow, That where the Trade is so large, and the Commodity of so certain sale and gene∣ral use (necessity I may say to some Countreys) and purchased at so easie Rates, and Private men, or the people in general exercise this Trade, those Pri∣vate men so trading, must (I say) needs grow rich and wealthy, and we know
they are so: Whereunto I shall add the great benefit arising from the Imploy∣ment this Trade affords to all sorts of Tradesmen and Artificers, with their Families, that have any relation to ship∣ping, or the Sea; which comprehends almost all Trades whatever. And equal to this do I esteem the commendable advantage of setting all sorts of poor people at work; not onely the strong and healthy, but even the most impotent, the Lame and the Blind, Old and the Young; insomuch that 'tis a rare thing to see a Beggar in Hol∣land. 7. Store of Provisions. And Lastly, We find by Experience, that though the Hollander be but little beholding to their own Countrey for the production of any thing considera∣ble for their support; yet do they in return for their Fish, furnish themselves (even to abundance) with all sorts of Provisions necessary for life, conducing to Luxury and Appetite, or requifite for War and Defene.
The Premises considered, I cannot understand the sullen perversness of that People, in provoking and quarrel∣ling with the King of Great Brittain; in whose Power it is, if not wholly to damm and choak up this the Fountain, yet strongly to interrupt the Steams and Current; not onely of their Great∣ness, but of their very Being. But if for their ingratitude to their best friends, who made them what they are, their Treachery and False-hearted∣ness to all their Consederates and Al∣lies, without any regard to their solemn Engagements; their Barbarous and in∣humane Cruelties to all (both Friends and Enemies) where they have gotten Advantage; Divine Justice think it time to call them to account.—Jupiter quos vult perdere dementat prius.
The present state of the Ʋnited Provinces. Countrey Gentleman. SIR, I can finde little or no satisfa∣ction in the Pamphlets you sent me concerning the present condition of Hol∣land and England; shall I intreat your Observations concerning both, where the one boasts Your irth, the other Your Education. Traveller. The Pamphlets I sent, pre∣tended not your satisfaction, but your Pleasure; as designed rather with their variety to Entertain, than with their exactness to Inform you. And I am as heartily glad we have in the retirements of our Countrey, such exact Judgments, as rest not in superfi∣cial Accounts of things, as sorry I am not in this particular more able to an∣swer their expectation or yours. However being (as your Worship knows by many instances) more willing to betray a Weakness, then an Ʋndutiful∣ness:
your Curiosity shall not sully to that particular on these two Subjects, wherein my Observations shall not at∣tend it. Gent. The first particular that offers it self to consideration, is the Their condition in regard of Scitu∣ation. present condition of Holland, in regard of its Scituation. Trav. And that very Rationally, the Interest of all Countreys depending on their Position, and their Estate arising from the mutual aspect of their Neigh∣bours towards them, and theirs toward their Neighbours; wherein to proceed with a clearness agreeable to my Tem∣per and Subject. I need not inform you, That of 17 Provinces formerly belonging to the House of Burgundy, and in Right of that House, to the House of Austria; there are seven united in a free State among themselves, under the notion of the uni∣ted Netherlands; the Scituation of each whereof in particular, will resolve your first Question. 1. Holland the chief of them, and the
Province that designes the enslaving of the rest, ever since it enjoyed freedom; for it self is awed on the N and W with the German-Sea, and whosoever is Ma∣ster of it: On the E. bounded with Ʋtrecht, on the South, lying over to Bra∣bant, the Mase onely parting them Gent. It must needs be sad with that Countrey, when so mighty a Prince by Sea threatneth it on the one hand, as the King of Great Brittain is in the German-Sea; and such a Neighbour watcheth it, as the King of Spain is in Brabant; un∣less they are wonderfully fortified on all sides. Trav. Three places there are, upon which depend the Fate of Holland: 1. Encheusen, on the very point of Zuider-zee, standing most conveniently to command the Posts of Amsterdam. 2. Edam, upon the very same Gulf, their great Chatam or Arsenal of ships; and 3. Briell, in the Island Voorn, formerly one of the Cautionary Towns, chosen by the English; in regard of the great command it hath upon the passage to Gertrudenburgh, and the rest of Brabant;
as also to Delph, Dort, Rotterdam, the greatest Towns of trade in South Hol∣land. Gent. Since we unhappily parted with this Town, such are the Dikes and Chan∣nels round it, Hoorn, and most of their strong Holds, that it is impossible to pos∣sess our selves of them. Trav. When you remember how or∣dinarily they were bought, sold, and sur∣prized in the Spanish War, you will not despair of them: Besides that, the whole Countrey lyeth so low, that it is but dispatching a few Pick-axes against the Mud-wall, Banks, Ramparts, and Dikes; whereby, with much adoe, they confine the Sea, and the Rivers, and the whole Countrey shall lye in Pickle, as their Herrings do. Gent. Its the greatest Bogg of Europe, and Quagmire of Christendom, thats flat, of which it was formerly more strane, than it will be upon this War true; That having no Corn of their own, they had the Granary of Europe; no Wine they drank, more than any Coun∣trey besides; no Wool or Flax they made more Cloth of both sorts, than
any people, besides the French and Eng∣lish; and no Timber, yet spending more than any Nation. Trav. 1. A Power that confines them at home, starves them; and one years stop on their Trade overthrows them. Gent. I look upon the Dutch in this Quarrel with England, like the Belly in its Controversie with the Members which fed them; or like the Rebellion of Paris, which (saith the Historian) was starved, rather than Conquered. But Sir the next Province. Trav. 2. Zealand (consisting of 7 I∣slands, the remainder of 18) hath no more to secure it from Flanders, than the left Branch of the River Scheld, or Hont; or from Brabant East-ward, but the right Branch of the said River; nor on the West from England, but the Sea; whereof the whole World knows who is Master. A Province that is so ill provided with Wood, that without a supply of Coals from New-Castle; and Scotland hath no other remedy now, but to digg Turffs out of the Banks, too much weakned al∣ready thereby in the late English War;
and that is to be drowned, for fear of being starved; whose Fate depends upon lushing (another cautionary Town, for∣merly a poor one, since, the very Key of the Netherlands; without whose License, no ship could pass formerly, either to or from Antwerp:) and the most capacious Haven Ramme, or Armynygden. Gent. 3. West Friezland Sir. Trav. West-Friezland, That hath no Fire but Cow-dung, no Ayr but foggy, no water, but Marshy; lyeth Eastward obnoxious to Westphalen in High-Germa∣ny, N. and W. to the main Ocean. Gent. Where lyeth the strength of that place? Trav. 1. In the strong Castles, that over-looks Harlingen-Haven, and Stave∣ren, in that part of it called Westergoe. 2. Leuwarden, in that called Oastergoe:—The rest of the Countrey being the seven Forrests, called Seven-Wolden:—In an Isle whereof called Schelink, to divert you, you may observe the taking of Dog∣fish in this manner: The men of the Island attire them∣selves with Beasts-skins, and then fall to dancing; with which sport the fish being
much delighted, makes out of the waters towards them, Nets being pitched pre∣sently between them and the water; which done, the men put off their dis∣guises, and the frighted fish hastning to∣wards the Sea, are caught in their Toyles. Gent. But if it please you, the Scitua∣tion of Ʋtrecht. Trav. 4. Ʋtrecht lyeth safe enough, being surrounded by Holland and Gelderland; East, West, North, and South, as doth 5. Overyssel; onely West phalen casts a scurvey Aspect towards it Eastward. Gent. Where lyeth the advantage a∣gainst this Countrey? Trav. In several parts of the Isle, which is secured onely by Daventer and Campen, as they are onely by the adjoyn∣ing Marshes; which yet are rendred ut∣terly unserviceable in one month of Frost; as appears An. 1527, when the Imperialists were let into both these Pro∣vinces. Gent. Please you Sir to go on. Trav. 6. Gelderland, which bred a Bull 1570, that weighed 3200 pound, must watch the Elector of Bradenburgh East∣ward,
whereon its bounded with Cleve∣land; whereof the States have got half into their hands, and the Brabanters, who shut it up South-ward. Gent. Where lye the passages into this Countrey? Trav. At the confluence of the Mase and the Wael, where Duke Albert erect∣ed, and the States maintain the Fort St. Andrews to command that Passage; and Gelders, the onely place in the Pro∣vince, that would never submit to the States. Gent. Zuphten Sir. Trav. 6. Zuphten, lyeth at the mercy of Westphalen on the East, and Cleveland on the South. Gent. Where is this place usually at∣tached? Trav. Over the old Yssel, from West∣phalen, onely Zuphten, Groll, and Does∣burgh secure it; which yet every year of the last War shifered their Masters, so lyable they were both to surprize and Corruption. 7. To which I may add Groning, in∣closed by the Friezlands on all sides, save the North, that lyeth open to the main
Ocean; succoured onely by Old Haven and Groning. Gent. But have the States no holding in Flanders or Prabant? Trav Yes, they have the Sluyes, the Isle of Castandt in Flanders, with such pla∣ees of Importance in Braant, as may tempt their watchful Neighbours to im∣prove this juncture of their breach with England, to recover all the World; knowing that when they are so mightily ingaged by Sea, they will have but a ve∣ry poor defence by Land; and it being obvious to themselves (but that Fate in∣fatuates them it would punish) that a breach with England may lose what ami∣ty with it hath gotten them. Gent. I pray how bigg may this United State be? Trav. Its Circuit is some 300 miles, its walled Towns 71; whereof 23 belong to Holland, 8 to Zealand, 11 to West-Friezland, 5 to Ʋtrecht, 11 to Overyssel, 16 to Geldrland, 8 to Zuphten:—And its Villages, 1560; whereof 400 are in Holland, and 300 in Zealand, 45 in West-Friezland, 70 in Ʋtrecht, an 100 in Over∣sse, 300 in Gelderland, 145 in Groning,
besides the Towns in Brabant, landers, and Cleveland. Gent. I pray how stand all these Neighbours affected towards their Uni∣ted Province? Trav. Westphaliae, and the Bishop of Munster is disobliged about the Eyler-Sconce; the Elector of Bradenburgh is not well pleased with some Passages in Cleve∣land; the Emperour and Spain strenthen themselves in Flanders: neither is the King of France without preparations in Picarty and Artois, and all this while the King of Great Brittain hath made the most dreadful preparations against them that any Age can remember. Gent. This is so sad, that it must needs sink any other people but the Dutch, who are so much given to hope, that like St Clemens, though drowned, they have an Anchor about their necks. Trav. Yet this is not all, for the Hol∣landers, under pretence of Liberty of Trade, which the Duke of Rhoan saith is their Interest; having engrossed a Mono∣poly of it, which all the World decrees as their Usurpation. The industrious Portugeze, whom they
have wormed almost out of all their dis∣coveries in Asia and Africa upon the least Truce with Spain, would set up Repri∣zls, as well for their Trade, as their Goods on either side of the Line. The incensed Swede is ready to re∣venge Modern affronts, and former un∣kindnesses; besides his design for free Trade in the Balticc-sea. The concerned Dane must secure his Sound, or quit his Kingdom. The generous French meditate a free Trade, and an Universal Commerce, equally suitable to the inclinations and necessities of Man-kind; in order where∣unto, (as Sir George Downing observes) he hath permitted his Subjects the reco∣very of some places in the Dutch hands with Honour, the loss whereof his Pre∣decessors connived at, not without some disgrace. What the Duke of Muscovy may do when disabused, is obvious to discern∣ing men; who know that those Northern (and indeed all rude) people are never more implacable, than when imposed upon; never knowing upon what ground to trust, when once deceived.
Neither is Christendom onely offend∣ed by this unhappy people, who when put on by an Heathen Prince that for∣bad Christians Trade, to the sad choie, to renounce either their Trade, or their Religion, made this untoward Answer; That they were not Christians, but Hol∣landers: But even the Pagan World near hand here in Affrica, and further off in Asia and America, watches the first fair opportunity to rid their Ports, as the Ghinois; their Islands as the Indians, and their Coasts, as the Negroes of Guinee of their insulting Usurpers, that know as little how to command moderately a∣broad, as how to obey dutifully at home; out-doing Barbarisme it self in uncivility, and Heathenisme in cruelty; both which are ashamed of themselves as acted by Dutchmen. Gent. Yet they are very strong (they say) in the Indies, and at Guinee. Trav. Its very true, and no more than needs, that they who have a peculiar unhappiness of disobliging all manind, should have a considerable Power to awe them, and that the miserable people that are not loved, should be feared.
Yet when what they have gained in Trade, by their adventure to Guinee, is compared with what they have lost in Reputation, the great support of Govern∣ment by the surprize of it (unworthily assaulting a Christian Prince there, when he was engaged in their assistance against an Infidel elswhere) when Nova Battavia is weighed with Amboyna; when Surat and the Coast of China ballanceth the Mollacco Islands; when the unexpressable losses of their West-India Company by miscarriages, repulses, surprizes, ship∣wracks, strike tallies with the advanta∣ges of the East India; when they have reckoned as well what they can bring home, as what they have there, they will have as little reason to boast of their In∣terest on the other side of the Line a year hence, as they have to do so on this side of it now. Gent. I doubt you are now a little par∣tial, therefore waving all reflections, I pray give me an exact account of their state in those remote parts. Trav. Although the Improsperous Ne∣therlanders have done themselves so much wrong, that to relate their condition,
looks as if it were to reflect upon them; and bare Narratives that concern them, seem little less than Invectives; yet with the impartiality you alwaies expect, in the freedom of our private Discourses, take their state in Asia, Affrica, and Ame∣rica in this clear Account. SECT. 1. An account of the Hollanders state, in Asia, Affrica, and America. 1. IN Asia, 1. The Sultan of Persia (since the assistance we afforded him in removing the Trade of Ormuz to Lar) hath had so great a respect for the English Nation, that their Agent, who resideth at Gambroon, takes Custom of all Strangers that Traffique thither; and the Dutch are as much at our mercy in those Coasts, as they should and may be in good time on our own. Neither are they more subject to us about Ormuz, then they are to the Mus∣covites (I suppose our very good friends)
upon Mare de Bochu in Hircania; from whom they must take all their Silks at second hand every year, during the sea∣son of Trade, i. e. from March, when they go thither, to July, when they re∣turn. And to say no more, They that have travelled the large Coast of Persia know, That as the Portuguez. (none of the Dutch est friends) manage the Trade of the Southern Ocean, so the Muscovite likely, upon a Trepan upon him, to be none of their mildest Foes, hath Engros∣sed the Comerce of the Caspian Sea. In Tartary, 1. Capha, that flourish∣ing Empory, and capacious Haven, not farr from the Streight Stretto de Cuffu, sivi Germanum, never allowed the Hollanders any Trade, but what they must be be∣holding for to the Genoese their Compe∣titors (who commanded that Trade, and indeed all upon the Euxine) or the Turk their Enemies; who under Mahomet the Great 1475, give Law to that place: Nor 2. Tanus, without the favour of those Nations, bordering on the Euxine Coast; and what entertainment they have a∣mong
the Circastians, whose capacious Bayes, and commodious Havens Synda Brata, &c. are most fitly seated for Trade and Merchandize, this last years Gazet hath informed us; wherein 18 ships are said to be lost to the fury of the insenced Inhabitants, as they had done 11 a lit∣tle before, not far from Bolgar, on the River Volga: Nor 3. Cathay, where they are forced to take their Rye, Hemp, Ruburb, Silk, and Musk on the second hand of the Chi∣nois: Nor 4. Cascur, on the N W. of China, in whose Royal City Hiachum they pay toll for their Merchandize: Nor 5. Cainu, where they must accept of the Womens Veil, the great Commodi∣ties of those Ports from the Dantzikers: Nor 6. Theby Musche, without Custom to the Englsh. 3. Of the fifteen Provinces of China, 6 the most open and rich for Trade, in Wheat, Barley, Rye, Wool, Cotton, O∣lives, Vines, Flax, Silks, Mettals, Fruits, Suger, Honey, Ruburb, Camphire, Gin∣ger, Musk, all Spices▪ China-dishes, and
Manufactures, will as soon trade with a Dutchman, as they would with a Tar∣tar; the difference they say between them being this, viz: That the Tartars are Hollanders without, and the Hollan∣ders Tartars within. 4. What frequent irruptions are made by the Indians upon their Trade into those places; where they having no∣thing but what they have usurped from the Portuguez, who first by Vasques de Gama 1477; and then by Alphonso de Pa∣gua, Bartholomew Diaz after discovered the way of Commerce with this Coun∣trey, by the new way of the Cape de bua Sperance; what surprizes in their passages to and fro upon the River Labor; what a check from Diw the strong Portuguez Gar∣rison; what a stop from Goa, where lives a Portuguez Viceroy; what discourage∣ments from the Portugueze Sea-Towns in Canara; wht frights are they put to by the Cittadel of Cononor; what Tributes do they pay the King of Calicute; and yet how suspected by him? What interrup∣tion from the Portugals in the great Ha∣ven of Chochee; what changes have they been subject to in Bengula; what over∣tures
there have been made by the Inha∣bitants to K. J. to undermine them; what hard meats they are held to by the Por∣tuguez at Colmuchi; what subjection to the English (who are very much beloved there) at Bantham, the chief English Fa∣ctory in that Countrey? What Losses they have suffered since they have in∣grossed the whole trade of the Moluccoes? What Customs they pay the Portuguez at Japan, the Empory of the Chinois, who unwilling to trade in their own Coun∣treys, bring their Traffique thither? To say no more, how unwelcom they are in the Isles where the Slaves were set free, on condition they could cut them off, and bring in the English; who are more acceptable for their honesty and civility than these haughty men, who curbed the Natives some years with three Forts, the people of Lantora voluntarily sub∣mitting themselves to the Protection of K. James, and to his use giving possession of their Countrey to Capt, Hage, Nov. 24. 1620. as the Inhabitants of Warne and Rosengen did a little after. Gent. But is it not possible for these Dutch, notwithstanding the prejudice
they now seem to lye under to tack a∣bout, and make an Interest yet in the divisions of Europe? Trav. Its possible, but very improba∣ble, since they have lost their Reputa∣tion, which is the bottom of their Inte∣rest, and you will fide none will heartily close with them; because none can really trust them. Gent. Potentates without Integrity, are the same thing with Tradesmen with∣out Credit, for suspicion is irreconcile∣able; and its said of Rome, that Favendo piet ati fideique ad tantum fastigii per vene∣rit: And if you can make this good, the Low-countreys have seen their best days. Trav. I wish them no more harm, than that your inference be not as fatal∣ly just, as the premises are irrefragably true; and easily evidenced to be so, by as notorious an Induction, as is this day Re∣gistred in Europe. Gent. As how? Trav. 1. In reference to Spain. Then they petition against strangers, declare for Liberty and Religion, when they had newly taken the Oath of Alle∣giance,
made their Soveraign a Present of 120000l. and insinuated their chief Demagogues to the places of greatest Ho∣nour and Trust in the Countrey: Then they surprize Mecklenburgh, Enchusen, &c. when they treated at Brussels: Then they subscribed themselves Vassals to Frane, when they had senta Petition to Spain: In a word, Whatever was the ground of these mens revolt from that Kingdom, their conduct in it had nothing of Ho∣nour or clearness, as wholly suiting a Popular and Plebeian humour. 2. In reference to France. Not to mention the affront they put upon Mounsier, 1578; when they enter∣tained him for Protector, yet obliged themselves to; whence upon his exclusion Q. Eliz from Amsterd. the Hierogliphick that represented them, was a Cow, fed by Q. Eliz. stroaked by the Prince of O∣rauge, and held by the tayl by D. Francis, till it bewrayed him, or any other sleights before they came to a consistency which may be reckoned as their necessi∣ty, rather then their fault. 1627. When they were High and Mighty, a strictly mutual Consederacy
and Alkance Defensive and Offensive for 17 years, with a mutual Engagement not to treat with Spain on either side, without consent was agreed on Aug. 28. between Lwis 13th of France, and the States of the United Provinces, ratified June. 30, 1630, and pursued on the French side, with a Million of Lieurs, i. e. 100000l. sterling, besides 10000 Foot, and 1500 Horse fallen into Artois and Henault; notwithstanding all which par∣ticulars, they endeavoured a Truce with Spain and the States of Flanders, without the advice or consent of France; as ap∣pears by several underhand dealings of the Dutch with the Spaniards, couched in the French Embassadours memorial to the States 1634. With whom I mean Mounsier de Char∣ness by name (when their reaties with Spain proved fruitless) Feb 8. 1635. they renewed the former League upon the very same terms of No peace with Spain, without mutual consent, and in pursuit of it, fell with joynt forces upon Tienen, Loven, Skinchen-Schons; yet (the Province of Holland suspecting France no less than Spain, in the very heat of this War,
wherein the French were engaged on their account (so good are these Water∣men at Rowing one way, and Looking another) their Attorney General Musch is secretly dispatched to Don Martin Ax∣pe, Secretary to the King of pain about a Treaty; which the States solemnly de∣nyed to Carnasse; and yet their Embas∣sador Paw (when the French King told him, That these secret proceedings, did con∣tradict their solemn Treaty; and how much it differed from the justice his Majesty used towards them, said they had com∣municated it to Charnesse 1641, 1642, 1643. Yea, though Anno 1635, 1636, 1637, 1638, there were notwithstanding these underminding several ratifications pas∣sed of these Treaties; and 1644 a League Guarantin entered into: Yet as Moun∣sier de la Thuilleres averred to their Faces, not a Month in these years passed with∣out overtures between them and the Spaniards; which brought on the Trea∣ty at Munster without, and against the French Kings consent, even when he was in the field on their behalf, at Dunkirk, Stechen, Loqueren, &c at the rate of 18
or 20000 Foot, and four or 5000 Horse to no purpose, the Dutch slurring him in most undertakings; as particularly at Antwerp, which did as good as offer up it self to their Army. Nay (which was more) the inter∣cepted Letters of Count de Pennerand made it evident, That The peace (at Mun∣ster) was agreed on without any regard to the French Interest; which was not so much as named by the Dutch: And though the other Provinces were against it, yet because Hol∣land was for it, they would soon bring the other Provinces to a compliane: Only ho∣nest Heer van Nederhurst refused to sign so perfldious a Treaty, against not only the Honour, but the very Interest of his Countrey; of which I may say as the Greek Orators of Sparta, No League, no subsistance; no Faith no League. 3. Should I re-capitulate their strange dealings with England, how they solicit∣ed our Queen, and yet dealt with the French King: How they promised us free Trade, yet stopped our ships: How they borrowed our money, to buy a peace with Spain: How they admitted our Embassadors to their supream Se∣nate,
yet because he should not under∣stand all Debates, they presently set up a secret Council: How they intreated the Q. to send over the Earl of Leicester, yet abused him so far, that he left behind him a Meddal, whereon there was en∣graven a Dog and a flock of Sheep, with this Inscription; Non Oves sed Ingratos: How they depended on our Field. Of∣ficers, and yet enjealousied them one against the other. How they delivered us the Caution. Towns we had taken, yet were never quiet till they had trucked for them: How they owned King James their Protector, yet set up a blasphemous Reader (I mean Vorstius) in competition with him: What earnestness they used to disswade him from. Alliance with Spain, when they had a correspondent there! How they complemented King Charls the first (of blessed memory) when they disputed his Right to his own Seas: How they protest their Obligati∣ons to him, yet cheat us of the Impost upon their Herring fishing, and presume to fight with Oquendo the Spanish Admi∣ral, in our very Havens: How they had their Agents here, during our Civil War,
under pretence of mediating our Peace, observing the advantages they might make of our War: How affectionately they there embraced the Kings Interest, and yet how suspiciously their Embassa∣dour faultered about his death: How zealously they espoused his Majesties In∣terest that now is, while hopefull 1649, 1650, 1651, 1652, (for a pretence to hide their design of quitting the Homage they owed to England, and engrossing its Trade) and when that was done, how like themselves (that is Cunningly) they deserted it, from 1653, to 1660: How eager they were to entertain His Maje∣sty, (though not till they had assurance of his Restauration) and yet how un∣kind to his Excellent Sister and her Son: How instant for Peace at White-hall, and yet how unreasonable in their Usurpati∣ons, Pyracies, Depredations, and Sur∣prizes in Affrica and America? How ready to deliver the Pepper I∣slands, and what pretences from year to year to keep it: How earnest in solicit∣ing a War with the Turks in Algiers, yet how treacherous in deserting it: How importunate in their addresses for peace,
yet how diligent in their preparations for War! How ready to make satisfacti∣on for old injures, when the mean time they offer new ones: How respectful of His Majesly in their Embassies, yet how abusive of his Person, Government, and Relations in their licensed Libels and Pictures: What Civility, what Kindness pretended! yet how barbarous to our Prisoners at home! How severe to our Merchants abroad! Should I (I say) recollect more parti∣cularly their several Transactions with England, from the year 1665, to the year 1665, that is for an Hundred years to∣gether, it might be interpreted my Spleen, rather than my History; and the gratification of my own Interest, than the information of your Judgement. 4. With Denmark they made a League, wherein among other things it was provided, they should pay a Rose-Noble for every ship that passed the Sound; which yet they payed or denyed (as the King of Denmark Remonstrated) onely according as their Convoys were either weak or strong, sometimes p∣ting his very Dominion in the
and threatning the rade of the Baltick-Sea. 5. Yet when Swedeland upon their in∣stance 1640, 1643, 1644, 1645 entred into a League Guarantine, and in pursu∣ance thereof began a War in Denmark, the very same poynt of time they sent 50 ships to the Sound, and three Embas∣sadours to Copenhagen, representing the formid able Power of the Swedes in the East-Sea, and entring into a League De∣fensive with the Dane, not onely with∣out the Queen of wedens consent, but with a promise of 4000 men against her; yea and an Article, wherein she is obli∣ged to pay Toll to the Dutch for the Sound; they having hired it during some years for 140000 Pattacoons, or Dollars per annum: Of which matters the Swe∣dish Ministers have made loud Remon∣strances to the States General, and to the World. 6. Neither have they any more Cre∣dit with the Portuguez, with whom they ordered a Cessation of Hostility, upon the alteration there 1640, conducing so much to the Spaniards weakning, and their own establishment; yet cunningly insert∣ing
this Clause, viz: That the Truce should not begin in the East-Indies, till within a year; nor in Braziel, till within half a year after the ratification thereof; and as cun∣ningly by vertue thereof, giving order to their men, to take what they could in the mean time; as they did at Angola, Marinsan, and St. Thome; which they sur∣prized, being admitted by the innocent Portuguez to them, under the colour of that League and Truce the Mighty States making this unworthy Allegation to the Portuguez Embassadour, in behalf of that action, viz: That there was no wrong done, in regard that in that Clause its said, That each side should hold and keep what it can take in such a time. Whereunto the Embassadour gene∣rously replyed; That That must be under∣stood Bonâfide, viz: That which should be ta∣ken, without having any knowledge of the Truce. 7. Nay, in the 11th Article of the U∣nion at Ʋtrecht, An. 1579. its promised, That no Member thereof should be neg∣lected in fuure Treaties; and proceed∣ings yet, how Antwerp, Gaunt, and Brussels, though involved therein, were deserted
in the Truce 1607, and the peace 1648, as well as in the War 1625, when the Prince having taken the Castle of Teem∣che, and the French Dunkirk, Antwerp might have been easily rescued, is as well known to the World, as the Reason of it; viz: because Antwerp being reduced, would have drawn to it self its antient and great Trade, which Holland and Zealand enjoyed as long as Antwerp, and the Shilds were dammed up. Gent. These passages with 1. The Amboyna action, within two years after a solemn Treaty begun at London 1613, continued at the Hague 1617, and finish∣ed at London 1619. 2. The 20 ships lent against their an∣tient friends, the French Protestants, 1625. 3. The little satisfaction we have for our losses at Amboyna, notwithstanding the special promise of Reparation before the year 1625, together with the 326 particular injuries done our Merchants and Countrey within these 145 years, amounting to 958646l. where its not unknown to the World, nor to them∣selves, though they would willingly for∣get
it, what their condition was, when England first undertook their Protection; what kindness Blood, and Treasure from England set them up in Queen Eli∣zabeths days; what Power and interposi∣tion from Great Brittain had them de∣clared a free State in King James his time; what Indulgence and condescention to let them pass, trade, and fish on our Seas, upon the civil condition onely of striking sail to our ships and Castles, in acknowledgment of our Soveraignty, have satisfied me, That the Dutch ha∣ving been so careless of that Grand thing Reparation, that they are as un∣likely to make an Interest in Europe for the future, as they are unable for the present: And now they are to stand upon their own bottom; will you vouch∣safe to shew me their Strength, and that first in point of Money, the Sinnews of Warr?
The Dutch present Condition in refe∣rence to Money and Treasure. Trav. HAving of late years Engros∣sed most of the Trade in the Baltick sea, i. e. the East-land Trade, the Trade of Sweden, liefland, Prusia, Poland, Pomerania, Silesia, for Masts, Pitch, Ca∣bles, Iron, Copper, Brass, Clapboard, Tar, &c. the Sound being let them 1651, at so low a rate, as 140000 Pattacoons or Dollars: Monopolixed the Spice, Gold, Pearl, and other Trades in the East and South, so that all the World traded up∣on second-hand from Holland; then the Emporium of it passed, and fished with∣out controul upon our Coast these 30 years. Its not unlikely but that they have amassed a considerable Treasure; but now the French King, and all Europe pursue so vigorously the design of free Trade; now the King of Denmark pre∣pares so considerably for the mainte∣nance of the Sound; now the Swedes
have a mighty Navy to restore their Nor∣thern Trade; now the Portuguez devolve their Interest upon the King of Great Britain; and that mighty Prince checks their Usurpations and Monopolies a∣broad, and forbids their Trade and Fish∣ing at home: that Bank must sink, and their great Charge and little Trade, must eat out the principal Stock, beyond all recruit amongst themselves; whose 7 Provinces, not so big as 7 of our Shires, (the great Quagmire of the South) can∣not maintain the 7th part of their Inha∣bitants at the rate of a Chelsey-Prisoner; who lived always upon Neighbours, eat their Bread, wear their Cloth, grow rich on their pay, and sterve at their displea∣sure. Gent. I but they have infinite Methods of Imposts and Taxes. Trav. They have more wayes indeed to raise Money, than to earn it: But in their Taxes, there are two things that portend their Ruine. Gent. I pray what are they? Trav. The first is, That the very grounds of their Taxes fail them. The second is, That the Measure
of them, breaks their People. Gent. As how? Trav. Thus: Their Taxes are either Those by Sea, or Those by Land. 1. Those by Sea must needs fall to the ground in this manner,—400000l. a year, besides the tenth fish, and the was∣tage of what was spent in Holland, or transported to any other Countrey; which, together with the benefit of al∣laying the Coyn taken in those Coun∣treys, amounted to an infinite Treasure for Herring, and other salt-fish now for∣bidden them on our Coasts, is lost, or at least much diminished. 2. Licenses, Pasports, Customs; since Trade is much deaded by their late Sick∣ness, and more by their present War; wherein their Merchants lose their Prin∣cipal, and therefore Rationally they cannot expect their Interest. 3. Their Prizes and Auxiliary Aides, reckoned in the Spanish War, a part of their revenue fall within a narrow com∣pass. 4. Their Imposts upon French Wines,
Vinegar, Coals, will be very short, till they have cleared the Coast between Burdeaux and New castle; and the like Judgement is to be made of their Tri∣bute. 1. Of assurance of Westlebank and Factorien in this great stop of Trade. 2. Those by Land, if it be possible to raise them in these Islands without free trade at Sea, are so grievous, that the third part of them cost the King of Spain his Dominion; and these (with the least defeat to improve the discontent of the people) may cost the States the Repub∣lick. Hear them, and bless God heartily that you are an Englishman born.— 1. Polt-money, i. e. 4s. for every Head, called by them Hooft-ghelt. 2. Chimney-money, called Scoorsteen-ghelt, 1s. 6d. a Chimney. 3. De twee Honderste Penningh, i. e. The 200l. penny of every mans Estate. 4. Sout-ghelt, or the Tribute for Salt, 6d. a Bushel. 5. Tribute on Ale and Beer, 3s. a Bar∣rel strong Beer, and 12s. small. 6. Tribute on Victuallers, a half pen∣ny a Meal.
7. Tribute of Butter and Candles, 1d. a Pound. 8. Den Impost van de ronde Maeten, or an Impost on whatever is measured with a round Measure. 9. The Impost on Turffs, Wood, Cloths sowed, Grounds, Waggons, Boats, Houses, Pictures, Books, Ships, and all immoveable Goods. 10. Four shillings for every Man-ser∣vant, and Maid servant; with many more that would tyre the patience of a better humoured people. Gent. Indeed when I consider that the two Supports of that Countrey are 1. Merchandize. 2. Manufacture. And withall reflect what little freedom there is for the trade of the one, and how little vent for the Workmanship the other; I am very apt to believe their Counsel of the Treasury have, as in that for Trad: though I admire not so much their buses are so low now, as that ever they could be so high. Trav. Indeed, 1. The Scituation of their Rivers, running through each part of their Countrey, and conveying thi∣ther the Wealth of the German, the Bri∣tish,
and the Meditaranian-Sea. 2. Their Excise rising with their charge; the most idle, sloathful, and im∣provident Souldier, that selleth his blood for drink, and his flesh for bread, serves at his own charge; for every pay∣day he payeth his Father, and he the Common purse. 3. The Coyn of Nations hoarded in their Banks for their Commodities, which, as the Carriars of Christendom, they convey from one Nation to the other. 4. Their trading every where upon the freest Conditions. 5. Their encouraging of Merchants and Artists, 1. By freedom from Im∣posts. 2. By due limits of every one in his own way; as the Hamburgh and Dan∣sick Merchants in their way, the East-In∣dians in theirs, and the West Indians in theirs. 3. By their Respects towards them, and the Priviledges allowed them. 4. By taking care that neither Merchant nor Artizan, that is expert in the secrets and Mysteries of his Profession, go out of their Dominions. 6. The concernment of each Person in the state of the Publick.
7. Their prudence in committing all Accounts to Merchant-—Commissio∣ners. 8. Their fundamental constitution for a yearly estimate of all Estates and Persons. 9. The very necessity of being indu∣strious in a Countrey, where Nature can do nothing without Art. 10. The Peoples humour to maintain their Liberty, which cannot be without Arms, as Arms cannot be supported without Stipends, nor Stipends without Impositions; which are the easier raised, the more lively apprehensions those people have of Danger; and the easier paid, because they appoint 40 days to every Souldiers month. Gent. Besides, there is a world of mo∣ney raised, under pretence of Repairing the Publick Banks, and maintaining the common Cause, called Quota insensibly from this free State: But are you able to make out how much their Treasure falls short by reason of this War? Trav. Besides the fore-mentioned Ar∣gument on that Subject, I shall add ano∣ther by way of Instance in particul Provinces.
1. Holland (which ballanceth the rest of the Provinces in Expences and Coun∣sels) depends in its Revenue on 1. Wea∣ving and making of Cloth; as at Harlem and Leyden, which a restraint on Spanish and English Wool (besides our skill therein) stoppeth. 2. on Merchandize and Navigation; as at Amsterdam and Rotterdam, which this War baffleth. 3. In the vent of Cheese, Butter, French-Wines, and Beer; as at Delph and Dort, which this Quarrel forbids. 4. The sale of Salt and Salt-fish throughout the Countrey, which they owed to our In∣dulgence. 2. Zealand on the Wines of France, the Wines and Allum of Spain, the Spi∣ces and Gold of India, hitherto with our leave onely carried to Prusia, Lief∣land, Denmark, and other Northern Ports. 3. Friezland on Horses, Bulls, Turff, and Onions; commodities sold among themselves, not likely to support so vast a charge as a War with Great Brittain and Ireland may amount; onely Embden Port must not expect its usual conflu∣ence of English, Danish, Nind, Norway
ships, nor its wonted vent for Milk, Bar∣ley, and Beans to Cermany.—To say no more, A War with a potent Nation at Sea, doth what they complained of in Spain; Imprison them in a poor home, that hath onely Ayr (and that none of the best) to breath in. The Dutch present Condition in re∣spect of Government. Gent I Am very well satisfied with re∣spect to the present state of af∣fairs, together with the strict Acts of State in most Kingdoms, against the Ex∣portation of Coyn and Bullion; in what condition our Neighbours are in point of Treasure, will you be pleased to pro∣ceed to the point of Government? Trav. Their Government, to use a Fellow-Travellors words, is a Democra∣cy (and there had need be many to rule such a Rabble of rude ones; tell them of a King in jest, and they will cut your throat in earnest; the very name carryeth in it more Odium than
Image to a Jew, Old Age to a Woman, or a Surplice to a Non-con or mist) made up of these parts, viz: 1. A Stadt-holder, or General, whose Power is not to decree any thing, but to Advise; not to order any matter, though of the least moment, but see their Orders executed. 2. The States General, called Hoegh Moeghend, or High and Mighty; consist∣ing 1. Of Delegates chosen by the seven Provinces somtimes for three years, som∣times for more, never for life. 2. Of a President changed every eighth day. 3. Secretaries removed every three years, all paid by their respective Pro∣vinces, a constant stipend; and when sworn not to regard so much the Interest of their particular Provinces, as of the Union trusted, 1. With the choice of Cenerals, not so much to Command, as Oversee. 2. With the Oaths and other Disciplines of War by Sea and Land. 3. With the answering of Embassa∣dours. 4. With the Accounts of the resective Governours and States of Pro∣vnces, and all other affairs: They may
be at leisure, for 5. Onely all these af∣fairs must be offered first to the States of every Province, and thence imparted to the States General; by the major part of whom all things are ratified, unless in case of Taxes, War, Peace, &c. And such things as concern the Constitution of the Republick. 3. A Council of State, called by them Den Raet van Staten, out of the States-General; whose care is the Discipline and Provision, of the Militia, with the Execution of such Orders of the States-General as concern the Union, and the whole Common-wealth. 4. Upon Extraordinary occasions, a General Assembly of the States, called De general vergadering, made up of more Delegates than ordinary, are convented to treat of Offensive and Defensive Wars of Truce, Leagues, unaccustomed Taxes, &c. Affairs so managed with such una∣nimous consent, that they cannot pro∣ceed, till the dissenting Provinces be by Delegates sent to that purpose from the Assembly satisfied. 5. The Council of the Admiralty, consisting of Merchants and Sea-men;
whereunto their Maritine Revenue is brought, with their Deputies changed every year; whereof there are three ap∣pointed to reside in Holland, the first at Amsterdam, the second at Rotterdam, and the the third at Hoorn: One in Zealand, and that at Middleburgh; and one in Friezland, and that at Harlem; consist∣ing of seven Senators, one Secretary, and one Treasurer, of the Navy. 6. The Council of the Treasury, or the Committee of all Accounts, new every 2 years, (to which all their taxes are paid in) consisting of Merchants and Vsurers. Gent. I do not clearly apprehend what judgment to make of their present state from their Government; the least light in this particular, will be a very great fa∣vour. Trav. Briefly thus: 1. While a Monarch acts, these great Councils debate; while he is at their door they demur, either the quarrel, as Ʋtrecht and its Deputies, or the Method, as Zea∣land; or the charge, as Friezland; or the Command and Conduct, as Holland. 2. Each State and Province pretend∣ing to an equal Power; they are so long
in perswading dissenters by Delegates to Reason, that they lose both their Votes, and the very designes of them. 3. Particular Piques and Animosities shall hazard a Publick Interest, and some great ones will chuse to betray the State, rather than gratifie an Adversary. 4. Nay, such are the disorders of a Common-wealth, that when they should fight an Enemy, they are scuffling among themselves; and when the people expect effectual Orders in their Defence, they are throwing Ink-horns at one ano∣thers heads. 5. The Deputies of each Provinces are ingaged to particular Interests, when the whole lyeth at stake; and the Question is, Whether Zealand shall yeeld to Hol∣land, at that very instant, when its a question too, Whether both are not swal∣lowed by the first Invader. 6. The temporary Grandees of a free State have a private fortune, and a Po∣sterity to provide for upon the Publick Stock, when the Hereditary Princes of a Kingdom are secured for both; and De Wit shall design onely the erection of a Family, when King Alphonso the 4th
aymes at the free Trade of EƲROPE. 7. And a Pension shall buy the best Vote in the Senate, where is a man but would rather be a Duke under a Sove∣raign, than Burgemaster among the Rabble. 8. Besides that, a sudden advance∣ment of a Boor from his shop, to the Se∣nate; not for his Wit, God knoweth, but for his Money, is as much to seek in the affairs of War and Peace, as myn Heer vander Meer; who would needs make his son Admiral, because he had one day ventured in a Caper from the Weiling to Burdeaux. 9. Among which ignorant and unskil∣ful multitude to be Eminent, is to be dangerous; and to deserve well of the Government and Countrey, looks like a design to surprize it; an instance where∣of is old Barnevelt, who after 40 years incomparable services, was allowed no other Recompence than the loss of that head for out-witting his Countrey men, which had so often over-reached their Enemies, as likely to betray that State which he had so often supported. 10. Neither is this the onely incon∣venience
of their backwardness and bangling in State-matters (though its very sad that excellent persons dare not oblige their Countrey, and its safer there to miscarry, than go through an Enterprize;) for besides this, they are forced to keep so many Forreigners in Pension during life, as well when they have occasion to use them, as when not (lest they should be surprized in their ig∣norance or weakness) as put them to the charge of a War in the calmest and best settled peace. 11. What a peevish thing a Free-state is, when the people want Trade or Work; and those people are many in a narrow compass, where they with much ease and privacy Meet, Debate, Com∣plain, Contrive, yea and Remonstrate too, is upon no Ground better known, than in Holland and the United Pro∣vinces. 12. And when all this is done, they are so much puzzled about the choice of Officers and Commanders, that to pitch upon a Commander (when all cannot enjoy what every one desires) in Chief, is to hazzard a Revolt; and to decide a
Competition, is to lose a Province; where however the rejected Party will be able to undo in Private, whatever his Com∣petitor may undertake in Publick; not heeding the Quarrel, so much as the men that mange it. 13. Neither is this all the mischief of that Government, the nicities of Privi∣ledges and Liberty, Propriety and the Fundamental shall buzze the people in the greatest dangers to Mutinies against any trespassers against these sacred Rules, that are within either their Malice or Revenge. 14. Nay, to see the ambitious Heads, that aym at Power and Advantage, by the disorders of the Publick affairs; en∣gaging 1. The simple and the sloathful. 2. The I, and no men, and Blanks. 3. The Contrivers and Speakers. 4. The Sticklers and Dividers by Menaces, Flat∣tery, Pretences, Money, or Preferment, to move, to press, to quit, divert, and put off Debates in such season and order as may best comport with their Design and Advantage; what fair dresses, and clean∣ly couching of Proects; what suitable ways of working they have, upon the hu∣mours
of their Fellow-Burgemasters; as their Fear, their Anger, their loath, their Neglect, their Formality, Vanity, Caution, Inclinations, Profit, or Plea∣sure, to connive the pinch of Disputes; to scruple nothing; to divert, or neglect the best Vote in nature: What care to oblige the Rabble with Nods, Smiles, and what they most esteem a redress of Grievances, which yet the very Patriots themselves it may be contrived them∣selves, they being a people that will ontrive things a miss, rather than want somthing that they may mend. What generous entertainments to ca∣shiered Officers, broken Merchants, dis∣contented Counsellors and Advocates I What sullen Retirements from the State, with untoward Looks, Garb, and Lan∣guage! How cunningly the Factious re∣lieve the present necessities, with lasting inconvenience! How sliely they engross the Publick Treasure, into Private Hoards! What correspondents they keep in the Admiralties and Treasuries! What Advocates and Dependants in the par∣ticular States and Councils! What irre∣gular
and wid Resolves! I say, To re∣flect on these, and other Particulars of that Government, cannot chuse but con∣vince a man how deplorable a thing it is to be governed by a Rabble, that are more addicted to Appearances, than ca∣pable of comprehending the Reasons of Things; among whom, in all cases deter∣minable by Plurality of Voices, the grea∣ter number of Fools, weigheth down the more prudential Councils of fewer Wise-men. Nay, which is most ridiculous and miserable, (but that in popular suffrages it must be so) his Vote many times casts a Kingdom, that hath not brains enough to rule his private Family; deciding the Question, without understanding the Debate. Gent. Indeed when I consider how slow their Debates must be, when mana∣ged by so many divided Heads; and how low their Treasure, when passed through so many private hands; when I reflect on the several obstructions in their many Admiralties, and the indirect proceed∣ings in their numerou Councils for the Treasury; I wonder much how they
maintain a War, more how they con∣duct it: But Sir I observe Religion was their great friend in former Wars. SECT. 3. Their present state in point of Religion. Trav. IT was so indeed, when Queen Elizabeth pittied, the French Protestants relieved, and the German Princes assisted them upon the bare ac∣count of their being Professors of the Gospel; besides that, that Notion extraor∣dinarily inspired their Populacy, no∣thing rendring men more daring in this World than their Engagements for ano∣ther; when that which restrains and mo∣derates Passions inflames them. I. But 1. Since the Dutch have never been esteemed really devout, and now think it not worth their while to pre∣tend it; and are only Jewes of the New-Testament, that have changed only the Law for the Gospel, since they are so
much Christians as to tolerate Jewes, and banish Catholiques; and so much Protestants, as to silence Arminians, and indulge twelve sorts of Anabaptists; the common saying being, that A man may be what Devil he will there, so he pusheth not against the States. II. Since the Quarrel is not Religion, so much as Trade, so much their Faith, as their Interest; and they can clap a League with the Turk that they may in∣vade an Ally, and the best Protestant Prince in the World. III. Since the vey variety of their Religions endanger their Countreymen with seditions, than any Enemy yet hath done by Invasions; to instance no fur∣ther than the Remonstrant and Anti-re∣monstrant controversie, which if not sea∣sonably allayed, by the grave Councils, and potent Engagement of King James of blessed memory, 1617, 1618, 1619. had taken away their very Place and Nation: Every ambitious or discon∣tented Person, having the opportunity of making himself the Head, or at least of a dissenting Party; into whose Con∣sciences, by the fundamental constitu∣tion
of the Government, no man dares look, untill they grow so prevalent that none can controul their Practices, Schism being established there by a Law, and their Government made precarious and contemptible, as exposed to the restless Importunity of every Sect and Opinion; yea, and of every single Person who shall presume to dissent from the Publick, who finding that by being troublesom to the Government, that they can arrive to an indulgence, will, as their numbers increase, be more troublesom; that so at length they may arrive to a general toleration, and at last cry for an esta∣blishment; besides that the variety of Religions, when openly indulged, doth directly distinguish men into Parties, and withal gives them opportunities to count their numbers; which consider∣ing the animosities that out of a Religi∣ous Pride will be kept on foot by the se∣veral Factions, doth tend directly and inevitably to open disturbance, when there is no security that either the Do∣ctrine or the Worship of the everal Par∣ties, who are all governed by a several Rule, shall be consistent with the peace
of the State,—whereof there are these four degrees; Ministers, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons. IV. Since the Ministers cannot at all in this, or any other case assist the Go∣vernment, being 1. Poor, and stipendia∣ry, being allowed seldom above 50l. a year. 2. Chosen and settled with the consent of the people (about which mat∣ter, there are not there a few Blastings and Factions—about 1. The Right of Presentation. 2. The Examination of the person presented. 3. The Con∣tract between him and his Patron. 4. The time of Presentation. 5. The Or∣thodoxness and Piety of the man Pre∣sented. 6. The Churches Right of re∣fusing their Presented Minister, or to turn him out, &c.) 3. Unlearned, there being no encouragement to be Excel∣lent; the Pedant and the Doctor sitting together at the Ordinary, right at the rate of an Equall Common-wealth, after they have performed their Sermon and Common-place, and with Prayer and fasting are sent abroad, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbitery, and the lifting up of the hands of the people.
V. Since they have such clashings a∣mong their Ruling Elders, and such ado with their 1. National Synod. 2. Their Ecclesiastical Senate. 3. Their Provin∣cial Conventions twice a year. And 4. Their Ecclesiastical Conventicles, where∣of 16. in a Province once a month. VI. Since a man knoweth Sunday amongst them by no other Token than by their Playing and Mustring; since God may be more safely offended there than the States-General; their Repub∣lick, being to them more than Heaven: Liberty is their God, War their Heaven, Peace their Hell, the Spaniard their De∣vill, Custom their Law, and their Wills their Reason:—Since when they must in Heathen Kingdoms part with their trade or Religion, they will say they are no Christians, but Hollanders. VII. Since its the Protestant States and Princes that they have most disob∣liged, I mean Sweden, Denmark, and England. VIII. Since they have so little regard to Religion, that when the Christian Ministers in Turkey were sent for to con∣sult about Moses his Body, the Dutch
Merchants said they had none. These Particulars being warily put together, I may conclude that they have lost their Interest in point of Religion. Gent. Nay, when they pretend to no more Religion there, than 1. To Pray. 2. Read. 3. Preach. 4. Expound. 5. Ca∣techise. 6. Baptize. 7. Receive the Com∣munion the first Sundayes in April, July, October, and January, after 18. dayes warning. 8. To marry a Widow with∣in six months, a Maid at 14, with an Exhortation. 9. To make a sick mans Will. 10. To go before a dead bo∣dy, without either Prayer, Sermon, or so much as the tinkling of a Bell. 11. To admonish, suspend, excommunicate, 1. By praying for the guilty person. 1. On Sunday, without naming either him or his fault. The 2d. Naming him. The 3d. Naming him and his fault, for which he is excluded, till he confesseth it before the Congregation, and the Pul∣pit:—And all these things with that indifferency, that if men will, they may use them, and submit to them; if not, they may let them alone: Inso∣much as there is not a more ridiculous
Meeting in the World, than their Paro∣chial Sunday meetings; where they do what they please indeed for an hour or two, and the people do what they please all the Week:—I think we may wave that Point, and see what is— Their present Condition in point of Land-Forces. Trav. VVHn 1. They are orced to maintain so many thousands in time of Peace, on purpose that they may be ready against a War. 2. When their Weesvaders for the Or∣phans of their souldiers, when their East∣huysen for maimed souldiers, when their Aelmoestiniers for old servants and Offi∣cers, when their Die huyse sitten, de Ar∣men, and other Wase-houses, Guest-houses, Du houses, and most prudent provisions for those persons that fail in their ser∣vice, stand them in 364547l. 16s. 4d. Amsterdam alone maintaining 113764. with weekly accommodations. 3. When at their last year Estimates
(as the custom is) of States and Persons, they sunk almost half in half; besides that so many served forreign Princes without leave against the fundamental constitution of their Government, 4. When in the greatest danger of the Countrey, they will stand upon this Punctillio, of their Magna Charta; that none should be forced to serve out of his own Province. 5. When so many excellent persons, especially almost all their Commanders, must either quit their service, or their own Allegiance. 6. When the Coyn of each Nation, is by strict Lawes kept there, and the States must spend upon the common stock. 7. When the Lord of the Sea in Right and Power forbids the Importation of any Bullets, Match, Powder, Armes, Am∣munition, or any other Contraband Goods from any part of the World into Holland, upon pain of forfeiting the Goods and Vessels too. 8. When the gross Inhabitants are so unweildy, that they can do nothing but sit on their Breeches in a ship. 9. When they are as much at a loss
for Men to their Arms, as they may be for Arms to their Men, in a very short compass of time should a mighty Prince, who is Lord of the Sea in Power, as well as Right, continue that severe Edict whereby all Nations are advertised, That what Powder, Ammunition, or other Contraband Goods soever, they shall Import to the Lands, Territories, Plantations, or strong Holds, belonging to the Estates of the Ʋnited Netherlands, shall be judged Prize∣goods and forseited accordingly. And consequently the Dutch stores being likely to supply at least 40000 men by Sea and Land, without any hoped recruit, the Countrey must needs be lost, as Amsterdam was once for want of Am∣munition. Besides that, they will be as much to seek for Provision, as for Men; the Pesti∣lence preceding their War not more fa∣tally, sweeping away the one, (a third part being missed in Holland) than the Famine following it cuts off the other (the Market is already improved a moy∣ety;) and when the Baltick-sea is com∣manded by Sweden and Denmark, the Mediterranian awed by the Turk, and
French, and the Brittish-coasts over-ruled by their Soveraign, Holland will not be said so properly to be overcome, as to be starved; it being not likely that the King of England should be guilty of the King of Spain's oversight; (Princes seldom erre twice) which cost him those Provinces (and as much money as would have bought as much Land thrice over,) and rendred them as considerable, as it made him despicable; that is, ly pelting at their impregnable Townes, when he may swallow their whole Common∣wealth, and take that pedling Countrey quickly by the Wholesale, that cost others so much by the Retail. Its true, their Towns are strong, but Factious; driving at their particular Inte∣rests, to the prejudice of the general States, and ready to submit to any new Masters, rather than Truck under Am∣sterdam Antwerp chose rather trade under Spain, than Liberty under the free States: each Governour pursuing his own design as vigorously as the High and Mighty do theirs: Neither is there a Gar∣rison there, wherein the Governour is not engaged against the Burgemasters, and
they inveterate against him; wherein the Townsmen would not betray the Soul∣diers, or the Souldiers sell away the Townsmen. Besides, as an Agent (who doth there more service than an Army) may order the affair, such may the misunderstand∣ing be between the respective Provinces, that they had rather (as the Duke De Alva observed) be ruined by themselves, than saved by one another; though indeed as they are hardly attempted, by reason of the narrowness of their ways, and fre∣quency of their Dikes, so they are more hardly relieved; a 1000 well-encamped men, being not to be attempted there by 10000; to which may be added, That as strong soever their Towns may be by Land, they lye open by Sea, and so no longer tenable against us, then their Ma∣sters are Lords of the Brittish-coasts. But suppose their Forces by Land most considerable, yet you must suppose with∣all Commanders to those Forces; who being of necessity Forreigners, men of fortune, and it may be persons of vari∣ous apprehensions, never likely to close in a common Quarrel or Action unani∣mously
or honestly. Yea let me tell you, their very strong Holds are their weak∣ness; as to which they trust so much, that they could never yet look an Ene∣my in the face in the Field, nor perform any thing resolute or honourable. Not to mention their pay, which must as duly be paid, as the Usurers Mort∣gage-money, in the very time and place, or else the Countrey may be over-run while they lay down their Arms, and cry Ghelt, ghelt; as they did in the very first action of the Prince of Orange towards their freedom, to the loss of 5000 men, and three Counts of the Empire at Stein∣bocke. Neither is it the least consideration, That the Scene of a Land-war, must be the very bowels of their own Countrey; they not daring to look beyond their Cantons by Land, for fear of their friends, nor by Sea, for fear of their ene∣mies. Not to aggravate the affair with this unhappy reflection, That 2000 Horse eats up their Countrey in Summer, and must be eat up themselves, for want of Butter and Cheese in Winter: Yet the
worst is to come, viz: an untoward Oath was put upon so many expert, valiant, and deserving Scots and Eng., wch not on∣ly forfeits them these excellent Persons service, in the instant they could worst spare them, but likewise assists us with such Experience and Interests in their own Countrey, as these Gentlemen can∣not chuse but communicate, to the great prejudice of their Cause and Govern∣ment. Nor needed they have been so Prodi∣gal of the few Gentlemen they had from forreign parts, who have scarce any of their own; for among them a brave Courtly, Gentile, and Noble Person, is like Merlin in the field among Crowes af∣ter Michaelmas; which they wonder at, en∣vy, but can neither use nor respect. Their spirits are sunk as low as their Countrey,—and their blood runs as thick as their water:—Not an Order passing without a French Secretary, nor a Muster without an English Comman∣der, nor an Embassy managed without an Italian Gentleman. Men are like Wine, not good, before the Lees of Clownishness be settled;
nor when its too windy, and will flie out of the Bottle; nor when its too au∣stere and sowre: In a midling clarity and quickness it is best. Gent. Indeed I look for little good in a Land-service, from gross and unweil-Dutchmen: But I hope they are consi∣derable at Sea. Trav. Indeed there's not so Potent a piece of ground for the bigness of it in the World, as Holland at Sea: If 1. Their Timber were answerable at Land, to their ships at Sea; and they must not fight for their shipping, as well as their trade, being beholden to Swede∣land, Denmark, and England for the very strength wherewith they must engage them. If 2. They had either ships that (accord∣ing to the Automatical proposal made there last year) could manage them∣selves, and they were not as much to seek, to let the world see they can furnish an 100 sail, as they have been hitherto in perswading it they can build them; it being one thing in Holland to set out 1000 Merchant-men, and another 160 men of War; their Plantations abroad
having swept away those men that would maintain them at home; they, and their old Masters of Spain lying under one misprision and oversight, viz: That they enlarge the borders of their Domi∣nions at the charge of the strength of them. If 3. They could recruit their ships, as well as man them, and one Battel well followed without mercy or Quarter, overthrew them not beyond recovery. Holland, as well as Spain, were it not for want of men and bread, would do won∣ders. If 4. Their people would fight, as well as debate, and maintain a Quarrel, as well as scan it; and they were not the unhap∣py Common-wealth, where not a man will strike longer than he seeth a Reason for it; every fat Seaman out-staring his Master with a bold Cui ono, to what end all this. If 5. They were not so inured to slavery at home, that they will yeeld in extrea∣mity to a lasting captivity, rather than expire in a bold resistance; laughing in such cases at the English spirit, that pre∣fers an honourable death to a thralled
life;—when at best Hollanders are but Prisoners at large. If 6. Their constant dependance upon, and late Bangs by the English, hath not insinuated to them a Panick fear, that nothing can inspirit but Brandy, and im∣pressed such a disorder upon their spirits, that nothing rallieth them but Rhenish; so dreadful are their apprehensions of England, that when they would express a Momo, they paint a grim Britton rou∣zing with-these words, I am coming, I am coming. If 7. It were not the humour of most pot pular States, as most common people (of which sort they consist) not to hold out beyond one event, to give all over for lost after the first misfortune, while the generous Members of a Monarchy take courage from defeats, raise a reso∣lution from Despair, adding after an Overthrow, the heat of a brave Revenge to that of a common Enmity;—their Anger quickning their Hatred, and their Shame their Anger. If 8. Their Losses did not impede their Successes, and every Seaman almost went out with this sad Exclamation for the
Herring-fishing, the English Commerce, the Mediterranian and Baltick-trade; Well I am 40l. a year the worse for this foolish War: Those men will do little service against a Prince, that hath their Money in his Purse, their Meat in his own Stores, their Corn in his own Ground, their very Livelihood in his own Sea, and their Estates at his Mercy. If 9. Their Privateers did not overrule the Publick, and while every man would set up for himself, all failed not. If 10. Their Provinces could agree at Sea, any better than they do at Land; and did not justle for Precedency when the question is their being. If 11. They durst trust their Comman∣ders with full Commission, and they were neither restrained from their own de∣fence without Order, nor defeated of the best Advantages for want of Autho∣rity. If 12. The proceedings of the several Courts of Admiralties, and their respe∣ctive Debates; with their Particular States, and the States-General spent not that time upon the very Method of Acti∣on, till their Adversaries have cut off
the very possibility of it. If 13. They were secure in any neigh∣bouring Harbour, or in their own since the last are so dangerous, and the first are either shut up: by neutens, or blocked by Enemies. If 14. Antwerp were further off or stop∣ped up; and the blemings dad not an Am∣sterdam as well as the Dutch. If 15. Holland were as able to subsist of it self as England, and Dutchmen had homes to go to, when they have lost their Navy: Did a stop of trade put them onely to want Spice for Sawce, as in England, and not Meat; Wines, onely, and not Bread, Silks, Laces, and not Cloth; Curiosities in fine, and not Ne∣cessaries. If 16. Their Schuttery (as they call them) I mean their Train-bands of Burgemasters, were as good for service, as they are for shew. If 17. They had a Yeomandry to man∣tain their Seamen in War, as well as they Inrich them in Peace. In a word, If 18. They could be at once Valiant and sober, and it were not a sad necessi∣ty that a Dutchman must be either drunk
or fearfull, there being no remedy for Cowardize there, but Madness. The State of every Province. Gent. GƲicciardine, Buxhornius, A∣drian Junius, and Emmeius, the first in this Italique description of Bel∣gium the second and third in their Dutch Theatre of Holland, and the last in his large account of Friezland, say, That Holland alone is more powerful at Sea, than all the Princes of Europe put toge∣ther: What is it then in Conjunction with the rest against one King? Trav. 1. As to Holland, particularly so called, when I consider the differences that are between the Delegates of its No∣bility, the Die Ridder scap, ende Edelen as they call them, and those of its Cities, called Die Steden in most transactions. 2. The Disorders among its Senators, called Vroedt schappen, in most Cities con∣sisting of 20, 30, or 40. 3. The private pikes among its Burgemasters, the popu∣lar prejucice against its Schepenen or Judges, and their Raet-Pensionarous, or
Advocate. 4. The Factions in their Gecomitteerde Raeden, or the Commissio∣ners at the Hague. 5. The great diffi∣culties in settling the De vergaederinge van de Staeten van Hollandt, ende West-Friezland, and the respective Delegates of it. 6. The vast charge that is laid upon the Kamer van Reekeninge, or the two Chambers of Accounts, that over∣look their Estates and Tributes. 7. The vast loss upon the stoppage of free Trade and Herring-fishing, and the Blocking up of their Navigable Rivers. 8. The inclinations of the persons that com∣mand their strong Holds of Sluce, Berghen op Zoom, Breda, Gertrudenergh I say, when I put these particulars to∣gether, with the invidious Aspect cast up∣on this growing Province by the rest of its Neighbours, I expect not it should be able to perform now, what it did under a happier Government in a more useful League and Consederacy in Guicciardi∣ne's time. 2. First so much given to Tumults are the fierce and rough, Inhabtants of Zealand. 12. So full of awls and Con∣tentions are their Hoosden, or the
merry monthly meetings designed to promote friendship and good Neigh∣bourhood. 3. So Lawless and Pyrati∣cally given are their Seamen and Mari∣ners. 4. So deceitful, and apt to betray their confederates for an Interest. 5. So sottish, whorish, and licentious. 6. So Impatient of Order, I awes, Rules, or Government. 7. Such the clashing be∣tween their Admiral, and the Admiral of the States-General. 8. So little ac∣count can their Treasurers at Middleburgh give, of their antient Revenue by French Wines, Salt, Oyles, or Eastern Trades. 9. So weak are their Banks and Rampires, though painfully made, and chargably maintained, being at best but 7. Ells in heighth, and 17. in breadth at bottom made of the hardest Clay that can be gotten, in the inside stuffed with Wood and Stone, on the outside covered with Matts; a weak defence God knoweth, against a stroug Enemy, and a stronger Stream. 10. So visible is the decay of the trade of Middleburgh, upon the opening of that of Antwerp. 11. So obnoxious is that, Flushing, the Ramekins, the char∣gable Islands Romerswal, Schowen, and
Doveland to any Adversaries, that the Zealanders now they cannot Fish, upon which imployment depends their chief trade) are more likely to perplex the State General, than to assist them. 3. Considering 1. That but half Gel∣derland is under the States-General, ly∣ing open in the other half to none of their best friends. 2. That their Go∣vernour and Chancellour are of late so much disobliged. 3. That the proceed∣ings of their Province, are so dilatory, as depending so much on its particular Ci∣ties, as Zuphten, &c. which could never since the Revolt grow towards a settle∣ment; so many irregular hands & heads being concerned in each Vote. 4. That it hath so ill a Neighbour as Brabant, Cleveland, and Bradenburgh; that Pro∣vince at this juncture in my Opinion, on∣ly makes up a number: Notwithstand∣ing it was once so fruitful, that a Gel∣derland Bull was sold at Antwerp 1570, that weighed 3000 pound weight; and pretendedly so strong, that it boasts of 16 walled Towns; though those upon the Eure and Mase lie very open to the Lord of the Sea.
4. Zuphten is so ill befriended by West∣phalia, and the Bishop of Munster on the East of it, and by Cleveland on the South; so suspicious is the present Governour of Zuphten, so hardly came the Vote for Subsities out of their 12 Senators, that I may neglect it as much, as Duke Alva did 1573. 5. The maritine Friezlanders have 1. so little use of their Nets; The Inland Countreymen or Husbandmen judge themselves 2. So little concern'd in the Quarrel. 3. So intent they are upon the peaceful arts of Pasturage, and Tillage. 4. So much do they please themselves with their very fancy of Liberty and Pri∣viledges. 5. So hardly will they part with their Money. 6. So Modest, Meek, and Quiet they are, and given to hunt∣ing and Hawking. 7. So jealous are the Protestants of West-Friezland, who are under the States of the Catholicks of West-Friezland, who are under an Earl of their own, that the Frizons are neither very able, nor willing to dance after the East and West-India Companies Pipes in Holland; and the rather, because though surrounded with water, yet not so liable
to an Invasion, as the States insinuate (who would make use of their fears, to begin a War; which onely their Valour can prosecute) because of the many and cross Dykes, that forbid any marching throughout the Coast by either Horse or Foot. 6. The Inhabitants of Groning are so delicate, lazie, and proud; its Councill of 12 called Naetsluyden, and 24, called Geswoeren Raden; their Wacht Meesters are so stubborn, refusing at this present affair, boh a consederacy with, contri∣bution to, or commands from the United Provinces; being so safe in their rich and strong Groning, and so contented with their own Domestick-trade, prohibiting all Forreigners upon pain of Confiscati∣on of Goods and Vessels, that they nei∣ther know nor fear any Enemy. 7. Neither is Groynland so secure as Overyssel that low Marsh is fearful; Daven∣ter and Swoll, its two chief Towns ha∣ving still impressions of the English Va∣lour, since the fierce assaults made upon them 1576, under the Earl of Leicester, then Governour of the Low-countreys; as likewise hath the troublesome Bishop∣rick
of Ʋtrecht, which hath been so in∣ured to seditions at home, that it un∣derstands not what means a War a∣broad. Besides, some modern disgusts taken by the President, Senators, and the Treasurer at the proceedings, upon some appeals at the Hague, make them unwil∣ling to hazard the Rhine to any ordinary undertaker. Gent. It seems then relly, that the whole affair of this present War, is a∣gainst the Interest of this Countrey. Trav. I leave th to you, when you have reflected on these Particulars, which the Duke of Rhoan (writing of the Interest of the States of Europe) makes the peculiar concerns of the Uni∣ted Provinces, viz: 1. A firm League with England for trade, and a Confederacy against Spain the antient Soveraign. 2. A good correspondence with such Princes as are potent in the Mediterranian or the Baltick Sea. 3. A quiet and easie Government; free from Tumults and Seditions, or the oc∣casions of them, want of Trade, and Im∣positions.
4. Free trade. 5. A care that no one City or Province groweth either so Rich or Potent, that the rest should envy or suspect it. 6. A quickness to observe, and readi∣ness to buy off all pretensions or allega∣tions of Neighbour-Princes as soon as they are made. Gent. remember very well that there were 5 things for which Cardinal Bentvoglio presaged the downfall of this Republick, and they are, 1. That Liberty would come to Li∣centiousness. 2. That there would such inequality arise from their pretended equality, as would bring them as it did the Romans, from many Masters, under one Sove∣raign. 3. That they must in time trust too much to general Officers, especially their Admiral and General. 4. That their Expences must be in∣tollerable. 5. That Holland would enjealous the rest of the Provinces, or surprize them; all which are now their confessed case.
Their Case in a War with us, made out from the Causes moving the Queen of England to give Ad to the de∣fence of the peple Afflicted and Oppressed in the Low-Countreys. 1. THe Natural Situation of the Realm f England and the Low-Countreys, one directl opposite to the other; and by reason of the ready crossing of the Seas, nd multitude of large and Commodious avens an our side; a constant Ira ck and Commerce between the people of England, and the Low-Countreys, continued in all antient times, when the several Provinces were under their respective Lords. 2. Such hath been the devendnce of these poor people upon England, that their Prelates, Noble-men, Citizens, Burgesses, and other Commonalties of their Port-towns, entred into Obligati∣ons and Stipultions under their parti∣cular Seals from time to time, to the good people of England for avours,
Affections, and friendly Offices shewed towards them. 3. Such was the necessity of Com∣merce between these two People, that they have remonstrated to their Gover∣nours at several times, That they could not subsist without a Commerce with England; s to Philip Duke of Burgundy, in H▪ the 6th. his time, to his Son Duke Charles, and Arch-Duke Philip, in H. H. 7th. his time, and to Charls the 5th. in King H. the 8th. his time. 4. Upon the often and continual La∣mentable Requests made by the Univer∣sal States of the Countries of Holland, Zealand, Gelders, and other Provinces, for Succours in their Extreamityes, we thought at to Aid those poor and distres-People. Gent. How is it then things being so, that they have been able to do so well hitherto as they have done?
SECT. 4. The things that formerly advanced the Netherlands. Trav. 1. EƲrope hath been ever sne a most Constly emb∣ed. 2. They have had a Regular wy by themslves of ax, I man their Ex∣cise; whereby the more they py, he more they receive; or what the souldi∣ers receive in py, they pay in rink; ther vey Enemies, though they hate the States, yet love their Lqor, and pay Excise:—Yea, the most dle, sloath∣full, and improvident, that selleth his blood for drink, and his flesh for bread, serves at his own charge; for every pay day he reckoneth with his Father, and he with the common Purse. 3. Pyra∣cies, whereby they have those Commo∣dities in time of War in Gross, which they have onely in time of Peace by Re∣tail. 4. They have formerly checked the Austrian power which is now low.
5. They go out with less charge than other Nations, their ships requiring few∣er men, and those men all sharing in the Design, are contented with courser far; flesh among them being kept hot more dayes, than a Pigg in Pye-corner; it being their own case, they go through all dif∣ficulties with patience, so they husband all Expences with thrift. 6. They eu∣grossed the Coyn of Europe, carrying the Commodities of one Countrey into ano∣ther. 7. They have been hitherto al∣lowed in England, Denmark, and Musco∣y, to trade upon the best and sreest con∣ditions. 8. They kept in with England, and its Protestant Allies. 9. They have imployed all the poor that could work, and provided for those that could not. 10. They have had formerly Lombards, or Loan houses, where the poor have money upon any Pawn for a Rea∣sonable Rate, viz: 6. in the 100. with Reasonable time of payment. 11. Their Diet was course, and of every mans own providing. 12. They spent money for∣merly, but now their time in drinking. 13. They Trafficked for others super∣fluities, but not their own. 14. Their
Apparel was plain, and their Ambition onely upon Realities and Solidities. 14. Their Lawes were strictly executed, and no forfeitures left to the corrupt dis∣posals of an Officer, but all bestowed upon the Publick. 15. Usury was a stranger to them, every man laying out his Estate upon the Publick-traffick. 16. No idleness there, and therefore no thievery; a fault more effectually re∣strained there by Whipping, than here by Hanging. 17. If any man gained there extraordinarily by money, the tenth of his gain was the Common∣wealths; Usurers escaping not there as here. 18. One undone by casuality, they set up; one cast to Prison, the Cre∣ditor maintains; one troubled with a shifting Adversary, a quick tryal relieves. 19. All men debated, and all contribu∣ted to the Publick affairs, as concerned both by advice and purse. 20. Their Resolutions were secret and sudden. 21. Their Industry hath been great, and their Expences small; they maintaining it for a Maxime, That a thing lasts lon∣ger mended than new. 22. Their Re∣creation hath been Warlick, and they
have been to be souldiers before they were men. 23. They have been a hardy and a head-strong people, and you might sooner convert a Jew to Christia∣nity, turn an old Puritane, than con∣vince a Dutchman of Reason. 24. Not a man of them but might have been a Statesman, for they have all this gift, not to be too nice-conscienced. 25. They were seldom deceived, for they trusted no body, though every body must trust them. 26. They love none but those they profit by. 27. Complement is an idleness those brutish people were never skilled in; they are half marred being Saylors, and being Souldiers they are quite spoiled; for there (saith my Au∣thour) they would let a Jew build a Ci∣ty, where Harlem-Mear is, and after that couzen them of it. 28. They have had a Religion, and a Liberty, of both which they were very zealous formerly, and are as careless now. 29. They have enjoy∣ed the Easterlings trade in the North, and ours in the East. 30. Their watches were seldom of a Nation, so that they could seldom concur to deliver up one Town. 31. They were very strict upon
Musters, the list and the pole seldom dis∣agreeing. 32. Their souldiers are well Cloathed, Armed, Disciplined, and paid; the souldiers seldom any where commit∣ting fewer insolencies upon the people, or the Officers fewer deceits upon the souldiers. 33. Their General could not betray them, his Army being com∣posed of many several Nations; his Offi∣cers not at his own, but at the States disposal; and his Commission never Im∣plicitly left to his discretion, but by reason their Countrey hath no great bounds, he receives daily commands what to do. 34. Discipline was thus, Their Military Rules and Orders. 1. THat no man shall swear or blas∣pheme, upon pain of 5s. the first offence, five days imprisonment the second, and a disbanding the third. 2. That they shall pray prayers twice a week. 3. That they play not at either Cards or Dice, upon pain of two days impri∣sonment. 4. That no Women follow the Soul∣diers,
but Wives, Nurses, and Landresses, upon pain of Whipping. 5. That none lay violent hands on Women with childe, Virgins, Babes, or old Persons without Order. 6. That Drunkards shall be dischar∣ged. 7. Concealers of Treasons shall be racked. 8. Correspondents with Enemies shall dye. 9. None shall leave his Rank or File without leave upon pain of death. 10. He that sleeps at a Watch, or be∣wrayeth the watch-word, must dye. 11. Mutineers, and unlawful Assem∣blers shall dye. 12. None shall Quarrel with a Soul∣dier, or lift up a sword against an Officer on pain of death. 13. He that leaves his Post and Breach dieth. 14. He that deserts his Captain, or serveth under two, shall be imprisoned during pleasure. 15. He that imbezleth his Armour, Provision, or Furniture, is discharged. 16. He that steals any Souldiers Fur∣niture,
fore-stalls any Victuals, Exacts on the people, abusth Tradesmen, shall dye. 17. He that resist; a Proclamation, as∣sists any Mlefactor, disturbs any Quar∣ters, sets on fire any Building within the Camp or without, makes any false A∣larms knavishly shall dye. 18. No man shall neglect an Alarm, entertain a stranger, converse with Trumpeters or Messengers of the other side, loyter with the Carriages, or For∣rage abroad without leave, upon pain of suffering what the Marshal or chief Commander pleaseth. 19 No Captain shall undertake any Enterprize, or be absent from the Watch without Order from the General. 20. Neither Souldier, nor Captain shall dismiss, sell, or ransom any Priso∣ner or Booty, beore he hath presented him or it unto his immediate Officer. 21. Every Souldier shall stand by his Ensign day and night, till ordered to de∣part; and observe and learn the sound of Drums, Fifes, and Trumpets. 22. No Beast shall be garbaged, no Easement made but at a distance ap∣pointed
from the Camp. 23. Whosoever delivereth any place left to his charge or keeping, flieth to the Enemy, or passeth any other way, either in Town or Camp, but at the or∣dinary Gates without Order, shall dye. 24. No man shall (as they March) make any cry at all at the putting up of any hair, &c. All other offences that may tend to disorders (not comprimi∣sed in the foresaid Rules) shall be pu∣nished as the chief Commander shall think fit. These are the several Particulars, whereby they rose to this Grandeur and opulency, whereof some have fail∣ed, and the rest are not able to bear up that Government, which they altoge∣ther erected. Gent It being so obvious from these reflexions, to conclude their weaknes∣se; it were necessary their present Case and Controversie should be favourably staed to their Neighbours, for com∣passion or assistance. Trav. They are more unhappy in the ground of this present Quarrel, than in any of the fore-mentioned particulars.
Gent. As how Sir? Trav. Why first, In reference to trade and Fishing in the narrow Seas. The present state and Controversie be∣tween us and the Dutch. ALl the world know that we have Right to the Narrow-Seas, for the Seas that surround our Island, whither the Scottish, the British, the Irish or German were possessed and secured by the Brittains; who fished so much upon them, that they furnished the Hilts of their Swords with such fishes teeth as they took, and traded so considerably; that none came amongst them but Mer∣chants. Those Seas were by them transmittd with their countreyes to the Romans up∣on the Conquest; who, as they managed the Government of the Land by Presi∣dents, so they did that at the Sea by an Archigubernacy, or chief Governour and Admiral; who seured Commerce, took Prizes, looked on the Coasts of Spain, Ita∣ly,
and Affrica it self. After the Romans, the Saxons succeeded to this Right and Dominion, and commnded the Sea under a Count of the Saxon shore; i. e. (whatever Pava ollus saith to the contra∣ry) the Sea-shore, Octa and Ebista under Vortigerne and Hergist commanding these Seas; the Saxons and Danes keeping a numerous Navy to that purpose, by such Tributes and Duties as they imposed upon their Vassals, particularly Dane∣ghelt for the Guard of the Sea; Edgar and Canutus styling themselves Soveraigns of the Sea. The Right and Dominion of the Seas passed with this Nation to the Normans, as appears 1. From their Government, the custody of the Seas being under an Admiral, by Commissions from the seve∣ral Kings maintained by Tributes, paid in consideration of the said custody. 2. From their Right in all the Islands, lying on the Sea before the French shore. 3. From leave asked alwaies and granted to Forreigners by the English, to pass thse ea. And those that asked leave were the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, the Hans Towns in Quern Eliza∣beths
time; Hollanders and Zealaers themselves, not daring to fish before they asked leave of Scarborough and Kng James proclaiming May 6. 1610. That none fish upon the English or the Irish Sea, without leave obtained and every year at least renewed, from the Com∣missioners appointed for this purpose at London. But 4. Our Right to the Sea, appears from the Limits we set to such Forreigners (as Moderators of the Sea) as  at enmity with one another, and at amity with the English. 5. From the Publick Records, wherein the Domi∣nion of the Sea is ascribed to the Kings of England by the King himself, and the Estates of Parliament, with very great deliberation; and in such express words as these; "Lords of the English Sea on every side, all people accounted us So∣veraigns of the Seas: That our Soveraign Lord the King, and his Illustrious Proge∣nitors being Lords of the Seas, would impose a Tribute upon all strangers: the Kings of England have by right of their Dominions been Lords of the Sea (these are the words of all Europe, by their Commissioners at Paris;) and made
Laws, Statutes, and Restraints: of Arms upon them, together with Admirals, that they should preserve their Superio∣rity over the same. 6. From the Laws and most received Customs of England that make the Seas the Patrimony of Eng. and the King by the old custom of Engl. Lord of the Narrow-eas, and his Soveraignty there so ancient; that they make the four Seas to be equivalent with those words within or without the King∣dom; De mer Apourtenant au Rd' An∣gleterre: The Sea belonging to the King of England 7. From the Coyn, called Rose-nobles, of which its said, four things our Nobles sheweth to our King; Ship, Sword, power of the Sea. 8. From the custom of striking sail on our Coast time out of mind. 9. From the Licenses granted upon their humble supplicati∣ons to the French and Flemings, with li∣mitted number of Boats to fish upon our Coast. 10. From the Prerogative, where∣by all wrecks and Royal fishes, as Whales, Sturgeons &c taken in our Seas, are due to the King of England onely, or unto such, to whom by special Charter he grants the same; Stat. Edw 3. 17.
The state of the Controversies in point of Injuries and Affronts with the Ʋnited Netherlands. Trav HOw they forced us to trade at second hand, 1. In Ter∣nata, under their Fort Tabuche. 3 In Motir. 3. In Tidore. 4. In alvan, Hillo, Amboyn. 5. At Bunda 6. Poleway 7. The Coast of Cormandel, near their Arsenal at Jacatra 8. Their chief places Bantham, Japan, Jamby; though we directed them to all these places. How they represent∣ed us as Pyrates there, and when they had done any mischief, said they were Englishmen; untill for our safety we were fain to distinguish our selves from them, by the solemnity of Novemb. 17. and 5. How they contrived to blow up our Warehouses, forbad us all Commerce upon Queen Eliz. her death, made all Christians so odious, that the first Question asked in those parts, was Are you Flemmings?
How they seized our Yards, Wharfs, &c. giving order to kill every English∣man that would not swear fealty to them, upon the erecting of their Fort at Banna; intending to put all English in an old ship, and blow it up.—How they search, and stop our ships; give out, that they are under a King.—Make us pay them Custom at Bantham How they seized our ships at Poeway, though the Island was given our King; leading our men about streets, with Hal∣ters about their necks, and an Hour glass before them; intimating, that after that ran out, they should be hanged. How (though the Mogul would not look on them, till Sir Tho. Roe assured him they were our Friends; they seized our Pole∣roon 1617, suborning the Slaves to burn our ships; loading our men with Irons, dismembring some, setting others in their wounds in hard Grates; wherein their Legs swelling so, that they could go neither in nor out without a Carpen∣ter; pissing over their heads in Dungeons every morning, and allowing them but a half-penny loaf, and a pinte of water a day.—How it was proved at Jacatra,
that the States were seven years a plot∣ting a War between the English and the Dutch at the Indis; threatning likewise to land 60000 men in 24000 Flat-boats in England. How they carried us in Cages from Port to Port, boasting that our King was their Vassall. How though between 1577, when we assisted them first in their Indian trade, and 1625, they got, 1500 Tuns of Gold in Private hands; besides 400 in Com∣mon, they used us in Amboyna. They disputed our Right to the Sea, stopped our entrance to, and Trade at Bantham, Scanderoo, Guinee, Angola, &c. burned ur Factories at Jambee. How they surprized us at Guinee, abu∣sed us in the restoring of the Island Pola∣roon, which they have promised from time to time since 1622. How they gave us Law in the New∣Netherlands, a spot of ground they held of us by curtesie. How they put our men in nasty Dun∣geons at Castledelmina, to lye in their own Excrements, having not bread and wa∣ter enough to sustain Nature; leaving the living and the dead (after exquisite tor∣tures)
to lye together. Injuries, these (with Infinite more of the like nature (to the value of 600000l. in goods) being aggravated, with their preparations for War, to maintain them, even when His Maesty for three years together solicited them to justice and peace) that make it evident to the World, that War (which is defined, The state of two Parties con∣tending by publick force about right and wrong) is become necessary to us, since equity is denyed; and that we must put our affairs to the order of force, when they dare not come to the Test of the Law. Insomuch that I conclude, That as few will pity this ill-natured and unhappy People at the end of the War, as incou∣rage them in the beginning of it. FINIS.
