H3256 99831567 104787
HUDIBRAS On Calamy's Imprisonment, and Wild's Poetry. To the Bishops. MOst Reverend Lords, the Churches Joy and Wonder, Whose Lives are Light'ning, and whose Do∣ctrine Thunder, The rare Effects of both in this are found, Ye break Mens Hearts, yet leave their Bodies sound; And from the Court, (as David did, they say) Do with your Organs fright the Dev'l away: Awake: (for though you think the Day's your own) The Cage is open, and the Bird is flown: That Bird (whom though your Lordships do despise) May Shite in Paul's, and Pick out Sheldon's Eyes: 'Tis He who taught the Pulpit and the Press To mask Rebellion in a Gospel-dress: He who blew up the Coals of Englands Wrath, And Pick'd Mens Pockets by the Publick Faith: He who the Melting Sister's Bounty try'd, And Preach'd their Bodkins into Caesar's side: That Crocodile of State, who wept a Flood, VVhen he was Maudlin-drunk with CHARLES his Blood; Is by the Sisters Gold, and Brethrens Prayer, Become a Tenant to the open Air: For some were griev'd to see that Light expire, That lately help'd to set the Church on fire; And when their Ghostly Father was perplex't, Could wrest an Act, as he had done a Text. Now enter Wild, who merrily lets fly The Fragments of his Pulpit-Drollery: Though his Seditious Ballad pleas'd the Rout, The Verses (like the Author) had the Gout: Yet he proclaims the Show, invites the Crew; (The Presbyters have their Jack-Puddings too) He tells you of a Beast (had lately been VVithin the VValls of Newgate to be seen) That with a Throat (wide as the VVay to Hell) Could swallow Oaths would choak the Idol Bel, And burst the Dragon: yet he could not swear Obedience to the King, and House of Pray'r. Ingenious Wild, 'tis thy unhappy Fate That Iter Boreale's out of date; Love's Tragedy's forgot: for (Oh Disgrace!) Peters succeeds him in his Martyrs place: Publish the Legend of that Reverend Brother, And act the one, as thou hast writ the other. For when St. Hugh did mount the Fatal Tree, He left his Coat a Legacy to thee. O may the Gout no more disturb thy ease, But Bishop Halter take his Diocese; And now th'art dead in Law, (though Zealots laugh) Impartial Truth shall write this Epitaph: This Presbyterian Brat was born and cry'd, Spit in his Mothers face, and so he dy'd. He dy'd, yet lives; and the unhappy Elf, Divides Beelzebub against himself; Abuses Calamy, that Tayl of Smec, And shoots the Prelates through his Brothers Neck. Bishops awake! and see a Holy Cheat; The Enemy sows Tares among your Wheat: Do ye not hear the Sons of Edom cry, Down with the Act of Uniformity? VVe will compound, and worship God by th' halves: Take you the Temples, and give us the Calves. Thus you behold the Schismaticks Bravado's; Wild speaks in Squibs, but Calamy Granado's. Kirk, still these Bearns, lest under Tyburn-hedge, The Squire of Newgate rock them on a Sledge. FINIS.
