H3442 16137606 104788
The humble PETITION AND REPRESENTATION OF The Gentry, Ministers, and others of the Counties of Cumberland and Westmerland, to His Sacred MAIESTIE. With His Majesties Answer thereunto. York 5 Iuly. 1642. YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majestie: And by the Assignes of IOHN BILL. 1642.
To the KINGS most Excellent MAIESTIE. The humble Petition and Representation of the Loyall and Dutifull Affections of the Gentry, Ministery, and others, your Majesties Sub∣jects of the Counties of Cumberland and VVestmerland, whose names are hereunto annexed. Most Gracious Soveraign, WE acknowledge, with all possible Re∣tribution of gratitude, Your Maje∣sties Princely favour in yeelding your Royall Assent to such Bills as have passed since the beginning of this present Parliament. As for your gracious Declaration to continue the same as occasion required, for remedying the evils and pe∣rils incident to Church and State, and for your firm Resolution that the Laws of the Land should be the Rule of your Government; But more particularly endeared to our memories is that Royall sense your Majestie expressed of our dangerous condition and
impendent fears, when we stood ingaged as part of the Pledge to the Scottish Army; and your perso∣nall recommendation thereof to the speedy conside∣ration of both your Houses of Parliament. The former benefits we hold as the fruit of your generall care, equally extending to all; by this you suffered your Royall Nature to be tendered with a Compas∣sion more neerly regarding us; for which Grace we conceive our selves tyed in a more singular and strait Obligation then the most of your other Subjects are, in which respect our just fears might have presented us too remisse in performance of this duty, after so many had gone before us, but that our paucity, and the inconsiderablenesse of these Coun∣ties for quantity and quality, with-held us thus long, untill the too visible distempers of the times justled out such fears, as now unseasonable: Our own sense is our assurance of your Gracious Government, we see and acquiesce in this truth, that your Majesties profession of the true Protestant Religion, & the ex∣ercise of it go together; nor can we take up any more effectuall ground for a belief of sincerity. All our happinesse, and that of all Your Dominions would be compleat, and what were wanting we were in the way for, if a right Understanding were renewed between your Majestie and great Councell.
It is therefore our humble desire, That your Majestie would still be pleased in your wisdome to recollect, and in your goodnesse to imbrace all good means that may tend to this happy union, whereby we may reap the true enjoyment of the long labours of your Majestie and great Councell, for the effecting whereof we shall redouble our Petition, That some place may be thought on, which may be free from exception both of danger and distrust; and then we doubt not, but by Gods Almighty power, such wayes and means might happily be propounded, as may reconcile all differences and mistakings; and your Majestie have full satisfaction in your De∣mands. And we (as we are bound) shall be ready, accor∣ding to Our Power, with our lives and fortunes to defend your Majesties Person, Honour, Crown, and Dignity, the Religion and Laws established against all Maligners of your Maje∣sties Royall Prerogative, and the peace and prosperity of this Kingdom. Hereunto were annexed the names of foure thousand, seven hundred, seventy and four, of the Knights, Gentle∣men, and others, of the Counties aforesaid.
DIEV ET MON DROIT
At the Court at York, 5 Iuly. 1642. His Majestie Hath Commanded me to give this expresse Answer to this Petition. THat His Majestie is very well pleased with the Duty and Assertion of this Petition, and hath commanded me to signifie His good Acceptance of it, and Thanks for it to the Petitioners, and to assure them, That if some others had had the same sense of, and gratitude for His Iu∣stice and favour towards them in the yeelding of His Royall assent to so many good Bills as the Petitio∣ners have, and given as good credit to His Professions and Protestations for the defence of the Religion and Laws established as the Petitioners give, and been as ready to recollect and imbrace all good means that might tend to a happy union, and renew a right un∣derstanding between His Majestie and His Parlia∣ment, as His Majestie hath been, is, and ever shall be; This (by the help of God) had been by this time a most secure, united, and happy Kingdom, free from all the present Iealousies, Distractions, and Dangers. And as His Majestie consents with the Petitioners in a most earnest desire that such a way may be discovered
and pursued, which might reconcile all Differences and Mistakings, and by which He might have full sa∣tisfaction in His just demands; so He likewise con∣sents with them, that the choice of some place free from exception, both of danger and distrust, would be the most probable, and indeed a certain means to attain that end: which out of His great Affection to Iustice and Peace, and His Care of the Freedome, (which is the principall Priviledge) of Parliament, His Maje∣stie hath often intimated, and of late seriously recom∣mended to both Houses; But not onely without Suc∣cesse, but without Answer. His Majestie doth likewise assure the Petitioners, that He will no longer expect, that they should make good their Professions of being ready, according to their power, with their Lives and Fortunes to defend His Person, Honour, Crown, and Dignity, then He shall be ready, occording to His Power, with His Life and Fortune to defend the Religion and Laws established, against all Maligners of the Peace and Prosperity of the Kingdom. FALKLAND. FINIS.
