H3729AA 99828220 32647
depiction of King David Gloria Deo Cantate Domino Canticū Nouvm Psal: 95
A COLLECTION OF SOME VERSES OUT OF THE Psalms of David: Suited to several Occasions. Composed in TWO PARTS, CANTƲS & BASSƲS: BEING Common Tunes to the PSALMS in Metre, now used in ParishChurches. To which is added, Some INSTRUCTIONS for Singing of them. Collected for Mr. HENRY HUNT, for the Ʋse of his Scholars, and such as delight in Psalmody. The Second Edition. Psal. XXXV. v. 3. Praise ye the Lord, for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his Name, for it is a comely thing. LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall for Henry Playford; and are to be Sold by Anthony Boys at his Shop in St. Albans in Hertfordshire, 1698. Price stitch'd 1 s. 6d.
THE PREFACE. Courteous Reader, I Need not acquaint you with the Original and Progress of MƲSICK, and of its Divine Ʋse in all Ages, since we have the Testimony of it in Holy Scripture, both for Antiquity and Administration in the Church: We cannot doubt of the Inventor thereof, since Holy Writ has directed us to Jubal, Gen. 4.21. Nor can we be better informed of its Ʋse in all Ages, than by those Songs of Praise which Moses and the Children of Israel sung at the Overthrow of the E∣gyptian Army. Besides, the Psalms of David are mark'd with Musical Notes above and below, which is a clear Demonstration of Psalmsinging a∣mongst the Jews of old. Singing of Psalms was not only a part of the Jewish Devotion, but likewise a Christian Duty commended by St. Paul, who reckons Singing of
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, a great mark of Conversion. 'Tis commanded by St. James, ch. 5. v. 13. If any man be afflicted, let him pray; if any be merry, let him sing Psalms. And this kind of Devotion the common People are most intent upon; to Instruct whom, was the main Design of this little Collection: It having been a means to introduce that most excellent Book, en∣tituled, The whole Book of Psalms in Three Parts, Composed by Mr. John Playford. Those who make use of these Books, may sing without the Scots way of reading the Words, and do it in a standing Posture, letting their Hearts be ravished with the Harmony of God's Love and Goodness, whilst their Voices are joyned in his Praises; that having perfectly learned their Parts here, they may at last come to joyn with the Hea∣venly Chorus, and Sing Hallelujahs to all Eterni∣ty. Which is the hearty Wish and Prayer of Your Friend, Henry Hunt.
Instructions for Singing the PSALMS. The GAMUT, or Scale of MUSICK. Treble   A la mi re in Alt la la mi G sol re ut in Alt sol sol la F fa ut fa fa sol E la la mi ♭ fa D la sol sol la la C sol fa fa sol sol B fa ♯ mi mi ♭ fa ♭ fa A la mi re la la mi Mean G sol re ut {G-clef} Cliff.—sol {G-clef} sol {F-clef} la F fa ut fa fa sol E la mi la mi ♭ fa   D la sol re sol la la C sol fa ut {C-clef} Cliff.—fa {C-clef} sol {C-clef} sol B fa ♯ mi mi ♭ fa ♭ fa Bass A la mi re la la mi G sol re ut sol sol la F fa ut {F-clef} Cliff.—fa {F-clef} fa {F-clef} sol   E la mi la mi ♭ fa D sol re sol la la C fa ut fa sol sol B mi mi ♭ fa ♭ fa A re la la mi G Γamut sol sol la   FF fa ut fa fa sol EE la mi la mi fa DD sol re sol la la CC fa ut fa sol sol     B sharp. B proper. B flat.
The Names of the NOTES according to the Gamut, as they Ascend or Descend in the Treble. S D la sol re. L E la mi. F F fa ut. S G sol re ut. L A la mi re. M B fa ♯ mi. F C sol fa. S D la sol. L E la. F F fa ut. S G sol re ut. L A la mi re. Those Notes above F fa ut are called Notes in Alt, as G sol re ut in Alt, A la mi re in Alt, &c. The first three Notes above your Mi Are Fa sol la, here you may see; The next three under Mi that fall, Them La sol fa you ought to call. The eight Notes Ascending, and Descending. Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol. Sol fa la sol fa mi la sol. The Names of the NOTES as you ought to call them in Singing. If that no Flat be set in B, Then in that place standeth your Mi. Sol la fa sol la ♯ mi fa sol la fa sol la. But if your B alone be Flat, Then E is Mi, be sure of that. La ♯ mi  fa sol la fa sol la ♯ mi fa sol la.
If both be Flat, your B and E, Then A is Mi, here you may see. La fa sol la ♯ mi fa sol la fa sol la ♯ mi. If all be Flat, A, B, and E, Then Mi alone doth stand in D. ♯ mi fa sol la fa sol la ♯ mi fa sol la fa. The Ascendings. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. 8th. The Descendings. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. 8th. The breaking of Notes. Thirds. Fifths. s m l f m s f l l f s m f l m s. f s s l Eighths. f f s s. s s f f l s s f. s s l l f f s s s s f f l l s s.
The Names of the NOTES according to the Gamut, as they Ascend or Descend in the Bass. F CC fa ut. S DD sol re. L EE la mi. F FF fa ut. S Gamut. L A re. M B mi. F C fa ut. S D sol re. L E la mi. F F fa ut. S G sol re ut. L A la mi re. M B fa ♯ mi. F C sol fa ut. Those Notes below Gamut are called Double Notes, as Double F fa ut, Double Ela mi, &c. The first three Notes above your Mi Are Fa sol la, here you may see; The next three under Mi that fall, Them La sol fa you ought to call. The eight Notes Ascending, and Descending. Sol la mi fa sol la fa sol. Sol fa la sol fa mi la sol. The Names of the NOTES as you ought to call them in Singing. If that no Flat be set in B, Then in that place standeth your Mi. Fa sol la ♯ mi fa sol la fa sol la ♯ mi fa. But if your B alone be Flat, Then E is Mi, be sure of that. Fa sol la fa sol la ♯ mi fa sol la fa sol.
If both be Flat, your B and E, Then A is Mi, here you may see. Sol la ♯ mi fa sol la fa sol la ♯ mi fa sol. If all be Flat, A, B, and E, Then Mi alone doth stand in D. Sol la fa sol la ♯ mi fa fol la fa sol la. The Ascendings. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. 8th. The Descendings. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. 8th. The breaking of Notes. Thirds. Fifths. s m l f m s f l l f s m f l m s. s s l l Eighths. f s s l l s s f l l s s. f f s s l l m m m m l l s s f f
Of the Cliffs, with the Names and Proportions of Notes. IN the Gamut (as you have it set down in the first Page of these Instructions) is contained three Septinaries of Letters, viz. G, A, B, C, D, E, F, which are set down at the beginning of each Rule and Space, and are called Cliffs; but four are only used, one of which being always placed at the beginning of every Tune. {F-clef} The first is F fa ut Cliff, which is only used to the Bass, or lowest Part, and is set on the fourth Line at the beginning of each Tune, as you may see marked in the margin. {C-clef} The second is the C sol fa ut Cliff, which is proper to the Middle or Inner Part, as Tenor, ContraTenor, or Mean, and marked as in the Margin; but oftentimes set on the first, second, or fourth Line, as well as upon the middle. {G-clef} The third is the G sol re ut Cliff, being proper only to the Treble, or highest Part, and marked at the beginning of Tunes on the second Line upwards, as 'tis set in the margin. These three Cliffs are called, The three signed Cliffs; and from them all the Notes of your Tunes are known, by proving them up or down according to the Gamut. The fourth is the B Cliff, called B fa, B mi; the B fa signify∣ing flat, and kn4own on Rule or Space by this mark [b]; and the B mi, which signifies sharp, by this mark [♯]. Names of Notes. Proportions of Notes. {breve note} {semibreve note} {semibreve note} {minim note} {minim note} {minim note} {minim note} {crotchet note} {crotchet note} {crotchet note} {crotchet note} {crotchet note} {crotchet note} {crotchet note} {crotchet note} Breve. Semibreve. Minim. Crotchet. Breve. {breve note} Semibreve. {semibreve note} Minim. {minim note} Crotchet. {crotchet note} The Proportions of the Notes used in the Psalms are thus: A Breve contains two Semibreves, a Semibreve two Minims, a Minim two Crotchets, so that eight Crotchets bears in Pro∣portion of Time but one Breve, as they are here expressed in the margin. For farther Instructions, I refer you to Mr. John Playford's Introduction to the Skill of Musick, it being of a fit bigness to be bound up with this Collection of Psalms.
A TABLE of the Psalms and Hymns, with their Use, and the Names of each Tune. Cantus. Bassus. The PSALMS. The Use of the Psalms. The Names of the Tunes. Pag. Pag.       2 3 I   York. 4 5 II For Easter Cambridge. 6 7 III   Proper. 8 9 IV   Glocester. 10 11 V A Thanksgiving London. 12 13 VI   Bristol. 14 15 VIII At a Christning St. Mary's. 16 17 X For the Poor Cambridge. 18 19 XV   Martyrs. 20 21 XVII For a Penitent Sinner Windsor. 22 23 XVIII In time of War Proper. 24 25 XIX   York. 26 27 XX For the KING Canterbury. 28 29 XXV   Southwel. 30 31 XXVI   Windsor. 32 33 XXIX For a Thanksgiving Bristol. 34 35 XXXI   Lichfield. 36 37 XXXIII   St. David's. 38 39 XXXIV Parents Advice to Children Martyrs. 40 41 XXXV In time of War Hereford. 42 43 XXXIX For Burials Windsor. 44 45 XL   Westminster. 46 47 XL For Charity 18 Ps. Tune. 48 49 XLIII For our Delivery St. David's. 50 51 XLIX For Burials, or for the Rich Cambridge. 52 53 LVIII — LXXXII Before the Judges Norwich. 54 55 LXVIII   St. David's. 56 57 LXXXI   Proper. 58 59 LXXXIV   Winchester.
60 61 XC For Burials Windsor. 62 63 XCV   St. David's 64 65 C   Proper. 66 67 CIII At the Communion Westminster. 68 69 CV 70 71 CXIII   Proper. 72 73 CXVIII For Christmassday Martyrs. 74 75 CXIX   Proper. 76 77 CXXXIV   Southwel. 78 79 CXXXV For Easter 81 Ps. Tune. 80 81 CXXXVII   London. 82 83 CXLI For the Sick London. 84 85 CXLVIII   Proper. 86 87 CL For Deliverance London new. Cantus & Bassus. The HYMNS. The Use of the Hymns. The Names of the Tunes. Pag. 88 Veni Creator For Trinity Sunday 18 Ps. Tune. 89 Benedictus For Easter, or Whitsontide Proper. 90 Nunc Dimittis For Christmasday Benedictus. 91 Lam. of a Sinner For a Burial Cambridge. 92 An Hymn After the Ten Commandmts Proper. 93 An Hymn Before the Communion 18 Ps. Tune. 94 An Hymn After the Com∣munion Bristol. 95 An Hymn For Sunday morning 100 Ps. Tune. 96 An Hymn For Sunday evening 100 Ps. Tune. ☞ Note: All PSALMS of 8 and 6 Syllables may be sung to any Tune in this Book, except those that follow: viz. Psalm 25, 45, 2d Metre of Ps. 50, Psalm 67, 70, and 134, which are sung to Southwel or St. Peter's Tune. Also Psalm 50, 51, 100, 104, 111, 112, 113, 120, both Metres of 121, Ps. 122, 124, both Metres of 125, Ps. 126, 127, 130, both Metres of 136, and Ps. 148, all Proper Tunes.
A COLLECTION Of some VERSES out of the PSALMS, Suited to several Occasions. For the USE of Young Practitioners.
Psalm I. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4. Cantus. York Tune. THE man is blest that hath not bent, to ill advice his Ear: Nor led his life as sinners do, nor sat in scorners chair. But in the law of God the Lord, doth set his whole delight: And in that law doth exercise himself both day and night. He shall be like the tree that grows fast by the rivers side: Which bringeth forth most pleasant fruit in her due time & tide. Whose leaf shall never fade nor fall, but flourish still and stand: Ev'n so all things shall prosper well, that this man takes in hand. So shall not the ungodly men, they shall be nothing so: But as the dust wch from the earth the wind drives to and fro. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psalm I. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4. Bassus. York Tune. THE man is blest that hath not bent, to ill advice his ear: Nor led his life as sinners do, nor sat in sinners chair. But in the law of God the Lord, doth set his whole delight: And in that law doth exercise himself both day and night. He shall be like the tree that grows fast by the rivers side: Which bringeth forth most pleasant fruit in her due time & tide. Whose leaf shall never fade nor fall, but flourish still and stand: Ev'n so all things shall prosper well, that this man takes in hand So shall not the ungodly men, they shall be nothing so: But as the dust wch from the earth the wind drives to and fro. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore, As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psalm II. Verse 1, 2, 3, 5, 6. [For Easter] Cantus. Cambridge Tune. WHy did the Gentiles tumults raise? what rage was in their brain? Why did the Jewish people muse, seeing all is but vain? The Kings and Rulers of the earth conspire, and are all bent Against the Lord and Christ his Son, which he among us sent. Shall we be bound to them, say they? let all their bonds be broke: And of their doctrine and their law let us reject the yoke. But he that in the heaven dwels, their doings will deride: And make them all as mockingstocks thrôout the world so wide. For in his wrath the Lord will say to them upon that day: And in his fury trouble them, and then the Lord will say: I have anointed him my King upon my holy hill: I will therefore, Lord, preach thy law, and eke declare thy will.
Psalm II. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For Easter.] Bassus. Cambridge Tune. WHy did the Gentiles tumults raise? what rage was in their brain? Why did the Jewish people muse, seeing all is but vain? The Kings and Rulers of the earth conspire, and are all bent Against the Lord and Christ his Son, which he among us sent. Shall we be bound to them, say they? let all their bonds be broke: And of their doctrine and their law let us reject the yoke. But he that in the heaven dwells, their doings will deride: And make them all as mockingstocks thrôout the world so wide For in his wrath the Lord will say to them upon a day: And in his fury trouble them, and then the Lord will say: I have anointed him my King upon my holy hill: I will therefore, Lord, preach thy law, and eke declare thy will.
Psalm III. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Proper Tune. O Lord, how are my foes increast, which vex me more & more: They kill my heart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou, O Lord, art my defence, when I am hard bestead: My worship and mine honor both, and thou hold'st up my head. Then with my voice upon the Lord I did both call and cry: And he out of his holy hill did hear me speedily. I laid me down, and quietly I slept, and rose again: For why? I know assuredly the Lord will me sustain. If ten thousand had hem'd me in, I could not be afraid: For thou art still my Lord and God, my Saviour and mine aid. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psalm III. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Proper Tune. O Lord, how are my foes increast, which vex me more & more. They kill my heart when as they say, God can him not restore. But thou, O Lord, art my defence, when I am hard bestead: My worship and mine honor both, and thou hold'st up my head. Then with my voice upon the Lord I did both call and cry: And he out of his holy hill did hear me speedily. I laid me down, and quietly I slept, and rose again: For why? I know assuredly the Lord will me sustain. If ten thousand had hem'd me in, I could not be afraid: For thou art still my Lord and God, my Saviour and mine aid. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psalm IV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Glocester Tune. O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call: Thou hast set me at liberty, when I was bound and thrall. Have mercy, Lord therefore on me, and grant me my request: For unto thee uncessantly to call I will not rest. O mortal men, how long will ye my glory thus despise? Why wander ye in vanity, and follow after lies? Know ye that good and godly men the Lord doth take and chuse: And when to him I make my plaint, he doth me not refuse. Sin not, but stand in awe therefore, examine well your heart: And in your chamber quietly, see you your selves convert. Offer to God the sacrifice of righteousness I say: And look that in the living Lord, you put your trust alway.
Psalm IV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Glocester Tune. O God that art my righteousness, Lord hear me when I call: Thou hast set me at liberty, when I was bound and thrall. Have mercy Lord therefore on me, and grant me my request: For unto thee uncessantly to call I will not rest. O mortal men, how long will ye my glory thus despise? Why wander ye in vanity, and follow after lies? Know ye that good and godly men the Lord doth take and chuse: And when to him I make my plaint, he doth me not refuse. Sin not, but stand in awe therefore, examine well your heart: And in your chamber quietly, see you your selves convert. Offer to God the sacrifice of righteousness I say: And look that in the living Lord. you put your trust alway.
Psalm V. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. [A Thanksgiving. Cantus. London Tune INncline thine ear unto my words, O Lord, my plaint consider And hear my voice, my King, my God, to thee I make my Pray' Hear me betime, Lord, tarry not, for I will have respect My Prayer early in the morn to thee for to direct. And I will trust through patience, in thee my God alone: Thou art not pleas'd with wickedness, and ill wth thee dwells non▪ And in thy sight shall never stand these cruel men, O Lord: Vain workers of iniquity thou hast always abhorr'd. The liers and the flatterers thou shalt destroy them than: And God will hate the blood thirsty, and the deceitful man. Therefore will I come to thine house, trusting upon thy grace: And rev'rently will worship thee, toward thine holy place.
Psalm V. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. [A Thanksgiving.] Bassus. London Tune. INcline thine ear unto my words, O Lord, my plant consider And hear my voice, my King, my God, to thee I make my Pray'r. Hear me betime, Lord, tarry not, for I will have respect My Prayer early in the morn to thee for to direct. And I will trust through patience, in thee my God alone: Thou art not pleas'd with wickedness, and ill wth thee dwells none. And in thy sight shall never stand these cruel men, O Lord: Vain workers of iniquity thou hast always abhor'd. The liers and the flatterers thou shalt destroy them than: And God will hate the blood thirsty, and the deceitful man. Therefore I will come to thine house, trusting upon thy grace: And rev'rently will worship thee toward thine holy place.
Psalm VI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Cantus. Bristol Tune. LOrd, in thy wrath reprove me not, thô I deserve thine ire: Nor yet correct me in thy rage, O Lord, I thee desire. For I am weak, therefore, O Lord, of mercy me forbear: And heal me, Ld, for why? thou know'st my bones do quake for fear. My soul is troubled very sore, and vexed veh'mently: But, Lord, how long wilt thou delay to cure my misery? Lord, turn thee to thy wonted grace, my silly soul up take: Oh save me not for my deserts, but for thy mercies sake. For why? no man among the dead remembreth thee one whit: Or who shall worship thee, O Lord, in the infernal pit? To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psalm VI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Bassus. Bristol Tune. LOrd, in thy wrath reprove me not, thô I deserve thine ire: Nor yet correct me in thy rage, O Lord, I thee desire. For I am weak, therefore, O Lord, of mercy me forbear: And heal me, Ld, for why? thou know'st my bones do quake for fear. My soul is troubled very sore, and vexed veh'mently: But, Lord, how long wilt thou delay to cure my misery? Lord, turn thee to thy wonted grace, my silly soul up take: Oh save me not for my deserts, but for thy mercies sake. For why? no man among the dead remembreth thee one whit: Or who shall worship thee, O Lord, in the infernal pit? To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psalm VIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [At a Christning. Cantus. St. Mary's Tune. O God our Lord, how wonderful are thy works ev'ry where! Whose fame surmounts in dignity above the Heavens clear. Ev'n by the mouth of sucking babes thou wilt confound thy foes: For in those babes thy might is seen, thy graces they disclose. And when I see the heavens high, the works of thine own hand: The Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars, in order as they stand: What thing is man, Ld, think I then, that thou dost him remember? Or what is man's posterity, that thou dost it consider? For thou hast made him little less than Angels in degree: And thou hast crowned him also with glorious dignity. Thou hast preferr'd him to be lord of all thy works of wonder: And at his feet hast set all things, that he should keep them under.
Psalm VIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [At a Christning.] Bassus. St. Mary's Tune. O God our Lord, how wonderful are thy works ev'ry where! Whose fame surmounts in dignity above the Heavens clear. Ev'n by the mouth of sucking babes thou wilt confound thy foes: For in those babes thy might is seen, thy graces they discose. And when I see the heavens high, the works of thine own hand: The Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars, in order as they stand. What thing is man, Ld think I then, that thou dost him remember? Or what is man's posterity, that thou dost it consider? For thou hast made him little less than Angels in degree: And thou hast crowned him also with glorious dignity. Thou hast preferr'd him to be lord of all thy works of wonder: And at his feet hast set all things, that he should keep them under.
Psalm X. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. [For the Poor] Cantus. Cambridge Tune. WHat is the cause that thou, O Lord, art now so far from thine: And keepest close thy countenance from us this troublous time? The poor do perish by the proud and wicked men's desire: Let them be taken in their craft that they themselves conspire. For in the lust of his own heart th'ungodly doth delight: So doth the wicked praise himself, and doth the Lord despight. He is so proud, that right and wrong he setteth all apart; Nay, nay, there is no God, saith he, for thus he thinks in heart. Because his ways do prosper still, he doth thy laws neglect: And with a blast doth puff against such as would him correct. Tush, tush, saith he, I have no dread lest mine estate should change: And why? for all adversity to him is very strange.
Psalm X. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For the Poor.] Bassus. Cambridge Tune. WHat is the cause that thou, O Lord, art now so far from thine: And keepest close thy countenance from us this troublous time? The poor do perish by the proud and wicked men's desire: Let them be taken in the craft that they themselves conspire. For in the lust of his own heart th'ungodly doth delight: So doth the wicked praise himself, and doth the Lord despight. He is so proud, that right and wrong he setteth all apart; Nay, nay, there is no God, saith he, for thus he thinks in heart. Because his ways do prosper still, he doth thy laws neglect: And with a blast doth puff against such as would him correct. ush, tush, saith he, I have no dread lest mine estate should change: nd why? for all adversity to him is very strange.
Psalm XV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Martyrs Tune. O Lord, in thy Tabernacle, who shall inhabit still? Or whom wilt thou receive to dwell in thy most holy hill? The man whose life is uncorrupt, whose works are just & straight Whose heart doth think the very truth, whose tong speaks no deceit Nor to his neighbour doth none ill in body, goods, or name: Nor willingly doth move false tales, wch might impair the same That in his heart regardeth not malicious wicked men: But those that love and fear the Lord, he maketh much of them, His oath and all his promises, that keepeth faithfully: Althô he make his cov'nant so, that he doth lose thereby. That putteth not to usury his money and his coin: Nor for to hurt the innocent doth bribe or else purloin.
Psalm XV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Martyrs Tune. O Lord, in thy Tabernacle, who shall inhabit still? Or whom wilt thou receive to dwell in thy most holy hill? The man whose life is uncorrupt, whose works are just & straight: Whose heart doth think the very truth, whose tong speaks no deceit. Nor to his neighbour doth none ill, in body, goods, or name: Nor willingly doth move false tales, wch might impair the same. That in his heart regardeth not malicious wicked men: But those that love and fear the Lord, he maketh much of them. His oath, and all his promises, that keepeth faithfully: Althô he make his cov'nant so, that he doth lose thereby. That putteth not to usury his money and his coin: Nor for to hurt the innocent doth bribe or else purloin.
Psalm XVII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For a Penitent Sinner.] Cantus. Windsor Tune. O Lord, give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain: And hear the pray'r that I put forth with lips that do not feign. And let the judgment of my cause proceed always from thee: And let thine eyes behold and clear this my simplicity. Thou hast well try'd me in the night and yet could'st nothing find That I have spoken with my tongue, that was not in my mind. As for the works of wicked men, and paths perverse and ill: For love of thy most holy Name, I have refrained still. Then in thy paths that be most pure, stay me (Lord) and preserve: That from the way wherein I walk, my steps may never swerve. For I do call to thee, O Lord, surely thou wilt me aid: Then hear my pray'r, & weigh right well the words that I have sai▪
Psalm XVII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For a Penitent Sinner.] Bassus. Windsor Tune. O Lord, give ear to my just cause, attend when I complain: And hear the pray'r that I put forth with lips that do not feign. And let the judgment of my cause proceed always from thee: And let thine eyes behold and clear this my simplicity. Thou hast well try'd me in the night and yet could'st nothing find That I have spoken with my tongue, that was not in my mind. As for the works of wicked men, and paths perverse and ill: For love of thy most holy Name, I have refrained still. Then in thy paths that be most pure, stay me (Lord) and preserve: That from the way wherein I walk, my steps may never swerve. For I do call to thee, O Lord, surely thou wilt me aid: Then hear my pray'r, & weigh right well the words that I have said.
Psalm XVIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [In time of War.] Cantus. Proper Tune. O God, my strength and fortitude, of force I must love thee: Thou art my castle and defence in my necessity. My God, my rock, in whom I trust, the worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler, and my shield, preserver of my health. When I sing laud unto the Lord, most worthy to be serv'd: Then from my foes I am right sure, that I shall be preserv'd. The pangs of death did compass me, and bound me ev'ry where: The flowing waves of wickedness did put me in great fear. The sly and subtile snares of hell were round about me set: And for my death, there was prepar'd a deadly trapping net. I thus beset with pain and grief, did pray to God for grace: And he forthwith did hear my plaint out of his holy place.
Psalm XVIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [In time of War.] Bassus. Proper Tune. O God, my strength and fortitude, of force I must love thee: Thou art my castle and defence in my necessity. My God, my rock, in whom I trust, the worker of my wealth: My refuge, buckler, and my shield, preserver of my health. When I sing laud unto the Lord, most worthy to be serv'd: Then from my foes I am right sure, that I shall be preserv'd. The pangs of death did compass me, and bound me ev'ry where: The flowing waves of wickedness did put me in great fear. The sly and subtile snares of hell were round about me set: And for my death there was prepar'd a deadly trapping net. I thus beset with pain and grief, did pray to God for grace: And he forthwith did hear my plaint out of his holy place.
Psalm XIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. York Tune. THe heavens and the firmament, do wondrously declare The glory of God omnipotent, his works, and what they are. The wondrous works of God appear by ev'ry days success: The nights likewise wch their race run, the selfsame thing express: There is no language, tong, or speech, where their sound is not heard. In all the earth and coasts thereof, their knowledge is conferr'd. In them the Lord made for the sun a place of great renown: Who like a bridegroom ready trim'd, doth from his chamber come. And as a valiant champion, who for to get a prize, With joy doth haste to take in hand some noble enterprize. And all the sky from end to end he compasseth about: Nothing can hide it from his heat, but he will find it out.
Psalm XIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. York Tune. THe heavens and the firmament, do wondrously declare The glory of God omnipotent, his works, and what they are. The wondrous works of God appear by ev'ry days success: The nights likewise wch their race run, the selfsame thing express: There is no language, tong, or speech, where their sound is not heard. In all the earth and coasts thereof, their knowledge is conferr'd In them the Lord made for the sun a place of great renown: Who like a bridegroom ready trim'd, doth from his chamber come. And as a valiant champion, who for to get a prize, With joy doth haste to take in hand some noble enterprize. And all the sky from end to end he compasseth about: Nothing can hide it from his heat, but he will find it out.
Psalm XX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. [For the KING.] Cantus. Canterbury Tune. IN trouble and adversity, the Lord God hear thee still: The Majesty of Jacob's God defend thee from all ill. And send thee from his holy place his help at ev'ry need: And so in Sion stablish thee, and make thee strong indeeed. Remembring well the sacrifice that now to him is done, And so receive right thankfully thy burntoff'rings each one According to thy heart's desire, the Lord grant unto thee: And all thy counsel and advice, full well perform may he. We shall rejoyce when thou us sav'st, and our banners display: Unto the Lord, which thy requests fulfilled hath alway. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psalm XX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. [For the KING.] Bassus. Canterbury Tune. IN trouble and adversity, the Lord God hear thee still: The Majesty of Jacob's God defend thee from all ill. And send thee from his holy place his help at ev'ry need: And so in Sion stablish thee, and make thee strong indeed. Remembring well the sacrifice that now to him is done, And so receive right thankfully thy burntoff'rings each one. According to thy heart's desire, the Lord grant unto thee: And all thy counsel and advice, full well perform may he. We shall rejoyce when thou us sav'st, and our banners display: Unto the Lord, which thy requests fulfilled hath alway. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psalm XXV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Southwel Tune. I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most just: Now suffer me to take no shame, for in thee do I trust: Let not my foes rejoyce, nor make a scorn of me: And let them not be overthrown, that put their trust in thee. But shame shall them befall which harm them wrongfully: Therefore thy paths and thy right ways unto me, Lord, descry. Direct me in thy truth, and teach me I thee pray: Thou art my God and Saviour, on thee I wait alway. Thy mercies manifold remember, Lord, I pray: Also thy pity plentiful, for they have been alway. Remember not the faults and frailties of my youth: Remember not how ignorant I have been of thy truth.
Psalm XXV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Southwel Tune. I Lift my heart to thee, my God and guide most just: Now suffer me to take no shame, for in thee do I trust. Let not my foes rejoyce, nor make a scorn of me: And let them not be overthrown, that put their trust in thee. But shame shall them befall which harm them wrongfully: Therefore thy paths and thy right ways unto me, Lord, descry. Direct me in thy truth, and teach me I thee pray: Thou art my God and Saviour, on thee I wait alway. Thy mercies manifold remember, Lord, I pray: Also thy pity plentiful, for they have been alway. Remember not the faults and frailties of my youth: Remember not how ignorant I have been of thy truth.
Psalm XXVI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Windsor Tune. LOrd be my judge, and thou shalt see my paths be right & plain: I trust in God, and hope that he will strength me to remain. Prove me, my God, I thee desire, my ways to search and try: As men do prove their gold with fire, my reins & heart espy. Thy goodness laid before my face, I do behold always: For of thy truth I tread the path, and will do all my days. I do not lust to haunt or use, with men whose deeds are vain: To come in house I do refuse with the deceitful train. I much abhor the wicked sort, their deeds I do despise: I do not once to them resort, that wicked works devise. My hands I wash, and do proceed in works to walk upright: Then to thine altar I make speed, to offer them in sight.
Psalm XXVI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Windsor Tune. LOrd, be my judge, and thou shalt see my paths be right & plain: I trust in God, and hope that he will strength me to remain. Prove me, my God, I thee desire, my ways to search and try: As men do prove their gold with fire, my reins & heart espy. Thy goodness laid before my face, I do behold always: For of thy truth I tread the path, and will do all my days. I do not lust to haunt or use, with men whose deeds are vain: To come in house I do refuse with the deceitful train. I much abhor the wicked sort, their deeds I do despise: I do not once to them resort, that wicked works devise. My hands I wash, and do proceed in works to walk upright: Then to thine altar I make speed, to offer there in sight.
Psalm XXIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For a Thanksgiving.] Cantus. Bristol Tune. GIve to the Lord ye Potentates, ye Rulers of the world: Give ye all praise, honour and strength, unto the living Lord. Give glory to his holy Name, and honour him alone: Worship him in his Majesty, within his holy throne. His voice doth rule the waters all, ev'n as himself doth please: He doth prepare the thunderclaps, and governs all the Seas. The voice of God is of great force, and wond'rous excellent: It is most mighty in effect, and most magnificent. The voice of God doth rend & break the Cedartrees so long: The Cedartrees of Lebanon, which are both high and strong. And make them leap like as a calf, or else the unicorn: Not only trees but mountains great, whereon the trees are born.
Psalm XXIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For a Thanksgiving.] Bassus. Bristol Tune. GIve to the Lord, ye Potentates, ye Rulers of the world: Give ye all praise, honour and strength, unto the living Lord. Give glory to his holy Name, and honour him alone: Worship him in his Majesty, within his holy throne. His voice doth rule the waters all, ev'n as himself doth please: He doth prepare the thunderclaps, and governs all the Seas. The voice of God is of great force, and wond'rous excellent: It is most mighty in effect, and most magnificent. The voice of God doth rend & break the Cedartrees so long: The Cedartrees of Lebanon, which are both high and strong. And makes them leap like as a calf, or else the unicorn: Not only trees but mountains great, whereon the trees are born.
Psalm XXXI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Lichfield Tune. O Lord, I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame: As thou art just, deliver me, and set me quite from blame. Hear me, O Lord, and that anon, to help me make good speed: Be thou my rock, and house of stone, my fence in time of need. For why? as stones thy strength is try'd, thou art my fort and tow'r: For thy names sake be thou my guide, and lead me in thy pow'r. Pluck thou my feet out of the snare wch they for me have laid: Thou art my strength, and all my care is for my might and aid. Into thy hands, Lord, I commit, my spirit, which is thy due: For why? thou hast redeemed it, O Lord my God most true. I hate such folk as will not part from things to be abhorr'd: When they on trifles set their heart, my trust is in the Lord.
Psalm XXXI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Lichfield Tune. O Lord, I put my trust in thee, let nothing work me shame: As thou art just deliver me, and set me quite from blame. Hear me, O Lord, and that anon, to help me make good speed: Be thou my rock, and house of stone, my fence in time of need. For why? as stones thy strength is try'd, thou art my fort & tow'r: For thy names sake be thou my guide, and lead me in thy pow'r. Pluck thou my feet out of the snare wch they for me have laid: Thou art my strength, & all my care is for thy might and aid: Into thy hands, Lord, I commit, my spirit, which is my due: For why? thou hast redeemed it, O Lord my God most true. I hate such folk as will not part from things to be abhorr'd: When they on trifles set their heart, my trust is in the Lord:
Psalm XXXIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Cantus. St. David's Tune. YE righteous in the Lord rejoyce, it is a seemly sight: That upright men wth thankful voice, should praise the Ld of might Praise ye the Ld with harp and song, in Psalms & pleasant things With Lute & Instrument among, that soundeth with ten strings. Sing to the Lord a song most new, with courage give him praise: For why? his word is ever true, his works, and all his ways. To judgment, equity, and right, he hath a great good will: And with his gifts he doth delight the earth throughout to fill. For by the word of God alone, the heavens all were wrought Their hosts and powers ev'ry one, his breath to pass hath brought The waters great gather'd hath he on heaps within the shore: And hid them in the depth to be, as in a house of store.
Psalm XXXIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Bassus. St. David's Tune. YE righteous in the Lord rejoyce, it is a seemly sight: That upright men wth thankful voice, should praise the Ld of might. Praise ye the Ld with harp and song, in Psalms & pleasant things: With Lute & Instrument among, that soundeth with ten strings. Sing to the Lord a song most new, with courage give him praise: For why? his word is ever true, his works, and all his ways. To judgment, equity, and right, he hath a great good will: And with his gifts he doth delight the earth throughout to fill. For by the word of God alone the heavens all were wrought: Their hosts and powers ev'ry one his breath to pass hath brought. The waters great gather'd hath he on heaps within the shore: And hid them in the depth to be, as in a house of store.
Psalm XXXIV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [Parents Advice to Children] Cantus. Martyrs Tune. I Will give laud and honour both, unto the Lord always: Also my mouth for evermore, shall speak unto his praise. I do delight to laud the Lord in soul, in heart, and voice: That humble men and mortify'd may hear, and so rejoyce. Therefore see that ye magnifie with me the living Lord, Let us exalt his holy Name always with one accord. For I my self besought the Lord, he answer'd me again: And me deliver'd in stantly from all my fear and pain. Whoso they be that him behold, shall see his light most clear: Their countenance shall not be dasht, they need it not to fear. This poor distressed man for help unto the Lord did call: Who did him hear without delay, and rid him out of thrall.
Psalm XXXIV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [Parents Advice to Children.] Bassus. Martyrs Tune. I will give laud and honour both, unto the Lord always: Also my mouth for evermore, shall speak unto his praise. I do delight to laud the Lord in soul, in heart, and voice: That humble men and mortify'd may hear, and so rejoyce. Therefore see that ye magnifie with me the living Lord, Let us exalt his holy Name always with one accord. For I my self besought the Lord, he answer'd me again, And me deliver'd instantly from all my fear and pain. Whoso they be that him behold, shall see his light most clear: Their countenance shall not be dasht, they need it not to fear This poor distressed man for help unto the Lord did call: Who did him hear without delay, and rid him out of thrall.
Psalm XXXV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [In time of War.] Cantus. Hereford Tune. LOrd, plead my cause agst my foes, confound their force & might: And take my part against all those that seek with me to fight. Lay hand upon the spear and shield, thy self in armour dress: Stand up for me, and fight the field, to help me from distress. Gird on thy sword, and stop the way, mine en'mies to withstand: That thou unto my soul may'st say, I am thy help at hand. Confound them with rebuke & blame, that seek my soul to spill: Let them turn back & flie with shame, that think to work me ill. Let them disperse and flie abroad, as wind doth drive the dust: And that the Angel of our God their might away may thrust. Let all their ways be void of light, and slipp'ry like to fall: And send thine Angel with thy might, to persecute them all.
Psalm XXXV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [In time of War.] Bassus. Hereford Tune. LOrd, plead my cause agst my foes, confound their force & might: And take my part against all those that seek with me to fight. Lay hand upon the spear and shield, thy self in armour dress: Stand up for me, and fight the field, to help me from distress. Gird on thy sword, and stop the way, mine en'mies to withstand: That thou unto my soul may'st say, I am thy help at hand. Confound them with rebuke & blame, that seek my soul to spill: Let them turn back & flie with shame, that think to work me ill. Let them disperse and flie abroad, as wind doth drive the dust: And that the Angel of our God their might away may thrust. Let all their ways be void of light, and slipp'ry like to fall: And send thine Angel with thy might, to persecute them all.
Psalm XXXIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For Burials.] Cantus. Windsor Tune. I Said, I will look to my ways, for fear I should go wrong: I will take heed all times, that I offend not with my tongue. As with a bit I will keep fast my mouth with force & might: Not once to whisper all the while the wicked are in sight. I held my tongue, & spake no word, but kept me close & still: Yea, from good talk I did refrain, but sore against my will. My heart waxt hot within my breast wth musing, thought, & doub▪ Which did increase & stir the fire: at last these words burst out; Lord, number out my life and days, which yet I have not past, So that I may be certify'd, how long my life shall last. Lord, thou hast pointed out my life in length much like a span Mine age is nothing unto thee, so vain is ev'ry man.
Psalm XXXIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For Burials.] Bassus. Windsor Tune. I Said, I will look to my ways, for fear I should go wrong: I will take heed all times that I offend not with my tongue. As with a bit I will keep fast my mouth with force & might: Not once to whisper all the while the wicked are in sight. I held my tongue, & spake no word, but kept me close & still: Yea, from good talk I did refrain, but sore against my will. My heart waxt hot within my breast wth musing, thought, & doubt, Which did increase & stir the fire: at last these words burst out; Lord number out my life and days, which yet I have not past: So that I may be certify'd, how long my life shall last: Lord, thou hast pointed out my life, in length much like a span: Mine age is nothing unto thee, so vain is ev'ry man.
Psalm XL. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Westminster Tune. I Waited long, and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear: At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear. He pluckt me from the lake so deep, out of the mire and clay: Upon a rock he set my seet, and he did guide my way. To me he taught a Psalm of praise, which I must shew abroad: And sing new songs of thanks always, unto the Lord our God. When all the folk these things shall see, as people much afraid: Then they unto the Lord will flee, and trust upon his aid. O blest is he, whose hope and heart doth in the Lord remain: That with the proud doth take no part, nor such as lies maintain. For Lord, my God, thy wondrous deeds in greatness far do pass: Thy favour towards us exceeds all things that ever was.
Psalm XL. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Westminster Tune. I Waited long, and sought the Lord, and patiently did bear: At length to me he did accord, my voice and cry to hear. He pluckt me from the lake so deep, out of the mire and clay: Upon a rock he set my feet, and he did guide my way. To me he taught a Psalm of praise, which I must shew abroad: And sing new songs of thanks always, unto the Lord our God. When all the folk these things shall see, as people much afraid: Then they unto the Lord will flee, and trust upon his aid. O blest is he, whose hope and heart doth in the Lord remain: That with the proud doth take no part, nor such as lies maintain. For Lord, my God, thy wondrous deeds in greatness far do pass: Thy favour towards us exceeds all things that ever was.
Psalm XLI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. [For Charity.] Cantus. The 18th Psalm Tune. THe man is blest that doth provide for such as needy be: For in the season perilous the Lord will set him free. The Lord will keep him safe, and make him happy in the land: And not deliver him into his enemies strong hand. And from his bed of languishing the Lord will him restore: For thou, O Lord, wilt turn to health his sickness and his sore. Then in my sickness thus said I, have mercy, Lord on me, And heal my soul which is full woe that I offended thee. My foes did wish me ill in heart, and thus of me did say, When shall he die, that so his name may perish quite away? To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Immortal Glory be: As was, is now, and shall be still, to all eternity.
Psalm XLI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. [For Charity.] Bassus. The 18th Psalm Tune. THe man is blest that doth provide for such as needful be: For in the season perilous, the Lord will set him free. The Lord will keep him safe, and make him happy in the land: And not deliver him into his enemies strong hand. And from his bed of languishing the Lord will him restore: For thou, O Lord, wilt turn to health his sickness and his sore. Then in my sickness thus said I, have mercy, Lord, on me, And heal my soul which is full woe that I offend thee: My foes did wish me ill in heart, and thus of me did say, When shall he die, that so his name may perish quite away? To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Immortal Glory be: As was, is now, and shall be still, to all eternity.
Psalm XLIII. [For our Delivery.] Cantus. St. David's Tune. JUdge and revenge my cause, O Lord, from them that evil be: From wicked and deceitful men, O Lord deliver me. For of my strength thou art the God, why am I put from thee? Why walk I heavily, whilst that my foe oppresseth me? O Lord, send out thy light and truth, and lead me with thy grace, Which may conduct me to thy hill, and to thy dwelling place. Then shall I to the altar go, of God my joy and chear: And on my harp give thanks to thee, O God, my God most dear. Why art thou then so sad my soul, and frett'st thus in my breast? Still trust in God, for him to praise I hold it always best. By him I have deliverance against all pain and grief: He is my God, which doth alway at need send me relief.
Psalm XLIII. [For our Delivery.] Bassus. St. David's Tune. Udge and revenge my cause, O Lord, from them that evil be: From wicked and deceitful men, O Lord deliver me. For of my strength thou art the God, why am I put from thee? Why walk I heavily, whilst that my foe oppresseth me? O Lord, send out thy light and truth, and lead me with thy grace, Which may conduct me to thy hill, and to thy dwelling place. Then shall I to the altar go, of God my joy and chear: And on my harp give thanks to thee, O God, my God most dear. Why art thou then so sad my soul, and frett'st thus in my breast? Still trust in God, for him to praise I hold it always best. By him I have deliverance against all pain and grief: He is my God, which doth alway at need send me relief.
Psalm XLIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. [For Burials, or for the Rich.] Cantus. Cambridge Tune. ALL people hearken, and give ear, to that which I shall tell: Both high and low, both rich and poor, that in the world do dwell. For why? my mouth shall make discourse of many things right wise: In understanding shall mine heart its study exercise. I will encline mine ear to know the parable so dark: And open all my doubtful speech in metre on my harp. Why should I fear affliction, or any careful toyl: Or else my foes which at my heels are prest my life to spoil? For as for such as riches have, wherein their trust is most; And they wch of their treasures great themselves do brag & boast. There is not one of them that can his brother's life redeem, Or give a ransom unto God sufficient for him.
Psalm XLIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. [For Burials, or for the Rich.] Bassus. Cambridge Tune. ALL people hearken, and give ear, to that which I shall tell: Both high and low, both rich and poor, that in the world do dwell. For why? my mouth shall make discourse of many things right wise: In understanding shall mine heart its study exercise. I will encline mine ear to know the parable so dark: And open all my doubtful speech in metre on my harp. Why should I fear affliction, or any careful toyl: Or else my foes which at my heels are prest my life to spoil? For as for such as riches have, wherein their trust is most: And they wch of their treasures great themselves do brag & boast. There is not one of them that can his brother's life redeem, Or give a ransom unto God sufficient for him.
Psal. LVIII. v. 1. And Psal. LXXXII. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. [Before the Judges at the Assizes.] Cantus. Norwich Tune. YE Rulers that are put in trust, to judge of wrong and right: Be all your judgments true and just, regarding no man's might. Amid the press with men of might, the Ld himself doth stand: To plead the cause of truth and right with judges of the land. How long, said he, will you proceed false judgment to award? Why have you partially agreed the wicked to regard? Whereas of due you should defend the fatherless and weak: And when the poor man doth contend, in judgment justly speak. If ye be wise defend the cause of poor men in their right: And rid the needy from the claws of tyrants force and might. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psal. LVIII. v. 1. And Psal. LXXXII. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. [Before the Judges at the Assizes.] Bassus. Norwich Tune. YE Rulers that are put in trust, to judge of wrong and right: Be all your judgments true and just, regarding no man's might. Amid the press with men of might, the Ld himself doth stand: To plead the cause of truth and right with judges of the land. How long, said he, will you proceed false judgment to award? Why have you partially agreed the wicked to regard? Whereas of due you should defend the fatherless and weak: And when the poor man doth contend, in judgment justly speak. If ye be wise, defend the cause of poor men in their right: And rid the needy from the claws of tyrants force and might. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glo ry be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
Psalm LXVIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. St. David's Tune. LEt God arise, and then bis foes will turn themselves to flight: His en'mies then will run abroad, and scatter out of sight. And as the fire doth melt the wax, and wind blows smoak away: So in the presence of the Lord, the wicked shall decay. But righteous men before the Lord shall heartily rejoyce: They shall be glad and merry all, and chearful in their voice. Sing praise, sing praise unto the Lord, who rideth on the Sky: Extol the great Jehovah's Name, and him do magnifie. The same is he that is above, within his holy place: That Father is of fatherless, and judge of widows case. Houses he gives, and issue both, unto the comfortless: He bringeth bondmen out of thrall, and rebels to distress.
Psalm LXVIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. St. David's Tune. LEt God arise, and then his foes will turn themselves to flight: His en'mies then will run abroad, and scatter out of sight. And as the fire doth melt the wax, and wind blows smoak away: So in the presence of the Lord, the wicked shall decay. But righteous men before the Lord shall heartily rejoyce: They shall be glad and merry all, and chearful in their voice. Sing praise, sing praise unto the Lord, who rideth on the Sky: Extol the great Jehovah's Name, and him do magnifie. The same is he that is above, within his holy place: That Father is of fatherless, and judge of widows case. Houses he gives, and issue both, unto the comfortless: He bringeth bondmen out of thrall, and rebels to distress.
Psalm LXXXI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Proper Tune. BE light and glad in God rejoyce, wch is our strength and stay: Be joyful, and lift up your voice to Jacob's God, I say: Prepare your Instruments most meet, some joyful Psalm to sing: Strike up with harp and lute most sweet, on ev'ry pleasant string. Blow as it were in the newmoon, with trumpets of the best: As it is used to be done at any solemn feast. For this is unto Israel a statute, which was made By Jacob's God, and must full well be evermore obey'd. This clause with Joseph was decreed when he from Egypt came, That as a witness all his seed should still observe the same. When God himself had so prepar'd, to bring him from the land: Whereas the speech which he had heard, he did not understand.
Psalm LXXXI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Proper Tune. BE light and glad in God rejoyce, wch is our strength and stay: Be joyful, and lift up your voice to Jacob's God, I say: Prepare your Instruments most meet, some joyful Psalm to sing: Strike up with harp and lute most sweet, on ev'ry pleasant string. Blow as it were in the newmoon, with trumpets of the best: As it is used to be done at any solemn feast. For this is unto Israel a statute, which was made By Jacob's God, and must full well be evermore obey'd. This clause with Joseph was decreed when he from Egypt came, That as a witness all his seed should still observe the same. When God himself had so prepar'd, to bring him from the land; Whereas the speech which he had heard, he did not understand.
Psalm LXXXIV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Winchester Tune. HOW pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts, to me! The Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant, Lord, they be! My soul doth long full sore to go into thy courts abroad: My heart and flesh cry out also for thee the living God. The sparrows find a room to rest, & save themselves from wrong Also the swallow hath a nest wherein to keep her young. These birds full nigh thine altar may have place to sit & sing: O Lord of hosts, thou art alway my only God and King. O! they be blessed that may dwell within thy house always: For they all times thy facts do tell, and ever give thee praise. Yea, happy sure likewise are they, whose strength & stay thou art: Which to thy house do mind the way, and seek it in their heart.
Psalm LXXXIV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Winchester Tune. HOW pleasant is thy dwelling place, O Lord of hosts, to me! The Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasant, Lord, they be! My soul doth long full sore to go into thy courts abroad: My heart and flesh cry out also for thee the living God. The sparrows find a room to rest, & save themselves from wrong: Also the swallow hath a nest wherein to keep her young. These birds full nigh thine altar may have place to sit & sing: O Lord of hosts, thou art alway my only God and King. O! they be blessed that may dwell within thy house always: For they all times thy facts do tell, and ever give thee praise. ea, happy sure likewise are they, whose strength & stay thou art: Which to thy house do mind the way, and seek it in their heart.
Psalm XC. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For Burials.] Cantus. Windsor Tune. THou, Ld, hast been our sure defence, our place of ease and rest: In all times past, yea, so long since, as cannot be exprest. E're there was made mountain or hill, the earth & world abroad: From age to age, and always still, for ever thou art God. Thou grindest men thrô grief and pain to dust and clay, & then Thou unto them again dost say, Return ye sons of men. The lasting of a thousand years, what is it in thy sight? As yesterday it doth appear, or as a watch by night. So soon as thou dost scatter them, then is their life and trade Ev'n as a sleep, or like the grass, whose beauty soon doth fade. Which in the morning shines full bright, but fadeth by and by: And is cut down e're it be night, all wither'd, dead, and dry.
Psalm XC. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For Burials.] Bassus. Windsor Tune. THou, Ld, hast been our sure defence, our place of ease and rest: In all times past, yea so long since, as cannot be exprest. E're there was made mountain or hill, the earth & world abroad: From age to age, and always still, for ever thou art God. Thou grindest men thrô grief and pain to dust and clay, & then, Thou unto them again dost say, Return ye sons of men. The lasting of a thousand years, what is it in thy sight? As yesterday it doth appear, or as a watch by night. So soon as thou dost scatter them, then is their life and trade Ev'n as a sleep, and like the grass, whose beauty soon doth fade. Which in the morning shines full bright, but fadeth by and by: And is cut down e're it be night, all wither'd, dead, and dry.
Psalm XCV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. St. David's Tune. O Come let us lift up our voice, and sing unto the Lord: In him our rock of health, rejoyce let us with one accord. Yea, let us come before his face, to give him thanks and praise: In singing Psalms unto his grace, let us be glad always. For why? the Lord he is no doubt, a great and mighty God: A King above all Gods throughout, in all the world abroad. The secrets of the earth so deep, and corners of the land, The tops of hills that are so steep, he hath them in his hand. The sea and waters all are his, for he the same hath wrought: The earth and all that therein is, his hand hath made of nought. Come let us bow and praise the Lord, before him let us fall: And kneel to him with one accord, the wch hath made us all.
Psalm XCV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. St. David's Tune. O Come let us lift up our voice, and sing unto the Lord: In him our rock of health, rejoyce let us with one accord. Yea, let us come before his face, to give him thanks and praise: In singing Psalms unto his grace, let us be glad always. For why? the Lord he is, no doubt, a great and mighty God: A King above all Gods throughout, in all the world abroad. The secrets of the earth so deep, and corners of the land, The tops of hills that are so steep, he hath them in his hand. The sea and waters all are his, for he the same hath wrought: The earth and all that therein is, his hand hath made of nought. Come let us bow and praise the Lord, before him let us fall: And kneel to him with one accord, the wch hath made us all.
Psalm C. Cantus. Proper Tune. ALL people that on earth do dwell, sing to the Lord with chearful voice: Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, come ye before him & rejoyce. The Lord ye know is God indeed, without our aid he did us make: We are his flock, he doth us feed, and for his sheep he doth us take. O enter then his gates with praise, approach with joy his courts unto: Praise, land, and Bless his Name always, for it is seemly so to do. For why? the Lord our God is good, his mercy is for ever sure: His truth at all times firmly stood, and shall from age to age endure. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Praise and Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore. Amen.
Psalm C. Bassus. Proper Tune. ALL people that on earth do dwell, sing to the Lord with chearful voice: Him serve with fear, his praise forth tell, come ye before him & rejoyce. The Lord ye know is God indeed, without our aid he did us make: We are his flock, he doth us feed, and for his sheep he doth us take. O enter then his gates with praise, approach with joy his courts unto: Praise, land, and bless his Name always, for it is seemly so to do. For why? the Lord our God is good, his mercy is for ever sure: His truth at all times firmly stood, and shall from age to age endure. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Praise and Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore. Amen.
Psalm CIII. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [At the Communion.] Cantus. Westminster Tune. MY soul, give laud unto the Lord, my sp'rit shall do the same: And all the secrets of my heart, praise ye his holy Name. Give thanks to God for all his gifts, shew not thy self unkind: And suffer not his benefits to slip out of thy mind. That gave thee pardon for thy faults, and thee restor'd again: From all thy weak and frail disease, and heal'd thee of thy pain. That did redeem thy life from death from wch thou couldst not flee His mercy and compassion both he did extend to thee. That fill'd with goodness thy desire, and did prolong thy youth: Like as the eagle casts her bill, whereby her age renew'th. The Lord with justice doth repay all such as be oppress'd: So that their suff'rings and their wrongs are turned to the best.
Psalm CIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [At the Communion] Bassus. Westminster Tune. MY soul, give laud unto the Lord, my sp'rit shall do the same: And all the secrets of my heart, praise ye his holy Name. Give thanks to God for all his gifts, shew not thy self unkind: And suffer not his benefits to slip out of thy mind. That gave thee pardon for thy faults, and thee restor'd again: From all thy weak and frail disease, and heal'd thee of thy pain. That did redeem thy life from death from wch thou couldst not flee: His mercy and compassion both he did extend to thee. That fill'd with goodness thy desire, and did prolong thy youth: Like as the eagle casts her bill, whereby her age renew'th. The Lord with justice did repay all such as be oppress'd: So that their suff'rings and their wrongs are turned to the best.
Psalm CV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [At the Communion.] Cantus. Westminster Tune. GIve praises unto God the Lord, and call upon his Name: Among the people all declare his works to spread his fame. Sing joyfully unto the Lord, yea, sing unto him praise: And talk of all his wondrous works that he hath wrought always. In honour of his holy Name, rejoyce with one accord: And let the heart also be glad of them that seek the Lord. Seek ye the Lord, and seek the strength of his eternal might: And seek his face continually, and presence of his sight. The wondrous works that he hath done, keep still in mindful heart: Let not the judgments of his mouth out of your mind depart. Ye that of faithful Abraham his servants are the seed: Ye his elect, the children that of Jacob do proceed.
Psalm CV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [At the Communion.] Bassus. Westminster Tune. GIve praises unto God the Lord, and call upon his Name: Among the people all declare his works to spread his fame. Sing joyfully unto the Lord, yea, sing unto him praise: And talk of all his wondrous works that he hath wrought always. In honour of his holy Name, rejoyce with one accord: And let the heart also be glad of them that seek the Lord. Seek ye the Lord, and seek the strength of his eternal might: And seek his face continually, and presence of his sight. The wondrous works that he hath done, keep still in mindful heart; Let not the Judgments of his mouth out of your mind depart. Ye that of faithful Abraham his servants are the seed: Ye his elect, the children that of Jacob do proceed.
Psalm CXIII. Cantus. Proper Tune. YE children which do serve the Lord, praise ye his Name with one accord, Yea, blessed be always his Name: Who from the rising of the Sun. Till it return where it begun, is to be praised with great fame. The Lord all people doth surmount; as for his glory we may count, Above the heavens high to be. With God the Lord who may compare, Whose dwellings in the heavens are? Of such great pow'r and force is he. He doth abase himself we know, things to behold on earth below, And also in heaven above: The needy out of dust to draw, Also the poor which help none saw, his only mercy did him move. And so him set in high degree, with Princes of great dignity, That rule his people with great fame. The barren he doth make to bear, And with great joy her fruit do rear, therefore praise ye his holy Name.
Psalm CXIII. Bassus. Proper Tune. YE children which do serve the Lord, praise ye his Name with one accord, Yea, blessed be always his Name: Who from the rising of the Sun, Till it return where it begun, is to be praised with great fame. The Lord all people doth surmount; as for his glory we may count, Above the heavens high to be. With God the Lord who may compare, Whose dwellings in the heavens are? Of such great pow'r and force is he. He doth abase himself we know, things to behold on earth below, And also in heaven above: The needy out of dust to draw, Also the poor which help none saw, his only mercy did him move. And so him set in high degree, with Princes of great dignity, That rule his people with great fame. The barren he doth make to bear, And with great joy her fruit do rear, therefore praise ye his holy Name.
Psalm CXVIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. [For Christmas day.] Cantus. Martyr's Tune. O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he: Because his mercy doth endure for ever towards thee. Let Israel confess, that his mercy doth ever dure: Let Aaron's house likewise confess his mercy's ever sure. Let all that fear the Lord our God ev'n now confess and say, The mercy of the Lord our God endureth still alway. In trouble and in heaviness unto the Lord I cry'd: Which lovingly heard me at large, my suit was not deny'd. The Lord himself is on my side, I will not stand in doubt, Nor fear what man can do to me, when God stands me about. The Ld doth take my part with them that help to succour me: Therefore I shall see my desire upon mine enemy.
Psalm CXVIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. [For Christmas day] Bassus. Martyr's Tune. O Give ye thanks unto the Lord, for gracious is he: Because his mercy doth endure for ever towards thee. Let Israel confess, that his mercy doth ever dure: Let Aaron's house likewise confess his mercy's ever sure. Let all that fear the Lord our God ev'n now confess and say, The mercy of the Lord our God endureth still alway. In trouble and in heaviness unto the Lord I cry'd: Which lovingly heard me at large, my suit was not deny'd. The Lord himself is on my side, I will not stand in doubt, Nor fear what man can do to me, when God stands me about. The Ld doth take my part with them that help to succour me: Therefore I shall see my desire upon mine enemy.
Psalm CXIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. Proper Tune. BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart: Whose lives and conversations from God's laws never start. Blessed are they that give themselves his statutes to observe: Seeking the Lord with all their heart, & never from him swerve. Doubtless such men go not astray, nor do no wicked thing: But stedfastly walk in his way, without any wandring. 'Tis thy commandment and thy will, that with attentive heed: Thy noble and divine precepts we learn and keep indeed. O would to God it might thee please, my ways so to direct: That I might always keep thy laws, and never them reject. So should no shame my life attaint, whilst I thus set mine eyes: And bend my mind always to muse on thy sacred decrees.
Psalm CXIX. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. Proper Tune. BLessed are they that perfect are, and pure in mind and heart: Whose lives and conversations, from God's laws never start. Blessed are they that give themselves his statutes to observe: Seeking the Lord with all their heart, & never from him swerve. Doubtless such men go not astray, nor do no wicked thing; But stedfastly walk in his way, without any wandring. 'Tis thy commandment and thy will, that with attentive heed Thy noble and divine precepts we learn and keep indeed. O would to God it might thee please, my ways so to direct: That I might always keep thy laws, and never them reject. So should no shame my life attaint, whilst I thus set mine eyes: And bend my mind always to muse on thy sacred decrees.
Psalm CXXXIV. Cantus. Southwel Tune. BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord: Which in his house by night do watch, praise him with one accord Lift up your hands on high, unto his holy place: And give the Lord his praises due, his benefits embrace. For why? the Lord, who did both earth and heaven frame, Doth Sion bless, and will conserve, for evermore the same. To Father, and the Son, and Holy Ghost therefore: All Praise and Glory to the Three, both now, and evermore.
Psalm CXXXIV. Bassus. Southwel Tune. BEhold and have regard, ye servants of the Lord: Which in his house by night do watch, praise him with one accord. Lift up your hands on high, unto his holy place: And give the Lord his praises due, his benefits embrace. For why? the Lord, who did both earth and heaven frame, Doth Sion bless, and will conserve, for evermore the same. To Father, and the Son, and Holy Ghost therefore: All Praise and Glory to the Three, both now, and evermore.
Psalm CXXXV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For Easter.] Cantus. The 81st Psalm. Tune. O Praise the Ld, praise him, praise him, praise him wth one accord: O praise him still all ye that be the servants of the Lord O praise him ye that stand, and be in the house of the Lord: Ye of his court, and of his house, praise him with one accord. Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, sing praises to his Name: It is a comely and good thing, always to do the same. For why? the Lord hath Jacob chose, his very one ye see: So hath he chosen Israel his treasure for to be. For this I know, and am full sure, the Lord is very great: He is indeed above all gods, most easie to intreat. For whatsoever pleased him, all that full well he wrought. In heav'n, in earth, and in the sea, which he hath made of nought.
Psalm CXXXV. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. [For Easter.] Bassus. The 81st Psalm Tune. O Praise the Ld, praise him, praise him, praise him wth one accord: O praise him still all ye that be the servants of the Lord. O praise him ye that stand, and be in the house of the Lord: Ye of his court, and of his house, praise him with one accord. Praise ye the Lord, for he is good, sing praises to his Name: It is a comely and good thing, always to do the same. For why? the Lord hath Jacob chose, his very one ye see: So hath he chosen Israel his treasure for to be. For this I know, and am right sure, the Lord is very great: He is indeed above all gods most easie to intreat. For whatsoever pleased him, all that full well he wrought, In heav'n, in earth, and in the sea, which he hath made of nought.
Psalm CXXXVII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Cantus. London Tune. WHen as we sate in Babylon, the rivers round about: And in remembrance of Sion, the tears for grief burst out. We hang'd our Harps and Instruments the willowtrees upon: For in that place men for their use had planted many one. Then they, to whom we pris'ners were, said to us tauntingly: Now let us hear your Hebrew songs, and pleasant melody. Alas! said we, who can once frame his heavy heart to sing, The praises of our loving God, thus under a strange King? But yet if I Jerusalem out of my heart let slide: Then let my fingers quite forget the warbling Harp to guide. And let my tongue within my mouth be ty'd for ever fast: If that I joy before I see thy full deliv'rance past.
Psalm CXXXVII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Bassus. London Tune. WHen as we sate in Babylon, the rivers round about: And in remembrance of Sion, the tears for grief burst out. We hang'd our Harps and Instruments the willowtrees upon: For in that place men for then use had planted many one. Then they, to whom we pris'ners were, said to us tauntingly: Now let us hear your Hebrew songs, and pleasant melody. Alas! said we, who can once frame his heavy heart to sing, The praises of our loving God, thus under a strange King? But yet if I Jerusalem out of my heart let slide: Then let my fingers quite forget the warbling Harp to guide. And let my tongue within my mouth be ty'd for ever fast: If that I joy before I see thy full deliv'rance past.
Psalm CXLI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. [For the Sick.] Cantus. London Tune. O Lord, upon thee do I call, then haste thee unto me: And hearken thou unto my voice, when I do cry to thee. As incense let my Prayers be directed in thine eyes: And the uplifting of my hands as ev'ning sacrifice. For guiding of my mouth, O Lord, set thou a watch before: And also of my moving lips. O Lord, keep thou the door. That I should wicked works commit, incline thou not my heart: With ill men of their delicates, Lord, let me eat no part. But let the right'ous smite me, Lord, for that is good for me: Let him reprove me, and the same a precious oyl shall be. Such smiting shall not break my head, the time shall shortly fall. When I shall in their misery make prayers for them all.
Psalm CXLI. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. [For the Sick.] Bassus. London Tune. O Lord, upon thee do I call, then haste thee unto me: And hearken thou unto my voice, when I do cry to thee. As incense let my Prayers be directed in thine eyes: And the uplifting of my hands as ev'ning sacrifice. For guiding of my mouth, O Lord, set thou a watch before: And also of my moving lips, O Lord keep thou the door. That I should wicked works commit, incline thou not my heart: With ill men of their delicates, Lord, let me eat no part. But let the right'ous smite me, Lord, for this is good for me: Let them reprove me, and the same a precious oyl shall be. Such smiting shall not break my head, the time shall shortly fall, When I shall in their misery make prayers for them all.
Psalm CXLVIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Cantus. Proper Tune. GIve laud unto the Lord, from Heav'n that is so high: Praise him in deed and word, above the starry sky. And also ye, His Angels all, Armies royal, praise joyfully. Praise him both moon and sun, which are so clear and bright: The same of you be done, ye glistring stars of light. And you no less, Ye heavens fair, and clouds of th'air, his laud express. For at his word they were all formed as we see: At his voice did appear, all things in their degree: Which he set fast; To them he made a law & trade always to last. Extol and praise God's Name on earth ye dragons fell: All deeps do ye the same, for it becomes you well. Him magnifie, Fire, hail, ice, snow, and storms that blow at his decree.
Psalm CXLVIII. Verse 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Bassus. Proper Tune. GIve laud unto the Lord, from Heav'n that is so high: Praise him in deed and word, above the starry sky. And also ye, His Angels all, Armies royal, praise joyfully. Praise him both moon and sun, which are so clear and bright: The same of you be done, ye glistring stars of light. And you no less, Ye heavens fair, and clouds of th'air, his laud express. For at his word they were all formed as we see: At his voice did appear, all things in their degree: Which he set fast; To them he made a law & trade always to last. Extol and praise God's Name, on earth ye dragons fell: All deeps do ye the same, for it becomes you well Him magnifie, Fire, hail, ice, snow, and storms that blow at his decree.
Psalm CL. [For Deliverance.] Cantus. London new Tune. YIeld unto God, the mighty Lord, praise in his sanctu'ry: And praise him in the firmament, that shews his pow'r on high. Advance his Name, and praise him in his mighty acts always: According to his excellence of greatness give him praise. His praises with the princely noise of sounding trumpets blow: Praise him upon the viol, and upon the harp also. Praise him with timbrel, and with Flute, organs and virginals: With sounding cymbals praise ye him, praise him wth loud cymbals. Whatevet hath the benefit of breathing, praise the Lord: To praise his great and mighty Name, agree with one accord. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore. The End of the Psalms.
Psalm CL. [For Deliverance.] Bassus. London new Tune. YIeld unto God the mighty Lord, praise in his sanctu'ry: And praise him in the firmament, that shews his pow'r on high. Advance his Name, and praise him in his mighty acts always: According to his excellence of greatness give him praise. His praises with the princely noise of sounding trumpets blow: Praise him upon the viol, and upon the harp also. Praise him with timbrel, and with Flute, organs and virginals: With sounding cymbals praise ye him, praise him wth loud cymbals. Whatever hath the benefit of breathing, praise the Lord: To praise his great and mighty Name, agree with one accord. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore. The End of the Psalms.
Veni Creator. [For Trinity-Sunday.] Cantus & Bassus. The 18th Psalm Tune. COme Holy Ghost, eternal God, proceeding from above, Both from the Father and the Son, the God of peace and love: Visit our minds, and into us thy heav'nly grace inspire, That in all truth and godliness we may have true desire. Thou art the very Comforter in all wo and distress: The heav'nly gift of God most high, which no tongue can express: The fountain and the lively spring of joy celestial: The fire so bright, the love so clear, and unction spiritual. Thou in thy gifts art manifold, whereby Christ's Church do stand: In faithful hearts writing thy law, the finger of God's hand. According to thy promise made, thou givest speech of grace: That through thy help the praise of God may stand in ev'ry place.
Benedictus. [For Easter, or Whitsontide.] Cantus & Bassus. Proper Tune. THe only Lord of Israel be praised evermore: For through his visitation, and mercy kept in store, His people now he hath redeem'd, that long hath been in thrall, And spread abroad his saving health upon his servants all. In David's house his servant true, according to his mind: And also his anointed King, as we in Scripture find. As by his Holy Prophets all, ofttimes he did declare, The which were since the world began, his ways for to prepare. That we might be delivered from those that make debate, Our enemies, and from the hands of all that do us hate. The mercy which he promised our fathers to fulfill: And think upon his cov'nant made, according to his will.
Nunc Dimittis. [For Christmasday.] Cantus & Bassus. Benedictus Tune. O Lord, because my heart's desire hath wished long to see My only Lord and Saviour, thy Son, before I die: The joy and health of all mankind, desired long before, Which now is come into the world, of mercy bringing store. Thou sufferest thy servant now in peace for to depart: According to thy holy Word, which lighteneth my heart. Because mine eyes, which thou hast made to give my body light, Have now beheld thy saving health, which is the Lord of might. Whom thou hast mercifully set, of thine abundant grace, In open sight, and visible, before all peoples face. The Gentiles to illuminate, and Satan overquell: Also to be the glory of thy people Israel.
Lamentation of a Sinner. [For a Burial.] Cantus & Bassus. Cambridge Tune. O Lord, turn not thy face away from him that lies prostrate: Lamenting sore his sinful life, before thy mercy gate. Wch gate thou open'st wide to those that do lament their sin: Shut not that gate against me, Lord, but let me enter in. And call me not to strict account how I have lived here: For then I know right well, O Lord, how vile I shall appear. I need not to confess my life, I am sure thou canst tell: What I have been, and what I am, I know thou know'st it well. O Lord, thou know'st what things be past, also the things that be: Thou know'st also what is to come, nothing is hid from thee. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore.
An Hymn. [After the 10 Commandments.] Cant. & Bass. Proper Tune. THe Sp'rit of grace grant us, OLd, to keep these Laws our hearts restore: And cause us all with one accord, to magnifie thy Name therefore. For of our selves no strength we have, to keep these laws after thy will: Thy might therefore, O Christ, we crave, that we in thee may them fulfill. Lord, for thy Name's sake grant us this, thou art our strength, O Saviour Christ: Of thee to speed how should we miss, in whom our treasure doth consist. To thee for evermore be praise, with the Father in each respect: And with the Holy Sp'rit always, The Comforter of thine Elect.
An Hymn. [Before the Communion] Cantus & Bassus. The 18 Psalm Tune. BEhold we come, dear Lord, to thee, and bow before thy throne: We come to offer on our knee our vows to thee alone. Whate'er we have, whate're we are, thy bounty freely gave: Thou dost us here in mercy spare, and wilt hereafter save. But, O! can all our store afford no better gifts for thee? Thus we confess thy riches, Lord, and thus our poverty. 'Tis not our tongue or knee can pay the mighty debt we owe: Far more we should than we can say, far lower than we bow. Come then, my soul, bring all thy pow'rs, and grieve thou hast no more: Bring ev'ry day thy choicest hours, and thy great GOD adore. To God the Father, and the Son, and Holy Ghost therefore: Eternal Honour let be done, henceforth for evermore.
An Hymn. [After the Communion.] Cantus & Bassus. Bristol Tune. ALL glory be to God on high, and peace on earth likewise: Good will to men eternally, by Christ his sacrifice. O God the Father, heav'nly King, we praise, we worship thee: We glorifie thee, we give thanks, Lord, for thy great glory. O Lord, Lord God, O Jesu Christ, the Father's only Son: Only begot, the Wisdom true, by whom all things were done. O Lamb of God, that tak'st away the sins of all the world, By guiltless death on cursed cross, have mercy on us, Lord. O thou that tak'st away the sins and errors of the world, By guiltless death on cursed cross, have mercy on us, Lord. O thou that tak'st away the sins and errors of the world, By guiltless death on cursed cross, receive our Pray'rs, O Lord.
An Hymn. [For Sunday Morning.] Cantus & Bassus. 100 Psalm Tune. WE sing to thee, whose wisdom form'd the curious organ of the ear: And thou who gav'st us voices, Ld, our grateful Songs in kindness hear. We'll joy in God, who is the spring of lawful joy, and harmless mirth; Whose boundless love is fitly call'd, the Harmony of Heav'n and Earth. Those praises, dearest Lord, aloud our humblest Sonnets shall rehearse: Which rightly tun'd, are rightly styl'd, The MUSICK of the Universe. And whilst we sing, we'll consecrate that too too much prophaned Art, By off'ring up with ev'ry Tongue in ev'ry Song a flaming Heart. We'll hallow Pleasure and redeem from vulgar use our precious Voice: Those Lips which wantonly have sung, shall serve our turn for nobler Joys. To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all Praise and Glory be therefore: As in beginning was, is now, and shall be evermore. Amen.
An Hymn. [For Sunday Evening.] Cantus & Bassus. 100 Psalm Tune. PReserve us, Lord, by thy dear word, from Turk & Pope defend us, Lord: Which both would thrust out of his Throne our Ld Jesus, thy dearest Son. Lord Jesus Christ shew forth thy might, that thou art Ld of Lds by right: Thy poor afflicted flock defend, that we may praise thee without end. God th' Holy Ghost our Comforter, Be our Patron, Help, and Succor: Give us one Mind, and perfect Peace, All Gifts of Grace in us increase. Thou living God, in Persons Three, Thy Name be prais'd in Unity: In all our need so us defend, That we may praise thee without end. FINIS.
