H424 13649487 100969
THE LIFE & DEATH OF THAT RENOWNED JOHN FISHER Bishop of Rochester: Comprising the highest and hidden Transactions of Church and State, in the reign of King Henry the 8th. with divers Morall Historicall, and Politicall Animadversions upon Cardinall Wolsey, Sir Thomas Moor, Martin Luther, with a full relation of Qu: Katharines Divorce. Carefully selected from severall ancient Records, by THO. BAILY, D. D. Vivit post funera virtus. LONDON, Printed in the yeare, 1655.
The Right reverend father in God Iohn Fisher B: of Rochester. John Fisher was his name of whom you read Like John ye Baptist this John lost his head. Both y• sharpe axes, stroake theyr body's feeles Both theyr heads danc'd of, by light payrs of heeles. Read but this booke this Fisher through and then You'l finde a fisher, not of fish, but men.
THE LIFE & DEATH OF THAT RENOWNED JOHN FISHER Bishop of Rochester: Comprising the highest and hidden Transactions of Church and State, in the reign of King Henry the 8th. with divers Morall Historicall, and Politicall Animadversions upon Cardinall Wolsey, Sir Thomas Moor, Martin Luther, with a full relation of Qu: Katharines Divorce. Carefully selected from severall ancient Records, by THO. BAILY, D. D. Vivit post funera virtus. LONDON, Printed in the yeare, 1655.
To my honoured Kinsman Mr. Iohn Questall, Mer∣chant in Antwerp. SIR, THere are but three reasons indu∣cing an Author to dedicate his Book to any one man, rather than to another: The first is the patronage of his Work, under the shelter of some o're-spreading tree, whose armes may happily receive the suppliant under his protection, and defend it from the stormes of persecution. The second is a willingnesse in the Author, to expresse a Gratitude by Dedication, by reason of some former Courtesies received. And the third is a fitnesse in the person to whom he dedicates his book, whereby his dedication may become suitable to such a Patronage.
The first I never affected, as never be∣lieving that the estimation of any Patron could be o sufficient authority to dignifie the patronage, if it had not that within it selfe to make it acceptable, according to that expression of the Father of the En∣glish Poets, vz. I never knew that a Ge∣neralls Oration could make an Army either stand or fall, but look how much habituall valour each man hath in him∣self, so much in act it shews. The Second I alwaies loved, viz. to be gratefull to my friends, and where such love and gratitude cannot otherwise goe or stand upon their owne legs on any ground, they shall both creep on paper; wherefore, most worthy Cousin, having received so great a benefit (at your hands beyond the Seas) as in my low condition, not onely at once to relieve the Father in his necessity, but also to adde so bountifull a hand in the bringing up of that child, which by you speciall charity is now able to live of it selfe, to you onely do I dedi∣cate this book as an acknowledgement of all your loving kindnesses.
Nor is the dedication of the History (of this renowned Bishop and Cardinall elect) to your selfe altogether improper for you, being a Merchant your selfe, he being a Merchants Son, whereby it may appeare, that men of your profession do not altoge∣ther bring home, together with your Gold, from Ophir, Apes, and Peacocks fea∣thers, but sometimes Iewels of Divine verity, and highest estimation. Thus with my prayers to God for you, and your continuance in his Grace and Favour, till you reach his Glory, I take leave to rest, Your most faithfull Servant, and poore Kinsman, T. B.
The Life and Death of the most renowned John Fisher, sometimes Bishop of Rochester. CHAP. I. 1. The Time and Place of his Birth. 2. How suitable both his Names were with his Con∣dition. 3. His comparison unto John the Baptist. 4. His temperance in Dyet, and re∣tirement of Life. 5. His Education and Preferment. 6. The countesse of Rich∣mond (the Kings Mother) her great de∣sire of winning him to her service. 7. The great good deeds which she performed by his perswasion. AT the time, when as the Starres of Heaven frowned upon the Nation, to behold Innocence, swaying the Scepter of this Land, so misbecomingly; in the seven and thirtieth year of the Reign of
the most Noble (though unfortunate) King Henry the sixt, and in the year, one thousand, hundred, fifty and nine, after the time, that a Virgin Daughter had produced her Father, and a Creature, her Creator: (when the blessed Vine, sprang from the same Grape it bare, and the root of Iesse shot from the Spring) the Divine Providence brought forth under succour, whose after growth made it soon known unto the world, how worthily he received the two Names (which both his Christendome and his Parents had bestowed upon him, within the Collegit Church, and town of Beverly, scituate within the Province of York, about eight score miles distant (North∣wards) from the head City of the Nation) viz. of Iohn, and FISHER: of Iohn, being so like unto Iohn the Baptist, who was twice baptized: First, with Water, Se∣condly, with Blood: as by the first, he was named Iohn; so by the second, he deserved to be stiled Iohn the Baptist: having so fitly sympathized with the fore-runner of his Savi∣our, by his following Christ; that as like unto the others head, became both Fountaine, and their senselesse Trunkes, streamers of Blood, whiles the Spectators eyes, became Rivers of W. The first, his Head was beg'd of King
Herod, at a banquet of Wine, by a Psal∣tresse, or woman dancer: by the like light paire of heels, the second Iohn (of whom we treat) his head was beg'd of King Henry, whilst he was banquetting, and making mer∣ry at his house of Hanworth. The first was beheaded on the Birth day of King Herod, the second was beheaded on the Birth day of King Henry, having that very day, compleated the just age, of five and forty yeares. And as the Holy finger of Saint Iohn the Baptist (which pointed to the Lambe, when he said, Ecce Agnus Dei) was miracu∣lously preserved from corruption, for a long space of time, after his martyrdome, so the head of this most blessed martyr, wherewith he so decended (and that so manfully) the holy Catholick Church, and Head of his Mother, was by the like miracle preserved from corruption a long time (after it was stuck up upon the Bridge of London) with a fresh and lively colour, untill such time as by commandement from the King, it was taken downe, and conveyed away from the sight of Men. The first, made a Wildernesse his habitation: The second, turned his Pala into a Wildernesse, and place of solitude▪ so Austerely curbing his wanton appetite,
with the most spare and Lessian dyet, as that he made his Refection to be his Locufts: and so cooling his infrequent Pleasures with sighs, and sacing them with so many Tears, as that he made the selfe same bitter sweetings, his wilde Honey, the first wearing only a Girdle, but the second contiually a Shirt of courser haire. Only in this they may seem to differ in their agreement, the one diligently preach∣ed the coming of Christ to be at hand, giving notice of Salvation to all that would believe, and be Baptized: the other as diligently (by his continuall Preaching and Writings) giving warning to all his Country men of Christs departure from their coasts, (if like the Ger∣gesites, they preferred their owne swine be∣fore Salvation.) Thus did the two Cherubims over the Mercy-seat, which seemed opposite to one another, yet both of them mutually behold∣ing the same Arke, that stood between them. These two with contrary faces, mutually be∣held the same object, to which that was but a perspective. Both these dyed for a cause of Matrimony, the first, for saying to king Herod, It is not lawfull for thee to take thy Brothers Wife: The second, for saying to King Henry, it is not lawfull for thee to put away thy Brothers Wife.
Obj. How shall we reconcile these two asser∣tions, and make both them and their assertion good and lawfull? Sol. Herod, to whom the first so spake and reprehended, had taken to his Bed, his brothers Wife, his Brother living, which was repugnant to the Law of God: but Henry, to whom the second spake, as is be∣fore rehearsed, onely took to Wife his Bro∣thers Wife, his Brother being dead, having neither issue by, nor knowledge of her; which by Moses Law, in such like cases, is not for∣bidden, and therefore easily dispensed with, according to the rules of Ecclesiasticall au∣thority. And If this be sufficient to shew you how de∣servedly the name of Iohn, was bestowed upon the subject of our story at his Chri∣stendome, the remainder of the History will let you see, how worthily he deserved also to be called Fisher; being indeed (as indeed he was) a true Fisher of Men, as after shall appeare. His fathers name was Robert Fisher, his State sufficient, his Reputation among the best, his Condition a Merchant, the place of his abode, within the foresaid Town of Be∣verly; a place, where the blessed and glorious Confessour, St. Iohn of Beverley, Archbishop
of Yorke, sometimes lived, and Preached the Gospel: These we may suppose to be the causs why the Father gave unto this Son that name as a Looking glasse unto his eye, a Spur unto his Feet & as Copy for his Hand; a con∣sideration too much neglected in these our dayes, as if our names were only given us for distinction sake, or civill use, and not as ob∣ligations unto Christian piety. This Robert Fisher, after he had lived many yeares, in good estimation and credit amongst his neighbours, dyed, leaving behinde him this Iohn Fisher (of whom we treat) and a younger Sonne (who bare his Fathers name) both in their tender age. Their Mothers name was Anne, who in processe of time, marryed one Wright by name, by whom she had three Sonnes, Iohn, Thomas, and Richard, and one Daughter, which was called Elizabeth, which afterwards was a professed Nunne in Dartford; and yet these three Sonnes, together with a Husband that was living, no way stood between her, and the Piety which she owed unto the dead, as that she any way neglected the former two, but gave them the best education (as the expences of those Lgacies, which the de∣ceased Parent had provided for them in that behalfe) that could be had; in order where∣unto,
as soon as ever they were capable of Learning, they were put to School, and committed to the care and custody of a Priest, of the said Colledg Church of Beverly (being a Church which of antient time hath been richly endowed with Land and possessi∣ons) there this Iohn Fisher, among other children, was first taught his letters, and the rudiments of Grammer; where he continu∣ed not many yeares, but the bladeing of the Field, soon informed the labouring Husband∣man, of the gratefulnesse of the Earth, to which he had committed (with so liberall a hand) so great a trust, which appearing daily more and more, the counsell of his friends at last, thought it fitting to humour, so much as in them lay, the Genius of so promising a proficient; insomuch, that like a tender sappling, fitted for transplantation, he was taken from his nursery to be disposed of, in so faire a garden of the muses, as was so an∣tient and so flourishing an Vniversity, as is that Alma mater▪ which is called Cantabrigia, where he was committed to the government of one M. William Melton, a reverend Priest, and grave Divine, afterwards, Master of the Colledge (called Michael house in Cambridg) and Doctor in Divinity. Under whom, he so profited in few yeares, that he became
Master of all the Arts, before such time as he had received the degree of Batchelour, which he received in the yeare of our Lord, 1488. and his degree of Master, the third year fol∣lowing: where being suddenly elected Fellow of that house, he was as shortly after chosen Proctour of the University: in which space of time, according to the ancient Laws and Statutes of his Colledge, he took upon him the holy order of Priesthood, and now did the Almond tree begin to bud; all other Arts and Sciences were but his tooles, but this his occupation: and no wonder it was, that he that went through with his Philoso∣phy so heavenly, should be so excellent at the heavenly Philosophy; insomuch, that his Disputations in Divinity (according to the order of the Schools) were rather Determi∣nations than Disputes; so that in short space, he grew to such profoundnesse in those he∣venly Mysteris, that Envy her selfe, left can∣vsing for Palmes, whiles Vertue (her com∣panion) accounted him the flour of all the University, who in his due time, proceeded to the degrees of Batchelour, and afterwards of Doctor in Divinity: which with no small appluse he atchieved, in the year of our re∣demption, 1501. In which interim, it hapned that Doctor
Melton (of whom we before have made some mention) was preferred to the dignity of Chancellour of the Cathedrall Church of Yorke; whereby the mastership of Michael House in Cambridge became void: Where∣unto, by a most free and willing election of all the Fellowes of that house, this man (as the most deserving of all other) was wor∣thily promoted, who by his acceptance, made the proverb good, Magistratus arguit virum, for who more fit to play the Master, than he that knew so well, how to act the Disciple? in which office, he demeaned himselfe so worthily, that (as a mirrour from whence all Governours of other Houses might well take their patterne or resemblance) for his worths sake, he was soon after chosen Vice∣chancellour: Which office, as if one yeare had not grac'd (sufficiently) so great a wor∣thinesse, he was continued in the same office for another yeare; and had not his Fame (passing the bounds of the University) spread it self so far over the whole Realm, as that (at length) it reached the eares of the most Noble and Vertuous Lady Margaret, Coun∣tee of Richmond, Mother to the wife and sage Prince, Hen. 7. (who hearing of his great Vertue and Learning, never ceased till she had wrought him to her service) he
might have been (where he was twice toge∣ther) perpetuall dictator: who afterwards, mounted the high capitoll of Chancellour∣ship of that University, a dignity, which is able to adorne the brightest Purple. But now Vicechancellour-ship, Master∣ship, and all, must be laid downe as at her feet, who with her knees, requites the cour∣tesie, whiles she kneels unto him as her Ghostly Father. Remaining in which office, he behaved himselfe so temperately, and dis∣cretly, that both the Countesse, and her whole Family, were altogether governed and dire∣cted, by his high wisdome and discretion. Having by these opportunities lodg'd much Divinity within his Mistris Soule, and the Divine himselfe within her heart, he makes it soon known unto the world, what love it was, wherewith he posecuted so faire an op∣portunity, viz. to make his Mistresse, a most glorious Queen in Heaven, and himselfe ac∣ceptable in doing good, improving all that opportunity, not to the advantaging of him∣selfe in worldly honour, but to the inclination of his Mistresse minde to workes of Mercy; and finding in her owne naturall disposition; a liberality and bountifulnesse to all sorts of people, his worke was onely to advise her, that that bounty should not rune a course,
where it might be sure to lose its due reward; but that it might bstow it selfe in deeds of Almes, as to the poor; in redemption of Captives, in marrying poor and distressed Virgins, reparation of Bridges, and High∣wayes; in many such deeds of Charity he implored her (who easily was won thereto) to imploy so large a Talent as God had given her, that she might reap plentifully, by sow∣ing much. Nor did he suffer her to rest thus satisfied with the distribution of such doles of bread, and worldly food, but at his perswasion also, she erected two noble and goodly Colledges in Cambridge, to the glory of God, and be∣nefie of his Church: The one whereof she dedicated to Christ our Saviour, and called it Christs Colledge, largely endowing the same with store of maintenance, for all manner of Learning whatsoever; this Colledge, she in her life time beheld built and finished of Stone and Brick, as it now standeth. The o∣ther she dedicated to Saint Iohn the Evange∣list; endowing it with like proportion of maintenance, to the same intent and purpose, but she lived not to see this Colledge finished; but it was com∣pleated after her death, by this good Man, at his owne cost and charges,
as hereafter shall bee declared. Also, upon his motion, she ordained a Divinity Lecture in Cambridge, and ano∣ther in Oxford, to be openly read in the Schools, for the benefit of such, as should be Preachers, to the intent, that the darke and hard places of Scripture, might be open∣ed and expounded; in maintenance whereof, she gave good store of Land, to be dis∣posed, as stipends to the Readers, and that for ever. What good cannot such a Man doe, who held such keyes within his hand, such a Lady at his feet?
CHAP. II. 1. His preferment to the Bishoprick of Ro∣chester. 2. His contentednesse with that small Diocesse. 3. His promotion to the high Chancellorship of Cambridge. 4. His care and vigilance in that office. 5. His op∣posing of Martin Luther. 6. His excommu∣nicating of Peter de Valence, and his tender∣heartednesse therein. 7. His election to the Master-ship of Queens Colledge. THese proceedings of his, (together with many other performances of deeds of Charity procured from others, whereof not any one was ever performed, whereunto (according to his ability) he did not set his helping hand, together with his daily Preach∣ing to the people with most carefull dili∣gence) gained him so much love and reve∣rence from all sorts of people, especially from the Bishops, and all the Clergy in generall, that that most worthy and grave Prelate Bishop Fox, Bishop of Winchester (a man in no small authority and estimation with King Henry the 7. of whose Councell he was)
never left so commending of him to the King upon all occasions (as he saw his time conve∣nient) for his virtuous life, and perfect san∣ctity, untill such time as (by the death of William Barous, Bishop of London, Richard Fitz Iames, Bishop of Rochester, being trans∣lated unto that See, the Bshoprick of Roche∣ster, became void) he found his opportunity to present this Doctor Fisher, as a fit and worthy Pastor for that Cure, (nor was it o∣therwise possible but that so great a glory a∣bout the Moon should borrow (though but by reflection) some small lustre from the Sun) whereupon the King directed his Let∣ters to the Chapiter of the Church of Roche∣ster, to the intent they should elect the no∣minate within his letter, for their Bishop; whereunto (without any the least contradi∣ction or negative voice) they all most wil∣lingly assented, which act of theirs, was short∣ly afterwards confirmed by the See Aposto∣lick, by Iulius the second, Pope at that time, in the Month of October, in the year of our redemption, 1504. and of his age. 45. This sodain and unexpected promotion of this holy Man (in regard he never had been formerly advanced to any other dignity of the Church) caused some to suspect, and deem it, as a thing that was purchased (either
by his Mistresse purse or favour) from the King, her Sonne, which when it was told unto the King, his Majesty replyed, Indeed the modesty of the Man, together with my Mo∣thers silence spake in his behalfe, Solemnly protesting, that his Mother never so much as opened her mouth for him in that particular. And openly affirming, that the pure Devo∣tion, perfect Sanctity, and great Learning, which he had observed, and often heard to be in the Man, were the onely advocates that pleaded for him, the truth whereof may be gathered out of the very Statutes of S. Iohn's Colledge in Cambridge, where he took occasion to praise (much to the honour of) the King, at whose hands so frankly and so freely, he received this Donation, The like mention he makes of the Kings bounty, and liberality towards him, in his Epistle Dedicatory to Richard Fox, Bishop of Winchester, before the book which he wrote against Ocolampadius, where he makes men∣tion of the King, as his chiefest, and best friend and patron. So farre was this good man from making any meanes by friends, to be a ishop, that all the friends he had could scarce perswade him to accept the Office, after that it was granted to him: Which modesty of his, was
very much confirmed by the sequell of his deeds; for at one time after another, being offered the two great Bishopricks of Lin∣colne and Ely. he refused both; and from the hands of Hen. 8. but we may behold him in the foresaid Epistle Dedicatory, not only satisfying, but enjoying himselfe with his little shock, where his words have this begin∣ning. Habeant al proventus pinguiores, &c. Others have larger Patures, but I have lesser charge of Soules, so that when I shall be called to an account for both, I shall be the better able to give an account of either. Not making so high and heavenly an office, a stair-case, whereby we climb unto preerment. But so small a Bshoprick, a competent height, whereby he might so over look the plaines that were under him, that (in the end) with too large a prospect, he did not lose his owne eyes. Thus being mounted in the Kings favour, there will not be wanting those, who will be ready to say concerning such a one, thus shall it be done to the Man om the King hon∣nours; and accordingly, the University of Cabridge (considering with themselves what beneit they had received already, at his hand, and what future benefit they might receive) with a greatefull and prudent minde,
and forecast, unanimously chose, and ordai∣ned him their high Chancellour; a Magi∣stracy that hath no lese authority and juris∣diction (thereunto belonging) than of an Arch Bishop, in causes Spirituall; and of a high Judge, in causes that are Temporall. Hitherto we have traced him to his Bisho∣prick, and high dignity of Chancellorship, of the most renowned University of Cam∣bridge; how he behaved himselfe in both these places, we shall leave the mentioning of those particulars, to the post fuera of this History, as most proper for them; onely it shall suffice for the present, that his whole life seemed to the world to be no o∣therwise, than as if he had used the Church, as if it had been his Cloister: and his Study, as his Cell: Governing his Family with such Temperance, Chastity, and Devotion, as if his Palace, for continency, had been a Mo∣nastery, and for Learning an University. In the yeare of our Redemption, 1509. it happened that the most wise, and fortunate King, Hen. 7. departed this life, upon the twentieth day of May, being upon a Sunday, whereupon he had the opportunity to per∣forme two acceptable and good Offices, and, both of them deeds of Charity: whereby, he gained unto himselfe great applause, and
commendation: the one, in comforting the sorrowfull Mother of the King, his Mi∣stresse, who seemed to be overwhelmed with griefe, who received great contentment in his consolations. The other, in edifying the people by his Sermon, which he preached at the Funerall solemnity of the Kings buriall, exhorting them to the imitation of those no∣ble, and virtuous actions, which they saw to have raigned more over his Passions, than himselfe had exercised authority over his Subjects; powring into every are, an anti∣dote against the feare of Death, and a pre∣servative unto eternall Life. About the yeare, 157. at the time when this worthy Bishop of Rochester, had go∣verned his See 12 yeares, Luther began in Germany, to set up his new found Doctrine, then (as himselfe reports) unknown to the world. But the Divine Providence, who never suffered an Athanasius, a Lyberius, or an Hillary to be wanting, where there was an Aris risen up to rend, and teare the un∣desiled spouse of Christ (his Church) in pie∣ces: nor a Damasus, Gregorius, Basilius, or a Nazianzen, where there was a Macedo∣nius. Nor a Clestin, or a Cyrill, where there was a Nestorius: nor a Leo, where there was an Enyches. Nor an Irenaus,
where there was a Valentine: nor a Tertulli∣an, where there was a Martian: nor an Ori∣gen, where there was a Celsus; nor a Cy∣prian, where there was a Novatus, nor a Ie∣rome, where there were Helvidians, Iovini∣ans, Vigilantians, and Luciferians: nor an Austin, where there was a Donatus, or a Pel∣lagius, did not suffer such a Leviathan to roule about, and beat the sides of that Ship, into which Christ entred, out of which he taught; and of which, S. Peter was the onely Ma∣ster, but that there should be still a Fisher, to oppose and wound the Monster with such harping irons, as that this Kingdome never was much troubled with his Doctrines, whiles this good Bishop lived; nor ever could have had its entrance, till the others Exit brought it in. For, Hearing how that severall of Luther's Bookes, and Writings, were brought over by Merchants (whose profession, though it deserves to be ranked among the best of Edu∣cations, yet, like Solomons Merchants, they sometimes bring home (together with their Gold from Ophir) Apes, and Peacocks Fea∣thers) and dispersed among the people (too apt to entertaine any new fashion, of their Soules, as well as of their Bodies) and how the people swallowed downe the novelty,
that was so taudred with pretences: like unto some Generall (who hearing of the approach and march of an enemy) hasts to his army: with no lesse a cause of vi∣gilancy did so great a Champion of the Chuch hasten to so great a charge, the Uni∣versity, of which he was their Chancelour, that he might take an account in what con∣dition the main body of all Learning stood, whereby ability might be drawn up in the sa∣fst posture to defend the Faith. But, No sooner was he come amongst them, but he might perceive tres to be already sprung in so faire a Seminary, where so much good seed was sown, For About the same time, it fell out that Pope Leo the I0. had granted forth a generall and free pardon (commonly called indulgences) according to the ancient custome and tradi∣tion of the Catholique Church, to all Chri∣stian people (that were contrite) through the Provinces of Christendome, which is no otherwise than an application (by that Mi∣nistry) of the superabundant merits of our blessed Saviour (who shed so many, when the least one drop of his most precious blood was able to have redeemed a thousand worlds) to the souls of true Believers. This Luther formerly having written against, and the Bi∣shop,
and Chancelour of the University, being carefull the Students there as well as others, standing in need of such a remedy, might be partakers of the heavenly bounty, and cau∣sing certain copies of those Pardons to be set up in sundry places of the University (one where of was fixed upon the School gate) A man without a name came secretly in the night time, and wrote over the Pardon, which was there fixed, these word, Beatus vir cuus est nomen Domii spes jus, & non re∣spxit vaitates & insantas falss (istas) thin∣king the word (istas) which he had added would have brought the Pope and all his Clergy within the premunire of the Statute of Gods Word, for setting up that Pardon, whilest he forgot the severall punshments, which are threatned by the same Word, to all those who shall adde or diminish to the book of Life. In the morning, the schoole doores being opened, and the Schollers resorting thither according to their wonted manner, and be∣holding this strange spectacle, there needed no Shiboleth to distinguish, Ctholiques were much offended at so great an abuse of holy Scripture: others approved the fact, and thought it a fine thing, as they were severally addicted.
The Chancellour having notice hereof, was struck with horrour at the no lesse boldnesse, than wickednesse of the fact, whereupon he endeavoured to finde out the party, by the knowledge of his hand, but that in vaine; then he call'd a Convocation, where he declared unto them, for what cause they were conven'd; layes before them the foulenesse of the deed, interprets the true meaning of the abused places of Scripture: explicates the true and wholsome meaning of the words, pardons and indulgence, ju∣tifies the holy use thereof, acquaints them with the great displeasure that might justly ensue at the hands both of Almighty, and of the Kings, if so wicked a fact should passe unpunished; tells how great a discredit it would be to the University, that never had such a spot upon her breast before; and a length, moved the Author (though unknown( to  world , and confssion of his sinne, that he might be forgiven; which if he would performe within a time prefixed, he assured him in Gods name; but if the contrary, such remedy shuld proceed against him, as is (provided in such like cases) in Gods holy Chuch, by Christ himselfe, viz. to be cut offlike rotten Members) from the Body of Christs Church, by the censure of Excom∣munication,
which not being performed at the time prefixed (on the delinquents part) he called another Convocation (where there was a great Assembly) and fearing the infection of others, by the obstinacy of one, he betook him to his last remedy, and taking the Bill of Excommunication in his hand, he began to read it; but when the words began to sit heavy upon his tongue (according to the weight of the sentence) the fire of Love (as if within some Limbeck, or beneath a Bal∣no Mariae) kindling within his breast, sent such a stream up into his minde, s suddenly distilled into his eyes, which like an over∣flowing viol reverberates the stream back a∣gaine to the heart, till the heart surcharged, sends these purer spirits of compassion out at his mouth, which could onely say, that he could read no further. Good God! into what compassion did the mildnesse of such a na∣ture strike the beholders, who were all of them by this time mollified into the same affection? insomuch that they all left off without any further proceedings in the Ex∣communication for that time. Neverthelesse a third day being appointed for the same purpose, & time having brought on the day, there was a great multitude of people, where the Chancellour with a heavy
countenance, declared, how that no tidings could be heard, either of the person, or his Repentance; wherefore now (seeing there was no other remedy) he thought it necessary and expedient to proceed, and so arming himselfe with a severe gravity, as well as he could, he pronounced the terrible Sentence from the beginning to the end, which being done with a kinde of passionate compassion, he threw the Bill unto the ground, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, sate downe and wept. Which gesture, and manner of behaviour, both of his minde and body, struck such a ea into the hearts of all his hearers, and spectators, that many of them were a∣faid the ground would have opened to have swallowed up the man, but that they hop'd he was not there. But did all these teares fall to the ground? were none of them botled up, whereby they might become the wine of Angells? Certainly men may repent, as well as weep by proxie: Teares have their voices in the Parliament with God; and the same God that washeth us so clean with the Laver of Regeneration, by the Faiths of others, may (by the prerogative of his mercy) call us for the repntance sake of other men. For, So it appeared by this Dlinquent, who having not the grace as yet bestowed upon
him, of repentance, so many repenting for him, he became repentant▪ For Not long after, this miserable wretch (it semes, bing taken notice of by the alterati∣on of his countenance, and other changes in the disposition of his minde, whether he was there in presence, or had onely heard with what solemnity so terrible a Sentence was pro∣nounced against him to be the man) forsaking the Uivesy, his body carried his minde when it sound no sanctuary (as he supposed) with the superintended of Ely: a man too much taken notice of to be too great a fa∣vourer of Luthers Doctrine (Dr. Goodrich by name) where no lesse the dismall manner of proceeding, than the thing it self, would never out of his minde, where, notwithstan∣ding, he became a domestique servant to the said Dr. Goodrich, and had unfolded his mind unto them concerning the premises, yet they never coul perswade him otherwise, but that he had most grievously offended Al∣mighty God in that particular; openly de∣testing the deed, as a thing that was both un∣advisedly, and wickedly performed; inso∣much that his minde could never be at rest, untill such time, as with his own hands, in the self-same place, where the former sentence was written, he had blotted out his sin, and
that together by fixing upon the place thi other sentence, which carried healing in eve∣ry word, Delicta juventutis mea & ignorantias ne memineris Domine. Remember not Lord my sinnes, nor the ignorances of my youth; subscribing thereunto his name, Peter de Va∣lence (who was a Norman by birth, from whence he came to Cambridge to be a Student, and remained there till he had committed this fact) whereupon he was absolved, and be∣came a Priest. There is a great deale of difference in the consideration, which Catholiques doe use when they pronounce this terrible sentence, over that which the Lay-chancellours had with us, when they excommunicated for every threepenny matter, which was the rea∣son that in the end the people made not a threepenny matter of their Excommunica∣tions. Thus imploying his time, so needully requi∣red, in healing the sore Brest of such a Nurse, it happened, that in the year 1525. The: Wil∣kinson, Dr. in Divinity (who wasthe second Mastr of Queens Colledge) departed this life, whereby the Mastership of that Colledge became void, and in regard that the Chancel∣lour of the University had no house belon∣ging to him, as he was Chancellour, the Fel∣lowes
of that Colledge with unanimous con∣sent, chose him to be their Master, which he thankfully accepted of, whereby he became the third Master of that house, continuing there the space of three yeares and odde moneths. CHAP. III. 1. The Recreation of Bishop Fisher. The erecti∣on of Colledges. 2. The Lady Margaret dies and leaves him her Executor. 3. The high Ecomium which he bestowes upon her in his Funerall Sermon, made at the solemnities of her interrement. 4. His faithful behaviour in so great a trust reposed in him. 5. His great love unto that Colledge. 6. The praise∣worthinesse of the Vniversity of Cambridge. THat this good man sojourned in those parts, during the time he made it his recreation to overlook the work of Christ∣Colledge, which was then not fiished which the Lady Margaret had endowed wi main∣tenance for one Master, 12. Scholars, Fel∣owes, and 47. Disciples for ever, to be
brought up (as the words of her Will make mention) in Learning, Vertue, and Cunning: the which Colledge she onely lived to see finished, and so took sanctuary in the holy of holies, the celestiall Ierusalem; after the dis∣solution of so faire a Temple of the holy Ghost (as was the Body of so incomparable a Soule) in the yeare of our Lord God, 1519. the third of the Calends of Iuly▪ within the Abbey of S. Peters in Westm. to the great grief and sorrow of all good people but to her own eternal happinesse: who before her departure, made her last Will and Testament, wherein (together with other Personages of great quality) she made this holy Bishop (as one in whom she reposed her chiefest trust) one of her Executors: She was buried with all solemnity, accor∣ding to the dignity of so great a person, in the Abbey church at Westminster: at whose Fuerall Sermon, this most excellent Bishop threw these flowers upon her Grave, &c. As concerning her birth, that she was the daughter of Iohn Duke of Somerset, lineally descended from the most noble Prince, Ed∣ward the third, King of England: As for Quality, that she was a second Martha, both for her Hospitality and Nobility; where (together with many other of her great
Vertues, and incomparable deeds of Chari∣ty; all which he there related, at large, as so many proofs of sanctity) he had these re∣markable passages concerning her, viz. that notwithstanding she was Princesse, who by lineage and affinity, had had thirty Kings and Queens (besides Dukes, Marques∣ses, and Earles) within the fourth degree of marriage supporting her greatnesse; yet would she often fall so low, as to search and dresse the wounds and sores of poore and distressed people with her own fingers: per∣forming all this for his sake, who for ours, received so many wounds: as also when there was an offerture made by divers Princes to warre against the common enemy of our Faith, she encouraged them thereunto by often telling them, that upon condition that they would got, she would also goe along with them and be their Laundresse. The Funeralls of this great Lady being en∣ded, and that other Colledge, which she had willed to be dedicated to S. Iohn the Evan∣gelist, being not yet built, the rest of her Exe∣cutors, finding how faithfull the good man had been in his former trust, by a generall consent resigned into his hands (by a publick instrument in writing) the whole authority of the disposement of her Legcies: but
behold how worthily the dispensation was conferred upon him; for whereas the Lady Margaret, out of her great bounty and li∣berality, had given to so pious a use a portion of Land for the maintenance of one Master, and fifty Schollers, with all manner of furni∣ture, and Servants requisite to every Office, in manner and forme: This good man did not onely bear a portion in the charge of the same Building, but much augmented the Revenue thereof, with possession of Land, whereby four Fellowships were founded up∣on his own account, and one Reader of an Hebrew Lecture, and another of Greek, together with four examining Readers, and four under-Readers, to help the Principall; and whereas he observed the price of Victuals began to rise, he gave wherewith (by weekly divident) the Fellows commons might be augmented, bequeathing thereunto his Libra∣ry of Books (thought to be the best that ever was in Europe) after his death; together with all his Plate, Hangings, and other Housholdstuffe, whatsoever to him belon∣ging by a deed of gift in his life time, under his own hand, and putting the colledge into possession of the same by Indentures, onely borrowing the same back again to his owne use, during his life.
And for a perpetuall memory of his hearty good will, and love towards this Colledge; he caused a little Chappell to be built neere unto the high Altar or the great Chappell, where there was a Tombe set of white Marble inely wrought, where he intended to have laid his bones, if God had not so dispo∣sed of him otherwise, but he was otherwise disposed of, and (as if) because this Martyrs body was not permitted to be brought ∣mong these men, these Fellowes brought their bodies to his Martyrdome; for those famous Martyrs, Mr. Greenwood, Richard Rey∣nolds, Doctor in Divinity, a professed Monke in Sion, of the rule of S. Bridget, and Mr. Wil∣liam Exmew, a Carthusian, professed in Lon∣don: the first whereof, came out of S. Iohn's Colledge, the other two, came forth of Christs: all three, suffering death under King Hen. 8. in the cause of Supremacy, that they might still be of his foundation, though not of Stone and Mortar, yet of Blood and Fire. Out of the first of these two Colleges pro∣ceeded (likewise) Ralph Bayn, Bishop of Lichfield; Thomas Walson, Bishop of Lin∣colne; Iohn Christoferson, also Bishop of Chi∣chester; Thomas Bishop Elect of Glocester, and before that, Abbot of Leicester, all Ca∣tholique Bishops.
Out of the second (also) sprang that most Reverend and Grave Doctor, Nicholas Heath, Archb shop of York; together with divers other Grave and Learned Preachers of the Catholick Faith. And this is to be noted to the honour of that University, that during the space of so many hundred years, as is between the laying of the first Stone in this our Bethel: Cambridge was never infe∣cted with any unsound Doctrine, untill such time as Regis ad exemplum brought it in; and Luther's Soul, was transmigrated into Henry the eighth; who evr after, never spake at a lesser rate, than Si volo sic jubeo; who both of them, since their fall from the Catholick Church, pulled down Reason, and set up Will. And It is a thing which is most remarkable, that he who goard this University so much (as it is conceived (the more) for this mans sake of whom we treat, and the great love sake which they all bore unto his memory) by his placing and displacing)  men and lawes he pleased, and all to make way for a new Religion, in the end, reconcled himself unto the Catholick Faith; as appeares, by his subscribing to the six Articles of the Ro∣man Catholick Religion, which was all the difference that was (then) between the two
Churches, in matter of Doctrine, as also by the expresse words of his last will and Testa∣ment. So the first uncleane beast that ever passed through the Oxens-ford (I meane Wickliffe by name) afterwards chewed the cud, and was sufficiently reconciled to the Roman Faith, as appeares by his Recantation; Living and Dying conformable to the holy Catholick Church, at his Parsonage of Litterworth (as I take it) in Northampton-shire: constantly saying Masse unto his dying day. So that Re∣formation as it seems was left unto the time of which it is said, Vae Regn euipuer domina∣tur; woe be to the Kingdome over which a hild reignes.
CHAP. IV. 1. The encrease of Luthers Doctrine. 2. vigilancy to suppresse it. 3. His in∣tention to goe to Rome. 4. The occasion of his stay. 5. His brave and worthy Speech in the Synod of Bishops. NOw was the time come, wherein God was determined to make triall of his people; and the storme was not altogether unseen, to ensue by this good man: for by this time, the people of this Nation had well drank of the intoxications of Prince Luthers cup: but when he perceived the better sort of people to be so (like the Nature of Islanders) changeable, and desirous of No∣velties, and how Luthers Doctrine was now come from private whisperings, to open pro∣clamations: (whereby all authority, either of Pope or Emperour, King, or Bishop, or any superiority whatsoever, was much vi∣lified and debased, a new way of Salvation found out, a neerer, readier, and cheaper way to Heaven propounded; and liberty of
conscience promised to all that were Believers in his Gospell, all thinking him a brave fel∣low, and who but Luther, that cared neither for Pope, nor Emperour) this holy Prelate began to looke about, and bestir himselfe; and questionlesse had out-rid the storme, had not his hand been taken from the steerage, and the head. Pilot (when the poor fishers head w off) wilfully cast away the Ship. For, Hereupon this good Bishop, first acts the part of a good Chancellour, and set all right in that University in generall, especially in those Colledges, whereof he had peculiar jurisdiction: where he took an occasion to provide in the Statutes, that the Fellows of those Houses should so order their Stu∣dies, as that the fourth part of them might be Preachers: so that as soon as one was gone abroad, another should be ready to succeed in his place, that if it were possible the young Cubbe might be catch'd at his first arrivall. Then he returned to his pastorall charge at Rochester; and there, setting his owne Dio∣cesse in good order, he fell to Writing, and diligent Preaching, procuring others (whose abilities were best known unto him) to doe the like; but, perceiving the disease to
grew desprate, as it had done in Saxony, and other parts of Germany, and the rest of the Physitians, not so ready to set thereto their helping hands (as the necessity of the cause required) he not onely called for help from the King, but by his perswasions, and at his instance, the King himselfe set upon the head of all those mischiefs, and wrote a book against Luther, intituled, An asseron of the seaven Sacraments against Martin Luther. So learned, and so worthy a piece, as that thereby he worthily deserved the title of Dfnder of the Faith. Which upon that oc∣casion was given unto him, by Leo the tenth, then Pope of Rome; which book, was suppo∣sed by divers to be written by my Lord of Rochester, whereupon he obtained leave from the King, that he might goe to Rome, (as it is conceived, to take farther order concer∣ning the settlement of those affaires) and having obtained leave likewise of his Metro∣politan, and disposed his houshold, and ready to set forward in that expedition, all was dashed, by reason of a Synod of Bishop (together with a Synod of the whole Clear∣gy) which was then called by Cardinall Wol∣sey, by reason of his power Legantine, lately conferred on him by the Pope, which stop to his designe, he bare with lesse reluctancy,
because he hoped that much good to the Church, might happily be wrought thereby; but in the end, perceiving the Synod rather to be made a concourse (whereby to unto the world, the great authority, wherein the Cardinall was invested, and that he might be seen sitting in his Pontificality) than for any great good that was intended, he spake as followeth: Bishop Fisher his Speech in the Synod. MAY it not seem displeasing to your E∣minence, and the rest of these Grave, and Reverend Fashers of the Church, that I speak a few words, which I hope may not be ou of season. I had thought that when so many learned men, as substitute for the Cleargy, had been drawn into this body, that some good mat∣ters should have been propounded for the bene∣fit and good of the Church: that the sandals, that lye so heavy upon her men, and the disease, which takes such hold on those advantages, might have been hreby at once removed, and also re∣medied; who hath made any the least propositi∣on against the ambition of those men, whose pride is so offensive, whiles their profession is bunni∣lity? or against the incontinency of such, as have vowed Chastity? how are the goods of the Church
wasted? the Lands, the Tithes, and other Ob∣lations of the devo anstors of the people (to the great scandall of their posterity) wasted in super sluos, ritous expences? kew can we ex∣bort our Floks to fly the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, when we that are Bishops set our mindes on nothing more than that which we forbid? if we should teach according to our doing, how absurdly would our doctrines sound in the eares of those that should hear ? and if we teach  thing, and doe another, who believeth our report? which would seem to them no other∣wise than as if we should throw downe with one hand, what we built with the other: we prtach Humility, Sobriety, contempt of the world, &c. and the people perceive in the same mn that preach this Dctine, Pride, and Haughtinesse of wind, excesse in Apparrell, and a resignati∣on of our selves to all worldly pomps and vani∣ties: and what is this otherwise than to set the people in a stand, whether they shall follow the sight of their owne eyes, or the belife of what they . Excuse me reverend Fathers, seeing herein I blame no man more than I doe my self, for sundry times when I have setled my selfe to the care of my Flock to visite my Diocesse, to governe my Church, to answer the enemies of Christ, suddenly there hath come a message to me from the Court, that I mu attend such a
triumph, receive  an Embassadour, what have we to doe with Princes Courts? if we are in love with Majesty, is there a greater excellence than whom we serve? if we are in love with stately buildings, are there higher roofes than our Cathedrals? if with Apparell, is there a greater rnament than that of Prist∣hood? or is there better copany than a Com∣munion with the Saints? Truly most reverend Fathers, what this vanity in temporall things may worke in ou, I know not; but sure I am, that in my selfe I finde it to be a great impedi∣ment to Devotion: wherefore I think it neces∣sury (and high time it is) that we, that are the heads, should begin to give example to the inferiour Clargy, as to these particulars, whereby we may all the better be conformable to the Image of God, for in this trade of life, which we now leade, neither can there be like∣lihood of perpetuity (in the same state and con∣dition wherein we now stand) or safety to the Cleargy. Ate that he had uttered these and many other such like words to this effect, with such a gravity, as well became him, they all seem'd to be astonished, by their silence, and the Cardinalls state to become him not so well, seeingm,
CHAP. V. 1. Luther's rayling against the King. 2. Fisher writth in the Kings behalfe. 3. The effect of a Sermon which he preached at S. Pauls crosse. 4. Occolampadius his Doctrine and beginning. Fisher opposeth him. 5. The King leaveth off all care of Kingly govern∣ment, gives himselfe wholly to sensuality, 6. Laies his whole trust in the Crdinall. Wolsey's character. 7. His solicitation for the Bishoprick of Toledo, afterwards for the Papacy, is rfused both. ABout this time it was that Luther an wered the Kings Book, wherein he used such scurilou railing, against the King, as is not to be mntioned, far beneath the ap∣proement of a sanctified spirit, and the dignity of a sacred person. Whereupon This Bishop, (in vindication of the Kings honour, and defence of the truth) wit an Apologie, whereby he rebuked the Authors vilany, and abuse of a Pince of so great dig∣nity: the title of which Book was, A defence
of the King of England's assertion of the Catho∣lique Faith against Martin Luther's Book of the Captivity of Babylon; which Book he de∣dicated to his deare friend, and old acquin∣tance, Dr. West, Bishop of Ely. Shortly afterwards, he writ another book intituled, A defence of the holy order of Priest∣hood, against Martin Luther. Upon the Quinquagesima Sunday (which was in the yeare of our redemption, 1525.) this holy and most learned Bishop preached a most excellent Sermon at S. Paul's Crosse; where Cardinall Wolsey, Legate a latere, with eleven Bishops & great resort of the Nobility and Gntry, were present, which was perfor∣med with such feveney of faith, zeal to the Catholique Church, and force of arguments (grounded upon Scripture) that one Robert Barnes, an Augustin Friar, and five more (infected with Lutheranism) were thereby converted and abjured their Errors, and for their Penance stood openly at St. Paul's Crosse. Upon the Octaves of the Ascension, he preached also another most admirable Ser∣mon, in the presence of the Cardinall, and all the Bishops &c. wherein he shewed him∣self a most stout and zealous Champion, and Defender of his Faith, taing no lsse the se∣verall
curers of soules, with nglignce, than the people with levity. About this time, rose out of Lather's Schoole, one Ocolampadius, like a mighty and fierce Giant, who, as his Master had gone beyond the Church, went beyond his Master, (or else it had been impossible he could have been reputed the better Scholler) who deni∣ed the reall preseuce; him this worthy Cham∣pion sets upon, and with five bookes (like so many smooth stones taken out of the River, that doth always run with living water) slays the Philistine; which five books were written in the year of our Lord, 1526. at which time he had governed the See of Rochester twenty years; which books of his, nor any other of his books that he ever writ, were ever answe∣red. About this time it was that the King left off the Kingly Occupation (as they called it) wherein he had governed this Realme with great wisdome and moderation, whereby he became (as all wise Kings doe aim at) belo∣ved at home, and feared abroad; and addi∣cted himself wholy to sensuall pleasure and delight, leaving the Ministry of his state wholy to the disposition of the Cardinall, who was a man (though but meanly and ob∣surely borne) yet of an excellent wit, volu∣ble
speech, quicknesse of memory, haughi∣nesse of courage, well bred, sufficiently lear∣ned, and one that knew how to behave him∣self among persons of the greatest rank and quality, and that in businesses of greatest weight and importance: who besides, that he was Arch bishop of York, and Bishop of Winchester at the same time, and Abbot of S. Albns, and had the Bshopricks of Bath, Woroester, and Hereford, in Farm (at small rents, the Incumbents being Strangers, and continually living in their owne countries, whereby he might dispose of all presentations and promotions of those Bishopricks as free∣ly as if they had been his own, and was Legat à latere (whereby he might convocate the Clergy at his pleasure) besides what he re∣ceived from Italy, by reason of his dignity of Cardinall) he was also Lord Chancelour of England, whereby, in a manner, he formerly ruled all under the King (also) in matters tem∣porall; and to gve him his due, he so beh∣ved himselfe in Government, that he won from all wise men great praise for his indif∣ferency to all sorts of people, whether they were rich or poore, onely his fault was, that he governed himself the worst of all, for all this was not sufficient, except he was more, and more was nothing, except he was most of all. For
The Arch-bishoprick of Toledo in Spaine being void, he made meanes unto the Em∣perour, Charles the fifth, and to that purpose procured the Kings Letters, whereby that great dignity might be conferred upon him, but the Emperour noting his ambition, would in no wise condescend thereto. That failing, it happened that Pope Leo the tenth died, whereby the Papacy became void: then he bestirred himself exceedingly, together with all his friends, and (besides his own Master the King of England) he made means unto the King of France, who (upon certain grounds moving him thereto) took great paines in his behalfe, but all was disap∣pointed by the Emperor, who had so wrought with the Conclave of Cardinalls, that they elected Cardinall Hadrian (one who former∣ly had been Tutor to the Emperour) for their Pope, a man of singular and rare Ver∣tue and Learning.
CHAP. VI. 1. The Revenge which the Cardinall took again the Empero for withstanding his ambition. 2. The Scruple which he put into the Kings head concerning Queen Katherine: This Scruple the ruine of the Clergie. 3: The King is fallen in love with Anne Bullein. 4. Her Character. 5. The King resolved to go thorough-stitch with the Divrce. 6. The Kings dealing with Fisher in that behalfe. Fisher's answer to the King. THis lay boyling in the Cardinals sto∣mach so hot, that he never rested till he had set variance between the King his Master, and the Emperour, which he performed, by causing the King to enter into a strict league and amity with the King of Frnce, whereby the Emperours occasions were much hindred; and to affont him the more (together with the feare of a blind Prophesie which was told him, viz. that a woman should be the confusion of him, and fearing it might be the Queen (Katherine) in regard she was Aunt unto the
Emperour, whom he thus purposed to ma∣gne, he began to set the straw on fire that was under her bed; by putting a new Scruple into the Kings head of marrying his Brothers Wife: wherefore taking his opportunity, when he saw the King best disposed, he fell into discourse with him of the great unhap∣pinesse that was befalne the nation, and how great a pity it was, he had not issue Ml to succeed him in the Crown of England; where∣at the King began to stare upon him, but an∣swered him not a word, while the Cardinall proceeds to tell him that there might be a way found out, how with Gods blessing he might have plenty, whereat the King began to thrust his thumbs under his girdle, and to cry Hob man, hoh, lawfully begotten Cardinall, lawfully begotten? Yet, lawfully begotten, replied the Card. I speak no more than what I am able to make good, and justly; whereup∣on he began to tell him in plain termes, that the Marriage between him and his wife (in regard she had been his Brothers) was not lawfull, and that it was a thing which was much spoken of, as well in forraign Nations, as in his own Realm, and that therefore he was bound in conscience to tell him of it, to the intent he might consider of it, and inquire further.
The King looking a long time very earnestly upon the Cardinall, as if he had been greatly dismayed, at last answered him in these mild terme: Why, my Lord, you know this Marriage was sufficiently discussed at the beginning by sundry grave and learned men, and was at last by them concluded to be good & lawfull, which was afterwards confirmed and dispen∣sed with by the Pope himself; and therefore good Father take hed what you say in this great and weighty matter: whereupon they thus parted (for that time) from one ano∣ther. Having once broke the Ice, he thus intends to passe thorough the Ford; he sends for one Dr. Iohn Longland, Bishop of Lincoln, Con∣fessor to the King, a very timerous man, and one that was afraid to say or doe any thing that might displease the Cardinall, and there∣fore was there placed as a man wholy for his purpose: him the Cardinall conjures, that when the King should deal with him concer∣ning a Scruple of conscience about the marriage of his wife Queen Katharine, that by any means he should further the same as much as in him lay, and make it a great mat∣ter of Conscience to co-habit with her, being not his lawfull wife; Longland, as he suppo∣sed,
having given him his lesson, within two or three daies the Cardinall addresseth him∣selfe to the King, and after that he had dis∣cussed a while with him concerning the inva∣lidity of the Marriage, he adviseth him by all means to resolve on nothing rashly, but to advise with his ghostly Father, which when he had done, his ghostly Father was not alto∣gether the man which the Card▪ took him to be; for when the King advised with him con∣cerning the businesse, he put it off from him∣self, and advised his Majesty to consult with some other, that were the most learned Bi∣shops, whereupon the Cardinall had a gme to play for that, which he thought to have got by slight of hand; for now the King was pleased to send for the most able Bishops and Divines that he could think upon; amongst all which there was not any one in all his kingdome of whom he had a more reverend estimation both for honestly and learning, than he had of Doctor Fisher Bishop of Rochester, wherefore he was one of the nominates within the list of summons to a meeting at the Cardinall's house in West∣minster, where after much debatement of the businesse, and that the Bishop of Roshester had fully answered and refelled all the Argu∣ments and Reasons, which were there made
and given concerning the validity of the Mr∣riage (to the satisfaction of most of the Bi∣shops) he concluded that there was no cause at all of any question to be made, seeing the marriage between the King and the Queen was good and lawfull from the beginning, and that therefore it was necessary to remove that scruple from the Kings breast as soone as possible, and so the Conference was en∣ded. While the Clergy were all thus dancing about a scruple, in a lofty room led by the Cardinall, they were not aware of the loose fire which was brought into the powder, room, which was under them ready, and at last blew them all up: for just in this nick of time the King was deeply falne in love with a faire young Gentlewoman of the Court, then waiting upon the Queen, called Mrs. A. Bullein (secretly a Lutheran, and the first that ever opened her mouth to advise the K. to al: eration in Religion) Daughter to Sir Thomas Bullein Knight (who afterward for his daughters sake was promoted to many high honours and dignities.) This Mrs. Anno had formerly been brought up in the Court of France, under the Lady Mary the French Queen, Sister to King Henry, and sometimes wife of Lewis the 12. King of France, wherd
she had learnt much courtly fashion and be∣haviour, then strange and dainty in the En∣glish Court, whereby she farre surpassed all other Lades her companions, which so insla∣med the Kings minde (having conceived within himself a possibility of riddance from his old wife, and probability of having issue Male by this) that inwardly he was resolved to have her nolens volens, whereupon for the present, he shewed her great favour, and ex∣pressed unto her many signs of the love, which she was yet ignorant of, so that now he was resolved upon a hand gallop in this busi∣nesse. Insomuch, that when the Cardinall (insci∣ous of his design) made his addresse uto him to give him account of the Conference which was between the Bishops, and had told the King how that all did, and was likely to stick in the Lord of Rochesten, as the onely Remora to that proceeding (supposing that if the King could take him off, all the rest would follow his judgement) the King (by this time, desi∣ring nothing more than that the Divorce should take effect) speedily fell into consulta∣ion with the Cardinall, how the Bishop might be won to his (now) design; the Car∣dinall advised his Majesty to send for the Bishop, and to work him to him by faire means
and gentle usage; whereupon the King did as he was advised; for the Bishop being sent for, and come into the Kings presence, the King treated him with exceeding courtesie and liberality of good language, and at last took him with him into the long gallery, and there walking awhile with him, after that he had bestowed many words of praise and commendation upon him for his great Lear∣ning and Vertue, at length (in the presence of the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, and some Bishops that were there) he unolded his minde unto him concerning the businesse that was in hand, telling him how sore his Conscience was tormented, and how for that cause he had secretly consulted with his ghost∣ly Father, and divers other men, by whom he was not yet satisfied, & therefore (he said) up∣on special confidence which he had in his great learning, he had now made choic of him to use his advise above all others, requiring him to declare his opinion therein freely, whereby he might be sufficiently instructed in his conscience, and remaine no longer in su∣spence. The Bishop hearing all this, ell suddenl upon his knees, and in that posture would have delivered his minde unto him, but the King immediately lifted him up with his own
ands, and blamed him for so doing, where upon he spake as followeth. I beseech your Grace to be of good cheer, & not to disquiet your self one whit concerning this matter, nor to be dismayed, or troubled at this businesse; for there is no heed to be taken of these men, who account themselves so wife, and do arrogate to themselves more knowledge and learning in Divinity, than had all the learned Fathers of the Church, and the Divines of Spaine and England (together with the See Apostolick) that were in you Fathers time, by whose authority this Mar∣riage was approved, confirmed and dispens with, as good and lawfull: Truly Sir, m Soveraign Lord, you rather ought to make a matter of conscience, than to make any such scruple (in so clear and weighty a matter) b bringing it in question, than to have any the least scruple in your conscience; and there∣fore my advise is, that your Majesty, with all speed, lay aside those thoughts, and for any perill that may happen to your soule thereby, let the guilt rest on mine. And this is all that can be said by the loyallest of Subjects; and whether I have said well herein, or other wise I shall not refuse to answer any man in you behalf, whether it be privately, or publickly and I doubt not but there are as many wor∣thy
and learned men within your Kingdome; which are of my opinion; as on the contra∣ry (if they might be permitted to speak with freedome) who hold it a very prilous and unseemly thing, that any such thing as  Di∣vorce, should be spoken of; to which side I rather advise your Majesty to incline than to the other; whereat the King replied not on word; for whiles there was so faire a beau∣ty in his eye, his eares must needs be stopped with the blackest wool: So he departed sud∣denly, and never looked favourably upon the Bishop from that time forward.
CHAP. VII. 1: The Cardinal brought into a peck of troubles, by reason of this Soruple. 2. The King de∣clares himself for Anne of Bullein, and de∣clines the Queens company. 3. The Cardi∣nalls scret complotting to break off the match with Anne Bullein. THe King resolving to go thorough stitch with his work, makes it a publique busi∣nesse: And now the Cardinals hic labor was become hoc opus; for the same thing which was hitherto but secretly handled among the Bishops, was now made the common subject of discourse to the whole Kingdome: And a convention hereupon was had not onely of the Bishops, but of all the noted and famous Divines of both the Universities, Cathedrals, and Religious houses within the Realme, at the Cardinals house at Weminster, where the said businesse was debated, argued, and consulted many daies together; but the sub∣ject was too knotty for such tooles to work upon, and the knot too hard for their unty∣ing,
wherefore they dissolved of themselves without dissolution; and now the Cardinals hoc opus began to be impossible, and voluntas regis, to  so high, as if to that nothing were impossible, for now the King begins to puff and blow, and to sweare MOTHER of God he will have r, declaring it openly to all the world; whereupon, from more and more, he becomes altogether to decline his Katharine's company, and to delight himself wholy in the Courtships of his new Mi∣stress. In the mean time the Cardinall (Wolsey) walks the round within his owne Chamber, and with his bitten nailes teares ou these words by piece-meales from his mouth, WE WILL HAVE NONE OF THIS ANNE BULLEIN; for we mst con∣ceive him wonderfully perplexed, having otherwise designed au allianco for his Mster with the French King, by this Divorce, if he could have had his will so to have revenged himself upon the Emperour; and we cannot imagine the distressed Queen to be otherwise than implacably, as well as necessitously bent to employ all her engines to work together, with his ruine, her owne preservation. O the just and secret workings of the Almighty, who often buries us in the  pits which
we dig for others! Yet most wonderfull it is, to consider what countermines he had laid, if it had been possile to have blown up the Kings resolution in his new choice, able to have level'd any fortification of a minde that had been but compos'd either of Honour, Wisdome, Honesty, or Shame, & not of what was altogether wilfullnesse. For first, hearing a common fame of the incontinency of this Ann of Bullien he sends forth spies in every cor∣ner, to learne out, who had, or who could hear of any that had bin familiar with her: At last intelligence was brought him, that for a cer∣teine, Sir Thomas Wiat had carnall knowledge of her, whereupon providing himself with sufficient instuction, he sends for Sir Thomas Wiat, and tells him how thus and thus it ap∣peares, that he had bin oftentimes familiar with the Lady Anne Bullein, and that for ceteine, the King was at this time resolv'd to marry her (assoone as ever the sentence of divorce should be pronounced) and there∣fore out of the great love which he ever bare unto him, and care which he had of his wel∣fare, he thought good to acquaint him with what danger he was in, whereby he might avoid it by acquainting the King with what was truth, lest afterwards such a thing should come to the Kings eare, and then it would
not be all the land, nor all the life he had in England, that could give his Majesty satisfa∣ction for concelment of a businesse of so high concernment. The Knight replied, Sir, I thank you for the great love and sound advice which hath been alwaies exercised in my affairs: But reverend Sir, if the King be so in love with her, as you say he is, and the world takes notice of him to be. I think I cannot be in greater danger than in acquainting the King with such a bu∣siness. If you cannot prove it sid the Cardinall, you say well, it is a hard matter to prove that, said the Kn. it is a harder matter to answer the concealment, said the Cardinall, of a thing that is so much divulged as this is; and be∣sides, in this case you can hardly suffer, but you must finde many friends; in the other you will suffer pitilesse, and will will finde no man to speak in your behalf: in this you will be but ingenuous, in the other pccant; where∣fore I advise you of two evils to choose the least. Sir Thomas Wiat, by these perswasions, was resolved to confesse all upto the King, which he plainly did; and with great feare, told him, that she was no fit wife for him, if he wre free: the King commanded him to speak
no more upon his life, nor to acquaint any else with what he had told him; so blinde is fate. Nor would the Cardinall attempt to bat∣ter so strong a Tower with one Piece, but he procured a Reserve of Engines, which he thought could not faile; for he had notice given him how that (for certain) the said Anne Bullein was really contracted to the Lord Henry Percy, Son and Heire to the Earl of Northumberland (then a servant waiting upon the Cardinall) whom he immediately caused to appear before him, and by his ow confession, finding the report to be true, and selemnly performed, he sent for the Coun∣tesse of Wilt shire, mother to the said Anne Bullein; and hearing what she could say to the businesse, which w no lesse than what the said Percy had said before, he enouraged her in the prosecution, who for some reasons best known unto her self, a she said to the Cardinall, better liked of the Marriage of her daughter with the said Lord Percy, than if the King should marry her. The Cardinall finding a backwardnesse in this Lady, that her daughter should be wedded to the King; and hearing what fame had formerly spread abrod conerning the Kings former familiarity with her, gushed at the
cause, and therefore advised her to go unto the King, and deale freely with him in that particular, lest hereafter she might otherwise repent. The Lady takes his advise, and addresses her self to the King, who communing with him awhile upon that subject, between jest and earnest, she uttered these words; Sir, For the reverence of god take eed what you do, in marrying my daughter, for if you record your conscience well, she is your own daughter as well as mine: The King replied, Whose daughter sover she is, she shall be my Wife. But When she proceeded to acquaint him with the Contract, and told him how that her daughter and the Lord Percy were already man and wife before God, olemnly contra∣cted in the presence of sch and such: the King was exceeding angry, and swore by his wonted oath that it was not so, and it should not be so, and sent immediately for the Lady her self to come before him, to whom, as soon as ever she came into the presence, and before ever she had heard of the business, the King, with a frowning conntenance said unto her, Is it so Nan, is it so, hoh, what say'st thoss to it? To what, said Anne Bullein? Mother of God, said the King, they say that thou hast promi∣sed to marry young Pery: Mrs. Anne no∣thing
at all abashed, returns him this answer, Sir, When I knew no otherwise but that it was Lawfull for me to make such promises, I must confesse I made him some such promise; but no good subject makes any promises but with this proviso, that if his Soveraigne commands other∣wise it shall be lawfull for him to obey: Well said my own Girle, said the King, and tur∣niug himself to the Countess, he said, I told you that there was no such thing. Thus you see concerning the first particular, the King cared not who he married, so that he might be wedded to his own will; and concerning the second, the King presently af∣ter sent for the Cardinall, and him for to un∣do the former kno with his own teeth, en∣joyning him to procure his servant to release his Mistress of her engagement, which he did.
CHAP: VIII. 1. The first occasion of the Cardinalls ruine. 2. The King sends divers Orators to the V∣niversitis beyond the Seas to procure their assntments to the Divorce. 3. The return with satisfaction, but it proves fruitlesse. 4. Embassadours are sent to Rome. 5. The Cardinall aspireth to be Pope. 6. Ho useth strange meanes to accomplish the same. Now it is the Queen bed must be taken down, that her palat may be advanced: but from this time forward, though the Card. was seemingly forward, yet was covertly slow in the prosecution of the Divorce, which afterwards proved to be his ruine. Wherefore the King was advised by the Cardinalls, and the rest of the bshops (as the only way of dispatch) to send certaine Ora∣tors to forreine Universities (as well as to those at home) and so without any more a∣do to rest in their judgements. The King having made choice of men fi for his purpose, gave them instructions, and
sent them several ways to the most renowned Universities of Christendome, there to dispute the case, viz. whether it was lawfull for a man to marry his brothers wife, or not, with∣out acquainting them with the particulars, either of the former brothers having no car∣nall knowledge of the said wife, or the Popes dispensation thereupon, so that by this slight and subtily they easily obtained determinati∣ons from all the Universities, viz. that it was not lawfull; whereupon, not knowing whose case it was, nor the case it selfe rightly, the Oatours procured those determinations un∣der the common Sales of all the forraigne Uiversities, whereupon they returned with great triumph, to the great contentment of the King, who rewarded them highly for their paines; and it must not be thought that our Universities at home (though they onely understood the case) shuld be wiser than all the Universities of Christendome. All these Sales were all delivered into the Crdinalls hand, with a strict charge speedily to convene all the Bishops before him, and to determine upon the businesse: but this quick fire could not make this sweet malt; for it was determined (by whose means you may easily guesse) that although the Univer∣sities had thus determined under thir Seales,
yet the businesse was too weighty for them to determine thereupon, as of themselvs, without the authority of the Sea Apostolike; but they all fell upon this agreement among themselves, that Orators should be sent with these Seales of the Universities to Rome, to treat with the Pope for procuring his confir∣mation therein: thus the King was shov'd off with another wave from the Shore of his desired purpose. With much reluctncy, and sensibility of the tediousnesse of the delay, no other reme∣dy appearing, A mbassadours were dispatched in all hast to Rome, Clment the seventh being Pope at that time: The Ambassadours names were Stphen Gardiner, the Kings Secretary▪ Sir Francis Brian Knight, one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Prvy Chamber; Sir Gregory de Cassalel, an Italian, and Mr. Pter  a Venetian, who being arrived at Rome, ha∣ving propounded the cause of their coming, and rested themselves there awhile, letters were come unto them from the King and the Cardinall, with further instructions how to deale with the Pope, and to make all possible dispatch that could be made in the businesse: But the Ambassadours were not half so hasty in demanding, as the Pope was slow in expedition, and that by reason of
the Gout, which then afflicted him (and perhaps of an unwillingnesse of the minde, as well as a debility of the body) the Embs∣sadours, by the return of their Letters, having made knowne unto the King the Popes slownesse, by reason of his great infirmity, the Cardinall layes hold upon this occasion, and inormes the King, how that if he were Pope, if it should so happen, that the Pope should die, all should goe well and speedily on his side: To this purpose Letters were sent thick and three-fold to Rome, both from the King and Cardinall, with instructi∣ons, that they would the more earnestly and often call upon the Pope for a finall determi∣nation, hoping that he would the more easily be drawn thereto, that he might (by reason of his paine) be rid of their importunity; as also, that if the Pope should chance to die of this present disease, that (by all meanes) they should devise some way or other how the Cardinall of York should be elected to succeed in his place: and to pro∣mise mountaines of Gold, to procure their suffrages in his behalfe, and in case they could not prevaile, but that the Cardinalls were likely to choose some such man, as was not likely to further the Kigs designes, that they should take up what summes of money
they could upon the Kings credit, and there∣with to raise a presidie (as it is termed both in the King & Cardinals letters) or power of men (and taking with them such Cardinals as could be brought to favour their purposes) to depart out of the City into some out∣place not farre off, and there to make a Schisme, in the behalf of the Cardinal. But there was no need of that advise, for the Pope recovered health, and lived to finish the busi∣nesse, though contrary to the Kings expec∣tion, wherefore.
CHAP. IX. 1. Cardinall Campius is sent Legate into England to determine the business of Divorce. 2. The Embassadours are returned. 3. Car∣dinall Wolsey joyned in Commission with the other Cardinall. 4. The Court sits. 5. Coun∣sll is assigned to both the parties. 6. Queen Catharine's speech in her own defence. TH Embassadours finding the Pope to be the same man, for slownesse, as he was, when he was tyed by the leg: Requested of his Holinesse that he would be pleased to send a Legate into England with full authority to heare and determine the businesse there, ac∣cording to right, as he should see cause; which was granted, and accordingly one Laurence Campeius, a well learned man, and of undaunted courage (to whom the King about ten yeares before, had given the Bi∣shoprick of Bath at his being in England up∣on another occasion) was appointed for that negotiation. The Embassadours thus returning with a
conclusion of a new bginning, the Kings patience must now rest satisfied with the ex∣pectation of the Legates coming, which after long expectation he arrived here in En∣gland, who coming to Lond. was lodged in his own Palace, then called Bth-house; but be∣fore his arrivall, a new Comm ssion from the Pope overtooke him at Callis, wherein the Cardinall of York was joyned with him in Commisson; and this was procured by the King, whreby (as he thought) his businesse should be ae to meet with the fewer rubber. The Cardinals met, Audience was given, the Commssion was opened, the Place assig∣ned, the assignement was at the Dominick Fyers in Lonon, the King and Queene were to be close by at their lodgings at Bridewell: The learned Counsell on both sides were ap∣pointed. The King (bcause he would seeme indfferent) willed the Qeene to chuse her Cousell, the Qeene would chuse none at all (as suspectng the indifterency of such as were his owne subjects.) Wherefore for fashion sake these Counsellours were assigned her. Iohn Fisher Bshop of Rochester; Henry Stain∣dish Bishop of St. Alaph: Thomas Abel, Richard Fetherstor, Edward Powell, all Do∣ctors in Divinity; and of Cvilins, and
Canonists, William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury; Cuthbert Tunstall Bishop of London, Nichols West Bish▪ of Ely, and Iohn Clerk Bishop of Bath (for at Campeius his arivall he was translated to the Bishoprick of Salisbury) on the Kings part the like number of profound and learned! Doctors, as well Divines, as Civilians, and Canonists. Silence being proclaimed in the Court, and the Commission read, the Bishop of Rochester presented the two Legates with a Booke, which he had compiled in defence of the Marriage, making therewith a grave and learned Oration, wherein he desired them to take good heed to what they did in so weigh∣ty a businesse, putting them in minde of the great and manifold dangers, and inconvenien∣ces which were ready to ensue thereupon, not onely to this Realm, but to the whole state of Christendome. After this Oration was ended, the King was called by name, who answered HERE: After that the Queen, who made no answer, but rose immediately out of her chaire, and coming about the Court, she kneeled downe before he King openly in the sight of both the Legates, and the whole Court, and spake as followeth. Sir, I beseech you do me justice and right,
and take some pity upon me, for I am a sim∣ple woman, and a stranger born out of your dominions, and have no friend but you, who now bing become my adversary, Alas, what friendship or assurance of indifterency in y counsel can I find hope to amongst your sub∣jects? What have I done? Whrein have I offnded you? How have I given you any occasion of displeasure? Why will you put me from you in this sort? I take God to my judge I have bin a true, humble, & faithful wife unto you; alwaies conformable to your will and pleasure: Wherein did I ever contra∣dict, or gainsay whatever you said? When was I discontented at the thing that pleased you? Whom did I love but those whom you loved, whether I had cause or not? I have been your wife this twenty yeares; you have had divers Children by me; when you took me first into your Bd, I take God to be my witnesse I was a Virgin, and whether that be true or no, I put it to your conscience. Nw if there be any just caue that you can alleadge against me, either of dishouesty, or the lke, I am contented to depart the Realm, and you, with shme and insamy; but if there be no such cause, then I pray you let me have justice at your hands. The King your Father was in his time of such an excellent wit, as that for
his widomes sake he was accounted a second Solomon; and Ferdinand my Father was rec∣koned to be one of the wisest Princes that reigned in Spaine, for many yeares before his daies. These being both so wise Pince, it is not to b doubted but they had gathered unto them as wse Counsellours of both Realmes, as they in their wisdomes thought most meet; and as I take it, there were in those dayes, as wise, and learned men in both kingdomes, as there are now to be found in these our times, who thought the Mrriage between you and I to be good and lafull; but for this I may thank you my Lord Crdi∣nall of York (then her best friend, though she knew it not, or perhaps was secretly advised to be thus btter against him) who having sought to make this disention betweene my Lord the King and me, because have so often fund fule with your pompous; vnity, and asp∣ring minde; yet I doe not think that this your malice proceeds from you meerly in re∣spect of my self, but your chief displeasure is against my Nephew the Emperour, because you could not at his hands attaine unto the Bth pick of Toledo, which greedily you desired; and after that was by his meanes put by the chief and high Bishoprick of Rom, you most ambitiously aspired;
whereat being sore offended, and yet not able to revenge your quarrel upon him, the heavy burden of your indignation must be laid upon a female weakness, for no other reason but because sh is his Aunt. And these are the manly wayes you take to ease your minde: but God forgive you; wherefore Sir (applying her self to the King) it seemes to me to be no justice that I should stand to the order of this court, seeing one of my Judges to be so partiall; and if I should agree to stand to the judgement of this Court, what Coucellours hv I but such as are your owne Subjects, taken from your own Coun∣sell, to which they are privy, and perhaps dare not go against it; wherefore I refuse to stand to their advic or plea, or any judge∣ment that is here, and doe appeale unto the Sea , before our holy Father the Pope, humbly beseeching you by the way of charity, to spre me, till I may know what further course my friends in Spaine will ad∣vise me to; and if this may not be granted, then your pleasure be fulfilled. With that, making a low obeysance to the King, she dparted the Court, leaving be∣hinde her many d hearts, and weeping eyes, among the which this good Bishop of Roche∣ster was most compassionate.
After she was perceived to be quite de∣parted from the Court (for it was supposed that she meant to have returned to her place) the King commanded that she should be called back againe, but she would not in any wise returne, saying to those that were about her, This is no place for me to expect any indifferency, for they are all agreed what they will doe, and the King is resolved what shall be done. Soe she de∣parted cleare away from the Court, and never afterwards did she appeare there any more.
CHAP. X. 1. The good Character which the King gave his Queen (Katharine.) 2. The King declares his scruple of Conscence. 3. Shewes the dan∣ger the Kingdom is in for lack of issue Male. 4. His procdings with the Bishops there∣in. THe King peroeiving that she was thus departed, spake unto the Court as fol∣loweth: Forasmuch as the Queene is now gone, I will declare, in her absence, before you all, that she hath ever been to me, as true, obedi∣ent, and conformable a wife, as I could wish, or any man desire to have, as having al the vertuous qualities that ought to be in a wo∣man, of her dignity: she is high born (as the quality of her conditions do declare) yet of so meek a spirit, as if her humility had not been acquainted with her birth; so that if I sought all Europe over, I should never finde a better wife; and therefore how willing I wuld (if it were lawfull) continue her to be
my wife ill Death make the separation) ye may all guess: but Conscience, Conscience is such a thing, who can endure the sting and prick of Conscience, alwaies stinging and pricking witin his breast? Wherefore, my Lords, this woman, this good woman, I say, some∣times bing my brothrs wife, as ye all know, or have heard, hh bred such a scruple within the secrets of my breast, as daily doth tor∣ment, cumber, and disquiet my minde, fearing and mistrusting, that I am in great danger of Gods indignation, and the rather, because he hath sent me no issue Male, but such as died incontinently after they were born. Thus my Conscience being tossed to and fro upon these unquiet waves, (almost in despaire of having any other issue by her) it behoveth me, I think, to look  little further, and to consider now the welfare of this Realm, and the great danger that it standeth in, for lack of a Prince to succeed me in this office, and therefore I thought good in respect of the discharging of my conscience, and for the quiet state of this noble Realm, to attemp the Law herein, that is, to know by your good and learned counsell, whether I might lawfully take another wife, by whom God may send me issue Male, in case this my first marriage should appeare not warrantable;
and this is the onely cause for which I have sought thus farre unto you, and not for any displeasure, or disliking of the Queenes pr∣son, or age, with whom I could be as well contented to live, and continue (if our marri∣age may stand with the Laws of God) as with any woman living: and in this point consi∣steth all the doubt, wherein I would be satis∣fied by the sound Learning, Wisdome, and Judgements of you my Lords, the Prelates and Pastors of this Realme, now here assem∣bled for that purpose; and according to whose determination herein, I am con∣tented to submit my selfe, with all obedi∣ence; and that I meant not to wade in so weighty a matter (of my selfe) without the opinion and judgement of my Lords spi∣rituall, it may well appeare in this, that shortly after the coming of this scruple into my conscience, I moved it to you, my Lord of Lincolne, my ghostly Father; and forasmuch as you your selfe, my Lord, were then in some doubt, you advised me to ask the coun∣sell of the rest of the Bishps, whereupon moved you, my Lord, of Canterbury, fist, to have your Licence (inasmuch as you were the Metropolitan) to put this matter in que∣stion, as I did to all the rest, the which you all have granted under your Seales, which I have
here to shew. That is true, and if it please your Grace, said the Bishop of Canterbury, and I doubt not but my brethren here will acknow∣ledge the same. Now you must understand, that the King having won the Archbishop wholly to his designe▪ the Archbishop had got as many of the Bishops hands unto that Deed as he could, and set the rest of the Bi∣shops hands thereto, of his own accord, they both imagining that none would have been so bold as to contradict, or charge so openly, both the King, and the Archbishop of an un∣truth: but my Lord of Rochester, being of an undaunted spirit, and one of the Queenes Counsell assigned (whereby he might deliver his mind the better) knowing the clearnesse of his own conscience, said unto the Archbi∣shop, No my Lord; not so, under your favour, all the Bishops were not so farre agreed, for to that instrument you have neither my hand nor my seale: No, , said the King, and with a rowning countennc, said to my Lord of Rochester, Look here, Is not this your hand and seale? shewing him the instrument, no for∣sooth, (said the Bishop) it is none of my hand nor seale, How say you to that (said th King to my Lord of Canterbury) Sir, said he it is his hand and his seale; No my Lord (said the Bshop of Rochester) indeed you were in hand
with me often for my hand and seal, as others of my Lords have been; but I alwaies told both you and them, I would in no wise consent to any such act, for it was much against my conscience to have any such businesse called in question, and therefore my hnd and seale should never be put to any such instrument, God willing, with a great deale more, which I said to that purpose, if you remember. Indeed (said my Lord of Canterbury) it is true, you had such words with me; but after our talk ended, you were at last contented that I should subscribe your name, and put your seale thereto, and you would allow the same, as if it had been your act and deed; then my Lord of Rochester seeing himself so unjustly charged, said unto the Archbishop, No, no, my Lord, by your avour and licence, that had been all one, and that which you charge me with, is not true: And as he was proceeding in his speech, the King interrupted him saying, Well, well, my Lord of Rochester, it makes no great matter, we will not stand with you in ar∣gument, you are but one man amongst the rest, if the worst fall out: but the rest of the Bi∣shops that had bin dealt with in like manner, said not a word, so that the fist encounter on the Queen side was not so well performed, through want of seconds: And this was all that was done for that day.
CHAP. XI. 1. The pleadings of the Counsell on both sides. 2. The dposition of the severall Witnesse. 3. The honest Plea of Bishop Fisher. 4. The stout Plea of Doctor Ridley. 5. Cardinall Woley takes him up. 6. The Doctors Reply thereto. UPon the second meeting there was much matter propounded by the Counsell of the Kings part, concerning the invalidity of the foresaid marriage from the beginning▪ by reason of the carnall copulation there vehemently uged to have bin commit∣ted between Prince Arthur the Kings bro∣ther, and the present Queene; but being again as vehemently denied by the Queenes Counsell▪ the whole matter rested onely upon proof: to this purpose divers witnesses were produced. As 1. Agnes, the old Datchesse of Norfolk, dposed, that she was present at the marriage of Pince Arthur, at S. Paul's in London, and that sh saw them both in bed
together the next night after they were mar∣ried: the Prince being of the age of fifteen yeares, and the Princesse elder. 2. George, Earle of Shrewsbury, who depo∣sed, as to the celebration of the Marriage, Decimo septimo Henrici 7. 1501. that he was born at Winchester, secundo Hen. 7. that he be∣lieved Prince Arthur knew the Queen car∣nally, and was able so to doe, because he knew his wife before she was sixteen. 3. William Warham, Archbishop of Canter∣bury, that never liked the marriage, and that he told Hen. 7. as much. 4. Sir William Thomas Knight, who depo∣sed, as to the age of the parties, and their co∣habitation as man and wife five moneths to∣gether, both at London and in Ldlow. 5. Sir Anthony Poynes as to the age onely. 6. Thomas, Marquesse of Dorset, as to age, and that he wasof a good sanguine complexi∣on, and able (as he supposed) for the busi∣nsse. 7. Robert, Viscount Firwater, as to the age, and that the next day (after they had been bed together) he waited on Prince Arthur, whiles he was at breakfast, where Maurice St. Iohn carved, and the Lord Firzwater was Cupbearer, where he heard Prince Arthur
(upon the said Maurice hi asking the Prince how he had done the last night?) Answer, I have been in Spain the last night. 8. Thomas Lord Darcy, William Lord Montjoy, and Henry Guildford Knights of the Garter, little to any purpose but what they had heard by publique fame. 9. Charles Duke of Suffolk▪ deposed to the ame effect with Mauie S. Iohn, and that the Prince soon after begn to decay in bodi∣ly health; which said he, as the said S. Iohn related, grew by the Prince his lying with the Lady Katharine. 10. David Owen, as to the age onely. 11. Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Lord Trea∣surer of England, to the same effect with Maurice S. Iohn, by which words he belie∣ved that the Prince carnally knew the Lady; and because he was of a good complexion and age (as he supposed) sufficient, having performed the like himselfe at the same age. 12. Anth: Willoughby Kt. that the morrow after the Marriag (in the presence of divers witnesses, being in the Privy chamber) the Prince called to the sid Willougby, saying, Willoughby, give me a cup of Ale, for I have been in the midst of Spain the last night. 13. Nicholas Bshop of Ely, that he could say nothing concerning the carnalis copula,
but that he very much doubted it, in regard the Queen often (sub testimonio conscientiae suae) said to this Dponent, that she was ne∣ver carnally kown by Prince . These things being , the Bishop of Rochester stood up and spoke in this manner, And all this is no more than what hath formerly been deposed, examined, throughly debated, and scanned by the best and larnedst Divines and Lawyers that could possibly be got; which time I do very well remember, and am not igno∣ranc of the manner of their proceedings, when and where all the allegations (in respect of what was then produced to the contrary was a julged vain and frivolous; whereupon the Marriage was concluded; which Marriage was after∣wards approved, and ratified by the See Apostoa bque, and that in such large an lample maner, as that I think it a very hard matter now againe to call the same in question before another Iudge. Then stood up another of the Qenes Counsell▪ Doctor we have heard how the Queene her selfe, here in the face of the whole Court,  pre∣sence and hearing of the King himself, called the great God of heaven and earth to witness, that she
was a pure Virgin when she first came into the Kings bed, and how she put it to his conscience, speaking unto him face to face; and if it were otherwise, we cannot imagine that either the Queen durst so appeale to him, or the King so spoke unto (if unworthily) would not have contradicted her: besides, we have here the te∣stimony of a most reverend Father, who hath deposed upon his oath how the Queen had often testimonio  said unto him, ow that she never had any carnall knowledge of Prince Arhur. Now, my Lords, that such a rolick, or a jst (as that about a cup of Ale, or the midst o Spaine, which together with all the rest that hath beene said) are but meere conjectures and presumptions (should stand in competition with so great a testimony, as a sove∣raigne attestation of her cause upon the  conscience, and that conscience such presumption by its own silence,  to lay aside all reverence which  power and authority, as that all the , consultations, of all former powers, even of the See Apostolique it selfe, should become , by your calling this matter againe into , is a thing in my con∣ceit ost detestable to be rehearsed, and a great shae to this honourable Court to heare
uch stuffe ripped up to no other purpose but in contempt of former Power, and clling the wisdome of our Ancestors and , together with our owne, into question and derision. Whereat Cardinall Woley, that he might not seeme to say nothing by saying something, said unto him , Dmine Doctor, magis reverenter: No no, my Lord (said the Doctor) there belongeth no reve∣rence to be given (at all) for an matter would be unreverently answer'd. Where∣upon Cardinall Campeius called for Doctour Cuthbert Tunstall, Bishp of London, and desired to heare , for he was a man of profound judgement and lear∣ning▪ and one in whose wisdome and hone∣sty the Cardinall repsed great confience. This Tunstall had witten a very larned Treatise in defence of the , which indeed should have in the Court, but the bi∣lities, purposely sent hm upon into Scotland (at the vry  he should have appeared) about  businesse, so that he appeared not in Court this second time. It was conceieved, that had not the Queen
appealed unto  Marriage had been confirmed at this , as it was afterwards by the Pope , when it was too late; but being as it was, all matters of question were cleare laid aside, such things as belonged to In∣struction and Information of his Holinesse in , were inquired after, and that upon the  motion of the Bishop of Ely, one of the Queenes Counsell, whereupon both the gates determined to hear no fur∣ther pleadings.
CHAP. XI. 1. The King commanded the two Cardinalls to perswade the Queen to  her appeale. 2. Their  to his commands. 3. The King growes resolute, and demands sentence; th Cardinalls refuse to give it. 4. The Lor of the Counsell be∣gin to stome. 5 The King to conceive great indignation against the  of Yok,  the Countrey. 6. The pssage which happened between the King and Mr. .
better, and more honourable for both par∣ties, then to stand to a publique triall in for∣reigne parts. The Cardinall (to satisfie the Kings com∣mnds) proised the uttermost of his endea∣vous in that behalf, but all in vain; for the Queen sto stoutly to her Appeale, and would not in any wise be brought to retract her former resolution, affording them the same reasons as formerly, and requesting them for Charity sake, to give a simple and heplesse woman the best advise they could, what was bst to be done to the glory of God, the Kings satisfaction, and her owne honour: Whereupon they both returned to their formr perswasions, and the Queen to her formr answers. Thus the Cardinals re∣turned well pleasd, that they could not conquer her, and the Queen unfortunate that she was not overcome.
The Kg put off () from post to pil∣lar grew weary o these delayes, and resolute in having a speedy end, he cared not which way, so it were done, and done it must be, as he would have it: Whrefore he called another Session, and in person urged a finall Sentence, abd the proedings to be read in Latin, wheeupon the Kng Counsel called for judgement; with that Campeius answered again in Latin, Not so, I will give no Sentence before I have made a relation of the whole Transactions of these Affaires unto the Pope, whereunto I am obliged by vertue of the Queens Appeale consi ring whose  we are, and by whose authority we here sit. I come not hither for favour, or dread sake to pleasure any person living, be he King or Subjct, nei∣ther for any such  will I  my Conscience, or displese my Go. I am now an old man, both wek and sickly; and should I now put my soule in  of Gods time: So the , and no∣thing more of this nature was done (in En∣gland) ever after. The Lords about the Kg perceiving the miscarriage of the Kings , began to
happened; Mr. Cranmer ( Master both of all Arts, and cunning how to  & Fellow of Jesus Colledge in Cambridg) being at the same time retired into that Countrey with one of his Pupils (by reason of the Sicknesse then raging in Cambridge) happened to be in an  thereabouts, where some of the Courtiers were, by reason of the Courts then being at my Lord of Darcy's house, where (hearing some of the Courtiers relating how discontentedly the King behaved himself (by reason of those late accidents which had hap∣pned o crosse to his designes) insomuch that he would hardly suffer any man to come neere hm, much lesse to speak unto him) he spae unto them as followeth.
and my life against any man living. One of the Courtiers (hearing this, and knowing it to be a Spech so justly calculated to the height of that Meridian, and a saying so agreeable to the Kings temper, as i it had taken measure of his minde) said thus unto him, I ell the Scholler, the King shall what thou hast said; and if  words good, for and to speak with the King but it was late in the evening before he could inde his oppor∣tunity, but at the lst he foud it; and when he had related unto the Kng what such a man had said, and what he would undertake, the King swore by his wonted oth, Mther of God that man hth the right Sew by the care; I shall not goe to bed untill I  with him, commnding the same party forthwih to depart out of his presene, and to bring Cran∣mer to him with all speed, the Mssenger makes hast unto the Inne, but Mr. Cranmer was deprted to his friends house two miles off before his return thither, wherefore the messenger gave strict order to the Inne-kee∣per that he should send an Expresse unto M. Cranmer to tll him that he should not faile to be at the Court betimes on the morrow,
for the King would speak with him: Back to the Cout the Mssenger rturnes with this account, whereat the King was exceeding wroth with the Messenger, and swore that he should finde him out this night if he were above ground▪ and bring him to him, for he would not close his eyes until he had seen hm; with much ado night brought him unto the Kng, who brought night upon the Chuch; for questi∣onlesse there was the fist platform raised for the Church of Englands downfall. For after much private conference first had between the King and Mr. Cranmer, and af∣terward with his most private Counsell, the most cunning and abe men (as spies) were speedily sent to Rome to prie into the Re∣cords, to see in what state and condition the Clergy of England there stood with the Pope of Rome, as also what Oaths the Clergy of England did usually there take, and what Obedience they had promised unto him, &c. and what advantages otherwise might be pickt thence against the Clergie here, where∣by to draw them into a Paemunire. Which things peformed, the King returns back again to London with an ocean of dis∣pleasure in his bosome, and a tempst in his countenance.
Chap. XIII. 1. Both he Queenes set against Cardinall Wolsey. 2. Cardinall Campeius departs the Kingdom. 3. A Parliament is called where∣in great complaints are made against the Clergy. 4. The Bishop of Rochester his Speech in Parliament. 5. The Commons highly incensed at his Speech, they complaine thereof unto the King. 6. The King questi∣oned the Bishop therefore; the Bishops answer thereupon.
The Cardinall (Wolsey) had the two La∣dies, Catharine that was so neere her setting, and Anne that was so apparent in her rising (though as different as the two Poles between themselves) both against him; the one discovering, the other aggravating his offences; yet, though sometime he had a better friend; for he proved such a constant enemy to the last, that he became a Martyr for the former, and such a btter adversary (sometimes) to the first, as he be∣came (afterwards) the second's footstoole to her Throne; yet neither of them gave him thanks, which rendred his venome guilty of the nature of the Spiders thus to be intangled within his own web. Cardinall Campes perceiving the King disposed to discontentment, takes his leave of his Majey, and suddenly departs the Realme (after that he had made his abode here in this kingdome neere upon the space of one yeare) who was no sooner gone, but a sodaine rumour , how that he had car∣ried with him vast ummes of money of the other Cardinalls ut of the Realme; (for at that time Cardinall Wolsey wa suspected to the Land, by eason of the Kings displea∣sure) insomuch that  af∣ter, and overtaken at Callis▪ where when they had searched , they scarce found so much money about him as would serve to defray his ordinary charges to Rome: This the Cardinall Campeius took heavily, and thereat was mrvailously discontented; which search for trease was but a colour, for the thing which the King aimed at, was the instrument which contained the sentence of Divorce (which Campeius had shewed unto the King) in case he had seen cause to put the same in excution, which if the King
had sound out, it is supposed he would have made good play therewith: but he was de∣ceive of his purpose. Howsoever, in the 22. yeare of the Kings reigne a Parliament was summoned to begin at London the 3. day of November, and in the year of our Lord 1529. and according∣ly Writs were directed to all the Counties, &c. but withall private Letters were sent to the most potent men, directing them whom they should choose; which Letters there were few or none durst disobey, so that there was a Parliament filled to the Kings hearts desire. And The regulations of all abuses of the Clergy were referred to the house of Com∣mons, where svere complaints against the whole Clergy, as well as against particular Clergie-men, were daily presented; whereof some the house of Lord  into considera∣tion, and some they ; whch when the Bishop of Rochester perceived, he spake as followeth. My Lords, here are certaine Bills exhibi∣ted against the Clgy, wherein there are com∣plaints made against the , idnesse, rapciry and cruelty of Bishops, Abbots, Priests and their Officialls: But my Lords, Are all vitious, all idle, all ravenous, and ruell Priests,
or Bishops? And for such as are such, are there not laws provided alreay against such? Is there any abuse that we do not seek to rectifi? or can there be such a , as that there shall be no their owne? and  where they have no ahority to correc? If w be not  in our Lawes, let each man suffer for his dlin∣quency; or if we have not power, did  with your assistance, and we shall much the Good as the Goods of the Church, that is lookd after: Truly my Lords, how this may sound in your  I cannot tell▪ but to me it appeares no otherwise, than as if our holy Mo∣ther the Church were to become a bondmaid, and new brought into servility and , and by little & little to be quite banished out of those dwelling places, which the piety and liberality o our forefathers (as most  Benefa∣ctos) have conferred upon er; otherwise to what tendeth these  and curious Peti∣tions of the Commons? To no other intent or purpose, but to bring the Clergie into contempt with the Laity, that they may size their Pa∣trimony.
But my Lords, beware of your selves and your now on fire, teach us to beware our own disasters: whereore, my Lords, I will tell you plainly what I think, that except ye resist manfully by your authorit, this violent heap of mischiefs offered by the Commons, you shall see all obedience first drawn fom the Clegie; and secondly from your selves;  if you  into the true causes of all these mischiefs which reign among them, you shall finde that they all arise through want of Faith. This Speech peased and displeased divers of the house of Peeres,  were severally inclined or adicted to orward, or the Kngs designs; among the which none  thereto, but onely the
Bt when the Commons heard of this Speech, they conceived so great displeasure against the Bishop, that they forthwith sent their Speaker, Mr. Audeley, to complaine on him to the King▪ and to let his Highnesse un∣derstand how grievously they thou h them∣selves injured therby, so as to be so highly charged for lack of Faith, as if they had been Infidells or Hereticks, &c. The King therefore, to satisfie the Com∣mons, sent for my Lord of Rochester to come before him; being come, the King demanded of him why he spake in such sort; the Bishop answered, that being in counsel he spake his minde in defence of the Church, whom he saw daily injured and oppressed by the common peo∣ple whose office it was not to judge of her man∣ners, much lesse to reform them, and therefore (he said) he thought himself in conscience bound to defend her in all that lay within his power; neverthelesse the King wished him to use his words more temperately; and that was all, which gave the Commons littl satisfaction▪
CHAP. XIV. 1. The demand of all the small Abbies within the Land for the Kings use. 2. The Bishop of Rochester opposeth the demand in the Con∣vocation house. 3. The mindes of the Cler∣gie (before ready to condescend to the proposi∣tion altered thereupon. 4. The Bishop of escaped very narrowly from being poysoned at his dinner. 5. How he escaped another danger from the shot of a cannon. 6. His departure from the place to Roche∣ster. IMmediately hereupon the foresaid de∣mand for all the small Abbeys and Mona∣steries within the Land (of the value of two hundred pound land and under, to be given to the King) was revived; and the pretence for such demands of the Clergie, was in re∣compence of the great charges and expences, which the King was , concerning the Di∣vorce which he was put upon by the false and double dealing of the Cardinall and his Cler∣gie,
and therefore it was said to be all the reason in the world, that the Clergie should satisfie the King againe for the great expences he had been at; and this was urged with such imporunity; as if the businesse had been called upon by sound of Drummes and Tumpets: In conclusion, they all agreed that certine of the Kings Counsell should make demands hereof to the Covocation of the Clrgy, which was performed with such a terrible shew of the Kings displeasure them, if they yilded not to his , that divers of the Convocation (sea∣ing the Kigs indigntion, and hoping by a voluntary condescention in these particulars to save the rst) were of a minde to satisfie the Kig therin, which the Bishop of Roche∣ster perceivig, spake as followeth. My Lords, and the rest of our Brethren here assembled, I pray you to take good heed to what you doe, lst you do you know not what, and what you cannot do: for indeed the things that are demanded at our hands, are none of ours to grant nor theirs to whom we should be∣stow them, if we should grant them their de∣sires; but they are the Legacies of those testa∣tors, who have given them unto the Church for ever, under the penalty of a heavy urse imposed on all those who shall any way go abou to aliena
their property from the Church: and besides, if we should grant these smaller Abbeys, &c. to the King, what should we do otherwise than shew him the way how in time it may be lawfull for him to demand the greater? wherefore the man∣ner of these proceedings puts me in minde of a able, how the Ax (which wanted a handle) came upon a time unto the Wood, making his man to the great Trees, how he wanted a handle to work withall, and or that cause he was con∣strained to sit idle; wherefore he made it his request unto them, that they would be pleased to grant him one of their small saplings within the Wood to make him a Handle, who mistrusting no guile, granted him one of the smaller trees, wherewith he mad himself a handle▪ so becoming a compleat Ax, e so fell to work within the same wood that in processe of time there was neither great nor small tree to be found in the place where the wood stood. And so my Lord, if you grant the King these smaller Monasteries▪ you do but make him a handle, whereby at his owne pleasure he may ut downe all the Cedars with∣in your , and then you may thank your selves after ye have incurred the heavy displea∣sure of Almighty God. This Spch qute changed the mindes of all those which were formerly bent to gratifie the Kngs dmands herein, so that all was rejected for that time.
After this the Bishop escaped a very great danger, for one R. Rose came into the Bshops kitchin (being acquainted with the Cook) at his house in Lamb. Mrsh & having provied a quantity of dedly poyson, whiles the Cok went into the buterie to fetch him some drink, he took his opportunity to throw that poyson into a mss of Grue, which was prepared for the Bshops dinner; and after he had stayed there awhile, went his way: but so it happened, that when the Bishop was called unto his dinner, he had no apptite to any meat, but wished his servants to fall to, and be of good chear, and that he would not eat till towards nght: the Servants be∣ing set to dinner, they that did eat of that poysoned dish were miserably infected, whereof one Gentleman, namd Mr. Bennet Carwin, and an old Widow▪ died sodainly, and the rest never recovered their healths till their dying day. The person that did this wicked deed, was afterwards, for the same offence, boyled alive in Smithfield, in the 22. yeare of K. Henry's reign. Shortly after this, there happened another great danger to him in this same house, by reason of a Cannon bullet that was sht thorough his house, close by his study win∣dow (where he was used to spend much
time in Pryr and holy Meditations) which made such a horrible noyse and clutter, as it went thorough, that all the house were sud∣denly amazed; upon enqury made from whence this mischief shoud proceed, it was fund out how that it came from the other sie of the River, nd out of the Ele of house, Father to the Lady Anne Bullein, which being told unto the Bshop, he caled all his Sevants before him, and said uto thm, Let a trusse up ou baggage and be gone, this is no place for us to abide in any longer; so he set forwards in his jurny to∣wards . Cospiracies wre contri∣ved by the Kng consent, or pivity, it is not handsome to determine, being words against him at his table, & elswhere; which words xperience tel us how too great may often take so large commis∣sion from them, as to attemp such things as are beyond the nature of their warrant. The Bishop, now come to Rochester, fll to his old accustomed manner of fre∣quent preaching, visiting the Sick, con∣verting
the Seduced, and for his recrea∣tion, he would sometimes go and see his workmen whiles they wre employed in the reparation of Rochester : upon which he had bestowed great cost; ut had not long remained in those pats, but he was robbed almost of all his Plate by Thieves in the night-time, who brake into his Manour house of Halling, nare Roche∣ster, which being perceived in the morning by his Servants, they were all in great per∣plexity, and pursued the thieves as well as they could, and following them thorough the wood, the thieves le fall severall pieces of Plate, through the great hast which they had made in flying, so that they brought some of the Plate back gain be∣fore the Bishop had heard of the losse of any; but the Bp. coming downe to his dinner, perceived an unwonted kinde of heavinesse and sadnesse in their countenances, inso∣much that he asked them what was the matter? they seeming unwilling to relate the story, and looking upon one another who should begin, he commanded them to inform him of the cause of such dstraction, assuring them that he was armd for all adven∣tures (deeming it to be some great matter) but when they had given a full relation of
the whole businesse, and how they had reco∣vered some of the▪ Plate back again; the Bish. replyed, if this be all, we have more cause to rejoice that God hath restored to us some, than to be discontented that wicked men have taken away any for the least favour of God Almighty is more to be esteemed than all the evill (which the Devil and all his wicked instruments can doe unto us) is to be valued, wherefore let us sit down and be merry, thank God it is no worse, and look ye better to the rest.
CHAP. XV. 1. The Kings Agents are returned from Rome with sufficient matter of vexation to the Clergie. 2. The King calls another Parlia∣ment. 3. The whole Clergie are con∣demned in a praemunire. 4. The King laies hold on that advantage to make himself head of the Church. 5. The Bishop of Rochester his most admirable Speech upon that occasion, whereupon the Proposition was rejected. 6. The King persists in his demand. BY this time the Kings Agents, which were sent to Rome, were returned with sufficient matter wherewith to ve the whole Clergie; for they had learned our how that there had been a priviledge formerly granted from the See of Rome, no Legate de latere should enter the Realme of England, except he were first sent for by the King; now it happened that Cardinall Wolsey (either ignorant, or forgetfull of this priviledge, or perhaps thinking he might doe any thing without the Kings consent, or procuement) procured of, and for himselfe, the Power
legantine from the Pope that then was; but though the Cardinall had exercised that au∣thority for the space of divers yeares, without the Kings consent or privity, yet at the length (perceiving his own errour, and the danger he was in (if the Kings favour, which was no inheritance, should chance to slck its sailes) and perhaps how merrily the whele of fortune began to turn about) he so wrought (formerly) with the King, that he procured a confimation thereof under the great Seal of England, as well for that which was past, as that which was to come, which the King full well remembring, thought the Cardinall too hard for him; howsoever he was resolved he would be too hard for the Cardinll, and knowing that nothing stood between him and the mark he aimed a, but the reduction of this Cardinall to the statuquo wherein he had him once safe enough, he so deales with a servant then belonging to the Cardinall, and in great truth about him, that by his meanes he regained the fore∣said ratification under the great Seal, into his own hands, and then to work he went. And Accordingly he summoned another Parlia∣ment to begn upon the 16. day of February, in the year of our Lord God 1530. in which
Paliament divers heinous matters were pro∣pounded against the lergy, as a praeludiū of the winds to the ensuing tempest; then an account was given up in Parliament of 100000 l. charges which the King had been at to obtain so many instuments from forraign Universi∣ties concerning the businesse of the Divorce: All which expences they said the King had been at through the falshood and dissimu∣lation of the Cardinall, and certain others of the chief of the Clergie; all which was de∣manded of the Clergie, that they should make all good unto the King; but when this business began to be propounded to the Convocation of Divins, it was there opposed, & especially by the Lord B. of Rochester, who said uto the Kings Orators, that it was not their faults, as they were there the body representative of the Clergie, that the King had been at any charges at all concerning that businesse, for to his know∣ledge the Clergie were generally against it, that any such matter should at all be brought in que∣stion, and that if any such faulty persons were amongst them, it is fit they should be questioned, and compelled to give his Majesty, satisfaction; Whereupon they all sltly denied upon any such score to make any restitution at all. Then the King (more uriosly than ever) called the whole Clergie into the Kings
Bench, and sued the Cardinall, together with the whole Clergie in a praemunire, for recei∣ving and acknowledging the power Lgan∣ine of the Cardinal: which objection, whiles th Card, thought with as easie a grace to wsh off of him, as the proud Swan to slde so much water off of his back (like the bastard Eagle called Halits he was drowned un∣der the waves (because, like the true Eagle, he poized not his prey before he offered to carry it) by catching after a Fish, which was heavier than he could carry; and so they were all condemned upon the Statute of King Richard the second in a praemunire. Thu the K. was put into a capacity of imprisoning whom, or as many of them as he pleased, or to enter into, or upon what goods or posses∣sions of theirs he had a minde unto: whereup∣on the Clergie first fallen under the Kings heavie displeasure, and now not being wil∣ling to abide the further danger of his dis∣pleasure under his justice, sued unto him for mercy, declaring unto him their willingnes to pay the 100000 l. upon his indem∣nity, which the King promised unto them, excepting the Cardinall and some others. But The businesse of the Divorce suck so indi∣gstedly in the Kings stomach, that before he
wold either divorce them from their feares, or marry them to their former securities, he wished them all to repair unto their house of Convocation, and there he would propound unto them a businesse, which if they would condescend unto, then they should finde that he would be unto them a gracious Prince; which when they were assembled in the place ppointed, such a business was propounded to them, as never was propounded by men since there was a congregation of mankinde, viz. that they should acknowldge the King to be the Supreme Head of the Church which was pro∣pounded chifly by Mr. Thomas Audely, (who after Sir Thomas Moore had given over his place, was created Lord Chanclour of England) and that with such mixure of faire promises, and threatnig together, that ma∣ny of the Convocation thought themselves in a capacity neither of refusing any thing that shoud be demanded of them by the King, nor of consuling of what was, or was not to be granted; whereupon divers of the Convocation upon canning of the busi∣nesse, were in a readinesse to promote the Kings designe; and few there were that durst open their mouthes to speak their mind freely: Wherupon the Athanasius of the Clergie, this out Prelate, of whom we
treat, thus took the busiesse into considera∣tion. My Lords, it is true, we are all under the Kings lash and stan in need of the Kings good favour and clemency; yet this argues not that we should therefore doe that which will render us both riiculous and contemptile to all the Christian world, and issed out from the society of Gods holy Cathlique Church; for what good will that be to us to kp the pssssion of our Houses, Cloysters, and Covents & to lose the So∣ciety of the Christian world? to preserve our Goods and lose our Consciences? Wherefore, my Lords, I pray let us consider what we doe, and what it is we are to grant, the dangers and in∣conveniens that will ensue thereupon, or whe∣ther it lies in our powers to grant what the King requireth at our hands or whether the King be an apt person to receive this power▪ that so we may go groundedly to work and not like men that had lost all honesty and wit, together with their worldly fotune. As conerning the first point, vz. what the Supremacy of the Church is, which we are to give unto the King: it is to exercise the spiritu∣all Government of the Church in chief, which according to all that ever I have learned, both in the Gospel, and though the whole couse of Divinity, mainly consists in these two points.
1. In loosing and binding sinners, according to that which our Saviour sai unto St. Peter, when he ordained him head of his Church, viz. to thee will I give the keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven. Now my Lords, can we say unto the King, tibi, to thee will I give the keyes of the Kingdome of Heaven? If you say I, where is your warant? if you say no, then you have answered your selves, that you cannot put such keyes into his hands. Secondly, the Supreme Government of the Church consists in feeding Christs Sheep and Lambs, according unto that, when our Saviour performed that promise unto Peter, of making him his universall Sheepherd; by such unlimi∣ted jurisdiction, feed my Lambs, and not onely so, but feed those that are the feeders of those lambes, feed my sheep: Now my Lords, can any of us say unto the King, Pasce oves? God hath given unto his Church some to be Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors, some Doctors, that thy might edifie the body of Christ, so that you must make the King one of these, before you can set him one over these, and when you have made him one of these supreme Heads of the Church, he must be such a Head as may be answerable to all the Mem∣bers of Christs body; and it is not the few Mi∣nisters of an Island that must constitute a Head
over the Vniverse, or at least by such example, we must allow as many heads over the Church, as there are soveraigne Powers within Christs Dominion, and then what will become of the Su∣premacie? every Member must have a hea; attendite vobis, was not said to Kings, but Bishops. Secondly, let us consider the inconveniences that will arise upon this Grant; we cannot grant this unto the King, but we must renounce our unity with the See of Rome; and if there were no further matter in it▪ than a renouncing of Clement the seventh (Pope thereof) then the matter were not so great: but in this we do forsake the first four generall Counsells, which none ever forsook, we renounce all Canonicall and Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of Crist; we renounce all other Christian Princes; we renounce the Vnity of the Christian World, and so leap out of Peters ship to be downed in the wave of all Heresies, Sects, Schismes and Divi∣sions. For The first and generall Counsell of Nice ac∣knowledged Silvster (the Bishop of Rome) his authority to be over them, by sending their De∣crees to be ratified by him. The Cousel of Constantinople did acknow∣ledge Pope  to be their chief, by admit∣ting him to give sentence against the Here∣tiques,
Mcidonius, Sbellinus, and Enomi∣us. The Counsell of Ephesus acknowledged Pope Celestin to be their cheif Iudge, by admitting his condemnatin upon the Heretique Netorius. The Counsell of Chalcedon acknowledged Pope Leo to be their chief Head, and all generall Counsells of the World ever acknowledged the Pope of Rome (onely) to be the Supreme Head of the Church, and now shall we acknowledge another Head, or one Head to be in England, and another in Rome? Thirdly, We deny all Canonicall and Eccle∣siasticall Lawes, which wholy doe depend upon the authority of the Apostolicll See of Rome. Furthly, We renounce the judgement of all other Christian Princes, whether they be Prote∣stants, or Catholiques, Iwes, or Gentiles, for by this argument Herod must have been head of the Church, of the Iewes; Nero must have been head of the Church of Christ; the Empe∣rour must be head of the Protestant Countreys in Germany, and the Church of Christ must have had never a head till about 300. yeares after Christ. Fifthly, The Kings Majesty is not susptible of this Donation: Ozias for medling with the Priests office, was resisted by Azrias, thrust out of the Temple, and told that it belonged not to
his oice: now if the Priest spake truth in this, then is not the King to meddle in this busi∣nesse; if he spoke amisse, why did God plagu the King with leprosie for this, and not the Priest? King David, when the Ark of God was in bringing home, did he place himself in the head of the Priests Order? did he so much as touch the Ark or excute any the least, properly belon∣ging to the ? or did he not ra∣ther go beore, and abase himselfe amongst the people, and sy that he would become yet more vile, so that God might be glorified? All goo christin Emprours have evermore refused  authority; for at the first Generall counsel of Nice, certaine Bills were privily brought unto Constantine, to be ordered by his authority, but he caused them to be burnt, saying, Dominus  constituit, &c. God hath ordained you (Priest) and hath given you power to be Iudges over us, and therefore by right in these things we are to be juged by you, but you are not to be judged by me. Valentine, the good Emperour, was required by the Bishops to be but present with them to reform the heresie of the Arians▪ but he answe∣red, Forasmuch as I am one of the Mmbers of Lay-people, it is not lawfull for me to define such controverss, but let the Prists, to whom
not to separate our selves from such a one. If we answer, tht the Church of Rome is not of God, but a Malignant Church then it will ollow, that we the inhabitants of this land, have not as yet received the true faith of Christ; seeing we have not recived any other Gospel, any other Dotrine, any other Sacraments, than what we have received from her, as most evidently ap∣pears by all the Eclsiastical Histories: where∣fore if she be a malignant Church, we have been deceived all this while, and if to renounce the common Father of Christendome, all the G∣nerall Counsels, specially the first four, which none renounce, all the Cuntrys of Christen∣dome, whether they be  Countreys or Protestant, be to forsake the Vnity of the Chri∣stian world then is the granting of the Suprema∣cy of the Chch unto the King, a renouncing of the Vnity,  of the Samlesse coat of Christ in  a dividng of the Mystical body of Chst  Spouse limb , and tayle to tayle lik , to set the field of Christs holy Church all on : and this is it which we are about, wherefore let it be said unto you in time an not too late, LOOK YOV TO THAT. This Spech so wrought with the whole Convocon that all  were laid aside, and such an amour of resolution gene∣rally
put upon the whole body there assem∣bled, that come what come would, all was rejcted, and the Kings purpose for that time clearly frustrated. But the King desited not, notwithstanding all this but sent his Orators to the Convocation-house, to put them in mind of the dangers they were in, and to ac∣quaint them with the Kngs heavy displeasure against them, for denying him so reasonable a demand, both which particulars they aggra∣vated and set forth to the highst advantage; but it was answered, that they were sensible enough of that which they had said; and for the Kings displeasure they were very sorrow∣full, because they could not help it, wherefore if they must (they said) suffer, they must be contented. The King having in vain thus attempted the fury of the wind, in bereaving these Tra∣vellers of this upper Garmnt of the Church: he now makes triall what the policy of the Sun will do. Wherefore The King sent for divers of the chief lea∣ding men of the Convocation, as well Bishops as others, to come unto him at his Palace of Westminster; at whose first entrance into his presence, he shines upon them such a gracious look, as if all the ras of Majesty had beene bestowed upon them by that aspect; and
courts them with the sofst, mild, and gen∣tlest words, as that pssibly he could use, protesting unto them upon the word of a Kng▪ that if they would acknowledge and him for supme head of the Chuch of England he would never, by vertue of that Gant, ssume unto himself any more powr, juisdict on, or uthority over them, than all other thKings of England, his , had formey assumed; neiher woud he tke upon him to pomulg, or  any new spi∣ritual Law, or exrcise any  Jurisdi∣ction, or intermddle himself among them in altering, changing, ordring or judging in any spritual businesse whatsoever: wherefore (said he) I having made you ths frank pro∣mise, I expct that you should deale with m accordingy: and so he dismissed them to consier of this businesse amongst themslv, and to gve his Orators an accout thereof in the house the next morning.
CHAP. XVI. 1. The Bishops consult what course to take. 2. The Bishop of Rochster proposeth unt them a Parable, Whereupon they all break off in confusion. 3. The Kings Oators repaire unto the Coocation to know the Clergies fin determnation in the businsse. 4. The Bishop of Rchester's Spech unto the Kings Orators. 5. The Orators Reply unto the Bishops Speech. 6. The Headship of the Church grate unto the King upo conditi∣ons, the conditions rejected, at last accepted of. THe Bishops, &c. as soon as they were departed the Kings presence, retired themselves to a place of privacy, to consider with themselves what were best to be done, and what account and advice they should give unto the rest of the Clergie: Some of them were apt enough to think the businesse now pretty faire, seeing that the King had promised fairly; but because my Lord of Ro∣chester was the onely man that most stickled
in this businesse, they all asked his opinion herein, in the first place; who soon answered them with this parable, Thus stands the case my Maters, the Heart upon a tim sid unto the Members of the Body, lt me also be your Head, and I will promise you that I will neither see, nor heare, nor smell, nor speak, but I will close, and shu mine eyes and eares, and mouth, and nostrills, and will excecute no other offices than a meere heart should do; whereupon all hopes of reconcili∣ation upon that trust and wyes of satisacti∣on was soon nipp'd in the bud, and they all broke off in confusion with d hearts. The next day the Orators came to the house of Convocation, to know the Clergies resou∣tion in the businesse repeating unto the whole hous the words which the day before his Maj. had spoken unto some of them, and that over & over: and moreover, saying unto them, that if they should now oppose themselves a∣gainst his Maj. this businesse, it must needs de∣clare a grat mistrstulnesse which they had in the Kings words, seing he had made unto them so solemne and high an oath; which words of theirs pressed so home, and follow∣ed so close, with all the specious arguments, and fairest promises that could be imagined, stggered indeed some, but silnced all, ex∣cepting
him who is the subject of this History, who (after that he had earnestly required of the Lords to take good heed what they did, and to consider the manifold michiefs and inconveniencies that would nue unto the whole Church of Christ (if they should con∣descend to any such request) applying himself unto the Kings Orators, he spake thus unto them. It is true, the King was graciously pleased to protest thus and thus: What if the King should alter his minde, where is our remedy? What if the King will execute the Supremacy, must we sue unto the Head to forbeare being Head? Againe, this dignity is invested in him, his Successors will expect the same, and the Parliament will (questionlesse) anne that dignity to the Crowne: What if a Wo∣man should succeed to the Crowne, must she be Head of the Church? What if an Infant should succeed, can he be Head? This were not only (said he) to make the Church no Church, but the Scripture no Scripture, and at last Iesus to be no Christ. To the which sayings, the Orators re∣plyed, that the King had no such meaning▪ as he doubted (repeating againe his royall Protestation) and further said, that though the Supremacy were granted unto his
Mjsty simply, and absolutely, according to his demand; yet it must needs be under∣stood, or so takn, that he can hve no farther power or authority thereby, than quantum per legem Dei licet; and then if a temporall Prince can have no such au∣thority by Gods Lawes (as his Lorship hath declared) what needeth the forecasting of so many doubts? The Bshop of Rochester (perceiving the whole house to be much affcted with their manner of pleading, and fearing that they might desert him in the end, through ear and dread of the Kings displeasure) takes hold upon their last words, and thus speakes unto his Majestis Orators. Gntlemen, you think that herein we stand too stff upon our owne legs, but it is not so, but only in the defence of our owne, and your Mother, the holy Catholique Church, in whose bosome you are, as well as we; and the milk of whose Breasts it is your prts to suck as well as ours, and with∣in whose blssd Commuion there is but one Salvation, which is common uto all; wherefore, Gentlemen, let it be your care that our tendernesse in this point be not misconstrued to the King: and now, as to this demand, that his Mjesty, and you all,
may plainly see, that we shall (to please his Majsty) do the utermost of wha lie with∣in ou pwer in that ; let all that which his Majesty hath protested, and so solemnly taken his oth upon, be cordd, and the words quantum per lgm  be iner∣ted in the Grant (which is no otherw than what the King and you your selves have faith∣fully promised and protested) and for my part it shall be granted. Whereupon the Ortors went away as well , and made a report of all that had happened in the Convocation house unto the King▪ where∣at the King was highly offended, and said un∣to them. Mother of God, you have  petty prank, I thought to have made fooles of the, and now you have so ordered the businesse, that they are likely to make a foole of me, as they have done of you already: got unto them again, and let me have the businesse pssed without any quntum's, or tantum'; I will have no quan∣tum's nor no tantum's in the businesse, but lt it be done. Whereupon, immeitly they re∣turned to the Convocation house, calling and crying ou upon them with open and cotinu∣all clamour, to have the Grant pass absolute∣ly, and to credit the Kings honour, who had made unto them so solemne an oath and pro∣testation, falling into disputation with the Bi∣shops,
how farre a temporall Princes power was over the Clergie; but the Bishops soon disputed them into having nothing else to say, but whosoever would refuse to condescend to the Kings demands herein, was not worthy to be accounted a true and loving subject, nor to have the benefit of such a one. After which, no∣thing could prevaile, for then the Clergie an∣swered with unanimous consent, and full re∣solution, that they neither could, nor would, grant unto the King the Supremcy of the Church, without those conditionall words quantem per legem Dei licet, and so the Ora∣tors departed, relating unto the King all that had passed, who seeing no other remedy, ac∣cepted it with that condition, granting unto the Clergie a pardon for their bodies and goods, paying him 00000 l. which was paid every penny.
CHAP. XVII. 1. How Campeius related the whole businesse of the Divorce unto the Pope, and was blamed for the same. 2. The King send two Doctors of the Civil law with private Cmmissions to treat with the Pope about the Divorce. 3▪ The Pope solemnly ratifies the Marriage. 4. The Sentence it self. BUt we cannot well go on with our Hi∣story, except we fist arive our discourse within the gates of Rome, to observe what account Cardinall Campeius had given unto the Pope of all these proceedings, which was no otherwise than what had passed directly here in England, which being related to his Holinesse by the Cardinall, the Pope blamed him exceedingly, for that he had not over∣ruled Queen Katharine, to have waved her Appeale, whereby the businesse might have been determined within the Kings own Do∣minious; for which cause-ake he sent him thither. So slppery is the gound whereon Mnisters of state do set their feet in any busi∣nss,
that his businesse would doe right well, to make a separation between them by his de∣finitive sentence: the Pope demanded to see their Commission and Authority which they had to treat with him; they answered, that the Kig was by this time grown some∣what unruly, and that therefore what they did▪ they did it upon their own score, and for the love-sake which they bare unto the common good of the  Church, and for the peace and unity-ake thereof. Then the Pope demanded of them to see the Certificate under the Bshps , whereby it might appeare that they had so consented: to which they answered, that they had no such certificate for the present, but that they expected such a certificte daily to come unto them, together with a Commission to treat with his Holinesse. Whereupon his Ho∣linesse bad them expet. All this while the King was framing a new Model of a Church, and sent these men over on purpose, if it were pssible, to retard all proceeding at Rome, untill such time, as by a new court of Judicature, under a new Supre∣macy, the Marriage should have been adjud∣ged , bfore the Popes  of Ra∣tification (which was feared) should have made it good.
All which policies and workings here in England, you must not imagine them of Rome to be ignorant of. Wherefore the Pope takes the best and most substantiall advise that could be given him, and calls unto him, not onely his Cardinalls, &c. but the most able Canonists and Divines that could be heard of, and consults with the most famous Universities, procuring the censures of the most famous men that had written of this case; among the rest, the two books of the before-mentioned D. Tunstall Bishop of London, and this out Dr. Fisher Bishop of Rochester; (of which ast book (if you will believe that reverend and famous Clerk, Al∣phonso de castro) it is said of him to be the most excellent and learned of all other works) and at last, after diligent examination of the businesse,  himself in his Tribu∣nall seat, and open consistory, by assent and counsel of his , the Cardal, pro∣nounced this definitive  in the cause: The words begin as followeth▪
Clemens papa septimus.Christi nomine invocato, in throno ju∣stitiae pro tribunali sedentes, &c. which in English is thus. Pope Clement the seventh.We invocating the name of Christ, and having for our Tribunall the Throne of Iustice, and the glory of the Almighty God onely before our eyes; by this our definitive Sentence (which by the coun∣sell and assent of our venerable Brethren, the Cardinalls of the holy Church of Rome, assembled before us in consistory) we doe in these Writings pronounce, decree, and declare, in the cause and cau∣ses, lawfully devolved upon us, and the See Apostolique, by an Appeal (brought before us) of our welbeloved Daughter in Christ, Catharine, Queen of England,
from the judgements of the Legates, de∣puted by, and sent from us, and the see Apostolique, between the foresaid Queen Catharine, and our welbeloved Sonne in Christ, Henry the eight, the most illustri∣ous King of England, upon the validity and invalidity of the Matrimony between them, contracted and consummated, and upon other matters more largely deduced in the acts of such like cause or causes, and committed to our Son Paulus Capis∣suchus, then Dean of the Causes of our hly Palace▪ and in his absence to our re∣verend Father Symoneta Bshop of Pau∣saia, supplying the place of one of our Audtors of  said Palace, to be heard, intrustd and in our Consistory to be re∣pored▪ and by them to us; and the said , and maturely dis∣cussd dung the time of the matter , that the Matrimony cotract  the sad Queen Ca∣tharin and K. Henry of England, with all  of the same, was, and is, Canocall, and of good force,
and that they may and ought to enjoy to them their due effects, and that the sse between them heretofore born, or hereaf∣ter to be born, was, and shall be, lgiti∣mate, and that the oresad King Henry, ought is, and shall be ound and obliged, to cohabit▪ and dwell with the said Queen Catharine his lawfull wife▪ and to en∣treat her with all Husbandly affction, and Kingly honour; and that the said King Henry is condemned, and by all re∣medies of Law is to be restrained, and cmpelled as we do condemn constraine, and compell him, to accomplsh and ul∣fill all, and singular the premises ffctu∣ally; and that the molestatos and rfu∣salls by the foresaid King Henry, by any manner of wayes made to the said Queene Catharine touching the inalidty of the sid Matrimony, and alwaies from the beginning were unlawfull, and ; and that perpetuall silence  all the foresaid matters, and of the said Matrimony unto the said Henry, and
it; and that the said King Henry of England be condemned, and we doe con∣demn him, in the expences lawfully made before us and our said Brethren, in such case, on the behalf of the said Queen Ca∣tharine; the Taxation of which Expen∣ces we reserve to our selve till another time: So we have pronounced.This was published in the Pa∣lace of Rome, in open con∣sistory, the 23. of March in the year of our Lord God, 1534. Two men must be thanked for this (Wolsey and Fisher) and these two men must be met withall, whereby they may receive their pay∣ment: for the first, we leave him to his owne story, or some others on his behalf: The se∣cond is the subject of my pen, and how they found out him, the following Chapter must relate.
CHAP. XVIII. 1. The various rumour of the people concer∣ning the Divorce. 2. The History of the Holy maid of Kent. 3. Divrs persons of quality executed as traitors concerning her and the Bishop of Rochester, &c. convicted of misprision of Treason for the same cause. 4. A new Parliament called. 5. The Mar∣riage between the King and Queen Katha∣rine pronounced null by Archbishop Cranmer. 6. A new Oath made and tendred to both houses of Parliament, &c. all take it excepting the Bishop of Rochester. AT the time when the Kingdome began to be divided (when the King was a∣bout to make the Divorce between him and his wife, as the first act of his Supremacy) and to talk too busi, some in favour of the King, but most of the Queen: it happened, that one Elizabeth Barton, a young maiden borne in Kent, at a plac called Court, at Street, de∣clared unto sundry persons that she had late∣ly received certain Visins and Revelations,
concerning the Kings proceedings in this matter of Dvorce; and as sh thought, they came from God, and often falling into a trance▪ she would declare, how that the Kngs  away his wife would be a manes to bring in  Land, and that his wife, should never have cofot in any other; that whatsoever he did, yet the daughter of this Qeen should reign; and becuse he deprived  mother▪ the  Ca∣thol que Church, of so many chidren▪ all his childn should die , and himselfe comfortlesse, leaving an nominious name and fame  him to the wrlds end. To this and the like  she would tter words, which were too wonderfull to pro∣ceed ordinarily from so simple a reputed wo∣man. First, she communicated these Vsions, &c. to one M▪ Richard Mayster Parson of Al∣dington in Kent, whose Penitent she was. This Alington advised her to go to Mr. Ed∣ward Bocking Dr. of Dvinity, and a Monk of Christ-church in Canterbury; a man that was amous, both for Learning and Devoti∣on, who sent for one Mr. Iohn Deering, ano∣ther Monk of the same house; all these ad∣vised
her to go to the Archbishop of Can∣terbuy Doctor Warham, and to take his advse therein, and to follow his direction; who (as it was conceived, being conscious of the great ill-wll of the people which he had drawn upon hmself, by being so great a fur∣therer of the Dvorce, and of the inevitable changes and alterations in Rligion, which he then saw evidently to ensue rough his so much compliance with the King) shortly after discoursed with this Maid, died of grief. After whose departure from this life, the King (by vertue of his Supremacy) appoin∣ted ranmer to be Archbshop of Canterbu∣ry. This womans fame did so spread it self abroad over the whole Kingdome, as that she was resorted unto by multitudes of pople, and called by them the holy Maid of Knt, whose vertues were exceedingly exolled by the preachings of Mr. Henry Gold Bachelour in Divinity, and a learned man; Father Hugh Rich Warden of the riars Observants in Canterbuy, and Richard Risby of the same house; and having gone her Perambulation to the Charter-house of London, and Sheane, thence to the Nunnery of Sion, and thence to the Friars of Richmond, Canterbury, and Greenwich, at last she came to the King him∣self
and before him declared her minde fully and plainly (with whom, as she had quiet audience, so she had peaceable depar∣ture) at last she came unto the Bishop of Rochester, Dr: Iohn Adeson his Chaplain, and Dr. Thomas Bell, sometimes the Queenes Chaplaine, who, as a rarity, admitted her to come before them to heare what she would say, as all men else had done; and now (and not till now) was this businesse looked upon as a matter of dangerous consequence: the Kings Counsel were call'd together to consult about it, who were divided amongst them∣selves concerning her; some were for letting her alone, as knowing not what to make of her; others were for rigour and cruelty to be shewed against her: in the end forbea∣rance was laid aside, and severity was to take its place, which sentenced it to be a traiterous conspiracy between the Maid and some that were chief of the Clergie, to bring the King and his Government into contempt, and ha∣tred with his people, whereby to encourage them to tumults and insurrections: where∣fore the King sent for his Judges, and certain others which were servient to the Law, and propounded the case unto them, acquainting them with that which every one had done, desiring to know their opinions therein: who
sitting in long consultation, at last they made result, that Elizabeth Barton, Edward Boc∣kings, Iohn Deering Monks. Richard May∣sters, Henry Gold Priests. Hugh Rich, and Richard Risby Friars Minors, where all by the Law in case of high Treason, that my Lord of Rochester, Dr. Adeston, Dr. Abel, &c. bcause they were not the fist contrivers of the Matter, but concealers of the Thing, were only in the case of misprision of Treason, viz. losse of Goods, and imprisonment of their Bodies, during the Kings pleasure: and thus the King got the opinion of the Judges, but not so home (it was conceived) as he ex∣pected. This being done, all the forementioned persons, opin'd to be within the case of high Treason, were attached and carried to Lam∣beth before the new Arch-bishop (Cranmer) where, after they had been examined by him, & others of the Commissioners, and charged with Treason, Fiction, and Hypocrisie, Fase∣hood, Dissimulation, and Conspiracy, Tu∣mults, Rebellion, and Insurrection: they were all sent to the Tower. Thus the King got the parties into prison. Which being done, The King called a Parliament in the 25▪ year of his reigne, to be held at Westminster
upon the 15. day of Ianuary, where they were all attainted of high Treason, the Maid judged to b hanged and headd at Tyburne, the rest to be hanged and qurtered alive; the Bishop of Rochester, Dr. Adson, Dr. Abel Thomas, Register to the Archdeacon of Cant. and Eward Thwaites Gent. convi∣cted of misprision of Treason; of which conviction (being it was no more) the Bi∣shop of Rochester for that time, got himself cleared, paying unto the King three hundred pounds. A little before this Parliament sate, the Archbishop of Canterbury (Cranmer) had decreed (which decree was made at Dunsta∣ble) that the foresaid marriage solemnized between the King and the Lady Katharine, was clearly and absolutely against the Lawes of Almighty God, and that it ought to be accepted, reputed, and taken as of no va∣lue or effect, but utterly void to all intents and purposes; and that the Marriage which was to be had and solemnizd between the King and the Lady Anne Bullein, ought to be taken as undoubtedly true, sicere, and per∣fect; which Marriage (carrying with it the soveraign imfortunity of all second Marri∣ages) being compleated, the same Parlia∣ment enacted a Statue, which declared
the establishment of the Kings succession in the imperiall Crowne, to be upon the issue which he was to have by the present Queene Anne, ratifying whatsoever the foresaid Archbishop of Canterbury had decreed, and disinheriting the issue which the King had by the foresaid Lady Katha∣rine, from all title to the foresaid Crowne and Government; or that if any person of what state and condition soever, shall, by writing, printing, or any exteriour Act or Deed, procure, or doe any thing to the prejudice, slander, disturbance, or de∣ogation of the said Matrimony, or the issue growing of the same, every such per∣son shall be deemed and adjudged as an high Traitour, and suffer such punishment as in case of high Treason is provided; and for the better keeping of this Act, the Kings Majesty, together with his Counsel∣lours, of their owne authority, framed an Oth upon the breaking up of this Parlia∣ment (which was upon the 30. day of Mach) and tendred it the same day to all the Lords, both spirituall and temporall, as likewise to all the Commons, and was to be tendred to whom the Commissioners (for the same purpose) should call before them, the words of which Oath were these, viz.
Ye shall swear to beare Faith, Truth, and all Obedience, onely to the Kings Majesty, and to his heires of his body, and of his most dear and entirely beloved wife Queen Anne, begotten, and to be begotten, and further to the heires of our Soveraigne Lord, according to the limitation made in the Statute, for surety of his succession in the Crown of this Realm, mentioned and contained, and not to any other within this Realme, nor to any other forraign Authority, or Potentate what∣soever: and in case any Oath be made, or hath been made by you, to any person or persons, that then ye doe repute the same as vaine, and annihilate, and that to your cunning, wit, and utmost endeavours, ye shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the said Act of Succession: all the whole effects and in∣tents thereof, and all other Acts and Sta∣tutes, made in confirmation and for excuti∣on of the same, or any thing therein contain∣ed: and this ye shall do against all manner of persons, of what estate, dignity, degree, or condition soever they be; and in no wise do, or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be done, or attempted, directly, any thing, or things, privily, or openly, to the let, hindrance, danger, or derogation thereof; or if any part of the same, by any manner of meanes, or any
manner of pretences: So help you God, and all his Saints, and the holy Evangelist. Which Oath, all the Lords, both spirituall and temporall, took, except the Bishop of Rochester, who absolutely refused it: So the Parliament was ended. But The said Bishop had not been 4 daies quiet within his Palace of Rochester, but a Letter came to him from the Archbishop of Canter∣bury, together with other of the Commissio∣ners, willing him personally to appear before them in the said Archbishops house, by a cer∣tain day expressed within the Letter, all ex∣cuses set a part. And
CHAP. XIX. 1. The Bishop of Rochester summoned to appear before the Archbishop of Canterbury. 2. Sir Thomas Mor, and Dr. Wilson committed for refusing the Oath. 3. The Bishop of Rochester sent to the Tower for the same cause. 4. A Parliament is called, wherein the Bishops imprisonment was voted lawfull. 5. The Supremacy of the Church conferred upon the King, &c. by Act of Pliament, absolutely▪ and wout the fomer clause. 6. An Act  Parliament making i treason to deny the King to be supreme head of the Church. NOw was the thing come to passe, which was nohing terrible to him, because it was foreseen: wherefore he first makes his Will, and leaves severall Lgacies to divers persons and uses, as to Michael house in Cambridge, where he received his Education, to St. Iohns Colledge, to the Poore, to some of his  to all his Servants, whom
he leaves weeping behinde him, whiles the rest followed him (lamnting his condition) in his journey towards Lambeth. Passing thorough the City of Rochester, there were a multtude of pople gathered together, both citizens and countreymen, to whom he gave his benediction, riding by them all the while beheaded: some crying, that they should never see him again; others denouncing woes unto them that were the ocasions of his troubles; others crying out against the wickednesse of the times, and all of them lamenting and be∣wailing that whch was their miserie, and his glory: Thus he passed on his way till he came to Sutors hill, twenty miles from Rochester, on the top whereof, he rested himself, descen∣ding from his horse▪ and causing to be brought before him such victuals as he had caused to be brought thither for that purpose: he said, he would now make use of his time, and dine in the open aire while as he might: after which dinner he chearfully took his horse, and came to London the same night. The day of his appearance being come, he presented himselfe before the Archbishop of Canterbury (at Lambeth) the Lord Audely Chancelour of England, Thomas Cromwell the Kings Secretary, and the rest of the Com∣missioners, authorised under the great Seale
of England, to call before them whom they pleased, and to tender unto them the fore∣said Oath (then sitting at Lambeth) where, at the same tune, the Bishop met with Sir Tho∣mas Moore, who welcomed and saluted the Bishop in these termes, Well met my Lord, I hope we shall meet in Heaven: to which the Bishop replyed, This should be the way, Sir Thomas, for it is a very strait gate we are in. There had been Doctor Wilson, sometime the Kings Confessor, who, together with Sir Thomas Moore, had both of them refused the Oath a little before the Bshops coming, for which the Knight was committed for the present to the custody of the Abbot of West∣minster, as the Doctor had been formerly committed to the Tower of London; at which time also, the Clergie of London were war∣ned to appeare about the same businesse, who all of them took the Oath at the same time: Then was it that the Bshop of Rchester was called before the Archbshop, &c. who (put∣ting the Bshp in remembrance of the Act which was made by the late Parliament (whch had provided an Oth to be admini∣stred to all persons within this Ralm, con∣cerning the establshment of the Succession, &c.) how all the Lords, both spirituall and temporall, had taken the said Oath, onely
himself excepted, how grievosly his Majesty was offended with him therefore, how he had gven strict charge to himself and the rest of the Commissioners, to call him before them, and to tender unto him the Oath once more, presented unto him the Oath, laying it before him, and demanded of him what he would say thereto: the good man prusing it awhile requested that he might have some tim to considr upon it; the Commissioners consulting with themselves awhile, granted him five daies to cosider upon it, and so dismissing him for the present: whence he departed to his owne house in Lambeth Marsh. During which small time of his abode there, there came divers of hs friends, rather to take their leaves of, thn to vsit him: among which, one Mr. Seton, and Mr. Bransby, Sub∣stitutes of the Masters and Fellows of the two Cledges, to which he had shewed him∣self so much their friend, partly to salute him in the name of the two Societies, and partly to dsire his confirmation of their Statutes under his Seale which he had drawn long be∣fore; but the Bishop desired to have some further time to consider of them, as he inten∣ded; alas, said the two Gtlemen, we fear your time is now too short to read them be∣fore
you go to prison; It is no matter, said the Bshop, then I will read them in prison: that will hardly be permitted (said the Tru∣stees) if you come once there; then Gods will be done (said the Bishop) for I shall hardly be drawn to put my seale to that which I have not well considered of; howsoever (said he) if the worst should happen, there is Mr. Cowper (a worthy reverend man, and a Bachelour in Divinity) that hath the copy of the same Sta∣tutes, which I have, if I do not, or can∣not, according to my desire, peruse them, I will give it you under my Seale, that if you like them that shall be unto you a confirma∣tion; for I am prswaded, that one time or other, those Statutes will take place; and accordingly it hapned, for when this Master Cowper (long after the imprisonment and death of the Bshop of Rochester, and the change and alteration of the times, which had made Relgion, Lords, and Lawes, all new) commited this Book of Statutes to the custody of one M. T: Watson (a man that after∣wards came to great honor & estimation for his profound learning, & was afterwards ele∣cted to the Mastership o S. Iohn's Colledge, and afterwards to the Bishoprick of London who (as the Bshop of Rochester foretold) restored them to the house, who admitted
them as their onely Lawes whereby they were wholy governed, during the reign of Queen Mary. The time being come when the good Bi∣shop was to give an account of the Premi∣ses, he presened himself before the Com∣mssioners, cquinting them how that he had perused the Oath with as good deliberation as he could: but as they had framed it, he could not (with any safety to his owne conscience) subscribe thereto, except they would give him leave to alter it in some particulars, whereby his owne conscience might be the better satisfied: The King pleased, and his actions rather justified, and Warranted by Law. To this they all made answer, that the King would not in any wise permit that the Oath should admit any exceptions or alterations what∣soever, and (sd the Bishop of Canterbury) you must answer directly▪ whether you will, or you will not subscribe; then (said the Bishop of Rochester) if you will needs have me answer directly, my answer is, that foasmuch as my own conscience cannot be satisfied, I absolutely refuse the Oath. Whereupon he was imme∣diately sent to the Tower of London, which was upon Tuesday, the 26. of April in the year of our Lord God, 1534. and upon the 25. year of the Kings reign, being the last of his reign for that year.
Thus the Remora to the Kings proceedings (in this kind) being removed, the Ship went merrily along; for all things being fitted for a Parliament, there was a Parliament which was itted for all things immediately called, upon the 26. year of the Kings reign, and upon the 23. day of Novemb. which wrought above nine wonders, lasting but fifteen daies, wherein the Bishop of Rochester's imprison∣ment was voted lawfull, and all other men their imprisonments good and lawfull, that should refuse to take the foresaid Oath (which authority before was wanting) also another Statute was nacted, whereby the Su∣premacy of the Church of England was given unto the King▪ his Heires and Successors, to have and enjoy the same, as a title and stile to his imperiall Crown, with all Honours, Ju∣risdictions, Authorities, and Priviledges there∣unto belonging, with full power and au∣thority, as himselfe listeth, to visit, represse, redresse, reforme, order, correct, restraine, and amend all Heresies, Abuses, Errors, and Offences, whatsoever they were, as fully and as amply as the same might, or ought to be, done, or corrected, by any spirituall autho∣rity or jurisdiction whatsoever, and that with∣out the clause or condition of quantum per le∣gem Dei lieet, which was as contrary to the
Kings promise to the Convocation-house, as it was answerable to what the good Bishop forewarned the Clrgie of, whiles he amongst them. And thus whiles the Kng acted the Pope, the Bishop became a Prophet. This Act being once passed, the King re∣quired them to passe another Act, viz. That if any manner of Person whatsoever, should, by word or deed, presume to deny the title of Supremacy, that then every such person so offending, should be reputed and adjudged as an high Traitour, and suffer and abide such losses and paines, as in ases of high Treason is provided.
CHAP. XX. 1. The King sends divers learned Bishops to per∣swade with the Bishop of Rochester to take the Oath. 2. The Bishop of Rochester answers unto the Bishops. 3. Sir Tho∣mas Moore committed to the same prison. 4. The comfort which they received in each other. 5. Their lettters intercepted, and the Bi∣shops man committed to close prison therefore. 6. The simple, yet mrry question, which he ade thereupon. 7. The Lord Chancelour with divers other great Lords sent by the King to perswade the Bishop. BUt when that businesse came to be discus∣sed in the Parliament-house, the Com∣mons themselves began to think it a very hard Law, an full of rigour; for (said they) a man may chance to say such a thing by way of discourse, or such a word may fall from a man negligently, or unawares; all of them as yet not otherwise able but to think it a strange thing, that a man should die for say∣ing the King was not the head of the Church:
which debate held them many daies; at last the King sent them word, that except it could be proved that the party spake it mali∣tiously, the Statute should not be of any force to condemn: So the word MALICI∣OVSLY was put in, and it passed current∣ly, which afterwards served to as much pur∣pose, as the words Quantum per legem Dei licet. And During the Bishops hard and close impri∣sonment, the King (as he had at several other times so done) sent divers of the Privi-councel (as well Bishops as others) to per∣swade the Bshop of Rochester to take the oath of Succssion: after that the Bshop had suffered a great deale of Rhetorique to come from them▪ he thus spake unto them: My very good friends, and some of you my old acquaintance, I know you wish me no hurt, but a great deale of good; and I doe be∣lieve, that upon the termes you speak of, might have the Kings favour as much as ever. Wherefore, If you can answer me to one question, I will prform all your desires. What's that my Lord, said one, and all of them? It is this, said the Bishop, What will it gain a man to win the whole world, and to lose his own soule? Whereupon, after some little talk, to no purpose, they all left him; some
of them wishing (for their owne security) that either they had him in the same danger that they were in, or else that they were en∣dued with the same constancy of minde that he was of: Now the same God which refu∣sed him comfort in his Visitants, sent him the consolation of a fellow Sufferer, which was Sir Thomas Moore, the fame of the world, who was now sent to the same prison where he was, and for the same cause; whereat he seemed to conceive no small joy; to whom, as soon as opportunity would give leave, he sent (by his man) his most loving and heartly commendations, and received the like from him: between whom (to their comforts) there passed sundry Letters for a while▪ untill such time that there was notice taken thereof, and one of their Letters interceptd, and carried to the Kng Councel; which being read, although there was not in any part of least part of evil, yet was it taken in vil part; and a great charge was given unto their Keepers to restraine them from that librty. The Bshps man being clapt up  close prisoner, and threatned to be hanged (for carrying Ltters to Sir Thomas Moore) asked the Keeper if there were another Act of Par∣liament come forth, whereby a man should be hanged for serving his Master? Which co∣ming
from a man that was so noted for sim∣plicity, set them into such  laughter, that af∣ter a little examination, as how many Letters he had carried, &c. he was set at liberty, with a strict charge given him, that he should carry no more Letters. After the King had tried all other waies, he sent the Lord Chancelour Audely, together with the Duke of Suffolk, the Earle of Wilt∣shire, Secretary Cromwell, and divers others of the Councel, to the Bshop of Rochster, to certifie him of the new Law that was late∣ly made concerning the Kings Supremacy, and the penalty thereof to them that should gainsay it, or withstand it; and to know, in his Majsty's name, whether he would ac∣knowledge it (as the rest of the Lords, both spirituall and temporall, had done) or not: to which the Bshop, after some pause, replied unto them, My Lords, you present bfore me a two-edged sword for if I should answer you with a disacknowledgement of the Kings Su∣premacy, that would be my death; and if I should aknowledge the same▪ perhaps contrary to my owne conscience, that would be assuredly unto me worse than death; wherefore I make it my humble request unto you, that you would beare with my silence, for I shall not make any direct answer to it at all. Whereupon the
Commissioners were nothing satisfied, but urged him more and more to answer one way or other, directly telling him how dis∣pleasing such kinde of shiftings will appeare unto his Mjsty, how much the King was formerly displeased with his correspondence with Sr Thomas Moore; wherefore, said the Lord Cancelour, if you should now thus use him, you would exasperate his grievous in∣dignation against you more and more, and give him just cause to think that ye deal more stubbornly with him, than well becomes the duty of a good Subjct. To which the Bishop replied, That as con∣cerning the Letters which had passed between him and Sir Thomas Moor, he wishd with all his heart they were now to be read; which if they were (said he) tey would declare more innocence than hurt on our behalfe, most of them being onely friendly salutations, and encouragements to patience. Indeed I was a little curious (knowing the great learning and profound wt that is in the man) to know what answer he had made to the questions which were asked him concerning the Sta∣tute, which answers he sent unto me, as I had sent unto him mine: And this is all the conspiracy that was between us, upon that conscience which I suffer for, and will suffer
thousand deaths, before ever it shall be cal∣led upon by me to justifie the least untruth: And whereas you tell me, that his Majesty will be much displeased with me for this doubtful kind of answer: truly, my Lords, no man shall be more sorry for the Kings dis∣pleasure, than he that tells you he is srry to displease the King: but when the case so stands, that (in speaking) I cannot please him, except I displease Almighty God, I hope his Mjsty will be well satisfied with my si∣lence. Then said Mr. Cromwell, Wherein do you (more than other men, who have satisfid the Kings desires herein) think you shll displase Almighty God? Bcause (said the Bshop) I know how my own conscience dictates to me but do not how anothers may inform him. If your conscience be so setled, said my Lord Chancelour, I doubt not but you can give us some good reasons for it. Inde my Lord (said the Bshop) I think I am able to give your Lordships reasons that prhaps may seem suffi∣cient why my conscience stands affected as it doth and could be well contented that you heare them, could I declare my minde with safety, and without offence unto his Majesty, and his Laws. After which not a word more was spoken for that time; but calling for the Lieutenant,
they re-delivered him unto his custody, giving the Lieutenant a strict charge that no further conference, or messages, should pass between him and Sir Thomas Moore, or any other▪ All which being related to the King upon their returne to Court, the King swore they were all fooles, and asked them if there wer not more waies to the wood than one: they told his Majesty that they had tried all the wais that they could finde or think upon, advising his Majo to send some of his own Coat unto him, to perswade him further, as think∣ing it more proper for them: but the King swore Mother of God, both Moore and he should take the Oath, or he would know why they should not, and they should make them do it, or he would see better reasons why they could not; wishing them to see his face no more, untill it were done.
CHAP. XXI. 1. The notable slights which the Councel used to procure the two Prisoners (Fisher and Moore) to take the Oath. 2. The King sends the most grave and learnedst Bishops unto him. 3. How the Bishops Man set up∣on his Master to perswade him, after such time as the Bishops were gone, and could not prvaile with him. 4. Bishop Fisher is created Cardinall by Paul the third, Pope of Rome. 5. The Cardinalls Hat was sent as far as Callis. 6. The King sends to stop it from coming any further. THe Lords were by this time put to their trump, and to use their wits, how they might bring this thing to passe: wherefore the next morning they sent for Sir Thomas Moore to come to Court, and after they had kept them there three houre waiting upon them, they admitted him into their presence, and causing the Doore to be close shut, they discoursed
with him about half an houre, the main sub∣ject of the discourse being to perswade him to conformity, and compliance with the King in these demands, and to assure him how graciosly (thereupon) he should be received into the Kings favour, and accustomed good opinion of him: but all being in vain, he was deained in sfe custody within the Court, and a strict charg was given that he should not speak with any man and that none should be permitted to speak to him. This being done, it was given out, that Sir Thomas Moor had taken the Oth, so that all men believed it. This done, they sent for the Bshop of Ro∣chester the same day, and urged him very sorly to take the Oath of Supremacy, saying, that he (resting himself wholly upon Sir Tho∣mas Moore, by whose perswasion he stood out so stfly against the King) had now no reason but to do as he had done, who shew∣ing him now the way, they all expcted him to doe no otherwse than to folow the good example which he had given him, and be received unto the like grace and favour with the King, as his fellow-prisoner was at that time received: the good Bshop hearing as much befor, and now those Lords justify∣ing as much as he had heard, believed no less, an seemed to be much troubled thereat, and
sorrowfull for his sake; ut in the end, he thus spake unto the Lords, My Lords, I con∣fesse I am a little perplexed at that which you now tell me, which is no more than what I have heard already am exceeding sorrowfull that that courage should row be wanting to him which I once thought never would have failed him and tht constancy had not been an addition to all his other great and singular vertues: But I am not a fit man to blame him, in regard I was never assauld with those strong temptations of and childrn) the which, it
lodgings; and it was likewise given out, that the Bishop had subscribed to, and taken the oath of Supremacy, and that he was then conducted to the King to kisse his hand. In this interim, it hapned that Mrs. Mar∣garet Roper, (the darling daughter to Sir Thomas Moore, one that had much accesse unto the Lords by reason of her great friends and manifold perfections) was at the same time at the Councel doore, with a Petition in her hand, thinking to deliver it unto the Lords in the behalf of her Father, to procure him more enlargement within the Tower, than what he formerly had enjoyed; and hearing of her Fathers being there, was re∣solved to inform her self of the event of that daies Conference; which the Lord Chancel∣lour Audely perceiving, and knowing her businesse, went out unto her, and thus thought to perswade how the daughters thimble might prick a needle into the fathers consci∣ence, viz. Mrs. Roper, I am sorry I can doe you no more service, in that which you so earnestly solicite in your fathers behalfe: truly Mrs. Roper your father is to blame to be so obstinate, and self-will'd, in a businesse wherein no man in the whole Realm stands out but onely he, and a blinde Bishop, and yet that bishop was not so blinde, but at
the la, with much adoe, we have brought him to see his own error; with that Mrs. Margaret gave a spring for joy, and asked him, Are you sure that my Lord of Rochester hath taken the Oath? Yes, said the Lord Chancellour; and more than that, he is now with the King, and you will see him at liber∣ty, and in great favour with the King; then I will warrant you, said the poore Gentlewo∣man, that my Father will not hold out: Go, said the Lord Chancelour, and perswade your Father (that he doe not) before he be brought before us; for I wish him well, and it is a great pity that such a man as he should be cast away. Away goes Mrs. Margaret to her father, but could not be admitted to speak with him; back she comes to the L. Chan. and procures his warrant of admittance: in she comes unto her father, & tells him all that she heard with a great deal of confidence; when her father had heard all that she would say, he onely answered her with a soft voice, peace daughter, my L. of Rochester hath not taken the Oath: yes indeed father, it is so, said his daught∣ter, for my L. Chancelor told me as much with his own mouth, who wisheth you well, and my L. of Rochest. is at liberty, and is now with the K. and in great favour: Away, away, you foole, said Sir Tho: Moore, thou are not used to these
sights, I know the tricks of them all, they think to take me in a Poppet snatch, but they are decei∣ved; and I tell thee more, if the Bishop had taken the Oath, yet it should never be taken by me: A Bishop is a correcter of Vice, but no president for Sin. After they had had much talk to this, and no purpose, Sir Thomas Moore was sent for to appeare before the Lords, where he was no sooner entred the Room, but they all called upon him to do as my Lord of Ro∣chester had done before him; all of them using no other arguments, but my Lord of Rochester, my Lord of Rochester, as my Lord of Rochester had shewed him a good example; Sir Thomas Moor asked them where my Lord of Rochester was? saying, that if he could but speak with my Lord of Rochester, it may be his motives might induce him to take the Oath; they told him that my L. of Roch. was where he might also be, viz. with the King, if that he would do but as he hath done: May I not speak with him, said Sir Thomas Moor, before I take this Oath? They answered, that he should speak with him as soon as ever he had taken it, but to speak with him before, was not so proper, because then it would be said he pinn'd his judgement upon anothers sleeve, neither would they wish him to desire it, in regard that the King would then have
cause to thank the Bishop, and not him, for such his condescention; and besides, that would be too great a slghting of us that are here, in that you will not take our words for such a businesse: I pray you then, said Sir Thomas Moore, let me see his hand, if he have subscrbed: That said the Chancelour, is car∣ried also with him to the King: Then let me tell you, said Sir Thomas Moore, that I do not believe that my Lord of Rochester hath either subscribed his hand, or taken the Oath; and if he had done both, I could do neither. Whereupon they were both sent back to the Tower. The King (seeing these engines would not hold) betook himself to the advice which the Lords had formerly given him, and he reused to take, viz. of sending unto him men of his owne Coat, to perswade with him in this businesse; wherefore he sent for Dr. Stokesly Bishop of London; Stphen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester; Dr. Tunstall Bshop of Dur∣ham, and commanded them to repaire imme∣diately unto their Brother of Rochester, and see what they could do, and see they did it; for he would have it done. These men (know∣ing there was no mercy to be had, if they did not do their uttermost endeavour, at the least to give the King all manner of satisfaction
herein) went to the Tower and dealt heartily with the Bishop in that businesse. But before I will tell you what answer the Bishop made unto their importunities there∣in (that you may the better know the mise∣ries of those times) you shall first understand that these very men (after that this good man was dead and rotten) perceiving this Supre∣macy to exercise its authority more and more, untill at last it came to alteration of their Religion in point of Doctrine) would often weep most bitterly, and carelesse of themselves, wsh hat they had stuck to their Brother Fisher, and not to have left him wholly to mself, as wickedly they did, and not onely so, bu they would preach the same openly in their Pulpits, and upon all other oc∣casions, and times of meeting, and that bfore the Lords of the , and sometimes in the Kings hearing, which dw great commi∣seration from their hearers, and at last the Kng himslfe to serious animadversions of what he had , and at last to a rectificati∣on of what he  he had done amisse, by his  enjoyg of the six maine Ar∣ticls of  Rligon (which these Bi∣shops ) to be propounded unto al his Subjcts & to be subscribed unto, in which Religion the K. died, and in the reign
of K. Ew. 6. (when  Supremacy was held in a  over a childs head, being then  before the Kings Commissio∣ners, and  urged to proceed according to the fruits of those times) they did not one∣ly recant their former doings, but suffered themslves to be dprived of so great digni∣ties, and to endure the same prison, where, for the space of five years, they had no other comfort but the expectation of that Martyr∣dome, which might be an expiation to them of those errors, which fear and worldly va∣nity, had causd them to run into; which re∣signation of themselves so willingly into the hands of Almighty God, was answered with a mecy, which restored thm unto their former liberties, dignities, and honours, in the begin∣ning of the reign of Qu. Mary. But to return to my former story. When thee men had perswaded the good Bshop all they could, to do what their owne conscience tol thm should not hav been done, the good Bshp made them this reply. My Lords,  not  me so much to be urged so sorely n a  of this nature▪ as it doth wound me grievously that I should be urged by you, whom it concerns as much as  I but defend your cause, whiles you so plead against your selves; it would  become us all to stick
together in repressing the violences and inju∣ries, which daily are obtruded upon our holy mother the Catholique Church, whom we have all in common, than thus divided amongst our selves to help on the mischief: but I see judge∣ment is begun at the house of God; and I see no hope, if we fall, that the rest will stand; you see we are besieged on every side, and the fort is betrayed by those who should defend it: and since We have made no better resistance. We are not the men that shall see an end of these cala∣mities: wherefore I pray leave me to Al∣mighty god, in whom onely there is comfort, which no man can deprive me of; and for that you have so often told me of the Kings heavy displeasure agasnst me, I pray remember my duty to his Grace, and tell him, I had rather exercise the duty that I owe unto his Grace, in praying for him, than in pleasing him in this kinde. So they departed from him with hea∣vy hearts, and fad countenances, and never came unto him any more. Within a while after, that the Bishops were thus gone, the poore fellow (his man) that waited upon him, being somewhat sim∣ple, and hearing all the discourse, began to take his Master in hand, thinking he had not got reason enough to speak thus unto his Lord and Master, Alas my Lord, why should you
stick (said he) with the King, more than the rest of the Bshops, which are learned and godly men? Doubt ye not he requireth no more of you, but onely that you would say he is Head of the Church; and methinks that is no great matter; for your Lordship may still think as you please: whereat the Bi∣shop fell into such a fit of laughter, that he little thought he shld have laughed so much so long as he had a day to live: but the man taking courage at this, began to prosecute his begun discourse in a manner which he thought more serious, which the Bishop cut short with this composure of jest and ernest, Tush, tush, thou art but a foole, and knows but little what belongs to this businesse; but hereafter thou maist know more. Alas poore fellow, I know thou lovest me, and speakest this out of simplicity and love together; but I tell thee, it is not onely for the Supremacy that I am thus tossed and tumbled▪ but also for another Oath (meaning the Oath of Succession) which if I would have sworn unto, I believe I should never have been much questioned for the Su∣premacy; nor is it for these two that I stand out, but for the ensuing evills, that must necessarily follow hereupon: And this thou maist say ano∣ther day thou hast heard me speak. when I am dead and gone.
Upon the 21. of May, and in the yeare of our Lord 1535: Paul the third, Pope of Rome (hearing the fame of this good Bshops con∣stancy, and sufferings, in defence of the Ca∣tholique Church) at the solemn creation of Cardinalls in Rome, in the first yeare of his consecation (among divers other worthy and famous men) he nominated this good Bishop Fisher for one that should be made a Cardi∣nall, where, upon the same day before speci∣fied, he also was intituled, Sanct. Ro. Ecclesiae tituli Sancti vit. pretriter Cardinalis. This the Pope did for his great worth, and merits sake, thinking that by reason of the dignity and advancement of so high a degree of emi∣nence, that either the King would use him with more clemency for his dignity sake, or else that he might thereby heap further trou∣ble and danger upon the King, if notwith∣standing that dignity, he continued such his displeasure against him: and this was it that clean threw him over the perch, and brought him a fiery chariot to his journies end, whirl'd by all the furious winds of rage and madness; for upon the sending of the Cardinalls Hat to him from Rome, which was intended to have been prformed with the greatest ceremony that ever any Hat was sent from thence (ta∣king no notice of the condition he was in)
whereby it was conceived, that the King would reflect within himself, and take some heed how he offended so great a body as had the Universe for its Dimension: but it fell out otherwise, for Harry the 8. (for all the other Kings were called Henries) with his dagger, was resolv'd to go thorough stitch with what he had begun; wherefore, as soon as ever he had intelligence hereof, he sent immediately to Callis to stop the favour of the Pope, from coming any further into his Dominions, untill his pleasure therein was further known, which was done accordingly.
CHAP. XXII. 1. The K. sends his Secretary to the Bp. to know of him, that in case the Pope should send unto him a Cardinalls Hat, whether he would ac∣cept of it, or not. 2. The Bishops answer thereunto. 3. The King highly offended with his answer. 4. A notable, but most wicked policy, to entrap the Bishop within Delinquen∣cy. 5. A Commission to enquire and de∣termine Treasons. 6. Three Monks of the Charter-house executed. IMmediately hereupon, the King sent Mr: Thomas Cromwell his Secretary, to this good Father, thus in prison, to advertise him what was done, and to heare what he would say thereto; who (being come into the Pri∣soners chamber) after some other conference had passed between them, concerning divers other businesses, he said unto him, My Lord of Rochester, what would you say if the Pope should send you a Cardialls Hat, would you accept of it? whereat the Bishop of Roch∣ster replyed, Sir I know my self to be so far un∣worthy
of any such dignity, that I think of no∣thing lesse; but if any such thing should happen, assure your self I should improve that favour to the best advantage that I could, in assisting the holy Catholique Church of Christ, and in that respect I would receive it upon my knees. Mr. Cromwell making a report of this an∣swer (afterwards) to the King, the King said with great indignation, Yea, Is he yet so lusty? Well, let the Pope send him a Hat when he will, Mother of God he shall weare it on his shoulders then, for I will leave him never a head to set it on. And now was this impregnable piece of Constancy, and strong so  of Inocence, sur∣rounded on every side, by the most watchfull eyes, and diligent enquiry, how a breach may be made into it by the battery of the new Law, for prejudice to enter. In order to which Machination it was resolved upon (after that the blessed man had continued a prisoner (within the Tower) the space of a whole yeare, and somewhat more) that one Mr. Richard Rich (then Solicitor generall, and a man in great trust about the King) should be sent unto the Bshop, as from the King, upon some secret message, to be imparted to him on his Majesties behalf; which Message was to this effect, viz. that he had a great secret
to impart unto him from the King, which was a case of Conscience; for, said he, the truth is, my Lord, that though you are lookt upon (as you now look upon your selfe) as a man utterly forlorne, yet I must tell you, and not as from my self, but as a thing uttered to you by the Kings expresse commands, that there is no man within the Kings dominions, that he looks upon, as a more able man, or a man upon whose honesty and upright dealings he will more rely, than on your self, and what you shall be pleased to say in that bhalfe; wherefore he bids me tell you, that you should speak your minde boldly and freely unto me, as to him∣selfe, concerning the businsse of Supremacy, protesting upon his royall word, and the dignity of a King, that if he should tell him plainly it were unlawfull, he would never undertake it: And one thing more (said he) he wished me to acquaint you with, which is, that you may see how farre his royall heart, and pious inclination, is from the exercise of any unjust or illegall jurisdiction thereby, that if you will but acknowledge his Supremacy, you your selfe shall be his Vicar generall over his whole Dominions, to see that nothing
shall be put in execution, but what shall be agreeable both to the  of God, and good mens liking:  (saith he) the K. thinks that whiles  pople acknowledge any other Head besides himsel, his Crowne its not safe nor rightly upon his owne: Wherefore I pray, my Lord, since the King hath been so  pleased to open his breast unto you in these particu∣lars, that you will answer the respect with an ingenuity that shall be  to such high favour, and that without any the least suspition of any raud or guile intended to your good Lordship, either by him or me. The poore Bishop thinking he had as∣surance enough in conscience, when for Conscience-sake his opinion was required in such and such matters, answered thus freely. Worthy Sir, As to those high Commen∣dations which his MAIESTY (by your own mouth) is pleased to give me, I think them higher than what deservedly can stoop so low to take into due considera∣tion; so meane worth as that which every one must look to finde, that makes true search into me; however, according to the
ability and faithfulnesse which is resident in this poore piece of earth, I shall answer freely, and without feare of any other in∣tentions towards me, than what is just and honourable. As to the businesse of Supremacy I must needs tell his Majesty, as I have often told him heretofore, and would so tell him, if I were to die this present hour, that it is utter∣ly unlawfull; and therefore I would not wish his Majesty to take any such power or title upon him, as he loves his own soule, and the good of his posterity; for it will be such a president as none will follow, whiles all will wonder at it, and will never leave this Land till it lies buied with the first power that first assumed it: And to what purpose were it to make me his Vicar generall of his whole Dominions, to see that nothing were done contrary to the Lawes of God, when nothing is more contrary to Gods Law, than that I should be so? And as to his Majesty's conception of his Crown, not sitting rightly upon his head, whiles his people (as so many half Subjects) owne any other head besie himselfe; I must tell you, my Lord, that such a kinde of headship is no more prejudiciall to the tem∣porall Supremacy, than judgement (which is
the top of the soule) is inconvenient to the intellects: for I must tell you (my Lord) there were never any greater stayes, or sup∣porters to any Crown, than were your En∣glish Catholiques all along unto the Crown of England, and that even against all, or any the least encroachment offered or attempted to be made, even by the Bishop of Rome him∣self,Stat. King Rich. 2. as you shall find in the Sta∣tute Lawes of King Richard the second, where you shall finde (in many businesses wherein the Pope of Rome himself was interessed) the Roman Catho∣liques flatly denying the Crown of England (which they averred stoutly immediately to be subject unto none but God, and to other in all things touching the regality of the said Crowne) to be subject to the Pope of Rome, and yet the very same Parliament (said the Bishop) at the same time acknowledged the Bishop of Rome (in respect of his spirituall jurisdiction) to be their most holy Father. And This the Author assures the Reader to be taken notice of by Bshop Bilso,. Bils. in his true difference between Christian & Anti∣chriian Rebellion. part 3. pag. 243. 244. where he brings in this Parliament (consisting then altogether of Roman Catholicks)
thus expressing their loyalti to their Sove∣raigne Prince, viz. We will be with our said Soveraigne Lord the King, and his said Crown, and his Rgality in cases aforesaid, and in all other cases attempted against him, his Crowne and Dignity, in all points to live and di. Nor will I onely bring in your Protestant Bishops, but also your Protestant Chronolo∣gies of latest Editions averring the same, viz. Holinshead,Hol. in his second vo∣lume of the last e∣dition, p 309. b. line 66. where you may finde how in the reign of King Edward the first, all the Lords (then Ca∣tholiques, assembled a Lincoln in Parliament, in the name of all the Estates) did answer the Pope's right to judge &c. viz. that they would not consent that their King should do any thing that should tend to the disinhriting of the right of the Crown of En∣gland,Holins. ib. pag. 310. line 2. and that it was never known (where∣fore never practised) that the King of this Land had answered, or ought to answer, for their Rights in the same Realme, before any Judge, Ecclesiasticall, or Secular. And Yet notwithstanding all this, in their spe∣ciall Letter writ to the same Pope (Boni∣face) at the same time they thus wrote unto him.
Boniface,Ibid. p. 30. a. line 11. by Gods providence, high Bishop of the holy Roman, and universall Church, styling them∣selves his devout Sons, where (notwithstan∣ding all this) it consisted with their Devoti∣on, further, to affirme, that the King of England ought not to answer for any of their Rights in the said Realme, or for any of their Temporalties before any Judge Ecclesiastical, by reason of the free preheminence of the Estate of the Royall Dignity, and Custome kept without breach at all times, and after full treaty and delibe∣ration,Ibid. pag. 310. a. l. 11. it was consistent likewise with their devotion, to make it their common argument and una∣nimous consentIbid. pag. 310. a. l. 14. (which agree∣ment they said should be without faile in time to come) that their foresaid Lord the King,Ibid. pag. 311. a. l. 2. ought not by any meanes, to answer in judge∣ment, nor send any Proctors to the Popes presence;Ibid. pag. 311. a. l. 9. especially seeing that the premises tended manifestly to the disinheriting of the Crown of England, and also to the hurting of the Liber∣ties and Lawes of their Fathers, and the duties of their Oath made, which (said they) we will maintaine with all our power, and defend
with all our strength, and will not suffer our foresaid Lord the King, to do or attempt the premises, being so unaccustomed, and before not heard of. Nor will we onely bring you your owne Chronicles,Annotati∣ons upon the Rm. . cap. 13. 2. An. in 1 Pet. cap. 2. 13. but our owne Annotations upon our own Testaments, where you shall finde Catholiques acknowleging them∣selves bound in conscience to obey their Emperours and Governors, though they were Heathens and Persecu∣tors. Our greatest Champions,Bell. li. de aics. c. 10. & 11. where you shall finde Bellarmine himself maintaining how that the Lawes of Magistrates do binde even the consciences of Christians. Our strictst Casuists,of Dr. Keili∣son in his Survey printed 1603. p. 480. where you shall finde them averring how that Faith is not necessary to Iuris∣diction, and that Authority cannot be lost by the losse of Faith. Your own Protestant Apology for the Church of Rome,Tract. 3. sect. 5. written by I. Brerly An. 1608. though writ by us, yet made by you, where you shall finde the Roman Catholicks acknowledging them∣selves indissolubly bound by all
Lawes (Humane and Divine) in the highest degree of all earthly Allegeance, to the present temporall Government, notwithstanding at the same time, the Magistracy was adverse unto them in matters of Religion, and heavy upon them by reason of the same. Our owne submissions and protestations (in the vindication of our Loyalty to the tempo∣rall Magistrate) as the declared will of God in that behalf, where you shall finde us quo∣ting all these severall texts of Scripture out of the Word of God, to the same purpose,Exo. 22, 28 how that we ought not to speak evil of our Governours,Act. 23. 5. though they should perscecute us,Eccl. 10. 20 nor so much as to think amiss of them,Rom. 13. 2. but to be subject to them,Rom. 13. 5. and that not onely for necessity, but for conscience sake, lest otherwise we should be damned. Where should a man finde better Subjects? and yet these are the men who have been traduced all along, as inconsistent with poli∣tique Government. And why should the same Loyalty be suspected at any time, still to remaine within the same breasts, since that their Religion, Lawes, (both Civil and Eccle∣siasticall) Custome, Provision for the future, present Practise, Oathes and Protesta∣tions, all along, evermore obliging them to
such Obedience, especially whereas at this present, all other sorts and sects of christian Religion (excepting those who are for all sorts and sects) appeare against the present Government, like Aries, Scorpio, Leo, Sagi∣tarius, &c. as if they would all, and every one of them, wound each part and member of this body politique; the Roman Catholiques, like Pisces (the Emblem of the Fisherman) are contented to remaine quiet under foot. And this digression from the Subject we have in hand, I have presum'd to make, where∣by the courteous Reader may be more cour∣eous, if he please, to Roman Catholiques, seeing they have no such ugly features in their faces, as their adversaries would have them have, when the vizards are taken off, which they have clapt upon their faces; and there∣fore let not (hereafter) a few discoloured, powder-spiited, and inconsiderate men (a∣mong so many thousands (of the same Re∣ligion, and better quality) that were then ig∣norant of, and afterwards detesting the de∣signe as diabolicall) blow up a whole cause, so universall, or contract any tragicall, or immoderate application, for some few's sake, against the whole, any more than equity her selfe shall think it reason, that one Devil
shall be able to prejudice the dignity of the twelve Apostles, since that there hath not been all along (which way soever the Go∣vernment was adicted to one or other Reli∣gion) more faithfull, peaceable, and loyall Subjects, than were the Roman Catholiques excepting an exception which makes, but never marres a generall rule. What if this good Bshop had lived to see how in the daies of Queen Elizabeth, when she first took upon her the government of this Land (although that Catholiques were then the chiefest Ministers, both in Church and State, and had (at that time) the govern∣ment of both setled in that course, and there∣fore questionlesse were sufficient to have used any indirect, or sorcible meanes, if such kinde of loyalty had been consistent with their Re∣ligion, to have impugnd that alteration in Religion, then evidently foreseen to ensue) how the Catholique Bshops (although she was a Princesse of a contrary Religion) were so farre from holding their cro∣sirers over,Hol. vol 3. An. Eliz. 26. p. 1358 Ib. p. 1360. b. line 26. Ib l. 26. Ib. l. 35. Ib. l. 40. that they set the Crown upon her head (insomuch) that they are commended by Holinsheaa for peaceable and quiet Bshops) and the Catholique and temporall Lord there by him re∣corded
to be so farre from oppo∣sing themselves against her inte∣rest,Ib. l. 53. 54. &c. as that they are there said to offer her Majestie in her defence to impugne and resist any forraigne force, though it should come from the Pope himself, insomuch that they (also) are there commended by Holinshead himself for Loyalty and Obedience, and had seen how the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, himselfe,Holis. ubi supra, p. 1170. 2. l. 35. 36. and Chancellour of England (a Catholique Bshop) how instead of inveighing against her, or ca∣sting forth Libells against her Au∣thority (as Archbishop Cranmer did against Queen Mary, her entrance into the Government) he made a publique orati∣on in her behalfe, to perswade the people to Obedience, and acknowledge of her High∣nesse just Power and Authority, inso∣much that the said Archbishops faithfulness was left to the com∣mendation of a Protestant Bi∣shop,Goodwin in his Ca∣talogue of Bishops. adverse to him in his Reli∣gion, how all the Catholique Lords, and Catholique Bishops, repaired with all speed to London, to proclaime her Queene,Hol. ubi supra, p. 1170. l. 15▪ who not long after, turned them all out of their severall Offices and Bishopricks. And
On the contrary, how when Qu. Mary was to be invested in her right,As the Suffolk people, Sow in his Annals. p.  1046. Protestants would not re∣ceive her as their Queen, but up∣on Conditions; nor assist her with∣out Indentures; nor acknow∣ledge her but upon such and such termes;Sow An▪ printed 1592. p. 1039. and 1045. how Warre was waged against her by the Duke of Nor∣thumberland, a Protestant Duke; bills spread abroad, and severall treacherous practises contrived against her, & her Right and Dig∣nity,Stow. An. p. 1046. by Archbishop Cranmer, a Protestant Archbishop (for which he was afterwards arraigned and condemned of high Treason) what great commotions and insurrecti∣ons were made against her by Wiat upon the score of Religion;Stow. An. p. 1047. how Townes and Castles were taken and held out against her by Staf∣ford;Stow. ubi supra, pag. 1039. p. 1058. how daggers were thrown at, and gunnes shot off, at the Priests of her Religion, whiles they were preaching at Paul's Cross, insomuch that it is notorioslny evident, that there were more open Rebellions du∣ring the five years of her short government, than during the four and forty yeares of her
late Majesties after-reigne, and yet these, and such like men as these, are accounted Mar∣tyrs, whiles we onely suffered Martyr∣dome. Had this good Bishop, I say, lived to have seen, and to have observed all these particulars, how much more able would he have been to have answered Master Rich his Objection (from his Majesty) concerning the inconsistency of the Pope of Rome's spirituall, with his temporall Supremacy; but now both the Fish and the Fsher himself, is caught within the Net that was laid for him; for Mr. Rich was no sooner departed from him, but im∣mediately after the King commanded a Commission to be drawn, and given to Mr. Audely his Lord Chancellour, and certaine other persons commissionated under his great Seale, to enquire and determine Trea∣sons; which Commission was dated the first day of Iune, in the 27. yeare of the Kings reigne, against which time the Kings learned Councell, among the rest, had drawn up an Indictment of high Treason against the Bi∣shop of Rochester, and three Monks of the Charter-house of London, whose names were William Exmew, Humphrey Midlemore, and Schastian Nudigate. This Indictment was
not long in finding; for on St. Barnaby's day (the Apostl) being the 11. of Iune; it was presented to the Commissioners sitting in the Kings Bench at Westminster: whereupon the Carthusians were shortly after arraigned, and condemned; and having sentence of high Treason pronounced upon them, they were all three put to death at Tyburne, the 19. day of Iune next following, all in their Religious habits. But this good Bishop of Rochester (now Cardinall, if it be lawfull to call him so) chanced at that time to be very sick, inso∣much that he had likely to have saved the Commissioners, and divers others a great deale of paines, which afterwards they be∣stowed upon him, and it is conceived would willingly have spared, wherefore the King sent unto him his owne Physitians to admini∣ster unto him, to his great charges (as I have it in my Record) to the value of fifty pounds, onely that he might be eserved for fu∣ther riall. In the mean time, lest any con∣veyance might be made of his good remain∣ing at Rochter, or elsewhere in Kent, the King sent one Sir Richard Morison of his Pri∣vy chamber, and one Gostwick together with divers other Commissioners, down into that Countrey, to make seisure of all his moveable
goods that they could finde there; who be∣ing come unto Rochester, according to their Commission entred his house, and the first thing which they did, they turned out all his Servants, then they fell to rifling his goods, whereof the chief part of them were taken for the Kings use, the rest they took for them∣selves; then they came into his Library, which they found so replenished, and with such kind of Books, as it was thought the like was not to be found againe in the possession of any one private man in Christendom; with which they russed up, and filled 32. great fats, or pipes, besides those that were im∣bezel'd away, spoyl'd, and scatter'd; and whereas many yeares before he had made a deed of gift of all these books, and other his housholdstuffe, to the Colledge of St. Iohne in Cambridge (as in the beginning of this History it was mentioned) two frauds were committed in this trspasse; the Colledge were bereaved of their gif, and the Bishop of his purpose, yet both found out a way, through gratitude, to a reception; for the Colledge accepted the good will for the deed, and the Almighty received the giver for his good-will: and whereas a summe of money of 3001. was given by a Predecessor of the Bishop, to remaine as a Dpositum
for ever to the said See of Rochester, in the custody of the Bishop for the time being, against any occasion that might happen to the Bishoprick; to which this good B∣shop had added one hundred pounds out of his own purse, with this inscription upon a labell which hung out at the bags mouth, Tu quoque fac simile, and notwithstanding▪ that there was there written, in an old character upon the inside of the Chest, Let no man offer to lay hands on this, for it is the Churches Trea∣sure: yet they swept it all away. And I cannot omit (as a Scaene of mirth in this sad Tragedie) to relate unto you one merry passage, which hapned in this quaerendum, There was a wooden coffer strongly girded about with hoops of iron, and double lcked, which stood in his Oratory, where common∣ly no man came but himself, for it was his secret place of Prayer. This Coffer thus fen∣ced about, and in so private a place, and close unto him, every man beleived verily that some great Treasure had been stored up in that same Coffer, wherefore, because no indi∣rect dealing might be used in defrauding the King in a matter of so great consquence a this was thought to be, wherefore wit∣nesses were solemnly called to be present, so the Coffer was broken up before them, and
much paines was taken in breaking up th Coffer; but when it was open, they found within it, instead of gold and silver, which they looked for, a shirt of haire, and two or three whips, wherwith he used full often to punish himself, as some of his Chaplaine and Servants have often reported, that were neere about him, and curiously marked his doings; and other treasure than that found they none at all. But when report was made to him in his prison of the opening of that coffr, he was very sorry for it, and said, that if hast had not made him forget that, and many things else, ose things had not been to be found there at that time. After this good Bshop was recovered to some better strength, by the help of his Physi∣tians, and that he was more able to be carried abroad, he was on Thursday the 17. of Iune, brought to the Kings Bench at Westminster, from the Tower, with a huge number of Holberts, Bills, and other weapons, about him, and the Ax of the Tower born before him with the edge from him, as the manner is; and because he was not yet so well recovered that he was able to walk by land all the way on foot, he rode part of the way on horseback in a black cloth gown, & the rest he was car∣ried by water, for that he was not well able
to ride thorough for weaknesse. As soon as he was come to Westminster, he was there presnted at the Barre before the said Com∣missioners, being all set ready in their places against his coming, whose names were these, Sir Thomas Audely Knight, Lord Chancellor of England▪ Charles Duke of Suffolk, Hnry Earle of Comberland, Thomas Earle of Wilt∣shire, Thomas Cromwell Secretary, Sir Iohn Fitz. Iames Chief Iustice of England, Sir Iohn Baldwin Chief Justice of the Common∣pleas, Sir William Pawlet, Sir Richard Lyster Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir Iohn Port, Sir Iohn Spilman, and Sir Walter late Justices of the Kings Bench, and Sir Anthony Fitz∣herbert one of the Justices of the Common∣pleas. Being thus presented before these Commissiners, he was commanded, by the name of Iohn Fisher late of Rochester, Clerk, otherwise called Iohn Fisher Bishop of Roche∣ster, to hold up his hand, which he did, with a most cheerfull countenance and rare constan∣cy: then was his Indictment read, which was very long and full of words; but the ef∣fect of it was thus, that he maliciously, trea∣cherously, & falsly, had said these words, The King our soveraigne Lord, is not Supreme head in the earth, of the Church of England: and bing read to the end, it was asked him, whe∣ther
he was guilty of this Treason, or no? whereunto he pleaded, Not guilty. Then was a Jury of twelve men (being Free-hol∣ders of Middlesex) called to try this Issue, whose names were these, Sir Hugh Vaughan Knight, Sir Walter Langford Knight, Thomas Burbage, Iohn Nudygate, William Browne, Iohn Hewes, Iasper Leak, Iohn Palmer, Richard Henry Young, Henry Lodisman, Iohn El∣rington, and George Heveningham, Esquires, These twelve men being sworne to trie whe∣ther the prisoner were guilty of this Treason or no, at last came forth to gve evidence against him Mr Rich, the secret and close Messenger that passed between the King and him, as ye have read before, who openly, in the presence of the Judges, and all the peo∣ple there assembled, deposed and swore, that he heard the Prisoner say in plaine words, within the Tower of London, that he believed in his conscience, and by his learning he as∣suredly knew, that the King neither was, nor by right, could be Supreme head in earth of the Church of Engl. When this blessed Father heard the accusations of this most wretched & false person, contrary to his former oath & promise, he was not a little astonied thereat; wherefore he said to him in this menner: Mr. Rch, I cannot but mervaile to hear you come
in, and beare witnesse against me of these words, knowing in what secret manner you came to me; but suppose I so said unto you, yet in that saying I commited no Treason; for upon what occasion, and for what cause it might be said, your self doth know right well, and therefore being now urged (said he) by this occasion, to open somewhat of this matter, I shall desire, my Lords, and others here, to take a little patience in hearing what I shall say for my self. This man (meaning Mr. Rich) came to me from the King, as he said, on a secret message with commendations from his Grace, declaring at large what a good opinion his Majesty had of me, and how sorry he was of my trouble, with many more words than are here needfull to be recited, because they tended so much to my praise, as I was not onely ashamed to hear them, but also knew right well that I could no way deserve them; at last he broke with me of the matter of the Kings Supremacy, lately granted unto him by Act of Parliament, to the which he said, although all the Bishops in the Realme have consented, except your selfe alone, and also the whole Court of Parliament, both spiri∣tuall and temporall, except a very few; yet he told me, that the King, for better satisfaction of his owne conscience, had sent him unto me in this
scret manner, to know my full opinion in the matter: for the great affnce he had in me more than any other: he aded further, that if I would herein frankly and freely advertise his Maj. my knowledge, that upon certificate of my misliking, he was very like to retract much of his former doings, and make satisfaction for the same, in case I should so advertise him: when I had heard all his message, and considered a little up∣on his words, I put him in minde of the new Act of Parliament, which standing in force as it doth against all them that shall dictly say, or do any thing that is against it, might thereby ndanger me very much, in case I should utter unto him any thing that were offensive against the Law: to that he told me, that the King willed him to assure me on his honour, and in the word of a King, that whatever I should say unto him by this his secret messenger, I should abide no danger no perill for it, neither that any advn∣tage should be taken against me for the same, no, although my words were never so directly a∣gainst the Statutes seeing it was but a declara∣tion of my minde secretly to him, as to his owne person: and for the messenger himselfe, he gave me his faithfull promise that he would never utter my words in this matter to any man li∣ving, but to the King alone: Now therefore, my Lords, quoth he, seeing it pleased the Kings
Majesty to send to me thus secretly, under the prtence of plaine and true meaning, to know my poore advice and opinion in these his weighty and great affaires, which I most gladly w and ever will be, willing to send him in; methnks it is very hard in justice to heare the mssengers Ac∣cusation, and to allow the same as a sufficie testimony against me in case f Treason. o this the messenger made no direct answer; but (neither denying his words as false, nor confessing them as true) said, that whatever he had said unto him on the Kgs behalf, he said no more than his Majty commanded; and, said he, if I had said to you in such sor as you have dclared, I would gladly know what discharge this is to you in Law against his Majesty, for so directly speaking against the Statute; whereat some of the Judges taking quick hold one after another, said, that this message, or promise from the King to him, nether could, nor did, by rigour of the Law, discharge him; but in  claring of his minde and conscience agai the Su∣premacy, yea, though it were at the Kings own commandment or request, he committed Treason by the Statute, and nothing can dis∣charge him from death but the Kings par∣don. This good Father perceiving the small ac∣count
made of his words, and the favourable credit given to his accuser, might then easily inde in which doore the wind blew, where∣fore directing his speeches to the Lords his Judges, he said, yet I pray you my Lords con∣sider, that by all equty, justice, worldly ho∣nesty, and courteous dealing, I cannot (as the ase standeth) be directly charged therewith, as with Treason, though I had spoken the words indeed, the same being not spoken ma∣liciously but in the way of advice and coun∣sell, when it was requested of me by the King himself, and that favour the very words of the Statute do give me, being made onely against such as shall maliciously gainsay the Kings Supremacy, and none other: where∣fore, although by rgour of Law, you may take occasion thus to condemn me, yet I hope you cannot finde Law, except you adde rigour to th law to cast me downe, which herein I hope I have not deserved. To which it was answered by some of the Judges, that the word mlciously is but a supeous and void wod, for if a man speak against the Kings Supremacy by any manner of meanes, ta spakng to be understood, and taken in Law, as . My Lords, said he, if the Law be so under∣stood, then it is a hard exposition, and (as I
take it) contrary to the meaning of the that made the Law. But then lt me demand this question, whether a single testimony of one man may be admitted as sufficient to prove me guilty of treason for speaking these words, or no? and whether my answer, Nega∣tively, may not be accepted against his Affir∣mative to my availe and benefit, or no? To that the Judges and Lawyers answered (that being the Kings case) it rested much in con∣science and diecretion of the Jury, and as they, upon the evidence given before them, shall finde it, you are either to be acquitted, or else by jugement to be condemned. The Jury having heard all this sple Evidence, dparted (according to the order) into a secret place, there to agree upon the Verdict; ore they wnt from the place, the case was so aggravated to them by my Lord , making it so hainous and dan∣grous a treason, that they easily perceived what verdict they must returne; others heap such danger upon their owne heads, as none of them were willing to undergo; some other of the Cossioners charged this most re∣verend man with obstinacy and sgulaity, alledging, that he being but one man, did presumptuously stand against that which was in the gret Coucell of Parliament agd
upon, and finally was consented unto by al the Bshps of this Realme, saving himslfe alone. But to that he answered, that indeed he might well be accounted singular, if he alone should stand in this matter (as they said) but having on his part the rest of the Bshops in Chrttendorme far surmounting the number of the Bishops of Engl. he, said they, could not justly account him singular. And having on his part all the Catholicks and Bi∣shops of the world from Christ's Ascention, till now, joyned with the whole consent of Christs univerall Church, I must needs, said he, account mine own part farre the surer: and as for Ostincy, which is likewise obje∣ me, I have no way to cleare my self thereof, but my owne solemne word and promise to the contrary, if ye please to be∣live, it, or , if that will not serve, I am the same by my oath. Thus in effect he answered their objctions, though with many  words, both wisely and profoundy uttered, and that with a mervailous, couragious, and rare constancy, insomuch as many of his hearers, yea some of his Judges, lamented so grievously, that their inward sorrow in all sides, was expressed by the outward eares in their eyes, to perceive such a famous and revernd man in danger
to be condemned to cruell death, upon so weak vidence given by such an accuser, con∣trary to all faith and promise of the King himself. But all pity, mercy, nd righ, being set aside, ugour, cruelty, and malice, took place; for the twelve men being shorly re∣turned from their consutation, Verdict was given that he was  of the reason, which although they thus did, upon the menacing & threatning words of the Commissioners, the Kings learned Councell, yet was it (no )  ore against their conscience, as some o them would after report, to their dying daies, onely for safety of their goods and livs▪ which they were wel ssured to lose, in case they had acquitted him. After the Verdict thus given by the twelve mn, the Lord Chancellour commanding  to be kept▪ said unto the Prisoner in this ort, My Lord of Rochster, you have been here ar∣raigned of high reason, and putting your selfe to the triall of twelvmen you have pleaded not guilty, an  notwithstanding have found you guilty in their ; wherefore, if you have any more to say for your self, you are now to be  Iudgement according to the  and course of Law. Then said this blessed Faher againe, Truly my Lord, if that which I have before spoken be
not sufficient, I have no more to say, but onely to desire Almighty God to forgive them that have thus condemned me, for I think they know not what they have done. Then my L Chancellour framing himselfe to a solemnity in counte∣nance, proclaimed sentence of death upon him, in manner and forme following; You shall be led to the place from whence you came, and from thence shall be drawn through the city to the place of execution at Tyborne, where your body shall be hanged by the neck, half alive you shall be cut downe and throwne to the ground, your bowels to he taken out of your body before you, being alive, your head to be smitten off, and your body to be divided into four quarters, and after your head and quarters to be set up, where the King shall apoint; And God have mercy upon your soule. After the pronouncing of this cruell ser∣tence, the Lieutenant of the Tower, with his band of men, stood ready to receive and car∣ry him back again to his prison. Beore his departure he desired audience of the Com∣missioners for a few words, which being granted, he said thus in effect, My Lords, I am here condemned before you of high Treason, for deniall of the Kings Supremacy over the Church of England, but by what order of Iu∣stice I lave to God, who is the searchr both of
the Kings Majesty's conscience and yours. Ne∣verthelesse, being found guilty (as it is termed) I am▪ and must be, consented with all that God shall send▪ to whose will I wholly referre and sub∣mit my self. And now to tell you more plainly my minde, touching this matter of the Kings Supremacy, I think indeed, and alwaies have thought, and do now lastly affirm, that his Grace cannot justly claime any such Supremacy over the Church of God, as he now taketh upon him, neither hath it ever been seen or heard of, that any temporall Prince, before his daies, hath pre∣sumed to that dignity: wherefore if the King will now adventure himself in proceeding in this strange and unwonted case, no doubt but he shall deeply incurre the grivous displeasure of Al∣mighty God, to the great dammage of his owne soule, and of many others, and to the utter ruine of this Realme, committed to his charge, whereof will ensu some sharp punishment at his hand: wherefore I pray God his Grace may remember himself in time, and hearken to good counsell, for the preservaion of himselfe and his Realme, and the quietnesse of all Christendome. Which words being ended, he was conveyed back againe to the Tower of London, part on foot, and part on horseback, with a number of men, bearing holberts and other weapons about him, as was before at his coming to
raignment: And when he was come to the Towr  he turned him back to all his tra  had thus conducted him forward and  and said unto them, My Ma∣ster, I thank you all for the great labour and paines  with me this day, I am not able to give you any thing in recompence, for I have nothing left; and therefore I pray you accept in good part my hearty thanks. And this he  with so luty a courag, so amiable a countenance, and with so fresh and lively a colour, as he seemed rather o have come from some great feast, or banquet, than from his arraignment, shewing by all his gesture, and outward countenance, nothing else but joy and gladnesse. Thus being after his condemnation, the space of three or four daies, in his prison, he occupid himselfe in continuall payer most fervently; and although he looked daily for death, yet could ye not have perceived him one whit dismayed thereat, neither in word nor countenance, but still continued his for∣mer trade of constancy and patience, and that rather with a more joyfull, cheere, and free minde than ever he had done before, which appeared well, by this chance that I will tell you: There hapned a false rumour to rise sodainely among the people, that he should
b brought to his execution by a certain day▪ whereupon his Cook, that was wont to dres his dinner, and carry it daily unto him, hea∣ring, among others, of this Excution, dres∣sed him no dinner at all that day, wherefore at the ook's next repaire unto him▪ he de∣manded the cause why he bought him not his dinner as he was wont to doe: Sir, said the Cook, it was commonly talked all the towne over, that you should have died that day, and therefore I thought it but in vaine to dresse any thing for you. Well said he, merrily unto him againe, for all that report thou seest me yet alive; and therefore what∣soever newes thou shalt heare of me, hereaf∣ter let me no more lack my dinner, but make it ready as thou art wont to do; and if thou see me dead when thou comest, then eat it thy selfe: but I promise thee, if I be alive, I minde, by Gods grace, to eat never a bit the lesse. Thus while this blessed Bshop lay daily ex∣pecting the houre of hs death, the King (who no lesse desired his death than himself looked for it) caused at last a writ of Execution to be made, and brought to Sir Edmond Wal∣singham Lieutenant of the Tower. Bu where by his Judgement at Westminster he was con∣demned (as ye have read before) to Draw∣ing,
Hanging, and Quartering, as Traitors al∣waies use to be, yet was he spared from that cruell execution, wherefore order was taken that he should be led no further than Tower-Hill, and there to have his Head struck off. After the Lieutenant had received this bloody writ, he called unto him certaine per∣sons, whose service and presence was to be used in that businesse, commanding them to be ready against the next day in the morning: and because that was very late in the night, and the Prisoner asleep, he was loath to dis∣ease him of his rest for that time; and so in the morning before five of the clock, he came to him in his chamber in the Bell tower, fin∣ding him yet aslep in his bed, and waked him, shwing him that he was come to him on a message from the King, and after some circumstance used with perswasion, that he should remember himself to be an old man, and that for age he could not, by course of Nature, live long; he told him at last, that he was come to signifie unto him, that the Kings pleasure was he should suffer death that forenoone. Well (quoth this blessed Father) if this be your errand, you bring me no great newes, for I have long time looked for this message; I most humbly thank his
Majesty, that it pleaseth him to rid me from all this worldly businesse, and I thank you also for your tidings. But I pray you Mr. Liu∣tenant (said he) when is mine houre that I must go hence? your houre (said the Lieu∣tenant) must be nine of the clock: and what houre is it now (said he?) it is now about five (said the Lieutenant.) Well then (said he) let me, by your patience, sleep an houre or two, for I have slept very little this night. And yet to tell you the truth, not for any feare of Death (I thank God) but by reason of my great infirmity and weaknesse. The Kings further pleasure is (said the Lieutenant) that you should use as little speech as may be, especially any thing touching his Majsty, whereby the people should have any cause to think of him or his proceedings, otherwise than well: For that (said he) you shall see me order my self, as by Gods grace, neither the King nor any man else, shall have occasi∣on to mstke of my words. With which an∣swer the Lieutenant departed from him, and so the Prisoner falling againe to rest, slp soundly two houres and more. And after h was waked, he called to his man to help him up: but first of all he commanded him to take away the shirt of haire (which accusto∣mably he wore on his back) and to convey
it privlly out of the house, and instead there∣of to lay him forth a clean white sh, and all the best aparel he had, as cleanly brushed as may be: and as he was in array∣ing Abou nine of the Clock the Lieutenant came againe to his prisoner and finding him almost , said that he was come now for him. I will wait upon you straight (said he) as fast as this thin body of mine will give me leave. Then said he to his man, reach me my ppet to put about my neck. O my Lord, said the Lieutenant, what need you be so careful for your health for this little tme, being (as your self knoweth) not much above an houre? I think no otherwise (said this blessd Father) but yet in the mean time I will keep my selfe as well as I can, till the
very time of my execution: for I tell you truth, though I have (I thank our Lord) a very good desire, and a wlling minde, to die at this present, an so trust of his infinite mer∣cy and goodnesse, he will continue it, yet will I not willingly hinder my health, in the meant me▪ one minute of an houre, but still prolong the same as long as I can by such reasonable waies and meanes as Almighty God hath providd fr me. With that taking a little book in his hand, which was a N. Test. lying by hm, he made a Crosse on his fore∣head, and went out of  doore with the , being to weak that he was scarce able to go downe staires: wherefore at the  foo he was taken up in a chaire between two of the  and carried to the Tower gate, with a great number of weapons about him to be delive∣red to the Sherffs of London for executi∣on. And as they were come to the utter∣most prcinct of the liberty of the Tower, they rested there with him a space, till such time as one was sent before to know in what readinesse the Sheriffs were to receive him: during which space he rose out of his chaire, and standing on his feet leaded his shoulder to the wall, and lifting his eyes towards , opened his little book in his hand, and
said, O Lord, this is the last time that ver I shall open this book, let some comfortable place now chance unto me, whereby I thy poore ser∣vant may glorisie thee in this my last house; and with that, looking into the book, the first thing that came to his sight were these words, Haec est utem vita aeterna▪ ut cognoscant , so∣lum verum Deum, & quem  Iesum Chri∣stum. Ego te glorificavi supr terram, opius consummavi quod dedists mihi ut faciam: Et nunc clarifictu me,  apud &c. and with that he shut the book together, and said, Here is even learning enough for me to my lives end. And so the Seriff. being ready for him, he was taken up again among certain of the Sheriffs men, with a new▪ and much grea∣ter company of weapons than was before, and carried to the Scaffold on the Tower∣hill, otherwise called East-smithlt himselfe praying all the way, and recording upon the words which he before had read; and when he was come to the foot of the Scaffold, they that carried him offered to help him up the staires. But then (said he) nay Masters, see∣ing I am come so farre lee me alone, and ye shall see me shift for my self well enough, and so went up the staires without any help, so lively, that it was mervail to them th
knew before of his debility and weaknesse; but as he was mounting up the staires, the South-east Sun shined very bright in his face, whereupon he said to himselfe these words, lifting up his hands: Accedite ad eum, & il∣luminamini, & facies vestrae non consundentur. By that time he was upon the Scaffold it was about ten of the clock, where the Executio∣ner being ready to doe his office, kneeled downe to him (as the fashion is) and asked him forgivenesse: I forgive thee (said he) with all my heart, and I trust thou shalt see me overcome thi storme lustily. Then was his Gown and Tippet taken from him, and he stood in his Doublet and Hose, in sight of all the people, whereof was no small number assembled to see this Execution: there was to be seen a long▪ lean, and slender body, having on it little other substance bsides skin and bones, insomuch as most part of the beholders mervailed much to see a living man so farre consumed, for he seemed a very Image of Death, and as it were Death in a mans shape, using a mans voice; and there∣fore it was thought the King was something cruell to put such a man to death, being so neere his end, and to kill that which was dy∣ing already, except it were for pity sake to rid him of his pain.
When the innocent and holy Man was come upon the Scaffold, he spake to the peo∣ple in effect as followeth: Christian people, I am come hither to die for the faith of Christs holy Catholique Church, and I thank God hitherto my stomack hath served me very well thereunto▪ so that yet I have not fea∣red death; wherefore I desire you all to help and assist with your prayers, that at the very point and instant of deaths stroke▪ I may in that very moment stand stedfast, without fainting in any one point of the Cathol. Faithfree from any fear. And I beseech Almighty God of his infinite goodnesse, to save the King and this Realme and that it may please him to bold his hand over it, and snd the King good Councel. These, or the like words he spake, with such a cheerefull countenance, such a stou and constant courage, and such a reverend gravity, that he appeared to all men, not onely void of Feare, but also glad of Death. Bsides this, he uttered his words so distinct∣ly, and with so loud and cleare a voice, that the people were astonished thereat, and no∣ted it for a miraculous thing, to heare so plain and audible a voice come from so weak and sickly an old body, for the youngest man in that presence, being in good and perfect health, could not have spoken to be better
heard and perceived, than he was. Then after these few words by him uttered, he kneeled down on both, his knees and said certain Prayers, among which one was the Hymn of Te Deum Laudamus, to the end, and the Psalm In te Domine Speravi. Then came the Executioner, and bound a handkercheif about his eyes; and so this holy Father lifting up his hands and heart towards heaven, said a few prayers which were not long, but fer∣vent, and devout: which being ended, he laid his head down on the middle of a little block, where the Executioner being ready, with a sharp and heavy Ax cut asunder his slender neck at one blow, which bled so abun∣dantly, that many wondred to see so much blood issu out of so slender and leane a bo∣dy. As concerning the Head, the Executioner put it into a bag, and carried it away with him, meaning to have set it on the Bridge that night, as he was commanded. The Lady Anne Bullein (who was the chief cause of this holy mans death) had a certain desire to see the head before it was set up; whereup∣on, being brought unto her, she beheld it a space, and at last, contemptuously, said these or the like words: Is this the head that so of∣ten exclaimed against me? I trust it shall never
do no more harm: & with that, striking it upon the mouth with the back of her hand, hurt one of her fingers upon a tooth that stuck some∣what more out than the rest did, which fin∣ger after grew sore, and putting her to pain many dayes after, was nevertheless cured at last, with much difficulty. But after it was healed, the mark of the hurt place remained to be seen when her own head was not to be seen upon her shoulders. This may seem strange, as a rare example of cruell boldness in that sex, which by nature is fearfull, and cannot behold such spectacles, and therefore argueth (no doubt) a wonder∣full malice which she, by likelihood, bare to the holy man living, that could thus cruelly use his head, being dead. Then the Executio∣ner stripping the body of his shirt and all his clothes, he departed thence, leaving the head∣less carkasse naked upon the Scaffold, where it remained after that sort for the most part of that day, saving that one for pity and hu∣manity sake, cast a little straw over his privi∣ties; & about eight of the clock in the evening commandment came from the Kings Com∣missioners to such as watched about the dead body (for it was still watched with many hal∣berds & weapons) that they should cause it to be buried. Whereupon two of the watchers
took it upon a holbert between them, and so carried it to a Church-yard there hard by, cal∣led Alh: Barkin, where on the Northside of the Church hard by the wall, they digged a grave with their halberds, and therein, without any reverence, tumbled the body of this holy, Prelate, all naked and flat upon his belly, without either shirt, or other accustomed thing belonging to a christian mans buriall, and so covered quickly with earth. And this was done on the day of St. Albane the Pro∣omartyr of England, being Tuesday the 22. of Iune in the year of ou redemption 1535. and in the 27. year of the Kings reigne, after he had lived full threescore and sixteen years, nine moneths and odde daies. The next day after his burying, the head being parboyled, was pricked upon a pole and set on high upon London Bridge, among the rest of the holy Carthusians heads that suffered death lately before him. And here I cannot omit to declare unto you the miracu∣lous sight of this head, which after it had stood up the space of fourteen dayes upon the bridge, could not be perceived to wast nor consume, neither for the weather, which then was very hot, neither for the parboyling in hot water, but grew daily fresher and fre∣sher, so that in his life-time he never looked
so well, for his cheeks being beautified with a comely red, the face looked as though it had beholden the people passing by, and would have spoken to them, which many took for a miracle, that Almighty God was pleased to shew above the course of nature, in this preserving the fresh and lively colour in his face, surpssing the colour he had being alive, whereby was noted to the world the innocence and holinesse of this blessed Fa∣ther, that thus innocently was content to lose his head in defence of his Mother, the holy Catholique Church of Christ; where∣fore the people coming daily to see this strange sight, the passage over the bridge was so stopped with their going and coming, that almost neither cart nor horse could passe: and therfore at the end of fourteen daies this Executioner was commanded to throw downe the head in the night-time into the Rver of Thames, and in the place thereof was set the head of the most blessed and con∣stant Martyr, Sir Thomas Moore, his Com∣panion and fellow in all his troubles, who suf∣fered his passion the 6. day of Iuly next fol∣lowing. And touching the place of his buriall in Barkin Church yard, it was well observed at that time by divers worthy persons of the
nations of Italy, Spain and France, that were then abiding in the Realme, and more dili∣gently noted and wrote the course of things, and with lesse fear and suspition then any of the Kings subjects might or durst doe, that for the space of seaven yeares after his buri∣all, there grew neither leaf nor grasse upon his grave, but the earth still remained as bare as though it had been continually occupied and trodden. When by common fame this bloudy Exe∣cution was blown and spread abroad, straight way the name of King Henry begun to grow odious among all good people, not onely in his own Realm at home, but also among all forreign Princes and Nations abroad through Christendome, insomuch that Paul the third, then Pope of Rome, with great grief signified these doings by severall Letters to all the Christian Princes, openly detesting the out∣rage of King Henry, in committing such a wicked and manifest injury, not onely against the freedome and priviledge of the Church of Rome, but also against the whole state of Christs universall Church, for the which, in short space after, he pronounced the ter∣rible sentence of Excommunication against him. Likewise the most noble and christian Em∣perour
Charles the fifth, at such time as Sir Thomas Moore was beheaded, and word theof brought to him, sent speedily for Sir Thomas Eliot the Kings Embassadour, there with him, and asked him whether he heard any such newes, or no; who answered him that he heard no such thing: yes, said the Emperour, it is true, and too true, that Sir Thomas Moore is now executed to death, as a good Bishop hath lately been be∣fore: and with that, giving a sigh, said, alas, what meant the K. to kill two such man? for, said he, the Bishop was such a one, as for all purposes, I think the King had not the like agai in all his Ralm, neither yet was to be matched through Christendome, so that (said he) the King your Master hath in killing that Bishop, killed at one blow all the Bishops in England. And Sir Thomas Moore (said he) was well known for a man of such profound wisdome, cunning, and vertue, that if he had been towards me, as he was towards the King your Master, I had rather have lost the best City in all my Dominion than such a man. And in like manner King Francis the French King (though in some respects a man to be wished otherwise than he was, yet) tal∣king on a time with Sir Iohn Wallop the Kings Embassadour, of those two blessed men, told
him plainly, that either the King his master had a very hard heart, that could put to death two such worthy men, as the like within his Realm, whereof K. advertised, took it very ill at the King Francis, for  of him, saying, that he had don nothing but that himself was first made privy to it. In statute of his body, he was tall and comely, exceeding the common and middle sort of men; for he was to the quantity of fix foot in height, and being therewith very slender and lean, was neverthelesse upright and well formed, straight back'd, big joyn∣ed, and strongly sinewed, his haire by black, though in his later time, throug age and imprisonment, turned to hoarinesse, or rather to whitenesse, his eye large and round, neither full black nor full gray, but of a mixt colour between both, his forehead smooth and large, his nose of a good and even pro∣portion, somewhat wide mouth'd and big jaw'd, as one ordained to uttr much speech, wherein was, notwithstanding, a certaine comlinesse, his skin somewhat tawny, mixed with many blew vein, his face, hands, & all his body, so bare of flesh, as is almost ineredible, which came (rather as may be thought) by the great abstinence and penance he used upon
himself many yeares together, even from his youth. In his countenance he bare such a revrend gravity, and therewith in his doings exercised such discret severity, that not one∣ly of his equalls, but even of his Superiours he was honoured and feared; in speech he was very mild, temperate, and modest, sa∣ving in matters of God and his Charge, which then began to trouble the world, and therein he would be earnest above his accusto∣med order; but vainly, or without cause, he would never speak, neither was his ordinary talk of common worldly matters, but rather of Divinity and high power of God, of the Joyes of Heaven, and the Paines of Hell, of the glorious death of Martyrs, and strait I fe of Confessors, with such like vertuous and pro∣itable talk, which he alwaies uttered with such a heavenly grace, that his words were alwaies a great edifying to his hearers; he had such a continuall impression of death in his heart, that his mouth never ceased to ut∣ter the inward thoughts of his minde, not onely in all times of his exercise, but also at his meales; for he would alwayes say, that the remembrance of Death came never out of season: and of his own end, he would now and then (as occasion of speech was gi∣ven) cast out such words, as though he had
some fore-knowledge of the manner of his death; for divers of his Chaplaines and houshold servants have reported, that long before his death they have heard him say, that he should not die in his bed; but alwaies in speaking thereof, he would utter his words with such a cheerefull countenance, as they might easily perceive him rather to conceive joy, than sorrow thereat: in study he was ve∣ry laborious and painfull; in preaching assidu∣ous, ever beating down heresies and vice; in prayer most fervent and devout; in fasting, abstinence, and punshing of his lean body, rigorous, without measure. And generally in all things belonging to the care and charge of a true Bishop, he was to all the Bshops of England, living in his daies, the very mirrour and lantherne of light. One that was Dean of Rochester many years together, named Mr. Philips, in the daies of King Edward the sixth, when certaine Com∣missioners wre coming towards him to search his house for books, he, for eare, bur∣ned a large volume, which this holy Bishop had compiled, containing in it the whole story and matter of Dvorce, which volume he gave him with his owne hand a little be∣fore his trouble; for the losse whereof the Deane would many times after lament, and
wish the book whole againe, upon condition he had not one groat to live on. Pope Paul the third writing (as before is said) to the Princes of Christendome of the dealings of Kng Henry against this goodly man, wrote, among others, one Letter to Ferdinando King of Romans, which I my self have seen and read. In this Letter, after great complaint made of King Henry for killing of such a man, whom be before, for his great sanctity and vertue, had inrolled in the number and society of the Cardinall, hoping thereby that all should have turned to his better safety and deliverance, because that dignity in all places hath ever been a∣counted sacred, yet now falling ou: other∣wise, he taketh occasion to compare the do∣ing of King Henry the eight to the doing; of his Progenitors K. Hen. 2. and this holy Father he compareth, or rather preferreth, to the holy Martyr St. Thomas of Canterbury, saying, that his Kng Henry did not onely the impety of that Kng, but also went farre beyond him, for where he slew one, this slw many. St. Thomas defended the right of one particular Church, this of the Univer∣sall; that King killed an Archbishop, but this King hath put to death a Cardinall of the holy Church of Rom; that King exiled St.
Thomas by long banishment, but this King tormented this holy man by long & hard im∣prisonment; he sent unto S. Thomas certain hired men to kill him, to this was ssiged onely a hungman; he caused St. Thomas to be slin by a forcible death, but this by a shameful torment hath killed the holy man of God; he (in concusion) sought to purge himself before Alexander the third, and lay∣ing the fault upon others, did with humility, take upon him such , as was to him enjoyned by the Bshop of Rome; but this with a most obstinate inde, defended his own horrible fact, shewing himslf not onely unwilling to do penance, but also bcometh a stubborne and rebellious enemy against the Church of Rome. Then consider what that man of happy memory (Cardinall Poole) wrteth of him in sundry places of his works, who in his life time both knew him, and was familiarly ac∣quainted with him, but specially in that book which he wrote to King Henry the eight, in∣tituled Pro Ecclesiasticae Vnitatis defsione, wherein he extolleth the name of this bles∣sed Prelate, with words according to his great worthinesse, saying to the King, that if an Abassadour had bee to be sent from earth to heaven, there could not among all the
Bishops and Clergy so sit a man be chosen as he, for what other man (saith he) have ye presently, or of many yeares past had com∣parably with him in sanctity, learning, wis∣dome, and carefull diligence in the office and duty of a Bishop? of whom ye may just∣ly, above all other Ntions, glory and rejoice, that if all the corners of Christendome were narrowly sought, there could not be found out any one man that in all things did accom∣plish the parts and degrees of a Bishop equl with him. Further in the same place he lau∣deth him highly for his great travaile and care in the education of youth, especially of the young Students in the Uiversity of Cambr. for that by his onely mean and motion, that noble and right vertuus Ldy Margaret, Countesse of Richmond and Derby, sometimes his Mistress, erected two famous Colledges in that University (as before in this History hath been declared) wherein young Schollers re∣ceive great comfort toward their instruction in Learning unto which number himself be∣came also a very  and Father, and being after chosen by the whole consent of the University to the room of their high Chan∣cellour, he bame no less carefull over them than over the slock of his Diocess. All which, with many other high praises, this most ver∣tuous,
learned, and high-borne Cardinall set down very bountifully of him. Likewise blessed Sir T. Moor, his compani∣on and fellow in adversity and trouble, upon occasion of talk, ministred unto him by his daughter Mrs. Roper, about refusing the oath by my L. of Roch. & himself, saith in a certain Epistle to his id daughter, that he hath had him in such a reverend estimation, as for his wisdom, learning, & long approv'd vertue to∣gether, he reckoneth in this Realme no one man to be matched or compared with him. Furthermore, the renouned B. of Nuceria, and most elquent Historiographer of our time, P. Iovius, although he lacketh no com∣mendation of him throughout all his whole History, yet in one place specially he saith, that upon the acceptance of his great charge of a Bshoprick, he became so vigilant over his stock the space of many years together, that he was to be wondred at, not onely of his owne country people at home, but also of all other outward nations: then he greatly reverenceth him for his constant piety, in defending the Marriage between K. Hen. and his lawful wife Q. ath, and for withstanding the Kings wil∣full minde in taking upon him so absurdly the name & title of supreme head of the Church, for the which he did not refuse even in his
old age, to suffer the losse of liberty, livings, life, and all. Then weigh what is said of him by that most eloquent and learned Father Stanstau Hosmes, Bshop of Warima in Poland, and Cardinall of Rome, in his book of Confuta∣tion against Brentius the Heretique, his words being thus, Fatemur & nos Brnti, &c. wherein he sheweth very notably, how, al∣though in all ages Heretiques have lift up themselves against the Church of God, yet hath he not forsaken or left her destitute at any time. Neither hath God in these our unfortunate daies, failed his Church; for whereas you Lu∣therans are broken forth, and from you are sprung Zuinglius, Munserans, or Patimontans, and a number of Hereticks mo God hath pro∣duced against you into the battell, many wor∣thy men indued with singular wit, and excel∣lent learning, by whom your raging madness might be suppressed and put down. Among whom especially, and by name, was that fa∣mous holy man Iohn, Bishop of Rochester, who, in defence of the Faith, and Catho∣lique Church of Christ, never stuck for the loss of his life, and the shedding of his blood. Finally, whosoever shall read of Cocleus,
Wycelleas, Eckius, and others learned wri∣tings of Gerany, of the worthy Bishop and eloquent Writer, Osorius, of Alphonsus d Castro, and others of Spaine and Portugall, besides a number of such other learned Fa∣thers of many Nations, whereof some lived in his own daies, and some since, shall easily perceive that he was a man for his profound learning, and rare vertue, highly reverenced and esteemed thoroughout all Christen∣dome. And no doubt but if his writings and doings be well compared, ye shall find him most like those holy Fathers and Doctors, that in the Primitive Church laid the very first ground and foundation of our belief, upon the which we have since rested and stayed our selves, whom to describe wholly and fully unto you, according to his worthiness, I will not take upon me, neither am able to doe , yea were I as elequent as Cicro, or as witty and subtill as Aristotle, as copious as Demosthe∣nes, or as profound in Philosophy as Plato, such, and so innumerable were his singular vertues. But herein I will content my self with the generall commendation, which all the famous Universities of Divinity in Europe do give this learned man, by calling him blessed Mar∣tyr,
and alledging his works for great autho∣rity. Thus much I may also say, that unto Iustus his predecessor, the first Bishop of Ro∣chester, he was a just and true Successor; the place of his birth he doth greatly beautifie with the glorious Bishop St. Iohn of Beverly; to the Country of Kent, where he was Bishop, he is an ornament with St. Thomas of Can∣terbury; in gravity of his writing he is to be reverenced with St. Bede; for stout defen∣ding the right and liberty of the holy Church, against the power of Princes, he is not in∣feriour to the blessed Bishop St. Ambrose, and St. Crysostome; in praying for his ene∣mies and persecutors he resembleth holy St. Stephen; in constancy and stoutnesse of his Martyrdome he was a second Cyprian, and in the manner of his death to Iohn the Ba∣ptist. And now we shall observe the wonderfull working of Almighty God, whose judge∣ments are secret and strange in our sight, much to be marked and noted in him and his adherents; for as God of his own nature is patient and long suffering, because he expe∣ctth the amendment of our sinfull lives: so is he also just in his doings, and punsheth grievously, when no amendment is endeavou∣red, as now may well be perceived by those
perceive by those persons that were persecu∣ters of this blessed man; for they escaped not the danger of his heavy hand, as shall be de∣clared unto you. As first, to begin with the King himselfe, In quo quis peccat in o punitur, the Almighty (commonly) makes rods for our own sins, wherewith he often punisheth those that of∣fend him, as here most notably it is to be ob∣served in the three fold manner of his dis∣pleasure, which accused him to be so crul to this good man, that nothing but the punes of Death could satisfie his irfull indignation: As first for resisting his so inord  of changing wives. Secondly for his refusall to take the Oath of Succession, and his constant disapprovement of the unlawfull couses which he took to procure unto himselfe male. Thirdly for withstanding his Suprema∣cy in causes Eclesisticall. These were the three causes of his displeasure, which like a Trident he stuck into the breast of Inno∣cence▪ whiles the three pointed Sceptr made their severall entries within his own boome; for the first, he that robb'd so many breasts of the possssion of so great joy and happi∣nesse in being his through his desire of change, found change a robbery to his own hearts contentment in so many wives, which lawfully
were none of his, for of the six bells whereon he rung this change, two of them were repu∣diate, two beheaded, one wittingly killed, and the last so displeasing to him, as he had deter∣mined to have sent her to the Tower so far onward in her way to her Predecessors fates, had not his approaching death caused her to survive. As to the second, viz. the unlawful meanes which he took to have succession by his issue male, those females who he illegitimated, succeeded, and his issue male deceased, that they might succeed. As to the third, viz. his assuming (and ta∣ken upon him) the Supremacy of the Church (whose doings herein were neither approved by the Roman party (as monstrous in their opinions) nor by the Lutherans and Zuingl∣ans as different from theirs) but what the ho∣ly Martyrs conjectured; thereupon it came to passe, for, said he in the Convocation-house, (when this businesse was in scanning) the King desires that we would make him head of the Church; his successors will expect to be the like: what if his Successor should chance to be a child, or a woman, how shall we be go∣verned by such? and accordingly the Almigh∣ty, to shew us the ridiculousnesse of the usur∣pation, left him none but women and a
child to succeed him in that office; women that could not speak, and a childe that knew not how in the Church of God, till at the length he had neither male nor female to sit any more upon the Throne than in the Chair, Death having made all their hands (issueless) as unapt to sway the Scepter, as improper for the Keyes. Lastly, I shall produce before your eyes, his last will and Testanent, with some observa∣tions upon the same.
Henrici Octavi Testamentum. IN nomine Dei, gloriosaeque & bene∣dictae virginis Mariae dominae nostrae, totiusque sanctae societatis caelictum, nos Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Fran∣ciae & Hiberniae, defensor fidei; & in terris immediate sub Deo supremum caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae & Hiber∣niae, ejus nominis octavus: revocantes in memoriam magna dona & beneficia omnipotentis Dei nobis collata in hac vita transitoria, ipsi submisse himi∣limas reddimus gratias, agnoscentes nos ipsos protinus insufficientes ex ulla parte ad eadem beneficia promerenda aut compensenda: quin potius metu∣entes ne illa non digna receperimus: per∣pendentes ulterius apud nos ipsos, esse nos (ut & totum genus humanum) mortales, in peccato natos; cernentes nihilominus & sperantes, omnem Chri∣stianam creaturam in hoc transitorio
miseroque mundo viventem sub Deo, (dummodo in fide stabilita conetu & exerceat in hac vita si tempus habuerit, talia charitatis & pietatis opera quae scriptura injungit, quaeque ad Dei ho∣norem & beneplacitum faciunt) ordi∣natam esse ut per Christi passionem sal∣vetur, & ad aesrnam vitam pertingat, de quorum numero veraciter, confidi∣mus nos ipsos per Dei gratiam existere: Considerantes etiam unamquamque creaturam quanto fuerit sublimior sta∣tu, honore, & auctoritate in hoc saeculo, tanto esse obstrict orem, aut amer De∣um, eique serviat, & gratias agat, tanto∣que diligentius conari deberi ut bona opera charitatis faciat, ad laudē, hono∣rem & gloriam omnipotentis Dei; me∣moria etiam repetentes, dignitatem, honorem, regnum, & gubernationem, ad quae nos vocavit omnipotens Deus in hoc mundo▪ quoque haec, nos ipsi nec ulla alia mortalis creatura noverit tempus aut locum quando vel ubi pla∣cebit omnipotenti Deo nos ex hoc tran∣sitorio
saeculo evocare: Idcirco vo∣lentes & meditantes per Dei gratiam, ante nostrum ex eodum mundo transi∣tum, disponere & ordinare nostram ul∣timam mentem, voluntatem & testa∣mentum, eo modo quo confidimus gratum fore omnipotenti Deo, unico salvatori nostro Jesu Christo, & toti so∣cietati coeli ad satisfactionem etiam o∣mnium piorum fratrum in terra, adhuc integra perfectaque mente adhaerentes totaliter rectae fidei Christi ejusque do∣ctrinae, poenirentes de veteri detestabi∣lique vita, habentes perfectam volunta∣tem & mentem per ejus gratiam nun∣quam ab ea deflectere, quamdiu ulla memoria, spiritus aut interior cognitio fuerit in hoc nostro mortali corpore, humilime & cordialissime commenda∣mus & legamus animā nostrā omnipo∣tenti Deo, qui eam in su persona re∣demit pretioso corpore & sanguine suo in tempore passionis suae, & in plenio∣rem ejus rei memoriam relequit hic no∣biscum in ecclesia sua militante conse∣crationem,
& administratonem preti∣osi corporis & sanguinis sui, ad consola∣tionem nostram non mediocrem, si nos etiam ita gratanter accipimus, sicut ille gratanter, & quantum ex hominum parte est, immerenter, ad nostrum, non secu bonum illam ordinavit. Instanter eiam rogamus & obsecra∣mus beatam virginem Mariam, Dei matrem, totamque sanctam societatem coeli, ut continuo po nobis & nobis∣cum precentur quam diu in hoc mundo vivimus & in nostro transitu de illo, ut citius pertingamus ad vitam aeternam quam & speramus & vendicamus ex Christi passione, & verbo, quantum ad corpus meum, quod quando inde anima discesserit, manebit eadaver, at∣que ita ad vilem materiam unde factum fuerat, redibit: nisi locus & dignitas ad quam nos vocavit Deus, impediret; &  ne notemur quasi violatores huma∣nitatis, & bonarum consuetudinum, quando legi Dei non contrariantur: contenti sane essemus ut quovis in loco
peliretur Christianae sepulturae con su∣o, quantumvis vlis foret: cinis enim est duntaxat, & in cinerem reverretur: Nihilominus, quia non libenter volu∣mus populo nostro videri injuriam fa∣cere dignitati, ad quam Deus immeri∣tos nos vocavit, contenti sumus & per hanc nostram ultimam voluntatem ac testamentum volumus & ordinamus, quod hocce corpus nostrum terrae mandetur, & scpeliatur in choro colle∣gii nostri de Windesor, in medio spatio inter stalla, & summum altare, quodque fiat & collocetur, quam primum com∣modè possit post decessum no∣strum per exequutores nostros, & no∣stris sumptibus & expensis (si tamen per nos ipsos, in vita nostra non fiat) honorabile monumentū in quo ossa no∣stra requiescant guod monumentū jam pene consummatū est, cum cancellis seu cratibus pulchris circumpositis: in quo etiam monumento, volumus ossa, & corpus fidelis, & dilectae, conjugis no∣st reginae Janae simul poni: utque
projudeatur, ordinetur & fiat expensis sumptibusque nostris, aut exequutorum nostrorum si tamen in nostra vita non fiat) conveniens altare reverenter orna∣tum & instructum omnibus requesitis & necessariis ad missas quotidianas ibi∣dem decendas perpetuo, donec mundus perseverat. Volumus insuper ut se∣pulchra & altaria regis Henrici sexti & Regis Edwardi quarti, abavunculi & avi nostri fiant forma augustiori magisque principali & regali risdem in locis in quibus nunc sunt, idque nostris sumpti∣bus & expensis, & insuper voluntas no∣stra & specialiter desideramus atque re∣quitimus, ut ubi & quandocunque placuerit Deo nos vocare ex hoc mun∣do transitorio ad infinitam misericor∣diam, & gratiam suam, sive ultra Ma∣ria aut in quocunque loco extra no∣strum Angliae Regnum vel intra ipsum exequutores nostri quam primum com∣mode poterunt curent omne genus ser∣vitii divini, quod pro defunctis fieri so∣let pro nobis etiam celebrari idque in
proximo maximeque commodo loco, respectu illius in quo nos ex hac vita caduca decedere contigerit. Volumus praeterea ut quandocunque & ubicun{que} placuerit Deo nos vocare ex misera vita ista ad infinitam misericordiam & gra∣tiam suam, sive intra regnum sive extra ipsum, exequutores nostri quam pote∣runt pio, convenienti et celeri modo ordinent & procurent, corpus nostrum transferri & portari atque convehi ad praedictum collegium nostrum Winde∣sorae, quoque servicium Placebo & Di∣rige, cum concione, & missa postero mane, nostris sumptibus & expensis devote celebretur, & solemniter obser∣vetur▪ ut ibi terra mandetur & sepulia∣tur in loco disignato pro sepulchro seu monumento, ad eum finem faciendo: & haec omnia ut fiant devotissimo, quo fieri poterunt modo. Volumus & injungimus executoribus nostris, quatenus disponant & per viam eleemosinae distribuant pauperimis ma∣ximeque indigentibus personis quae
inveniri poterunt (exclusis tamen, quan∣tum ratio postulat, mendicis ordinariis) idque quam brevissimo intervallo post nostrum de hac vita transitoria disces∣sum, summam mille marcarum legalis monetae Angliae, partim quidem eodem ipso in loco, in quo placuerit Deo nos ad suam misericordiam evocare; par∣tim in itinere, partim in loco ipso se∣pulturae nostiae secundum quod ipsi discretius judicaverint ut populum cui hec nostrae elemosinae tribuentur, mo∣neant, ut Deum ex corde precentur propeccatis nostris & salute animae nostrae. Item volumus, ut quanta commode fieri poterit celeritate post nostrum ex hoc mundo transitum si in vita nostra id non fiat) Decanus & canonici liberae capellae nostae intra castrum Winde∣sorae habeant in maneriis, terris tene∣mentis & spiritualibus promotinibus ad annum valorem lexcentarum libra∣rum, ultra omnes alias expensas, iisdem assecuratum, successoribus eorum in perpetuum, sub his conditionibus se∣quentibus
& pro debita ad impletionem omnium conditionum inibi contenta∣rum, per formam indentaturae chiro∣grapho nostro subsignatae, quae transi∣getur per viam pacti & contractus in eundem sinem inter nos & praedictos decanum & canonicos in vita nostra, viz. praedcti Dcanus & canonici o∣rumque succssores in perpetuum habe∣bunt paratos duos presbieros qui Mis∣sas dicunt ad praeatum Altare in loco superius designato collocandum: & post decesrum nostrum celebrabunt quatuor solemnes obitus, pro nobis in praedicto Collegio Windesoae, cura∣buntque solemnem concionem haberi: & in unoquoque praedictorum obituum pauperibus donent decem libras (i. cen∣tum francos) quotannis in perpetuum, donent tredecim pauperibus, qui voca∣buntur equites pauperes unicuique duo∣dcim donarios (hoc est decem asses per diem, & semel per singulos annos unicui{que} togam talarem panni albi, ha∣bentem in pectore acupictam perisceli∣dem
seu garteriā cum cruce D. Georgii in scuto inclusam intra periscelidem & mantellam panni rubei: ut uni exllis tredecim, qui constituetur caput & re∣ctor aliorum, tres libras fex solidos & octo denarios (i. 33. Froncos & sex asses) ultra supraque predictos unicujus∣que diei duodecim denarios: uque omni dominica totius anni in perpetuū curent haberi concionem in castro Windesorae, sicut in praefata indenta∣tura, & contractu pleniùs & particula∣rius exprimetur. Volentes & onerantes & requirentes filium nostrum princi∣pem Edvardum, omnesque Exquutors nostros & consulatis postea nominan∣dos, omnesque haeredes nostios & suc∣cessores, qui hujus regni reges sunt, sicut se noverint responsuros co∣ram Deo in tremendo judici die, quat∣nus ipsi, & unusquisq psorum povide∣ant, ut praedcta indentatura & assecu∣ratio, inter nos & predictos decanum & canonicos transigenda & omnia in es contenta, debite mādentur exequutioni.
Observentur, & custodiantur in perpe∣tuum, juxta had extremam voluntatem nostram atque testamentum, &c. Reliquam testamenti partem in qua de successione disponebatur summatim recitat Sanderus in hunc modum: ut Edvardus filius ex Iana Seimera, novē natus annos primas omnium regnandi vices acciperit, secundas Maria x Ca∣tharina, tertias Elizabetha, ex Anna Bulleina postea his deficientibus ad illos transire successio ad quos jure cōmuni pertineret. Deinde impuberi filio sede∣cim constituit tutores & curatores pari potestate, cosque magna ex parte Ca∣tholicos, velut aristocratia quadam mo∣narchiam temperans. Demum valde mandavit ut filius in fide catholica edu∣caretur, excepto primatus titulo, quem ei reliquit & ut regnum ab haeresibus purgatum teneretur.
HE that had made void so many mens wills, had his own made void in every paricu∣lar. All those sixteen Counsellors which he had ap∣pointed to governt the Kingdome in his Son minority, either by threatning, exclusion, or imprisonment, were all of them forcd to give way to one, who wholly took upon him the go∣vrnment of the whole Kingdome; and he that took such care that his Son should have none to be of his Councill but such as should be Catho∣liques, had his will so performed, that there was one who took care that no Catholique should come  him; and when the heads of these gainsayers of his will were cut off, his Son was lft in tuition of such hands, as it was verily be∣lived, made his Son away, that they might set up one upon his thron, in opposition to his owne Daughter; the Religion wherein his Son was bred and commanded to be brought up in, was changed, his Lawes abrogated; and he that took so many unlawfull courses to obtain issue, had so many children, who all of them died issu∣lsse.
Next to the King I shall observe the punish∣ment of Almighty God, which lighted nea∣vily upon the Q. (Anne Bullein) the chief and principal cause of all this wofu Tragedie, who in a short space was suddenly thrown down from the top of all her high Dgnity and Honour (whose Glory was exalted upon this mans ruine) and for a most vil and abomi∣nable Incest committed with her owne bro∣ther, condemn'd and accused to be worthy of death by her owne fathr, together with di∣vers others of her own kindred, and the No∣bility then sitting in judgement, who, not long before, were her Idolaters, and she their Idoll; whereupon she was executed at Tower hill, her head being stricken off▪ of whose losse the King himself took such sor∣row, that the very next day after she was dead, he mourned for her in a Wedding gar∣ment. Next to the Queen we will call to minde M. Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, who of his own power, without any other warrant or authority, pronounced the sen∣tence of Divorce between the King and Queene (being calculated to the height of that Meridian) and afterwards called this holy man before him, and cast him into prison for refusing the two new Oaths, the one of
the Kings new Marriage▪ the other of the new Supremacy, from whence he was never delivered, till death rid him of all worldly . This Archbishop lived till he was con∣demned for a traitour, because he spred cer∣tain seditious Libels amongst the people, and assisted the Duke of Nortumberland in his Rebellion (in the behalf of the Lady Iane) against his lawfull Soveraigne. But foras∣much as this was done in Quen Mary her daies, and the Clergie had somewhat else to say to him, they burned him as a Here∣tique. As for Mr. Rich, the Kings Soliciter, and the Dequoy to this good man, who gave such strange and injurious testimony against him at his arrignment, he lived to be depo∣sed from all his high places and preferments, and fell into deep disgrace, not onely with the King his Master, but with those who af∣terwards sate at the stern in the young Kings time, insomuch that affiction brought him to understand, and the knowledge of himself to true repentance, so that it is to be believed that he escaped without any further punish∣ment than the clipping of his wings whilest he was alive, and the singing of his qody
when he was dead: for his dead body being laid into a coffi, seared & imbalmed, crtain candles that were set upon the hearse, through the watchers negligence, or absence, fell downe, and took hold first on the cloaths, and then upon the coffin, till at length came unto the sercloaths, that before any man could come unto the rescue, the fire was pre∣y onward in his way, to have deceived the worms. Lastly, we shall conclude with Mr. Crom∣well, a shrewd enemy to this good man, and a great Agent in this businesse; a man in whose behalf the Archbshop of Canterbury thus writ in his behalf in his Letter to the King, af∣ter his troubles had beginning. viz.—A man that was so advanced by your Majesty, whose surety was onely by your Majesty, who loved your Majesty no lesse than God, who studied al∣waies to set forward whatsoever was your Ma∣jsties will and pleasure, who cared for no mans displeasure to serve your Maiesties, who was such a servant, in my judgement, in wisdome, di∣ligenc, faithfulnesse, and experience, as no Prince in this Realm ever had the like, who was so vigilant to preserve your Maiesty from all treasons, that few could be so secretly conceived but he detected the same in the beginning; such
a man, that if the noble Princes of memory, King John, Henry the second, Richard the second, had had such a Councellour about them, I suppose they should never have been so treacherously abandoned and overthrowne, as those good Princes were. Who shall your Grace trust hereafter, if you mistrust him? Alas, I bewaile and lamet your Grace's chance herein▪ I wot not whom your Grace may trust, &c. And for this fidelity, ability, and good service, advanced successively to the dg∣nities of the Master of the Rolls, Biron, Lord Privy Seale, Knight of the Grter, Earle of Essex Lord high Chamberlaine of England, and higher than all this, Vcar generall of the Church of ENGLAND, by vertue of which Office he took place above them, who were Metropolitanes of all England, and yet notwthstanding he was arrested at the Councell ble of high Treason by the Duke of Norfolke, when he least suspected any such desige, committed to the Tower, brought hence unto the Hill, and (without being per∣mitted to plead for himselfe) there be∣headed without any more adoe. But the strangest thing of all, is, that he that was
the King Vicegerent in spirituall causes should be accused for an Heretique, and that made one of the causes of his death, and that that was such a great enemy to the Catholiqus (kicking downe all the Re∣ligious houses of the Lnd, and grinded the Religious together with the rubbsh un∣der his feet) should at his death openly profess that he would die in the Catholick faith. Thus we see Gods justice in the dstru∣ction of the Churches enemies; who knowes but that he may help her to such friends, though not such as may restore her her own Jewells, yet such as may heale her of her Wounds? And who knowes but that it may be affcted by the same name, sithenc the Almighty hath communicated so great a secret unto mortalls, as that there should be such a salve made known to them, whereby the same weapon that made the Wound, shoud work the Cure? Oliva Vera is not so hard to be construed; Olivrus, as that it may not be believed, that a Prophet, rather than a Heruld, gave the Common Fther of Christendom, the now Pope of Rome (Innocent the tenth) such Ensignes of his Nobility (viz.  dove
holding an Olive branch in her mouth) since it falls short in nothing of being both a Prophesie, and fulfilled, but onely his Highnesse running into her armes, whose Emblem of innocence beares him already in her mouth. FINIS.
