h943a 99827638 32061
The Dreadfull Character of a DRUNKARD. Or, the most odious and beastly Sin of DRUN∣KENNESS described and condemned. Shewing the fearful Judgements that have befallen notorious Drunkards: with brief Exhortations to perswade men from that Swinish and abominable Sin. The tenth Edition, by Andrew Jones, a lover of Sobriety 1 Cor. 6.10. Drunkards shall not inherit the Kindome of Heaven. London, Printed for Eliz. Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner. 1663.
Courteous Reader. THere is lately published an excellent and profitable Sermon, called, The Christians blessed Choice. Likewise Christs first Sermon. Also Christs last Sermon: And the Christians best Gar∣ment. Also Heavens Glory, and Hells Horror. And the School of Grace. Also, A warning-piece to the Sloathful, Idle, Careless, Drunken, and Se∣cure Ones of these last and worst of times. Very godly Books, and are but three pence price. Likewise, 1. Englands Faithful Physician. 2. Dooms-day at hand. 3. The dreadful character of a drunkard. 4. The Fathers last Blessing to his children. 5. The sin of Pride arraigned and condemned. 6. The Plain Mans Plain Path-way to Heaven. 7. The Black Book of Conscience. 8. Peters Sermon of Repentance. 9. The Charitable Christian. 10. Death Triumphant. All very necessary for these licentious times, and each of them being but of two pence price. They are to be sold by Elizabeth Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner.
The Dreadfull Character and Condition of a DRUNKARD. Habakkuk 2.15, 16. Wo to him that giveth his neighbour drink, that puttest thy bottle to him, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayest look on his nakedness. Thou art filled with shame for glory, drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered; the cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spewing shall be on thy glory. THe Prophet Habakkuk in the foregoing verses of this chapter, having denoun∣ced several woes against several evils and reigning sins, as cruelty & covet∣ousness, he coms here in this verse to denounce a sad woe against that most odious and abomi∣nable sin of Drunkenness; a sin too too much abounding in these our dayes. Woe (saith the Prophet) to him that giveth his neighbour drink. The word in the original is, Wo to him that drin∣keth to his neighbour; that is, with an intent to make him drunk, as the following words do de∣clare,
That puttest thy bottle to him, and makest him drunk also: The word in the original is, that puttest thy poison to him; discovering to us the great evil that is in overmuch drinking, it poisons the soul, and makes the whole man un∣serviceable both to God and man. Now that I may discover unto you the odi∣ousness of this beastly, swinish, and abominable sin of Drunkenness, I shall first set forth unto you the nature and condition of this filthy evil, and thereby shew you what it is: in the next place (God willing) I shall endeavour to set forth unto you the odiousness of this beast-like sin; and then give you some further discoveries thereof, in shewing you, First, how this sin of Drunkenness is hurtful both to our own and other mens souls. 2. How it is offensive and displeasing to God, and odious to good men. And then 3. I shall shew you how it wounds and destroyes both our good names, our credit, our estates, yea, our all in this life, yea, and (without the great mercy of God) how it will bring everlasting horror and confusion upon us both in soul and body to all eternity in the life to come. And then fourthly and lastly, I shall give you some few (but fearful Examples) of Gods heavy wrath and vengeance executed up∣on notorious Drunkards even in this life, and so conclude in a word or two of Exhortation.
Drunkenness is a flattering devil, a sweet poison (as one saith) and a delightsom sin, which who so delighteth himself in, is not himself, but a common shame even to nature it self, and perpetual disgrace to mankinde. And men may be said to be guilty of drunk∣enness, when they take in either wine or strong drink beyond measure, so as there follows an intoxication of the powers of the soul; and this Drunkenness is a sin that procures miserable plagues and sorrows both to the soul and to the body, inflaming the blood with unnatural heat, from whence comes Dropsies, Consumptions, and cold diseases, with untimely deaths: so that many by drinking Healths to others, have drank away health from themselves; a most abominable practice. Secondly, drunkenness confounds the memo∣ry, dulls the understanding, distempers the bo∣dy, defaceth beauty, & hurts the minde: for the heat and brain being the mediate instruments of the soul, and by drinking distempered and in∣flamed, and thereupon ariseth wicked imagina∣tions, disordered and unruly affections; from whence also cometh stinking breaths, redness of eyes, weakness, woes, sorrows, wounds, and contentions, and such like, being the fruits thereof, as Solomon saith, Pro. 23, 29 30. In the 29. ver saith he, Who hath woes? who hath sor∣row?
who hath contention? who hath bablings? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes? They (saith he, v. 30.) that tarry long at the wine, they that go to the mixt wine. 3. Drunkenness corrupteth the blood, drown∣eth the spirits, and beggars the purse. The Drunkard (saith Solomon, Prov. 23.21.) shall come to poverty. And further, it inricheth the carkass with Surfets and Dropsies, and turns the very Blood into water, and the very Soul into froth, swinishly disanimating the understanding pow∣er of the same. 4. Drunkenness causeth vomiting and filthi∣ness, of which the Lord himself complains by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 21.7, 8. speaking of the Priests, he saith, They also have erred through wine, and through strong drink are they out of the way; the Priests & the Prophets have erred through strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink, they erre in vision, they stumble in judgement. For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is no place clean. Now the evil of this abominable sin of drun∣kenness I shall here set forth unto you in these three things, First, as it respects God. 2. As it respects other men. 3. As it respects the drun∣kards themselves. And first, as it respects God, and so the sin of drunkennes makes men forget
God and his laws, Hos. 13.5, Prov. 31.4, 5. saith Solomon, drinking of wine and strong drink makes men forget both the laws of God and man. 2. Drunkenness is Idolatry, it sets up another God, which is a most notorious sin, Phil. 3.19. Whose God is their belly, saith the Apostle, The Babylonians had Bell for their God, a God of Brass, but drunkards and gluttons make their Bellies their gods, gods of flesh; their whole thoughts, cares, and endeavours, are onely to please their bellies, their whole course of their life is nothing else but a filthy delight in drink∣ing and swilling to please their base lusts: they are Belly-gods which love good liquors, who serve their Bellies; as St. Paul saith, Rom. 16.11. The Rabbins were used to say, that he was a Belly-god that drank a quart of Wine. We have many such amongst us, and do not they that drink healths upon their knees sacri∣fice it to those they drink to, and thereby make gods of them. 3. Drunkards abuse the good creatures of God, which they should use to the honour and glory of God; these they abuse in the maintenance, pleasing, and pampering of their own base sensual Lusts and pleasures, which are bitter enemies to God and his truth, and ought to be mortified, 1 Cor. 10.31. saith S. Paul, Whether ye eat or drink, and whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. What glory hath
the Lord when men make swill-tubs of their bellies, and so over-satisfie themselves with drinking, that they are unfit for motion, either for God or men, and fit for nothing but to sléep? 4. Drunkenness is a sacrilegious robbing of God of his Worship. You know we are com∣manded to honour the Lord our God, and to serve him with all out hearts, and with all our might, and with all our strength; but when men have over-cram'd themselves with meat, and over-liquored their filthy Carcasses with inordinate drinking; how unfit then are these men thus distempered with drink for the wor∣ship and service of God? their heads are either too heavy or too light, and their hearts are dull and drowsie, and God may have the drunken carkasses, but as for their hearts and spirits, they have none then for God; they are then fit for nothing but the devils drudgery, Hos. 4.11. There the Prophet saith, Wine and new wine take away the heart; excess or overmuch either in eating or drinking, causes defects in the ser∣vice of God: and as for such persons, God may have a little bodily worship and lip-labor from them, a few drowsie sleepy performances; but as for spiritual heavenly service and worship, that is not to be had of them, though the Lord be a Spirit, most Wise, most Holy, most Great, and most Glorious, who will be worshipped,
if acceptably, in Spirit and in Truth. Secondly, for the evil of drunkenness, as it respects others. First of all, drunkenness makes men forget the condition of others; those that give themselves to this evil of Drunkenness minde not at all the estate or condition either of Church or State, let come what will come so they may have drink enough, their pipes and their pots, it matters not what becomes of other. The Prophet saith, Amos 6.4, 5, 6. They eat the lambs out of the flock, and calves out of the midst of the stalls, they drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with chief ointments; but they are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. 2. Drunkenness doth excéedingly wrong and impoverish the poorer sort: drunkards and glut∣tons are like caterpillers and locusts, which de∣vour that which should maintain and relieve other: did not men exceed so much in eating and drinking as they do, there would be more plenty, and more cheapness, and more relief for the poor then there is; for one drunken beast devours more then would very well refresh and satisfie a hundred poor people that lie in want and misery. I dare confidently aver it for truth and I do verily believe it, that if the poor might have but one quarter of what is spent sinfully, and superfluously in rioting and drunkenness, I believe, nay, I am confident, I say, that we
should sée no Beggars in our stréets, nor hear any to complain for want of bread at our doors. There is a generation, (saith Solomon, Pro. 30.14.) whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw-teeth like Knives, to devour the poor from oft the earth, and the needy from among men. And such are the téeth and jaw-téeth of drunkards and gluttons; they make both bread and drink dear. 3. Drun∣kards wrong the chastity of others: who make more lustful attempts, or commit more fouler acts of uncleanness, then those that delight themselves in drunkenness? Fulness of drink bréeds fulness of sin and fulness of lust; intem∣perancy begets incontinency, and after rioting and drunkenness, follows chambring and wan∣tonness, Rom. 13.13. When Lot was filled with wine, then was he fit for incest, Gen. 19.31, 32, 33. And the drunken Sodomites, of whom the Text speaks, were guilty of most horrible un∣cleanness. 4. Drunkenness gives evil exam∣ples to others, they draw in others to follow their own most evil and abominable filthy pra∣ctice to intemperancy, in eating and drinking, which is a very great evil, 1 Pet. 4.14. They think it strange (saith the Apostle) that you run not with them to the same excess of riot. There is a very great inclination in the hearts of men na∣turally to follow others in eating and drinking excessively; they will not onely go, but run to
it; a little invitation will serve the turn, they need not to be asked twice: therefore Solomon counselleth his son, Prov. 22.20. not to keep com∣pany with wine-bibbers. One drunkard poisons another with his sin, and men are as it were poisoned by the evil examples of others. 5. This abominable sin of Drunkenness brings down heavy Iudgments from God, Isa. 5.12, 13. there the intemperancy of the people is first set down, and then the Iudgements that followed thereupon: They rose up early, and sate up late to follow after strong drink, as too too many now adays do; from the bed to the Alehouse, & from the Alehouse to bed again: but verse 13. be∣hold the Iudgements of the Lord upon them; Therefore saith the Lord (because of their exces∣sive drinking) my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge. Their Gluttony and drunkenness made them both senseless and sensual, & their honourable men are famisht, & their multitude is dried up with thirst: a most sad (but suitable) judgement. So likewise Bel∣shazzar, he feasts and revels with a thousand of his Lords; and that very night when he was in the midst of his jollity, he was deprived of his Kingdom, and himself also slain; as you may sée Daniel 5. He drank Wine and praised the Gods of Silver, and Gold, of Wood, and of Brass, and that very night did the Lord cut him
off, So 2 Sam. 13. Amnon being drunk was slain by Absaloms servants. Through drunken∣ness Benhadad with 32. other Kings were by the Israelites overcome, 1 Kings 20.11. So likewise David, a man after Gods own heart, 2 Sam. 11.13. made Uiah drunk, thinking there∣by to have covered his horrid sin of Adultery, for the which he sorely smarted afterwards. So Herod, Mat. 14. in his drunken banquet cau∣sed John the Baptist to be beheaded; and what became of him, he was deposed, and dyed miser∣ably in his exile. So the Iews, Isa. 5. drunk till they were thirsty, and then Hell was prepared for them. Through drunkenness even righteous Lots daughters lay with their father, & so two cursed Nations sprang from their loins, Gen. 19.31. Through drunkenness Nabals heart dyed within him, 1 Sam. 25.36. Through drunkenness the Philistines (Judges 16.25. making sport to themselves with poor Sampson) had the house pulled down about their ears. Thirdly, the evil of this most odious sin of drunkennes, as it respects the drunkards them∣selves, consists in these five things. 1. It hurts their souls. 2. Their bodies. 3. The whole man. 4. It impoverisheth their estates. And 5. it dis∣graces their names, and staineth their credit even in the world. And first, for the soul, drunkenness clouds and
infatuates the understanding, blindes the mind, and besots the spirits, Isa. 21.7. The Priests & the Prophets erred through wine, and through strong drink were they out of the way; the erre in visi∣on, and stumble in judgement. Drunkards drown both their wits and their senses in the Ale-tubs. 2. Drunkenness disorders the Affections; by overmuch drinking the government of Reason is laid asleep: and so the affections grow disor∣derly, & then wanton lusts, lascivious thoughts and desires travel up and down the Region of the Soul, and over-power and disorders the af∣fections, 2 Pet. 2.13, 14. 3. Drunkenness hin∣ders the activity of gifts and graces in the soul: when a man is over-laden with any burden he cannot move nimbly; so when men have over-laden themselves with too much drink, more then they can well bear, they are altogether unfit for service either for God or man; they are then fit for nothing but to sleep. 2. Drunkenness is hurtful for the bodies of men: overmuch and excessive drinking bring∣eth sickness, and is destructive to health▪ almost all the diseases which men have, come from the abundance of ill humours in the body, and from whence comes these ill humours, but from in∣temperancy either in eating or drinking: take men that are moderate and sparing in the use of the Creatures, and they are seldom troubled
with any disease. Sobriety is the best friend  health, and a greater enemy it hath not the drunkenness, 1 Cor. 11, 29, 30. The Corinthi∣ans were excessive in their eating and drinking and what saith S. Paul of them? For this cause (saith he) ver. 30) many among them were sick and weak. So Hos. 7.5. With bottles of wine the Princes had made the King sick. 3. Drunkenness is hurtful to the whole man, as 1 by drunkennes a man is brought into bon∣dage under the Creatures which God hath gi∣ven him, if he had grace to use them aright, do∣minion over them. Drunkards are under the ty∣rany & bondage of their pots and cups, they are slaves to their drink. 2. By drunkenness men become worse then the very beasts; the bruit creatures all, unless dogs or swine, will nei∣ther eat nor drink more then what serves to sa∣tisfie nature, neither can you perswade or force them to take more; But drunkards they drink not to satisfie, but to surfeit nature, Prov. 23.35. When the Drunkard was beaten he felt it not. Drunkenness bereaves men even of common sense: The horse and the Ass may teach the drunkards wit, if they had but grace to consider when they are sober. 3. Drunkenness hastens death. Many I am perswaded might have lived longer, if they had lived more soberly: drun∣kenness shortens mens dayes. Drunkards drink
healths to others, but drink away health from themselves. Many dye by the Sord, but many more by surfeiting and drunkenness: the Co∣rinthians excess in drinking sent many of them to their long homes, 2 Cor. 11.30. Drunkenness either abreviates or takes away the lives of men: How many have come to untimely ends in their drink? how many are there too too often killed by men in their drink, and destroyed; one Drunkard kills another when he is drunk, and so brings himself to the Gallows when he is so∣ber. How many Casualties do there daily hap∣pen to men in their drink? Many a Drunkard hath killed himself in his drink: some I know that have drowned themselves in their drink: and others by falling have broke their necks in their drink as they were going home. Drink makes men desperate and valiant for the De∣vil, but if they repent not, they shall wish they had béen more sober when they are in hell. 4. Drunkenness makes men very secure and fear∣less. Come (said those Drunkards in the Pro∣phet) we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Drunkards do not consider that when they are at their Cups, they are at the Devils work, and dancing about the very brink of hell. Ships that are heavy laden sink deep into the Water, but it over-laden they drown them∣selves;
so men that are over-laden with drink▪ sink déep into the sea of carnal security, and for ever hazard the drowning of their souls in hell. Luke 21.34, 35. saith our Saviour, speaking of the end of the world; If your hearts be over-char∣ged with surfeiting & drunkenness, that day will come upon you unawares, even suddenly as a snare. 5. Drunkenness is such a sin as indangers mens eternal estates hereafter: yea, and cer∣tainly without repentance, excludes men from coming to heaven. Be not deceived (saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.) neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor thieves, nor covetous nor drunk∣ards shall inherit the kingdom of God. The rich Glutton you know, Luke 16. was cast into hell, that was his portion. The Apostle saith, Gal. 5.21. They that do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. What things? Why drun∣kenness and revillings; which saith the Apostle, are fruits of the flesh, and without repentance, will for ever cast mens souls into hell: for no drunkard that lives and dyes in his sins, shall ever inherit the kingdom of heaven. 4. This cursed filthy sin of drunkenness de∣stroyes the estates of men; it consumes them to nothing, as Solomon saith, Pro. 23.31. The drun∣kard and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags Many by drunkenness & gluttony, rioting and revilling
in their youth have brought themselves to ex∣tream poverty in their age; many in their youthful dayes have so consumed their Estates in pleasing and pampering their lustful appe∣tites with Drink, that in their old age they wanted a piece of bread to eat; and then instead of feasting and rioting, they have been forced for want to fast and lament for their first abuse of the good creatures of God. The Prodigals excess among the Harlots brought him to want among the Swine. He, said Solomon, Pro. 21.17. that loveth wine and oyl shall not be rich; that is, he that loveth and delighteth in them exces∣sively shall never be rich, but shall come to poverty. 5. Drunkenness wrongs both the names and professions of men; intemperance brings an ill report upon men. Noahs Drunkenness was a great disgrace unto him. Prov. 28.7. saith So∣lomon, He that is a companion of riotous men, shameth his father; and if it be ill then to be com∣panions of such persons, how ill is it then to be a drunken person? Drunkards shame both themselves & their fathers, of whom men may say, and that truly, That he is a Belly-god, a méer toss-pot. The Prophet saith, Isa. 28.28. All tables are full of vomit and filthiness; so that there is no place clean: what a disgrace was this to those Prophets and Priests? Drunkenness is
a night work: They that are drunken (saith the Apostle, 1 Thes. 5.7.) are drunken in the night; it is a work of darkness, and it needs must dis∣grace a man. Who will believe or give credit to what a drunken man says. I beséech you then in the name of Christ, and as you love your own souls, your goods, and good name, take heed of this beastly sin, and avoid it: as our Saviour saith, Luke 21.34. Take heed (saith he) to your selves, lest at any time your hearts are overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness. Let us (as the Apostle saith, Rom. 13.13.) walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness; let us not be intemperate: why should we pamper up and please our vile bodies, which must shortly dye and become meat for the worms. The Apo∣stles rule is, Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. I shall now briefly show you some few, but fearful Examples of Gods judgements execu∣ted upon notorious Drunkards, and so I shall conclude. On the eighth of February, in the Year 1578. a company of Drunkards, whose name are re∣corded as followeth: Adam Gibbens, George Keepel, John Keysel, Peter Hordroff, John War∣ner, Simon Heamkers, Jacob Hermons, Hermon Frow. These eight Drunkards, in contempt of the blessed Sabbath, agreed to go to the Ta∣vern
on the Lords Day to be merry; and com∣ing to the house of one Anthony Hodge, and ho∣nest godly man, they called for burnt wine, sack, claret, & what not; the good man refusing to give them any, advised them to go to Church to hear the word of God: but they all save Adam Gib∣bens refused: saying, They loathed that exer∣cise. Whereupon the Hoast departed, who be∣ing gone to Church, they began to curse & ban, wishing he might break his neck ere he return∣ed: and wishing the Devil might break their necks if they went from thence till they had some wine: whereupon the Devil in the like∣ness of a young man appeared unto them, bring∣ing in his hand a flaggon of wine, and so drank unto them; saying, Good Fellows be merry, you shall have wine enough, you seem lusty lads, and I hope you will pay me well: who answering, said, They would either pay him, or ingage their necks for it; yea, rather then fail, their bodies and souls: thus those men continued drinking and swilling so long till they could hardly see one another: at last the Devil their Host told them, that now they must pay for all, at which their hearts war∣ed cold; but the Devil bid them be of good chear, for now they must drink fire and brim∣stone with him, in the pit of hell for ever. At which they Devil brake their necks asunder and destroyed them. And thus ended these Drun∣kards
their miserable dayes: which may serve for a Caveat for all drunkards for ever. Another example of Gods Iudgements was shewed upon two Drunkards at a place called Almain on the fourth of July, 1508, the truth whereof is as followeth. Two drunkards com∣ing into a Tevern, called for wine, which they presently had of the best; but they disliking it for the newness of it, demanded better: so they had store of old and new, where they sate swil∣ling & drinking until they were both as drunk as dogs: then one of them began a carowsing cup to his fellow, who pledging him, asked who he should drink to: (Quoth this wretched Drunkard) why, drink to God: upon which he drank a whole Carouse, and pouring out, he asked his drunken companion, which wine God should drink; who said of either, of which he would; then having filled up his cup with new Wine, he held up his hand over his head, as though God should have pledged him indeed; wretchedly speaking these blasphemous words: God (saith he) I would know what Wine thou lovest: this new wine is good enough, and too good for thee; if thou hadst sent better, better thou shouldest have had: but such as it is, take it, and carouse it off. But behold the dreadful Iudge∣ment of God presently executed upon this filthy wretch: for having thus stretcht forth his hand,
the Lord by his mighty power caused it to stand so stedfast, that the wretched man could not pull it in again, nor stir his body from the place where he stood; where for a while he stood in a most fearful manner, his countenance look∣ing most ghastly and fearful to behold; for he seemed to be alive but stirred not: after which the people sought to remove him, but could not; then they tied horses to him to remove him, but could not; then they assayed to burn him, house and all, but no fire would take hold of it: At which they concluded, that God had made him a fearful example, and a perpetual spectacle to all notorious drunkards for ever. And in this very place and manner as you have heard, standeth this blasphemous drunkard to this very day; the other drunkard his companion upon this, they hanged upon a Gibbet before the the door of the said house. Thus hath the Lord in all ages manifested his sore displeasure against this no∣torious beastly sin of drunkenness. Now then séeing drunkenness is so offensive to God, & bringeth such great evils as you have heard upon men in this life, and eternal con∣demnation in the life to come; let us then in the fear of God avoid it, as most abominable, evil and pernicious? for every drunkard is the devils Imp, a very limb of Satan. Drunkards rather resemble bruit beasts then men: for first,
how do their eyes stare out of their heads? how do they foam and froth at their mouths like Boars: do not their tongues falter in their mouthes? are not their heads as heavy as mil∣stones? and their wits as it were drowned in their cups: Therefore howl ye drunkards, and wéep for the destruction that shall fall upon you. A Heathen could say, he was better born then to be a slave to his body. We are Christians, let us say, we are better born then to dishonour and disorder our bodies by filthy drunkenness; we should be better born & better bred then to be slaves to our sensuall lusts and affections. It is a saying of our Tobacconists, when any refuse their smoaky practice, (O say they) he was never so well bred. O that Christians would say, when any entice them to be drunk, that they are not so ill bred; that they cannot so disgrace their ho∣nourable calling and profession so much. You have heard now the evil of this most hainous sin of drunkenness, together with the most mani∣fold miseries and calamities that attend it: namely, loss of credit, good name, and estate. & without repentance, eternal loss both of soul and body in hell fire for ever. O then for the Lords sake, Christians, I beséech you as you love your own precious souls, fly from this sin as from the devil that will damn you for ever. I beseech you hate and abhor it; thou art worse
then a brast if thou doest not: what  wilt thou indanger the loss of thy estate, and hazard the health of thy body, and the eternal welfare of thy soul for a little drink, a little swill? O do not venture the loss of thy soul, thy precious & immortal soul, for the enjoyment of a little swill, to please thy own base sensual lusts and affections. O do not drink and quaff away thy soul to hell, thou wilt repent thée if thou doest, for out of hell there is no redemption. Consider then betimes in the fear of the Lord, every time thou goest to the stinking Alehouse to be drunk thou goest on the Devils score, and he will have his penniworths out of thée in hell, thou shalt then pay the reckoning to him, both thy soul & body too will then be little enough for the devil; he will not do as the Alewives use to do, turn you out of doors when you have no mony; no, but he will torment both thy soul and body in hell fire for ever. I beseech you consider, Alehouses are the de∣vils Academies, the Nurseries of all vice and Wickedness; the Devil sends men to the Ale∣house to be drunk, and the Alehouse sends men to Hell to be damned: both the Devil and the Alehouse are beholding to one another for cu∣stomers; the Devil is the best friend the Ale∣house hath, he sends them many a drunken cu∣stomer; and were it not for the Alehouse, the
devil might want guests in hell. Consider what St. Paul saith to the Corinthians, No drunkard shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, unless he re∣pent. The good Lord awaken every sinful drun∣kard out of security, and bring them to repen∣tance and amendment of life. To conclude in a word, Walk honestly as in the day, as St. Paul saith, not in rioting and drunkeness, nor in cham∣bering and wantonness; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof, Rom. 13.13. For the grace of God which brings salvation hath appeared unto all men, teaching them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for that bles∣sed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God and our Saviour Jusus Christ; Titus 2.13, 14. Whether then ye eat or drink, or whatever else ye do, do all to the glory of God: to whom be glo∣ry and honour for ever and ever. Amen. FINIS
