J1109 R1988 12576615 63600
A JOURNAL OF THE War with Holland, SINCE His most Christian Majesty's departure from PARIS, until His Return. With a continuation of what happen'd after the Kings return into FRANCE. Translated out of French. OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. Anno Dom. 1673.
A JOURNAL OF THE WAR WITH HOLLAND. Since his most Christian Majesties Departure from Paris, until his Return. Translated out of French. At the THEATER in OXFORD. M.DC.LXIII.
A LIST of the General OFFICERS Of his most Christian MAJESTIES Armies in Holland. Officers of the Kings Army. THE KING, at the head of all his Forces in person. MONSIEUR, Generalissimo. Monsieur de Turenne, General. Lieutenant Generals. Monsieur the Count de Soissons. M. de la Fueillade, Duke of Roannez. M. the Count du Lude, General of the Or∣dinance. M. the Count de Lorge. M. the Marquis de Rochefort. M. de Gadagne.
Feild-Marshals. Monsieur the Chevalier de Lorraine. M. Martinet. M. de Montal. M. the Marquis de Genlis. M. de Vitry. General Officers, with Titles. Monsieur de Turenne, General of the Hors M. the Count de Soissons, Colonel Genera of the Suisse. M. the Marquis de Ranes. Colonel Gene¦ral of the Dragoons. M. the Chevalier de Fourille, Camp Maste of the Light-horse. Quarter-Master General. M. the Count de Froullé. Major General of the Army. M. de Saintsandoux. Quarter-Masters of the Army. M. de Langlée. M. de Champlay, the Son. Brigadiers of Horse. Monsieur the Count de Roye. M. de la Füeillée. M. de Chazeron. M. de illoys. M. de Koniksmarck.
M. de Caluaut. M. de Rouvray. M. de Villiers. Brigadiers of Foot. M. the Marquis de Beauveau. M. the Marquis de Castelnau. Adjutants of the Camp. Monsieur the Count d' Ajen. M. the Marquis d' Albret. M. the Chevalier de Nogent. M. the Count de Grancé. M. the Marquis d' Angeau. M. the Marquis de Breauté. M. de Cavois. M. the Marquis de Termes. M. d' Artois. M. de la Roche-Courton. Besides these Adjutants of the Camp, there re others that belong to each of the Lieu∣enant Generals, and to the Feild-Marshals.
A List of the General Officers of the Army of Monsieur the Prince. MOnsieur the Prince, General. Lieutenant Generals. M. the Count de Guiche. M. de S. Aure. M. Foucault. M. the Count d'Estrade, the Father. Feild-Marshals. Monsieur the Count du Plessis. M. the Count de Nogent. M. de Magalotty. M. de Choiseul. Major General of the Army. M. de Trassy, Captain of the Guards. Commissary General of the Horse. M. de la Cardonniere. Brigadiers of Horse. M. de Montauban. M. de Fourneaux. M. de Beauvezé. M. Vivien.
Brigadiers of Foot. Monsieur de Puysieux, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment de Turenne. M. de S. Micault, Colonel of the Regiment de Condé. M. de la Motte, Colonel of the Regiment d' Anguyen. Monsieur ....... His Majesty, who is a person of an ad∣mirable judgment and a deep foresight, thought it would be of great consequence to secure his Frontiers; and to that end he sent a flying Army of 10 or 12 thousand men into Flanders, under the command of Monsieur de Nancré. He appointed also an Army for Roussillon, and gave the command of it to Monsieur le Bret, Colonel of the Regiment des Vaisseaux, and Governour of Doway. And whereas the Mareschal de Cre∣quy, who was designed to command an Army in Holland, was impeded, His Majesty was pleased to recall Monsieur the Count de Cha∣milly, who was gon Lieutenant General to M. the Archbishop of Colen, and bestow on him the command of that Army, with two Ma∣reschals de Camp, who were M. de Vaubrun Nogent, and M. the Chevalier du Plessis Prâ∣lin.
Major General. Monsieur de la Marilliere. Brigadiers of Horse. M. de Joyeuse. M. de Pierrefitte. Last of all M. the Duke of Luxembourg, was sole Commander of all the Forces of the Allies of Munster and Colen. Camp-Master of the Horse of the Allies. Monsieur the Marquis de Renel. Colonel of the Foot. Monsieur de Mornas. So many Armies from all sides could not but contain a prodigious number of Soldiers; which are usually distinguished into Com∣panies, out of which are composed Regi∣ments, and of a number of these Brigades. Of which here follows a particular.
An Account of the KINGS Forces, for his War with Holland. Forces belonging to the Kings House. The Horse. THE first body of horse, belonging to the Kings house, is at present the Gardes du Corps, since his Majesty hath declared for them against the Gendarmes, who formerly held the first rank. And the first Company of the Gardes or Archers du Corps, is the Scotch Guard, under the command of M. the Duke de Nouailles, and M. the Count d'Ayen his son in reversion. It consists of 360 Maistres, two Lieutenants, two Ensigns, two Exempts, two Adjutant Majors, four Briga∣diers, eight Ʋnder-brigadiers, and so in the three other Companies. The second, commanded by M. de Ro∣chefort, of 260 men. The third, under the command of M. the Duke de Duras, of 260. men. The fourth was under the command of M. the Marquis de Lauzun, and since is com∣manded by the Duke of Luxembourg, of 260 men.
The Company of the Gendarmes of the Kings Guard was under the command of M. de la Salle Caillebot Captain Lieutenant, and at present is commanded by M. the Prince Due de Soubise Rohan, of 200. men. The Light-horse of the Kings Guard, un∣der the command of the Duke de Chevreuse, of 200 men. Two Companies of Musquetiers, the first called the Grey, commanded by Mons. the Count d'Artagnan, of 300 men. The second called the Black, under the command of M. Colbert de Maulevrier, at present commanded by M. de Monbron, of 300 men. Scotch Company of Gendarmes, under the command of M. the Chevalier de Haut∣feuille, of 100 men. English Company of Gendarmes, com∣manded by Sr George Hamilton, of a 100 men. English Company of Light-horse, under the command of M. the Marquis d'Hautte∣man, of a 100 men. Company of Gendarmes de Bourgogne, commanded by M. the Count de Broglio, formerly Eusign of the Kings Gendarmes, of a 100 men. Company of the Queens Gendarmes, un∣der the command of M. the Marquis du Ga∣rot, of 150 men.
Company of the Queens Light-horse, commanded by M. de Velliers, of 150 men. Company of Monseigneur the Dauphins Gendarmes, under the command of M. the Marquis de la Trousse, of 200 men. Company of Monsieur the Dauphins Light∣horse, commanded by M. the Count de Rieux of 100 men. Company of Monsieur Gendarmes, com∣manded by M. the Count de la Roque, of 150 men. Company of Monsieurs Light-horse, un∣der the command of ...... of 150 men. Company of M. the Duke d' Anjou's Gen∣darmes, under the command of M. the Mar∣quis de Genlis, of 100 men. Besides a Company of the Gardes de la Porte, under the command of M. the Count de Valsemé. As also Cent Gardes de la Prevosté, com∣manded by the Marquis de Sourches; but these do not fight. The Foot Guard belonging to the Kings House. French Regiment of Guards, consisting of 30 Companies, 100 men each, M. de la Feuillade Colonel. Swiss Regiment of Guards, 10 Compa∣nies, 200 men each, M. de Molondin Colonel.
The hundred Swiss, under the command of M. the M. de Vardes. Other Regiments of Foot. The Old Body. Picardie, under the command of M. the Count de la Marck, 70 Companies, 50 men each, besides Officers. Champagne, under the command of M. the Marquis de Monimes, 70 Companies. Navarre, under the command of ...... 70 Companies. Piedmont, under the command of M. de la Meilleraye, 70 Companies. Normandie, under the command of M. the Marquis de Meily, 70 Companies. La Marine, under the command of M. the Count de Tonnecharante, 70 Companies. Besides these there are several other Re∣giments, some of which were heretofore cal∣led the Little Old ones, but are now mixt with the others, and are distinguished only by seniority. Of which here follows a List. Auvergne, under the command of M. the Marquis de Coeuvres, 33 Companies. Sault, under the command of Monsieur the Count de Sault, 33 Companies. Castelnau, under the command of M. the Count de Castelnau, 33 Companies.
Rambures, under the command of M. de Rambures, 33 Companies. La Marine, under the command of ..... 33 Companies. Bandeuille, under the command of M. the Marquis de Bandeville, 16 Companies. The Regiment du Roy, under the command of M. Martinet, at present commanded by M. de Monbron, 100 Companies. The Regiment Royal, under the com∣mand of M. the Duke d'Arpajou, and M. de Pierrefitte, 70 Companies. The Regiment d'Anjou, under the com∣mand of Monsieur the Count de S. Geran, 70 Companies. Lyonnois, under the command of M. the Marquis de Villeroy, 25 Companies. Praslin, under the command of M. the Chevalier du Plessis, 18 Companies. Dauphin, under the command of M. de Be∣ringhen, 70 Comp. The Regiment des Vaisseaux, under the command of M. le Bret, 80 Comp. Crussol, under the command of M. the Count de Crussol, 18 Comp. Montaig, under the command of M. the Marquis d'O, 10 Comp. Turenne, under the command of M. de Turenne, M. the Marquis de Puisieux, Lieu∣tenant Colonel, 33 Comp.
La Motte, under the command of M. the Count de la Motte, 17 Comp. Dampierre, under the command of M. the Marquis de Dampierre, 16 Comp. Louvigny, under the command of M. the Count de Louvigny, second son to M. the Mareschal de Grammont, 18 Comp. Grancé, under the command of M. the Mareschal de Grancé, 16 Comp. La Reine, under the command of M. the Marquis de Moussy, 70 Comp. Mompezat, under the command of M. the Marquis de Mompezat, 16 Comp. Orleans, under the command of M. the Marquis de Beaufort, 33 Comp. Artois, under the command of Monsieur the Marquis de Senlis, 33 Comp. Bretagne, under the command of M. de Noyon, 16 Comp. Carignan, under the command of M. the Count de Carignan, 16 Comp. Chasteau-neuf, under the command of M. the Marquis of Chasteau-neuf, 16 Comp. Sourches, under the command of M. the Marquis de Sourches, 18 Comp. Vendosme, under the command of M. the Duke de Vendosme. La Ferté, under the command of M. the Marquis de la Ferté, 18 Comp. Conty, under the command of Monsieur the Prince de Conty.
La Fere, under the command of ...... Condé, under the command of M. the Prince M. de S. Micault, Colonel, 17 Comp. Anguyen, under the command of M. the Duke, M. de la Motte Colonel, 17 Comp. Jonzac, under the command of M. de Jon∣zac, 18 Comp. Monperoux, under the command of M. the Marquis de Monperoux, 16 Comp. Boüillon, under the command of M. the Duke de Boüillon, 16 Comp. Bourgogne, under the command of M. the Marquis de Chamilly, 33 Comp. La Marine nouveaux, under the command of ....... Vermandois, under the command of M. the Count Gassay, 20 Comp. Fusiliers, under the command of M. the Count de Lude, General of the Ordinance, for the guarding of which this Regiment attends, of 24 Comp. The Forreign Regiments of Foot. Alsace, under the command of ......... of 12 Comp. Each of which of 180 men, besides Officers, which are not comprehend∣ed in the number of which the foremen∣tioned Companies were said to consist, that is, there are 50 men complete in the French bodies. The Scotch and English, under the com∣mand
of Sr George Hamilton, 10 Companies, 120 men each. Roussillon, under the command of ...... 20 Companies, 120 men each. Furstemburg, bears the name of its Colonel, 12 Comp. 100 men each. The Irish, under the command of M. the Marquis du Glas, 24 Comp. 100 men each, who also commands the following Regi∣ment. Another Irish Regiment, under the com∣mand of Mr Merrow, Colonel to Sr George Hamilton, 16 Comp. 100 men each. The Royal Italian, all under the command of M. de Magalotty, 27 Comp. 100 men each. The Royal English, under the command of the Duke of Monmouth, 8 Companies, 100 men each. Stouppe Suisse, bears the name of its Co∣lonel, 12 Comp. 200 men each. Erlac Suisse, bears the name of its Colo∣nel, 12 Comp. 200 men each. Festa Suisse, as the former. Salis Suisse, the same. The English Regiment, under the command of the Duke of Monmouth, 8 Comp. 100 men each. The Regiment of the Duke of Monmouth, of 7000 men.
Besides these there are two Regiments of Dragoons, the first called the Colonel, under the command of M. the Chevalier de Tilladet, 6 Comp. 100 men each. The Regiment Royal, under the command of M. the Chevalier de Bouffiers, 6 Comp. 100 men each. The Regiments of Light-Horse. The Colonel General of the said Horse is Monsieur de Turenne, the Regiments of 6 Troops, and of 50 men each Troop, be∣sides the Officers, which are, Captain, Lieu∣tenant, Cornet, and Quarter-master. Camp-Master General of the said Horse, is M. the Chevalier de Fourille. Commissary General of the said Horse, is M. de la Cardonnierre. Royal du Roy, under the command of M. the Count de Gassay, a Forreign Regiment. Another Forreign Regiment. Cravates du Roy, under the command of M. the Count de Talar. La Reine ....... Dauphin ........ Orleans, under the command of MON∣SIEUR, the Kings only Brother. Condé, under the command of Monsieur the Prince. Anguyen, under the command of Monsieur the Duke.
Rouvray, under the command of M. de Rouvray. Gassion, under the command of Monsieur de Gassion. De Joyeuse, under the command of M. the Duke de Joyeuse. Fourille, under the command of M. de Fourille. Des Fourneaux, under the command of M. des Fourneaux. Resnel, under the command of Monsieur the Marquis du Resnel. La Fueillée, under the command of M. de la Fueillée. Montauban, under the command of M. de Montauban. Pillois, under the command of Monsieur de Pillois. Beauvezé, under the command of M. de Beauvezé. De Roye, under the command of M. the Count de Roye. Calvaut, under the command of M. de Calvaut. Chazeron, under the command of M. de Chazeron. And so of the following Regiments, which bear the names of their Colonels. Cabonet. Coulange.
Merlin. S. Loup. In this Regiment there are nine Troops. Cachan. Saint Aoust. Derdelin. Douget. Du Condé. Tilladet, under the command of M. the Marquis de Tilladet. Sourdis, under the command of M. the Mar∣quis de Sourdis. Saint. Rut. Hislez. Bligny. La Fabliere. Lambert. Humieres, under the command of M. the Mareschal d'Humieres. Caberel. Prouille. Bartillac. Beaupré. Paulmy Beaufort. Carendo. Sanzay. Chenuet. Nouart. Sommieure. Anjou.
The following Regiments consist but of three Troops of 50 Maistres, besides Offi∣cers. Coislin, under the command of M. the Duke de Coislin. Estrades, under the command of M. the Count d'Estrades. Bethune, under the command of M. the Marquis de Bethune. Montgeorge, under the command of M. de Montgeorge. Busenval, under the command of M. de Busenval. Basleroy, under the command of M. de Basleroy. Thiange, under the command of Monsieur de Thiange. Longueville, under the command of M. the Duke of Longueville. Ragny, under the command of M. the Marquis de Ragny. Bouillon, under the command of M. the Duke de Bouillon. Auvergne, under the command of M. the Count d'Auvergne. Grignan, under the command of M. the Count de Grignan. Vantadour, under the command of M. the Duke de Vantadour. Laurieres, under the command of M. de Laurieres.
Granville, under the command of M. de Granville. Du Roulle, under the command of Mon∣sieur the Count du Roulle. Meré, under the command of Monsieur de Meré. Tury, under the command of M. the Mar∣quis de Tury. Valavoir, under the command of M. de Valavoir. Arnolfiny, under the command of M. d' Ar∣nolfiny. Harcourt, under the command of M. the Prince d'Harcourt. Armagnac, under the command of M. the Count d'Armagnac, Grand Escuyer. Saint Aignan, under the command of M. the Duke de S. Aignan.
A JOURNAL OF THE War with Holland, From His Majesties departure from Paris, until his return. According to the order of Action and Time. THE States of Holland were raised in a short time to such a pitch of Pride and Insolence, that 'twas impossible they should maintain it long. Their Irreligion was so great, that Heaven could no more be deaf to the just complaints of the Oppressed. They were so blind, as to take no notice of the Favors of that Monarch, who had, as it were, raised them out of nothing: and they pretended to give Law to those Powers,
from whom, not long before, they had had petition'd to receive it. In fine, their Am∣bition, their Tyranny, and their Ingrati∣tude did exceed all bounds: and they were so puft up with the thoughts of being Princes, and understood withal so little what Soveraignty was, that they imagined all the World ought to stoop and pay Obe∣dience to them. There was then a necessity that some one or other should charitably interpose to dis∣abuse them; and none could undertake that Work more effectually, then our Great Mo∣narch. That care was his particular concern, and none had so great an Interest in it as Himself. He had the Power, and nothing was wanting but a Will; which he is always rea∣dy to exert, whensoever so just an occasion offers it self. As being The most Christian King, He was obliged to undertake the de∣fence of the Church: as one that had raised them, 'twas His Interest to chastise their In∣gratitude▪ and as being the most absolute Monarch in the World, it became His glory to maintain His Soveraignty. 'Twas this that obliged Him to declare War, and to put Himself at the head of a Hundred thou∣sand Men, to teach them such Lessons, as they should never forget. His Majesty parted from S. Germains, on
Thursday the 28. of April, in the Year 1672, and having taken the way of Soissons, He arrived at Rocroy the second of May en∣suing, where the Troops, that were to com∣pose his Army, began to rendevouz; as those, which were to make an Army for Monsieur the Prince, did at Sedan. The same day we came also to Rocroy, by the way of Fymes, Rheimes, and Retel. The third of May in the Morning, His Majesty parted with all His Forces from Rocroy, and came to Mariemburg, where we were scarcely encamped, but he command∣ed the Marquis de Ranes to advance towards Philipville; which we presently did, and found there several Troops. The fourth, His Majesty came to Philip∣ville, and we, with the Troops that we found there, marched to Charleroy, where all the Army gathered into a Body, during seven or eight days that His Majesty resided there. The fifth, the King arrived at Charleroy: And having had intelligence, that 3000 Horse and 600 Foot were march'd out of Maestricht, and run along the Meuse, with design to plunder the Boats that brought our Provisions from Huy to Leige; and that they were come up to the Gates of Huy, and being denyed entrance there, had threatned
to pillage and burn the Town, unless the would thrust out our Commissaries: Ther were dispatched 2500 Horse, and 200 Dra¦goons, under the Command of Monsieu the Chevalier de Fourille. Thereupon w marched to Gyblou, and in our way gave a alarm to Namur, which thought we wer coming to besiege it. The sixth, whil'st His Majesty stayed a Charleroy, where his Army increased ever day; we encamped at Bonneff. The seventh, we marched to Mosey. The eighth, His Majesty tarryed still a Charleroy, and we thought to have continu¦ed our Quarters at Mosey: But about 9 i the morning, the Commissaries, that ha care of the Provisions at Huy, came an acquainted Monsieur de Fourille, that they could not convoy the Provisions with safety unless we advanced up to the Passage Whereupon we chang'd our design, an marching towards the Gates of Huy, en¦camped in a Meddow over against the Vil¦lage of Chouquiere, at the foot of the Castle of Berloc, upon the edge of the Meuse, a¦bout the mid-way between Huy and Liege where the Enemy two days before had re∣fresh'd themselves, and plundered the Boats We learnt, notwithstanding, that they wer in so great fear, that their Horse had take
the alarm at the arrival of their Foot, who could not come up so soon; and that mista∣king their own Forces, and thinking them to have been French Troops, they had se∣cured themselves by flight, if some had not run and acquainted them with the mistake. At length our Provisions passed on guarded with 100 Horse, that marched along the River on the left hand, and secured with a 100 Dragoons, that were placed at the ave∣nues on the right hand: and being arrived over against the Castle and our Camp, the Guard of Dragoons was made to enter the Boats, and that of the Horse was doubled, which marched all night as far as Leige, and returned again. The ninth in the Morning, we went back, and encamped at Fallais, a Village of Br∣bant, belonging to the Spaniards, where Monsieur the Marquis de Louvois joyned with us, who came thither about ten in the Morning with a Guard of 500 Horse; and afterwards about three in the Afternoon parted from us with 120 Horse, and went to Leige. The Enemy now began to shut themselves up, and issued out no more in a great Body, but only as Pickeerers, 12, 15, or 20 in a Company, and killed a Quarter∣master, and six of the Horse men that guard∣ed Monsieur the Marquis de Louvois, and
had tarryed a little behind the rest. The same Evening two others, who had bin foraging in a Village, were killed by the Enemy, who had hid themselves, and pretended they were Spaniards, belonging to some of the Spanish Garrisons. The tenth, we march'd to Bierzey, and came near again to Leige. The same day Monsieur de Turenne left the King (who tar∣ryed still at Charleroy) and advanced with one part of the Troops, of which he formed an Army for himself. The Troops that had convoy'd Monsieur de Louvois, rejoin'd with us, and he himself tarryed at Leige. The eleventh, Monsieur de Turenne con∣tinued his march, and we stayed at Bierzey. Monsieur de Louvois sent word, that we should dispatch in the Evening a hundred Dragoons to guard them along; wch Monsieur the Marquis de Ranes sent him. In the mean time Monsieur the Prince marched slowly on with his Army on the other side of the Meuse, on the right hand. The twelfth in the morning, Monsieur the Marquis de Louvois returned from Leige, and we being joyned with the Army of Mon∣sieur de Turenne, went to encamp at Greville near Tongren, which we took without re∣sistance, and placed a Garrison in it. Mon∣sieur the Count de Chamilly, came to us from
Huy, where he had bin before. The thirteenth, Monsieur de Turenne staid at Greville, but he sent away the Foot Regi∣ments of Alsace and Languedoc, that made six Bodies, three Companies of Dragoons of the Regiment Royall, that came to 300 men, the Horse Regiments de Joyeuse, de Tury, de Gassion, de S. Loup, de Rouville, and some others. This party was commanded by Monsieur the Count de Chamilly. After∣wards we went to Bilsem. The fourteenth, we went and encamped at Rakem, which lies two Leagues on the other side of Maestrickt, and within one of Maesiick. M. de Turenne followed us with his Army; and the King marched another way near Vizè, 2 Leagues above Maestricht. The 15. in the morning, we came up within sight of Maisiich, where the army being drawn up, M. the Count de Chamilly summon'd the Town, which not seeming averse to a Parley, he went in, but they not agreeing upon Conditions, command was given to prepare Faggots, and we began to raise a Battery for four pieces of Canon; and not staying to throw up Trenches, some Com∣panies of Foot were drawn out, and com∣manded to come up under the shelter of some thick Hedges, and old Walls which lay near the Town-ditch. All this was done by two in the Afternoon, and then we began
to play upon the Town, which did the like upon us. They held out about five hours, and defended themselves well enough. In this Action we lost in all but one or two Of∣ficers, and some few common Soldiers, and the Enemy had not above 3 or 4 men killed: but notwithstanding, about 7 of the Clock they beat a Parley, and denr'd to Treat; whereupon the Count de Chamilly, and the Sieur de Ranes went in again, and came not back till the Town was surrendred; and in the mean time, the Chevalier du Plessis, Camp Marshal to the Army, commanded the Attaque. But before this, not imagining the Place would, have yielded so soon, advice was given thereof to Mareshal Turenne, who thereupon advanced, and was very near when the Marquis de Ranes took Horse and left the Town, which had just now yielded, to advertise him of it. Whereupon he made a halt, and encamp'd with his Army pretty near ours, and himself retir'd into one of the M. de Ranes's Houses, who went back imme∣diatly into the Town to Count de Chamilly and thence they both return'd to Marsha Turenne. This Action gave occasion to some Dutch Railery, who thereupon told that the French had taken Maestricht, no no, I mis∣take would they say, 'tis Maesiick: but this was the last time they were in a ralling hu∣mor;
for since then we have dealt with them in such earnest, that they have not had time to bethink themselves, or give their minds to so much relaxation, as to be in a fit of drol∣ling or playing the Satyrists. The sixteenth, we left the Sieur Chamilly at Maesiick with his Troops, and Monsieur du Plessis, to see to the fortifying of the Place. The Marquis de Ranes coasted along the River towards Maestricht with three Companies of Dragoons, and took all the Boats he met with, to the number of 25, and had them all brought back up the River to the Abby of Ocq, where we were by that time encamped, and where at our coming we found Monsieur Vaubrun Camp Marshal, with a part of the Army which he there com∣manded. The 17th in the Morning, we left that Par∣ty to the conduct of Monsieur Vaubrun their Commander, and march'd with some Guides to Vizè, whether His Majesty came also the same day; but in our March, coming with∣in Canon shot of Maestricht, there issued out thence some Horse, one part of which seem'd to turn off towards Monsieur Van∣brun's Camp, and the other to advance to∣wards us. The Sieurs Trenne, and de Ranes, made up towards them, but they thereupon nimbly retir'd, the Enemy only letting fly 30 or 40 Canon, and some volleys of small
Shot at us, which did no harm. A League from thence, we met the Count de Lorge with his flying Army, who had encamp'd hard by, upon the way to Tongres: He drew near likewise to Maestricht, and beset it closely on his side, as Monsieur de Vaubrun had on the other. The 18. the King went to take a view of the out-works of the Fort ... wch belongs to the Spaniard, and lies on the right from the Meuse, near a League from Vizè, and two from Maestricht: he was saluted by the Garrison, which is always very strong, with many great Guns, and volleys of small shot, The 19. Monsieur the Prince encamped within two Leagues of us, and came the same day with Monsieur the Duke, to visit the King; and afterwards (having first been at Council) return'd to his Camp. The 20. the Kings Army, as also that of the Prince, rested. The 21. They rested again, and a Bridge of Boats was begun upon the Meuse below Vizè. Monsieur Vaubrun went and joyned his Troops to those of Monsieur de Chamilly, who have since been employ'd, almost du∣ring all the rest of the Campaigne, in forti∣fying Maseick, and in coursing about Ma∣stricht.
The 22. they continued working about the Bridge, which was well forwarded. The same day the Prince's Army march'd. The twenty third, His Majesty rested again, the Bridge was finish'd, and the Collonel Regiment of Dragoons left Vizè to go and joyn with the Army of Monsieur the Prince, under whom it serv'd during the rest of the Campaigne. Three Companies of the Regiment Royall, which had been left about Maestricht, came back. The heavy bag∣gage past the River all that day. In the e∣vening some were drawn out of the Kings Houshold to go and get Intelligence of the Enemy toward Maestricht: it fell to the lot of the Marquis of Saurebeuf, a younger Brother, one of the Kings Guards, to be first pick'd out to go, and see what might be discover'd at the Pallisado. He brought back word to the Brigadier of Musque∣teers who commanded the Party, that he had seen a Sentinel without the Pallisado, and within many lighted matches, which made him think it was well man'd. The Commander not being satisfied with this ac∣count, told him, That would not serve his turn, and that the King would know whe∣ther any body had gone out of the place or no, wherefore he must return and do his utmost to learn that; which he presently did, and going streight to the Sentinel, ask'd
him, If the Party that went out that day, were yet return'd; to which, he receiv'd no other answer then a Musket-shot in his throat, that was followed by at least forty more, which however mist him; but the first wound was in so dangerous a place, that he immediatly fell, and was altogether una∣ble to make his Escape; so that the Enemies carryed him into the Town, where he was long kept Prisoner and ill of his wound. The 24. His Majesty pass'd the Maes upon the bridge of Boats, with the whole Army, except only Five hundred Foot, which were drawn out by lot to be left in Garrison at Vizè, a little Town lying on the right side of the Maes, between Maestricht and Liege; so we went and encamp'd at Biernaw upon the little River Berwine, in the Coun∣try of Limbourg. The same day in the morn∣ing, Monsieur the Vicount of Turenne, and the Marquis de Ranes, march'd with some Horse and Dragoons to the Fort call'd Fou∣quemont, (otherwise Fauquenton, or Valkem∣borg.) This is a Castle three hours Journey from Macstricht, on the other side of the Ri∣ver, built on a steep Rock; at the Foot of which there is a great Town, bearing the same name, and depending on it. There was in it a Garrison for the Hollander, but upon notice of the march of the foresaid
Persons, they retir'd into Maestricht, and quitted the Castle, though it be inaccessible and impregnable without Canon. There are within it Caves of a Prodigious depth and bigness, wherein a whole Army might be hid: there was little Provision in it, for which reason the Sieur de la Roüillardiere, Captain of a Company of Dragoons, who was left there with One hundred men, was forc'd to buy some from the Town, and o∣ther neighboring places; the King having ordered, That he should take nothing but what was paid for. The 25. His Majesty rested. The 26. the Kings Army still rested, and nothing extraordinary passed. Monsieur the Prince still march'd forward toward the Rhine, upon the resolution which had been taken not to set upon Maestricht, but to go straight on and take the places which lie a∣long that River, and so drive straight for∣wards into Holland. The 27. at night, the Weather grew very bad, and in the morning it was very cloudy and louring, but we departed notwithstand∣ing, and came to Willers, where the Rain did not a little incommode us. The 28. The Weather being good a∣gain, the King went and encamp'd at Rolduc, and upon some Intelligence, a Coun∣cil
was call'd, where it was resolv'd, That Monsieur Turenne should march on with 15000, or 16000 men, which he did: but this Order not having been foreseen, many of those who were commanded to accom∣pany him having march'd before, went on with the Kings Army, till being told of their duty, they were forc'd to march all night to overtake the Army of Monsieur de Turenne, who went and encamp'd at Erkelens. The 29. the King came within half a League of Juliers, and Monsieur de Turenne encamp'd at Telns, a little Village between Nuis and Keiserwort, in the Country of Co∣len. The same day the Prince's Army pass'd the Rhine upon a certain Float of Wood, wch carryed 2000 Foot and 200 Horse, with all their baggage at a time: and his Highness and the Duke of Newbourg treated them so well at their arrival at Keiserwort, that they were all very merry, which yet hinder'd not the Duke of Newbourg from coming in the Evening to see Monsieur de Turenne, and to invite him to Dinner the next day. The 30. We stayed at Telns. Monsieur de Turenne dined with the Duke of New∣bourg, and in the Evening at his return he had 96 Prisoners brought him, sent by Mon∣sieur de Montal, Governor of Charleroy, who commanding a Party of our Troops, had
fallen into an Ambush of theirs, and with five or six more had born up against all their Firing, amongst whom Monsieur the Che∣valier de Marsillac was mortally wounded. In the mean time, forty Dragoons lighted off their Horses, and with 30 Musqueteers, did so bestir themselves, that before the Enemy could make a second discharge, they had quite routed them, kill'd eleven, and took their Commander (who defended him∣self so manfully, that they were forced to use him worse then they desir'd) with all the rest, excepting 2 or 3 who at first betook themselves to their heels. Afterwards, the Ca∣ptain being known by some of the Officers of our Party, had quarter given him; & be∣ing not yet dead, all possible means were us'd to save his Life. He was carryed off in∣to a Castle, where Monsieur de Turenne sent him his own Chirurgion, but to little pur∣pose, for he dyed soon after. The rest of the Prisoners were brought to Nuis, where Mon∣sieur de Strasbourg arriv'd the same day, and was saluted with the great Guns of the Town. The 31. in the Morning, Monsieur de Tu∣renne took with him a party of the Corps de Guard, all the Light Guards of the Kings Houshold, three Companies of the Regi∣ment Royall of Dragoons, a part of the Re∣giment
of the French Guards, and some Light Horse; who, after having winter'd in the Country of Colen, came by order of His Majesty to encamp and intrench them∣selves upon the banks of the Rhine, on the left side near Keiserwort, where they encamped & fortified themselves very commodiously. Afterwards we march'd all day, and en∣camp'd under a great Hill above Orsoy. The King march'd on to Nuys, and Monsieur the Prince advanc'd by the side of him in equal marches. The first of June, the King left Nuys and besieg'd Orsoy, a little Town of a reasonable strength, situate on the left side of the Rhine. As soon as His Majesty came before it, He caus'd it to be summon'd, but the Governor refusing to yield it up, we were immediatly employ'd about making of Faggots, and put∣ing our selves into a condition to attaque it. The next day Monsieur the Prince came before Wezel, and did that day only encamp and invest the Town, which seem'd strong and considerable enough to make us pro∣ceed cautiously in our attaque. Wezel is a very great Town, situate on the right side of the Rhine, at the Mouth of the River Lyppe. It hath a great Ditch fac'd with good brick, and is divided in the middle by a great Trench, and very good Fortifications, so that
if one half of the Town were gain'd, one should be put to the trouble of a Siege to get the other. Monsieur de Turenne with whom we were, came before Burick, which we invested; and after the Camp was setled, he sent for some Foot to raise a Redout between this Town and Wezel, which are over-against one the other, on each side the Rhine. Burick is two good Musket-shot di∣stant from it, but not so far, but that they might give one another mutual assistance. For this reason it was thought necessary to make this Redout, as well to hinder their communication, as to cut off the Passage between Burick and the River, from whence the Enemy might have mischiev'd us in the Trenches, which we were about to begin on the other side, so to make our approaches to Wezel. At the same time we were employ'd in raising a Battery on the bank of the Ri∣ver, to hinder the Dutch Vessels going to and fro upon the River, and assisting the Be∣sieg'd. At our first coming thither we took two of them, which we mann'd with Dra∣goons, and plac'd in the middle of the River. The Duke of Luxembourg, who command∣ed the French Troops belonging to the Bishops of Colen and Munster, besieg'd Lokem.
The second, the King commanded an As∣sault to be given to Orsoy, whereupon we presently made our selves Masters of the Counterscarpe, and gain'd all the out-works, which made the Governor desire to come to composition; but no other Articles being of∣fer'd, but, That the Garrison should surren∣der themselves upon discretion, He would not hear of that: so the King sent him back, threatning, That if they discharg'd but one Canon more, He would have no mercy on them. But this hinder'd not their firing much more freely then they had don before, which greatly incens'd the King. Monsieur the Prince caus'd the Fort of Lippe to be at∣taqued that Evening, which was carryed by the Count de Nogent by Assault. This very much terrified those of Wezel, because that Fort was near, and did in some manner com∣mand the place. The Governor was there kill'd, with his Pike in his hand. In Monsieur Turenne's Army, they were all busied in making their Lines of Circum∣vallation, and blocking up the Town. The Battery, begun the day before upon the bank of the River, was finish'd, and nine pieces of Ordnance mounted on it. Monsieur the Prince raised also another on his side of the River, consisting of 6 Pieces; and in the E∣vening we were busied in repairing the Re∣doute,
which had been almost beat down that day by the Guns of the two Towns. The third, Orsoy yielded. For the Gover∣nor seeing himself unable to make any long∣er resistance, was fled with his Family, and all that was most dear to him, in a small Vessel, designing to gain Rhineberg; but His Majesty having intelligence of it, and being incens'd against him for his stubbornness, caus'd the Canon to play so hard upon him, that at last, seeing one of his Wives Wo∣men cut off in the middle by a Canon shot, he was forc'd to come ashore, and yield him∣self up to the mercy of the Conquerors. The Plunder of the Castle was given to the Soldiery, and the Garrison made Prisoners at discretion. The chief Persons whom we lost in the Action, were the Sieur de Valens, and the Chevalier D'Arquien, which last was kill'd by a Canon-shot near the Kings Per∣son, who presently afterwards commanded Rhineburg to be invested. At the Prince's Army, the whole day was spent in parlying, for the Inhabitants would by no means hear of standing it out; and the Garrison, tho finding themselves so weak as not to be able to undertake any thing, could not resolve to yield themselves upon discretion, so that the whole day pass'd without any Action. As for us who were before Burick, we pre∣par'd
our selves to attaque it so vigorously, as not be behind-hand with the other Ar∣mies. We made Faggots, and in the After∣noon carryed them almost as far as the Pal∣lisado's, not without the loss of some Troopers and their Horses, as well there as in our Camp, which lay level with the Canon of the Town. In the Evening, that part of the Regiment of the Kings Guards which was in our Army, and the Regiments of Burgundy and Artois, opened their Trenches. The Marquis de Ranes, with 150 Dragoons which he commanded, was to at∣taque a Half-moon, and intending to make his way forwards, resolved himself to be at the head of them. A like number were drawn out of the Regiments of Castelneau and Tu∣renne, to do as much on the other side; which returning all safe, could not properly be said to have gone upon the Forlorn. But just as we were about to fall on, we heard a Trum∣pet from the Town, and assoon as we had an∣swered it an Officer came forth, & after him a second, so that the Soldiers of the Guards, without staying for the issue of the design'd Conference, began to cry, That they might leave off working at their Trenches, seeing the Enemy yielded, and desired quar∣ter. But the last Officer seeming a little
more fierce and resolute then the other, because he had not a ready answer; we pre∣pared to fall on immediatly if they did not yield without delay; which the Enemy per∣ceiving, and having discover'd some Scaling-ladders just ready to be made use of, they open'd their Gates, and the Regiment of Guards enter'd the Town just about Mid∣night, and feasted themselves with the Pro∣visions which they found were bringing to the Soldiers that were upon Service in the Out-works. All the Garrison were made Prisoners at discretion. Burick is a reasonable great Town, situate upon the left Bank of the Rhine, within two Musquet-shot of the River, in a fine even fertile Soil. The space that is between it and the Rhine, is a great Marsh, and deli∣cate Fields and Meadows, which are nothing near so boggy and wet, as the most part of the rest of Holland, Zeland and Frizeland. It lies over-against Wezel on the other side of the Rhine, which is a very fair great Town. Burick is none of the least Towns which the Dutch have in these parts; its Fortifications are good, and it hath good Bastions and Half∣moons, almost wholly of earth, but their Out∣works are too big. The C. de Chamilly speak∣ing of this Town, said, It might well have held out 3 Months: From whence 'tis plain,
that in the confidence of its strength the Hol∣landers had been negligent: and not having taken care to keep their Fortifications in good repair, we found them laboring day and night in making Gabions for the top of the Ramparts; but they were so suddenly and briskly set upon, that they could by no means perfect them. The same day we took two Barques upon the Rhine, and by that means we doubled the Guard we had plac'd in the middle of it. As soon as Burick was yielded, M. de Turenne receiv'd a Pacquet from the King, upon which he immediatly hastned to wait on His Majesty. The fourth, nothing was done at the Kings Army, nor at Monsieur Turenne's; but at the Princes they open'd Trenches before Wezel, which would not yield up to mercy. They were begun on the side of the Town that lies toward the River, and a Drain was made to empty the Ditch, which would have been done the night following, had not the Ene∣my at last, seeing his Highness resolv'd to set on then vigorously, sent the Keys of the Town, and yielded themselves up to mercy. At the same time we were inform'd, that the Duke of Luxembourg had taken Lokem. The fifth, the Kings Army was busied in making Faggots and Gabions for the attaqu∣ing of Rhineberg. His Majesty sent a Com∣mand
to M. de Ranes to meet him there with the Regiment Royal of Dragoons, which was then with him before Burick, which he did. M. the Prince at 6 in the Morning en∣tred Wezel, and visited the Officers and Sol∣diers of the Garrison, where he search'd for French-men, and finding 10 or 11, had them hang'd. The Duke of Luxembourg turn'd off toward Grol, and M. Turenne's Army rested. M. Cajax was made Governor of Orsoy. The fixth in the Morning, 10000 Faggots more were ordered to be made, which the Dragoons perform'd, but the Garrison at Rhineberg finding themselves too weak to resist a Victorious Royal Army; and being likewise out of hope of receiving the Suc∣cors were promised them by the States, re∣solv'd to yield. The Officers of the Gar∣rison came, and laying themselves at his Feet, begg'd of him not to take ad∣vantage to their cost of the trick which the States had put upon them, in promising them 2000 Men more as a reinforcement, which they had not perform'd. His Majesty consi∣dering the falshood of the States Promises, even to their own Soldiers, was mov'd to compassionate their condition, and thereupon gave them leave to march out, Drums beat∣ing, Colours flying, with Match lighted, and Bullet in mouth; which they did, and march'd
toward Maestricht, the King having given them a Convoy, and Provision for four days. The Regiment of Guards entred the place about one of the Clock in the After∣noon. Rhineberg is a pretty large Town, be∣longing to the Archbishoprick of Colen, si∣tuate on the left side of the Rhine, in the midst of a very low Marshy Country, which contributes much to its strength. The States had taken it again and again from the Spaniards, they having wrongfully took it from the Elector of Colen, who ever since hath been demanding it of them, and making complaints upon that account in every Diet; till at length the Spaniard propos'd to give it him back, on condition he might keep a Garrison there: But this condition not plea∣sing the Elector, they at last promis'd, with∣out any reserve, to put it into his hands; but how instant soever the Elector was with them, he could never perswade them to be as good as their word: they had so many shifts, feig∣ned excuses, and pretences, that at last they proved the chief cause of the Electors de∣claring War against them. Whilst it was in their possession, they fortifyed it to their own minds; and being it was a Frontier Town, they had made it one of their strongest Holds. The Fortifications are very regular;
there are good Bastions and Half-moons, good Ramparts, and very broad Ditches: but their Out-works are to big, as in most of their Towns. All the Works are of Earth, which makes them the easier to be assaulted, though it better resist the Canon, which can only make a hole in them. The same day some Foot were sent o∣ver the Rhine to plunder a certain Castle there, but the Prince had sent some others to the same purpose the day before; so that those who came last, did but lose their la∣bor. The Princes and Monsieur de Turenne's Armies rested again, and the Count d'Estrade was made Governor of Wezel. The seventh, Monsieur de Turenne left the King, and so did M. de Ranes, and the Regiment Royal of Dragoons. We went and joyn'd with the Army which was left before Burick, and having sent all our hea∣viest baggage to Rhineberg, where we left the new Companies of the Regiment of Turenne in garrison, we went and encamp'd at Worstemberg near Santein, in the Country of Cleve, which belongs to the Duke of Brandenbourg. M. the Prince left Wezel, and advanced likewise on his side. The King's Army stayed still at Rhineberg, and the Duke of Luxembourg with the Munster forces attaqued Grol.
The eighth, the King left Rhineberg, & came to Burick, whether the Float was brought to waft over the Army to the other side of the Rhine. We left Worstemberg in the morn∣ing, passed by Zante or Santein, and went and besieg'd the Fort of Rees, which we present∣ly beset so closely, that the frighted Garri∣son durst not fire so much as one gun. But the Town which lyes on the other bank of the Rhine, was not so civil, for their Canon did much harm to our Dragoons, especially those, who being come close up, lay open to them. There were many of them lost, and more of their horses. But notwithstanding the Capitulation went on at the Fort, which was but ill man'd, and because the Gover∣nor stood upon terms, and would not deli∣ver the place before he had seen and felt our Canon, M. de Turenne commanded the Foot to advance and begin the Assault, which they did without any resistance from the Enemy (who had retired into a Redout which was very strong.) Wherefore he caus'd a bridge of hurdles to be made, by which he pass'd over and enter'd the place himself, and commanded the Governor and his Gar∣rison to be beset, who at last yeilded. After∣wards we turn'd the Canon of this Fort up∣on the Town, and much shot past on both sides. Many of the Enemies Guns were dis∣mounted,
and the whole Town so tired out that the next day they were forc'd to carry the Keys of their Gates to M. the Prince, who came up as we did, and made a shew as if he would also have attaqued it, though his design was to go streight on to∣wards a party of the Enemies which kept the Passage of the Isle of Beter and of the Yssel, that the King might go and besiege that Town and Emerick. As soon as the Fort had yeilded, Monsieur de Turenne left there a part of his Horse, all his foot, the Artillery and Baggage; and upon no tice that 4000 of the Enemies Horse had pass'd the Wahal, with a design, as 'twas thought, to set upon us, we went to meet them. To that purpose we went and pass'd the River near Calcar, a little Town (in the Country of Cleve) defended by a Citadel, whose fortifications are all of earth without any other facing. We were saluted in our passage by at least 100 great Guns, and thence pass'd to Cleves, where our Army was victualled gratis. It is the capital City of the whole Province, but is a place of no defence. Afterwards we encamped a quarter of an hours riding from that City, by a park, which belongs to a House of pleasure of the Duke of Brandebourg. The ninth was wholly spent in passing the
Kings Army from the left to the right side of the Rhine. The town of Rees quite spent and wearied out by our Canon from the Fort, brought in her Keys, and yeilded as the rest had done. Rees is a fair great Town situate on the right side of the Rhine, 3 leagues below Bu∣rick and Wezel, and 2 leagues above Emerick. It is strengthned by a good Fort of its own name, separated from it only by the Rhine, whose waters on the right side wash the walls of the Town, and on the left those of the Fort. This Town is very great, her for∣tifications very compleat and good. It hath good Bastions, Horn-works, Half-Moons well strengthn'd with good Pallissados, large ditches, and covered ways, all very regular. In fine, when M. de Turenne enter'd the Fort, he told them that were near him, that their friends that knew Reés, and heard they laid Siege to it, would certainly be very much concern'd for them: and thereupon having sent for the sieur Paul, a Flemming Engineer, to ask his opinion of it, he answered him, that if any body would have an excellent Model of a regular Fortification, they need not seek it any where else, but might take it from Rees and its Fort; which is a Pen∣tagone, whose outworks were a little out of repair, but within there was a Redout
which they call the Castle, which is very well and in good case. It is separated from the Body of the Fort by a great flat broad ditch, which is deeper then it is broad, over which there is a little Draw-bridge, and a good Gate on the other side, and a high ram∣part well pallissado'd and Gabioon'd, which at each corner hath two little Horn-works, which flank upon the bridge and ditch. At the same time M. the Prince advanced towards Emerick, which made no resistance, the Dutch having withdrawn their Garrison some days before. Emerick is a pleasant town, seated on the right side of the Rhine, a league above that place where the river divides, and makes the Rhine with its right branch, and the Wa∣hal with its left. Tis a reasonable good town, and its fortifications, that are all of earth, are well enough maintained. However the Dutch some few days before the Princes ar∣rival, withdrew themselves and quitted their Garrison; either because they thought it could not endure a Siege, or for some other reason, that I am ignorant of, & cannot imagine what it should be; for since that time we have taken several Towns not so strong as that, where∣in they had made very good Garrisons. That morning M. de Turenne with some Officers, and a small Guard, went to take a
view of Skinksconce, and came so near as to be within hearing of the Garrison: from whom we received about 40 musket, and several Canon shot, but they did no execution. Thereupon, having learned the retreat of the enemy, we returned back, and joyned with the rest of the Army, near the Fort of Reés, in the mid way between Calcar, and another place called Hompel. The same day M. the Prince advanced above Skinksconce, the Rhine lying between him and it, and discovered the enemy on the other side, guarding that passage. In the mean time the Dragoons of the Colonel Regiment were commanded to at∣taque Demecum; but that place held out so little a while, that they had time enough to come back, and share the Glory of that pas∣sage, that was made two days after. The 10 his Majesty came to Reés, we stayed with M. de Turenne's Army, where we received the news of the taking of Grol by the Bishop of Munsters Forces. That Town, if not the strongest and most conside∣rable that the Hollanders were masters of, was yet of great consequence to them, as lying on the Frontiers of Germany, and being excellently well seated; on which ac∣count twas fortified by Charles the Fifth. It hath five Bastions, fair and good Ram∣parts,
besides a great ditch, that cannot easily be emtied, by reason of the river Sling, that discharges it self into it. The 11 his Majesty being advised that M. the Prince intended to swim the Rhine, and endeavour to force the enemy from the other side, though they appear'd to be considera∣bly strong, resolved to be present in person at that Enterprise, which never had any equal, nor attended with like success, and, as it were, divest himself for some time of his Title and Dignity, to share with his Soldiers, under the quality of a Feild-Marshal or private person, the honour of a day, that was almost to decide the fortune of all Holland. To this intent he left his Army in their Quarters; and having taken with him his house Guard, and 2000 loose horse, he incam∣ped on the side of the River, on the right hand of Tolhuys, a small Fort about a league below Skinksconce in the Isle of Betaw. The enemy, that lay intrench'd on the other side, in number about three or four thousand, gave fire, and skirmished all that day. We on our side caused some Foot to advance, whilst we raised a battery of five peices of Canon. In the mean time the Army of M. de Turenne approached to pass over the Rhine, over against Reés, on a float of wood:
who after he had convayed over his Majesty, with his Army and the baggage to Wezel, came down to do the like with his own Army: but the water being low, and no great wind stirring, they encamped at Nerdmorm∣ter, and began not to pass till the evening: and so the foot continued to pass all night, and afterwards the horse. The 12 in the morning, his Majesty hav∣ing expressed he should be glad to have the passage of Tolbuys sounded, to try if it were not too deep before they ventured on it, M. the Count de Guiche went immediately, and sounded it himself. Thereupon command was given to horse; and his Majesty, vext to see the enemy pretend a desire to engage, and not being able to endure those out∣ward signs, that were so contrary to their inclinations, without staying to draw up, and not considering whether his Guards, Gendarmes, and light horse were present or no, who were to make the first onset, having found the Cuirassiers near at hand, he commanded them to fling them∣selves into the water and cross the river; which they did so briskly, that the poor M. the Marquis de la Salle, whom they hap∣pened to meet in their way, received from them five or six dangerous wounds, as if he had been a Hollander (for indeed they
took him for one) though he was clothed after the French mode, and had a white scarf on. Monsieur the Count de Guiche was at the head of them, and did all that a good Captain and a brave Soldier could have done on the like occasion. The Forces of his Ma∣jesties house were commanded to pass next, and to swim the river; which they imme∣diately did with so much courage and reso∣lution, as struck a terrour into the Enemy. They were followed by a great number of Volunteers; and immediately our Canon began to play, as also did that of the Ene∣my. In the mean time General Wurts, Com∣mander of the Troops that guarded the pas∣sage, being a stout and well experienced Captain, marched at the head of the first squadron, and caused them to advance into the water up to their Horses bellies, having given order to all the rest to follow him in∣to the river, some on the right, and some on the left hand. The first squadron advanced with resolution, and made a brisk discharge, at which M. the Count de Nogent, Feild-Marshal to that Army, a person of a brave and daring spirit, received a wound in his head, which made him sink into the water, where he was unfortunatly drown'd. But the following squadrons that had orders to enter the river, not daring to run that hazard, stayed
in the rear of the former, and by that means gave liberty to our men to pass, both on the right and the left wing, and at the same time to come upon them on the flank. In the mean time the Dragoons, being impa∣tient also to cross the river, though having had no order they did not dare to do it, ad∣vanced part of them into the water, that they might skirmish more commodiously, and never ceased giving fire. At length the Dutch took the rout, and the Commander himself, that had enter'd so briskly into the water, was forced to consult his own safety by flight. For having comforted his men, and told them that no Nation but ours, was ca∣pable of such bold enterprises, and that no∣thing would be able to resist us, trusted his life and his honour to his Horses feet, and at length made his escape, after he had fled a league or two, and suffered a continual loss of his men in the pursuit. During this time, the Generals and Monsieur the Prince him∣self having past the river, the Enemies Foot, that could not take the same course that the Horse had done, and had nothing to hope for but death or mercy, began to mollify, and M. de Longueville with the Duke and other Volunteers were coming up to them. But M. the Prince observing the Enemy to yeild, and fearing the youthfull
heat of the young Gentlemen would pro∣duce some bad effect, run up, crying they would cause his son to be killed: and having made all possible hast, he came up to the trenches as soon as the rest, and cryed out to the Enemy they were all Rogues, and if they shot once more, he would have them all hanged. His threats made them all lay down their arms, and cry out in their own Language Kartyr, Kartyr. But the misfor∣tune was, that M. de Longueville, not taking notice of what had past, and desiring to free that Post, found a passage too soon; and falling upon the first Officer that he met, kill'd him on the place: and upon the con∣fused noise he heard of Kartyr, which the Enemy demanded, he gave a sign with his hand, and cryed, no Quarter, being imme∣diatly followed by all his men that were then present. Thereupon the Enemy, despairing of their lives, betook themselves again to their arms, and gave one shot more, which proved a very fortunate one to them: for at it the sieur de Longueville, M. de Guitry, Grand Master of the Kings Wardrobe, M. d'Aubusson, the Marquis de Tasse, nephew to Monsieur the Marshal de la Force, and the Count de Theobon were killed upon the place. Several others also were wounded, amongst which were M. the Duke de Coistin, and M.
de Vivonne, M. the Prince de Marsillac, M. the Count de Saulx, the last in the face and the arm, after he had been ingaged in the general and a single Combat: For having gone too far in the pursuit of the Enemy, he found himself alone with one of their Officers, who put himself upon his guard, and wounded the Count in his face. M. de Brouilly dyed in a short time of his wounds, M. de Termes was also wounded, and M. the Count de Revel received a wound on his arm, and another of a musket shot in his thigh. M. de Beringhen was shot through the breast. The other persons of note that were wound∣ed, were the Marquis de Beauveau, de Mont-revert, de Beaumont, de S. Arnoul, and which was worst of all, Monsieur the Prince had his left arm broke at the wrist; which accident did much retard and lessen his Majesties Conquests: for his name alone made the Enemy tremble, and they began not to make resistance, till they had learnt the news of his mishap: considering too that from that time Monsieur de Turenne was obliged to command in his place, and to join the Troops of his own Army with those of the King: so that of three Armies there remained now but two. The enemies also on their side lost in this rencounter three or four hundred men, that were killed upon
the place, besides a great nume that were taken prisoners. After all this laughter the Forces of the Kings Huse draw up on the edge of the Rhine, and the sde of the Island, and quartered at Bihva. Th Any that had hitherto been commanded by Monsieur de Turenne, continued all day passing the Rhine over against Rees, and were all over that night. The thirteenth, the Bridge of Boats, that had been making the day before, was fi∣nished; and the Army of M. the Prince be∣gan at break of day to march over with M. de Turenne, who from that time com∣manded alwaies in the place of his Highness. When they were all over they pillaged Tol∣huys, a plain Castle with one great Tower, guarded only by a ditch and a wall: but being seated within a musket shot of the river, near the passage, a hundred looss horse, that had been drawn out of the Fort of Schain to secure that Castle, had time enough to give two volleys of musket shot, and dis∣charge twice or thrice a peice of Canon that carried eighteen pound bullet charged with cartridges, before we could get over and come up to them: and afterwards they had the conveniency to retire before our coming, because M. the Count de Guiche, who was the first that passed, had busied himself in
pursuit of the horse, and M. the Prince of the foot, as was said before. We found in this Castle store of fair and good Moveables, some persons also, that had retired thither in hope that we would not have attacqued Holland, about this Isle, but have passed directly on to Yssel, where the Prince of Orange, and the Count Maurice were both with their Armies. After the pillage of this Castle, Monsieur de Turenne marched on close after the Ene∣my, a party of which he overtook, and found breaking a bridge, upon the Channel that runs from Arnhem to Nimegen, over which we must necessarily pass. These men, though but a small party, had a mind to finish their enterprise, perhaps because they thought they might be second∣ed with the rest of the Army, that was not gone far; but having skirmish'd a little with the Vanguard, the Dragoons lighting of their horses, set upon them so vigourously, that they gave them the rout, and forced them into Arnhem. And finding themselves well enough at the end of a bridge that lyes over the Rhine, and reaches from this Town to the Isle of Betau, they lodged there, maugre the Canon and musket shot of the Enemy, that fortunately killed more horses then men.
His Majesty having call'd a Council be∣fore the departure of M. de Turenne, as soon as it was ended began to march towards Emerick, to joyn with his Army, which all this time lay in their Quarters at Reés. The Army also, that had been commanded by M. de Turenne, came thither likewise, and made up one body with that of the King. The Troops that had followed his Majesties two days before, and those of his own House did the like. M. the Duke of Monmouth, natural Son to the King of England, arrived the same day at the Camp at Emerick, with 7000 foot, that were all brisk and active men. Mon∣sieur the Cardinal de Bouillon that day consecrated anew the great Church of Reés. The 14th his Majesty rested with his whole Army, at the Camp of Emerick. After dinner he visited M. the Prince (who the day be∣fore had caused himself with the rest that were wounded, to be removed into this Town) and at his return took a view of the Duke of Monmouths Forces. Monsieur de Turenne seeing his affaires so well advanced before Arnhem, resolved to lay siege to it, and thereupon having taken a view of it, and taken up his Quarters, he sammoned the Town. In the mean while, that no time might
be lost, M. the Count du Plessis employed some men about repairing the boats that the Enemies had began to break, as being neces∣sary for our passage; but in that action he was killed with a Canon shot to the great regret of the whole Army. The Dragoons, which were much incommoded by a guard of the Enemy placed in a redoubt on the other side of the river, were resolved to ven∣ture the passage, which, after orders were given, they performed with so much resolu∣tion and success, as struck a terrour into the Town; whereupon the Burghers began to mutiny, and at length forced the Garrison to leave of firing. The Fame of General Wurts defeat, and of our entrance into Betaw, was not long a spreading, and the noise of it no sooner came to the ears of the Prince of Orange, who with his Army guarded the passage of Yssel, but the Enemy, being daunted with the news, thought of nothing but a retreat, which was done in so great hast, as terrified all the places through which they passed. In the mean time M. de Turenne ordered 150 horse under the command of a Captain of the horse of Condé, to swim the river, and to fall on their rear Guard, that passed pretty near Arnham. The Enemy little expecting this attaque, as thinking themselves secured
by the River, were so surprised at this as∣sault, that the Guard of the Baggage aban∣doned it all to those few horse, who made themselves masters of it at their leasure, and returned loaded with so great a booty, that they had enriched themselves by it, though they had not joyned to it the two other of, which they had also the spoile, which amount∣ed to no less then fourty thousand Francks. The same day M. the Cardinal de Bouillon consecrated anew the great Church of E∣merick. The 15. The Kings Army rested, and His Majesty took a view of it after dinner. Upon the Summons that M. de Turenne had given to Arnhem, the Citizens began to mutiny, and threatned the Garrison to cut all their Throats if they fired any more; whereupon they came and demanded Arti∣cles: but M. de Turenne sent them to the King, and immediatly marched away with the greatest part of his Army, to besiege Knotzembourg, otherwise called the Fort of Nimigen, because it is seated on the right side of the Wahal, directly opposite to that great Town, that lies on the left hand. He arrived thither time enough to open his Trenches that Evening, it being but three little Leagues from Arnhem. That Night we worked with so much success, as to lodge
our selves on their Counterscarpe, by which we became Masters of their covered way, but not without some difficulty, and the loss of several Men: for they defended them∣selves from the Fort very briskly, and gave continual fire from the Town; besides three Boats, each of them provided with 8, 10, or 12 pieces of Canon, came round, and fired at us with full Charges at about thirty paces distance. During all that Night, there was fired so great a number of Canon-shot, that those that heard it from Emerick, where His Majesties Army lay, could not imagine where so continual a noise should be made: but from another place where the noise could not plainly be heard, one would have thought they had been Musket-shot, and on∣ly an engagement of some Foot. The 16. His Majesty early in the Morning parted with all His Army from Emerick, and encamped at Latem upon the River Yssell, or rather the Channel of Drusus. A branch of this River that runs from Arnhem to Do∣esburg, is a Channel that communicates be∣tween the Rhine and the Yssel, which was made by Drusus in the time of the Romans, whence 'tis called the Channel of Drusus, or the Drusian Ditch. In the mean time we advanced to Zevenaer, a small Town, that hath no other Fortification but its Ramparts,
so that we made our selves Masters of it without any great difficulty. Presently af∣ter that, M. the Count de l' Orge, and M. the Marquis de Ranes, had command to pass the Yssel; the one with 4000 Horse, and the o∣ther with the Regiment Royal of Dragoons, to take the places that lie before Doesburg, which immediatly they did. But the De∣puties of Arnhem having came to the King, and brought the Keys of their Town with∣out Conditions, His Majesty in the After∣noon gave order to the M. de Ranes to go with his Dragoons to take possession of the Town. M. the Marquis de Louvois went thither also; and the Inhabitants had granted them a freedom of their Religion, with all their Priviledges, but the Garrison were made Prisoners of War, and disarmed, to the number of 3000 Foot and 200 Horse, which were very sufficient to have defended the place. The Dragoons were hardly ma∣sters of the Gates, when 200 Bores that came to the Garrison with Provision, desired entrance; whom we suffered to come in, and afterwards made Prisoners with the rest. Arnhem is a great Town, seated on the right side of that Branch of the Rhine which keeps its name, and washes the Walls of the Town. Its situation is partly high, partly
low, being commanded on that side that looks towards the Velue by a Hill, which to repair the Injury it doth it, sends down a torrent of Water, that defends it on the other side by a great flat bottomed Ditch, all lined with Free-stone, which is the fairest and largest that one shall any where see, and which doth almost surround the Town, except on that side where the Rhine washes the Walls, and doth sufficient∣ly defend it. For the rest, the Hollanders have taken care enough, and bin very dili∣gent in fortifying it; and I may very well affirm, They have not very many Fortifica∣tions so good as these. They are all lined with Brick, which is not ordinary in their other Towns. The Ramparts also are very fair and large. To conclude, all things are very good, and it might be very well look'd upon as one of their best Towns. At nine in the Evening, M. the Count de Guiche brought thither the Regiment of Na∣var, and the Dragoons came back and en∣camped on the side of the Yssel. In the mean time M. de Turenne continued to storm the Fort of Nimigen, which defended it self al∣most all day with equal force: but having fired also on the Boats, they were run a ground so well, that the Enemy fearing least in the night we should make our descent in∣to
the Ditch, and so enter the Town, they rendred themselves up, after having killed 1000 or 1200 Men, of which the Sieur de la Plastriere, Lieutenant Colonel of the Re∣giment Lyonnois, and the Sieur Alsan the son, Lieutenant of the Colonel of Champagne, were the principal. M. Magalotty Camp-Marshal, lost a Finger of one Hand, and was hurt in the other. The 17. in the Morning, the Marquis de Ranes repass'd the Yssel with his Dragoons, upon a Bridge of Boats which he made over it, and went and joyn'd with the Kings Ar∣my, which by reason of a great maras was forced to turn back by the way of Zovenaer; and then passing by Dutecum went and be∣sieg'd Doesburg. M. the Prince removed to Arnhem, that he might not be far from the King. M. de Turenne, who came himself to acquaint the King with the taking of Knotzembourg, return'd immediatly, and caus'd us to march towards Skenkssconce, which since our passage over the River had been block'd up. The Marquis of Sauvebeuf, who, as has been said, was hurt before Mae∣stricht the 24. of May, and there taken Pri∣soner, came back to the Camp cured of his Wounds, and without having paid any ran∣som, by the means of the generous C. Rhin∣grave, who, together with the Spaniards in the
Garrison (whose Commanders had taken his part) had a contest with the States and Dutch party upon that account; for though the Dutch were willing enough to release him, yet they were very eager for to have him pay his ransom first: But at last, after a great dispute on both sides, the Spa∣niards threatned to forsake the Town if they would not agree; which made the States consent to give him his liberty freely, toge∣ther with a Pass to return to the Army. The 18. The King summon'd Doesburg, but the Governor refusing to hearken to the Trumpeter, or receive the Letter he brought, His Najesty ordered preparations to be made to attaque it. Faggots and Gabions were commanded to be provided, which was done with all diligence. The Count de Lorge who lay on the other side of the River with 4000 Horse, advanced toward the Town, to hinder any Succors from being put into it that way. M. de Turenne caused Trench∣es to be open'd against Skenksconce, in which was a Garrison of 1900 Men. The same day, about four of the clock, M. de Rochefort, Captain of a Company of the Life Guards, and Lieutenant General in this Campagne, who had receiv'd Orders to be ready to march with 4000 Horse, set for∣ward only with 1800, because at so short
warning the Victuallers had not had time to bake Bread enough for so great a number. M. de Genlis was given him for his Camp-Marshal. The Marquis de Ranes set forward likewise with the Regiment Royal of Dra∣goons. We swam our Horses over the Yssel, and march'd on all the rest of that day, and the night following, without drawing bit. The 19. was spent in preparations for o∣pening of Trenches before Doesburg, in making Faggots, Gabions and Bridges for communication. M. de Turenne on his side so vigorously assaulted Skenksconce, that the Garrison beginning to be disheartned, and dispairing of any succor, were thinking up∣on capitulating; which M. de Turenne su∣specting, sent the Colonel Regiment of Dra∣goons to attaque the Fort of S. Andrew, which made no long resistance, though there were in it 200 Men; and it be, I think, the best Fortress the Enemy hath. It lieth in the narrowest place of the Isle of Bommel, compast with five good Bastions, and water'd almost quite round by the River Wahal, so that it is impossible to drain its Ditches, and almost so, to make any Bridge over them without the consent of the Besieged. M. de Rochefort, with whom as I said we swam the Yssel, and march'd all night, continued still his march all this day, so that we were al∣most
23 hours continually on Horse-back without drawing Bit. At two of the clock in the Afternoon, as we came out of a very fine Village, which we found deserted, our Van-guard discover∣ed a Body of Foot; which assoon as we went about to pursue, sav'd themselves in the neighboring Woods, which made us think they were only some Peasants, or some that had been laid in Ambush by Count Mau∣rice, whose Army we were in pursuit of. At last we came to Amerfort, with design to attaque and take it by assault; but the In∣habitants, who had ever since the Prince of Orange his flight, kept some at the top of a Steeple to give them notice of our coming (that they might not fall into the Trap we had laid for them) and being advertized of our coming, came out before us, and obtain'd the free use of their Religion and preserva∣tion of their Rights and Priviledges, open'd their Gates to the Marquis de Ranes, who entred the Town with the Regiment Royal of Dragoons which he had brought with him, and staid there until the 27 of the same Month. The Sieur de Mazelles, a Captain of Horse, having at the same time been drawn out (with his Company, which con∣sisted of 50 Maistres, and the Sieur de Bon∣neval Captain of Dragoons, with 100 Mai∣stres
of the same Body) to go forward and get intelligence of the Enemy, march'd all night toward Naerden, a little, but very strong Town, which hath six Bastions, and lies just upon the Frontier of the Province of Holland, 3 little Leagues from Amsterdam; in which was a Garrison of 200 Men, as well Horse as Foot. At his arrival, he made all the noise he could with Drums & Trum∣pets, beating and sounding divers Marches, and afterwards summon'd the Town; which being terrified and surprized, the Burgo∣masters of it came out to Treat, which they spun out so long, that the Garrison had time to make their escape: And when they were all gone, they open'd their Gates and admit∣ed him. As soon as he was in the Town, he made enquiry to know if there was no Sol∣diers in the place, and was told there was not; but considering that place to be of too much importance to be left without a Gar∣rison by the Hollander, he caus'd one of the Burgomasters to be apprehended, and told him, They should all lose their Heads, for not discovering to the King truly whether there were any Soldiers in the Town. These threats made them confess, That truly there had been some there, but as soon as they heard the noise of the French Troops, they had fled towards Amsterdam; whereupon
he immediatly caus'd the Gates to be open'd, and went out in pursuit of them; and at the same time order'd his Lieutenant, with some Horse, to follow the Enemies Horse, who were not yet out of sight; and were some a Horse-back, and others on Foot, their Horses being laden with their Baggage. The Lieutenant pursued them to the Gates of Amsterdam, got the greatest part of their Baggage, and in his way homewards sum∣mon'd Muyden, which not finding in case to make any resistance, he entered, and was master of it for 2 hours: but at last finding himself to weak to keep that place, he re∣turned to fetch more Men; but in the mean time things put on another face. At the same time the Sieur de Mazelles on his side, had pursued the Foot, which took the way of the Fields and enclosures, and passing over 3 Bridges, still broke them as soon as they were got over, so that he was forced to his Horses strength to follow them. But the third time as he swam, his Horse was mired, so that taking only his Pistols, he left him there and follow▪d on, only accompanied with about 20 more of his Company, who making up to them upon the very mouths of their Muskets, at last took almost all the Soldiers, and two of their Captains Prison∣ers.
This day the Inhabitants and Burgoma∣sters of Ʋtrecht, and the Towns depending on it, being frighted by the suddain Con∣quests and Enterprizes which His Majesty so fortunatly and vigorously prosecuted, after 3 or 4 days consultation sent a Trumpeter to ask for a Pass, for them to come and bring the King the Keys of their Town and its dependents, viz. Amersfort, (which we had unknown to them already taken) Ew∣ick, Rhenen and Montfort. The same day we were inform'd, that the States-General had left the Hague in a fright, and retired to Am∣sterdam with all their Writings and Riches; how they arrived there the seventeenth, and assembled themselves to consult on Saturday the eighteenth, being very much frighted and full of consternation. That they mi∣strusted the Prince of Orange who had so soon taken flight, and retired with his Army to the Country about Leiden. We heard likewise of the pittiful condition to which Count Maurice and his Army were reduc'd, (who some days before had fled beyond Ʋ∣trecht, they having refus'd to admit him) and that he was now marching for Amsterdam, whether he had been sent for: That some of his Companies had not above five or six Men left, the rest having forsook him and fled to divers parts: That when they
were near Amersfort, a Bore having in sport told them, he had seen a great party of French thereabouts, immediately upon hearing of it, they took their heels and ed above 2 leagues, without stopping. The Dke of Luxembourg came now, and laid e to Deventer. The 20 the Kings Army open'd their Trenches before Doesburg: they wrought hard all night pretty freely and undisturb'd∣ly, under the command of the Duke of Roannez, at the head of four Batalions of the French Guards, defended by Monsieur de Rommecourt, who commanded the horse Guards; for the Enemy fired but very spa∣ringly. Monsieur de Rochefort left Amersfort in the morning, and with a party of horse march'd towards Ʋtrecht, and by the way heard that Naerden was taken, and that the Count Maurice was not far from it. M. de Rancs came back to Amersfort, and took with him 150 horse, 50 of which were Dragoons, and we march'd all night that way. In the mean time the Marquis de la Trousse, who had been out by the King with 3 Squadrons to march towards Zutphen, frighted them of that place not a little, so that the Burgomasters considering that the longer they held out, the worse conditions they should have, and that on the other side
they could hope for no succours, sent to let him know that they desir'd they might send Deputies to the King to Capitulate for them, and that their Governour would not be against it: the Marquis de la Trousse pre∣sently inform'd his Majesty of what had pass'd, whereupon Monsieur prepar'd to march thither, and in the mean time the Marquis de Ranes sent some Dragoons to the Castle of Em, who possest themselves of it. This Castle takes its name from the little river Em, which runs from Amersfort, and discharges it self into the Zuiderzée, after it hath run by this Castle which lyes near the mouth of it. The 21 the Garrison of Doesburg, which the night before were as quiet as if they had been a sleep, began to bestir them∣selves in the morning, and at break of day began to fire very furiously: but this hinder'd us not from going on in our work happily enough, and with little loss, so that the Bat∣teries were made fit to play. Monsieur being come to Zutphen, sum∣mon'd it, but they absolutely refus'd to yeild it up, which so much the more incensed his Royal Highness, because the day before they had sent to propose the yeilding it. The Marquis of Ranes arriv'd at Naerden about 2 of the clock in the morning, he rein∣forc'd
the Garrison with 50 Dragoons, be∣sides those 100 which were there already, with the Company of the Sieur de Marelles, upon notice that Count Maurice was there∣about with his Troops, and that he had put 2000 men into Muyden (which he had that day done so suddenly, that the Lieutenant, who had been master of it 2 houres, and went to fetch more men to put into it, when he came back, found the Enemy possest of it) and had now retrench'd himself on the other side of the stream of Wesep. Monsieur de Turenne at last made himself Master of Skenksconce, and then turn'd his Arms to∣wards Nimegen. Skenksconce is a little hole (as I may say) so famous that it were unnecessary to say any thing of it, but it is also of more than ordinary concern to the Possessours, because of its situation, which is just on the point of the Island Betaw, just where the Rhine divides it self into two great arms, whereof one retains its own name and runs towards Arnhem, and the other takes the name of Wahal, and leads to Nimegen. No Vessel can go up or down either River without their leave, who are Masters of this Fort; so that it is the Key which ei∣ther opens or shuts up all communication between Holland and Germany. This makes
it of very great importance; for no Mer∣chandize as Rhenish Wine, Timber, and chiefly Firr-trees, which continually come down that way from Switzerland, Suaveland, and other places of Germany, and bring a great income both to those who send for them thence, and also to those who sell them again at second hand to other Nations, who come thither to buy them; so that the trade both of these Commodities, and a hundred more, cannot go on without the leave of this Fort. And as its situation is most ad∣vantagious, so is its strength proportion∣able, for on 2 sides Nature hath so strength∣en'd it with the defence of this great River, that it is not to be set upon that way, and on the other, which is that that faces the Isle, Art hath fortified it with a great ditch full of water, good Bastions and half Moons, and a strong Rampart, which make it in a manner impregnable. The In∣habitants of the Country round about, who can still remember former Wars, do assure us it was always thought impregnable, and in History we never find it ever was taken above twice, the first time in the year 1636, when a certain Captain of a Garrison in Guelderland for the King of Spain, call'd Enhoolt, being very much incens'd against the Hollanders, for putting divers of his
friends and kindred to death, took it by surprize, so that this can hardly be called a taking of it: the second time was after a Siege which will be remembred many ages to come, since it lasted 8 months, and con∣sum'd so many men before it, that in many places it is yet known by the name of the French burying place, for they had then taken part with the Dutch, and did with their blood purchase there both Glory and Vi∣ctory. It is likewise reported that when it was taken, there were left in it but 12 men, who did even then maintain the place. Deventer, at last being tired out by the Bishop of Munsters Granados, yeilded, and it's Garrison march'd out with their arms towards Nimegen, with a Convoy, but so weak a one, that when they came near Zut∣phen, the Hollanders in spight of the Convoy, cast themselves into it, and this recruit it was which made the Governour change his mind, and deny to yeild up the Town to Monsieur, as he himself had propos'd the day before. The Marquis de Ranes having visited Naerden, and left good directions for the preservation of that Place, departed thence about 6 of the clock for Amersfort, and left the Burgomasters of Muyden not a little confounded for having profer'd the Keys
of that Town, when it was no more in their power to let him into it, and even them selves were shut out of it. The same day Deputies from the States left Amsterdam to come and find the King at Doesburg, whose Garrison attempted to make a sally, but without any success, for they were presently repulsed. The 22 the Sieur Martinet Camp-Master to the Kings Regiment, appointed Governor of Emerick, and Camp-Marshal in this Cam∣pagne, imagining that some persons did dayly watch him out of a suspition, that he had not so much courage as he pretended to, did all that day and night run himself upon all dangers, and so fortunately, that with∣out receiving any wound, he advanc'd with his party much further among the Enemies Posts then could be expected; so that by ill fortune the Count of Soissons, who com∣manded the Isle of Yssel, and was order'd to shoot cross way upon a Post of the Enemies, not being aware that the said Sieur Mar∣tinet had already gain'd it, plaid upon it, so that Martinet was kill'd by a Canon shot; the same ill fortune took away the Sieur Sourry a Switzer Captain, and the Sieur Cy∣ron, who was appointed Governour of S. Menehould. This gave occasion to some who delight in railery, to say, that Doesbourg, which
the Hollanders had taken such pains to for∣tifie, and had 4500 men in it (who yeilded themselves up to mercy) had cost the King but one Swallow, one Mouse, and one Worm, from the signification of the French names, for indeed the Place yeilded upon it. Doesburg is a Town which hath not been long famous, and indeed was at first very inconsiderable, but since the Hollanders have found the possession of the Yssel to be so ne∣cessary to the preservation of their Country, they thought fit to fortifie all the Places that lye upon that River, and chiefly this which is situate just where the Channel of Drusus mingles its waters with those of this river. So that at present it is in a very good con∣dition, having good Fortifications, which for the most part are coated on the outside. It is strengthned on one side by the River, and on the other by a great Marsh, which lies between it and Arnhem, which altogether hinder it from being any way accessible, but by one neck of Land. This place yeilded notwithstanding this day upon the same terms as did the rest. Af∣terwards his Majesty sent Monsieur a recruit of 4000 foot and 1500 horse, because he had with him but 6000 foot and 200 horse be∣fore. His Majesty sent him likewise the parti∣culars of the Capitulation at Deesburg, where∣fore
Monsieur caused Zutphen to be again summoned, and sent the Governour a sight of the Articles of the Capitulation at Does∣burg; but this taking no effect, his Royal Highness caus'd many faggots to be made, and in the evening had the Trenches open'd by the Regiments of Normandy, Turenne, and Orleans. Monsieur de Turenne continued battering Nimegen from the Fort of Knotzembourg, without attaquing it on any other side; but sent and took in Worm. The Sieurs de Rochefort and de Ranes went to Naerden, and drew near to Muyden, to take a view of the Enemy, who appear'd in great numbers upon a Bastion, but never offer'd to sally out. From thence they return∣ed to Amersfort, whither came also a party of Musqueteers and 1800 horse from the Kings Army. The body of Monsieur the Count de Nogent, who had been kill'd by a musket shot, as he swam the Rhine, was found about 3 leagues lower, and bu∣ried in the great Church at Zevenaer with all possible State. News was brought to the King of De∣venter's being taken by the Confederate Ar∣myes of Munster and Cologne, and that Swol, Campen, Elburg, Alderwick, Hasselt, Hat∣tem and Ommen had upon the single sum∣mons
of a Trumpet, drove out their Gar∣risons, and received those sent them by the Confederates. The 23 Monsieur de Turenne sent news to the King, of the taking of the Forts of S. Andrew and Worm's, which are the Keys to the Island of Bommelle. Before Zutphen the Canon was in a condition to play by break of day, and did the Enemy conside∣rable dammage. An hour before day, the besieg'd tried to give a false Alarm, but it succeeded not as they hop'd: for the Cheva∣lier de Lorraine, who had not stirred from that Trench, discovered their design, and kept the Soldiers in due order. At 2 in the morning Monsieur de Rochefort, who had return'd to Amersfort, left it again to go with all his horse, as well those who came the last night, as those which were in the Town before, and encamp'd at the Gates of Ʋtrecht, between the Town and the Enemy. The Marquis de Ranes stayed at Amersford with his Royal Regiment of Dragoons, and in the evening caus'd all things necessary for an Assault to be carried upon the works, that they might be ready in case of need. About nine in the morning the same day, the Sieur Hotain, a Colonel of the Munster Troops, who then commanded a flying Party, came before the Town, and summon'd it, but un∣derstanding
it was already possest, he com∣manded his Army to make a halt, and gave order that 800 horse and 500 Dragoons, which he commanded, should refresh them∣selves. Afterwards he desir'd he might come in and salute the Governour; which he did, and breakfasted with him, he, and 3 or 4 more of his Company. He confirm'd the news of Deventer, and of the deaths of M. de Gerzey, and M. de Beaufort, Camp Master to a Regiment of horse, who in a sally which the Enemy made, beat them back into the Town, but having engag'd himself beyond possibility of retreating, receiv'd a great many wounds, of which he dyed on the place, as well as the sieur Mallet, a Captain of horse in the same Regiment, and the sieur Mauvoi∣siniere his Lieutenant. The same person af∣firm'd he had newly made himself Master of Elbairg and Harderwick, which are two little Towns above Campen, near Zuiderzee. After breakfast, as he took leave, he said he was going to raise contribution of all the places that depended upon those two Towns, and that he had taxed the Peasants at a Patagon (which is equal to a French Crown) for every Hearth, and then was re∣turning to Harderwick. A party of the Colonel Regiment of Dra∣goons being sent to Waningen, took it, and
stayed there some days, as well to refresh themselves, as to stay till there should come thither a body of foot. Waningen is a pretty Town about the big∣ness of Meaux in Brie, situated in an un∣even Country. On the upper side of it there lyes a heath of 4 or 5 leagues extent in the narrowest place, on the other side there are very good Pastures, intermingled with some Arable land, which is very fruitful. This town lying in the midst of many others, the States thought it unnecessary to fortifie, but left it in its ancient condition, so that it hath hardly any Fortification besides its rampart. The same day a Swiss Drummer, who had been at Amsterdam to carry news of some Prisoners to their Relations, and to desire them to send them money to pay their ran∣som, brought back word that he had been brought before Count Maurice, and mighti∣ly question'd by him: that his Army within their Retrenchments did not seem to contain above 4000 men, that they seem'd much dis∣may'd, and that all the fierceness which he strove to put on, could not hide his con∣cern when he heard in what condition the Kings Army was, and that the Count had taken order to let him see as little as might be of the disorder and slenderness of his Army. Let us therefore give them a little leasure to
take heart again if they can, and leaving a while the continuation of our Journal, let us rejoyce with the whole Kingdome of France, at our Great Monarchs fortunate Progress, and the Birth of a Prince, which GOD hath now sent Him.
A JOURNAL OF THE War with Holland. THE SECOND PART. ALTHOUGH Men naturally love change, and novelties carry still with them somewhat of delight, yet there are some things that immediatly disgust us, particularly those that are forc'd upon us. As God at our Creation made us free, so is there nothing more repugnant to our na∣tures, then to be forced or constrain'd to any thing, or deprived of that lov'd liberty, to which we were born. This it was which made the Philosophers say, that nothing wch is violent or forced could be of long con∣tinuance, because such things directly op∣pose our nature, whose power cannot long be withstood, it being nothing but the Will of God impress'd upon his Creatures.
We ought not then to think it strange, that those who have from their youth been brought up under one kind of Government, should find a great deal of difficulty in wean∣ing themselves from that, and accustoming themselves to live under another, seeing it is natural to us so to do, and the very irrational Creatures do as much by instinct: as we see every day in Horses, who if they have been us'd to the Saddle cannot without much difficulty be brought to draw; and Dogs that have been us'd to hunt, will not without much trouble be brought to couch when their game is in view. It is a common saying that a Monkey will never leave his Apish tricks, and that a Fox will ever love Geese to his last: and so it is with Men, for those who have liv'd under a Monarchical State, are very hardly brought to be contented with Democracy, and all men think that kind of Government best, under which they them∣selves have been brought up. So that, though the French yoake be much less greivous to the Subject then that which the States have laid on the People of Holland (amongst whom the very Servants pay Taxes out of their wages) yet we had great reason to watch very carefully over those whom we had now lately conquer'd, upon the account of what we mention'd before, least Nature
should prevail in them, as it usually doth in other Creatures. But good Fortune, which hath always attended the French Arms, and that peculiar blessing which Heaven hath bestow'd on our King, of being equally both fear'd and belov'd where ever he goes, had taken care to make our suspicions groundless, by inspiring into the People of those Countreys as strong inclinations, and as much love towards his Majesty, as was to be found in the hearts of his most Loyal French Subjects; and we did very remark∣ably discover in many of them so greedy and earnest a desire of seeing us, that in many places they were even afraid, least we would not come and take their Towns; and I have been told they desir'd nothing so much as to become his Majesties Subjects, and fear'd nothing more then not to be so. The timely course that all the Province of Ʋtrecht took, doth sufficiently justifie what I have said, and it is likewise certain that had not the States gone in good time to Amster∣dam, the Inhabitants of that great Town were thinking of delivering us up the Keys: But those blood sucking Leeches, whose power would by this means have come to no∣thing, and who could no longer have fed up∣on and enrich'd themselves with the spoyles of the poor Subject, hinder'd their design,
inspiring into them a false and imaginary kind of courage, which they took from de∣spair, and by which they let themselves be misled, never thinking of that happiness and quiet which their neighbours did now en∣joy under the French Government, and how much they were pleas'd with the change. Their rejoycing at it did visibly appear, when they first heard the news of the birth of the Duke of Anjou, which every body with one voice did congratulate; and for Joy Bon∣fires were made in all places, every body striving who should with most zeal shew his resentment of so welcome news. But it will not perhaps be impertinent here to inform the Reader how that this kind of Ceremony is by them perform'd in a much different way from what we do on the like occasions in France: for whereas we do generally as∣semble our selves together to some Public place, where a great Fire is made on the Public charge, no man contributing any thing more to it then he needs must, though he defire never so much to be thought a good Subject; with them on the contrary, every House-keeper makes a fire before his door, and the greater the fire it is the sign of the greater zeal; neither do they make their fires by piling of wood up, but fixing a stake, at the top of which they fasten pitch barrels and
such like combustible matter, which being lighted, they make merry and sing about it in the same manner as we do. The 24 his Majesty sent a supply to Mon∣sieur, that he might hasten the reducing of Zutphen, where the same day we made our selves masters of a Sluce which did us good service in draining the ditch. The besiedg'd made a sally hoping to regain it, but they were beaten back into the Town without being able to do any thing. The Chevalier de Lorraine behav'd himself bravely on that occasion, and us'd them so severely that they have not since dar'd to shew themselves. The Regiments of Piedmont and des Vaisseaux were in their turns reliev'd by those of Ca∣stelnau and de la Reine, who gain'd the Coun∣terscarp, which put the Enemy into no little fright, so that they now began to reflect up∣on the desperate condition they were in. M. de Turrenne seeing that the playing of the Cannon from Knotzemburg did not so work upon those of Nimegen, as to make them think of a surrender, prepar'd himself to lay a formal Siege to it. As for Monsieur de Rochefort, when the Inhabitants of Ʋtrecht, who had refus'd to admit a Dutch Garrison, or give Count Maurice passage, had put two of their Gates into his hands, he caus'd them to be kept
by his Musqueteers, and backd them with all the other forces he had with him, which were encamp'd over against S. Catharine's Gate, on the border of the channel that goes hence to Leiden and so to Rotterdam, and then sent to give notice of what had pass'd to the King, on whom the Bishop of Strats∣bourg waited the same day. The 25 the Bishop of Munster made the King a visit, and after having made his ap∣pearance with the ordinary solemnity on such occasions, he had a private conference with him, which lasted a great while; and having din'd he return'd, having been presented by his Majesty with a Cross of Diamonds of great value; afterwards his Majesty gave audience to an Envoy extraordinary from the Elector of Tiers. The Duke of Roannez was ordered to go to Ʋtrecht with 3 Ba∣tallions of the French Guards, as many of the Switzers, and two Companies of the life Guards, to relieve the Musqueteers who kept that place, and the horse who back't them. The same day Monsieur de Turenne, came and din'd with the King, and inform'd him of the obstinacy of the Garrison and Inha∣bitants of Nimegen; afterwards he return'd back to give such further orders as should be found necessary.
At last Zutphen was reduced to that con∣dition, that the besieg'd began to beat a Parley betimes in the morning, and desir'd to capitulate. The Articles of Capitulation at all the places which have been won from the Hollander were in general the same, and therefore here as in other Places the Gar∣rison was made prisoners, and the place yeilded up without any other conditions. The Chevalier de Lorraine went to receive their Hostages, which were a Burgomaster and two of the Officers of the Garrison, whom he brought to his Royal Highness; who granted the Inhabitants as well here as in other places liberty of Conscience, and their Priviledges, and presently gave notice of the business to his Majesty: acquainting Him withall, that the number of his Pri∣soners was increas'd by 3000 foot and 250 horse, besides the Governor. I cannot but take this opportunity of doing Justice to Monsieur, in letting the World know that in this Siege he perform'd all that could be done by an expert General, and a valiant Soldier; he was very circumspect and watch∣full, look'd after every thing himself, and was always where there was the hottest service, going with an undaunted courage to the most dangerous place in all the Trenches, where many were kill'd round
about him, both with great and small shot, he remaining all the while fearless; so that the Chevalier de Lorraine was at last forc'd to beg of him by all means to retire from so evident danger, or at least to give him leave not to be in the same place with him, least if any harm should befall the Prince, he should be call'd to account for it. Zutphen is one of the cheif Towns of the Dutchy of Guelderland, and the Capitial of Zutphania, otherwise call'd the County of Zutphen, to which it gives the name. It is situated on the right bank of the Yssel, as it runs towards the Zuiderzee, just by the mouth of the river Borkel. It is one of the best and the strongest places the Hollanders had, it hath 9 Bastions almost all coated on the outside, 4 half Moons, 2 horn works, and without all this a very broad ditch, besides the inner one, which is twice as broad and flat bottom'd; it hath also trebble Ramparts, which make it strong almost beyond belief. Ysseltein, Oudewater, Buren, and Croanam∣burg, open'd their Gates and receiv'd Gar∣risons from Monsieur de Rochefort. The Count Maurice seeing himself so straitned, and closely pursu'd, imagining he should ere long be set upon, and not think∣ing himself strong enough to stand to it, re∣solv'd
at length to retire still further: and that he might be in some place where he might sleep safely a while, he got on the other side of a great Channel, which runs on the other side of Wesep, and quited Myen to our mercy, but because from thence there was a near way to Amsterdam, they let out the waters all thereabouts. We heard of the wounds which the Heer de Wit, the emprison'd Counselor, receiv'd within 100 paces of his own house, as he was returning home at midnight from an Assembly of the States; how he was set upon by 4 men, two of which were Citizens, and the other two Sons to a certain Coun∣sellour in the Court of Justice, who was likewise one of the States, called Vander Graef, who had given him divers stabbs in the head, neck, shoulder, and side, leaving him for dead; but that the Chirurgeons notwithstanding affirm'd his wounds not to be mortal, and gave some hopes of his life, though the Assassinates, who were taken, had little hopes of theirs. However this accident did not a little fright all men, especially the great ones, who now began to contrive how they might make an escape out of the Town, and were preparing to do it with all their Goods of value: but the multitude openly withstood their design, not suffering
so much as the Ministers of other Princes to depart. The 26. The King left the Camp at Does∣burg, and went to a place called Biloin. The Sieur Groot (commonly call'd Grotius) who came to mediate Peace between the King and States, return'd without doing any thing. Monsieur sent Father Zocoli a Jesuite, and his Confessor, to Zutphen in the Morning, there to say Mass in a Tent which was pitcht for that purpose in the middle of the Town, and about 3 of the clock, after Dinner, made his entry into it, and view'd the Town with its Ramparts, and other Fortifications. We heard the Hollander had quitted Gen∣nep, and that Monsieur the Count de Cha∣milly was gone to possess himself of it; and Grave seem'd not to intend any resolute resistance. The 27. The King left Biloin, and ad∣vann'd towards Wagemingen, after having lef orders that the Regiment de Vendosme should go and secure Arnhem. About 8 in the Morning, the second Bataillon of the Dauphins Regiment arrived at Amersford, together with some Horse, making up in all between 8 and 900 Men; some of which were to stay there, and some to march on to Naerden; so that their arrival gave liberty to the Marquis de Ranes, and his Dragoons,
which were at Amersford, to go and joyn with the Marquis de Rochefort at Ʋtrecht, where the Duke de Roannez likewise ar∣riv'd with 4500 Men of the Regiment of Guards, and two Companies of the Life-Guards, but they enter'd not into Ʋtrecht that day. In the mean time the States at Amsterdam were not a little disquieted; they sat in Council every day, and could not any way be satisfied, till they had dispatch'd the Sieur Grotius back to the King in all hast, with new Orders, and a more ample and unlimit∣ed Commission. The Towns of Dort, Goud, and Roterdam, began openly to proclaim the Prince of Orange Captain-General of the Ʋnited Provinces, misusing and Imprisoning some Burgomasters, who went about to op∣pose them in it, which made others more wary how they venter'd to displease an in∣cens'd multitude. Soon after all the rest follow∣ed their example; Amsterdam only excepted: which however a while after yielded, not∣withstanding all the shifts and devices which the States, to whom the Peoples Acclama∣tions on this occasion seem'd a very unwel∣come sound, contriv'd to divert it. Woerden also open'd its Gates, and receiv'd a Garrison from M. Rochefort. Woerden is a little Town, situate on the Rhine, five little
Leagues from Leiden: and therefore not far from the Camp where the Prince of Orange had retired, and in which he had intrench∣ed himself, being not a little troubled to see us Masters of that place; and advan∣cing so nimbly towards him, that he would not be able easily either to make an escape thence, or to enterprize any thing against us, though he should have desir'd it. The Ca∣stle belonging to this Town is very strong, and the whole Town secure from any sudden assault. The 28. the King rais'd his Camp at two in the Morning, and went to encamp at A∣merongen, whither the Sieur Grotius came the same day. On the other side, Monsieur de Turenne finding the obstinate Resolution of those of Nimegen, in which were 4500 Men in Garrison, order'd Faggots, Gabi∣ons, and other like Preparations to be made, resolving the next day to open his Trenches; and caus'd likewise his whole Army to pass the Wahal, that they might set upon the Town on the other side of the River, whilst the Fort plaid upon it from this. The Duke de Roannez enter'd Ʋtrecht with his 3 Batallions of Guards to defend that place, whose strength consists more in the number of its Inhabitants (though they be very seditious, inconstant and waver∣ing)
then the goodness of its Fortificati∣ons, which are made up only of a pretty broad, but shallow Ditch, and a Rampart which is very much out of repair. But as to the Buildings of the Town, they are very stately, neat, and costly, especially in the heart of the Town. The little Rivolets which run through many of their Streets, do not a little contribute to the beauty of the place. The out-parts & skirts of the town are likewise very pleasant, having many Canals; & the entry into the town is very fine. There are many pleasant Houses scatter'd about, and the Suburbs are large and convenient; about which lie many rich Meadows and Pasture Grounds (stock'd with abundance of all sorts of Cattel) as far as one can see every way. Because the Burgomasters, when they came to yield up their Town, had desir'd to have no Garrison forc'd upon them, promising to defend the place them∣selves for his Majesty; and being they staid not till they were summon'd, but of their own accord had yielded up the place, it was resolv'd they should be thereupon consider'd and kindly used. And that they might have no reason to complain, M. de Roannez pitch'd his Tents upon the Rampart, where he still continu'd, as did likewise the rest of the Of∣ficers and Guards after his example. The
Musqueteers, who had kept the place ever since the Surrender, retir'd and encamp'd without St. Catharin's Gate, with the Mar∣quis de Rochefort's Army, upon the Bank of the River that runs hence to Rotterdam. The two Companies of Life-Guards enter'd the Town, and dispersed themselves into divers quarters of it, where they lay upon the Guard; and afterwards the Horse-Guards belonging to the Kings Houshold mounted the Guard by turns, relieving one another every Morning at six of the Clock. The news of Count Maurice's retiring still farther, was confirm'd to us, and that he had also broken down most of the Banks that kept out the Sea, having left only one which lay inwardmost standing; and that thereabouts he made Intrenchments, which he very carefully guarded, and fortified with divers pieces of Ordnance. Groot (or Grotius) in his passage, told M. de la Fueillade, That he had a Blank to pre∣sent to the King if he would treat, and so unlimited a Power granted him, as the States had never before given to any Pleni∣potentiary. The 29. the King leaving Amerongen, went and encamped at Zeist and Stotwegen, where Grotius had Audience, and made his Proposals for a Peace, but without success;
for the King would not admit of them: so that being acquainted with the Kings Plea∣sure, he prepar'd for his departure the next day. Monsieur de Turenne open'd his Trenches before Nimegen, where the be∣sieg'd behaved themselves like Men, that in∣tended to defend themselves resolutly, but without making any sally. The Marquis de Ranes drew out 70 Dragoons of the Regi∣ment Royal, to strengthen the Garrisons at Montfort and Isselsteing, and march'd with them himself to visit those places, and give such Orders as he should find necessary for the defence of them. The Count de la Mark was left sick at Ʋtrecht. The 30. Nothing extraordinary was done at the Kings Camp which lay at Zeist and Stotewegen. M. de Turenne proceeded on in his approaches before Nimegen, where the be∣sieged still defended themselves very vigo∣rously. The Marquis de Rochefort went out betimes to view and take notice what Forces lay upon the River that goes from Ʋtrecht to Amsterdam. After Dinner Grotius re∣turn'd to Ʋtrecht, and thence to Amsterdam, to acquaint the States with the Kings plea∣sure as it related to a Treaty of Peace, which was now diversly talked of.
The first of July His Majesty lay still, and rested where he did before, and so continued until the 10th. The Marquis de Louvois, and of Pouange, came to Ʋtrecht after dinner. The King in Person review'd his whole Army very strictly, and then issued out severe Pro∣hibitions to hinder any of his Army's wan∣dering from their own Colours, upon pain of certain death without mercy; so that whoever should offend, they should all be hang'd, and not hope that any should be put to the Lot for their Lives; with command likewise to all Officers, That they should bring in every Night to the Commander of each Body, the names of all such as had been absent from their Companies. It was now reported, That a pail of fresh Water was worth 12 Stivers at Amsterdam, which are equal to 15 French Sols. The second of July, the Cardinal of Bou∣illon came to Ʋtrecht, where he was almost crowded to pieces by Roman Catho∣licks, who followed after him as an Angel sent from Heaven, praying him with much earnestness, to Bless and Consecrate the Churches of the Town. The Archbishop of the place himself desir'd it of him with much importunity, in the name of all the People; but he desir'd to be excused, till he should have order to do it from the King.
The Marquis de Ranes, and the Chevalier de Bouflers, Camp-master to the Regiment Royal of Dragoons, going over from Ʋ∣trecht to His Majesties Camp, which lay but two Leagues distant, were ordered to send two Companies of the said Regiment to the Count de Lorge, who was about four Leagues thence, drawing towards Arnhem with a fly∣ing Squadron, which made M. de Bouflers re∣turn post to Ʋtrecht, from whence he sent two Companies, that of de la Faye, and that of de la Rouillardiere. Monsieur, who 2 or 3 days before had joyn'd with the Kings Army, after the taking of Zuphen went to Ʋtrecht, where he din'd with the Chevalier de Lorraine, who treated him very splendidly. The night following there chanced to be a Fire in the Town, which burnt down two Houses; and we were told, That one of the 36 Burgomasters of Amsterdam, who had been one of the 3 that had been against the giving up the Town to the King, when the Inhabitants would not resolve to acknow∣ledge the Prince of Orange, as the most part of the rest had done, we heard, I say, that this Burgomaster had received a Musket∣shot from a Sentinel, for not answering in time, when he was asked, Who goes there? and that he was in great danger of death by
it. And that the Sea finding no opposition, since the Count Maurice's cutting down the Banks, did come into the Country with a dreadful impetuosity, and had already over∣whelmed a great part of the Country which lay between us and Amsterdam. The Count de Chamilly, whom M. de Tu∣renne had ordered to march towards Gennep and Grave, and make himself master of them, arrived before Gennep, thinking the Inhabi∣tants, whom the Dutch Garrison had for∣saken, would without difficulty have yield∣ed it up, but found not what he expected: for a Colonel belonging to the Brandenbur∣ger, being ordered to put some Forces into it, and keep it as belonging to the Elector his Master, having performed his Orders, re∣fused to give it up to Monsieur de Chamilly. The truth is, this little Town, which is not extraordinarily strong, and lies upon the Meuse between Ruremonde and Grave, had formerly belong'd to the Duke of Branden∣bourg; but having been taken from him, and long possest by the Hollander, it was now no more reckoned to be his. Wherefore M. de Chamilly resolving not to be put off, sent him word, That unless he would be gon and leave the place to him, he would cer∣tainly put all his Men to the Sword, and hang
him without mercy. But the Colonel being not mov'd at this Threat, the Count de Cha∣milly made his Troops immediatly prepare to assault the place; but then the Colonel searing a dismal Halter, which he foresaw would be his fate if he stood out any longer, sent us word, That rather then disgrace his Family with being hang'd, he would con∣sent to any thing to avoid such an ignomini∣ous death; wherefore, he desired to be used as an Officer of the Duke of Brandenbourgs, who having not as yet declared himself, ought not to be reckon'd nor used as an Ene∣my; he therefore desired, he might freely march off and return to the place from whence he came; and earnestly entreated M. de Chamilly, that least he should be hang'd at his return for not maintaining the place, he would give him an Certificate under his Hand, that he was ready to give an Assault to the place, and had threatned to hang him before he yielded it up; which having been granted him, he retir'd into the next Garrison, as well satisfied as if he had gained some great Victory, or done some memorable exploit. So that the Count Cha∣milly presently ordered his Men to enter the place; and then marched towards Grave, whose Garrison was retir'd, and which was
now in the possession of the Sieur Cleodore, who by order from M. de Turenne, kept the place with 40 or 50 Maistres. The third, the Marquis de Louvoys went and visited the Town-house of Ʋtrecht, and commanding the Maps of the Country to be brought him, informed himself of the number, bigness, and other qualities of the Channels which compass'd the Prince of O∣range's Camp; that being before-hand in∣structed in these matters, he might be ready to go and attaque him in case a Peace were not concluded. It must be confess'd, that the prudence and conduct of the Marquis de Louvois are almost incredible; he hath manag'd things in this Campagne, as he doth all things else, with marvelous vigilancy, care and success. The Kings Troops, the care of which lay wholly upon him, were the best order'd that might be; nothing was wanting in the Army: he had taken such care for all things necessary, that the King need∣ed only wish that things should be done, and they were so. He found in that Man an inexhaustible Treasure of all those good Qualities which fit a Man for ordering bu∣siness dextrously; he had establish'd such good Orders, and such a way of living a∣mong the Soldiers, that they found them∣selves as well accommodated as if they had
been in Paris, and that without any way being grievous to the Countrys where they lay. There were every where continual Fairs and Markets, to which Merchants, Vi∣ctualers, and Country people resorted, with as much security as to St. Laurence's Fair. In a word, he so well contriv'd all things, that we never wanted any thing. After Dinner the King came to the Camp, and having walked about it and view'd his Troops, without causing them to take Horse; he also rounded the out-side of the Town, and then went into it likewise, but incognito. Monsieur de Turenne continu'd still battering Nimegen, which did still couragiously de∣fend it self. Notwithstanding, he dispatch'd a Courier to the King, to tell Him, he hop'd that very day to spring a Mine, or that at farthest it would be sprung the next day. The Sieur de Carman, Lieutenant Colonel of the Champagne Regiment, was killed before this place. The Count de Lorge made his Men labor hard all day about making a Bridge over the Rhine, that by it he might get into the Betaw. The News of the Prince of Orange's being chosen Statholder, and Protector of their Country, by all the Towns of the United Provinces, except only Amsterdam, was con∣firm'd to us, and at the same time the Sieur
Groot, who was this day to return and bring the King an answer about the ratification of the Peace, instead of coming himself, sent to desire, That his time might be prolong'd two days more, which were accordingly granted him. It is to be noted, That His Maje∣sty would treat with him not as coming from the States (whose Authority he would not acknowledge) but only as from the Peo∣ple of Holland. The fourth, nothing extraordinary hap∣ned in the Kings Army, which continued rest∣ing and refreshing it self after all the hard∣ship it had undergon. M. de Turenne, after having had his design of mining Ni∣megen twice frustrated by Countermines, at length, notwithstanding all the Enemies care and pains to hinder it, almost finish'd one; so that they finding they should ere long have a breach made in their Walls, and be forced to endure an assault, and come to handy∣blows with the French (which they feared above all things, as knowing how good our Nation is at that kinde of Service, and how dangerous it is to fall into their hands) re∣solv'd at last to come to a Composition. The Count de Saulx had a piece of his Breeches shot off, and one of his Servants kill'd with him by a great shot before this place, which gave occasion to the spreading of a rumor,
that he was dead, and made him as much lamented in the Kings Army, as if he really had been so. The fifth, at break of day, 2 Horse-men from Naerden came to Monsieur de Rochfort, to give him notice of the Count Maurice's last retreat, and how he had cut down the Banks and let in the Zuiderzee, whose far∣ther course was now stopp'd by nothing but only one Dike, which was only broad enough for 3 Horse to march abreast on. At the same time M. de Rochfort dispatch'd a Cou∣rier to the Marquis de Louvois to give him notice of it, and M. de Roannes drew out a party of the Life Guards, which were of the Guard at Ʋtrecht, and some of the Kings Men at Arms, who were come thither, & sent them under the Command of the M. d'Am∣bre, to view and take cognizance of the Post which the Enemy now possest. They did ac∣cordingly, and stood within Pistol-shot of their Intrenchments two long hours, none of the Enemies in the mean time daring to come out towards them; only they were free of their Musket-shot, which yet did no harm, so that our Men came back just as they went: which is an infallible token of the Dutch cowardize, who dar'd not stir out when they might have cut the whole Party to pieces: and though they had fear'd some
ambush, yet might they have come round in their Barks, and set on them behind with∣out any danger of being any way surpriz'd, being sure of a safe retreat when ever they desir'd it. Monsieur de Turenne at length be∣came master of Nimegen, which yielded up∣on the same terms as others had done, only the Governor and other chief Officers had li∣berty to depart with all their Baggage. Nimegen is a very great Town, and full of Inhabitants, situate on the left side of the Wahal, which runs by its Walls, and sepa∣rates it from the Fort of Knotzembourg; it lies high on one side, and low on the other. On the higher part of the Town stands an old Castle, which is still strong enough, and commands both the Town and River. The lower part is plentifully furnish'd with Tow∣ers, Bastions, and Half-moons of an exces∣sive bigness, and upon that account they need more Men to defend it then we do in our Towns, who are more concern'd to have them well lined and flanck'd. Those who have Travell'd in Holland, may have ob∣serv'd the prodigious dimensions of all parts of their Fortifications, so that each Work requires as many Men almost to defend it, as a whole Town of ours. In the mean time the Count de Chamilly, who was march'd towards Grave, found
strange alterations there, as well as he had at Gennep. Some of the States, either those that were at Maestricht, or others, hearing that their Garrison had so causelesly quitted the Town, which is very strong, and whose Works are in very good repair; and know∣ing withal that there were not in it above 40 or 50 of our Men, sent a command to the Governor that had quitted it, to return thither and defend it upon pain of death; and ordered the Governor of the Busse to give him all possible assistance in case of need. Wherefore, upon this Order he was forc'd to turn back again, and the Governor of the Buss took with him 33 Companies of Foot, and 100 Horse, to go and perform what was commanded him. There being as yet no Garrison put into the place, and the Townsmen refusing to keep the Gates, it was easie for him who came before in hast with 100 Maistres to enter the Town, whil'st the Foot followed softly after; though as it prov'd, they made too much hast to their own misfortune. He therefore visits the place, and reckons upon those Men of ours which he found there, as so many Prisoners. But whilst this was doing, the Van of the Count de Chamilly's Army was discover'd, and he withal gave notice of his coming, which was but ill news for the new Con∣queror,
who by this means was not like to wear his Laurel long. Hereupon the Towns∣men began to change their note, and declar'd they would not suffer themselves to be plun∣dered by us, and therefore bid the Gover∣nor shift for himself, which he could no o∣therwise do, then by sending to desire a Pass from M. Chamilly, that he might come and capitulate with him, which he did, and was suffer'd to return again to the Busse with his 100 Horse; he mentioned not the Foot in the capitulation, which he thought was so far behind, that he might easily give them notice to retire homewards and none of us the wiser. But to their misfortune he was out in his calculation, for M. de Joyeuse met with them, who though he had then with him but a small party of the Brigade of Horse which he commands (the rest being gone before under command of the Marquis de Tury, to recover the Town) he fell upon them so fu∣riously, that they had only time to make one discharge at us. In this Encounter most of the Enemy were kill'd, and the rest taken, so that there hardly escap'd one to carry home the bad news: we got at this bout 33 Colours. The night that follow'd, and the sixth day, there hapned a Fire in the Kings Quarters, which began in the Duke of Monmouth's
House, and burnt down together with some others; the damage the Duke had by it was computed to amount to 100000 Crowns. The fire reached the Kings Stable, and de∣stroyed many Horses and their harness, and at last grew so dreadful, that the King was forced to rise, least the fire should also come to his Appartment; many of his Pages having had their cloths burnt. We heard of the ill success of Monsieur de Nancrud's attempt upon Ardemburg, which had faild by his guides and spies saults, these having misinform'd, and the other misled him. The Particulars of that business were as follows; Word was brought to him that the Garrison was both very small and also negligent, which made him resolve to try if he could surprize it; and to that purpose he order'd his march so as to ar∣rive before the Place at midnight, with a design to attaque it in four several places at once, but it so happen'd, his Guides either not being sufficiently acquainted with the Country, or mistaking their way in the dark, that his whole party met at the same place, and so were for∣c'd to make their attaque all on one side of the Town; which being perform'd very couragiously, they beat out the Enemy and gained a half Moon, which Post design∣ing
greater things they cared not to secure from the Enemy's shot; but day at last be∣gining to break, the Enemy who had re∣ceiv'd supplies from Sluice, now made more vigorous resistance; and having discover'd our men, who lay leuel and open to their shot, kill'd many of them, so that they were forc'd to retire with loss of 1000 or 1200 men. The Marquis de Ranes went to Isselstaing and Monfort, leading thither some Dragoons to reinforce those Garrisons. The same day about evening, the King came to visit Ʋ∣trecht; and he was scarce gone thence when the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Arlington, Embassadors from the King of England arriv'd, hoping to have found his Majesty there, to whom they were sent by the King their Master. The 7 the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Arlington went from Ʋtrecht to the Camp at Zeist, where the King presently gave them Audience, after which a Courier was dispatch'd to the King of England, who was mightily sollicited by the Dutch Mi∣nisters to a Peace. The Enemy came and attaqu'd Oudwater, and beat back our horse Guard, after hav∣ing killed 5 or 6 of them with the like loss on their side, but the Alarm being streight
given to Monsieur de Rochefort, he present∣ly went to their assistance, as did also the Marquis de Ranes with his Regiment Royal of Dragoons, but they at their arrival found the Enemy retir'd, so that all these sup∣plies kept a guard all that night upon the Place. The Musqueteers, who ever since the surrender of Ʋtrecht had been either within the Town to secure it, or encamp'd just be∣fore it with Monsieur de Rochesorts Army, return'd now to the Kings Camp at Zeist, a part of whose Guard they were. The three Bataillons of the Regiment of Guards, wch the Duke de Roannez had with him in the same place, did the like, and in their stead were sent thither, one Bataillon of the Kings, and another of the Queens Regiment, the Regiment of Castelnan, the Royal Re∣giment de la Marine, and that of Suitzers, whose Colonel is the Sieur Stouppe, who also commanded the Place, as belonging of right to him whilst that the King had yet appoint∣ed no Governour of it. The rest of the Re∣giment of Turenne was sent to Naerden, to relieve those of the Dauphin's which lay there, and many foot were sent to reinforce M. de Rochefort's Army, which his Majesty in∣tended to leave about Ʋtrecht, as well to keep all that part of the Country quiet, as to hinder the Hollanders Armys, which lay
not far off, from attemting any thing up∣on the new conquered places that lay that way. The eight in the morning, Monsieur de Rochefort order'd some powder and shot to be sent to Oudewater, with a Convoy of horse, and then he returned with the Troops he had brought the day before. The Marquis de Ranes came back also with his Regiment Royal of Dragoons: The King prepar'd to leave Zeist; and the Cardinal de Boüillon went and consecrated the Church of Ʋtrecht, which was perform'd with great pomp, to the great Joy of an infinite number of Ro∣man Catholicks, who impatiently expected that day. The 9, the Duke of Luxembourg return∣ed to the Kings Army, with the Marquis de la Valiere, having left his Baggage and Equippage near Emerick, and the command of his Army to the Bishop of Munster, who came likewise to give the King a visit, and then returned towards Frizeland, where since he hath done the Enemy much harm. The Marquis de Ranes, who during all this Cam∣pagne had commanded the Regiment Royal of Dragoons, left that, and took the com∣mand of the Regiment Colonel, and went to the Kings Camp to follow his Majesty. The next day, the Prince who had been
conveyed to Arnhem, and continued there ever since his Majesty left that place, found himself worse then he had been of his wounds, and was much tormented with a fit of the Gout. The King gave 8000 livres, among those who had lost their horses in the late fire. The 10 the King left Zeist (which lyes within 2 leagues of Ʋtrecht) where he had lain 8 days, and went back to encamp be∣tween Rhenen and Wageningen. The Duke of Luxembourg went to the Camp before Ʋ∣trecht to command that Army, which M. the Marquis de Rochefort left to follow the King; which Army was found to consist of between 15000 and 16000 men. The 11 in the morning, the King went and encamped in the Suburbs of Arnhem, the Government of which, together with those of Nimegen, the whole Isle of Betaw, and Grave, he bestowed on the Count de Lorge, with a pension of 1000 Crowns monthly, M. de Turenne, who had march'd with his Army towards Grave, came to wait on his Majesty soon after his arrival, and having assisted at the Council which was held, returned and lay at Nimegen. The weather which had some days threatned a change, at last became very fowl, and from this day forward, rain, wind, and cold did
as much trouble us, as if it had been the middle of Winter, till we returned again into the Climate of France. This stormy weather was very favorable to many Towns, which otherwise would certainly have been taken as others had been. The 12, the King left Arnhem, and having passed the Rhine, over a Bridge of Boats made for that purpose a little below the Town, marched through the Isle Betaw, and passed the Wahal also upon a Float over against Nimegen, where he lay that night. All the former night and this day we wrought hard in making a Bridge, to pass over the Army, Artillery, and Baggage, but not being able to sinish it time enough, one part of the Army was forced to stay in the Isle till the next day. Monsieur de Turenne left Ni∣megen betimes in the morning, and went to Grave, where he found his Army pas∣sing the Meuse, over a bridge of boats which had been, made above the Town, and the Marquis de Ranes met there a part of the Regiment Colonel of Dragoons, which had staid there for the defence of the Place, whilst the rest were gone to joyn with the Count de Chamilly's Army, which lay beyond the Busse, between that Town, Heusden and the Fort Crevecoeur, at a place called Ʋly∣men. As soon as the whole Army had pas∣sed
the River, we march'd on and went to encamp at Bergen, which is within three leagues of Grave. We must not forget to let you know, that Grave, though it be but a little Town, yet is one of the prettiest, pleasantest, strong∣est, and easilyest defended places, that I have seen. It is situated on the right bank of the Meuse, which does very much strength∣en it on that side, and on the other side it hath a great marsh, always full of water, which makes it inaccessible at all times, be∣sides it hath excellent Fortifications, and in good repair, but above all a great Horn∣work very well secured with a covered way, which goes to the very Gate, with excel∣lent Ravelins, besides a good Counterscarp, and a Pallisado which is but newly made, and is in very good order, and strong Bul∣warks: so that I may truly say that I have not seen in Holland a prettier Town, better in order, or in a likelier condition to defend it self. It hath been often taken and re∣taken, the first time was in the year 1586, when the Prince of Parma besiedged it, and had it surrendred to him upon Articles; and then it was again retaken in 1602, by Prince Maurice of Nassau, and since hath conti∣nued in their possession. The 13, because of the Bridges not being
time enough in readiness the day before, the King kept at Nimegen, whilst the rest of the Army all that day pass'd over from the Isle of Betaw. Monsieur de Turenne passed from Bergen in the morning, and encamped at a Village call'd Hempel, within a league of the Busse, and half a league from Crevecoeur, and immediately set his men to work about making a bridge over against his Camp, and at the end of the bridge rais'd a Redout to keep the Enemy from putting any suc∣cours into Crevecoeur, which he intended to besiege. The 14 the King left Nimegen, and march∣ed towards Grave, where he passed the Meuse, and encamp'd on the left side of that River. Monsieur de Turenne went and view'd the Fort of Crevecoeur, and though news came that the Inhabitants of Bommelle had sent to the King to capitulate, he not∣withstanding sent a Trumpet to summon it. M. de Montauban advanced on the other side of the Busse with 4000 horse. The weather began to make the Country almost unpas∣sable; the cold, rain, and wind grew very troublesome, so that we could hardly find the Causseys, though there be no going any where else, the whole Country being nothing but marshes and dikes. The 15 his Majesty left Grave, and came
within a league of Boxtel, a little Town near the Busse, but of very great importance, be∣cause it commands the Sluces, which either keep in, or let out the waters, all over this part of the Country. But at this time they had no great need of them, the rain having already so plentifully fallen, that all about the Town was overflown, which hinder'd us from besieging it, as we before design'd. The Bridge which Monsieur de Turenne had ordered to be made over the Meuse, for communication between his Camp and the Isle of Bommelle, was now finished; he ordered 10000 Faggots to be prepared, and view'd the Fort again, which he found to be a very good one, and that it commands the Sluces below the Busse, as Boxtel doth above it. It hath 5 good and large Bastions, though they be not coated: the Garrison consisted of 800 men, who might well de∣fend the Place, which was secured on one side by the River, and on the other by a great unpassable Marsh, and which (had we not provided against it by setting a guard on the passage) might have kept correspon∣dence with the Busse, and been releiv'd and assisted from thence as oft as they would. The 16 the King went to Boxtel, where he found no resistance. Monsieur de Turenne as soon as the Faggots he had order'd were
ready, made the horse carry them, and in the evening caused the Trenches to be open∣ed by the Regiments de Champagne, Lyonnois, and de Louvigny, who advanced them very far, and raised a Battery on that side where the Champagne Regiment was, whereon were planted two peices of Canon, which were ready to play by day break. They likewise very much forwarded another, which was began in the Lyonnois Regiment's quarters, to plant 8 peices on. The besiedged, who were certainly by the ill season lulled a sleep, and thought it not possible we should work in such tempestuous weather, discharg'd not above 7 or 8 Guns at us, which hurt no body. The Duke of Luxembourg, who, as we said, staid at Ʋtrecht with 15 or 16000 men, encamped without S. Catharin's Gate, chang'd his quarters, and passing the Canale which runs from thence to Rotterdam, went beyond a part of the Suburbs which lies on the other side, and encamped not far from the Town, between it and Naerden, after having defeated a party of the Enemy, who had set upon his van-Guard. The 17 the King rested with all his Army at Boxtel, and departed not thence till he return'd for France. In the morning as we said the Lyonnois Regiment's Battery began to play upon Crevccoeur, and beat down a
Redout which lay on the left side of the Fort toward the River, so that some Sol∣diers which were in it were forced to aban∣don it, and retire to their fellows in the Fort it self; afterwards 100 Grenadiers were placed upon the Channel that comes from the Busse, to hinder the communication of the Enemy with that place, and a Serjeunt with 20 men lodged about 30 paces from the declivity of the works, behind the ruines of a Redout, which the Enemy had quitted and fired some days before. The Grand Ma∣ster of the Artillery came and brought with him 16 peices of Canon, 8 of which were sent to be mounted on the Battery fi∣nished the night before in the Champagne Re∣giments quarter. The Marquis de Ranes took with him all the Dragoons that were in M. de Turennes Army after dinner, and went with them to the Count de Chamilly's, with whom was the rest of the Ʋlymen Camp: this Army was likewise now busied in car∣rying Faggots, to set upon Crevecoeur on their side also. The 18 his Majesty kept at Boxtel, where nothing extraordinary happened. The Battery of 8 peices of Canon which was begun the night before by the Lyonnois Regiment before Crevecoeur, was finish'd and ready to play by break of day; and the Enemy soon were
made sensible of it by having 6 of their Guns dismounted in a little time; on the Count Cha∣milly's side, Trenches were likewise open'd, from wch they gave a false Alarm. M. de la. Fo∣rest Lieutenant Colonel of the Dragoons, went in the morning, and caused all the Trees about the Avenues of his Camp to be fell'd to hinder the Enemy, who was very strong in Heusden, from setting on him behind, but they attemted no such thing; on the con∣trary the Marquis de Ranes, after dinner ac∣companied by some of his Dragoons, march'd towards them, and beat back their Guards, and made them retire within their Pallisado, on purpose to entice them out to fight, but none of them stirr'd, only some volleys of small shot were let fly at us from their works. In the mean time, the Duke of Buc∣kingham and the Earl of Arlington, the En∣glish Ambassadors, having dispatch'd their business, took leave, and returned by Brus∣sels, that so they might require the Count Monterey, the Governor of the Netherlands, to withdraw all the Spanish Forces from the Dutch service, or upon his refusal to de∣nounce War against him in the name of the King of England; and tell him that he would immediately fall to acts of hostility against the Spaniard. Monsieur de Villacerre ac∣companied them to be a witness of their
Conference, and the English and French Fleet came up as far as the Texel, with design to land, if he refused assent to the proposal: but the Count de Monterey made answer, that the business was of such importance as he could not answer till he had acquainted his Superiors with it, and therefore desired time till he might send to Madrid, and then he would act according to the instructions he should receive thence. An Officer that went a pickering with a party of Horse towards Breda, met with a party of the Enemy, and though ours was but 30 against 80, he made them give ground, and after someresistance wholly routed them: but 500 Peasants, which had gathered to∣gether, and strongly intrenched themselves endeavour'd to cut off the retreat of our men, so that they were feign to force their way, wch they did happily enough through their first barricado, but when they came to the second, the case was altered, for the Peasants had sent to the routed party of the Enemy, to bid them rally and set on our men behind, whilst they would oppose them before, and stop their passage. The project took so well that they defeated our party, and though there were not many killed upon the place, yet it fared the worse with them that scaped; for falling into the hands of the Peasants,
there was no sort of cruelty which they en∣dured not from them; but they were not long unrevenged, for the King hearing of their barbarous usage the same evening, pre∣sently ordered a party to go and put all those Villages to fire and sword. On the 19, which was the day following, the Chevasier Fourille marched out by break of day with the Brigades de la Feuillée and de Roye, and 200 Dragoons which M. de Ranes had sent him, under the command of the Chevalier de Tilladet, Camp master to the Regiment Collonel, with orders to burn, plunder, and put to the sword all that they should meet; and accordingly they burnt and plundered the Villages: but the Peasants having heard of the design, were for the most part fled, so that few of them fell into our hands; but being very near Breda, some Dragoons who were commanded to set fire at any place where they could, went up to the very Gates of the Town, and there fired some houses whilst the rest of the party and the Horse defended them; this troubled the Town a little, who thought sure there∣upon that we were coming to besiege them. The Governor of Crevecoeur, finding we should now soon be in a condition to assault the Place, resolved to stand out no longer, and that he might get the better conditions,
went himself to make them; so he came forth and desired to speak with M. de Turenne, who gave order he should be civilly intreated, but would not see him. He only disarmed the Garrison, and because we had more Pri∣soners then we could well tell what to do with, he had them all conducted a league from the Place, and there gave them their liberty, as he had done before to those of Nimegen, among which he had found 500 or 600 Citizens of Ʋtrecht, whom he sent to their own homes. Hinkel which is a little Fort between the Busse and Crevecoeur, was taken by the Count de Chamilly, with more ease then he himself did expect: for the Garrison either being frighted, or having heard that we intended to assault them, quited it after having set fire on their powder and the houses of the Fort, a part of which were notwithstand∣ing saved. The 20, the King, who continued still at Boxtel, having heard of the surrender of Crevecoeur, came and viewed the Fort, and afterwards returned, whilst M. de Turenne passed over the Island of Bommelle, and sent and summoned the Town which bears the same name. The Inhabitants were at a stand what answer to make, on one side they found not themselves in a condition to hold
out a long Siege, and despaired of being relieved; they likewise saw that many Towns better fortified and Garrison'd then they, had not been able with all their strength to defend themselves; and that all the Country round about them was already in our pos∣session; but on the other side also they re∣membred that they had formerly born up against all the fury of 25000 Spanish foot, when their Fortifications were by no means in so good a condition as at present: and besides a certain little Collonel, who had before been in Nimegen whilst we besiedged it (and who would have still been among the rest of our Prisoners had he not been re∣leased) and was afterwards made Governor of this Town, thought himself engaged in honour of which he had much bragged to M. de Turenne, not so lightly to yeild up a Place of that importance; wherefore we were forced to set on them, and as we came before the Place, the Guides brought M. de Turenne so near that a Cannon bullet, which had been shot from the Town, fell just at his feet; but that hindered not our proceed∣ings, we therefore went and encamped at Stelst; which is a little Village lying upon the River, within Canon shot below the Town.
Whilst the Kings Quarters were prepa∣ring, some attendants, having retired them∣selves into a certain grove to refresh them∣selves till a house should be appointed them for their Master, perceiv'd the ground had lately been turn'd up there, which gave them the curiosity to search if nothing were hid∣den underneath, whereupon one of them felt with his sword, and finding some re∣sistance, uncovered the place before some Officers that were then come thither, and there found 28 dead bodies newly kill'd, piled one upon the other, divers of which those Officers knew to have been our horse. The Count de Chamilly left Ʋlymen, and went over with his Army to Monsieur de Turennes Army at Hempel, and in the mean time order'd the fort of Hainkel to be slighted. The 21 about 10 in the morning, the be∣sieged in Bommel, who from the top of their works could easily see that we were en∣camped upon the River, ventur'd out of the Town, without any opposition, fill'd a Fregate, which carried 4. or 5 pieces of Canon, with Soldiers, and coming down the River ere we were aware of them, arriv'd over against our Camp, where they landed and made a discharge of their muskets and Canon loaded with small shot, amongst our Tents,
by which they kill'd some few of our Ca∣valiers, and many of their horses: thereupon some of our men made up to them, and our foot beating them back to the River side, shew'd them so much vigour and courage in the Skirmish, that they retir'd to the other side of the River, which is out of Musket shot. They came back however two or three times to discharge again, but were still repulsed, though not without difficulty and the loss of some men; for the Marquis de Ranes having got between the Town and them at a place where the River is much narrower, forc'd them to stand one of our discharges, which they did, but not to be behind hand with him, answered it with their Muskets and Canon charged as be∣fore; so that one Dragoon lost an arm, and another a leg. But as ill fortune for them would have it, the fire caught in their pow∣der room, and so fired one end of their Vessel, whereupon 7 or 8 of them for fear of being burnt, flung themselves into the water, where they all perish'd, being either drown'd or killed by our men, who were skirmishing on the shore, this accident fright∣ed them so, that from that time forward they dared not venter out. At the same time Monsieur de Turenne ordered Faggots to be made, and sent a Trumpet to summon the
Place once again, the besiedged let him in, and went to counsel, which lasted 5 or 6 hours, wherefore M. de Turenne sent M. Baleroy, a Captain of horse, with another Trumpet, to enquire what was become of the first, the Governor desired M. de Bale∣roy to come in, which he did, and they as∣sured him they would surrender, beseeching him to desire M. de Turenne to send Articles, which he thereupon presently did. In the mean time, M. de S. Abre, who was Lieu∣tenant general that day, not to loose any time, caused Faggots to be carried, and way made for the Canon, which he brought forward, and when night drew on, he be∣gan to open the Trenches, but proceeded not far in them, because the besiedged sent back the Articles sign'd. An hour or two after dinner, a Fregate with men to put into Bommel, came up the River from Worcum, (or Gorcum) but having been made more cautious by what happen'd in the morning, we had plac'd a Corps de Garde on divers places of the Banks, so that they could not pass, and were forc'd to go back as they came, after having made a discharge or two of their Muskets and Ca∣non charged with small shot. By which a∣mongst others poor M. Clodoré (whom we had occasion to mention before, for making
the Capitulation at Grave, and the history of whose life was known to many) was kill'd, one half of his head having been taken off. At length, the Place being yeilded up in the evening, one Monsieur d'Espagne was made Governor of it the next morning, and there were put into it 4 Companies of Switzers and the Regiment de la Ferté for a Gar∣rison. Bommel is a great Town, situate (as we said) on the left bank of the Wahal, 3 leagues above Gorcum; its situation is very advantagious both upon the account of the Wahal, which defends one side of it, and of the Marshes which encompass it on the other, and which are so deep that one can neither undermine nor keep Trenches long open before it. Its Fortifications are likewise good, and the Hollander who have made it one of the Keys of their Country, have not forgot to keep them in repair, but made its preservation one of their cheif cares. It is surrounded with good Cortin's, Bastions and Towers, a double Rampart, and a double ditch. It was besiedg'd in 1599 for the Spaniard by Don Francesco de Mendoza high Admiral of Arragon, who after many stra∣tagems, at last vented all his fury upon this Place, which he besieged with 30000 men, but was notwithstanding forced after a fort∣night's
stay to raise his Siege. By which we may judge of the strength and consequence of this Place. The 22, after a Garrison had been put into Bommel, the whole Island became sub∣ject to the King, the Forts of S. Andrew and of Wornes being already possest by our Dra∣goons, Monsieur de Turenne departed hence with his Army, and came back to Hempel, where being to march through the Town he din'd. The Artillery by reason of the bad ways having not been able to keep pace with the Army, came behind under the Convoy of the Dragoons. Those who had been drawn out on the 19 to fire the Villages, whose Peasants had beaten and so barbarously used our party, returned after having routed 100 foot and 50 Maistres of Breda, which they met with. Monsieur de Montauban was made Governor of Zutphen, M. de Beauvezé of Rees, and M. de Villiers of Doesburg. This day there arriv'd at Boxtel an Envoye from the Prince of Orange, with many Proposi∣tions for a Peace; which made the World think it would at last come to something. The 23 after the Prince of Orange's En∣voy had made known his Propositions, the King ordered a Drummer to go with him to Brussells, that he might know the Count de Monterey's answer to the Duke of Buc∣kingham
and the Earl of Arlington's demands in the King of England's name, which was to call back all the Spanish Forces that were either in Breda, the Busse, Bergen-op Zoom, or the Dutch Army's. M. de Turenne came to wait on his Majesty at Boxtel, and lay there that night following, and his Army the while rested at Hompel, whether the Ordnance being arriv'd with their Convoy, they were sent on a league forward of the next day's journey towards the Kings Quarters. The 24 the King called a Council of War, at which he himself was present, as he always used to be; and it was there re∣solved, that after his Majesty's departure, (who intended to return and refresh him∣self a while in France after the toile he en∣dured in the Campagne) Monsieur de Turenne should stay behind in Brabant with 20000 men, and should have for his Lieutenants general, the Sieurs de S. Abre and Foucault; for his Camp-Marshals the Sieurs de Choi∣seul, Magalotty, and de Vitry; that the Count de Chamilly should come and lye below Maestricht, and the Marquis de Rochefort with the greatest part of the Kings House∣hold above it, that so betwixt them they might wholly block up that Town; that M. de la Feuillade should go with his own Bri∣gade,
and some others which he should have given him to the number of 4000 horse, and lye about Wezel. And because the King in∣tended to return again, as soon as he should have given such orders at home as were necessary, he sent most part of his Equi∣page and heaviest Baggage to Grave, that he might not be troubled to send them back∣wards, but that at his return he might meet them there in readiness. The same day the Duke of Neubourg came to Boxtel to give his Majesty a visit, and Monsieur de Turenne's Army leaving Hempel, advanc'd towards Beerlicon within 2 leagues of the Kings Quarters, and remain'd there till after his Majesty departure; whom M. de Turenne left not till then. At the same time the Spanish Troops in the Hollanders ser∣vice, having heard of the Proposals which the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Arling∣ton were going to make with Count Mon∣terey, and knowing that the Spaniard was not in a condition to maintain a War of that importance as he was thrcaten'd with upon refusal, pack'd up bag and baggage, and made themselves ready to depart, upon the first orders to that purpose, which they doubted not but they should speedily receive. Some persons whom we met in our march told us they went every day to the Busse,
and assur'd us they had seen the said Troops there, who were very weary of the service, and complain'd much of their ill diet and pay. The 25, the King after having treated the Duke of Neubourg, had him out to view the Troops that belong'd to his person, and some others that were then with him, and in the evening when he came back, he let us know that he would be going the next morning for France, and accordingly gave order that all things should be in a readiness for his departure against that time. The same day he committed the Govern∣ment of Lorraine to the Marquis de Roche∣fort. Monsieur de Turennes Army rested at Beerlicon, and the Count du Lude Grand-Master of the Ordnance left it, and came to Boxtel with a part of the Artillery, which was to follow the King. Some few days after, the Marquis de Ranes General of the Dragoons, and the Count de Guiche Lieu∣tenant General of the Prince's Army, came thither likewise, the King having order'd them to follow him into France. The 26 in the morning, the King de∣parted from Boxtel, and came to lye at Borkel, which is a great Abbey of white Fryars in the way from Boxtel to Tongres.
His Majesty lodg'd in the Abbey, but al∣most all the Court was forced to encamp about it, because there were very few houses thereabouts. A great part of the Regiment of Guards staid behind, to joyn with M. de Turenne's Army, as did all the rest of the Foot which was in the Kings retinue, because they could not keep pace with the King, who intended thence forwards to take great Journeys; only 12 Companies were order'd to follow softly after him to Paris. Monsieur de Turenne return'd to lead his Army, which lay still at Beerlicon; and the Prince of Mechlebourg came to visit the King at Bor∣kel. The 27 in the morning, the King left Borkel, which lies in Brabant, and within the Territories that belonged to the Hol∣lander, and having passed by Beringen, which is a little Town in Liege, went and lodg'd a league beyond that Town. The 28 in the morning, the Light-horse which had hitherto accompanied the King, returned to joyn with M. de Turenne's Army, which had not yet disencamped; his Ma∣jesty came to a little Village called Leuve, within a league of Hannuy, a little Town of the Spaniards, where we met some Cravates belonging to the Spanish-Troops. The heavy baggage of the Court, and those that be∣longed
to them, had orders not to accom∣pany the King any farther, but to march after leisurely with a Convoy which was ordered for them all. The same kind of bag∣gage which belonged to the Kings Houshold, was sent to Maesiick with another Convoy. The King in the middle of this day's Jour∣ney met Monsieur Vaubrun with 2000 horse, a 1000 of which he left with his Majesty to guard him beyond Binche, and returned with the rest to M. de Turenne's Army. The 29 the King left Leuve betimes in the morning, and having staid to dine in the middle of his Journy, he was inform'd that all the heavy Baggages had been taken and plundered, some said by a party which sally'd out of Maestricht, and others by the Cravates we met at Hannuy. His Majesty thereupon sent in hast to know the certainty of the business, but the Courier brought back word, that only M. Brancas's Baggage had been taken by some horse of the Enemy's who being aware that his Waggoner drove a good way before the rest, made him turn into the Woods, where they took away the horses, and left the rest to be riffled by the Peasants, who had hid and sheltered them∣selves there ever since the beginning of the War.
The 30 the King, continuing his march, left Ameley betimes in the morning, and came by Binche, where without entring the Place he dined at the Gate, and afterwards went and lodged a league beyond that Place, up∣on the road of Quesnoy. This day he order'd the Van of his Life Guard, and the Bri∣gades of the Men at Arms and light Horse∣men to go before, and expect him at the Castle of Cambray, where he intended to spend the next day. The 31, the King setting out by break of day, arriv'd at Quesnoy about 11 of the Clock, where taking only a little broth, he went to bed, and rested till 5 in the evening, and then after a light repast, took Coach, (which he had not done before during all this Campagne, but had always travail'd on horseback whatever weather it was) and rode on all night accompany'd by a strong Con∣voy, which had been drawn out of the Life Guards, Men at Arms, Light Horsemen and Musqueteers, who accompany'd him to the Castle of Cambray, where he dismissed them, and made use of those he had sent two days before to expect him there; and so march't on with them all the night following. Almost all the Court staid at Quesnoy to come lea∣surely after, because the King had horses lay'd for him by the way, and the rest of
the horses that came from the Army were not able to keep pace with them. The Troops that belong'd to the Kings Houshold encamp'd before the Gates of Quesnoy. The first of August the King arriv'd at S. Quintin by 4. of the Clock in the morning, heard Mass in the Church of S. James, and having taken a little broth, which was brought him from M. de Pradelle the Governour of that Town to a Semstresse's Shop, took Coach again and went on to Ham, where he left his Convoy, and at length arrived by 10 at night at S. Germains, where the ueen did not expect him till the Thursday following. The Troops which had staid be∣hind at Quesnoy, march'd this day to Lan∣dreby, whether the party that had convey'd the King came also, that after two or three day's rest they might return towards Mae∣stricht, whether Monsieur de Rochefort had order to march with them.
A LIST OF THE PLACES Conquered by His Majesty in this Campagne. Tongres. Maesiick. Foucmont. Vizé. Orsoy. Rhinemberg. Burick. The Fort of Lyppe. Wezel. Rees. The Fort of Rees. Emerick. Skensconce. The Castle of Tolhuis. Tolhuis. Arnhem. Doësbourg. Zevenaer. Zutphen. Deutecum. Ouageningen. Rhenen. Wick. Utrecht. Amersford. The Castle of Em. Naerden. Monford. Woerden. Oudwater. Isselsteing. Dussel. Croanembourg. Tiel. Wyanem. Culembourg. Buren. Knotzembourg.
Nimegen. The Fort of S. An∣drew. Woorn. Bommelle. Crevecoeur. Hekel. Borxel. Grave. Gennep. Besides many Castles about Utrecht and Amsterdam, whether the Enemy used to retire, and secure themselves.
The Author to the Readers. REaders, I grow weary of venting my Wares thus by retail. The rest are of the same kind with the former, but I will give them out to you now in the gross. They are not deceitfull I can assure you: for though I have not been an Eye∣witness to what I shall henceforward re∣late, as I was to all that pass'd during the Kings stay in Holland, yet I have it from some of my Friends who sent me their memoirs, and having no design to mis∣inform me, took care to write nothing but what they knew for certain truth. And what has confirm'd me in my good opinion of their veracity, is, that I find them alto∣gether conformable to the Accounts that were constantly brought to Court of what pass'd in our Armies. You will find here some Particulars and Circumstances, which 'tis likely you have not heard of be∣fore, and which I promise my self you will not be sorry to know. I wish I could have
done more both for your Service and Sa∣tisfaction, and in requital, desire you to pardon what you shall find amiss. I wil∣lingly confess my weaknes: and unfitness to be an Author. As I never valued my self upon appearing in Print, so what I have done now, was only in complaisance to some who desir'd it.
A CONTINUATION Of what happen'd in the Dutch WAR, After the Kings return into France. OUr invincible Monarch having suffici∣ently humbled the haughty States, and left a general consternation all o∣ver their Country, which made his very name formidable to the stoutest of them, took his way for France as we before men∣tion'd. His absence a little rais'd their spirits, so that they ventur'd out of their Intrench∣ments and march'd towards Woerden, Croa∣nembourg, and som other small Towns, which we had left ungarrison'd only upon pro∣mise of their Fidelity, not judging it neces∣sary to bestow Garrisons on them, that did of necessity fall into the Hands of him that was Master of the Field. They put some Forces into them, and possess'd them awhile quietly enough, and it may be we should not have concern'd our selves so far
as to drive them out, had not the Prince of Orange design'd to make Incursions into the liberties of Ʋtrecht, and to use Woerden as his retreat. Whereupon the Duke of Lux∣embourg, who, as we said before, command∣ed the Army near Ʋtrecht, and now permit∣ted it to rest and refresh it self, glad to find an opportunity of doing something for his Kings Service, took the Field, and streight march'd to Croanembourg, where (the Horse upon notice of their design, securing them∣selves by a timely retreat) they soon made themselves masters of the Foot, who with∣out much resistance, were made Prisoners of War: and not only they, but 72 more, who intrench'd themselves in a Castle that lay on the way, and for 5 or 6 hours kept our Dra∣goons in play, having killed 10 or 12, and broke Monsieur de Rouvray's arm, who commanded our Horse and the Attaque on one side, with a Musket-shot. Afterwards the Duke march'd to Woerden, which far'd no better then Croanembourg, and the Count de la Mark was left there with the Picardy Regiment. These proceedings did more trouble the States then one can well imagine: for besides the confusion it put them in, the loss of this last place, though it be little, and in it self in∣considerable, yet was of great importance
to them, because it gave us admission into the heart of their Country, and cut off all communication between divers of their great Towns. So they presently call'd a Council of War, and very earnestly desir'd the Prince of Orange presently to besiege it, who, thinking it a business of no difficulty, the Town being but slenderly fortified, clos'd with the proposal, not doubting of car∣rying it, and reckoning it would do well to flesh his heart less Men; wherefore he pre∣sently betook himself to the march. Whe∣ther it was because the Prince had willingly, upon their reqest, undertaken this business, or that they did imagine Woerden would not be so easily taken, I know not: but so it was, that hereupon they let not their Gal∣lant Protector depart, without bestowing on him more new Testimonies of their Kind∣ness; wherefore they drew out a very con∣siderable supply out of their Ships, with which that he might joyn, he went and en∣camped at the head of a Pass between Wesep and Naerden, where he caus'd a strong In∣trenchment to be rais'd behind a great Ca∣nale, and placed a guard on it. Such preparations could not be made without the Duke of Luxemburgs know∣ledge, for every body talk'd of them; and because it seem'd probable, their designs
were either against Naerden, which they had long threatned, or Ʋtrecht, towards which their march seem'd to incline, he presently drew out to prevent them. This happened on the 8th of October, for though they had long known of the Kings return into France, yet were they 2 or 3 months before they could so recollect their spirits as to think upon attempting any thing. The Duke therefore by 4 in the morning, leading with him 4000 Foot, and all his Horse, went and took up his post near the Pass through which the whole Dutch Army was to march; but this he did so suddenly, that he surprized them; so that their Van-guard, without staying to discover who we were, betook themselves to their heels with as much hast as if they had been already beaten, which gave our Van-guard occasion to laugh at them sufficiently: yet with all their haste they could not escape some of our Dragoons, who flung them∣selves into the Cannel, which serv'd them as a Baricado, and swimming over killed di∣vers of them, and took 40 Prisoners just be∣fore the Intrenchment within which the whole Body of their Army lay, not one of them daring to stir out to bring off their Companions; only they let fly some Vol∣leys of Shot from their Canon, notwith∣standing
which, our Men encamped them∣selves there. The next day being the ninth, our Army, which had purposely taken this post to ob∣serve their motions, was very intent all day upon that, and getting together some For∣rage, without enterprising any thing else: But the Hollanders lay not so quiet as we, for they had been too long upon the defen∣sive part already, and therefore resolv'd now to enter upon the offensive; 20 or 30 of their bravest Fellows seeing us lie still, had a great mind to take our Forragers, who were as securely at their work, as if they had been at the Gates of Paris, not thinking any body would dare to come and disturb them. This their confidence gave the Enemy the better opportunity, who thereupon enclosed both the Men, Horses and Forrage. The truth is, the Sieur de la Rouillardiere, Captain of a Company of Dra∣goons, and the Sieur Vieuxpont his Cornet, had been order'd to be their Convoy; but because the extent of the Country, which they were to defend, was somewhat large, they had divided themselves, each taking 15 Maistres which they commanded; so that they could not hinder the Enemies design, neither did they oppose it, but suffer'd all to be taken. Yet the Hollander had no rea∣son
to brag of the Exploit; for our Captain and his Cornet, instead of coming towards them, left them masters of the Field awhile, and wheeling a little about, joyn'd, and took up their post in a narrow passage, by which they saw the Enemy must come with his prize, and there waited for them; where, after having stood their first discharge, they made them all Prisoners, not one escaping, and brought them, and all the Forragers, back to our Camp. In the Evening, the Duke of Luxembourg gave order to his Men to be ready by the next Morning, resolving, seeing they stirr'd not, to approach them nearer, and try if he could entice them out: and at the same time order'd a Ca∣ptain of the Piedmont Regiment, with 12 Granadiers, to go and attaque them within their Barricado, and try if any of them sal∣lyed out, to take some Prisoners, whilst he would be ready, in case of need, to bring them off. The Captain perform'd what he was commanded very couragiously, past their first Barricado without any resistance, and march'd on to the second, where he found as little opposition; and seeing nothing but Men that fled, he advanc'd to the third, which chanc'd to be a House, so he set fire on that, and went on with intent to take some Pri∣soners if he could, as he had been ordered,
but he lost his labor; for the Dutchmen, notwithstanding their pursie fat bulk, plyed their legs so nimbly at this time, that it was not possible for him to overtake one. Where∣fore he return'd, and being to give account of what he had done, told the Duke, He had forc'd & fired their Barricado's, and ran after the Enemy, but without being able to catch any, because they flew, fear having put wings to their feet. The truth is, they never left running till they came to Boden∣grave, so that M. de Luxembourg finding there was likely to be no more action, re∣turn'd to Ʋtrecht, where he was not long idle; for the Hollanders prepared more Lau∣rels for him, as you shall hear. The tenth in the Morning they set forward, and embarking upon the River to the num∣ber of 14000, came and took up their post before Woerden, which the Prince caus'd presently to be block'd up, hoping to sur∣prise the Garrison, who indeed had no no∣tice of their coming; but they not having been negligent in their duties, the business was not likely to be effected so soon as the Enemy hop'd, who now began to fear this little paltry Town would cost them more then they imagined, wherefore they spent the rest of this, and all the following day, in Intrenching themselves, and fortifying all
the Avenues to their Camp, especially that part of it which lay towards Ʋtrecht, ima∣gining if any succors came to the Town, it it would be from thence. In the mean time, the Count de la Mark took care to give no∣tice to the Duke of Luxembourg, and not doubting but he would speedily come to his assistance, was still upon the watch, ready to sally forth and set upon the Enemy on his side, as soon as he should find some succors come to second him. Upon this Intelligence, which came in a very ill time (because the Duke of Luxem∣bourg was then in the Field with so small a party as could not be able to attempt any thing of themselves, any one but he would have been sufficiently puzled; but it was not then a time to stand considering, where∣fore he commanded those that were with him to march on toward the besieged place, whilst he went post to Ʋtrecht, where he or∣dered the Marquis of Genlis to take all the Horse he had, and some Foot, and follow after with all possible speed, ordering 2000 which were then ready to march immedi∣atly, because the danger being great requir'd a like remedy. These Orders were given most prudently, and if they were not ac∣cordingly executed, I can give no reason for it; but this I can certainly affirm, That the
Duke, being impatient till he got to the E∣nemy, left all these Forces to be brought af∣ter by Monsieur de Genlis, and put himself at the head of those he had sent before, when he first receiv'd the news of the Siege; and the other 2000 Foot which he found ready, resolving with this small party to set upon the Enemy, and venture all, rather then suf∣fer the place to be lost so under his nose, with∣out ever attempting any thing to save it. It must be acknowledg'd that this Enter∣prize was strangely hazardous, and the happy issue of it beyond belief. For it seem'd morally impossible, that our party should swim over a River, and the Causeys being as good for the Hollander as so many Rampires and Gabions; that they should rout an Army ten times as numerous as their own, and win a Fort from them furnished with five Intrenchments well flank'd and pallizado'd. Yet notwithstanding all this, the Duke of Luxembourg having staid a little for Monsieur de Genlis, and as long as was convenient to prepare himself for an attaque, began to set on the Enemy, who in spite of all his courage, and theirs that he command∣ed, beat him twice back; but at the third Onset, the Marquis de Meilly gave the rest a good example, by leaping into the Water up to his middle, which made many Offi∣cers
and Voluntiers, and at last the whole party to do the like, and so they passed over upon the very mouthes of the Enemies Guns, and got within their Intrenchments, which they were glad to quit and betake themselves to slight, as their last and best re∣fuge. The Count de la Mark in the mean while, who as I said before, was still ready to re∣ceive the Enemy if he had assaulted the place, or to sally out, if he saw any likeli∣hood of being assisted, being aware of the Duke of Luxembourgs arrival and attaque, lost no time, but sallyed out in person, and fell in amongst them like Lightning, killing many with his own hand, and being very well seconded by those that followed him, who had before tryed the Enemies Courage in a Sally that 400 of them made at the be∣ginning of the Siege, in which, driving the Enemy out of a part of the Suburbs where they had sheltred themselves, the better to make their approaches, they fired it, and beat the Enemy out of three Intrenchments which they had made to hinder any sallies from the Town. The M. of Bois Dauphin was killed in this first action, with six other Soldiers. So all their Intrench∣ments, Banks, Canales, Sluces, Forts and
Redouts, wherewith they had fortified them∣selves, and all their Canon, were obstacles too weak to keep us out, for they were pre∣sently quite routed, and the Prince of O∣range himself was forc'd to put all hopes of safety in the fleetness of his Horse. But he was fortunate enough, not to be of the number of about 500 who were taken, and 800 slain; amongst which were the Sieur Zulestein, who had been Tutor to the Prince of Orange, and Colonel Bis his Steward; with 2 other Colonels, 3 Lieutenants, and about 70 or 80 Officers, besides a great many that were drown'd, and whose num∣ber could not be certainly known, but may be guest at by those who were since taken up at divers places; which among the rest, amounted to 50 in one little Canale. Their flight was too sudden for them to think of any thing but saving their lives, wherefore all their Baggage and Canon, which were nine Pieces, three of which were on Batteries against the Town, and the rest within their Intrenchments, against any succor that might come to relieve it, fell in∣to our hands. These were all put into the Town, and will be made use of to repulse the Enemy again, if they dare ever attempt any thing against it.
As there are no Roses without Prickles, nor great Pleasures, which have not either accompanying or soon following them some alloy of sorrow, so this strangely fortunate success, could not be attain'd without some loss of our side. We lost in the Action ma∣ny Soldiers, and among the Persons of Note were the Count de Meilly, the Colonel to the Normandy Regiment, and who commanded the Foot in this Service, the Sieur de la Til∣hays his Lieutenant, a Gentleman of Nor∣mandy, and the Sieur de Parville Tibout, a Voluntier of Normandy likewise, in the same Body. The M. de la Meylleraye, Co∣lonel of the Piedmont Regiment. M. de Lar∣diniere, Lieutenant Colonel of the Navarre Regiment, and the Chevalier de Boufflers, Colonel of the Regiment Royal of Dragoons were dangerously wounded; besides divers Voluntiers who did wonders. As the success of so perillous an Enter∣prise could not but be very glorious to the Duke of Luxembourg, so upon that account it did reward it self; but neither prov'd it less advantagious to him, then glorious. For the generous Monarch, for whose service it had been undertook, no sooner heard of it, but with many Commendations bestow'd on him, He presently thought how he might re∣compense it; and besides a great sum of
mony, sent the Duke a Commission to be Captain of his Guards, in the stead of the Marquis de Lauzun Peguilain, that he and all Men might thereby see, That no Man serves him for nothing, That whatever is done for him, is presently follow'd by its re∣compence; and, That he better knows how to reward Virtue then punish Vice. This first Essay of the Hollanders, for the execution of which they had taken all possi∣ble care, and done all that might assure them of a good event, succeeding so ill, was not however altogether useless to the Prince of Orange; who being made more cautious by his ill success, resolv'd from henceforward not to venture any thing, nor make the least attempt where he was sure to find any great opposition. The States likewise began to discover how unseasonably they had put him upon this Siege. Wherefore, that he might not be forc'd to be always doing nothing, to which he was here reduc'd by the Duke of Luxembourg, who was still at the heels of him, as soon as he took the Field. He thought he might do somthing to more purpose, if leaving Holland he went toward Liege, ei∣ther against Tongres or Fouquemont, which were neither fortified, nor like to be succor'd by any Army that lay near them: for M. de Turenne was march'd after the Imperial and
Brandenbourg Forces, or else against Maesiick, whose Fortifications not being yet finish'd, would more easily be taken. In this reso∣lution he chose out his best Troops, and most experienc'd Commanders, in whom he chief∣ly confided, and made up a Body of about 14000 or 15000 Men. And thus having given all necessary Orders for the security of his Camp at Bodengrave, (which had hither∣to been his retiring place in all his Misfor∣tunes, and which having been fortifying it all the Summer, he had made a Bulwark for the security of all the rest of Holland) he set forward by the ways of Worcum, Gorcum, and Breda, designing to take with him a part of the Garrison of this last nam'd Town, as well as those of the Busse, Berguen-op-Zoom, and Maestricht, to augment his Army; but did not execute what he intended, either be∣cause he chang'd his mind, or because he could not, the Garrisons of those places being for the most part Spaniards. How∣ever it were, it matters not, but Bommelle lying in his way, and that being a great rich Town, and one of the chief of those that lie on the Wahal, he thought it would be no bad prize if he could compass it, and would be a happy beginning of his intended Pro∣gress; wherefore he march'd thither, and began to make his approaches; but going
in Person to view it, he chanc'd to bleed at the Nose; which seeming ominous, he would not obstinatly stay any longer before it, but march'd straight on to Tongres, with design to set upon that. But the Sieur Montal, Go∣vernor of Charleroy, having had Orders from the King, who had intelligence of their de∣sign, to put some Soldiers into it; having done accordingly, spoil'd their design. Mae∣siick would have been a better bit for them, but they were too dainty to stoop to such course fair, and therefore went on towards Fouquemont, upon which the Prince vented all his fury, and took it with as much greedi∣ness, as it had been defended generously, by the Lieutenant Colonel of the Jonzac. Regi∣ment, who was in it only with 200 Men, endur'd four Assaults very bravely, but at last was forc'd to yield it up. After this, the Prince resum'd his design against Ton∣gres, and march'd towards it; but let us leave him awhile to see what was done in the mean time in his own Country. The Hollander had not so much reason to rejoyce at the taking of Fouquemont, as they had of being sorrowful at the success of our Arms, and those of the Bishop of Munsters in Friseland. The Count de Saulx, having been told by a certain Captain in his Regi∣ment, who had learn'd it from some German
Fugitives from the Dutch Army, that the Bampfield Regiment lay at Hylestein in very ill plight, and that there was a way to come to them which was not well guarded, and whose Fortifications were not capable of gi∣ving us any stop, the Guard it self consist∣ing but of 40 or 50 Men, which lay a great way from the rest within an Intrenchment beyond the Canale of Gorcum; and that their retreat might be cut off, not to lose any time, sent some to take knowledge of the Post, and in the mean time gave intelligence of it to the Duke of Luxembourg, who was very glad of the news, but however expected the return of those who were gon to take an ac∣count of the place; who soon returning, con∣firm'd almost all that the German Fugitives had related. Hereupon the Count de Saulx received the Order which he had desir'd of marching thither; he had given him to that end 300 Men of his own Regiment, and 200 out of that of Castelnau, 50 Dragoons, and as many Horse, with Commission only to take all the party that were guarding that passage, and not to venture, for fear of be∣ing lost in going to the Enemies Quarters. The 15 of November was the day which confer'd on him the glory he gain'd in this enterprize. He set out about 3 of the clock after dinner, having at least 100 Refor∣mades
Officers that follow'd him as Vo∣luntiers; and the first thing he did, was to send a Captain of his Regiment to go be∣fore and secure the Avenues, that no intelli∣gence might be given to the Enemy of the march. But he was but just got beyond a place called Lexmende when he saw the Ca∣ptain return, who brought word, That the Enemy had certainly smelt the Design, be∣ing since they were sent, the number of the party was encreas'd, and they had made up a Barriere before their Intrenchment, where they had plac'd some of their new comers, whom he had seen reliev'd by others, and that the outward Guard seem'd to consist of about 10 Men. This news encreas'd the joy of our brave Commander, who now saw, that though he was confin'd to do nothing but carry away all that guarded that place, yet he now should carry away at least twice as many; and that if he afterwards march'd on to the Enemies Quarters (as he intended) he should with more ease master them, since they had weak∣ned themselves by sending this party to the others assistance. Wherefore he command∣ed the same Captain, with his Company, to take only their Swords and leave their Fire∣arms behind, that so they might, if possible, make the other party yield without noise,
least the Alarm should be thereby given to the Enemies main Quarters. This was ve∣ry well contriv'd, but the party proving to be Horse (which he knew not of his Scouts, who saw none of their Horses) some of them gave notice to the rest time enough for them (who had receiv'd very considerable succors upon the intelligence they receiv'd 2 hours before of the Design) to prepare themselves to receive us. So great an alteration was enough to have sent the Count back as he came, but it did only heighten his courage, who thought himself now too far ingag'd to leave off so, wherefore seeing all his men desiring nothing more then to engage, he continued his march, and within a little while came with∣in Pistol-shot of the Intrenchment. There were two ways which led to it, and gave him an opportunity to attaque it in two pla∣ces at once, but one of them was hardly passable upon the account of a Sluce five or six foot deep; yet notwithstanding he re∣solv'd to make use of them both, and to that purpose mended the other a little first, and then immediatly commanded the Grenadi∣ers to advance and cut down the Pallisados; but they not being able to perform it, because of their thickness, he commanded the Offi∣cers to climb over, which succeeded so well,
that the Enemies, after a short resistance, be∣took themselves to flight, and gain'd their Quarters where they staid not long; for see∣ing themselves pursued, they stole away without any noise of Drum or Trumpet, though they were 1000 or 1200 Men. It must be confess'd, that as the Enemies were always very vigorously set upon, so was their Cowardize extraordinary, other∣wise it had not been possible 1200 Men should suffer themselves to be routed and beaten out of a Fort, which on one side was strengthned by a great Canale that ran at the foot of it, and on the other by two rows of strong Pallisado's 7 Foot high, a Pa∣rapet Canon proof, 8 foot high, with two pieces of Ordnance, which they had plac'd there upon notice of our Design; besides 3 Fregats upon the Canale, who with their Ca∣non were to defend the Intrenchment. The Marquis of Castlenaw, who was one of the Voluntiers, after having kill'd three with his own hand, in the heat of the Action had his hand lifted up to have done as much to a fourth, but was prevented by a Musket∣shot, which so shatter'd his Arm, that it was fain to be cut off; and afterwards, notwith∣standing all the Chirurgions care, gangrend, so that he dyed of it some days after at Ʋ∣trecht, and was much lamented by all, as one
of the most couragious and brave Men we had: but his death was soon reveng'd by that of him that had shot him, and 50 of his Companions, which were killed on the place, and 100 more who were taken: the Fire destroying the rest of them. The same day being the 15th, the Marquis de Moussis, Colonel of the Queens Regiment, having been order'd to go and beat up a par∣ty of the Enemy Quarter'd near Wesep, went accordingly with 300 Men, drawn out of the Garrison of Naerden; but he found no body, for they had retir'd upon notice of his march, so they fired the Village which they had quitted. At the same time the Enemy took a fansie to attaque a place in Frizeland, whether they went with 5000 Horse and 300 Foot, and not having been able to surprize it as they hop'd, they laid so formal a Siege to it, that it lasted too long to their misfortune. For the Marquis Reinel, Camp-master to a party of Horse of the Confederate Forces, hear∣ing of it, got together all the Men he could in hast, and went to its relief, where he broke through their Lines, getting into the Camp among them, killed many, routed the rest, and gain'd all their baggage. The Elector of Brandenbourg, their Pro∣tector, had no better fortune then they, or
the Imperialists that he had with him. Monsieur de Sainfandaux at this time Fora∣ging about the Country with 20 or 25 Mai∣stres, was betraid by a Peasant who was his Guide, into the Hands of a party of theirs, consisting of 800, where after a long and brave resistance, he was at length over∣power'd by numbers, wounded, and carry∣ed away Prisoner. This was done before any Declaration of War from that Elector, but this act of Hostility was not long with∣out Reprizals. Monsieur Turenne hearing they had left 100 Horse for the Guard of the Bridge, by which they had pass'd over the Main, sent 150 Maistres of the Kings hous∣hold, under the command of Monsieur Brizac, Lieutenant of the Life-guards, to take cognizance of them, and discover whi∣ther what had been done was out of some particular grudge to M. Saintsandoux, or that they intended an open War. He went ac∣cordingly, and having found the Bridge guarded as he had been informed, advanc'd towards the Commander in chief, and after having ask'd who they were for, demanded free passage, which was granted him: after∣wards he demanded Quarters in the neigh∣boring Houses, whereupon the Officer told him, That being there was not suf∣ficient room to quarter both parties in,
there was no reason he who had first taken up the Quarters should be turn'd out of them; this satisfied him as to that point, he having no design to quarter there, wherefore M. Brizac ask'd him if he would send for some Wine, saying, They must needs drink a Bottle together: but the German smelling a design of making him speak more in his drink then he was minded to do now he was sober, replyed, He had already drunk his Mornings draught; and that if they must needs drink to one another, it must be at a distance: whereupon Monsieur de Brizac commanded his Men to advance, saying, Why then you are not our Friends? and so sell on and defeated them. A part of whom were kill'd in the Encounter, and the rest were either taken, or saved themselves by flight, so that our Men became masters of the Bridge; but Monsieur Brizac having had no order to keep it, came back with his party. The keeping of this Bridge was of main consequence to the Duke of Brandenbourg, both upon the account of his Interest and Ho∣nor: it being the way by which he was to retire, in case of ill success; and he having bragg'd and promis'd he would maintain it. Wherefore, having been told by those who had fled, that they had been defeated by one
only Squadron, imagining we should have kept the same post, he sent 2000 Men to take it from us; but we saved them a labor, because we thought it not worth keeping. But it seems they were not of our mind, for those 2000 Men strongly entrenched themselves at the end of the Bridge, and set∣ing a strong guard there, dispos'd of them∣selves as well as they could in the Quarters thereabout, but with order to be ever upon their guard, because they foresaw that as long as Monsieur Turenne lay so near them, he would not fail frequently to visit them. They were not out in their conjectures, for Monsieur Turenne having had notice of their being his neighbors, two days after their return thither, and imagining they were come thither with a design not to for∣sake the place without engaging, took with him the Kings Houshold, and march'd to∣wards them with all speed, to take cogni∣zance of them himself, being resolv'd once more to beat them from that post. He had not march'd far, when being yet above three quarters of a mile short of the Bridge, passing thorow a Wood he met the Count d'Onak, a near Kinsman to the Duke of Brandenbourg, who being out upon a de∣sign of getting intelligence, hearing some Dogs which had follow'd our party, and
were hunting in the Wood, he follow'd the Cry till he came near our Van-guard, and hearing a noise of Men and Horses, came on towards us, but found other kind of Hunters then he was aware of, for he soon perceived they were our Troops by their marching in rank and file; he came up to us notwithstanding very resolutly, and having ask'd who we were for, let fly at us first; who returning the same salute, wounded him in five or six places, whereof he dyed on the place cursing and swearing: part of his followers, which were 15 or 16 in all, were taken Prisoners, and the rest fled to the Bridge, where they put the whole party in such a fright, that M. Turenne at his arri∣val found it deserted. These were the worthy Exploits the Hol∣lander and their Partizans perform'd at home, whilst the Prince of Orange rang'd a∣bout in the Country of Liege, with intent to surprize some place on that side. He went to set upon Liege it self, but staid not long before it: but because Tongres, and the Gar∣rison there had done him much mischief, he had a great spight at it, and was alway fra∣ming some design against it. After the ta∣king of Fouquemont, he resolv'd to besiege it in good earnest; and it was in his march to∣wards it that we left him but now, and there∣fore
we will now pursue our discourse of him, and see how his design sped. But if we would have found him before the Place, we must have return'd sooner, for though he came thither with intent to sit down before it, yet Count Marsin made the pro∣ject miscarry, who (seing though the Place was not over well fortified, yet the Garrison in it was very strong, and might defend themselves very long, and cost a great many lives to winn it, M. de Montal being in the Place, who doubtless would maintain it to the last), advised him not to pursue the de∣sign any farther. This advice which was well grounded, suggested to them another more likely pro∣ject, and the issue of which would be of much more consequence. Monsieur Montal being now in Tongres, whether he was come and had brought with him a great party of men to reinforce the Garrison, made them judge Charleroy, whose Governour he was, and out of which he had drawn those men, might easily be gained, both upon the ac∣count of the Governours absence, and thin∣ness of the Garrison, which they imagin'd was much weakened by the party that M. de Montal had thence carried with him to Tongres: upon these grounds, they resolv'd to besiege it, and gave Count Monterey
notice of their design, to oblige him consi∣dering the importance of the Place, to send them more Forces; which, it seems, he too carefully and zealously did. For he unfurnish∣ed many of his Towns to make up a body of 16000, which was directly contrary to the Treaty at the Pyrenaeans and Aix la Chappelle. The 15 of December the Count Marsin, who commanded that Body, went and sat down before the Place in expectation of the Prince who was to follow with his Army. In the mean time the Sieur de Montal being inform'd of the design by some pri∣soners, and by 50 Maistres, whom he had ordered to follow the Enemy at a distance and observe their motions, (though he could hardly beleive they would venture upon so great and difficult a business) yet sent intel∣ligence of it to the Court (as they also did from Charleroy) withal desiring a Commis∣sion to return, and get into the Town; which he immediatly prepared himself to do, without staying for orders, so soon as he should be sure they were resolved upon the Siege of that Place. The 16 Monsieur de S. Cla a Brigadier of Horse, hearing of the same design at Maesiick where he then was, went thence accompanied by the Sieurs de S. Sylvestre, and d'Arty Captains of Horse, the Sieurs
de Labadie, Vignart, de Treüil Lieutenants Levigny and Magny Cornets, and Lopair and Empereur Quarter-Masters, together with 50 other Horse, and brought the con∣firmation of this news to M. de Montal at Tongres, offering him withal, to accompany him in his design of getting back into the Town; he accepted their profer, and with∣out any farther delay, dispos'd himself to set forward the next morning. The 17 he set out about 10 in the morn∣ing, as he had appointed, accompanied by the forementioned Gentlemen and their 50 Maistres, besides 60 more which he had brought along with him to Tongres, and marched all day and all night, intending to get thither the next day, whatever it cost them. In the mean time, the Couriers, who had been sent with the news, making all possible speed, arriv'd all three one after another to Versailles, were their Majesties then were. The news they brought, was so extra∣ordinary, and it seem'd so improbable that the Prince of Orange should come into Fland∣ers to besiege one of our principal Places there, that had not all the 3 Couriers suc∣cessively confirmed what had been related, of the Count Monterey's drawing out 15000 or 1600 men out of his Garrisons, and
sending them to begin the Siege, the Couriers would have been laught at as mad men, rather then beleiv'd; besides that after all, there was another reason that added to the improbability of it, which was the viola∣tion of the Treaty, which after this Count Monterey could not excuse. They were not∣withstanding beleived, because they all said the same thing, and the King thereupon that same night sent the Marquis of Louvois thi∣ther in post, and sent orders to the Marshal d'Humieres, who was at his own estate near Compiegne to go immediatly to Lisle, of which he was Governour, and there to expect farther orders. As M. de Louvoys is a man of excellent conduct and foresight in mana∣ging business, so is he indefatigable when their is need of dispatch, he therefore set out at midnight as soon as he had his orders, and having sent to the Chevalier de Nogent to accompany him, went by Peronne, and thence to Athe. The Marshal d'Humieres likewise though he had kept his bed three days before, being tormented by the Colick, set out immediatly for Lisle. As to Monsieur de Montal, he took the same way along the Caussey, by which the Enemy had march'd before him, that so he might not be disco∣vered: he had not marched above 5 or 6 hours, before he overtook some of the rear
of their Army loitering behind, all which he strip'd and hamme-string'd their horses, that they might not follow nor give notice of his march. The 8 before day he came pretty near the Enemy, 1500 or 1600 of whose foot were quartered in a Village call'd Perruis, and all the horse who conveyed them were disposed of in other Villages along the Caus∣sey, as far as Giblow; all these he passed without being discovered, but coming nearer Charleroy, was aware of other Troops, whom to avoid he was forced to turn out of his way, and fetch a compass on the right hand to gain the Woods. All this was don in the night, and at day break he arrived within sight of their Camp, but there made a halt, not being willing to appear till their guards were releiv'd, least when he would have forced his passage, all the whole Army should be upon his back, which succeeded as he could have wish'd. The first body of Men he came at, after coming out of the Woods, was a Regiment of Spanish foot, amongst whom he intruded so far, before they were aware of it, that though they began to suspect him, yet they dared not give the Alarm, but on the con∣trary saluted him civilly, and he returned them the like.
If Monsieur de Montal had found all the Spaniards and Hollanders of the same oblig∣ing and civil temper, he would certainly have ever after commended their good breeding, and found no use for the swords which he and all his party carried ready drawn under their cloakes. But that would not be, for as he came near a Glass-house where a great many were quartered, as well as in all the out-houses thereabouts, some body having spied their naked swords, cryed to Arms, saying they were Enemies, and thereupon they shot at them from every part, because they still marched on, not minding what was don; but by this time the Alarm was every where spread, and it was time for our men to think of defending them∣selves, which they did so much the more easily because the Enemies Horse-guard, which consisted of 150 Maistres, and were posted between the Town and Camp had newly unbridled their horses, so that not above 70 or 80 were found ready, who came upon us and were most of them killed, a∣mongst whom was he that lead them call'd Floris Major, who was in great repute a∣mongst them. 13 or 14 of our party were either killed or taken, whom we staid not to releive, least by so doing we should have lost the favorable opportunity of getting in∣to
Charleroy, for if we had obstinatly staid to disengage them, it may be the whole Army had fall'n upon us. We therefore pre∣sently gain'd the Town, in number 100 horse, besides the Officers, and got into it on Brus∣sels side, where at our coming M. de Montal found every one doing their duty, and very watchful against any thing the Enemy should attempt. The Place was close beset by the Enemy, who lay within Carrabine shot of it, yet without attemting any thing upon the out∣works: The truth is M. de Franclieu, the Kings Lieutenant in that Place, who com∣manded in cheif during the Governors ab∣sence, had done every thing that was pos∣sible, and applied all imaginable diligence, to put all things in the best posture that could be, in case they should be attaqu'd. Monsieur Desbonnais, a Brigadier of foot, who by good chance had staid there, did likewise much contribute to it, as did the Sieur Terrade, an Engineer, who took on him the care of the works: so that every body strove who should shew most zeal for his Majesty's and their Country's service, there being no body who deserv'd not much commendation on this occasion. As soon as Monsieur de Montal was ar∣rived he took care that all things should be
ordered to the best advantage, and finding that the party of horse which he had brought with him, might be very serviceable to him against the Enemy, and likewise very trouble∣some to the Place if their Forrage began to fail, he sent out 50 of them to defend 150 Musketeers, commanded by the Sieur Des∣bonnais, whilst they should get together all the Forrage they could find all along the Sambre, in the most remote houses, this was 3 houres doing, and had been sooner perform'd had not the Enemy strove to oppose it, and so hinder'd our men from returning so soon as otherwise they might. And yet we lost nothing by the bargain, for our men beat the Enemy on this occasion from a Post which they kept with a considerable guard of horse and foot, and killed many of them, we loosing but 2 Soldiers in all the Action. Whilst all this went on so gloriously, e∣very body was severaly employed in the Town, M. de Montal betook himself to dis∣cover the designs of the Enemy, and having observed a Battery which they were raising upon a rising ground that lay before the two little ponds, where the works chanced no to be coated, nor quite finish'd; he judg' they would make their cheif attaque on that side, which made him particularly provid for the security of that quarter, that h
might defend it to the last. Now Monsieur de Franclieu, having before foreseen how the business would go, had drawn a traverse acrosse the whole length, which though it was not yet quite perfected, yet was forward enough, to be capable of sheltering those Soldiers, which M. de Montal immediately commanded to be placed there, together with some horse which were ordered to take up their station in the ditch, which was not fenc'd with Pallisados, that they might have the freer passage in and out. The Sieurs de Franclieu and Desbonnais placed themselves where they thought they might do the best service in their own persons. But the Enemy, who by this time disco∣vered from their Camp, which lay very near, that they should not easily carry the Place, began to flinch, and abate much of their fury; so that the night following, instead of assaulting the Town, as they ought to have done, they discontinued their Battery, so that on the 19 in  he morning Monsieur de Montal observing this, resolved to send out all his Horse, with orders to sally out upon the high ground that lay towards Brussels, and to line the Counterscarpe, and out∣works with all his Musqueteers, that so they might get some prisoners. This suc∣ceeded
according to his wish, and indeed all was ordered with admirable courage and conduct. Twenty Horse were first sent out, who falling in with the Enemies out∣guard, entic'd out their main Guard con∣sisting of 150 Horse, commanded by the Baron of S. John, with three Colours; but Monsieur de S. Cla, who was ready with all the rest of the Horse upon the first onset to follow and second them, came just in time to fall on those who came in a greater number to releive the Enemy; he utterly routed them, killing many, among which was the Sieur de S. Jean, who re∣ceived two mortal wounds: there was a Lieutenant, and some others taken pri∣soners, and carried into the Town, whilst the rest of our men retreated leasurely to∣wards the Counterscarp, on purpose to draw on the Enemies that way who pursued but faintly, but were set forwards by the Prince of Vaudemont, and the Count of Lou∣vignies, who hearing the Alarm which had by this time been spread over their whole Camp, were come to their relief, with many others of the most considerable per∣sons in their Army. They came near enough to receive a sa∣lute of small shot from a small party of
our foot, which hurt many of them, and a discharge from our Canon, which plaid so well that many of them were cut off by it, and among others 3 Cornets, one of which belonged to the Prince of Oranges Guards; the Prince of Vaudemont lost his horse and his heel, which had like to cost him his life; and they were all so roughly handled, that they afterward kept at a great∣er distance, and not dared to make any ap∣proach, though we did all we could to in∣vite them to it, but on the contrary they placed a party of foot behind their Horse∣guard, to second them, in case we should sally out again. All this while our indefatigable King, whom neither the time of the year, nor the ill weather, nor any other difficulty could ever fright, being accustomed to expose himself to as many dangers as if he were a private person, resolved to go himself to provide for the defence of the Place, and the Queen being sensible how impatient she should be of his absence, if she could not constantly hear from him, resolved to go as far as Compiegne, that she might be nearer him; so their Majesties the same day left Versailles, and went to S. Germain in Laye.
The 20 was spent at the same place in giving order for their Majesty's progress. The Enemy before Charleroy, whether it were because they began to be sensible that they should loose their labour. if they staid any longer, or that they apprehended some design against them from Monsieur Lou∣vois, who was at Athe, giving orders for every thing that might any way inconve∣nience them, or from the Marshal d'Hu∣mieres, who was there likewise, and had by this time gathered together a body of 15000 or 16000 men, or that they had intelligence of the Duke de Duras his march∣ing with all speed towards them; what∣ever it was I can't determine, but they be∣gan to prepare for a retreat, and without offering to stir a foot forward, whatever sallies we made upon them, were content to stand on their own defence. All this while Monsieur de Montal not knowing of their design, and understand∣ing they had ready great numbers of Fag∣gots and wool packs, and 2000 Barrels, besides all other necessary's for making an assault, kept all night on the Guard, and lin'd the Counter scarps as thick as he could, that they might be well defended. The 21 their Majesties continuing in
their first design, the King for Charleroy, and the Queen for Compeigne, left St. Germain in Laye, and went and lay at the Louvre in Paris. Monsieur de Montal, who had all the night been upon the Watch, expecting that the Enemy should attaque his Out∣works, or open their Trenches, was fru∣strated in his expectation; for betimes in the morning, Count Marsin sent away all his Wool-packs, Baskets, and Sacks to put Earth in, together with twenty pieces of Canon, and two Morter-pieces, to be carryed back to Namur. The 22. their Majesties went and lay at Verberye, which is a great Village almost in the mid way between Senles and Compeigne. At last the Enemies rais'd their Siege, and about day-break all their Troops, both Dutch and Spanish, discamp'd and march'd off; the Hollanders going by the ways of Marchienes-au-pont, and Fontaine-l'Evesque towards Binche, which they attaqu'd as they came from the Siege of Charleroy; and the Spaniards towards ..... where the Prince of Orange, Count Marsin, and some other Generals met, and after∣wards march'd towards Rennel, Viennotte, and other places, and then departed every one to their several Quarters: and among
the rest, Fifteen hundred Foot, and some Horse, which had been drawn out of Mae∣stricht, return'd thither. The 23. Their Majesties arriv'd at Com∣piegne, which the King intended to leave and pass on further, according as he should hear from the Courriers; but those who arriv'd that night, bringing news of the Enemies retreat, made him change his mind; but being likewise told of the Hollanders sitting down before Binche, he resolved to stay there till he could further see into their de∣signs. The 24, 25, and 26, their Majesties rest∣ed at Compiegne, and talk'd not of stirring thence, because of the return of the Dutch Forces to Binche; their Majesties were not willing to go back thence, till the Dutch were retir'd from before that place, which at last they did, after having beat down the Gates of it as a mark of their fury. The 27, whilst the Hollanders venter'd their last stake before Binche, the Duke of Luxembourg left Ʋtreeht, taking with him Two thousand Horse, and all the Foot he could make, and went to Woerden, where he would not stay, but made his Men march on
all night, intending to set upon Bodengrave, which was the Hollanders refuge, to which they us'd to retire, when ever they had ill success, as to an assur'd place of safety. So that the next day, in spight of the Thaw, the Snow, the Bogs, and Canales, in which he many times had like to have been lost with his whole Army, he came in good time to a Village call'd Wells, where the Enemy was quarter'd, and had cast up two Intrench∣ments, which he easily forc'd, with the loss of one only Soldier, who was kill'd by one of five or six shots, which they made be∣fore they betook themselves to their heels. From thence marching along a Dike, which made his march much easier then it had been hitherto, he met with six hundred more at a Village call'd Swammerdam, where they were entrench'd in all the Houses, from the windows of which they were very liberal of their shot, and port-holes for Canon, which were many. He attaqu∣ed them at two several places, at one of which the Count de Saulx, chief Brigadier of the Army, commanded in chief; and at the other, the Marquis de Moussy. And because there were two Bridges to pass, which were guarded by the Enemy, the Sol∣diers of their own accord, without being commanded, leaped into the Water, and
waded through it to beat them down, shew∣ing in such a voluntary action much of their courage and zeal; and so much the more, in that the Enemy made a very resolute oppo∣sition to their Designs, insomuch that they had like to be worsted, had they not been se∣conded by a party that was drawn out to that purpose, and advanc'd to skirmish the Enemy, which they perform'd so well, that they forc'd them to retire into the Houses of the Village to their Companions, where the Count de Saulx got almost as soon as they; and notwithstanding all their Shot, forc'd the Doors of all those Houses, and made himself master of them. The Duke of Luxembourg immediatly commanded them all to be fired, not sparing so much as that of the Prince of Orange, in which many Men, Goods and Cattel were burn'd, to be reveng'd of him for assaulting the Castle of Marimont, one of the Kings Houses of Pleasure, which had been yielded him at the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle. After so many Toils, Perils, and so much Execution done, one would have thought it would have been but reasonable to give the Soldiery a little rest; and truly had they de∣sired it, they could not in reason have been denyed it. But it is to be admired, that
the Soldiers march'd on of their own accord, till they came to Bodengrave, where they found not that resistance which they expe∣cted, for the Count Koningsmark had quitted it with all his Troops. At Compeigne their Majesties being certifi∣ed of the Prince of Orange's retreat, resolv'd to return to St. Germains. The 29. Orders were given at Compeigne for their Majesties departure, and prepara∣tions made to set forward on the 31. The Duke of Luxembourg, who staid a∣while at Bodengrave, to give his brave Sol∣diers a little rest and refreshment, found him∣self necessitated to march on yet further: for being inform'd that some of those whom he had routed the day before, had not dar'd to stay at Niverburg, and by their fright so infected all those that kept the Garrison (which was most advant giously fortifyed) that they had all forsaken it; he thought himself oblig'd to march thither: where at his coming he found no living soul, only 21 pieces of Canon, 8 of Iron, and 13 of Brass fell into his hands, which he sent to Boden∣grave, to be secur'd by his Foot, which were
left there, the Horse and Dragoons having been all left at Woerden. After this, the Prince of Orange took his way homewards, having had as ill success in Flanders and the Country of Liege, as in Holland. And because Monsieur de Duras lay between Tongres and Charleroy, and had possest all the ways by which the Prince was to return, he was forc'd to go a great way a∣bout, to avoid meering any of the French Forces, which he dreaded above all things. The 31. their Majesties left Compiegne a∣bout 9 in the Morning, and came that night to Senlis, from whence they went on the first of January, 1673. after the Queen had been at her Devotions, and lay that night at the Louvre in Paris, from whence they went to St. Germain en Laye. FINIS.
