L1489 12890138 95095
A LETTER FROM Major General LUDLOW TO Sir E. S. Comparing the Tyranny of the first four Years of King Charles the Martyr, with the Tyranny of the the four Years Reign of the Late Abdicated King. Occasioned by the reading Doctor Pelling's Lewd Harangues upon the 30th of JANUARY, being the Anniversary Or General Madding-Day. Neque enim satis amarint Bonos Principes Qui Malos non Oderint. Plin. Panegyr. They can never love Good Princes as they ought, who do not perfectly abhor wicked Tyrants. Amsterdam, printed Anno Domini 1691
A LETTER FROM Maj. Gen. LUDLOW To Sir E. S. SIR, MY Love to Old England, is such as can never be shaken; no not by an Eternal Banishment; but I must ever wish, and heartily pray for its Pro∣sperity: And though 'tis not permitted to me to breath my Native Air, yet, that it is now in a great measure freed from those Pestilential Vapours which poy∣soned it in the late Reigns, and that my dear Country is at length delivered from that intolerable Oppression and Tyranny, under which it has long groaned, is to me a matter of great rejoycing. 'Tis (with me) beyond doubt, that the late happy Settlement of the Kingdom is well∣pleasing to God, and consonant to the Laws of the Land: for as Sir Robert Philips affirmed in his Speech in Parlia∣ment, in the year 1628, it is undoubtedly true, that the People of England are under no other Subjection than what they did voluntarily consent unto by the Original Contract between the King and the People. And King James the first was greatly in the right, when he told the Lords
and Commons in the year 1609, That he is no King, but a Tyrant, that governs not by Law: which (by the way) being true, the late King James ceased to be King, even before his Abdication. And, Now (Sir) you and I being agreed that the late King having broken the Original Stipulation and Contract, and be∣coming a Tyrant, by  and annulling the estab∣lished Laws; the Crown is most rightfully placed upon the Heads of the most excellent Princes King William and Queen Mary. I shall demonstrate to you, That King Charles the First, did equal (I might justly say transcend) his Son (whom you have deservedly Abdicated) in all his Acts of Tyranny; to this Undertaking I am provoked, by the reading the many Idle,  and Lewd Expressi∣ons, and Extravagant Encomiums of the first, in the Rants of one Edward Pelling, who stiles himself Rector of S. Mar∣tins ,  Person  of Spight, Falshood and Venome, that the Cock being turned, upon the thirtieth of January, he spouts out a Sea of Calumnies, Lyes and Poison) He, as you shall see, paints forth King Charles the First more like a God than a Man; talking of him at this rate, viz. That great Monarch and Martyr, of whom the World was not worthy, and perhaps will hardly ever see the like of him again; That Incomparable Prince; That Mirrour of Princes, the Noblest of Martyrs, the Wonder of Ages, and the Honour of Men; That Innocent, Ver∣tuous, Religious, Matchless Prince, The Lord's anointed, A Man according to God's own Heart. No King could be ever better than this; under the Sha∣dow of his Wings we did rejoyce; Peace and Plenty was our Portion; Every Man was sure of his Right, as long as this Religious Prince had his Just Authority; every Man was easie in his Cottage, as long as he sat at ease in the Throne; our Liberties were secure, our Laws had Life, and Religion never flourished more in this Nation than under him — He dyed a Martyr for Religion, and a Victim for his People. I am of Opinion that if the Blood of any Prince or Martyr could be so valuable as never to be atoned for in this World, it would be that Royal, that Sacred, that Innocent Blood. Now
To shew the effronted Impudence of this little, fawn∣ing, lying Levite, and to set your own, with the Thoughts of the present Age, right, in reference to this Idolized,  , I shall endeavour to place him in his true and just Light; and not to forget my proposed Method of doing it by way of Parallel, I shall first recount the Miscar∣riages wherewith the last Tyrant was most justly charged; and when I have so done, I shall proceed to convince you and all the World (my Doctor excepted, to whom I pre∣tend not to speak, in regard I find him telling his kind and Noble Friend, the late Bloody Monster Jeffryes, in an Epistle Dedicatory to one of his Raving Tracts, upon the the thirtieth of Janury 1683, that his Ears are past all feeling) how much his Father out-stript him, even in the first four Years of his Reign; for to that Time, I purpose to confine my self in this Letter. To be∣gin, The late King, by his Coronation Oath, promised and solemnly swore to maintain his Subjects in the free Enjoy∣ment of their Religion, Laws and Liberties; Nevertheless, he overturned the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the King∣dom, and subjected all to a Despotick and Arbitrary Go∣vernment; and so broke his Oath to the Poople: To come to particulars herein. I. He assumed to himself a Power to suspend and Dispense with the execution of  Laws, enacted for the Security and Happiness of the Subjects, and thereby rendred them of no effect. And, In order to the obtaining a Judgment in the Court of King's-Bench for declaring the Dispensing Power to be a Right belonging to the , he turned out such Judges  could not in Conscience  in so Pernicious a Sen∣tence; and having pack'd Judges for his purpose, he obtain∣ed the Judgment he required. II. He against Express Laws to the contrary, did set up  Commission for Ecclesiastical Matters, which was executed contrary to all Law.
III. None were raised to Ecclesiastical Dignities, but such Persons that had no Zeal for the Protestant Reli∣gion; He made Parker Bishop of Oxford, and Cart∣wright Bishop of Chester, and Watson Bishop of S. Da∣vids (who is most deservedly excepted in their Majesties Act of Indemnity.) IV. The Bishop of London was suspended, only be∣cause he refused to obey an Order, sent to him, to suspend Dr. Sharp. The President and Fellows of Mag∣dalen College in Oxford were Arbitrarily, and against Law, turned out of their Freeholds; and the College was put into the Hands of Papists. V. Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,  of the Peace, and others in Publick Employments, who would not comply with the Design of Repeal∣ing the Test and the Penal Laws, were turned out. VI. The Privileges of some Corporations were in∣vaded, and their Charters : And Surrenders of the Charters of other Corporations were procured to be made. VII. He put Papists into Civil and Military Employ∣ments and Trusts. VIII. The Archbishop of Canterbury, and six other Bishops, were sent to the Tower for setting forth, in a Petition, their Reasons, why they could not obey an Order, requiring them to appoint their Clergy to read the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. IX. The Earl of Devonshire was most exorbitantly fined Thirty thousand Pound, and imprisoned, for a Tri∣vial Matter: And the Lord Lovelase was treated as a Criminal, only for saying that the Subjects were not bound to obey the Orders of a Popish Justice of the Peace. SIR, I am the more brief in setting down the Matters charged upon the late King, the same being yet fresh in the Memories of all Men; but I shall be something more particular and large in representing
the Father's Tyranny, in regard Time has placed us at a greater Distance from it. That King Charles the Second went off by Poisoned Chocolate, to make way for his Brother, when Mat∣ters were well prepared to set up the Romish Idolatry, is a thing generally believed: And so it was, that King James the First, was so dispatch'd, as they may see who will turn to the Earl of Bristol's Speech in Parliament,'s first Collecti∣ons. and his Articles against the Duke of Buckingham; and to Sir Dudly Diggs his Speech at the Delivery of the Impeachment against the Duke, at a Conference with the Lords; and also to the thirteenth Article of that Impeachment, which charged the Duke with a very suspicious Plaister and Potion admini∣stred to that King. Well, right or wrong, King Charles ascended the Throne upon the twenty seventh of March 1625, and at the first gave the World a Prospect what was to be expected from him; for he instantly took the Duke of Buckingham and Laud (then Bishop of Bath and Wells) into admired Inti∣macy and Dearness, and made them the Chief Conductors of all Affairs in State and Church; and that aspiring Prelate had the Guidance of his Conscience. The Duke's Mother, and many near about him, were Pa∣pists; and he advanced Men Popishly devoted, to places of the Chief Command in the Court and Camp; The Good Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, Doctor Abbot, speaks thus of him; He was talented but as a common Person, yet got that Interest, that in a sort all the Keys of England hung at his Girdle; and it appeared that he had a Purpose to turn upside down the Laws, and the whole Fundamental Liber∣ties of the Subject, and to leave us, not under the Sta∣tutes and Customs which our Progenitors enjoyed, but to the Pleasure of Princes. Three Parliaments in the be∣ginning of this Reign, found and declared this Duke the Cause of all our Miseries and Disasters; The Grievance of Grievances. The Character of Laud, by the same Great Man, Arch∣bishop Abbot, was this; He was the inward Counseller with Buckingham, and fed his Humour with Malice and
Spight: His Life in Oxford was to pick quarrels in the Lectures of the Publick Readers, and to fill the Ears of King James with Discontent against  that took pains in their places, and  the Truth, (which he called ) in their Auditors: It was an Observation what a sweet Man this was like to be, that the first observable Act he did, was the Marry∣ing the Earl of D. to the Lady K. when it was notoriously known that she had another Husband, who had divers Children living by her. The Bishop of  (Dr. Williams) procured for him at the first, the  of St. , which he had not long enjoyed, but he began to undermine his Benefactor; and verily such is his aspiring Nature, that he will underwork a∣ny Man in the World, so he may gain by it. This Man, after the Death of the Duke of B. was the sole Favourite, and was preferr'd to the Bishoprick of London in his way to Canterbury: But to return to our King. He obliged himself (as yours did) by his  Oath, to observe, keep and  the Laws, Customs and Franchises of the Realm: Which had he  (says Arch∣bishop Abbot) all things had  in : But he broke the Oath of Protection and Justice which he took to his People, as the whole History of His Reigh shews: To give you some few of the Innumerable Instances which may brought therein. In the beginning of his Reign he married Henrietta Maria of France: Besides the General  upon that Marriage, he agreed to Private Articles in favour of Pa∣pists (viz.) that those who had been imprisoned, as well Ec∣clesiasticks as Temporal, should be released: That Papists should be no more molested for their Religion, &c. Hereby a Toleration (little less) was instantly grant∣ed to Papists, who without fear of Laws, fell to their Pra∣ctice of Idolatry, and scoffed at Parliaments, at Law and all: Their Numbers, Power and Insolence daily increased in all parts of the Kingdom, especially in the City of Lon∣don; which seem'd to be overflowed with Swarms of
This King wrote to the Pope, and by his Letter salu∣ted Antichrist with the Title of,  Pater, Most Holy Father. He procured the Pope's Dispensation for his Marriage, which was solemnized by Proxy, according to the Ceremonies of the Romish Church. Pursuant to his Private Articles with France, he in∣stantly granted a Special Pardon to twenty Popish Priests, of all Offences against the Laws; and he built a Chappel at Sommerset-House, with Conveniencies for Friers, who were permitted to walk abroad in their Habits, The Lords and Commons percieving the Protestant Reli∣gion to be undermined, and all things apparently tending to an Innovation and Change of Religion in the Kingdom; They presented to the King a Petition for advancing true Religion, and for suppressing Popery: He by his Answer assu∣red them of performance; yet, the very next day after that promise made, He assumed to himself a Power to dis∣pense with the Laws of the Twenty first and Twenty se∣venth of Queen Elizabeth, and of the third of King James; in granting Pardons to Baker a Jesuite, and ma∣ny other Papists, which passed by immediate Warrant; and were recommended by the Lord Conway, Secretary of State, without the Payment of the Ordinary Fees. The Secretary being called to answer this in Parlia∣ment, very boldly said, that he never hated the Popish Re∣ligion; That the King commanded the granting the Par∣dons, and that no Fees should be taken. This King, as well as yours, made Papists Lords Lieu∣tenants, Deputy-Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, &c. As you may see by the Petition of the House of Commons, wherein they complained of the increase and counte∣nancing of Papists; and named about One hundred Po∣pish Lords, Baronets, Knights, Esquires, &c. who held Places of  and Trust in England, and Wales; And I shall here remember you, that as his Secretary of State did not hate Popery; so Weston, whom he made Lord Treasurer of England, died a Papist.
He granted a Commission to certain Commissioners to compound with Papists for all Forfeitures for Recusancy, from the Tenth Year of King James, whereby they made their Compositions upon very easie Terms: And he in∣hibited and restrained both Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts and Officers to intermeddle with Papists; which a∣mounted to no less than a Toleration. In Ireland, the Popish Religion was openly  without control, and practised in every part thereof; Popish Jurisdiction being there generally exercised and a∣vowed: Monasteries, Nunneries, &c. were erected in Du∣blin and most of the great Towns, and filled with Men and Women of several Orders. The Men whom he preferred to Bishopricks, generally speaking, were unsound in their Principles; they set up for a New Church of England; and corrupted our Reli∣gion, in Doctrin, Worship and Discipline: These laid new Paintings on the old Face of the Whore of Babylon, to make her shew lovely: These were ready to open the Gates to Romish Idolatry, and Spanish Tyranny (which you well know, did in that day threaten our Nation to as high a Degree as that of France hath done of late) These, particularly Neal Bishop of Winchester, and Laud of Bath and Wells, were complained of by Remonstrance in Parliament, for countenancing and cherishing Papists, and Persons Popishly affected, and depressing and discoun∣tenancing Pious, painful and Orthodox Preachers, how con∣formable soever: And Bishop Laud being advanced to Lon∣don, was charged by a Petition of the Printers and Book∣sellers, to the House of Commons, that, the Licensing ofTo publish a good, was made then a Sin, (by this Bishop of Lon∣don) and an ill one a Vertue; and while one came out with Authority, the other could not have a Dispensation; So that we seemed to have got in Expurgatory Press, though not an Index; and the most Religious Truth must be expunged and sup∣pressed, in order to the false and secular Interest of some of the Clergy. Books being wholly restrained to him and his Chaplains, he allowed Books which favoured Popery, but denied to li∣cense Books that were written against it.
Mountague, one of this King's Chaplains, published a Book intituled An Appeal to Caesar, and another Book in∣tituled A Treatise of the Invocation of Saints: In these Books he asserted many things contrary to the Articles of Reli∣gion: This being taken into consideration by the House of Commons in the King's first Year, They voted that Moun∣tague endeavoured to reconcile England to Rome, and in∣stanced that he maintained these Positions. 1. That the Church of Rome is and ever was a True Church. 2. That Images might be used for the In∣struction of the Ignorant, and for Excitation of Devo∣tion. 3. That Saints have not only a Memory, but a more peculiar Charge of their Friends; and that it may be admitted that some Saints have a peculiar Pa∣tronage, Custody, Protection and Power, as Angels al∣so have, over certain Persons and Countries by spe∣cial Deputation. That he impiously and prophanely scoff'd at Preaching, Lectures, Bibles, and all shew of Re∣ligion, &c. That his Scope and End in his Books was to encourage Popery, and to draw the King's Subjects to the Roman Superstition, and consequently to be re∣conciled to the See of Rome: The Commons prayed that Mountague might be punished, and his Books sup∣press'd and burnt. The Pious Archbishop Abbot had disallowed and sought to suppress the Appeal to Caesar, but it was approved by Laud and his Set of Bishops, and printed and dedi∣cated to the King. Laud solicited the King to shelter Mountague from the Prosecution of the Commons, and upon the occasion of that Prosecution said, I seem to see a Cloud arising andHe might indeed have a more early sight of the Cloud than a∣ny Man living, because 'twas of his own raising. threatning the Church of England, God for his Mercy dis∣sipate it.
The King appeared incensed at the Prosecution, and sent a  to the Commons, that Mountague  his Chaplain, and he had taken the business into his own hands: He afterwards granted him a Pardon of all , and made him Bishop of Chichester. It sufficed not to introduce an Innovation and Change of Religion at home: This King, to the Dishonour of our Nation (formerly the Sanctuary of oppressed Prote∣stants) the Scandal of our Religion, and the high dis∣advantage of the Protestant Interest throughout Chri∣stendom, did at this time (his sirst Year also) Lend Eight Ships (which he equipped with the Subsidies given for the relief of his distressed Protestant Sister, the Electress Palatine, and the poor oppressed Protestants of the Palati∣nate) to the French King to fight against the miserable Protestants of Rochel: Of this Squadron, Captain Penning∣ton in the Vantguard went Admiral: The Commanders and Mariners protested against the service, though temp∣ted with Chains of Gold, and other Rewards, and re∣turned with the Ships into the Downs, declaring they would sink rather than fight against those of their own Re∣ligion: The Duke of Rohan, and the French Protestants solicited the King not to let the Ships go again, and had good words and hopes from him: Nevertheless he wrote a Letter to Pennington, Dated the Twenty Eighth of July, 1625. Strictly requiring him without delay to con∣sign the Vantguard into the hands of the Marquess D' Essiat, for the French King's Service, and to require the seven o∣ther Ships, in his Name, to put themselves into the Service of the French,  to his promise: And commanding Pennington, in Case of backwardness or refusal, to use all for∣cible means to compel them, even to sinking. Pennington hereupon went back, and put his Ship into the Absolute Power of the French King, and com∣manded the rest so to do; but the Mariners refused, declaring they would rather be hanged at home, than sur∣render their Ships, or be Slaves to the French, and fight against their own Religion: And they were making away,
but Pennington shot and forced them all in again, the Neptune excepted, which, in Detestation of the Action, Sir Ferdinando Gorges, to his Eternal Honour, brought away. All the English, Men and Boys (except one Gunner, who at his Return, which is somewhat remarkable, was slain in Charging a Piece of Ordnance, not well sponged) declined the Service and quitted the Ships, refusing to serve against the . In September following these Ships were actually employed against the Rochellers, almost to their utter Ruin: The  boasted that the Uantguard mowed the Hereticks down like Grass: By these Means were these good Good People wholly lost; They indeed held the Town till the Year 1628, but were reduced to incredible Misery, having lived long upon Horse-slesh, Hides and Leather, Dogs and Cats; There were at length but about four thousand left alive of fifteen thousand Souls; many dyed with Fa∣mine, and they usually carried their Coffins into the Church-yard, and therelaid themselves in and dyed: [A sad Story, never to be forgotten in the History of our Blessed Martyr's Reign.] SIR! Having thus shewed you how Rome was found to eat into our Religion, and fret into the Banks of it, the Laws and Statutes of the Realm; I shall now lead you to the Remembrance of this King's Admini∣stration in Civil Matters, and how it fared then with the Subject in the Points of Liberty and Property; and shall evince, That he took our Goods from us against our Wills, and our Liberties against the Laws; That he plucked up the Root of all Property; We were almost grown like the Turks, who send their Janizaries, and place the Halbard at the Door, and then are Masters of all: But not to hold you in Generals, This King, in the very beginning of his Reign, levy∣ed twelve thousand Soldiers, and, contrary to Law, required the Countries to furnish the Charge of   Conduct Money.
He appointed Commissioners to Try, Condemn, and Execute Delinquents by Martial Law, against the known Laws of the Land, and some were executed thereby. He struck directly at the Property of the Subjects Goods, and (having dissolved the Parliament) he, con∣trary to many Laws, issued Commissions for raising Money, by way of Loan, and the Commissioners were order∣ed to certifie to the Council-Board, the Names of all Rc∣fractory Persons; particularly, He demanded One hun∣dred thousand Pounds of the City of London; and the Magistrates representing the People's Excuses, the Council commanded them to proceed therein, threatning, that up∣on their Failure, His Majesty would frame his Counsels as appertained to a King, in such extreme and important Occasions. He also required the City to set forth Twenty Ships, Manned and Victualled, for three Months: The Mayor, Aldermen and Common-Council, petitioned for Abatement of the Number of Ships demanded; but were answered, That Petitions and Pleadings were not to be received: That as the Commanded was to all in general, and every particular of the City, so the King would require an Account both of the City in General, and of every par∣ticular: That the Precedents of former Times were Obe∣dience, not Direction; and that Precedents were not want∣ing for the Punishment of those that disobey the King's Commands. The Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of Dorsetshire being commanded to set forth Ships, insisted, That the Case was without Precedent; but they were severe∣ly checked, for that instead of Conformity they dis∣puted, and were told, That State Occasions were not to be guided by ordinary Precedents. The Persons of Quality who refused to subscribe to the Loan, were put out of the Commissions of the Lieutenancy and Peace (as they were who refused to comply with your King's Humour) and were bound to appear at the Council-Table, where, as Refractory Per∣sons,
they were committed to Prisons, or put under ; these were Persons both of Note and Number, as the Prisons in London demonstrated, and as you must conclude, when you read these following Names, and know they were of that Number; viz. Sir John Elliot, Sir John Heveningham, Sir Nathaniel Bar∣nardiston, Sir John Strangwayes, Sir Walter Earle, Sir Tho∣mas Grantham, Sir Thomas Wentworth, Sir Harbottle Grimston, Sir Edward Hambden, Sir Thomas Darnel, Sir John Corbet, Sir William Armin, Sir William Masham, Sir William Wilmer, Sir Erasmus Drayton, Sir Edward Ayscough, Sir Robert , Sir Boauchamp Saint-John, Sir Oliver Luke, Sir Maurice Berkley, Sir John Wray, Sir William Constable, Sir John Hotham, Sir John Pick∣ering, Sir Francis Barrington, Sir William Chancey, George Ratclif, Richard Knightly, John , William An∣derson, Terringham Norwood, John Tregonwell, Thomas God∣frey, Thomas Nicholas, John Dutton, Henry Poole, Na∣thaniel Coxwell, Robert Hatley, Thomas Elmes, William Coriton, and George Catesby, Esquires, besides above twenty Eminent Citizens of London, and many other Gentlemen of good Note. Sir Peter Hayman, upon his refusal of the Loan, was commanded to go upon the King's Service beyond the Seas; others, of a meaner Rank, were either bound to appear before  Lieutenant of the Tower, to be enrolled for Soldiers to be sent for Denmark, or were impress'd to serve in the King's Ships. Now, can it be imagined that there could be found a Man so hardened in Wickedness, as to avow these unheard of Violences which trenched into all we had? Yes, there were in that, as in every Age, Pellings, and , amongst the Clergy; Base Sycophants, Aspiring Time-servers, the Vile Descendents of Cambyses's Judges, who being demanded, Whether it were not law∣ful for him to do what in it self was unlawful, they (to please him) answered, That the Persian  might do what they listed; at that Rate those lying Pro∣phets, our slattering Gentlemen of the Cassock, to scanda∣lize
the Laws and subvert Parliaments, prated to this King; They told him, All we had was his JURE DIVINO; and perswaded him (who was most ready to believe it,) That the Right of Empires was to take away by strong Hand: Of these, Doctor Manwaring in two Sermons before the King, (printèd under the Title of Religion and Allegiance) in∣culcated this Doctrin. 1. That the King is not bound to observe the Laws concerning the Subjects Rights, but that his Will in imposing Loans and Taxes, without Consent in Parli∣ament, doth oblige the Subjects Conscience, upon pain of Eternal Damnation. 2. That they who refused the Loan, did offend against the Law of God, and against the King's Su∣preme Authority; and thereby became Guilty of Impiety, Disloyalty, Rebellion, &c. 3. That Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the raising of Aids and Subsidies. And, Doctor Sibthorp, Vicar of Brackley, printed a Sermon, which he preached at the Assizes at Northampton, and dedicated to the King; wherein he obliged his Country with these Positions.A Deo Rex, à Rege Lex, Title-page of Pelling's Ser∣mon, 30. Jan. 1683, dedi∣cated to Jef∣feryes. But we find different Doctrin in Bracton and Fleta; they tell us, That Rex Angliae habet Superiores, viz. Legem per quam factus est Rex; ac Comites & Baro∣nes qui debent ei fraenum ponere; The King of England hath for Superiors both the Law, by which he is constituted King (and which is the Measure of his Go∣verning Power) and the Parliament, which is to restrain him if he do amiss. Eraction lib. 2. cap. 16. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 17. 1. That it is the Princes Duty to direct and make Laws, (his Text, by the way, was Rom. 13. 7. Render there∣fore to all their dues) he justified this by that apposite Proof, Eccl. 8. 3, 4. He doth whatsoever pleases him. — Who may say unto him, What doest thou?
him) I shall not be afraid of any Evil Tidings, for my heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. But the Bishop of London appeared more plyable, and gave Licence to this Sermon, and it came out approved by my Lord of London, as a Sermon learnedly and discreetly preached. The King instantly suspended the Archbishop, and also confined him, and committed the Archtepiscopal Jurisdiction to five Bishops, all of the New Church of England, and Sibehorp's Patrons, viz. London, Durham, , Oxford, and honest Laud of Bath and Wells. The Commons Impeached Manwaring for his Sermons, and by the Judgment of the House of Lords, (amongst other Penalties) he was disabled from holding any future Ecclesiastical Preferment or Secular office: The King granted him a Pardon of all , and he was pre∣sented to the Rectory of Stamford - Rivers in Essex, and had a Dispensation to hold it, together with the  of S. Giles in the Fields. I shall in this Place remember you, That  Bi∣shop, Doctor Williams of Lincoln (as well as the )  the Heavy  of this your  King. In the  Year of his Reign the Bishop of Lin∣coln was Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; but upon his ap∣pearing in Parliament against the Kingdom's great Griev∣ance, the Duke of Buckingham, he was Disgraced and Se∣questred from the King's Presence and the  Table. In his Second Year he was  for speaking publick∣ly against the Loan; and also for  to give way to Proceedings in his Courts against the Puritans; and Doctor  charged him that he should say, He was sure the Puritans would carry all at last: The King now imprisoned him in the Tower, and so the  King was not without a Presidont, when he sent seven Bishops thi∣ther: Well, this Good Bishop out-living his ; when (upon the King's  the ) we came to a Tryal of Skill for the Old English , he resolutely said, NOLUMUS LEGES AN∣GLIAE MUTARI, and took a Command in our
Army, and bravely asserted his  Liberties with his Sword. Having thus (Sir) shewed you that the King, which I Abdicated, made no more Bones of Pious  Bishops, when he found them standing in the way of his Tyranny, than he did to whose  you lent your Hand; I shall now proceed to remind you, That both the Tyrants went , in their Dealing with West∣minster-. It is before remembred, That Yours mo∣delled the Courts of Justice, till he got Judges to  his Right to the Dispensing Power, but Mine set him the Example; for he resolving to subject the Liberties and Estates of the Subject to his Will and Pleasure, and find∣ing that the Grave and Learned Judge, Sir , Lord Chief Justice of the King's-Bench, had decla∣red himself against the , and would not serve the Turn in that Day, to give a Judgment, That the King might im∣prison, , and  leave the Subject in the Goal and Remediless; turned him , and substituted Sir Nicholas  in his Room, and  gained his Point: For, Sir Thomas , Sir John , Sir Walter Earl, Sir John  and Sir Edward , Five of the Gentlemen imprisoned for refusing the Loan, brought their Writs of  in , in the Third Year of this King: The Warden of the  made Return, That they were detained in his Custody by the Special Command of the King. We had then an  (Sir Robert Heath) little short of your late  , at the Knack of en∣slaving the People; he  and justified this  of ,  no Special Cause was assigned; and the Lord Chief  Hide, who was  on purpose for it, did singly (as the Practice has also been of late) give Judgment for Remanding the  to Perpetual Imprisonment, for that Judgment did in effect declare upon Record, That by the King's Command a Subject might be  for ever.
To the Imposition of the Loan, and the many other Grievous Sufferings and Violent Oppressions, under which we groaned; This King added the Burthen of Billeting Soldiers, of whom many were ; they brake out into great ; mastered the People, disturbed the  of Families, and the Civil Government: To some Places they were  for a Punishment, and where∣ever they came there was a General Outcry; the  were , and the Markets unfrequented; they  a  to all, and  to many of the People. He also (towards the End of the Year 1627) issued    under the great Seal, to several  Lords, with  and Loud, Bishops of , and Bath and Wells, and others, to raise Money by an Excise,  to enforce the Payment, and (which is very probable) to  the Parliament, which was to assemble the seven∣teenth of . ☞ Upon the Thirtieth Day of January 1627, sent a  to the Lord Treasurer to this effect, We com∣mand you forthwith to pay to Philip , Merchant Thirty thousand Pounds, to be paid by him over, by Bill of Exchange, into the Low- and Germany, unto Sir William Balfoure and John Dolbier was a Papist. , for Levying and Providing certain numbers of  with Arms for Horse and Foot, to be brought over into this Kingdom, for our Service, &c. Burlemark being afterwards called into the House of Commons, and examined about this Matter, declared, That he received the Thirty thousand Pounds; That One thou∣sand  levyed, and those Horses and their Riders  to come over; and Arms were provided for them in Holland, but he heard a  was gone to stay them. In this  third Parliament, to which the Extre∣mity,March 17th 1627. of his Affairs brought him, much against his Will; The , with sad hearts, taking notice of the high Oppressions of the People, by heavy and illegal Exacti∣ons, by false and arbitrary Imprisonments, . and
upon the strange and dangerous Purpose of bringing in German Horse and Riders, to change the Frame both of Religion and Government: They found it as necessary as just, to vindicate our Ancient Vital Liberties, and in order thereto, They drew up a Pe∣tition of Right, thereby  of the levying of Moneys without Authority of : Of the Imprisoning the Subject without any Cause shewed, and not being delivered by  Corpus as by  they ought: Of the Subjects being  to  Soldiers into their Houses; and to  a∣gainst their Wills; And of the Excuting Martial Law; contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm: Whereupon they prayed, as  Rights and Liber∣ties, that none should  be compelled to yield any Gift, Loan, , Tax, or such like Charge, without common Consent by Act of Parlia∣ment: And that no Freeman should be imprisoned with∣out Cause shewed: And that the People might not be burdened with Soldiers in time to come; And that no Commission for procceding by Martial Law  hereafter issue; q They further prayed (as their Right) that the King would declare that the proceedings to the prejudice of the People, in any of the Premises, should not hereafter be drawn into Example: And that in all the things aforesaid, All his Officers and Ministers should serve him according to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm. This highly necessary and seasonable Petition met with great Interruption and violent Opposition; The King urged that it trench'd upon his , his  Authority,  Power, Sovereign Power, &c. (which imported no less than  King's being loose and  from all Ties and Restraints, either by  Sti∣pulations, or superadded Laws;) The great Sir Edward Coke said, in answer thereunto,  is such  Fellow, that he will have no : Let us not yield a Sovereign Power above all  Power in Law (as the  Posse Comitatus) is taken for a Power with force;
The King strugled long to shift it off; and to avoid the an∣swering this  in a Parliamentary way, pressing them again and again, by Messages, to rest and rely upon his Royal Word: The Commons persisting, pursued their Pe∣tition, and to have it pass into a Law; and Sir Edward Coke said, Was ever a Verbal Declaration of the King, ? — The King must speak by Record, and in particulars, not in generals: All succeeding Kings  say, ye must trust me as well as ye did my Prede∣cessors: Let us put up our Petition of Right; Not that I distrust the King, but that I cannot take his Trust, but in a Parliamentary way. At length this Petition being unanimously agreed un∣to by the Lords,  was presented to the King, who at first gave a lame and uncertain Answer to it, and being press'd to give a direct and plain Answer, he  word to the House, that he would not alter his An∣swer: but he was afterwards brought to do it, by the Importunity of the Lords and Commons, and gave a clear and satisfactory Answer, and so that Excellent Law pass'd. But, He had no sooner granted this Petition, but We found it notoriously violated, by his  of , and levying the Subsidies of  and Poundage, which determined by his Father's Death, and were ne∣ver payable to any of his Ancestors, but only by speci∣al Act of Parliament: Hereupon the Commons shewed by Remonstrance, that Tonnage and Poundage were always the free Gift of the Subject, for guarding the Seas, and that the taking the same without Act of Parliament, is a breach of the fundamental Liberties of the Kingdom, and contrary to the King's Answer to the  of Right: However, by order of Council he commanded the Cu∣stoms to be levyed. Pursuant thereto the Custom-House Officers seized great quantities of the Goods of Mr. Vassal a Merchant, be∣cause he refused to pay Customs; and an Information being brought in the Exchequer, Mr. Vassal pleaded Mag∣na Charta, and the Statute de  non , &c.
and that the  was not  seu certa , and that it was imposed without assent of Par∣liament: The Attorny  having demurred to Mr. 's Plea, and he joyned in demurrer, The Barons of the   denied to hear Mr. Vassal's Counsel, to argue for him, and said that the King was in Possession, and they would keep him in Possession: And shortly after they imprisoned Mr. Vassal for not paying the Customs, as he had been before for refusing the Loan. The Goods of Mr. John Rolls a Merchant and Member of Parliament, and of Mr. Richard Chambers, a Merchant, being seized for Non-payment of Customs, They brought Writs of Replevin to regain the Possession of their Goods, but the Barons of the  sent an Injunction to the Sheriffs of London, commanding them not to execute the Writs: Also the Warehouse of Mr. Rolls was lock'd up by , at the time when he was sitting in Parli∣ament. Mr. Chambers was likewise prosecuted in the Star∣Chamber, for saying that the Merchants are in no part of the World  and  as in England; That in Turkey they have more encouragement; For this he was  2000 . committed to the Fleet, and ordered to make Submission, which being drawn up and tendred to him, he thus (like a brave English Man) underwrote it: All the abovesaid Contents and Submission, I do utterly abhor and detest, as most unjust and false, and never till death will acknowledge any part thereof. Rich. Chambers. To this he added, Wo to them that devise Iniquity, because it is in the power of their hand; and they covet , and take them by Violence, and Houses, and take them away: So they  a Man and his House, even a Man and his Heritage. Micah 2. 1, 2. Now (Sir) to draw towards a Conclusion, I shall ob∣serve that no Rank or Order of Men stood clear from the  of this Tyrant: He kept the  of  under Confinement near two Years without being charg'd with any Accusation, or brought to Tryal, or
Permitted to answer for himself: And upon his Petitioning the Lords to be  to his Liberty, and to his Seat in Parliament, and  an Accusation against the Duke of , This King, upon ,  for him in Custody as a Delinquent, and prosecuted him as such. Also, He committed the  of Arundel to the Tower in time of Parliament, without expressing any Cause of his , in Violation of the  of the : This  was long detained a Prisoner, though the House of Lords pre∣sented a Remonstrance, and many Petitions for  him to Parliament. And, As he oppressed our best Patriots, so   and shel∣tred the grand Enemies of the Commonwealth: When the  in Parliament prosecuted the Duke of , as the Principal Patron and Supporter of a  set on foot to the Danger of the Church and State: As a Per∣so notorious in Evil, that all our Evils came by him: As the Man who had cast the Body of the Kingdom into an high Consumption: The King interposed to rescue : When the Commons impeach'd him, and by one of their. Articles charg'd him (in effect) with the Murder of King James. The King told the House of Lords, that to approve Buck∣ingham's Innocence, he could be a Witness to clear him in every one of the Articles. When the Earl of Bristol exhibited Ar∣ticles to the Lords against the Duke, the King took upon himself to become a Witness to accuse the Earl of Traiterous Practices, some Years before. Notwithstanding nothing grows to abuse but the House of Commons hath Power to treat of it, and it hath been their Ancient and Undoubted Right and Usage to question and complain of all Persons of what Degree soever,  grievous to the Commonwealth: Whereof there was a noted Instance in 30 Edw. 3.  When they accused John de Gaunt, the King's Son for misleading and misadvising the King, and he went to the Tower for it; yet our King told the House of Commons, that he would not allow any of his Servants to be questioned amongst them, much less such as were near him: That he saw they aimed at the Duke, but as∣sured
them he had not intermedled, nor done any thing concerning the Publick but by his special Directions: He added, that he wondred at the foolish Impudence of any Man, to think he should be drawn to offer such a Sacrifice. He, in scorn and defiance of the Parliament, procured the Laudean Faction in the University of Cambridge, (whoThis might be the first, but 'twas not the last time that the Uni∣versity hath made an Election in contempt of the Parliament. were gaping for Ecclesiastical Preferment) to choose the Duke their Chancellor, at the Time when he stood Impeach'd in Parliament. He constantly gave interruption to the Parliament, when they had the Duke's Offences under Examination, not bear∣ing their mentioning his Name and Misdoings; And he dis∣solved three Parliaments when they were intent upon his Pro∣secution, refusing a Petition of the House of Lords against one of those Dissolutions, and denying them Access to his Person. Upon the Dissolution of his second Parliament, he sent Sir Dudly Diggs and Sir John Elliot Prisoners to the Tower (to the infringing the undoubted Priviledges of the Commons) for managing a Conference with the Lords, upon their Im∣peaching the Duke. He, in the time of his 3d. Parliament sent Warrants for sealing up of the Studies of Sir John Elliot, Mr. Holles, and Mr. Selden, and also sent  to Mr. Holles, Sir Miles Hobart, Sir John Elliot, Sir Peter Hayman, John Selden, William Coryton, Walter Long, William Strode and Benjamin Valentine, Esqrs; all Members, to appear before the Privy Council; Mr. Holles, Sir John Elliot, Mr. Coriton, and Mr. Valentine ap∣peared, and refusing to answer out of Parliament, what was said and done in Parliament, they were (during the Parliament) committed close Prisoners to the Tower; and a  was issued for apprehending Mr. Long and Mr. Strode, who coming in, were committed close Prisoners to the King's Bench: And all the rest of the before named Members were committed to several Prisons.
These imprisoned Gentlemen in Trinity Term following (1629.) brought their  of  Corpus, and were brought to the King's Bench-Count, where very learned Ar∣guments were made on their behalf, shewing the Illegality of their Imprisonment; and being to be brought again upon another day, to receive the Judgment of the Court, they were, (by the unpresidented Arbitrary Practices of that time) removed and shifted to other Prisons, and toss'd from Goal to Goal, and by that wicked Artifice, as they were imprisoned in notorious Breach of the Priviledge of Parliament, so were they now deprived of the Fruit of the Habeas Corpus, and of the Benefit of Freeborn Subjects for obtaining their Liberty; and were long de∣teined in Prison, and the brave Sir John Elliot ended his days in the Tower, not without Suspicion of foul Play. But why have I deteined you so long in recount∣ing these particular Violations of the Priviledges of Parliament, when 'tis so evident that this King struck at the very being of Parliaments, as many Instances fully demonstrate. Sir Dudly Carleton his Vice-Chamberlain, and a Privy∣Counsellor (whom he soon after created a Lord) warn∣ed the Commons to take heed of bringing the King out of love with Parliaments, and said, that in all Christian Kingdoms, Parliaments were anciently in use, until the Monarchs began to know their own Strength, and at last overthrew Parliaments, throughout Chri∣stendom, except here only with us: He proceeded setting forth the wretched Condition of Subjects in Foreign Countries, and said, This is a Misery which yet We are free from: Let us then be careful to preserve the King's good Opinion of Parliaments, lest  lose the repute of a Freeborn Nation, by our Turbulency in Parliaments. The King himself sent a threatning Message to the Commons, that if he had not a timely Supply, he would betake himself to New Counsels [Which could only mean the putting an End to the use of Parliaments.]
At another time speaking to the Lords and Commons,We here have Dr. Edw. Pel∣ling's MIR∣ROUR OF PRINCES,  of Martyrs, Wonder of Ages, and the Honour of Men, laying down his living Opinion of the Constitution of our Government, and (according to his then Judgment) passing a Sentence of Death. upon our Parliaments: And seeing the  told CAPTAIN SIMMONS of the WONDER TAVERN, with his good∣ly Petitioners, , Sissan, Owen and , and the rest of his Parishoners upon the Thirtieth of January, 1690. That his most Noble Martyr BEING DEAD YET SPEAKETH, I do put in an early request to him, on behalf of the Commons of England, that he would oblige them upon the next Madding day (the twen∣ty Ninth of May,) in letting them know what his Matchless Saint now speaks, and in particular what he says about their Right to Annual Parliaments, for 'tis to be hoped that by this Time, if he be kept  from ARCHBISHOP LAUD, he may be set right in this great Point of English Parliaments. he said, Remember that Parliaments are altogether in my Power; therefore as I find the Fruits of them, good or evil, They are to continue, or not to be. At the opening of the Parliament the 17th. of March, 1627. he told them, if they should not contribute what the State needed, he must use those other Means, which God [and Laud, Sibthorp and Manwaring, &c.] had put in∣to his hands. To this the Lord Keeper added, that if the King found the readiness of their Supplies, he might the better forbear the Use of his Prerogative: That the King chose that way of Parliament, not as the only way, but as the :. Not as destitute of others, but as most agreeable to his Disposition. Thus (Sir) have I (as I promised) run through the first four Years of this King, and shew'd you how our Liberties and Properties were invaded: How our Religion and Government were undermined: How an Army was rai∣sed to subject our Fortunes to the Will of Power, and to make good the Breaches upon our Liberties: And how Parliaments were contemned and cast off; so that it was well and truly said in the House of Commons, that the Subject suffered more in the first three Years of this King, in Violation of Ancient Liberties, than in three hun∣dred Years before.
It remains now, That I recal into your Memory, what the Carriage of our Parliaments was, under this Universal Op∣pression: Why, their Temper, Mildness and Moderation was incredible, as their Speeches, Petitions, and even Remonstrances do evince; They dealt long with the King, with no other Weapons but Sweetness, Trust and Confidence; and 'twas their only Endeavour and End to make up all Rents and Breaches between the King and his Subjects; but they found in him A sowerness of Temper, Fierceness of Disposition and Pride, joyned with a peevishness of Humour, not to bear the having his Will dis∣puted or  by the established known Laws; He was wilful and inexorable, and knew not the things of his Peace. Having Abdicated Parliaments, for from this Time We had eleven Years Interval of Parliament, He (as idle Boys say when they act Mischief) began to play absolute Reaks instead of Rex. 'Tis a certain Rule, Nemo repente  turpissimus; and I have here given you but a Tast of the Miserable and Calamitous State, under which he laid us, as you must conclude, when you remember how (after the Dissolution of his third Parliament) he betook himself to New Counsels, and exerted his Sovereign Absolute Power, and how despotically he used and exercised them. Were I to continue his History (as I may in another Letter, if you accept this) when I lead you into Westminster Hall, you would see the Illegal and Wicked Judgments of the Courts there, to the compleat Overthrow of the Liberty of our Persons, and the Property of our Goods; and in open∣ing to you his accursed Star-Chamber, and High Commission Courts, I should shew you his most Cruel and Barbarous , Pilloryings, Stigmatizings, &c. His Suspending, Ex∣communicating, Depriving and Imprisoning the Conforming Clergy of the Church of England, for Preaching against Po∣pery, for not Reading his Book for Sports on the Lord's Day, and for not Making Corporal Reverence at the Name of Jesus; I should not forget to lay before you his Billeting of Soldiers, and his most Arbitrary Imposing and Exacting of Ship Money, against the known Laws, and contrary to his Late Promise in the Petition of Right; and (which is never to be forgot∣ten) his Accession to the Horrid Murders of those many
Thousands of Miserable Protestants, who fell in Ireland. But, To conclude your present Trouble, We long bore our Heavy Burdens, and the Yoke of this , with Pati∣ence, even almost to the Breaking of our Backs; at length (no other Moans availing to rescue Us from Utter Ruin) We strugled to continue the English Liberties to our selves, and to the Generations that should come after us, and to leave our Posterity as free as our Ancestors left us: And had we not so done, and that in the way we did it, where had your English Liberties been at this Day? The Great Lord Hollis told you the Truth therein, in his Letter to Van , in the Year 1676, when he said, That had not We, in the Parliament of 1640, interposed, the English Government must have sunk e're now, for save what we did, Not one true Stroke had been struck since Queen Elizabeth. SIR! Having now made an End with my Tyrant, and by the Particulars which I have presented to your View, set it beyond all possibility of rational Controul, That the Tyrants, of whom I have treated, were at least Parallels: I shall now offer one Word for my self, which is, That in whatsoever I have said, I have had a Due and Faithful Regard to Truth; and do challenge even Pelling himself (who ought for his own Vindication to do it if he can) to convict me of Falshood in any one Particular here charged upon his In comparable Prince; and if you shall esteem me over-tart in any of my Expressions, I say, That if to call a Spade, a Spade, be un∣becoming, I have transgressed; if not, I cannot see how I ought to have expressed the Despotick and Arbitrary Pranks I have mentioned, by any other Name than Tyranny; nor to have stilled him, who acted them, other than a Tyrant. And, as to my Reverend Doctor, it seems a Difficulty to me to find Words proper and severe enough, whereby to brand and stamp a Character of Infamy upon him, who with such Loathsome Flattery and Slavish Sycophancy (at a most bold, wild, and impudent rate) calls such a Man as this, The best of Kings, A Man according to God's own Heart; therefore to vindicate my self, in treating the Doctor as I have done,
I tell him in his own slovenly  Language, (in his Ser∣mon upon the thirtieth of January 1683, dedicated to that Viper Jeffryes) That such a superlative Piece of Putid Impo∣sture, may well stir an honest Man's Choler, and provoke him to spit some of it in the Villain's Face. And now (Sir) wiping my Mouth, as good Manners re∣quire, after this so foul Pollution, I take my leave of you, declaring, that I will ever approve my self King William's and Queen Mary's, and my most Dear Country's Most Affectionate, Loyal, Dutyful, and Obedient Subject and Servant, Edmund Ludlow.
Postscript. THough King Charles the First hated nothing more than to Govern by Precedent, yet he would not pray with∣out it; and none of the Liturgies suiting his Fancy, he had recourse to a Romance, as you may here see. The Prayer of King Charles, stiled, A Prayer in Time of Captivity, printed in a great Folio, called, The Works of K. Charles, and also in his Eicon Basilice. O Powerful, O Eter∣nal God, to whom nothing is so great that it  resist, or so small that it is contemned; look upon my Misery with thine Eye of Mercy, and let thine in∣finite Power vouchsafe to li∣mit out some proportion of deliverance unto me, as to thee shall seem most convenient: Let not Injury, O Lord tri∣umph over me, and let my Fault by thy Hand be cor∣rected; and make not my Unjust Enemies the Ministers of thy Justice. But yet my God, if in thy Wisdom this be the aptest Chastisement for my unexcusable Transgressions; if this ungrateful Bondage be
fittest for my over-high De∣sires; if the Pride of my (not-e∣nough humble) Heart be thus to be broken, O Lord, I yield unto thy Will, & cheerfully embrace what Sorrow thou wilt have me suffer; only thus much let me crave of Thee (let my Craving, O Lord, be accept∣ed of, since it even pro∣ceeds from Thee) that by thy Goodness which is thy self, thou wilt suffer some Beam of thy Majesty so to shine in my Mind, that I, who in my greatest Afflictions, acknow∣ledg it my noblest Title to be thy Creature, may still depend confidently on thee; Let Calamity be the Exer∣cise, but not the Overthrow of my Virtue; O let not their Prevailing Power be to my Destruction; and if it be thy Will that they more and more vex me with Punish∣ment, yet, O Lord, never let their Wickedness have such a Hand, but that I may still carry a Pure mind and stedfast Resolution ever to serve Thee without Fear, or Presumption, yet with that humble Confidence, which may best please Thee; so that at the last I may come to thy Eter∣nal Kingdom, through the Me∣rits of thy Son our alone Savi∣our, Jesus Christ. Amen. The PRAYER of PA∣MELA (to an Hea∣then Deity) being un∣der Imprisonment. In Pembroke's Arcadia , Edit. 13. printed 1674. O All-seeing Light, and Eternal Life of all things, to whom nothing is either so great that it may resist, or so small that it is contem∣ned; look upon my Misery with thine Eye of Mercy, and let thine insinite Power vouchasafe to limit out some proportion of Deliverance unto me, as to thee shall seem most convenient: Let not Injury, O Lord, tri∣umph over me, and let my Faults by thy Hand be cor∣rected; and make not mine unjust Enemy the Minister of thy Justice. But yet my God, if in thy Wisdom this be the aptest Chastisement for my unexcusable Folly; if this low Bondage be fittest for
my over-high Desires; If the Pride of my not-enough hum∣ble Heart be thus to be bro∣ken, O Lord I yield unto thy Will, and joyfully embrace what Sorrow thou wilt have me suffer; only thus much let me crave of Thee (let my Craving, O Lord, be accept∣ed of thee, since even that proceeds from Thee,) let me crave even by the noblest Title which in my greatest Affliction I may give my self, that I am thy Creature, and by thy , which is thy self, that thou wilt suffer some Beam of thy Majesty to shine into my Mind, that it may still depend confidently on thee; let Calamity be the Exercise, but not the over∣throw of my Vertue; let their Power prevail, but prevail not to Destruction; let my great∣ness be their Prey: Let my Pain be the Sweetness of their Revenge; Let them (if so it seem good unto Thee) vex me with more and more Pu∣nishment: But, O Lord, let never their Wickedness have such a Hand, but that I may car∣ry a pure Mind in a pure Body; and pausing a while; and O most gracious Lord, said she, whatever becomes of me, preserve the Virtuous Musi∣dorus. FINIS.
