L1752 R41470 31355409 110447
A LETTER, To the unknown AUTHOR OF JƲS POPƲLI. Printed in the Year, 1671.
A LETTER to the unknown Author of Jus Populi. SIR, MY ignorance of your Name, and the Place of your resi∣dence, forceth me on this pub∣lick Addresse, from which I should have been otherwise  verse: For, though faults committed be∣ore all, ought to be publickly reproved; et, I would willingly have used our LORDS method, of telling my Brother in private, if  have ought against him. But, since this will find its way to you, better from the Press then by any direction I could give it, he charity I owe all Christians obliegeth me to use the freedom of representing some hings to you, which I pray GOD you may eceive well, and ponder seriously. But on the way, I must tell you, I have o quarrel at your person, neither do I so
much as know who you are; so that no particular consideration of your self draw this from me. Next, I must assure you I have no malice nor bitterness against tha Way which you own: And though I con∣fess, I am highly displeased with some o their Tenets, but more with their spirit an way of carrying on their Cause, yet may al the mischief I wish any of them, fall o my own soul. Therefore, as both my tem∣per and conscience barr all heat and violen¦cy from any way of arguing differences So in writing to you at this time, I desig your conviction, and not your confusion Indeed, Sir, all the passion that your Book or such other discoveries of that spirit, af∣fects me with, is grief and regrate: Nei∣ther do I so much as perceive within m self, any commotions of wrath and anger a you or your way; pity and compassio being truly the strain in which all my thoughts concerning you do run. GOD is witness, what groans and tear those furious and unchristian distempe that are raised among us, do draw daily fro some of us, whom you are persecuting wit
so much bitter (but I trust blind) zeal. Can ny man, who is in any degree concerned or GOD'S Glory or the advancement of true Religion, look on without the saddest heart n the World, when he sees the great de∣signs of Godliness and Piety suffering so much, from some who pretend so highly, nd yet are more concerned for a few incon∣siderable and disputable Opinions, then for harity, meekness, peace, unity, and obedi∣ence to Authority, and are at more pains o promote these particular niceties, then or carrying on the great Ends for which Christ died and rose again: Can it be de∣ied, that there is a generation, who was nce by appearance seriously minding their ouls, but now the edge of their affections eing taken off that noble exercise, is bent n foolish and unlearned questions which ender strife, and the perverse disputings of en of corrupt mindes? When these ex∣ellent lessons of charity, patience, humi∣ity, meeknesse and true holinesse are laid side, how many are better pleased to hear the Bishops railed at, then to hear GOD magnified or CHRIST commended? And
how many ears do itch to hear the faults o the times severely inveighed against, but fret when their own sores are in the least touched? In a word, Religion is ruining, and CHRIST is again betrayed by some wh with Judas kiss him, and say, Hail, Master, when they sell him for the gratifying of thei passions and humours. What a spirit of cen∣suring, traducing, bitter railing, rash judging, angry fury, and forging and publishing of ca∣lumnies and lies, is too legible among ma∣ny, who (perhaps) were they not strangely mis-tuned, might mean well, and are hones at bottom? But these things have dissolv∣ed the Ligaments and Bonds of CHRISTS Body; and as in the natural Body, every slackening of the Nerves brings with it a weakness over all the Members; So, the bonds of peace and unity being thus untied▪ we clearly see what draws on the decaye of Piety and true Religion among us. These things affect serious beholders with deep, as well as just regrates; So that their souls having dwelt long with them that hate peace, they are daily panting fo an escape from the contentions and confu∣sions
here below, unto those happy Regions of peace and joy above, where even such as annot be now tuned into harmony, shall all sing a constant and concordant Halelujah. But next to those sweet hopes and desires, who would not, with Jeremiah, look out or a place in some wilderness, and a lodge of way-faring men, that he might wander far ff, and hasten his escape from the windy storm and tempest? Think not, Sir, that all his is the effect of my zeal for Episcopacy, No, no; it is the great Bishop of souls whom you are doing what in you lyes, to depose from His Government and King∣dom, which is neither in meats nor drinks, neither in Episcopacy nor Presbytery, but in righteousnesse and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. I do indeed believe, that Episcopacy is not only in nothing contrary to the Word of GOD, but may prove, if well managed, a very proper mean for advancing all the ends of Religion: And that from the dayes of the Apostles, it was that form of Govern∣ment under which the Church of GOD was planted in most places, and grew up every
where, during her best and purest times and whatever abuses the succession of many Ages might have insensibly brought upo it, it is still of it self innocent; and hence it is that I give a chearful obedience to the Laws that have established it. But, from this free Declaration you may see, I am no furious Zealot; for indeed it was never in my thoughts to advance the asserting o Episcopacy to a divine right and absolute necessity, or to condemn such Churches; where both the Civil and Ecclesiastick frame are cast in a different mould: Hence it is that I quarrel with none on this Head, unlesse it be to vindicate my own perswa∣sion; which I am much deceived if I can∣not do, notwithstanding of all I ever saw alledged on the contrary. My expostulating with you shall be free both of railery and injury, though if I had intended either, you have laid your self open to great disadvantages. Indeed your Buf∣fonery is both so dull and so little serious, that I am ashamed of it; neither am I so destitute of fancy, but that I could easily make your poor little flashes of a left-hand∣ed
wit rebound on your self, so that you should be the object of all mens scorn. But believe me, I am in a more serious mood; neither shall I mingle- in the levi∣ties of fancy with so grave a subject; and I hold it below a man, and unworthy of a Christian, to rail: wherefore I shall in so∣ber sadness, lay before you a few serious truths. The first notice I had of your Book, was from some of your own Party, who no∣withstanding of their great inclinations to the way of Presbytery and the Covenant, were highly dissatisfied with Jus Populi, and confessed, they found it written in a strain so different from the meeknesse of Christ, that they thought it prejudged, ra∣ther then advanced, the Cause it seemed to defend. This put an edge upon my cu∣riosity, which is blunt enough for such Pieces: I was indeed desirous to see a Book which had a part of one of the blessings of the Gospel, since all men (even of all per∣swasions) spoke evil of it. I had occasion also to meet with some good Ministers of that Perswasion, who in sad language de∣clared
to me their dislike of your Book, and told me, they knew not one of all their Brethren who had not the same sense of it. This made me wonder what a work that could be, which was so severely condemned even by these who might justly be suspect∣ed of partiality in your favours: At length I got hold of the Book it self, which did fully justifie all their censures; So that often since I first saw it, I have been forced to reflect with much sorrow on the sad estate of the Church of GOD among us, when such stuff shall be so confidently vented. And first, that humour of scurrilous rai∣lery, which appears in every Page, especial∣ly in your foolish Postscript, is so unseemly that I wonder how, though you want pru∣dence, you should be so void of gravity Truly, Sir, such language may do tolerably upon a Stage; but certainly, it becomes a Church-man (and such you are said t be) very ill, when he is treating about se¦rious purposes. Is this the method of Mo∣ses or the Prophets, of CHRIST or his Apo¦stles? Whom of all the approved Writen
of the Church in any age, finde you hand∣ing grave matters in Burlesque? Hath his way any thing in it that is decent or omposed? Oh! Sir, consider to how much ntemperance your ill-managed zeal hath ed you, that you may be ashamed of it: But that you think not I esteem your rai∣ery to be sharp, I must tell you, it is the oursest of any I ever met with, being with∣ut either edge or point, and made up of ome flat dull reflections, which any who would give way to so much feminine pas∣ion, might have said with a thousand-fold more of life, and in far better language. If  designed your infamy, I could here set own so much proof for what I have alledg∣d, that I am sure even your self would lush at it; for every Page is full of those nstances. But, my desire to you, and for ou to GOD, is, that you may in cold blood eflect on that writing; which if you do with  serious and humble, and not with a self-ustifying and Pharisaical temper, I doubt ot but your thoughts of it will be so full of shame and remorse, that you will need ather lenitives to allay, then incentives to
provoke, your further resentments. Besides, Sir, no man loves to rake in a puddle no dwell in a kennel: therefore, I am not abl to master the great aversion I have from such stuff, so far as to spend the time and pains were necessary for pumping up of al that putrid matter. I think it too much that I read it once in your Book, and so an in no inclination to write out any of these unhandsome and ill-said passages. But this leads me to another reflection, near of kin to the former, upon the bitter an un-exempled railing with which you hav stuffed your Book. This contradicts the law of nature, and civilities of mankind, as wel as the rules of the Scriptures, wherein w are taught to speak evil of no man, not to b brawlers but gentle, and not so much as to ren∣der railing for railing, but contrary waye blessing, seing we are called to inherit a bles∣sing. And truly, to fall on the persona defaming of an Antagonist, is a course a foolish as impious: for, what though you opposit were as bad as you call him, doe that prejudge our Cause, or advance you own? On the contrary, the wiser of man∣kind,
when they find the Advocats of a Party falling on such methods, from that very thing, are apt to suspect the weaknesse of the Cause, since such as defend it are dri∣ven to those unhandsome shifts. Neither are he stories men vent of their Antagonists o be believed by any living; since all the World think, they are bound to look on hem but as the blasts of passion, which as t is ever credulous, so is often fraudulent, nd therefore never to be credited in ear∣est. Sir, I cannot look on your Book with∣ut wondering, how your pen could serve ou in this office. And let me speak home to your con∣cience, and charge you, as before that reat GOD, who shall one day judge the secrets f all hearts, to consider what spirit acted ou, when you wrote this Book. Were ou then in a serious and humble temper? Were you depending upon GOD for directi∣n, and adhering to him in the exercises of Faith and Love? And did you tenderly de∣ign his Glory, with the good of your Coun∣rey-men? or, were you not driven by an nward tide of bitter passions? Found you
not the distempers of rage and anger eatin up your breast? and did you not give wa to all the blasts of your splen, and the over¦flowings of your gall? Alas, Sir, if I w ashamed at your railery, I am grieve for your scolding; which discovers you temper to be far enough from CHRISTS who when he was reviled, reviled not again but bore all the injuries and affronts malic could put on him, without opening h mouth. Have you considered these word love your enemies, blesse them that curse you do good to them that hate you, and pray fo them who despitefully use you and persecu you, that you may be the children of your F¦ther which is in Heaven? But if you wi not learn Christianity from the Gospel, could send you to the heathen Philoso¦phers to be taught Morality by them, wh have said that on this head, which shall ri up in judgement against you, if you repen not. And indeed you seem to affect an impar¦tiality in your scolding, that you may no appear guilty of respect of persons. And it like, you count it your glory, to despise do¦minions
and speak evil of dignities: though Michael the Arch-angel durst not bring up a ailing accusation against the Devil. St. Paul confessed his mistake, when he had uttered eviling words even against a mercinary and an unjust High-priest, and acknowledged t was written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. But it must be confest, that your procedor hath nothing of that eserve in it; and I am afraid you think it a peece of noble Gallantry, to have railed at King, Parliament and Council: But, Sir, have you so learned Christ? and is this your obedience to the fifth Command, when you expresse both how much your self disho∣nours the Father of your Countrey, and how desirous you are to dethrone him out of the affections and esteem of his Subjects? For, our Gracious Soveraign (whom GOD ong preserve to reign over us) he needs no vindications from the calumnies you asperse him with: since his clemency and gentle∣nesse even to all his enemies, hath been the discourse and wonder of Christendom. And the favours he hath granted that Party which you seem to own, are so unparalelled,
that your language of him is as full of ingra¦titude as of disloyalty. Yet, because yo are not able to deny this, you betake you self to a strange course of traducing hi goodnesse, as well as accusing his justice as if the former were designed for ensnaring and abusing his Subjects: And this impu∣tation you divide betwixt his Majesty an his most honourable Privy Council: using all the arts your Politick and Rhetorick can furnish you with, to hinder his Subject from enjoying the happy quiet they may have under his Government. Pray, Sir, i this the language of a Minister of the Go∣spel and a Peace-maker? or, is it not th stile of an Incendiary? What! and hath no all the blood we have seen shed in Britain quenched your thirst? are you not satisfie that our fields were covered with the Bo∣dies of the slain, and our scaffolds smoake so long with the blood of Prisoners, tha one King was murthered, another banisht fo so many years, and that our Countrey wa over-run and sore opprest? and is not all thi enough for your zeal? or, do you long to see the same tragedies re-acted? and would
you again blow up the people to a new re∣llion? Truly, if this be your design (and can scarce divine what other construction ur Book can admit of) let me tell you eely, I must look upon you as an Agent of ll, and not as a Servant of CHRIST, ce I am sure, Beelzebub could not contrive ore mischief then this would draw after  But in managing of it, you have gone  foolishly to work, that, blest be GOD, no rms nor earthquakes are like to follow on what you have done: for truly, you m as free of the wisdom of the Serpent, of the innocence of the Dove. But after your carreer against the King d Council, the Bishops and their Clergy  the objects of your fury and indignati∣ Truly, by your Character of them, it uld appear, that they had blasphemed D, renounced CHRIST, destroyed his urch, overthrown Religion, persecuted e Saints, and what not? and that they are  filth and off-scourings of the world, and company of profane, ignorant, carnal etches. With this and much more of this d, do you charge them; and therefore,
in a grave mood, you advise the hanging o them up before the Sun, for the expiatin of the sins and guilt of Scotland. But, thank be to GOD, though we be bad enough, w are not so bad as you represent us. I con¦fesse, there are many things among us o of joynt, and we are far from the primiti and apostolical Purity; so that there b too just grounds for very much sorrow, t any who shall ponder matters seriously But all this will not justifie your misca¦riage, who by what you say of us, seem design our infamy, and not our reformatio But, good Sir, could you shake your sel little out of your immoderate heats, I shou tell you, that there hath been no Age n Society of men, who might not be charg with very grosse imputations; and were as unbridled in my humour as you are, could here recriminat too sadly: But, y mention not these things as one th mourns for them, and wishes to see the corrected, but as one who insults over the and glories because of them; beware the¦fore of the curse of Canaan, since you guilty of the crime of Ham, who discove his Fathers nakednesse.
But, your reproaches are as unjust as cruel; for we want not men among us, of whom we may glory, who may be upon all ac∣counts compared (to say no more) with ny of the other perswasion. If I be a fool for glorying thus, you have compelled me o it; and I speak nothing but what is nown to all, who are but so far indifferent s to be ingenuous. But, alas! whither will your malice drive you? and whence is t that you give so loose reins to your irre∣gular passions? Is it not enough, that for a ourse of many years, all who owned the Episcopal Perswasion were cruelly tossed nd persecuted? Is it not enough that we re mis-represented at home, being traduced nd reviled by our ill-willers, whereby our eople are provoked to contemn, abuse nd separate from us? And can there be o measures nor bounds set to our persecu∣ions from your tongues; but when you have one all you can against us at home, you must go among strangers to defame us? All  shall answer, is, The Lord rebuke thee. GOD knows how to vindicate the oppressed nnocency of his poor servants; and he will
in due time clear up our righteousnesse which you study to overcloud. It is our par to bear the indignation, because we have sin¦ed, and to wait patiently for the end of th Lord: But, we trust, he will in his goo time discover your unjust malice, and o sincerity. For my part, I must acknow¦ledge my self as bad as you can either thin or call me; yet, whatever be my sailing before God, I write as one who hath obtain¦ed grace in some measure, to be faithful i the Ministery wherein GOD hath put me and therefore, I value not your reproache except it be to pity your malice: and I very earnestly pray, that GOD may show yo what spirit you are of, and convince you your errours, which are indeed both ma and grosse. Having given you thus far my free sen of the strain of your Book, and of the sp¦rit which seems to have acted you in t contriving and composing it; my ne work shall be, to put you in minde of so things that relate to the matter of it, a chiefly, of the whole design of it, which to provoke the Subjects of Scotland to R¦bellion:
And in order to this, you have amed a large Systeme of Politicks, where∣ith it seems you are highly satisfied: But,  shall not ravel far into this intangled mat∣er, conceiving it a Theme without my here, and (with pardon be it spoken) with∣ut yours likewise: yet, your part in this as very easie, since you have done little, eside the putting of Lex Rex into another ethod; So that your Book deserves best he Title of The second edition of Lex Rex, ll of new errata and mistakes. But, I could sily cut off all that contexture of Policy, y two Positions, neither of them hard to e evinced. The first is, that by imme∣orial possession, and a long tract both of aw and Practice, the King of Scotland is  absolute Soveraign, accountable only to OD, and not to be controlled by the force  his Subjects: But more especially, that e Subjects of Scotland are bound to obey  Laws enacted in Parliament; or at least, to bmit to the enacted Mulcts and Punish∣ents. And though the first branch of this osition, concerning the Kings Power, hath een called in question, yet you have the
honour to be the first who controverts th Authority of King and Parliament. Bu the perpetual practice of Scotland befo the year, 1648. will easily determine a that are not totally strangers to our Consti¦tutions, that Laws agreed to by King an Parliament, are and must be of force, till r¦pealed by the same Authority that enjoyn¦ed them. If this be true, then all yo long winded Systeme will evanish in a Idea, since we are not to examine what w the first rise of Societies, Magistrates Kings; or what is the nature of the com¦pact, betwixt a King and his Subjects: Ne¦ther are we to be determined by the prece¦dent of the Kings of Judah, Israel, or oth Nations; our work being only to conside what is the right wherewith our King stan now invested, and what is the obedience which we are engaged. And if it be fou (as undoubtedly it will) that the Subjec of Scotland are oblieged to obey, or suffe according to the Laws and Acts of Parli¦ment, no shift will escape this, unlesse yo prove such a Constitution simply unlawfu and contrary to the expresse Law of God
which will be very hard to do, as long as you allow of no other Canon, then the Books of both Testaments. But, if such submission be contrary to the Law of GOD, then it will not only be warrantable, but necessary for Subjects to defend themselves; nd if so, they are self-murtherers who suf∣er willingly, when they are in any capacity to resist: but, I hope your zeal will not drive you so far as this goes. Alas! can there be no way for vindicating your Tenets, out that which must asperse all the glorious cloud of Witnesses, not only with too much amenesse, but with an impious and dege∣nerated baseness of minde; since by your Doctrine, those on whom all the Ages of he Church have lookt as glorious Mar∣yrs, must now pass for ignominious self-murtherers. But, I know, you hope to escape by the distinction of Religion, when t becomes a Land-right and settled by Law, from what was before it was so esta∣blisht; and that in the former case, we may nd ought to fight for it, though not in the atter. But, Sir, this runs contrary to what you alwayes maintain, that we must defend
all our natural Rights, of which undoubted∣ly Religion is the first and chief: So tha if your Systeme of Policy hold good, eve before Religion be established, it is one o the natural Rights of the Society, an therefore, every Law that contradicts it, i to be rejected, as contrary to the natura and essential Liberties of the Subjects. But if our obligation to defend Religion b Armes, be only because it is a Land-right then certainly, that flows from the Autho¦rity of King and Parliament, they being th only Subjects of the Legislative Power And certain it is, that they who have th Authority to make a Law, can also unmak and repeal it, so that after they have repeal¦ed it, it is no more a Land-right, an therefore, according to your own concessi¦on, is not to be fought for. You might have spared your pains proving, that the King cannot obliege by his Laws, to break the Commandmen of GOD. Our Soveraign hath his Powe from GOD, and acknowledgeth himself t be under Him and His CHRIST. An that doctrine of hell, broached by its Age
Leviathan, which pleads, that we are bound to obey all Laws, good or bad, just or un∣just, even though their contradiction to the divine Law were not our and apparent, is de∣servedly condemned as impious and athe∣istical. But, the inference you would draw from this, is truly worthy of your self; that because, when the Magistrate commands what is contrary to the Law of GOD, we are not bound to obey him, therefore, when he punisheth contrary to that same Law, we are not bound to suffer: Indeed, such a Sophism might be excused in a Boy who is learning Logick, but is unpardonable in one who writes Books, and pretends to teach the World. For, in the case of the Kings enjoyning what is contrary to the Law of GOD, the countermand from GOD is supposed to be clear; and so it is beyond doubt, we should obey GOD rather then man; but, where are our sufferings counter∣manded, though he punish unjustly? And besides, much less sufficeth to warrant a forbearance, wherein we are not only passive and do nothing, then will justifie a positive acting: So, when we suffer, we are only
passive, but we cannot resist without being active; therefore, except our warrand for that be expresse, we must resolve on a part forbearance. I will trace your politicks no further, my chief design being to convince you, that matters of Religion are not to be decided by the sword. And here it is that you dis∣cover your spirit to be totally different from CHRISTS, and that you have not consi∣dered rightly the nature of the Christian Religion, or of the Kingdom of CHRIST, when you think his servants should fight for him. I know you will say, should any thing be so dear to us as Religion, and should we not hazard life and all we have in its de∣fence? But this, though it may be plausible and taking with the vulgar, bewrayes your ignorance visibly: For it seems you ap∣prehend, Religion can be endangered by the opposition it meets with from the World. No, no, Sir, CHRISTS Throne is better settled; for he shall sit at his Fathers right hand, till all his enemies shall be made his foot stool: All the hazard can be apprehen∣ded, is of our lives, fortunes and liberties
and if we had the courage to submit these to GODS Providence, we should see Reli∣gion were so far from danger, by being ob∣jected to persecution, that nothing did more secure nor advance it. The truth of the matter is, that we apprehend our own prejudice too sensibly, though the advan∣tage our holy profession receives from pa∣tient suffering be apparent. But upon this whole matter, I shall modestly suggest a few things. The great design of the Gospel is, to elevate our mindes to a noble contempt of this World, with all its trifling pleasures and interests, and to a just dis-regard of our Bodies, as the depressing loads which hang about and bow down our mindes; that so, living like Pilgrims on earth, we may alwayes bend forward and mount up∣ward, little concerned in what meets us here below, having fixed our thoughts and affections on those things that are above: And it is by faith and patience that we most inherit the promises, for he that believeth must not make haste. Therefore, as we ought to trust to our heavenly Father his
care in all our straits; so we must chearfully acquiesce in his holy Will, how contrary soever it appear, either to our carnal inte∣rests or humane reasonings, patiently wait∣ing for that issue of things, which his wife Providence will bring forth in the fittest time. Now, let all the World judge, whither suffering or fighting agree best with this temper and design. The har∣mony the one hath with it being evident, whereas the other speaks out a forward and impatient minde, deeply concerned in worldly losses and hazards, distrustful of GODS promises, and uncapable to wait his leisure. Again, for I will but name things, that course from which carnal and corrupt na∣ture is most averse, and which cannot be gone about without a great temper of mind, and an high measure of the divine assistance, as it is certainly the sublimer path, so is more proper to convince the world that such men are of God, when notwithstand∣ing of their power to secure themselves from storms and fears, they bear patiently the spoiling of their goods; neither are their
lives dear to them for the Name of Jesus. It must be confest, that this is a strong evi∣dence to all who look on, that such per∣sons are not of this world, but of heaven, and that they are acted by some inward, mighty Principle from above, which stifles all their resentments into that quiet and calm submission. But on the contrary, of when we are injured and suffer wrongfully, we break out into fighting and contenti∣on, Is not this to give way to the fury of passionate nature, and to follow the guise of the World? Such methods may well make others suspect, but will never force them to esteem, either us or our Profes∣sion. And you know, a wicked man may fight couragiously for CHRIST, though he cannot suffer patiently; and therefore, the one is from Nature, and the other of Grace. And thus it appears, that suf∣fering brings glory to our Profession, where∣as fighting and warring asperseth it with jealousies and reproaches. Further, the method which agreeth best with the Practices and Precepts of our great Master, is certainly to be preferred by all
his followers. He blessed those who shoul suffer for him, but threatned such as dre the sword: And he blessed the peace-makers entitling them the children of God: Bu where are the Incendiaries of War pro∣nounced happy? And whose children mu we conclude the bourteseus of Rebellio to be, but his who was a murtherer from the beginning? And certainly, such a breath out war and cruelty, know not o what spirit they are of; since all in th dispensation is gentle and peaceable; It Author is the God of peace, it's Lord th Prince of peace, it's Rule the Gospel peace, it self consisting in righteousness, peac and joy in the holy Ghost: And all th was signally confirmed by the un-exemp¦led sufferings of our meek and low? Master, who refused the aid of the swor entailing perdition on such as should dr it; who are all these that are not war∣ranted so to do by the Magistrate, whose only hands GOD hath depositat it. He witnessed that good confessio before Pilate, that Cesar needed appr¦hend no hazard from his Kingdom, f
it not being of this world, was not to be fought for by his servants. And it is strange, that through the whole Gospel we should meet with repeated blessings pronounced on those who suffer, but never an en∣couragement nor blessing entailed upon such as fight with the carnal weapons: Neither is there any thing pretended for this, beyond that one mistaken word of CHRISTS to his Disciples, that they should sell their coats to buy a sword. But certainly, had his Disciples, after they were filled with the holy Ghost, under∣stood this of the material sword, either their Practices or Writings should have had some vestiges of that sense; and you know, neither can be alledged. It's true, at that time they mistook his meaning, and shewed him two swords, but his answer [It is enough] corrects their errour, for that cannot relate to the two swords they shewed him, since how could two swords be enough for eleven persons. So that by that short answer, our LORD on∣ly broke off the purpose, it being equiva∣lent to enough of this, or no more of it, finde
he saw they mis-understood his forme words of a sword, which were only a gene∣ral phrase of an allarm to them to look for straits and hardship. But, from all this it will easily appear, to one who examines the matter without prejudice, whether suffer∣ing or fighting have the clearest characters of the meekness of Christ on them. Finally, that Doctrine which tends most to the recommending of the Christian Re∣ligion to all Princes and States, is to be pre∣ferred to that which I may prepossesse the mindes of all with the deepest prejudices against it. Indeed, Mahomets Alchoran incites with the fair hopes of great rewards, to kill all who are not Musulmans, and hath been propagated and maintained by the edge of the sword. But, our holy Profes∣sion rejects the carnal weapons from its de∣fence; and therefore, is not to be lookt on as on apple of contention, or an occasion for warres, which since they spring from our lusts, cannot take their rise from that which enjoyns the mortifying of them all. In∣deed, Religion teacheth the duties both of obedience to Soveraigns, and of peace∣ablenesse
towards fellow-subjects, so fully, that nothing can secure either the Autho∣rity of Princes, or the Peace of Societies, so entirely, as the receiving, believing and practising of this heavenly Doctrine. And this alone, though it serve not to convince the world of its truth, yet may sufficiently secure them of its innocency, and that no ad consequences may be apprehended from t. But, indeed, the Doctrine of resist∣ance will change its whole visage, so that this dayes star, whose aspects are benign and serene, will look like a fiery Comet, lazing Warres, and portending commo∣tions and alterations of States. For, if this Principle be drunk in by the Christian Societies, they may for ever despair of peace, since it is not to be expected, that ll can be of one minde in matters of Religion; and therefore, any side or par∣ty when opprest, would undoubtedly raise tirs and tumults, how soon they were n a capacity: And sure your friends would find it a hard pull, to govern any State n the world at this rate, especially if you keep up your old quarrels, not on∣ly
at Toleration, but Moderation. And from this Principle, what peace were to be expected from Papists? since their Re∣ligion being establisht in the fullest form, continued in a long course of possession, so that it became a Land-right, and wa more interwoven in our Laws, then any thing you can pretend to: But, none o all these hazards are to be apprehende nor feared, if the Doctrine of patient peaceable suffering were received; where∣fore, it is certainly more for the interes of Mankind, and the peace of all So∣cieties. But, after I have gone this far wit you, let me bespeak your looking bac with a serious survey of these two diffe¦rent methods of advancing Religion, th comparing them in true ballances, yo may see whither of them will preponde¦rate: And if to all this, I should add th bad effects of War, especially of a civ one, I should have a large Theme: Bu our wounds are too fresh, and the la Tragedies too recent in our memorie to need any long excursions for makin
out of this. It were a long story to reckon o all the advantages that peace carries ong with it for a religious life, even hough its termes were very uneasie; the uiet retirement it affords being none of he least of them. But, when a Land  become the scene of War, all must rgo their peaceful solitude for a life of ussling and contention, engaging in ma∣y distractions, anxieties, solicitudes, uds and daily hazards. Truly, Sir, what∣ver attractives such things may have to n ambitious and daring minde that thirsts or Glory, I cannot see what should com∣end them to one who designs the good f Souls, or the advancement of the Gos∣el. Besides, in all such Warrs, the suc∣esse is at best doubtful; yea, the very rmy imployed for managing of the ador∣d Cause, may in the end prove more yrannical, then could have been appre∣ended from those against whom they ngaged; which was our late case. I will next attempt the convincing of ou, by some instances from Scripture, hat fighting is none of the methods ap∣proved
of by GOD for advancing his cause When the Israelites were in Egypt, the were opprest to the highest degree, bot in their Religion, Lives and Liberties, an these lasted about an hundered years a least, since Moses was fourscore years o when he was sent to deliver them, and th oppression was begun before he was bon Neither were the Israelites contemptib for strength, since six hundered thousan fighting men, might attempt the conque of the whole earth: And Pharaohs tit over them was not so well founded as on conquest. But, how comes it, that all th while they were so ignorant of their na¦ral rights, that they made no violent a¦tempts for their liberty, or the free exerci of their Religion; since no doubt they h a traditional Religion conveyed to the with the Circumcision? And how com it, that Moses understood nothing of th gallant doctrine? not a hint of it appeari either in his discourses to Pharaoh, or to Israelites. But the next instance shall be yet stron¦er, when Jeroboam made Israel to sin,
setting up the calves, discharging the Tribes o go to Jerusalem, and turning out the Priests and Levites out of their Cities: hat was a time, if every any was for a popu∣ar Reformation; for Religion was to that eople, not only a settled land-right, but he very right and title they had to the vading and possessing of the land: And et no attempts were made to redresse this y force. It is true, you may say, the Tribes ere too guilty of a defection, to be very ctive in a Reform. But, if that was their uty, how comes it, since none were so ealous of the Law as to offer at it, that one of the Prophets (though they freely ccused their defection) ever required them o fall to these popular courses, or to pull own the calves by force: for if that was he peoples duty, their silence had been sin∣l; and yet, neither Ahijah the Shilonite, oseah, Amos, Micah, or any other Prophet, ught this Doctrine. Yea, though Achab dded the Idolatry of Baal to the sin of the lves, yet Elijah (though far enough from eing over indulgent to that wicked King) ever stirred up the people to armes. It is
true, himself once executed vengeance o the Priests of Baal, but he did that as a Pro∣phet, it being ordinary in that dispensati∣on, for acknowledged Prophets to act autho¦ritatively, but he never sounded an allar of War among the people, though ther were divers thousands who never bowe their knee to Baal. Likewise in Judah though divers Kings set up groves and hig places, and Achaz did totally destroy th Temple-worship, by removing the Alta from its place, so that the people were to sa∣crifice on the Altar, framed from the patte of that of Damascus: and though Manasse defiled the whole Courts of the Lord House with Idols, and set up an Idol i the Temple it self: to which Idolatry the also added the height of tyrany, Jerusa¦lem swiming in Blood with Manasseh's cru¦elty: And who knows but that cruelt was exercised on those who would no comply with his Idolatry? Yet, it seem those men of Judah knew nothing of yo generous politicks; Otherwise they h taken a shorter method for their redresse neither is this tamenesse ever charged o
them by Isaiah or any other of the Pro∣phets, as luke-warmnesse in the Cause of GOD. And if these of Libnah revolted out of their zeal against Jehoram's forsak∣ing the Lord God of his fathers, and if that was justified and approved; it is strange, hat during the reign of worse Kings, no others followed their example, and that none of the Prophets encouraged them to the like undertaking. Truely, you must confesse these instances to be strong: for as in these cases the Apo∣stacy from Religion was undoubted, so the peoples submission, with the silence of the Prophets, though they be negatives, yet do prove convincingly, that they were strangers to that doctrine, which you would draw from the Law and dictates of Nature. And all this will be the more binding, if it be considered, that in the dispensation of Moses, the use of the sword was more allowed then under the Gospel; they being warranted to invade the peo∣ple of Canaan, and put them all to the edge of the sword; and these was suitable to that frame which consisted much in
externals, and had annext to it the pro∣mises of an earthly Canaan, with much prosperity and length of dayes in it. But, under the Gospel we are called to bea the Crosse alwayes, but no where to draw the sword: therefore, if the use o that, in matters of Religion, was not al¦lowable of old, it will be much lesse so now. And I leave it with all free mindes to consider, whither the instances I alledg make it not clearer, that at that time it was not allowed; then your little ni∣blings at some disjointed places, do the contrary. For, the first ages of the Church, yo are forced to yeeld their unacquainted∣nesse with this doctrine, which yet had Christs words about the sword been expounded by your glosse, could not have escaped their knowledge. Neither will the distinction of Religions being a land right, serve the turn here: for be∣sides what was already marked upon that head, after Christianity was settled by Constantine, Julian apostatized to Idolatry, and not only set up the Pagan
Worship again, but was using very poli∣tick arts to root out the Gospel, and i end was beginning to persecute. As al∣o, Constantius and Valens establisht Aria∣ism, and persecuted the Orthodox; yet, o Church-man ever animated the peo∣ple to, or justified Insurrections. And  will positively and upon all hazards as∣ert this historical Point, that till the eleventh Century, that Pope Gregory he seventh swelled to the Antichristian eight of usurping over Kings, the Do∣trine of Subjects resisting their Soveraigns y force, upon pretence of Religion, was nheard of in the Church of GOD: mark, hat I speak of the Doctrine, and not of ome particular instances, since there are o crimes but some Christians have been uilty of them; but as these actions were ot justified, so the Doctrine was not wned; therefore, the date of this Opi∣ion must be drawn from the ignorantest nd worst of Ages, wherein Antichrist as rising to his Meridian, in the per∣on of that Monster Hildebrand: And ad I the leisure or humour for such a
tedious and unpleasing Task, I could ea∣sily demonstrat, that all the grounds o which either you, or others whose pla∣gary you are, do go on this matter, are borrowed from these Writings which as∣sert the Popes absolute, transcendent and temporal Dominion over all Princes and States. Yet, as bad as the Roman Church is, even this Doctrine was never agreed to in it, many of that Communion hav∣ing directly appeared against it: And it's chief Patrons were the Canonists of old and the Jesuits of late. For informati∣on in all this, if your curiosity reach such Writings, I refer you to the col∣lection of the Pieces that past in thi Controversie, which are gathered to∣gether and published in many great Vo∣lumnes by Goldastus; or to bring yo nearer our own times, to the ground on which the late League of France wa framed and defended: read any of th Writings of the Spanish Divines that ju¦stified it, and it will appear, that all th grounds on which you walk, are borrowe and stollen from them.
And thus, if you be capable of con∣viction, I have said enough for your cure: ut if you be past hope, I can add no more, but commit your recovery to the Great Physician of souls, in whose skillful hand no Patient can miscarry, and with whom, what is impossible with men, is not only possible, but easie: And indeed you need many prayers, for I must add this one severe word, that I do very much apprehend you are in the gall of bit∣terness, when you are capable of belch∣ing up such stuff. All this while, I have taken no notice of the matter on which you found all your tragical complaints and cruel insinuations, which you take for granted to be the Cause of GOD; where∣in, if all along I have not contradicted you, it was that I might ruffle you as little as was possible, and so I might ad∣vance your cure with the less pain. But, I could blot much Paper on this head, for convincing you, that the matters which you so highly magnifie, are far from what you apprehend them to be; and that they have neither that truth nor
importance which you suppose to be in them. But, I shall not adventure too far at once on your patience, which I fear is already over-spent; only ere we part, I must take notice of the Post∣script you have set down at the fag end of your Book, wherein you break out in the most unsampled peece of railing I ever met with; all your quarrel being, because the Archbishop of St. Andrews said in a Sermon, that the Subjects lives were more the Kings then their own. I per∣ceive there would be no holding of you, if you had real advantages, when you are so insolent without any: But, I shall say only one thing to convince you of the truth of that Position: When a Sub∣ject hath committed a crime that is ca∣pital, he hath no right to be the exe∣cutioner of justice on himself, but cer∣tainly the King hath, and so his life is more in the Kings power then in his own. As for instance, though you be guilty of Rebellion and Treason, in as high a de∣gree as your poor abilities can serve you to; yet, I should be heartily sorry, if
your remorse for it carryed you so far, as to be a Fellon on your self, and turn your own Hangman; but it cannot be denyed, if you were in the hands of Ju∣stice, your Soveraign should have very much reason for making you an example to all such desperate Incendiaries: But, I protest sincerely, I wish your repentance, and not your ruine. I have not taken notice of a multitude of particular trips that met me as I run thorow your Book; but indeed, the total of it was so bad, that I choosed rather to examine it in bulk, then by retail: And now I leave you to better hands, wishing I had more reason to subscribe my self, Your assured Friend and humble Servant. FINIS.
