M1412 12418187 61776
The Old Couple. A COMEDY. BY Thomas May, Esq LONDON, Printed by J. Cottrel, for Samuel Speed, at the signe of the Printing-press in S. Paul's Church-yard. 1658.
Actors Names. Sr. Argent Scrape, An old covetous rich Knight. Earthworm, An old miserly niggard. Mr. Freeman. Eugeny, Sr. Argent Scrapes nephew. Euphues, Freemans nephew, Scudmores friend. Theodore, Earthworms vertuous son. Scudmore, supposed to be slain by Eugeny. Fruitful, The Lady Covets Chaplain, Scudmore dis∣guis'd. Barnet. Dotterel, A Gull, married to the Lady Whimsey. Trusty, The Lady Covets Steward. Jasper, Earthworms servant. 3. Neighbours of Earthworms. Officers. Women Actors. The Lady Covet, Betrothed to Sr. Argent Scrape. Matilda, Earthworms neece, Scudmores Love. Arremia, Freemans daughter, Eugeny's Love. The Lady Whimsey, Married to Dotterel.
Incipit Actus Primus. Eugeny solus. Eug. THis is the hour which fair Artemia Promis'd to borrow from all company, And bless me only with it, to deny Her beauteous presence to all else, and shine On me, poor me! within this garden here, This happy garden, once while I was happy, And wanted not a free access unto it, Before my fatal and accursed crime Had shut these gates of paradise against me, When I without controul alone might spend With sweet Artemia in these fragrant walks The days short-seeming hours, and ravish'd, hear Her sweet discourses of the lillyes whiteness, The blushing rose, blew-mantled violet, Pale daffodil, and purple hyacinth, With all the various sweets, and painted gloryes Of natures wardrobe, which were all eclips'd By her diviner beauty; but alas! What boots the former happiness I had, But to increase my sorrow? my sad crime Has left me now no entrance but by stealth, When death and danger dog my venterous steps. But welcome danger, since thou find'st so fair A recompence, as my Artemiaes sight. Artemia. Eugeny. And art thou come, my dearest Eugeny? Has thy true love broke through so many hazards To visit me? I prethee chide my fondness That did command thee such a dangerous task. I did repent it since, and was in hope Thou wouldst not come. Eug. Why hop'd Artemia so? Wouldst thou not see me then? or can the hazard Of ten such lives as mine is, counter vail
One glance of favor from thy beauteous eyes? Art. Why dost thou use that language to a heart Which is thy captive, Eugeny, and lives In nothing happy but in thee? Eug. Ah! love, There lyes my greatest sorrow, that the storms Of spiteful fortune which orewhelm my state, Should draw thy constant goodness to a suffring, A goodness worthy of the happyest man Art. Those storms of fortune will be soon oreblown When once thy cause shall be but truly known, That chance, not malice wrought it; and thy pardon Will be with ease obtain'd Eug. It may be, love, If old Sr. Argent do deal truly in it. Art. But keep thy self conceal'd, do not rashly Venture two lives in one, or when thou com'st Let it be still in silence of the night. No visitation then, or other strange Unlook'd for accident can bar our joyes. The Moon is now in her full orb, and lends Seemer light to lovers then the Sun. Then onely come, but prethee tell me love, How dost thou spend thy melancholy time? Eug. Within the covert of yon shady wood Which cloathes the mountains rough and craggy top, A little hovel built of boughs and reeds Is my abode, from whence the spreading trees Keep out the Sun, and do bestow in lieu A greater benefit, a safe concealment. In that secure and solitary place, I give my pleas'd imagination leave To feast it self with thy supposed presence, Whose only shadow brings more joy to me Then all the substance of the world beside. Art. Just so alone am I, nay want the presence Of mine own heart, which strayes to finde out thee. But who comes to thee to supply thy wants? Eug. There Artemia names my happiness, A happiness, which next thy love, I hold To be the greatest that the world can give, And I am proud to name it. I doe there Enjoy a friend, whose sweet society. Makes that dark wood a palace of delight; One stor'd with all that can commend a man, In whom refined knowledge and pure art Mixing with true and sound morality Is crown'd with piety. Art. What wonder's this
Whom thou describ'st? Eug. But I in vain, alas! Doe strive to make with my imperfect skill A true dissection of his noble parts: He loses, Love, by all that I can say, For praise can come no neerer to his worth, Then can a Painter with his mimick Sun, Express the beauty of Hyperion. Art. What is his name? Eug. His name is Theodore, Rich Earthworms son, lately come home from travel. Art. Oh heavens! his son! Can such a caitif wretch Hated and curst by all, have such a son? The miser lives alone, abhorr'd by all Like a disease, yet cannot so be scap'd, But cankerlike, eats through the poor mens hearts That live about him, never has commerce With any but to ruine them; his house Inhospitable as the wilderness, And never look'd upon but with a curse: He hoords in secret place of the earth Not only bags of treasure, but his corn, Whose every grain he prizes 'bove a life, And never prayes at all, but for dear years. Eug. For his sons sake tread gently on his fame. Art. Oh! Love, his fame cannot be redeem'd From obloquy; but thee I trust so far As highly to esteem his worthy son. Eug. That man is all, and more then I have said: His wondrous vertues will hereafter make The people all forgive his father's ill. I was acquainted with him long ago In forreign parts. And now I think on't, Love, He'll be the fittest man to be acquainted With all our secresies, and be a means To further us; and think I trust his truth, That dare so much commend his worth to thee. Art. He is my neighbour here, that house is Earthworms, That stands alone beside you grove of trees: And fear not, dearest Love, Ile finde a means To send for him, doe you acquaint him first. Exeunt. Euphues, Dotterel, Barnet. Euph. Then shall I tell my cozen that you are A younger brother, Mr. Dotterel? Dot. Oh yes, by any means Sir. Euph. What's your reason? Dot. A crotchet Sir, a crotchet that I have. Here's one can tell you I have twenty of 'um,
Bar. Euphues disswade him not, he is resolv'd To keep his birth and fortunes both conceal'd, Yet win her so or no way: he would know Whether himself be truly lov'd or no, And not his fortunes only. Euph. Well, access You have already sound, pursue it Sir; But give me leave to wonder at your way. Another wooer to obtain his love Would put on all his colours, stretch r'appear At his full height, or a degree beyond it; Bely his fortunes, borrow what he waned, Not make himself less then he truly is. What reason is there that a man possest Of fortunes large enough, that may come boldly A welcome suiter to her self and friends, And ten to one, speed in his suit the fair And usual way, should play the fool and lose His precious time in such a hopeless wooing! Dot. Alas Sir, what is a Gentlemans time? Bar. Euphues he tels you true, there are some brains Can never lose their time what ere they do: Yet I can tell you, he has read some books. Dot. Doe not disparage me. Bar. I warrant thee, And in those books he says he findes examples Of greatest beauties that have so been won. Euph. Oh! in Parismus, and the Knight o'th Sun. Are those your Authors? Dot. Yes, and those are good ones: Why should a man of worth, though but a shepherd, Despair to get the love of a Kings daughter? Euph I prethee Barnet how hast thou skrew'd up This fool to such a monstrous confidence? Bar. He needs no skrewing up; but let him have His swinge a little. Euph He shall have it freely. But you have seen your mistres, Mr Dotterel, How doe you finde her? coming? Dot. That's all one, I know what I know. Bar. He has already got Some footing in her favor. Euph. But I doubt Hee'l play the tyrant, make her doat too long, Wear the green sickness as his livery, And pine a yeer or two Dot. Shee's not the first That has done so for me. Euph. But if you use My Cozen so, I shall not take it well. Dot. Oh, I protest I have no such meaning Sir, See, here she comes, the Lady whimsey too.
nter Lady Whimsy, Artemia. Lad. I thought sweet heart, th'had'st wanted company. Art. Why so I did yours, Madam. Lad. Had I known Your house had been so full of gallants now, I would have spar'd my visit. But 'tis all one, I have met a friend here. Euph. Your poor servant, Madam. Lad. I was confessing of your cozen here About th'affairs of love. Euph. Your Ladiship I hope will shrieve her gently. Lad. But I tell her She shall not thank me now for seeing her, For I have business hard by. I am going A suitor to your old rich neighbor here, Earthworm. Euph. A suitor? he is very hard In granting any thing, especially If it be money. Lad Yes, my suit's for money, Nay all his money, and I himself to boot. Bar. His money would doe well without himself. Lad. And with himself. Bar. Alas! your Ladiship Should too much wrong your beauty to bestow it Upon one that cannot use it, and debar More able men their wishes. Euph. That's true, Barnet, If she should bar all other men, but that Would be too great a cruelty. Art. Doe you hear My cozen Madam? Lad. Yes, he will be heard: Rather then fail, he'll give himself the hearing. But prethee Euphues tell me plainly now What thou dost think of me. I love thy freeness Better then any flattery in the world Euph. I think you won drous wise. Lad. In what? Euph. In that That makes or mars a woman, I mean love. Lad. Why prethee? Euph. I think you understand so well What the true use of man is, that you'll nere Trouble your thoughts with care, or spoyl your beauty With the green sickness, to obtain a thing Which you can purchase a discreeter way. Art. How doe you like this, Madam? Lad. Wondrous well, 'Tis that I look'd for. But what entertainment Would old rich Earthworm give us, do you thinke? Bar. Unless your presence, Madam, could infuse A nobler soul into him, 'tis much fear'd 'Twould be but mean. Lad. Because (you'll say) hee's covetous: Tut, I can work a change in any man: If I were married to him, you should see What I would make him. Euph. I beleeve we should, aside If cuckolds horns were visible. Art. But could
Your Ladyship be pleas'd with such a husband? Lad. Who could not well be pleas'd with such a fortune? Art. Wealth cannot make a man Lad. But his wealth, Lady, Can make a woman. Euph. Yet I doubt old Earthworm Would prove too subtle to be govern'd so: You'll finde him, Madam, an old crabbed piece. Some gentle fool were better for a husband. Art. Fie, cozen, how thou talk'st. Lad. Hee's in the right: Fools are the only husbands, one may rule'um. Why should not we desire to use men so As they would us? I have heard men protest They would have their wives silly, and not study'd In any thing but to dress themselves, And not so much as able to write letters. Just such a husband would I wish to have, So qualify'd, and not a jot beyond it, He should not have the skill to write or read. Art. What could you get by that? Lad. I should be sure He could not read my letters; and for bonds, When I should have occasion to use money, His mark would serve. Art. I am not of your minde, I would not have a fool for all the world. Bar. No, fairest Lady, your perfections None but the wisest and the best of men Can truly finde and value. Dot. And I protest, Lady, I honour you for not loving a fool. Lad. You would love a wife it seems that loves not you. Euph A tart jest, Barnet. Bar. But he feels it not. Euph. Fie, Mr. Dotterel, 'tis not nobly done In you to hate a fool: a generous spirit Would take the weakest parts, and fools you know Are weakest still. Dot. Faith, Mr. Euphues, I must confess I have a generous spirit, And do a little sympathize with fools. I learn'd that word from a good honest man. But hark you, cozen Barnet, this same Lady Is a brave woman. Bar. Are you taken with her? Dot. I love a wit with all my heart. Bar. 'Tis well, He is already taken off, I see; Aside From fair Artemia, or may be soon; Upon this tother I may build a fortune. Euph. But, Madam, if your Ladyship would marry Upon those terms, 'twere better that you took Old Earthworms son. Lad. Has he a son, I prethee? Euph Yes, lately come from travel, as they say, We have not seen him yet, he has kept close
Since his arrival; people give him out To be his father's own. Lad. Nay, then I swear Ile none of him, if he be covetous And young, I shall be troubled too long with him: I had rather have the old one. Art. Here's my father. Enter Mr. Freeman. Free. Health to this good society; I am sorry That my poor house must not to day enjoy The happiness to entertain you all. We are invited to th'old Lady Covets, And thither must our company remove. Lad. Sir, Ile be govern'd by you. I was bold To come and see Mrs. Artemia. Free. Shee's much beholding to your Ladyship For doing her that honor. Euph. Tell me, Uncle, I hear Sir Argent Scrape is at her house. Free. Nephew, 'tis true, and which thou'lt wonder at, That marriage, which we talk'd of as a jest, In earnest now's concluded of, and shall To morrow morning be solemnized Euph. Betwixt Sr. Argent and the Lady Covet? I doe not thinke it strange; there's but one hedge Has a long time divided them, I mean Their large estates, and 'tis th'estate that marries. Free. But is't not strange? nay, most unnatural? And I may say ridiculous, for those years To marry, and abuse the ordinance? My Lady Covet is at least fourscore, And he this year is fourscore and fifteen: Besides, he has been bedrid long, and lame Of both his feet. Euph. Uncle, hee's not too old To love, I mean her money, and in that The chifest end of marriage is fulfill'd, He will increase and multiply his fortunes; Increase you know, is the true end of marriage. Free. They have already almost the whole country. Euph. But you shall see how now they'll propagate Free. Is such a marriage lawful? Euph. Ah! good Uncle, Dispute not that, the Church has nought in this; Their Lawyer is the Priest that marries them, The banes of matrimony are the indentures, The bounds and land-marks are the ring that joyns them. Art. But ther's no love at all. Euph. Yes, pretty cozen, If thou art read in amorous books, thou'lt finde That Cupids arrow has a golden head,
And 'twas a golden shaft that wounded them. Free. Well, thither we must go; but prethee nephew Forbear thy jesting there. Euph. I warrant you, Ile flatter the old Lady, and persuade her How well she looks: but when they go to bed Ile write their epitaph. Free. How man? their epitaph? Their epithalamion thou mean'st. Euph. No Sirs Over their marriage bed Ile write their ages, And only say, Here lies Sir Argent Scrape Together with his wife the Lady Covet; And whosoever reads it, will suppose The place to be a Tomb, no marriage bed. Lad. How strangely thou art taken with this weddig Before thou seest it! Euph. And then let me see, To fit them for an Hymenaean song, In stead of those so high and spirited strains Which the old Graecian Lovers us'd to sing When lusty Bridgrooms rifled mayden-heads, Ile sing a quiet dirge, and bid them sleep In peaceful rest; and bid the cloathes, instead Of earth, lie gently on their aged bones— Free. Thou'lt nere have done. Well, gallants, 'tis almost The time that calls us, I must needs be gone. Lad. We'll wait upon you Sir. Free. Your servant, Madam. Exeunt. Manent Artemia, Euphues. Art. Stay, cozen, I have a request to thee. Euph. Thou canst not fear that Ile deny it thee: Speak it, 'tis done. Art. Why then in short 'tis this: Old Earthworm, cozen, has a son they say Lately come home; his name, as I have heard Is Theodore. Euph. Yes, I have heard of him. Art. I would intreat you by some means or other To draw him hither, I'de faith speak with him: Ask not the cause, but do what I request: You may hereafter know. Euph. Well, Ile not question't, But bring him hither, though I know him not. Art. Cozen, farewel, I shall be look'd for straight. Exit Artemia. Manet Euphues. Euph. Rich Earthworm's son? why in the name of wonder Should it be her desire to speak with him? She knows him not: wel, let it be a riddle, I have not so much wit as to expound it; Nor yet so little, as to lose my thoughts, Or study to finde our, what the no reason
Of a young wenches will is: should I guess. I know not what to think; may she have heard That hee's a proper man, and so desire To satisfie her self? What reason then Can she alledge to him? Tut, that's not it; Her beauty, and large dower, need not to seek Out any fuitors, and the odious name Of his old wretched father would quite choak it: Or have some tattling gossips, or the maids Told her perchance that hee's a conjurer? He goes in black; they say he is a scholar, Has been beyond sea too, there it may lie; And he must satisfie her longing thought, What, or how many husbands she shall have, Of what degree, upon what night she shall Dream of the man, when she shall fast and walk In the Church-yard to see him passing by Just in those cloathes that first he comes a suitor: These things may be; but why should she make me To be her instrument? some of the men Or maids might do't as well: well, since you have Us'd me, fair cozen, I will sound your drifts, Or't shall go hard. The fellow may abuse her: Therefore Ile watch him too, and straight about it; But now I think on't, Ile sollicite him By letter first, and meet him afterward. Exit. Actus Secundus. Earthworm, Theodore. Earth. I Do not more rejoyce in all my stores, My wealthy bags, fill'd garners, crowded chests, And all the envy'd heaps that I have glean'd With so long care and labor, then I do In thy most frugal nature, Theodore, Concurring just with mine; in thee, my son, I see, methinks, a perpetuity Of all the projects which my soul has hatch'd, And their rich fruits, I see my happiness
When I consider what great hoords of wealth With long care rak'd together, I have seen Even in a moment scatter'd; when I view The gawdy heirs of thriving Aldermen Fleeting like short-liv'd bubbles into ayr, And all that fire expiring in one blaze That was so long a kindling. But doe thou, Do thou my son, go on, and grow in thrift, It is a vertue that rewards it self: 'Tis matterless in goodness who excels: He that hath coyn, hath all perfections else Theod, Sir, I am wholly yours, and never can Dege nerate from your frugality: Or if my nature did a little stray, Your good example would direct it still, Till it were grown in me habitual. Ear. 'Twill be a greater patrimony to thee Then all my wealth: strive to be perfect in't, Study the rules; one rule is general, And that is this, Give away nothing, son, For thrift is like a journy, every gift Though nere so small, is a step back again. He that would rise to riches or renown, Must not regar, though he pull millions down. The. That lesson, Sir, is easie to be learn'd. Ear. Laugh at those fools that are ambitious Of empty air, to be stil'd liberal; That sell their substance for the breath of others, And with the flattering thanks of idle drones Are swell'd, while their more solid parts decay. What cloathes to wear, the first occasion Of wearing cloaths will reach a wise man best: The. True, Sir, It reacheth us how vain a thing It is for men to take a pride in that Which was at first the embleme of their shame. Ear. Thou hitt'st it right, but canst thou be content With my poor diet too? The. Oh, wondrous well! 'Twas such a diet which that happy age That Poets stile the golden, first did use. Ear. And such a diet to our chests will bring The golden age again. The. Beside the gain That flowes upon us, health and liberty Attend on these bare meals; if all were blest With such a temperance, what man would fawn, Or to his belly fell his liberty? There would be then no slaves, no sycophants
At great mens tables; if the base Samentus, Or that vile Galba had been thus content, They had not born the scoffs of Caesar's board. He whose cheap thirst the springs and brooks can quench, How many cares is he exempted from? Hee's not indebted to the merchants toile, Nor fears that Pyrates force, or stormes should rob him Of rich Canatyes, or sweet Candyan wines: He smels nor seeks no feasts, but in his own True strength contracted lives, and there enjoyes A greater freedome then the Parthian King. Ear. Thou mak'st me more in love with my blest life. The Besides, pure cheerful health ever attends it, Which made the former ages live so long. With riotous banquets sicknesses came in, When death 'gan muster all his dismal band Of pale diseases, such as Poets fain Keep sentinel before the gates of hell, And bad them wait about the gluttons tables; Whom they, like venom'd pills, in sweetest wines Deceive! swallow down, and hasten on What most they would eschew, untimely death. But from our tables here no painful surfets, No fed diseases grow, to strangle nature, And suffocate the active brain; no feavers, No apoplexies, palsies or catarrhs Are here, where nature not entic'd at all With such a dangerous bait as pleafant cates Takes in no more then she can govern well. Ear. But that which is the greatest comfort, son, Is to observe, with pleasure our rich hoords Dayly increase, and stuff the swelling bags: Come, thou art mine, I see; here take these keys, Keyes. These keyes can shew thee such amazing plenty, Whose very sight would feed a famish'd country. I durst not trust my servants. The. Me you may, Who equal with my life do prize your profit Ear. Well, Ile go in, I feel my self half sleepy After the drinke I took. The. 'Twill do you good, Sir. Exit. Work sweetly, gentle cordial, and restore Those spirits again, which pining avarice Has 'rest him of; ay me! how wondrous thin, How lean and wan he looks! how much alas! Has he defrauded his poor Genius, In raking wealth? while the pale grisly sighs Of famine dwell upon his aged cheeks.
Oh avarice! then thee a greater plague Did nere infest the life of wretched man. Heaven ayd my work; that rare extraction Which he has drunk, beside the nourishment, Will cast him in a safe and gentle sleep, While I have liberty to work my ends, And with his body's cure, a means Ile finde To cure his fame, and which is more, his minde. Enter Jasper. Jasper? Jasp. Sir. Theod. Are those disguises ready Which, I bespoke? Jasp. They are all sitted Sir. Theod. Then at the hour which I appointed thee, Invite those people Jasper, but be true And secret to me. Jasp. As your own heart Sir. The Take this, I will reward thy service better, Counters. Assoon as these occasions are dispatch'd, Jasp. I thank you Sir. I have a letter for you Letter. Left here but now from Mr. Euphues, Old Mr Freeman's nephew. The. Give it me, I will anon peruse it, but my hast Permits not now, Eugeny waits my coming. Exit Theod. Jasp. I like this well yet, if I should prove false To my old master for my young masters sake, Who can accuse me? for the reason's plain And very palpable, I feel it here: This will buy ale, so will not all the hoords Which my old master has: his money serves For nothing but to look upon; but this Knows what the common use of money is: Well, for my own part, I'm resolv'd to do Whatever he commands me, hee's too honest To wrong his father in it; if he should, The worst would be his own another day. Exit. Eugeny solus. Eug. Just thus in woods and solitary caves The ancient hermits liv'd, but they liv'd happy. And in their quiet contemplations found More real comforts, then society Of men could yeeld, then cities could afford, Or all the lustres of a court could give; But I have no such sweet preservatives Against the sadness of this desert place. I am my self a greater wilderness Then are these woods, where honor and dismay Make
Make their abodes, while different passions By turns do reign in my distracted foul. Fortune makes this conclusion general, All things shall help th'unfortunate man to fall. First, sorrow comes, and tells me I have done A crime, whose foulness must deserve a sea Of poenitent tears to wash me clean again; Then fear steps in, and tels me if surpriz'd, My wretched life is forfeit to the Law; When these have done, enters the Tyrant Love, And sets before me the fair Artemia, Displayes her vertues and perfections, Tels me, that all those graces, all those beauties Suffer for me, for my unhappiness, And wounds me more in her then in my self. Ah Theodore! would I could ever sleep. But when thou com'st; for in my self I find No drop of comfort, welcome deatest friend. Enter Theodore. The. Pardon the slowness of my visit, friend, For such occasions have detain'd me hence, As if thou knew'st, I know thou would'st excuse. Eug. I must confess, I thought the hours too long, But the fruition of thy presence now Makes me forget it all. The. Collect thy self, Thou droop'st too much, my dearest Eugeny, And art too harsh and sour a censurer Of that unhappy crime, which thou were forc'd Lately to act; I did allow in thee That lawful sorrow that was fit, but let Well grounded comforts cure thee; nought extream Is safe in man. Eug. 'Tis time must work that cure. The. But why thy pardon is not yet obtain'd, Let me be free in my conjectures to thee. Eug. Speak, friend, as to thy self. The. Sir Argent Scrape Your old rich kinsman, who to morrow morning Is to be married to the Lady Covet. Eug. Is that match come about? oh avarice! What monsters thou begett'st in this vile age! The. Sr. Argent Scrape, I say, is next heir male On whom thy whole estate was long ago Entail'd. Eug. 'Tis true. The. He must inherit it Should thy life fail. Eug. 'Tis granted. The. Then, friend, hear, What not a bare conjecture, but strong grounds Move me to utter; think upon that word
Thou spok'st so lately, thinke what avarice Can make her bondmen do, that such a price As sifteen hundred pounds a year, will make Him labor not thy pardon, but thy death. Eug. Can there be such a miscreant in nature? The. I should not thinke so, if I weigh'd him only As hee's thy kinsman, I have been inform'd He labors under hand to apprehend thee Just at the assizes now, and has layd plots To stop all pardons, which in that short time Might be procur'd; and then what bribes may do In hastening execution, doe but consider: If this be false, some Courtiers have abus'd His fame. And pardon me, my dearest friend, If I suspect the worst for fear of thee. Eug. When I consier what accurst effects Proceed from wretched avarice, I begin To feel a fear. The. This very age hath given Horrid examples lately, brothers have been Betray'd by brothers in that very kinde: When pardons have been got by the next heirs, They have arriv'd too late. No tie so neer, No band so sacred, but the cursed hunger Of gold has broken't, and made wretched men To fly from nature, mock religion, And trample under feet the holyest Laws. Eug. He has been ever noted for that vice, Which with his age, has still grown stronger in him. The. Ah Eugeny! how happy were that last Age of a man, when long experience Has taught him knowledge, taught him temperance, And freed him from so many loose desires In which rash youth is plung'd, were not this vice: But heark, heark friend, what ravishing sound is that? Eug. Ha! wondrous sweet! 'tis from th'adjoyning thicket. Song. This is not the Elysian Grove, Nor can I meet my slaughter'd Love Within these shades; come death, and be At last as mercifull to me, As in my dearest Scudmore's fall,
Thou shew'dst thy self tyrannical. Then did I die, when he was slain: But kill me now, I live again; And shall go meet him in a grove, Fairer then any here, above. Oh! let this woful breath expire: Why should I wish Evadue's fire, Sad Portia's coals, or Lucrece knife, To rid me of a loathed life? 'Tis shame enough that grief alone, Kils me not now, when thou art gone. But life, since thou art slow to go, Ile punish thee for lasting so, And make thee piece-meal every day, Dissolve to tears and melt away. The. Ah Eugeny! some heavenly nymph descends To make thee musick in these desert woods, To quench or feed thy baleful melancholy: It is so sweet, I could almost beleeve, But that 'tis sad, it were an Angel's voice. Eug. What in the name of miracle is this? The. Remove not thou; Ile make discovery Within this thicket. Eug. Ha! what means thy wonder? What dost thou see? The. I know not how to tell thee; Now I could wish my self to be all eyes, As erst all ears. I see a shape as fair And as divine as was the voyce it sent; But clouded all with sorrow: a fair woman, If by a name so mortal I may term her. In such a sorrow sate the queen of Love, When in the woods she wail'd Adonis death, And from her crystal-dropping eyes did pay A Lovers obsequy. Eug. Let me come neer. The. Sure, black is Cupid's colour; death and he Have chang'd their liveries now, as in the fable They did their quivers once. Eug. Ah! woe is me! The. What means that woe? Eug. Ah Theodore! my guilt Pursues me to the woods, no place can keep The monuments of my misdeeds away. The. I understand you not. Eug. It is Matilda The slaughter'd Scudmore's Love, his vertuous Love.
Whose life by me unhappily was spilt. The sad melodious ditty, which so late Did pierce our ravish'd ears, was but the note Of this fair turtle, for her slaughter'd mate: In which (perchance) amidd'st her woes, she sends Black curses up against my spotted self. But I with prayers and blessings will repay What ere thou ven'st'gainst me. Oh! do not wish More wretchedness to my distracted soul Then I already feel. Sad sighs and tears Are all the satisfaction that is left For me to make to thy dead Love and thee. The. Those lips can vent no curses; 'twould take off Much from the sweetness of her vertuous sorrow. Where lives this lovely maid? Eug. In the next village. The. Has she a father living? Eug. No friend, he died When she was in her infancy; her mother Two yeers ago deceas'd, and left her all The substance that she had, which was not great, But does maintain her: in that little house Ere since this fatal accident, she lives A miracle of truth and constancy, Wayling her Loves, and now it seems was come To vent her woful passions to the woods. The. How happy had he been in such a Love, If fate had spar'd his life! but he is dead, Aside. And time at last may wear this sorrow off, And make her rellish the true joyes of love. But why do I thus wander in my thoughts? This passion must be cub'd in the beginning, 'Twill prove too stubborn for me if it grow. Eug. Come, let us to my cave, as we intended, Ere this sad object stayd us. The. Sad indeed, Beleeve me friend, I suffer with thee in it. But we were wounded in two different kindes. Come, let's be gone, though I could still dwell here. Exeunt. Enter Matilda. Mat. Methought I heard a noise within the wood, As if men talk'd together not far off, But could discover none. The time has been In such a solitary place as this I should have trembled at each moving leaf; But sorrow and my miserable state Have made me bold. If there be savages That live by rapine in such woods as these,
As I have heard in ancient times there were, My wretched state would move their pity rather Then violence. Ile confidently go, Guarded with nothing but my innocence. Exit. Enter Fruitful, Trusty. Fru. Come, master Steward, you have had a time Of sweating for this wedding. Tru. I have tane A little pains to day, your's Mr. Fruitful Is yet to come, I mean your sermon Fru. Yes, but the pains are past, and that's the study. But to our business that more concerns us: Is the deed realy written that my Lady Must seal to day? Tru. Do you beleeve shee'l seal it? Fru. I warrant you, I have so follow'd her, And layd it to her conscience, that I dare Hazard my life 'tis done. Tru. Well, here's the deed, 'Tis plainly written Fru. Ile peruse't anon. I know the other feoffees are as true And honest men as any are i'th' world. Exit Trusty. Enter Freeman, Euphues, Barnet, Dotterel, Lady Whimsey. Free. Save you, Mr. Fruitful. Fru. Worthy Mr. Freeman. Free. How does my Lady Sir? I have made bold To bring her company. Fru. Please you draw neer Sir, I will goe up and signifie unto my Lady Exit Fruit. That you are here Bar. What's he? her Chaplain, Euphues? Eup. Oh, yes, Lad. She uses praying then it seems Eup. Yes, Madam, and fasting too, but gives no alms. Lad. Cannot he teach her that? Eup. 'Tis to be doubted: But he has other wayes which are far safer, To speak against the fashion, against painting, Or fornication; if he were your Chaplain, He would inveigh as much 'gainst covetousness. Lad. He would hurt me little in that: but has he learning? Euph. No surely, Madam, he is full of knowledge But has no learning at all; he can expound, But understands nothing: One thing in him Is excellent, though he doe hate the Bishops, He would not make them guilty of one sin, Which was to give him orders, for he hates Orders as much as them. Free. Well, I have heard Though he came lately to her, he has got A great hand over her, and swayes her conscience Which way he list. Eup. Uncle, 'tis very easie
To rule a thing so weak as is her conscience, Ile undertake that a twin'd thread would doe it As well as a strong cable; if he could Rule her estate too, he would have a place on't. Free. Why that will follow tother. Euph. I thinke not, Rather her conscience follows her estate; Oppression had not else increas'd it so She wrong'd a worthy of mine, young Scudmore, And by meer fraud and bribery took away His whole estate, five hundred pound a yeer. Free. I must confess, 'twas a foul cause indeed, And he poor man lack'd means to prosecute The cause against her. But he feels it not At this time, nephew. Bar. Was't that Scudmore, Sir, Whom Eugeny Sir Argent Scraps young kinsman Unfortunately kill'd? Free The same. Well, let All these things pass, we come now to be merry. Lad. Let's eat up her good chear; a niggards feast, Is best they say. Dot. Shall we have wine good store? Bar. Oh! fear not that. Dot Hold belly, hold, yfaith? Bar. Yes, and brain too. Dot. Nay, for my braine Let me alone, I fear not that, no wine Can hurt my braine. Lad. Say you so, Mr. Dotterel? Why such a braine I love Dot. Madam, I am glad I had it for you, Lad. For me, Sir? Dot. Yes, Lady, 'Tis at your service, so is the whole body. Did I not tickle her there, old Lad? Bar. Yes, rarely. Lad. Shall I presume to call you servant then? Dot. Oh Lord! Madam! if I were worthy to be! Lad. Nay, I know you have good courtship, servant, Wear this for my sake. Dot. 'Tis your livery, Madam. Sca. Bar. Well, th'art a happy man, if thou knew'st all. Euph. Madam, I see your Ladyship can tell How to make choice in dealing of your favors. Dot. It pleases you to say so, good Mr. Euphues. Euph. Why Sir, I speak but of the Ladyes judgment. Dot. 'Twas more of her curtesie then my desert. Enter Lady Covet on crutches. Euph. Here comes the Lady bride. Free. Joy to your Ladyship. Lad. Cov. I thanke you Sir, yo'are very welcome all. Free. I have made bold to bring my friends along As you commanded Lady. Lad. Cov. They are most welcome. Euph. Me thinks your Ladyship looks fresh to day, And like a bride indeed. Lad. Cov. Ah Mr. Euphues! You I perceive can flatter. Euph. Does your glass
Tell you I slatter Madam? Lad. Cov. Bestow this Upon young mayds, but let me tell you, Sir, Old folks may marry too, it was ordain'd At first be as well a stay to age, As to please youth; we have our comforts too, Though we be old. Euph. Madam, I doubt it not: You are not yet so old, but you may have Your comfort well, and if Sir Arnt Scrape Were but one threescore yeers younger then h'is Bar. What a strange but thou mak'st? Eup You would perceive it. Lad. Whi. Servant, could you finde in your heart to marry Such an old bride? Dot. No mistress, I protest I had rather have none. Lad. Whi. What age would you desire To chuse your wife of? Dot. Just as old as you are. Lad. Whim. Well, servant, I beleeve you can dissemble. Lad. Cov. Wil't please you to draw neer? Sir Argent stayes Expecting within. Free. Wee'l wait upon you. Exeunt Manent Barnet, Dottrel. Bar. To what strange fortune, friend, are some men born? I mean by thee; surely when thou wert young, The fayries dandled thee. Dot. Why prethee Barnet? Bar. That Ladyes thus should doat upon thy person: Dost thou not see how soon the Lady Whimsey Is caught in love with thee? Dot But is she think'st thou? Bar. Is she? Come, thou perceiv'st it well enough; What else should make her court thee, and bestow Her favors openly? and such a Lady So full of wit as she is too, would she Betray the secrets of her heart so far, But that Love playes the Tyrant in her brest, And forces her? Dot. True, and as thou sayest, Barnet, Shee's a brave witty Lady, and I love A wit with all my heart. What would she say If she should know me truly, that thus loves, And thinkes I am but a poor younger brother? Bar. Why still the greater is thy happiness, Thou may'st be sure she loves thee truly now, And not thy fortunes. Dot. Has she found me out For all I sought to hide my self? Bar. The more Thy worth appears, the more her judgment's seen. Oh! 'tis a gallant Lady! Well, she might Have cast her eye on me, of Euphues, But 'twas not our good fortune. Dot. Doe not despair, Some other woman may love thee as well, Come, thou hast worth, Barnet, as well as I.
Bar. Nay, nay, abuse not your poor friends, but tell me What dost thou thinke of young Artemia now? Dot. Of her! a foolish girl, a simple thing, Shee'd make a pretty wife for me: I confess I courted her, but she had not the wit To finde out what I was for all my talke. Bar. And that was strange she should not, but 'tis fate That governs marriages Dot. Let her repent, And know what she hath lost, when 'tis too late. But dost thou thinke this gallant Lady Whimsey Will marry me? Bar. Mak'st thou a doubt of that? 'Tis thy own fault boy, if thou hast her not. Dot. That I protest it shall not be; but tell me, Shall I express my love to her in verse Or prose? Bar. In which you will. Dot. I am alike At both of them indeed. Bar. I know thou art. Dot. Come, let's goe in. Bar. Thou long'st to see thy mistress. Dot. Wee'l drink her health in a crown'd cup, my Lad. Exeuat. Actus Tertius. Theodore, Neighbours. Sacks. The. COme neighbours, pray draw neer; my fellow Jasper Has told you wherefore you were sent for hither. 1. Nei. I, I thank you friend. 2. Nei. And my good master too. The. My master touch'd with sorrow and remorse For that unhappy error of his life, That fault (alas!) which by too true a name Is termed misery, determines now By deeds of tender charity, to make The wronged poor amends, and to the world Declare the fruits of a reformed life. An I first your pardon, neighbours, he would beg, And next to Heaven, be reconcil'd to you. 1. Nei. Now blessing on his heart. 2. Nei. Good tender soul! 3. Neig. I ever thought him a right honest man. The. He that before did churlishly engross And lock those blessings up, which from the hand Of Heaven were show'd upon him, has at last Found their true use, and will hencesorth redeem
The former mispent time. His wealthy stores Shall be no longer shut against the poor; His bags seal'd up no longer, to debar The course of fitting bounty. To you all Of corn and money, weekly he'll allow In recompense a greater quantity By far, then men of greater rank shall do: Nor will he come himself to take your thanks, Till, as he sayes, he has deserv'd them better. Mean time by me, he pours his bounty forth, Which he desires with greatest secrecy May be perform'd; for all vaing lorious showes And oftentation does his soul abhor: He sounds no trumpet to bestow his almes, Nor in the streets proclaimes his charity; Which makes the vertue vice, not would he have The world take notice of you at his doors. 1. Nei. See, see, religious man! 2. Neig. Ah neigbour! Some in the world have been mistaken in him The. Nor would he have you blaze his bounty forth, And prayse him openly. Forbear it, neighbours; Your private prayers only he desires, And hearty wishes: for true charity Though nere so secret, findes a just reward. I am his servant newly entertain'd, But one to whom he does commit the trust Of his desires in this, and I should wrong His goodness strangely, if I should keep back The least of what his bounty doth intend. Come in with me, Ile fill your sacks with corn, And let you see what money he bestows. Omnes Neig. We'll pray to Heaven to reward his goodness. Exeutn. Euphues, Barnet. Euph. Our Dotterel then is caught? Bar. He is, and just As Dotterels use to be: the Lady first Advanc'd toward him, stretch'd forth her wing, and he Met her with all expressions, and is caught As fast in her lime-twigs as he can be Until the Church confirm it. Euph. There will be Another brave estate for her to spend. Bar. Others will be the better for't, and if None but a Dotterel suffer for't, what loss Of his can countervail the least good fortune That may from thence blow to another man? Euph. She spent her tother husband a great fortune. Bar. Dotterel's estate will finde her work again
For a great while; two thousand pounds a yeer Cannot be melted suddenly; when 'tis, Men can but say, her prodigality Has done an act of justice, and translated That wealth which fortunes blindness had misplac'd On such a fellow; what should he doe with it? Euph. And thou say'st right, some men were made to be The conduit pipes of an estate, or rather The sives of fortune, through whose leaking holes She means to scatter a large flood of wealth, Besprinkling many with refreshing showers: So usurers, so dying Aldermen Pour out at once upon their sive-like heirs Whole gusts of envy'd wealth; which they together Through many holes let out again in showers, And with their ruine water a whole country. But will it surely be a match? Bar. As sure As the two old death's-heads to morrow morning Are to be joyn'd together. Euph. Who, Sir Argent And his Lady? Bar. Yes, if she keep touch In what she promis'd me, Ile undertake Her Dotterel shall be sure, and given to her In matrimony. Euph. Given to his wife? I see thou mean'st in Dotterel to bring back The ancient Spanish custome, where the women Inherited the land, rul'd the estates: The men were given in marriage to the women With portions, and had joyntures made to them: Just so will be his case, he will be marryed Unto a brave subjection: How the fool Is caught in his own noose! what confidence Had he, that he would never marry any But such forsooth, as must first fall in love With him, not knowing of his wealth at all? Bar. Well, now he's fitted: he begun at first With fair Artemia. Euph. He might have told Her of his wealth, and mist her too, or else I am deceiv'd in her; true vertuous love Cannot be bought so basely: she besides Has been in love, I'm sure, and may be still, Though he be fled the land. But now I thinke on't. I must go see whether old Earthworms son Have yet perform'd what she desir'd; she stays At home Bar. He in, and see how Dotterel Counts his brave mistress: I left him composing A sonnet to her. There are the old couple
Within too. Euph. If a man could get to heare Their way of courting, 'twould be full as strange As Dotterel's is ridiculous: but stay. Sir Argent Scrape, Lady Covet, brought in chaires. Here comes the lovely Bride and Bridegroom forth: Prithee let's venture to stay here a little Behinde the hangings man; we shall be sure To heare their love; they are both somewhat deafe, And must speak lowd. Bar. Content, He stay with thee. S. Arg. Leave us a while; now, Madam, you have seene So have your learned counsel, that I deal Squarely with you; my personal estate Is no lesse worth then I profest, when first I mov'd my loving suit. Bar. I marry, Sir, A loving suit indeed. Euph. Let um go on In their own proper dialect. La. Co. I finde it, And should be loath but to require your truth In the same kinde; you seem'd at first to question How strong my title was in that estate Which was yong Scudmore's once; 'tis a fair mannor. Euph. 'Tis true, old rottennesse, too good for you. La. Co. My counsel can enforme you that I kept it, And did enjoy possession while he liv'd; And now he's dead, who should recover it? The heires are poore and beggarly. S. Arg. Nay, I think We neede not feare their suing against us. La. Co. If they should stirre, a little piece of money Would stop their mouths. Euph. A little piece of durt Will stop your mouth ere long, and then the suit Will goe against thee, mischief. Bar. Prithee peace; Thou art not merry now, but cholericke. Euph. I think of my wrong'd frend. La Co. But you were saying You made no doubt but shortly to enjoy Your kinsman Eugeny's estate; that were A fair addition to your land; they say It goes at fifteen hundred pound a year. S. Arg. 'Tis true, and 'tis well worth it. La. Co. But what hopes Have you to gain it shortly? S. Arg. He, you know By Scudmore's death has forfeited his life Unto the law; and the estate's entail'd On me as the next heir. La. Co. But he is fled. S. Arg. No, no, I know he lurks not farre from hence, And I shall shortly learne the very place By some intelligence: I have provided My secret scouts; and then you know th'assizes
Are now at hand; the time will be too short To get a pardon, specially as I Have lay'd some friends to stall it underhand. Euph. Here's a new mischief Barnet. Bar. And a strange one. Lad. Cov. And then you must not spare a little money To hasten execution at an hour Unusual; those things may well be done, Else what were money good for? Sir. Arg. You say right. If 'twere once come to that, I fear it not. Lad. Cov. Well, Sir, I see all's right and straight between us; You understand how welcome you are hither, I need not tell it o'er again. Sir Arg. No, Lady, I will be bold to say, I doe not come Now as a stranger, but to take possession Both of your house and you. Euph. He cannot speak Out of that thriving language in his love. Lad. Cov. Will you goe in again? our guests perhaps Thinke the time long. Sir Arg. With all my heart: A cup of sack would not doe much amiss. Lad. Cov. We'll have it with a toast. Who's neer there, ho! Enter Servant, and carry them out. Bar. What a strange kinde of pageant have we seen? Euph. Barnet, I cannot tell, whether such strange Unsatiable desires in these old folks That are half earth already, should be thought More impious, or more ridiculous. Bar. They are both alike. Euph. But a monstrous Unnatural plot as his, to apprehend His kinsman, I nere heard of; If I knew Where Eugeny remain'd, though 'twere his fortune To kill a friend of mine, I'd rescue him From this unnatural and wolvish man. Bar. That would betray his life to satisfie His avarice, not justice of the Law. Enter Dotterel, Lady Whimsey. Here comes another piece of matrimony That may be shortly. Euph. 'Tis better far then tother; They are the last couple in hell. Dot. Save you gallants. Bar. You are the gallant, Sir, that on your arm Do wear the trophies of a conquer'd Lady. Euph. Madam, I had almost mistaken my salutation, And bid, God give you joy. Lad. Whim. Of what I prethee? Euph. Of this young gallant, call him by what name Or title you are pleas'd, husband or servant.
Bar. He may be both, Sir, he is not the first Has been a husband and a servant too. Dot. I am her servant, Sir, and I confess Have an ambition, and so forth. Lad. Whim. How now servant? Euph. I tell you truly, Madam, 'tis reported (And those reports are fatal still you know) That Mr. Dotterel and you are purpos'd To bear th'old Knight and Lady company Tomorrow to the Church. Lad. Whim. That I confesse. And so will you I thinke Euph. Nay, but to do As they do Madam, ty the lasting knot. Lad. Whim. Do you heare, servant? this it is to have So proper a servant, every one supposes I must needes be in love. Dot. I would you were As deepe in Cupid's bookes as I. Euph. That is In Cupid's favour. You are a happy man. Lad. Whim. My servant has been searching Cupid's bookes I thinke, to finde that Sonner that he gave me. Are you content that I should shew your poetry? Dot. Do Mistris, I am not asham'd on't. But you shall give me leave to read it to um. 'Tis but a Sonnet, Gentlemen, that I fitted To my fair Mistris here. Euph. Let us be happy To heare it Sir. Dot. Take it as it is: A paper. Deare, do not your fair beauty wrong, He reades. In thinking still you are too yong. —Euph. How! too yong! Bar. Let him alone, I know the song. Dot. The rose and lillies in youre cheeke Flourish, and no more ripenesse seeke. Your cherry-lip red, soft, and sweete, Proclaimes such fruit for tast most meete. Then lose no time, for love has wings, And flies away from aged things. How do you it like, Gentlemen? Euph. very well. The song's a good one. Bar. Oh monstrous! Never man stole with so little judgement. Euph. Of all the love-songs that were ever made, He could not have chose out one more unfit, More palpably unfit; that must betray His most ridiculous theft. Lad. Whim. Who would have thought My Servant should suppose, I think my self Too yong to love, that have already had
One husband. Euph. Oh excuse him, gentle Madam, He found it in the song Bar. And it should seeme He could get not other song but this. Lad. Whim. Surely, a woman of five and thirty year old, Is not too yong to love. Bar. Oh spare him, Madam. Euph. Let's raise him up; I think the Sonnet's good, There's somewhat in 't to th' purpose; read it again. Euph. —For tast most meete. He reades it. Very good; and there he tickled it. Mark'd you that, Madam? the two last of all? Then lose no time, for love hath wings He gives you fitting counsel. Lad. Whim. Yes, I like it. Dot. I thought when they understood it, they would like it. I am sure, I have heard this song prais'd ere now. Lad Whim. This doe's deserve a double favour, servant. Dot. Let this be the favour, sweete Mistres, Kisses. Euph. How some mens poetry happens to be rewarded! Lad. Whim. Shall we goe in? but prithee Euphues What is the reason sweet Artenia Thy Cozen is not here? Euph. I know not, Madam, But her pretence was businesse; I am going To visit her: if you goe in to keepe Th'old couple company, Ile fetch her to you. Lad. Whim. I prithee do, farewell; come servant, Shall we goe in? Dot. He wait upon you, Mistres. Exeunt. Theodore. Artemia. Theod I Will acquaint him, Lady, with the hour, And to his longing eare deliver all Your sweete salutes; which is the only aire Of life and comfort Eugeny takes in. Your constant love and vertues, sweetest Lady, Are those preservatives, which from his heart Expel the killing fits of melancholy, And do in spite of fortune quicken him. Art. Oh would those comforts could arrive at him, That from my wishing thoughts are hourly sent. Theod. Such vertuous wishes seldome are in vain. Art. I should be farre more sad in the behalf Of my deare Eugeny, but that I knew He does enjoy your sweet society, Which he beyond all value does esteem. Theod His own is recompence enough for mine, And I the gainer in it; did not grief For his misfortune stain that perfect joy Which I could take in his deare company
Art. If I should speak, Sir, how he values you, I should too much oppresse your modesty. Theod. Our frindship fairest Lay, is more old, And he more true then that his heart so long Should be unknown to me. He not be long. Before I visit him, to let him know What hour shall make him happy in your sight. My longer stay, sweete Lady, might be more Observ'd, and pry'd into. Let me be bold To leave you now, but be your servant ever. Art. All happinesse attend you, worthy Sir, Exit Theodore. Would I my self might goe as well as send, And see that seeming solitary place, That place of woe. Sure it would be to me No desert wood while Eugeny were there, But a delightful palace. Here at home, The more that company comes in, the more I am alone methinkes; wanting that object On which my heart is fix'd, I cannot be Possest of any thing. Nothing can be My comfort, but a hope that these sad clouds Of our misfortunes will at last blow over. But mischief's like a cockatrices eyes, Sees first, and kils; or is seene first, and dies. Enter Euphues. Euph. How dost thou, Couz'? I wrot a letter for thee To Earthwormes sonne; has the yong ten i'th' hundred Been here? Art. I thank you, Cozen, the Gentleman Was with me, and but newly parted hence Euph. H' has got a title then by coming hither, But he may be a Gentleman; his wealth Will make it good. Art. His vertues make it good; Believe it Cozen, there's a wealthy minde Within that plain outside. Euph. How is this? Have your quick-eyes found out his worth already? Art. They must be blinde that cannot, when they know him. Well Cozen, you may laugh at me. Euph. By no meanes. I know your judgment's good. Art. As good as 'tis, It must content a woman. When you know him, You 'll finde a man that may deserve your friendship, And farre above all slighting. Euph. I am sorry I came not soone enough; but prethee, Cozen, What are the wayes have taken thee so soone? Art. What taking do you meane? you promis'd me You would not ask the cause I sent for him.
Though you shall know hereafter. But I hope. You do not thinke I am in love with him. Euph. I'll looke upon the man, and then resolve you. Arte. Well, do; perhaps you'll know him better then. He knowes you well. Euph. Me? has he told you how? Art. Did you nere meet one Theodore at Venice? Euph. Can this be he? Art. Yes, very well: although He be old Earthworms sonne, and make no shew At home. Euph. And have you found out so much worth In him already? Art. How do you esteeme him? We women well may erre. Euph. I smell a rat; And if my brain faile not, have found out all Your drifts, though nere so politickely carry'd Art. I know your brain Cozen is very good, But it may faile. Euph. It comes into my head What old Sir Agent Scrape told to his Lady, Aside. His kinsman Eugeny lurk'd hereabouts; He was her sweet-heart once, and may be still; I think she's constant; though she keep it close. This Theodore and he were fam'd for friendship. I have collected, Cozen, and have at you. Art. Let's hear it, pray. Euph. You shall; this Theodore I do confesse a most deserving man; And so perchance your lover Eugeny Has told you, Cozen! ha? do you begin To blush already? I am sure those two Were most entirely friends. And I am sorry To heare what I have heard to day, concerning Young Eugeny. Art. What, prethee Cozen? tell me. Euph. Now you are mov'd; but I may erre you know Art. Good Cozen tell me what. Euph. Nay, I believe I shall worse startle you; though you would make Such fooles as I beleeve he is in France. Yes, yes, it may be so; and then you know He's safe enough. Art. Oh Cozen, Ile confesse What you would have me, do but tell me this. Euph. Nay, now, I will not thank you; I have found it. And though you dealt in riddles so with me, Ile plainely tell you all; and teach how You may perchance prevent your lovers danger. Art. Oh I shall ever love you; Euph. Well, come in; Ile tell you all, and by what meanes I knew it. Finis Actus Tertii.
Actus Quartus. Earthworme, Iasper. Earth. OUt villain! how could any fire come there But by thy negligence? I do not use To keepe such flies, as should at all endanger My house, much lesse my barne. Ias. I know not Sir, But there I'm sure it was, and still continues, Though without danger now; for the poore people Ee this have quench'd it. Earth. There my wonder lyes. Why should the people come to quench my fire? Had it been in a city, where one house Might have endanger'd all, it justly then Might have engag'd the peoples utmost aide, And I nere bound to give them thanks at all. But my house stands alone, and could endanger No other building. Why should all the people Come running hither so to quench the fire? They love not me. Ias. Sure Sir, I cannot tell; Perhaps the people knew not what to do, And might be glad to see a sight. Earth. Me thought As I came by I saw them wondrous busy, Nay more, me thought I heard them pray for me, As if they lov'd me. Why should they do so? I nere deserv'd it at the people hands. Goe Iasper, tell me whether it be quench'd, And all secure; I long to heare the newes. Enter Theodore. Theo. The fire is quench'd, and little hurt is done. I come to bring you happy tidings Sir. Earth. That's well, my sonne. Theo. But Sir, if you had seene How the poore people labour'd to effect it, And like so many Salamanders rush'd Into the fire, scorching their cloaths and beards, You would have wonder'd justly, and have thought That each man toil'd to save his fathers house, Or his owne deare estate; but I conceive 'Twas nothing but an honest charity
That wrought it in them. Earth. Had a charity? Why should that charity be shew'd to me? Theod. If I mistake not strangely, he begins To apprehend it Earth. As I came along, I heard them pray for me; but those good prayers Can never pierce the skyes in my behalf, But will returne again, and ever lodge Within those honest breasts, that sent them forth. Theod. Surely it workes. Earth. Oh! all the world but I Are honest men. Theod. What is't that troubles you? Your goods are safe; there's nothing lost at all. You should rejoice methinkes. You might have sufferr'd A wondrous losse in your estate. Earth. Ah sonne! not the thought of what I might have lost That drawes these teares from me. Theod. Doe's he not weepe? Or do my flattering hopes deceive my sight? He weepes, and fully too; large showers of teares Bedew his aged cheekes. Oh happy sorrow That makes me weepe for joy! never did sonne So justly glory in a fathers teares. Sir, you are sad methinkes. Earth. No sadnesse, sonne, Can be enough to expiate the crimes That my accursed avarice has wrought. Where are the poore? Theod. Why, Sir, what would you do? Earth. Aske me not, Theodore; alas, I feare Thou art too much my sonne; my bad example Has done thee much more harme then all the large Encrease of treasure I shall leave behinde Can recompence. But leave those wreteched thoughts, And let me teach thee a new lesson now; But thou art learned Theodore, and soone Wilt finde the reasons of it. Theod. Do you please To speake it, Sir, and I will strive to frame My self to follow. Earth. Where are all the poore? Iasper, goe call them in. Now prethee learne, (For this late accident may truly teach A man what value he should set on wealth) Fire may consume my houses, theeves may steale My plate and jewels; all my merchandise Is at the mercy of the windes and seas; And nothing can be truly term'd mine own, But what I make mine own by using well. Those deedes of charity which we have done, Shall stay for ever with us; and that wealth Which we have so bestow'd, we onely keepe; The other is not ours. Theod. Sir, your have taught me
Not to give any thing ar all away. Earth. When I was blinde, my sonne, and did miscal My sordid vice of avarice true thrift. But now forget that lesson, I prethee do; That consening vice, although it seeme to keepe Our wealth, debars us from possessing it. And makes us more then poore. Theod. How farre beyond All hope, my happy project workes upon him! Enter Neighbours. Earth. Y'are welcome Neighbours, welcome heartily. I thank you all, and will hereafter study To recompence your undeserved love. My house shall stand more open to the poore, More hospitable, and my wealth more free To feed and cloath the naked hungry soules. I will redeem the ill that I have done, (If heaven be pleas'd to spare me life a while) With true unfained deedes of charity. 1 Neigh. We thank your worship. 2 Neigh. We know ful well Your worship has a good heart toward us. Earth. Alas, you do not know it, but have had Too sad a cause to know the contrary: Pray do not thank me till you truly finde How much my heart is chang'd from what it was; Till you by real and substantial deedes Shall see my peaitence, and be fully taught How to forget or pardon all the errours Of that my former miserable life. Iasper, go in with them; the way Into my house. Ias. I think I had need to shew um; No poore folkes heretofore have us'd this way. Earth. And Ile come to you, Neighbours, presently. 1 Neigh. Long may you live. 2 Neigh. All happinesse betide you. 3 Neigh. And a reward fourfold in th'other world. Earth. How dost thou like this musicke, Theodore? I meane the hearty prayers of the poore, Whose curses pierce more then two-edged swords. What comfort like to this, can riches give! What joy can be so great, as to be able To feede the hungry, cloath the naked man? Theod. Now, Sir, you think aright; for to bestow Is greater pleasure farre then to receive. Earth. No vice, so much as avariace, deprives Our life of sweetest comforts, and debarres So much the fair society of men.
I taught thee once faire otherwise; but now Study this last and better lesson, sonne Thod. With more delight then ere I did the former. You never yet knew scholar covetous. Earth. And now I think on't, Theodore, I have A neece, the daughter of my only sister, Her mother dy'd a widow two years since. How shee has left her orphan daughter there I do not know; if she have left her ill, Ile be a father to her; prethee, goe Enquire her out, and bring her to my house, How well soere the world may goe with her. Bountie's spice of vertue, whoso can, And won't, relieve the poore, he is no man. Theod. Where lives shee, Sir? Earth. 'Tis not a mile from hence, In the next village; thou nere saw'st her yet; But fame has spoke her for a vertuous maide. Yong Scudmore, while he liv'd, and was possest Of his estate, thought to have marry'd her; Whose death (they say) shee takes most heavily, And with a wondrous constant sorrow mournes. The. Sure 'tis the same faire maid. Earth. Her name's Matilda. Theod. The very same; I can enquire her out, And, if you please, will presently about it. Earth. Do, while I my Neighbours visit: he doth live Mighty, that hath the power and will to give. Theod. This is the same faire nightingal that tun'd Her sweet sad accents lately to the woods, And did so farre enthral my heart; but that Fond love is vanished. Like a kinsman now Ile comfort her, and love her vertuous soule. Oh what a blessed change this day has wrought In my old father's heart! you powers that gave Those thoughts, continue them: this day will I Still celebrate as my nativity. Exit. Lady Covet. Fruitful. La. Cov. But is that lawful to convey away All my estate before I marry him? Fruit. 'Tis more then lawful, Madam, I must tell you 'Tis necessary, and you Ladyship Is bound in conscience so to do, for else 'Twill be no longer yours, but all is his When he has marry'd your. You cannot then Dispose of any thing to pious uses;
You cannot shew your charity at all, But must be govern'd by Sir Argent Scrape; And can you tell how he'll dispose of it? La. Cov. 'Tis true, perchance he'll take my money all, And purchase for himself, to give away To his own name, and put me while I live To a poore stipend. Fruit. There you think aright. You can relieve no friends, you can bequeath Nothing at all, if he survive you, Madam, As 'tis his hope he shall. La. Cov. That hope may faile him. I am not yet so weak, but I may hop Over his grave. Fruit. That is not in our knowledge. But if you do survive him, as I hope, Madam, you will; there is no law at all Can barre you of your thirds in all his land, And you besides are Mistris of your own. And all the charitable deedes which you After your death shall do, as building schooles Or hospitals, shall goe in your own name; Which otherwise Sir Argent Scrape would have, And with your Riches build himselfe a fame. La. Cov. I grant 'tis true: but will it not seeme strange That I should serve him so? Fruit. Strange, Madam? no; Nothing is now more usual; all your widowes Of Aldermen, that marry Lords, of late, Make over their estates, and by that meanes Retaine a power to curbe their lordly husbands. When they to raise the ruines of their houses Do marry so, instead of purchasing What was expected, they do more engage Their land in thirds for them. La. Cov. Well, I must trust The feoffees then; but they are honest men. Fru. You need not fear them, they are zealous men, Honest in all their dealings, and well known In London, Madam, Will you seale it now? Enter Trusty. La. Cov. Yes, have you it? Fruit. 'Tis here: here's Mr. Trusty too Your steward, Madam: he and I shall be Enow for witnesses. La. Cov. 'Tis true, give me Deed, seale, Ink. Seales and dilvers. The seale. So now dispose of it as I Entended, My Fruitful. Fruit. I will, Madam. La. Cov. Trusty, come you along with me. Exeunt. Fruit. Now all our ends are wrought; this is the thing Ma∣net Fruitful. Which I so long have labour'd to effect.
Old covetous Lady, I will purge your minde Of all this Wealth, that lay so heavy there, And by evacuation make a cure Of that your golden Dropsy, whose strange thirst Could ne'er be satisfy'd with taking in. You once had Wealth. But soft, let me consider; If she should marry old Sir Argent Srape, We could not keep it; for his money then Would make a Suit against us, and perchance Recover hers again. Which to prevent, I will go spoil the marriage presently. The fight of this will soon forbid the Banes, And stop his love. Then she wants means to sue us. Be sure to keep thine Adversary poor, If thou would'st thrive in Suits. The way to scape Revenge for one wrong, is to do another: The second injury secures the former. I'll presently to old Sir Argent Scrape, And tell him this; he's meditating now What strange additions to his large Revenue Are coming at one happy clap, what heaps Of Wealth to morrow he shall be possest of. What purchases to make, how to dispose Of her and hers. But soft, the Cards must turn. The man must be deceiv'd, and she much more. To cozen the deceitful is no fraud. Exit. Enter Sir Argunet Scrape. Scra. Methinks a youthful vigour doth possess My late stiffe limbs, and like a Snake, I feel A second Spring succeed my age of Winter. Oh Gold! how cordial, how restorative Art thou? What though thou canst not give me legs, Nor active hands? Alas, I need them not; Possest of thee, I can command the Legs, The Hands, the Tongues, the Brains of other men To move for me. What need he Hands or Brains That may command the Lawyers subtilty, The Souldiers valour, the best Poets wit, Or any Writers skill? Oh Gold! to thee The Sciences are servants, the best Traders Are but thy slaves, indeed thy creatures rather; For thee they were invented, and by thee Are still maintain'd. 'Tis thou alone that art The nevers of War, the sement of the State, And guide of humane Actions. 'Tis for thee
Old Argent lives. Oh what a golden shower Will rain on me to morrow! Let me see, Her personal Estate alone will buy Upon good rates a thousand pound a yeer. Where must that lie? Not in our Country here, Not all together; no, then my Revenue Will have too great a notice taken of it; I shall be rais'd in Subsidies, and sess'd More to the poor: No, no, that must not be. I'll purchase all in parcels, far from home, And closely as I can; a piece in Cornwal, In Hampshire some, some in Northumberland. I'll have my Factors forth in all those parts, To know what prodigals there be abroad, What penyworths may be had: so it shall be. Enter Fruitful. Ha, Mr. Fruitful! welcom, how go the squares? What do you think of me to make a Bridegroom? Do I look young enough? Fruit. Sir, I am come To tell you news, such news as will perhaps A little trouble you; but if your Worship Should not have known it, 'twould have vex'd you more. Scra. Vex'd me? what's that can vex me now? speak man. Fruit. I thought that I was bound in conscience Sir To tell it you; 'tis conscience, and the love I bear to Truth, makes me reveal it now. Scra. What is the business? Fruit. Do not suppose That I am treacherous to my Lady Covet To whom I do belong, in uttering this. In such a case I serve not her but Truth, And hate dishonest dealing. Scra. Come to'th' purpose. Fruit. Then thus it is; My Lady Covet, Sir, Meerly to cozen you, has past away Her whole Estate; you shall not get a peny By marrying her. Scra. How man? is't possible? Fruit. 'Tis very certain Sir, I for a need Could shew you the Conveyance, for my hand Is as a Witness there, so is her Stewards. Scra. Oh horrible deceit! Fruit. Ask her her self; If she deny it, I can justifie it; So can her Steward too. Scra. You make me mad. Fruit. I keep you from being so, by a mature Prevention of your cozening. Scra. O what hopes Am I fall'n from? who would believe these false Deceitful creatures? Fruit. Sir, I could but wonder That she would cheat so honest a Gentleman,
That came a Suiter to her for pure love. Scra. Love? mischief of love. Fruit. Alas, I know It was not her Estate that you sought after, Your love was honester; and then that after, Should cozen you? Scra. She shall not cozen me. I'll have my Horse-Litter made ready straight, And leave her house. Fruit. But when you see her Sir, It may be your affection will return. If you should leave her onely upon this, The world would think that you were covetous; And covetousness is such a sin you know. Scra. You do not mock me, do you? Fruit. Who, I Sir? I know your Worship do's abhor the sin Of covetousness; But I confess indeed 'Twould vexe a man to have been cozoned so. Sir Arg. Havel liv'd all this while to be o' reach'd And cheated by a woman? I'll fotsake her Immediately. Fruit. Sir, 'tis a happy thing When men can love with such discretion, As to forsake, when they shall see just cause. Some are so fond in their affections, That though provok'd by all the injuries That can be off'red, they can never leave The Mistriss of their Hearts. Sir Arg. I warrant her For any such affection in old Argent. Fruit. I do believe it Sir, you are too wise. Enter Lady Covet. Lad. Cov. How do you Sir? Arg. E'ene as I may. You do not mean I shall be e're the better For you. Lad. Cov. How's this? I do not understand What you should mean Arg. You may, if you consider: But if you do not, I'll explain it to you. Have I deserv'd such dealing at your hands? Cov. As what? Arg. As that you should speak one thing to me, And mean another; But I'll make it plainer; You seem'd to love me, and for love it seems, Thinking to marry me, have made away All you Estate. Cov. How's this? Arg. Nay 'tis too true? Or else your Chaplain do's you wrong. Cov. Oh Villain! Arg. Nay Villain him no Villains; is it so Or not? Fruit. If she deny it to you Sir, I can produce her hand, and have the Deed. Cov. On monstrous villainy! Oh impudence! Can'st thou abuse me thus, that first of all Did'st counsel me to do it? Fruit. I confess
I gave you way, and for the time did wink At your false dealing; but at last my conscience Would not permit me to conceal it longer. I have discharg'd it now, and told the truth. Arg. 'Twas well none of you, Sir; well, I'll away. Madam, seek out some other mn to chat, For me you shall not. Cov. Stay Sir, my Estate Shall still be good; the Feoffees will be honest. Fruit. I, that they will, to keep what is their own. Cov. Oh monstrous wickedness! was e're like Heard of before? Fruit. I know the Feoffee mindes. Enter Freeman, Euphues, Barnet, Dotterel, Whimsey. Free How fare you Madam? Wherefore look you sadly At such a joyful time? Cov. Oh Mr. Freeman I am undone, and ruin'd. Fruit. No, good Madam, We'll see you shall not want. Free. How's this? Fruit. You shall have a fair competence allow'd you. Euph. What riddle have we here? Cov. Our thou ungratious Dissembling villain. Fruit. An indifferent means Will keep your Ladyship; for you are past Those vanities which younger Ladies use; You need no gaudy clothes, no change of Fashions, No Paintings nor Perfumes. Euph. I would fain know The bottom of this. La. Whi Servant, can you discover What this should mean? Dott No Mistriss, I protest, With all the wit I have Fruit. And for you House, You shall have leave to stay here, till we have Provided for you. Cov. Oh my heart will break! Euph. Here is the finest turn that e're I saw Arg. I will resolve you Gentlemen; This Lady To cozen me in marriage, had it seems Past her Estate away; into what hands 'Tis fall'n I know not, nor I care not, I. Fruit. 'Tis fall'n into the hands of wise men, Sir, That know how to make use of what is theirs. Cov This hypocrite perswaded me to do't, And then discover'd all, as if one purpose He sought my ruine. Fruit. No not I, good Madam; 'Twas for your soules health; I have done you good, And eas'd you of a burden, and a great one So much Estate would have been still a cause Of cares unto you; and those cares have hinder'd Your quiet passage to a better life.
Euph. Excellent divel! how I love him now. Never did knavery play a juster part. Fru. And why should you at such an age as this Dreame of marriage, a thing so farre Unfit, nay most unnatural, and prophane, To stain that holy ordinance, and make it But a meere bargain? for two clods of earth Might have been join'd as well in matrimony. 'Tis for your soules health, Madam, I do this. Euph. How much was I mistaken in this Chaplaine? I see h' has braines. Free. Though 't be dishonesty In him, yet justly was it plac'd on her! And I could even applaud it. Lad. Whim. I protest, I love this Chaplain. Dot. So do I, sweet Mistris, Or I am an errant foole. Cov. But yet I hope, The feoffees may prove honest; Ile try them. Fru. Ile goe and bring them to your Ladyship. Exit Fruitful. Arg. Ile stay no longer; make my Litter ready. Lady farewel; and to you all. Free. Nay, Sir, Then let me interpose; let me entreat you By all the rites of neighbourhood, Sir Argent, Make not so suddain a departure now. What though the businesse have gone so crosse? You may part fairly yet. Stay till to morrow: Let not the country take too great a notice Of these proceedings and strange breach; 't will be Nothing but a dishonour to you both. Pray Sir, consent; give me your hand, Sir Argent. Arg. At your entreaty, Sir, Ile stay till morning. Free. Before that time you may consider better. Exeunt. Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quintus. Matilda, Theodore. Mat. I'Ll not refuse my Uncles courtesie, But go and see his House; I should before Have done that duty to him, but I thought My visits were not welcom, since he liv'd So close and privately. Theod. Sweet Coz', you'll finde A happy alteration in my Father, And that there dwel a kinde and honest soul Within his brest; though wretched Avarice The usual fault of age, have heretofore Too much kept back the good expressions Of such like thoughts, he now will make a mends To all the world, and has begun already With his poor Neighbours. Mat. Cozen, I shall be Too bad a Guest at this sad time, and bring Nothing but sorrow to my Uncles house. Theod. You'll be your selfe a welcom Guest to him; And I shall think our roof exceeding happy If it may mitigate that killing grief Which your so solitary life too much Has nourish'd in you Cozen, feed it not; 'Tis a disease that will in time consume you. I have already giv'n the best advice That my poor knowledge will afford, to ease Your troubled thoughts If time which heaven allows To cure all grief, should not have power to do it; If death of Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Should be lamented still, the world would wear Nothing but black. Sorrow alone would reign In every Family that lives, and bring Upon poor Mortals a perpetual night. You must Forget it, Cozen. Mat Never can I Forget my love to him. Theod. Nor do I strive To teach you to forget that love you bear To his dear memory, but that grief which lies Wrapt in amongst it, and turns all to Poyson; Making it mortal to that soul that tastes it.
'Tis that, sweet Cozen, which I hope that time May by degrees extinguish. Will you please To walk along? my Father long ere this Expects us I am sure, and longs to see you. Exeunt. Eugeny in the Officers Hands. Eug. I blame you not at all, that by the Law And vertue of your places, are requir'd To apprehend me. Offi. We are sorry, Sir, We were inforc'd to see you. Eug. But I wonder What curious eye it was that search'd so far Into my secret walks, that did discover This dark abode of mine, and envy'd me My solitary sorrow; such a life As I enjoy'd, a man might well afford To his most great and mortal Enemy. Offi 'Twas a plain fellow, Sir, tha brought us hither, In the Kings name, and left us when we had you. But Sir, we wish you all the good we may Eug. I thank you Friends; I cannot tell at all Whom to suspect, nor will I further vex My thoughts in search of such a needless thing. I call to minde what once my Theodore Told me by way of a surmise, but sure It cannot be so foul; shall I entreat you To carry me to old Sir Argent Scrape My Kisman? I would onely speak with him Before I go to prison; And let one, If you can spare a man, go run for me To Mr. Earthworm's house, and bid his son Meet me with old Sir Argent; he lies now At my Lady Covets house: I have about me What will reward your pains, and highly too. Offi. It shall be done as would have it, Sir, Eug. I dare not send to fair Artemia: The sight of her, and of so dear a sorrow As she would shew, would but afflict me more. Perchance I may come safely off; till then I would conceal this accident from her. But Fame is swiftest still when she goes laden With news of mischief. She too soon will hear, And in her sorrow I shall doubly suffer. Thus are we Fortunes pastimes, one day live Advanc'd to Heaven by the peoples breath, 'The next hurl'd down into th' Abyss of death.
Enter Euphues, Artemia. Euph. But are you sure 'tis hereabouts he lives? Ha! who is that? 'tis he, and in the hands Of Officers; Cozen, the mischief's done Before we come. Art. O my dear Eugeny! Eug. Artemia too? Ay me! she swoons: help, help! Look up, my Love; there is no fear at all For me; no danger, all is safe, and full Of hope and comfort. Euph. She begins to come Unto her self again. Eug. But pray Sir, tell, How came you hither, Noble Euphues? Euph. I never knew the place; but now by her Instructions found it out: I came to bear Her company; and her intent of comming Was to inform you of a danger neer, Of such a monstrous mischief, as perchance You scarce can credit; old Sir Argent Scrape By me, and by another Gentleman, Was overheard to say, hat he had Scouts, And had laid certain plots to apprehend His Kinsman Eugeny just before th' Assizes, Besides what further means he did intend Closely to work your death, he then declar'd To the old covetous Lady, whom he came A Suiter to. Eug. Prophetick Theodore, How right thou wert! Euph. This thing when I had heard, I told it her; and we with speed made hither, But ere we came, the mischief was fulfil'd. Eug. I thank you, Sir, for this discovery: How ere I speed, pray pardon me, if I Shall by the Hand of Justice, die your Debtor. How soon from Vertue, and an honoured Spirit, Man may receive what he can never merit! Be not thou cruel, may Artemia; Do not torment me with thy grief, and make Me die before my time; let hope a while Suspend thy sorrow; if the worst should fall, Thy sorrow would but more enfeeble me, And make me suffer faintly for thy sake. Art. If worst should fall, my Love (which Heaven foresend) How could I chuse but suffer? Euph. I will hope Your safety yet may well be wrought, and knowing Sir Argent's minde, you know what wayes to trust. Art. Good Cozen help us with thy counsel now, If thou do'st love my life. Euph. Fear it not Coz';
If I may aide you, Sir, in any thing, You shall command it. Eug. Sir, I cannot thank you So much as it deserves; this timely favour, If not in life, yet shall at least in death Endeare me to you. Art. Do not name that word, My dearest love. Euph. You must be speedy, Sir, In all your courses now. Eug. Then let me begge That you would meet me at my Lady Covets. Ile ring Sir Argent Scrape so loud a peale, As shall perchance awake his bedder'd soule, Aud rowze it, though so deepely sunke in drosse, Drown'd and orewhelm'd with mucke. Goe you together, And leave me to my way. Art. Farewel deare love. Exeunt. Enter Barnet. Lady Whimsey. Bar. Madam, 'tis sure; I know your Ladyship Is so possest. La. Whim I think he loves me well, And will not now start backe from marrying me. Bar. That is the happy hour he only longs for. But if so strange a thing should come to passe, (Which yet I think impossible) that this Your marriage should break off; I will give backe Into your hand this bond which I receiv'd; And 'tis worth nothing, Madam, as you know By the condition. La. Whim True, I fear it not; But I durst you if 'twere otherwise. Bar. He waits the hour when you will please to ty The happy knot with him. La. Whim. He shall no longer Waite for it now; Ile goe confirme him. Bar. But think not, Gentle-Madam, that I sharke, O cheat him in it; I have to a sum Greater then this from him as good a title As right can give; though my unhappy fortunes Made me forbeare the tryal of my title Whiles his old crafty father was alive; He held from me a farme of greater value, As all the Neighbours know; I then forbore it, And will do still, since by an easyer way I may have satisfaction. But here comes Enter Trusty. Lady Covet. One that has lost a marriage. La Cov. Tell me, Trusty, What say the feoffees? Tru. They'll say nothing, Madam, Make me no answer, but that they know how To manage their own fortunes. La. Cov. All the world Conspires against me; I am quite undone. Tru. I promise you truly, Madam, I believe They meane little better then plain knavery.
La. Cov. I, 'tis too true. La. Whim. How does your Ladyship? I was in hope to day we should have seen you A joyful Bride. Cov. Ah Madam, 'twas my folly To dream of such a thing; 'tis that has brought me To all this sorrow, and undone me quite. Whim. I hope not so. But, Madam, I confesse, The marriage could have done you little good; One of your years, and then a man so old. Cov. Oh do not mention it; I am justly punish'd. Whim. Pardon me, Madam, I must make so bold As leave you for a while. Come Mr. Barnet, Shall we goe see the party? I wait you, Madam. Exeunt. Cov. My sorrow will not leave me. But, alas! 'Tis a deserved punishment I suffer For my unjust oppressions; I detain'd Scudmore's estate injuriously, and had No conscience to restore what was not mine: And now all's tane away; what then I would nor, I cannot now performe, though I desire. Enter Freeman. Artemia. Free. Feare not, Artemia, there shall no meanes Be left untry'd to save the Gentleman. I did approve thy choice, and still will do, If fortune will consent. My Lady Covet, Are you sad still? Cov. Never had any woman A greater cause of sorrow, Mr. Freeman, For I protest it does not trouble me So much, that by this cheat I lose the power Of my estate, as that I lose all meanes Of charity, or restitution, To any person whom I wrong'd before. Free. Why then you make a true and perfect use Of such a crosse, and may hereafter take True comfort from it. Cov. If my conscience Were satisfi'd, I could forsake the rest. Enter Euphues. Euph. My Cozen I perceive has made more hast Hither then I; but I have seen a pageant That in the saddest time would make one laugh. Free. What, prethee? Euph. I have seen you neighbour Earth∣worm In such a mood as you would wonder at, And all that ever knew him heretofore. He is inveighing 'gainst Sir Argent Scrape For being so basely covetous, as thus
For hope of lucre to betray his kinsman; A thing that he himself would scorne as much, He does protest, as can be. Free. I have known It otherwise; what may not come to passe When Earthworm is a foe to avarice? Euph. But he they say has made it good in deedes. Free. He has been so exceeding bountiful Now to our poore, and vowes to be so still, That we may well beleeve he is quite chang'd, And strives to make amends for what is past. He has they say a brave and vertuous sonne Lately come home, that has been cause of all. Euph. It well may be; I know yong Theodore; Uncle, he is of strange abilities, And to convert his father was an act Worthy of him. Enter servant, and Sir Argent in his chaire. Serv. Madam, Sir Argent Scrape would take his leave Of you. Cov. When it please him. Arg. Get me my litter Ready presently, I will be gone, Madam, I now am come to give you loving thanks For my good cheare, and so bid you farewel: But let me tell you this before we part, Things might have been carryed another way For your own good; but you may thank your self For what has happen'd now. Cov. If you suppose It had been for my good to marry you, You are deceiv'd, for that in my esteem (Though once I was so foolish to give way To that ridiculous motion) had brought with it As great a misery as that which now Is fall'n upon me Arg. How, as great a misery As to be begger'd? Cov. Yes Sir, Ile assure you I am of that opinion, and still shall be: But know, Sir Argent, though I now want power To give you that which you still gap'd for, wealth, I can be charitable, and bestow Somewhat upon you that is better farre. Arg. Better then wealth? what's that? Cov. Honest counsel: Let my calamitie admonish you To make a better use of your large wealth, While you may call it yours: things may be chang'd: For know, that hand that has afflicted me, Can fin out you: you do not stand above it. Arg. I hope I shall know how to keepe mine own.
Euph. I do begin to pity the poore Lady. Free. This has wrought goodness in her. Who are these? Enter Earthworm and Theodore. My neighbour Earthworm? Lord! how he is chang'd. Earth. 'Twas basely done, and like a covetous wretch, Ile tell him to his face: what care I for him? I have a purse, as well as he. Euph. How's this? Earth. Betray a kinsmans life to purchase wealth? Oh detestable! Euph. Oh miraculous change! Do you not heare him Uncle? Earth. Mr. Freeman, Happily met. Free. Sir I am glad to see you. Earth. I have been long your neighbour Sir, but liv'd In such a fashion as I must indeavour To make a mends hereafter for, and strive To recempence with better neighbourhood. Free. It joyes me much to see this change in you. Earth. Pardon my boldness, Madam, that I make This intrusion. Cov. Y'are welcome, Mr. Earthworm. Euph. Let me be bold then, noble Theodore, To claime our old acquaintance. Theod. I shall think it My honour, worthy Sir, to hold that name. Earth. Is that Sir Argent Scrape in the chair yonder? Free. Yes, Sir. Earth. Oh fy upon him: but soft, Eugeny brought in. He will be told on't now. Arg. Ha! Eugeny, Why have they brought him hither? Eug. I am come: Me thinks these looks of mine, inhumane wretch, Though I were silent, should have power to pierce That treacherous breast, and wound thy conscience Though it be hard, and senseless, as the idol Which thou ador'st, thy gold. Arg. Is this to me, Kinsman, you speak? Eug. Kinsman? do not wrong That honest name, with thy unhallowed lips. To finde a name for thee, and thy soule guilt, Has so farre pos'd me, as I cannot make Choice of a language fit, to tell thee of it: Treacherous bloody man, that hast betray'd And sold my life to thy base avarice. Arg. Who, I betray you? Eug. Yes, can you deny it? Cov. Ile witness it against him, if he do. 'Twas his intent I know. Euph. And so do I, I overheard his counsels. Earth. Out upon him, Unworthy man. Euph. I could e'ene laugh to heare Old Earthworm childe. Eug. But think upon the deed, Think on your own decrepid age, and know, That day by natures possibilitie Cannot be farre from hence, when you must leave Those wealthy hoords that you so basely lov'd,
And crry nothing with thee, but the guilt Of impious getting; then if you would glve To pious uses what you cannot keep, Think what a wretched Charity it is; And know, this Act shall leave a greater stain On your detested memory, then all Those seeming deeds of Charity can have A power to wash away; when men shall say, In the next age, This goodly Hospital, This house of Alms, thi School, though seeming fair, Was the foul issue of a cursed murther, And took foundation in a Kinsmans Blood. The priviledge that rich men have in evil, Is, that they go unpunish'd to the Devil. Arg Oh! I could wish the deed undone again: Ah me! What means are left to help it now? Free. Sure the old man begins to melt indeed. Eug. Now let me turn to you, my truer Friends, Enter Fruitful & Trusty. And take my last farewell. Euph. My noble Chaplain, What pranks comes he to play now? I had thought His business had been done. Fruit. Health to you Madam. Cov How can you wish me health, that have so labour'd To ruine me in all things? Fruit. No, good Madam, 'Twas not your ruine, but your good I sought. Nor was it to deprive you of your means, But onely rectifie your conscience. Free. How's this? Euph. Another fetch; this may be worth The hearing. Fruit. Madam, you convey'd away To three good Honest men, your whole Estate. Cov. The have not prov'd so honest; I had thought I might have trusted them. Fruit. Then give me hearing: They by the vertue of that Deed possest, Have back again convey'd it all to you. Cov. Ha? Fruit. Madam, 'twas done before good Witnesses, Of which your Steward here, was one. Trust. Most true. Fruit. And all the other are well known to you; Here is the Deed. Free. Let me peruse it Madam. Cov. Good Mr Freeman do. Euph. What plot is this? Freeman reads it to himself Fruit. One Mannor onely they except from hence, Which they suppoe you did unjustly hold From the crue Heir; his name was Scudmore, Madam, Cov. I do confess I did unjustly hold it, And since have grieved much, that while I might, I made not restitution. Fruit. He was poor, And by the Law could not recover it, Therefore this means was taken; by this Deed
They have convey'd it hither, where it ought Of right to be: are you content with this? And all the rest of your Estate is yours. Cov. With all my heart. Free. Madam, the Deed is good. Cov. For that Estate which justly is pass'd over To Scudmores Heir, I am so well content, As that, before these Gentlemen, I promise To pay him back all the Arrearages Of whatsoever profits I have made. Fruit. I thank your Ladyship; Now know your Chaplain That wanted Orders, Cov. Mr. Scudmore living! discovers himself. Euph. My Friend, how could'st thou keep conceal'd so long From me? Scud. Excuse it, noble Euphues. Arte. Oh happiness! beyond what could be hop'd! My Eugeny is safe, and all his griefs At quiet now. Eug. Is this a vision, A meer fantastick shew? or do I see Scudmore himself alive? then let me beg Pardon from him. Scud. Long ago 'twas granted; Thy love I now shall seek: but though a while For these my ends I have conceal'd my self, I ever meant to secure thee from danger. Eug. What strange unlook'd for happiness this day Has brought forth with it! Scud. To tell you by what means I was most strangely cur'd, and found a way How to conceal my life, will be too long Now to discourse of here, I will anon Relare at large; but one thing much has griev'd me, That my too long concealment has been cause Of so much sorrow to my constant Love, The fair Matilda. Sir, she is your Neece, Let me intreat my pardon, next to her, From you. Earthw. You have it: Go, good Theodore, And bring her hither, but prepare her first: Too sudden apprehension of a joy Is sometimes fatal. Theod. I'll about it gladly. Exit. Euph. Dear Cozen Eugeny, if I yet may be Thought worthy of that name, pardon my crime, And my whole life, how short soere it be, Shall testifie my love to be unfained. Eug. I do forgive you freely Now to you Grave Sir, in whose rich bounty it must lie, To make me happy, in conferring on me So bright a Jewel as Artemia, 'Tis your consent I beg. Free. You have it freely; Her heart I know, she gave you long ago, And here I give her hand. Eug. A richer gift
Then any Monarch of the world can give. Blest happyness! gently my joyes distil, I est you do break the vessel you should fill. Enter Barnet, Dotterel, Whimsey. Euph. Here comes another couple to make up The dayes festivitie, Joy to you, Madam. Whim. Thanks noble Euphues. Dot. We have ty'd the knot That cannot be undone: this Gentleman Is witness of it. Bar. Yes, I saw it finisht. Whim. Mrs. Artemia, as I suppose, I may pronounce as much to you. Art. You may As much as I shall wish your Ladyship. Enter Theodore and Matilda. Scud. Here comes the dearest object of my soule, In whom too much I see my cruelty, And chide my self; Oh pardon me, deare Love, That I too long a time have tyranniz'd Over thy constant sorrow. Mat. Dearest Scudmore, But that my worthy Cozen has prepar'd My heart for this, I should not have believ'd My flattering eyes. Scud. To know brave Theodore, Next to enjoying thee, was my ambition; Which now affinity hath blest me with. Eug. His friendship, worthy Scudmore, is a treasure. Theod. I shall endeavour to deserve your loves. Earth. Come, leave your complements, at all hands now, And hear an old man speak; I must entreat This favour from all this noble company, Especially from you good Mr. Freeman, Although this be your Daughters wedding day, That you would all be pleas'd to be my Guests, And keep with me your marriage-festivals. Grant my request. Free. 'Tis granted, Sir, from me. Eug. And so I think from all the company. Earth. Then let's be merry, Earthworme's jovial now, And that's as much as he desires from you. FINIS. An advertisement of Books worth buying to be sold by S. Speed at the Printing-Pressin Paul's Church-Yard. MR. Caryl his Exposition with practical observations, on the fifteenth, sixteenth
seventeeth Chapters of the Book of Iob. In Qarto. The Valley of Vision, being twenty one Sermons, delivered by that Learned and Reve∣rend Divine, Richard Holsworth, Doctor in Di∣vinity. In Quarto. Mr. Greenhil his Exposition on the first nine∣teen Chapters of the Prophet Ezekiel, with use∣ful observations thereupon. In Quarto. The VVorks of Mr. Nicholas Luckyer, M. A digested into one Volume. In Quarto. Gospel Liberty, by Mr. Walter Cradock. In Quarto. Paracelsus of Metals and Minerals. In Octav. The Life of Guzman the Rogue, a piece of most are contexture, in Octa. Mr. Iohn Simpson O justification. In 8. Mr. Ainsworths Communion of saints. In 8. —Arrow against Idolatrie. In 8. Dr. Sadlers Enchiridion of the art of Phy∣sick. In 8. The first Exhortation of H. N. to his chil∣dren, and to the family of love. Likewise H. N. on the Beatitudes, and the seaven deadly sins. In 8. Mrs. Sarah Wights wonderful and comfortable letter to a friend. In 8. A Patterne of Catechistical Doctrine, by the reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, Lord Bishop of Winchester. In 12. The New Testament in Welch. In 12. Mr. Samuel Richardsons Divine consola∣tions. In 12.
Several Romanes, Poems and Playes. With variety of Bookes Astrological. Astronomical. Mathematical. Likewise, There will be suddenly extant an excellent work, entituled Astrological institutions, written in Latine by Guido Bonatus, and transla∣ted into English by a skilful Student. In 8. FINIS.
