P3165B R221802 99833059 37534
Praemonitio Kanciae commitatui; OR, A VVARNING-PIECE TO KENT VVherein are sundry motives to per∣swade the well-affected of that COUNTIE, to hasten their Association with Sussex, Surrey, and Hampshiere. Lento gradu ad vindictam sui Divina procellit ira tarditatemque supplicij grauitate compensat, Val. Max. Printed in the Moneth after the great Conjunction, 1643.
❧ A Warning piece to KENT. A Well wisher to the languishing Island, with griefe observing the vast Calamities predomi∣nant in most of the Counties thereof, occasioned by an in∣testine Warre, and presaging the danger that KENT will undoubtedly fall into, unlesse God bee the more mercifull, and the speedier care be taken, for its Association with the neighbouring Counties; doth tender these en∣suing lines, to the consideration of the well-affected Inhabitants, who have a precious regard to their Religion, Liberties, and Lives;
never neerer invasion and abolition then now. It is doubted by divers, that the Parliament is not made sensible of the hazourdous condi∣tion that Countie is in, nor what extremities the whole Land may be exposed unto, in case that yet unconquered Countie, should be pos∣sessed by a Malignant crew, and therefore the Author, out of his affection to the republique in generall, and to KENT in particular, hath published the following Quaeries, whereby the impartiall Reader may collect, what cause there may be for a speedie Association. 1. Is the Countie large, and stored with Graine, and other rich Commodities? Quaere, if it be not the fitter receptable for the devouring Cavaliers, who are at a stand, or rather sitting in councell, to thinke where they may disperse themselves, to worke most mischiefe. 2. Is the Countie rich, as who doubts the contrary? Quaere, how free it hath been to
give or lend, either to the Parliament, or the necessities of poore Ireland, the animadver∣sion whereof, may sufficiently perswade any man, how that Countie stands affec∣ted. 3. Is the Countie populous? Quaere, how in∣considerable the number of good men, are to the Malignants. 4. Is the Countie in part bounded with the Ocian? Quaere, if it be not the more ly∣able to a forraigne enemy. 5. Are most of the Kings ships in a River within that Countie? Quaere, what great cause there may bee, for the safegaurding them, being the wals of the Kingdome. 6. Is not the principall Magazine for those ships at Chatham-dock? Quaere, if the Garri∣son under the Command of Captaine Chap∣man there, bee a considerable strength, to oppose the Sonnes of violence, and to
preserve the Stores, if any attempt should be made. 7. Are the Bridges at Aylesford, and Ro∣chester very usefull for the stopping and exa∣mining of Passengers (the common Roads for the French and other Nations)? Quaere, Whether they have sufficient guards, and such as may be trusted. 8. Hath his sacred Majestie through the advice of those about him, issued Procla∣mations forbidding that, and the Neigh∣bouring Connties upon severe penalties, neither to associate, nor contribute, to the late weekly sesse made by our wise Councel in Parliament? Quaere, if the cause may not bee so much the greater, to spurr us on to an Association. 9 Are the Magistrates within that Coun∣tie to be confided in? Quaere, what parties they adhere unto for it is an old saying and true, par cum paribus, birds of a feather will
fly together, learne their company you shall have their inclinations. 10. Are the Clergie zealous for the Parlia∣ment? Quaere, how forward they bee to read their Declarations, how active they have been to stirre up people by their prea∣ching, to give or lend to the Common good, nay enquire further, if they do not alow of discourses against the great Coun∣cell of our Land, by not reproving those that belch out their Malignities, I dare say no more (though I might bee copious in this particular) lest I should make the black gaurd rise in the head, and under that pre∣tence to raise a Partie before their time. 11. Is the Countie forward, to furnish themselves with a zealous Ministry? Quaer. Who complains of their disordred Teach∣ers, the hollow-heartednesse of the Coun∣ty appeares in nothing more, I pray GOD this sinne may not be laid to their Charge, who are silent in that particular. 12. Doth the Countie abound with Ta∣verns,
and Victualling-houses? Quaere, if the multitudes of those that frequent them be not great, and for the most part ill-affe∣cted, excepting the Cathedrall and Cathe∣dralized-Clergie within the two Cities, and the places adjacent. 13. Doth the County exceed in Gentry? Quaere, the East and some other parts, how many have shewed themselves active, ei∣ther in their words or deeds for the Patlia∣ment, good Sir Michael Livesey must troope it a lone, others are ashamed to appeare in Gods cause. Beloved in Kent, I have given you thirteene Quaeries to the dozen, if you bee not willing to sacrifice your Lives for the Parliaments good, yet out of your severall relations to Piety, your Families, Estates, and priveledges, consider whe∣ther the premisses may not be necessary motives for hastening you to an Association, which I heare you are backward in, and if after so plain a praemonition you shall with-hold your mutuall furtherance to that worke, when misery fals upon you, say you had a Warning-piece from a Friend. Qui ante non cavet, post dolebit.
