P3822 12349064 59928
THE PROTESTANT ANTIDOTE Or an Answer to a PAMPHLET, Entituled, A seasonable Address to the Right Honourable the LORD MAYOR, &c. Touching the present Election of Sheriffs. In a friendly Epistle to that worshipful Author, from his humble Servant Phil. Anglus Trueman. Mounsieur Philo-patris Miso-patriae! HAving a months mind to give you a Bottle of Wine and wanting directions how to send to you by the peny-Post, I am forc'd to give you the Advertisement this way. The reason why I am so ambi∣tious of your acquaintance is, because I fancy Thee to be a divelish patey fellow, a person of Intrigue, and Politicks; a man of Brains and Forehead, a deep one I'le warrant thee. Thou sayst indeed thou are a Citizen, but never trust me if I can tell how to believe thee; a Citizen? man! why thou Writest like any Doctor, Mr. Coleman (if he were alive, again) could not do it more cleverly; didst thou never Read his intend∣ed Declaration? There were Sugar plum words in abundance, and very kind expressions for the Church of England too, and yet you know (better perhaps than I) the design was to root out, that pestilent Heresie that has so long domineer'd over the Northern World. Therefore I am still apt to conceit thee, some Gentlemans By-blow at least, because thou art so complaisant and so much in the fashion, for alas! Be-lettering of men is all the mode of late: A Letter to Dr. Titus Oates, A Letter to the Earl of Shaftsbury, A Letter to the Duke of Monmouth, and now a Letter to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Commoners of London. And all these and an hundred more scandalous Pamphlets, smell strong of the same Ink, and wherein (if I mistake not) there is not a little Gall and Roman Vitriol; One may give a shrewd guess at the work by the Forge from whence it comes: Whoever you are, that are the father of the Bantling (which it appears you are asham'd at present to own) the late Intelligencer about Fetter lane is said to be the Man-midwife;—But to the matter.— You say distempers much prevail in our Corporation, and that 'tis high time to consider of an expedient to cure them. What these distempers are, or who occasions them I shall not inquire, but only observe that you seem to have a strong opinion of your own Quackship, who thus scatter your Bills, and obtrude your Catholicons, which yet perhaps like the universal Medicines of other Empericks will prove in the operation worse than the disease it self, As on the other side you shew but little manners and respect to his Lordship and that honorable body to which you boldly Address, whilst you suggest that they are either so negligent as never to consider of, or so weak, as not to know how to apply apt Remedies without your prescriptions and dictates; you advise us well to beware of the Jesuits delusions, but do you think we never heard a Pick-pocket cry, stop thief? Though you have drest your self up like an Angel of Light in robes of pretended Loyalty, and seeming zeal, for the establisht Church, yet your cloven foot, and the mark of the Beast appears now and then, and all your Art cannot conceal it, as when you cast a squinting Reflection on the discovery of that damnable Plot, which would utterly have destroyed that Church, which you pretend to be such a frend to: For you say, those very many testimonies of it are now become highly esteemed through the follies of those that testified. 'Tis a strange paradox how follies should create esteem, and we bless God, that even by that which you call foolishness, it hath pleased the All wise God in a great measure hitherto, to defeat the subtleties of all the Romish Achitophels, and wonderfully to preserve the Sacred Life of our King and our Religion and properties from an inundation of superstition and tyranny. Another place wherein your speech betrays you: Is, when you complain, that I know not who lately in Authority pursued Popery so hot that the very Effigies of our Saviour must be made fuel, &c. Suppose this true, did not a Father of the Church as much? Yes verily, Epiphanius in his Epistle to John of Jerusalem, Epist. 60. assures us, That hmself meeting with a vail hanging at the door of a Church died and painted and having as it were the Image of Christ (for the very effigies that you talk of, pray tell us, who can draw)? He cut it all to pieces; and was not this as bad as burning a popish vestment, though adorned with what the cozening supersticious Priest was pleas'd to call the Effigies of our Saviour? Nor is Eusebius less zealous against any such Trumpery, in his Epistle to Constan∣tia the Empress, who sending to him for an Image of Christ, he thus roundly answers her—What Image do you require? such as may express the characters of his Divine Nature? surely you are instructed that no man hath thus seen the Son but the father; do you require the Image of that form of a Servant, which he took? Then you must understand that that was joyned to the Glory of his Godhead, insomuch that his Apostles could not behold the Glory of his flesh in the Mount, much more glorious, is it now having put off mortality, who is therefore able with weak and liveless colours, and a shadow, to express those dazling beams of so infinite a splendor? Thus you see such Effigies were contemn'd by the fa∣naticks (for so you'l call them) of the very primitive Ages, and do you come now as a Church of England—man to wheadle us with such exploded Idolatries? No, no, Sir! The Church of England is more pure and Apostolical. But what is all this to the pretended subject of your Letter, The Choice of Sheriffs? Why, only to scatter a little Popery and blacken an active Plot Prosecutor by the by, against whom have been forg'd a thousand other lies and scandals. I confess the depending Election has made much noise, and outcries have been of tumults, rab∣ble, and faction. But why, or on which side it lies, seems undetermined. If the right of Choice be in the Common-Hall, if they fairly Elect persous qualified by Law, is it not a symptome of
faction or turbulency for any little un∣known pragmatick fellow (as suppose your venerable self, Sir!) to Censure the body of the City as opposers of the present Constitution of the Government? If those that stand for the antient priviledges and customes allow'd by Char∣ter and confirm'd by many Acts of Parliament, who proceed regularly, and plead for nothing but known usages and approved methods, never heretofore contradicted, must be branded with faction, who are the good subjects,  who the peaceable Citizens? Because you cannot have your unlawful lusts gratified must you presently sound the Trumpet of sedition and cry out, Why shall we permit our Adversaries thus to Tryumph? let us stand up like men of Courage, &c. Just as if you were going to Boxing? For my part I should think it rather blame wor∣thy, if any few should obstinately refuse to acquiesse in the determination of a Major Vote, or should urge un∣usual unpresidented proccedings, and little Stratagems and shams, which should seem against common Right Equity, and reason, but whether any such thing have lately been offered by those you would be understood to complain of, is left to wiser judgments. But you seem to object something against the persons of some of the Candidates; If they are not qualified, let the law reprobate them, but all you say, is by way of sly Insinuation, had you spoke plainly and proved any such matter, it had been worth consideration; now tis only Rancour and Libel. I am not ignorant, tis buzz'd abroad, That one of them was nominated of the Council of state in the late times of confusion, and a list have been very industriously printed, concerning which having no personal knowledge of the Gentleman that seems to be aimed at, I cannot give so full an answer as might otherwise be done. But however there is so little in that objection, that any man of impartial sense may abundantly be sa∣tisfied that 'tis malicious and impertinent; for, 1. In the Act of free and general pardon indempnity and oblivion 12. Car. 2. Ca 11th. Tis enacted for the reasons in the oreamble thereof, viz To the intent that no crime whatsoever should thereafter rise in iudgment, or, be brough: in Question against any of the Kings subjects (except such crimes and persons as are therein excepted) to the least endamagement of them▪ or to the prejudice of their reputations by any reproach or term et distinction, and to bury all seeds of future discords in the breast of his Najesty and in the breasts of all his subjects one towards another &c. That all crimes misdemeanours, &c. be pardoned, released, Indempnified, discharged and put in utter oblivion. With a penalty therein upon any office in any law Court, &c. that shall vex, disquiet or grieve any person, pardoned, and Indempnified by the said Act, From whence it appears that every person within mentioned (not exempted in the sad Act) is as capable as any other of his Majesties Subjcts to have his share in the Government and several of them have been since honoured, dignified and employed in eminent Affairs of state by his Majesties special Election and choise, and consequently. Quere. Whether the Printer and publisher of that paper called The true list, &c. And you Mr. Addresser who are harping on the same string be not disturbers of the publick peace, and enemies to the quiet of his Ma∣jesties good subjects? 2. The Printer or publisher of that paper, would perswade the Reader, that all those persons therein named had taken the Oath therein mentioned, which is most false and scandalous, for the Lord Fairfax never took that oath nor appeared at that Council, and General Monk was then in Scotland, and could not appear to be sworn at that time, likewise Sir Thomas Widdrington, Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper, Alderman Love, Mr. Bethel and others, of whom I challeng that Libeller or you Mr. Addresser, to prove that any one of them took that Oath, and if any body shall report such a thing and be not able to prove it, does he not deserve the name and punishment of a Libeller or Slanderer? But the willful malice in the publisher of that paper is apparent in that the very Author from whom he taketh that list, viz. The continuation of Bakers Chronicle, Fol. 678. calls it only the names of the intended Counsellors of State, and ingenuously and truely acknowledges, that even a third part of them at least refus∣ed it, and were therefore not admitted to sit and act. All which this Libeller conceals purposely to promote a causeless scandal. 3. Tis well known, that Vice-Admiral Lawson (if he did take the Oath) appeared very faithful to the King after his Restauration, and lost his life in his Majesties service at sea, and why unless to serve some popish de∣sign, amuse people, and raise feuds and Animosities; should the Author of this paper now revive this story and so falsly represented, striving to infect the people with prejudices and slanders against diverse persons of worth and honest reputation? In which design you Mr. Addresser, are likewise engaged, and tho your words are smoother than oil, yet the poison of asps seems to be in your heart, but the world is pretty wel aware of your devices, you spit your venom but in vain: Let us therefore I beseech you, noble Sir, Injoy that Peace with you seem to recommend, Alarm not the Government and your Neighbors with needless fears and false representations of tumults and tll practi∣ses and designs where there are none; Forbear your slanders how many hundred real, sound, strict, and most obedient Sons of the Church of England have lately been stigmatiz'd with the title of Fanaticks, meerly because they stood up for their just, legal, civil rights and priviledges as Citizens and English-men. Whereas you say, tis not so easy to introduce Popery amongst us, as a Common-wealth, I conceive tis both a false and seditious assertion, but accursed be he and let his memory rot that designs either of them; and in spight of all your little divid∣ing arts, I do not doubt but to see his Majesty long to continue great, dear, and glorious in the hearts of his sub∣jects, the Church of England to be supported with due Reverence, the Protestant Religion to flourish, pre∣rogative, liberty, and property to be maintained according to Law, and Popery with all its plots and Abbetters however maskt or disguised to be (in these nations shortly, and throughout the world in Gods determined time) utterly confounded. To which he that does not cordially say Amen let him be Anathema. POSTSCRIPT. If the unknown Author of the sheet called the Address &c. shall within few days (as he promises) prove himself to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor to be a Citizen and a Protestant I hereby Engage likewise to publish my name and openly beg his pardon for any thing wherein I may seem (through mistake) to have misrepresented him, and upon that Issue I leave it. FINIS
