P917A R216915 99828629 33060
THE Peace and Joy OF THE SOUL Procured and Preserved. —And he went on his way Rejoycing, Acts 8. 39. LONDON, Printed for W. Freeman, at the Bible over-against the Middle-Temple-gate, in Fleet-street, 1700.
TO THE READER. EVery wise Man is for making his Life as easie as he can; and would they all meet together to Con∣sult which way, they'd find none like that the upright Man is in already. They would agree with the wisest of them, that there's nothing better under the Sun, than to be Merry and Rejoyce; Eccle. 2. 24. &c. & 3. 12, 13, 22. & 5. 18, &c. & 8. 15. & 9. 7. and yet, that there's no solid, durable Joy to be found in sensual Pleasures, or Secular Enjoyments; much less in any sinful ones: For, to enjoy these, Men are forc'd to run from them∣selves under the shelter and refuge of Atheism, to take those Principles as an opiate to procure a dul∣ness
and Lethargy of Mind, to still their affrighting Apprehensions, which so startles, scares and terrifies them: To banish from them (O foolish Peo∣ple and unwise!) the Thoughts of God, the only Fountain of everlasting Satisfaction and Delight, to those that place their Happiness in him; in being, and doing good. Which is the only way to Procure and Preserve (what all Men desire) the Peace and Joy of the Soul. For after all endeavours and Experiments, no abiding Comfort will be found, but in a virtuous Life. Not that the pleasures of Religion are felt alike by all; but, the sincere Pra∣ctice of it, is the only way to find Rest to our Souls: And the steady bent and tenor of our Hearts and Lives, is a surer ground of Comfort, than our Souls ravished with sensible Joys, (which we may be mistaken in.) Our Sa∣viour admitted but three Disciples to his glorious Transfiguration; one only lay in his Bosom; yet all, except a notorious Traytour, dearly Beloved by
him, and sit with him in his Throne; as all shall who Believe in him through their word. Among the Tryals some of them meet with, is a Melancho∣ly Constitution; not (as falsly Charg∣ed) the fault of Religion, nor theirs neither, so they strive to Rectifie it, give not way to it, stir up themselves a∣gainst it; If the Iron be blunt, put to the more strength. They are not an∣swerable for the meer Effects of it, but Considered by him who knoweth our Frame, remembers that and all other Bodily distempers and disadvantages we pass through here. This I declare (saith an eminent Man) to every sincere Person so continuing, he is always safe. The unchearful Tem∣per the Author formerly hath been liable to, and of late sometimes found two or three of his Acquaintance in, moved him to Collect and put together the following Lines, which had not In∣creased the Croud of Books, if any in it (as he thought) so sutable for them as this. If it advantage them only,
he hath his End, though it serve no other. The Prayers are (as our Sa∣viour directs us in his, to be daily used by us) at the same time also for all others, that are in a like Condition with themselves.
THE Peace and Joy OF THE SOUL Procured and Preserved. The First Part. My dear Friends, WE can never sufficiently adore the goodness of God, in making the Con∣ditions of our everlasting undistur∣bed Rest, so effectual for our pre∣sent
Comfort. While we serve, we please him; we ease and gratifie our own Minds; are made partakers of the Divine Nature, by imitating the Divine Perfections, in Goodness, Righteousness and Truth, and so become acceptable to him, and our selves too. Notwithstanding the rude Treatment Religion finds from an ungrateful World, there's no∣thing on Earth so conducive to our Satisfaction and Delight in it, as making that our Business: And there∣fore, to procure and preserve the Peace and Joy of our Souls, In the first Place; let us discard e∣very evil Thing, and so keep our selves in the Love of God Jud. v. 21. by doing that which is well-pleasing in his fight. Sincerity is the only way to assure, and secure us in the Divine Favour, and to free us from all doubts con∣cerning it. The work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righte∣ousness,
quietness and assurance for Ever Isa. 32. 17.. The Primitive Chistians were never troubled with Writing or Reading Cases of Conscience; being true to their own, maintain'd their Joy in a world of trouble; so that they were but as sorrowful, yet always rejoycing—as having nothing, and yet possessing all things 2 Cor. 6. 10.. The straight way to Heaven is very plain and pleasant; Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody Isa. 51. 3.. But Men may thank themselves for misgiving fears in forbidden, dark, or doubtful paths. It's not Religion, but the want of it, or superstitious mistakes about it, that disquiets Minds. An honest innocent Man knows the pu∣nishments the Laws of his Country denounces against Thieves, Mur∣derers, or the like Offenders, with∣out being terrified, or dismayed at
them. Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend them Psa. 119. 165.. Be glad in the Lord, and re∣joyce ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart Psa. 32. 11.. (2.) The good state of the Body is no small advantage to the Mind. Let us therefore use the abilities and assistances God hath given us for our Health; under a grateful sense, that we, and all the accidents and unea∣siness of our Sickness, are in his hands who errs not in bringing about his gracious purposes for the good of our Souls or Bodies; even by others Errors and Oversights, as well as by their Care and Kind∣ness. To be peevish with our Dis∣ease, Medicines, Food, Atten∣dance; fretful and uneasie on e∣very little mistake, error, slowness, or forgetfulness; when things are not done as, or when we would; to make Burdens which are not too
heavy (by Divine Assistance) to be born, at present Intolerable, by pu∣sillanimous, anxious fears and mi∣strusts of what they may be in a little time; renders us troublesome to our selves, and others; deprives us of that Composedness, Quiet, Peace and Comfort, which is the result of Patience, Resignation, hope in God, and a thankful sense of all his past and present Undeserved Mercies, They cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee, O Lord my God: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbred Psa. 40. 5.. (3.) Avoid solitariness, and being un∣imployed. Retirement, to melancholy Con∣stitutions, is the Food and Element of Discontent, where no joy was ever found; sutable Society rouzes and revives the dull and clowdy, the listless and unactive; chears and refreshes the disconsolate Soul; Iron sharpeneth Iron, so a Man sharpeneth
the countenance of his friend Prov. 27. 17,; chaces away those sullen, black, and dismal Imaginations, which are such Enemies to, and hinder us from maintaining a constant chear∣fulness of Heart, and lightsomness of Spirit, so advantagious, so well∣becoming us in our Pilgrimage. Good Company animate and encourage one another in most dismal times, divert from sad and melancholy Musings, exhilerate the drooping Spirit, lift up the Hands that hang down, and the feeble knees; have had their Hearts burn within them, as they walkt together and were sad, whil'st talking of our Redeemer, who hath done so much for us, is coming to take us to himself, and so shall we be ever with the Lord, wherefore comfort one another with these words Mal. 3. 13, &c. Luk. 24. 13, &c. 1 Thess. 4. 14. &c..
Idleness is one of the most tedious irksome things in the World; rack∣ing the Soul with melancholly Con∣ceits, with troublesome distracting Amusements; starving it for want of satisfactory Entertainment; cau∣sing it to feed on its own heart, by doleful Considerations; infesting it with crowds of stinging Thoughts; gauling it with the sense of shame∣ful Sloth and Laziness. Every one should consider the World as the Fa∣mily of that great House-keeper, of whom the whole Family of Hea∣ven and Earth is named (k). And himself as an Officer or Servant pla∣ced by God in his Station, to confer in his order and way (or rather in God's, wherein he hath set him) somewhat towards a Provision for the maintenance of himself, and Fel∣low-Servants. And when we e bu
are prepossess'd, and have no room or vacancy for frivolous pensive I∣maginations. A sedulous Applicati∣on to Business, chears the Spirit with wholesome Diversion, with pleasant Entertainment; quickens, inflames our Activity; diverts us from the sense of Pain, and anxious Perplexi∣ties; preserves the vigour of our Minds, and health of our Bodies; from a dull Listlesness, a heavy Un∣weildiness seizing on us. Industry hath an innate satisfaction, which tempereth all Annoyances; redeems us from the molestations of Idleness, that lies on others hands as a pester∣ing Incumbrance; even ingratiates the Pains going with it; delighting us, that we are not squandring a∣way precious Time; not burying, or abusing, but using the Oppor∣tunities, Abilities, and Advantages he hath given us for our selves, and him that needeth; whereas, he that doth not Earn, can hardly own his own Bread, and in St. Paul's judg∣ment,
should be debarr'd of Food 2 Thess. 3. 10, &c.. (4) Let's endeavour to keep our selves in a calm, serene, even State, which is the State of Peace; and upon any breach of it, without the least delay, return to it again, through him who is the great Mediator between God and Man. When we would have, or do any thing, lets stand ex∣actly even and indifferent as to the Event, that whatsoever that be, our Happiness may be the same, even as if we had desir'd nothing at all: Without being transported on ac∣count of any good or bad Success, be it what it will. Avoiding all Dissatis∣faction, Sorrow, Fear, and Anger, Peevishness, and immoderate Care, Heaviness, Grudging, and Com∣plaints, with all occasions of them. Inuring our selves to bear Repulses, Abuses, Injuries, Contempts, Scoffs, Reproaches, Slanders, Losses, Cros∣ses; those Calamities, which are
so grievous Discontents to others, with composed, sedate, unconcern∣ed Minds; diverting, refreshing, recreating them by contrary pleasing Objects. Not dwelling upon me∣lancholly Prospects, sad Remem∣brances, and recitals of our Miseries; but on the best, most pleasing part of our Condition. Eying, not those above, but below us, not him in the Chair, but those that carry it: Not what we want, but enjoy, and others are without: What God hath done, and provided for us. Let our Thoughts, our Hearts be where we profess our Treasure, our Country is: Let our Blessedness, our Reward, (which it's possible to make sure of, and Christ hath told us how) Mat. 5. 3, &c. be always rolling in our Minds, and we shall have a perpetual Antidote against all dejection, which is fed by disobedience and unbelief. While we look not at the things that are seen,
but at the things which are not seen; Ours appear light Afflictions, and but for a moment, and working for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory 2 Cor. 4. 16, &c.. Its too much pondring on this World makes our Minds uneasie, which if imploy'd on Divine Objects (alone capable of sa∣tisfying our immortal Appetites) would support and comfort us, when nothing else could Psal. 119. 92.. And there∣fore, lets think as little as may be on things below, and not at all on any thing that's apt to make us sad; which the Prophet owns his fault, and for which he chides his Soul, and chases away with delightful Thoughts of God, (his Goodness, Grace and Mercy) and Psalms of Praise Psal. 43. & 77.. And so should we, fre∣quently raising up our Souls in pious Ejaculations; saying continually, the Lord be magnified; Blessed be God Psal. 35. 27. & 40. 16.. In our Devotion exercising Acts of
Resignation, and expressions of our Trust and Confidence in him, (the most effectual way to obtain it.) But thou O Lord art a shield for me, my glory, and the lifter up of mine head. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength n whom I will trust; my Buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall  be afraid? Though an host should en∣amp against me, my heart shall not fear; hough war should rise against me, in this ill I be confident. For in the time of trouble, he shall hide me in his pavilion, in the secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me, he shall set me up upon a Rock Psal. 3. 3. & 18. 2. & 27. 1, 3, 5.. And therefore, (5.) Let nothing make us stagger, or e able to shake our stedfast trust and confidence in God; his promises to us, his providence over us, doing what
we are able for our own Salvation, Relief and Safety; and then humbly, and faithfully recommending, and intirely delivering up our selves, Souls, and Bodies, and all our con∣cerns into his hands; under a quiet composure of Mind, that he takes care of us, will make good his word unto us. Mankind in general are invited to depend continually upon him, from the care he takes of all his Creatures, his whole Family. But there's more∣over, not only his particular Love, but his multiplyed Promises to his Children; to those devoted to his Service. And he'll sooner dissolve the whole frame of Nature, than break his word, which he never hath done, nor never can. And what would Men give upon the Brink, to be sure of Pardon? Good Men are as sure of it, as of their own sincerity, as of the word of God. And, As I live saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wick∣ed, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel Ezek. 33. 11.? Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, (saith the Lord.) Though your sins be as scar∣let, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool Isa. 1. 16, &c.. When the wicked Man turneth away from his wickedness that he hath committed, and doth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive Ezek. 18. 23.. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon Isa. 55. 7.. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth 1 Tim. 2. 4.. Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance 2 Pet. 3. 9.. And therefore sent his Son to be the Saviour of the
World. And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world 1 John 4. 14. & 2. 2.. Who gave himself a ransom for all 1 Tim. 2. 6.. Tast∣ed death for every man Heb. 2. 9.. Became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him Heb. 5. 9.. For, the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all; He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed Isa. 53. 5, 6.. Herein God commended his love to∣wards us, in that while we were yet sin∣ners, without strength, Christ died for us, for the ungodly Rom. 5. 6, 8.. And the Blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanseth us from all sin 1 John 1. 7.. Then, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifieth, who is he that con∣demneth? It is Christ that died, yea ra∣ther that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God; who also maketh
intercession for us Rom. 8. 33, 34.. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them Heb. 7. 25.. So that whoso confesseth and forsaketh his sins shall have mer∣cy Prov. 28. 13.. For, if we confess our sins, he is faithful (having promised) and just, (Christ having satisfied) to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all un∣righteousness 1 John. 1. 9.. And, he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things Rom. 8. 32.? Without question he will, who so dearly loved us. By our incredulity we dispute the good∣ness and veracity, the truth and faithfulness of God. For every un∣worthy distrust of him a good Man reproves himself; as arguing, great Ignorance, or little Faith. They are our Saviours own words, therefore can never possible deceive us, Seek ye
first the kingdom of God and his righte∣ousness, and all these things shall be added unto you Ma. 6. 33.. That is, as him∣self explains it, all these things which our heavenly Father knoweth we have need of. And sure then, we have little temptation to fear want, when we are assur'd of all needful things; it may perhaps be an equal mercy to secure us from great abun∣dance, and from necessary sufferings no mercy, but a diskindness. The Psalmist thankfully acknowledges Af∣flictions among the great Blessings of his life Psal. 119. 71, 75.. And our Saviour in∣joyns us to rejoyce and be exceeding glad, instead of being cast down un∣der them Mat. 5. 1, 12.: And concludes it a great reflection on the Divine Pro∣vidence, and his constant followers, to be diffident of his fatherly goodness to us, who are his off sping Acts 17. 28.; and who hath implanted such a tender care and kindness in natural Parents to
their's (q). He's the best judge of all Mens necessities; and appoints or permits nothing, but what's for our welfare, benefit, advantage; in right reason, all things consider∣ed, best for us; and what we should be sure to wish, if we rightly under∣stood our own Case. Making it our business to please him, if we af∣fect not to lay it on thick; squan∣der not away our provision; be sa∣tisfied with what Nature desires, and what infinite Wisdom and Goodness appoints; we shall have so much as is necessary to support us in our Be∣ings; not only enough to keep Life and Soul together, but a sufficient competency for industrious, mode∣rate, frugal Persons; and while we're sure of thus much, we must blame our selves only, if we be unhappy for what's not really needful for us▪ The Lord also will be a r¦ble.
And they that know thy name will put their trust in thee: for thou, Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee Psal. 9. 9, 10.. When, and as best, keeping them from, supporting them under, deli∣vering them out of all their trou∣bles. And now having brought our selves to a stedfast dependance upon God; we shall find, we have laid the su∣rest foundation for our own Comfort and Happiness, in this World, and that which is to come; of such un∣speakable advantage is this excellent duty to all that are rightly exercised therein. Its the best recommenda∣tion to the Divine Blessing and Pro∣tection; the best antidote against cares and fears; the best support un∣der all pressures and calamities; the best preparation against the preva∣lency of those temptations, where∣by the diffident and distrustful of God's Providence, are sure to be
over-come. This necessarily dis∣poses us, to take no thought for the morrow: To forbear tormenting our selves with direful expectations of what may happen hereafter: Ba∣nishes, chases away all doubtful Ap∣prehensions; lays us in a pleasing, delightful repose: Inables us to bid defiance to whatsoever threatens us; and not to be ruffled, or discompos'd at any inconveniences we meet with here. This is that compleat securi∣ty, that perfect safety and satisfaction mention'd by the Prophet, as annex∣ed to a steady reliance upon God, Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stay'd on thee; (and for this very reason) because he trusteth in thee Isa. 26. 3.. (6) Serious and devout Prayer, is the way to compose our Thoughts, to calm our Passions, to refresh our Spirits, to spiritualize and raise our Affections, to strengthen our Faith,
quicken our Hope, inflame our Love; to obtain the Divine Assistance, to discharge our Minds (unless we are very Hipocritical in our Devotion) of all cares and fears. Provided we implore him with clean Hearts and Hands; from a full Perswasion, and firm Belief, of his gracious Promi∣ses, and Christs powerful intercessi∣on; as our great Duty, and a means to obtain what we want. A care∣less, customary performance of it, breeds trouble afterwards, for not discharging it as we ought; or an insensibility, and deadness in our Souls, without any Warmth, Life, or Comfort. Being therefore, not only constant, but very solemn, and affectionate in our Devotion, with all our might, fervent in Spi∣rit, serving the Lord, pouring out our Souls unto God our exceeding Joy Psal. 43. 4., we may go away in peace, with our Countenance no more
sad 1 Sam. 1. 15, &c., knowing, He hath heard us Psa. 65. 2. & 34. 6.. He heareth us always Psal. 66. 18, 19. John 9. 31. & 11. 41, 42.. Is nigh unto us in all we call upon him for (y). The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him, he also will hear their cry, and will save them Psa. 145. 18, 19.. The eyes of all wait upon him, and he giveth them their meat in due season. He o∣peneth his hand, and satisfieth the desire of every living thing, provideth for (Birds, and Beasts of Prey) the ra∣ven his food, when his young ones cry unto God. The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God Job 31. 41. Psal. 104. 21, 25, 27. & 145. 15, 16.. He heareth the prayer of the righteous Prov. 15. 29. Isa. 5. 16.. His eyes are upon them, and his ear open to their cry Psal. 34. 15, 17.. What∣soever we ask, we receive of him 1 John 3. 21, 22.. And this is the confidence that we have(y)
in him, that if we ask any thing accord∣ing to his will, he heareth us 1 John 5. 14, 15.. Eve∣ry one that asketh receiveth Mat. 7. 8.. And therefore, if any of you lack wisdom, (or any thing pertaining to Life and Godliness) let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and up∣braideth not, and it shall be given him Jam. 1. 5.. There's a natural hope, good Men have in God, that he will hear and help them. Themselves will do all the good they can, for those that ask them. But this pro∣perty of Goodness, is most perfect in God, who is perfect and infinite in Goodness. If ye then (as our Saviour teaches us to argue) being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Child∣ren▪ how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven, give good things to them that ask him Mat. 7. 11.? But these natural Notions we have, that God is good, ready to forgive, heareth pray∣er, plentious in mercy unto all them
that call upon him Psal. 65. 2. & 86. 5., are confirm'd by his express word, his multiplyed promises; that he saith not to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain Isa. 45. 19.. And call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee Psal. 50. 15.. Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking, I will hear Isa. 65. 24.. Ask, and it shall be given you. All things whatso∣ever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. Whatsoever he shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you, saith our Saviour Mat. 7. 7. & 21. 22. John 15. 7. & 16. 23.. And for this purpose he appears for us at the right hand of God, to offer up our Pray∣ers, and to make intercession for us John 14. 16. & 16. 26. Rom. 8. 34. Rev. 8. 3.. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, (for pardon) and find grace to help, (and strengthen us) in time of need Heb. 4. 16..
(7.) That we may be careful, (anxious, thoughtful, solicitous,) for nothing; to our Prayers and Sup∣plications unto God, we must joyn thanksgiving. Under a grateful Re∣sentment, and thankful acknow∣ledgment of his marvellous loving Kindness, in Condescending to, hum∣bly beseeching, and stedfastly be∣lieving that he will take care of us. This is the most effectual way to commit our ways (or, in other words) to cast our Burden, and all our care upon him Phil. 4. 6. Psal. 37. 5. & 55. 22.. There's no better remedy against all perplexing Thoughts for the future, than that sensible experience we have had already of his good Providence to∣wards us. It being impossible to have a grateful Sense, and a solici∣tous distrust of his goodness at the same time. It becomes us therefore to procure and maintain perpetually such a deep
sense of all his mercies, that our hearts may be unfeignedly thankful: in no wise suffering any regret to disturb our Praise, to quench our joy in God, in his Divine Excellencies, and their Beneficialness to us. Sing∣ing and making melody in our hearts to the Lord Eph. 5. 19.. Composes, refreshes disordered Minds; as David's Harp, chases away the troubled Spirit, from molested Souls. It is (then) a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto thy name, O most high: To shew forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night Psal. 92. 1, 2.. I will bless the Lord at all times: His praise shall continually be in my mouth. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: The humble shall hear there∣of and be glad. O magnifie the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name toge∣ther Psal. 34. 1, 2, 3.. Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praises unto
my God, while I have my being. My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the Lord. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities: Who healeth all thy diseases. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who crowneth thee with loving kindness and tender mercies Psal. 103. 1, 2, 3, 4. & 104. 34. & 145. 2. & 146. 2.. (8.) Let's frequently, with attention and close application of mind, read and observe the holy scriptures. Making them our Counsellor, our Comfor∣ter, our Treasure, our Study, our Delight, our meditation Day and Night; we shall esteem the words of his mouth, more than our ne∣cessary Food, sweeter than Honey, and the Honey-comb: Above Gold, yea, than much fine Gold: Better unto us than thousands of Gold and
Silver Job 23. 12. Psal. 1. 2. & 19. 8. & 119. 24, 50, 72, 99, 127.. We shall then not envy, but pity any who have the greatest insight into Arts, Sciences, Histories, and neglect this, so Ancient, that it takes rise from the first point of Time; beginning with the Original of the whole universe. So True, as attested by its very Enemies, and our own experience. So Compre∣hensive, that it informs us in all things necessary to be known, the chief Good, and Happiness of this World and the next; with the right path that infallibly leads to it; and such motives and encouragements to keep us in it, as to which nothing can be added. Where can we find such satisfying entertainment as here? To see in the new Testament, the accomplishments of so many Types, Rites, Cere∣monies, Sacrifices, Prophesies, Pro∣mises, of the Old. The glory of infinite Wisdom. The harmony of
the Divine Attributes in the Con∣trivance, and Accomplishment of our Redemption: his Justice satisfi∣ed, without diminution to his Mer∣cy; and his Mercy, without in∣trenching on his Justice: His Holi∣ness most eminent in his Indignati∣on against Sin, and his Love in sparing Sinners. Such strange variety of Memorable, remarkable Occurrences, heroick Actions, undaunted firmness of Mind, under, and in sight of suffer∣ing, before Kings and Judges of the Earth; such excellent Discourses; well couch'd Parables; rariety of Events; the Deliverances and Punishments, lives and ends of the Righteous, and the Wick∣ed, wherewith it abounds; at once instructing, and encouraging with a delightful Admiration. What Divine Eloquence? What moving Rhetorick? What melting Strains? What endearing, Expressions and In∣stances of the greatest Tenderness
and Love, to reconcile us at once, to God and our selves? To draw and win us to our Duty, and Hap∣piness: Who hath so many Titles to us; and by whose meer Bounty we live: Engageing to reward our Obedience, which he might, upon the utmost penalty exact; and will, if we will, enable us to perform. What moving exam∣ples of uprightness, and integrity, fervent Prayer, and Charity; un∣shaken Faith, and Constancy; in∣tire submission, and resignation to God's Will; Patience, Contented∣ness, Joyfulness under Sufferings. Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage Psal. 119. 54.. A Book that means us so much good; design'd only to make us happy; gives us the truest Judg∣ment of all worldly, and eternal Things; speaks not at our mere vain Rate, but for the most importent
Ends; tending more to the Reputa∣tion, Health, and Harmony of Man∣kind, than all the sayings of the Sages upon Earth. That great Magazine, and Store-house of Health, Help and Comfort: That hath so much in it to cure Heaviness, to extirpate Grief, to lay asleep our troublesome Thoughts and Passions; to raise and satisfie our drooping doubting Spirits, when our Feet are well nigh slipt; to administer relief un∣der all Wrongs and Injuries; to support us under all the adversities of Life, and terrours of Death. How many precious Promises for all things pertaining to Life and Godliness, are seattered through it, to fill us with all Joy and Peace in believing! That sets before us, how to be delivered from Impurity, and Inquietude: To free our selves from the Tyranny of those Lusts, Appetites, Passions, which so agitate and turmoil our Souls: How to recover our Liberty and Freedom from the vilest Bon∣dage,
by his holy Spirit, upon our asking Grace; and fresh supplies of it, upon our good improving it. That shews us our Enemies, and their snares laid before us for our Lives: Fortifies our Faith; excites our Courage; assists, furnishes us with the whole Armour of God; annimates our Souls, by assuring us, that if we will not basely surrender our selves, we can never be over∣come; if we but stand our Ground, keep close to its Conduct, follow our Leader, who hath spoiled Prin∣cipalities and Powers, we cannot miss of Victory, of a Crown of Life, for being kind to our selves, willing to be happy here. A Book that takes in, the care of our secular Concerns. A qiet Life; keeping us out of the way of many Misfortunes which turbulent, un∣ruly Spirits meet with, by living peaceably with all Men: Puts us into the fairest rode to Riches; by a dilligent Hand, and the Blessing of God. How
to preserve our Reputation; by pro∣viding things honest in the sight of all Men. To make our Enemies at peace with us; by having our ways please the Lord. How to secure an unconcern∣ed Mind, and all we really want, by relying on him. Fixing us in all Vi∣cissitudes, by satisfying us, who Rules, in whose Hands we are. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the rejoycing of my heart Psal. 119. 111.. (9.) Let not the consolations of God be small unto us, which he hath given us in his word. Not Customarily thinking on, but ruminating, digesting of them; expatiating our closest Thoughts upon them. Amongst so many, we'll here instance but in one, which we would not be without for all the World. We know that all things work together for good, to them that love God Rom. 8. 28.. A most comfortable
Truth. For (1) this gives us secu∣rity where there's most need of it, i. e. against the causes of Fear and Sor∣row, i. e. The evils of this Life. (2.) The Ʋniversallity of the expres∣sion, makes our Comfort and Secu∣rity equal to our Dangers: The number of them cannot dismay us, where, without exception to any one, Provision is made against all: where the remedy will not fail, not only, if any one, but, if every one of them should happen, that we are liable to. (3.) Its an equal Antidote a∣gainst the dread, and feeling of Sor∣row. Suffering not our Present En∣joyments to be imbittered with Fear of the future; and supplies us with Hope and Patience when e∣vils are present. That belief which supports us under present E∣vils, will not let us feel disturbance from the possibility of future ones.
There being a concurrance of our Endeavours, the Grace of God will not be wanting; for if any thing that's grievous befal us by his Providence, he will not deny us, that inward Assistance of his Spirit towards a good use of it, which is needful; be∣cause the outward means of doing us good, is not of our own chusing, but his. Whilst we unalterably resolve not to forfeit our interest in his special Grace and Providence, for abtaining any worldly Good, or avoiding any worldly Evil. For, when without Sin, we cannot a∣void Suffering, he'll turn it to a great∣er Good; because it plainly appears to be his will, that we should suffer. So that, to do evil, for a good End, is not only damnable Rom. 3. 8., but fool∣ish Deut. 4. 6. 1 Sam. 13. 13., to obtain that which may be for our hurt, or prevent that which may be for our Good. And is also a dishonouring God, by dis∣trusting
his Providence, which is in nothing more concern'd, than in seeing that in the Event no Man shall be a loser by doing his Duty. laying this as a sure Foundation for us to build upon; that, though our Affairs go never so contrary to us, its best things should be as God will have them; who in chusing our Condition hath still a regard to what is best for us? so that, we may not only conclude in General, that its good for us that we are afflicted, that he in faithfulness afflicts us Psal. 119, 71, 75,, but particularly, that that Affliction we are under is more for our good, than any other would have been, not only adversity in general, but those that happen to us in parti∣cular. And now, were it left to us, whe∣ther we would have an assured in∣terest in this Promise, and that Grace and Providence of God, which will
make it Good; or, from Time to Time have the disposal of our selves. Would we trust our selves in our own Hand, who should undo our selves, even with desiring hurtful Things; and take our selves out of God's, who will make all things that are not good in themselves, work together for good? And, can we wish any thing more for the quieting our Minds, the giving us a profound, and lasting Peace, than to know that future Evils will as certainly work for our Good, as if they were present? And that though they are supposed and uncertain, yet the good is certain, upon supposition that the Evil hap∣pens? To reap all the comfort of present Enjoyments; and to be able to account upon Adversity, without disturbance? We know they are uncertain, and that while they last, they shall work for our Good, and when they fail, they shall do so too. And is not this a mighty Advantage,
to know, and be assured of this? And what can be wanting to an absolute Assurance of it, but that we love God? And this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments 1 John 5. 3..
THE Peace and Joy OF THE SOUL Procured and Preserved. The Second Part. THE sensual World enter∣tain strange Thoughts of Religion; as if it were a sul∣len, lumpish, melancholy Thing; void of all Mirth and Pleasure: Re∣quiring
a dull, heavy, morose kind of Life; full of hardship, and seve∣rity. That its a lamentable way to our promised Land; through a solitary, disconsolate Wilderness; barren of every thing to gratifie and delight; and that eateth up the In∣habitants with bitter Remorse. Whereas, it alone, is the never fail∣ing Source of true, pure, steady, substantial, constant Joy: Such as is deeply rooted in the Heart; im∣movably founded on the reason of Things; permanent, like the im∣mortal Spirit wherein it dwells, and the eternal Object on which it's fix'd. Permits us not to be one moment sad; banishes the least Fit of Me∣lancholly: Allows, obliges, com∣mands us in all times, upon all occasions, to Rejoyce. And what can any Soul desire more, than to be always in good Humour, in a chear∣ful Frame? To lead a Life in con∣tinual Alacrity? Who would not embrace so pleasant a Duty, as Plea∣sure
it self? Who would affect a Sin, which hath nothing in it, but disease, and disgust? Tempered with regret; easily dash'd by cross accident; soon declining into a nauseous Satiety; in the end dege∣nerating into Gaul, and biting An∣guish. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is heaviness Prov. 14. 13,. How can we sufficiently magni∣fie the transcendent goodness of God, that he enjoyns Joy, and prohibits Sadness: Makes our Duty, to be our delight; and our sorrow, to be our Sin. Adapting his Holy Will, to our principal Instinct: Would have us resemble him in a constant state of Happiness: hath provided for us Joy and Pleasure here, and at his right Hand for ever more: Ordered the whole frame of our Religion, in a tendency to procure Joy in those that embrace it.
Must it not be very entertaining, to contemplate the infinite Wisdom, Power, Bounty of God in the Crea∣tion? In raising this great, this mag∣nificent Pile, producing so beauti∣ful a Structure, so goodly a Frame: Furnishing every part of it, with such variety of Creatures, so exqui∣sitly fitted for the use and service of themselves, and one another? So copious a Store-house of things, with a special regard to our Sustentation, Accommodation, Delight. And, with the same Almighty Hand, vigilant Care, benign Regard, upholding, governing, maintaining the same? To observe the conspicuous Strokes and Tracts of infinite Wisdom: The miraculous demonstrations of the Divine Hand; the stupendious efforts of its Power; the signal tri∣umphs of Providence, his glorious Perfections so Illustriously shining forth, (who is the principal of our Love, our Reverence, our Confi∣dence; to the conviction of Infide∣lity,
confirmation of our Faith, cherishing of our Hope, encouraging our Obedience) spreading and re∣newing a Table where all may reach. his Benefits to Mankind particularly, so plentifully dispenced. Renewing the donation of our Being every mo∣ment, by preserving it. While we are spending the Production of one Year, preparing for us against ano∣ther. Placing us as spectators in this noble Theatre, the World, to view and applaud those Scenes of Earth and Heaven, the workmanship of his Hands. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches: so is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping, innumerable, both small and great, &c. Psal. 104. & 145. 15, 16. He might have made the Earth, a place of our perpetual Suffering; a kind of Hell unto us. Submitted us here to continual Misery; shut up
from us all springs of Pleasure and Delight; turned all our fair Days, into so many sad and dismal Nights; given us Eyes for nothing, but fright∣ful Aspects, or to be fill'd with Tears; and Ears to receive no sound but that of his Judgments; a taste for nothing but Bitterness; a touch to be sensible of nothing but Pain: He might have mingled all our Feasts with Gall; inclosed every taking Ob∣ject with Briars and Thorns to pierce us through at coming near them. But behold, among how many comforts hath he placed us, and given us li∣berty and ability to enjoy, who de∣serve not the meanest competency of the common Benefits all Men par∣take of, and without which we cannot subsist? Whom strict Ju∣stice would often cast into utter Dis∣consolateness? Not only our Enjoy∣ments, but the capacity to enjoy them, is his Bounty. Behold, the goods he hath given us, offers to us, hath put into our Reach! Yea,
he hath made us capable of, faith∣fully offers to us, the greatest, im∣mense, all-comprehending good, himself, the Fountain of all Joy and Bliss, to be fully enjoyed by us: In having whom, we virtually and in effect have all things: Becoming thereby, in the highest degree, rich, honourable, happy. We will be glad and rejoyce in thee, we will re∣member thy love more than wine: the upright love thee Can. 1. 4.. What is the Gospel, but good tid∣ings of great Joy? Doth he not re∣present himself therein, as the God of Love, of Hope, of Peace, of all Consolation? Hath he not sent down from Heaven his only begotten Son, to assume our Nature, to satisfie for our Sins? Hath he not rescu'd us from endless misery? Purchased Pardon, Peace, eternal Salvation? Promised the Comforter to abide with us for ever? Is he not now sitting
in glorious exaltation at God's right Hand? Governing the World for his Church's benefit? Interceding as our merciful, faithful high Priest, for our forgiveness and acceptance? for supply of our necessities; relief of our Distresses; assistance of our weakness; that we may be able to over-come fleshly Lusts, inordinate Passions, strong Temptations, our Selves, the World, Principalties and Powers; to do all things (incum∣bent on us) through him that streng∣theneth us Phil. 4. 13.. For what doth he call us to him? But that he may give rest unto our Souls; wipe away all Tears from our Eyes; save us from most woful Despair; settle us in a blessed Hope; that we may enter into our Master's Joy; that our hearts may rejoyce; that our Joy may be full, that no Man taketh from us? The kingdom of God consists in Righ∣teousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost Rom. 14. 17.. The fruits (sprouting from the root of Christian Life) of the Spirit, are Love, Joy, Peace Gal. 5. 22.. Our Lord pronounces a special Bea∣titude, to the practice of every Vir∣tue Mat. 5▪. Each grace (Humility, Meekness, Patience, &c.) have a pe∣culiar delight annexed to it: No pious Exercise, no good Deed, can be per∣formed without satisfaction. And if we scan all the Doctrins, Precepts, Promises of Christianity, each ap∣pear pregnant with matter of Joy, each yield great Reason, strong ob∣ligation to rejoyce always. How many Declarations importing a joy∣ful satisfaction, granted to the ob∣servers of God's Commandments? That, in keeping them there's great reward. That, light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart Psal. 19. 11. & 97. 11.. What a warm and vigorous In∣fluence must a Religious heart feel
from fixing his Love, (the sweetest, most delectable of all Passions) on the most amiable, desireable Object, that uncreated Beauty, that supream, al-sufficient Good? whose Nature is Love; who prevented us with it, when we were Enemies; will em∣brace us when we're become his Friends: Not deny his Love to a Soul wholly devoted to him, desiring nothing so much, as to serve and please him; not disdain his own I∣mage, nor the heart wherein it is en∣graven: Who can never be absent from us; opening our Eyes, we eve∣ry where behold the appearances of his Presence and Glory; the traces of the Divine Nature and Perfections discovered in every thing we see, and converse with him whom our Soul loveth. It's not the Colour, the comliness of Faces, or proporti∣on, but we see, or apprehend some excellency, goodness, sweetness of Nature and Disposition, that charms our Spirits, commands our Love, e∣ven
of them we never saw: Their Perfections are not obvious to the sight of our Eyes; we can only di∣scern the signs and effects of them. We cannot but discern that Almigh∣ty Power, Wisdom, Goodness, which fills the Universe; Displays it self in all the parts of the Creation; esta∣blishes the frame of Nature; turns the mighty Wheel of Providence; and keeps the World from disorder and confusion, who is the only true Cause of all our comfort from every Creature: That alone Acts in us, and causes all our grateful Sensati∣ons, wherewith we're truly affected. All the good we ever enjoy'd, or can expect, being derived from his pure Bounty. Every thing else in com∣petition with him, being Piti∣ful, Mean, Ugly, Loathsom: All things without him, vain, unprofi∣table, hurtful to us. Let them that love thy name, be joyful in thee Psal. 5. 11..
What a happy Complexion, chear∣ful Disposition, is there in charity to Man! which rids us of those gloo∣my, keen, turbulent Imaginations, uncharitable Affections, that cloud our Minds, frets our Hearts, discom∣poses the frame of our Souls; and consequently, settles our Minds in an even temper, sedate Humour, har∣monious Order; in that pleasant state of tranquility, which natural∣ly results from the voidance of irre∣gular Passions. What Glory, what Triumph, what Satisfaction is there, in forgiv∣ing Injuries? Whereby we dis∣charge our Souls from those vexati∣ous Inmates, those black Thoughts, of burning Anger, stormy Conten∣tions, gnawing Envy, rankling Spite, raking Suspicion: Clear our selves from the troubles attending feuds, strife, distracting animosities: Ren∣der our selves capable of Divine Mercy: Acquire a Title to our own forgiveness.
What more Excellent, Noble, Generous; what sweetness and de∣light, in a Soul that feels it self en∣larged to embrace all Mankind? Whose wishes and desires are level∣led at the good and well-fare of the universe; that considers every Man's Interest as his own; over-looks their Ingratitude, Malice, Injuries; pities their Follies; over-comes their evil with good: Is so far from entertaining any base, or injurious Thought, that he had rather suffer a thousand Wrongs, than be guilty of one: Never designs any other revenge against his most malicious Enemies, than to put all the Obliga∣tions he can upon them, whether they will or no. How great a Joy is there, in les∣sening the inconveniences of Man∣kind? In removing the Troubles, encreasing the Satisfactions, abating the Wants, easing the Pains, allaying the Sorrows of one another; suc∣couring those that are over-taken
with any Calamity, in any wise do∣ing good? whereby we feed good Humour; gratifie our best Inclina∣tions; endear our Brethren; moli∣fie, oblige our Enemies; resemble the Divine Goodness; attract the Di∣vine Favour. Who can out of Cha∣rity give Alms, or shew mercy, without chearfulness? Seeing, he thereby, satisfies his own Mind, ea∣ses his own Bowels, receives more good to himself, than he doth to his Neighbour (so that, properly speak∣ing, the Receivers are the Benefa∣ctors) discharges a Duty accepta∣ble to God, obliges him to requite, abundantly to reward his slender Beneficence: So well pleasing to our Saviour, that he hath engaged his word, under the Figure of the good Samaritan,—Whatsoever thou spend∣est more (upon him) when I come again: I will repay thee Luke 10. 35.
How unconfinedly, inexhaustibly vast, is that delight which a chari∣table complacency in the good of our Neighbour (a rejoycing with those that rejoyce, &c.) affords? we thence ingrossing all the good in the World; appropriating to our selves all the prosperous successes; all the pleasant entertainments; all the comfortable satisfactions of our Neighbour. Had I my choice of all things that might tend to my pre∣sent Felicity, next to the Love and Enjoyment of God, I would pitch upon this, to have my heart posses∣sed with the greatest kindness to∣wards all Men in the World. This would make me partake in all their Happiness: Their inward endow∣ments, and outward prosperity; every thing that benefitted, or ad∣vantaged them, would afford me comfort and delight. Yea, the Soul, even by a charita∣ble Sympathy, or condolence in our Neighbour's Adversity, is (not desti∣tute
of delight) thereby melted in∣to a gentle temper, susceptive of the best Impressions. We share in the comforts we Minister to others: are refreshed in that kindly submis∣sion to God's good Pleasure; in that lightsome contemplation of God's Mercy; in these comfortable hopes of a happy Issue, which we suggest to the afflicted; we thence are di∣sposed to a grateful Sense of God's Goodness, in preserving our selves from those Calamities, and qualify∣ing us to comfort our Brethren. We feel satisfaction in reflecting upon this very Practice, and observing that we do Act conformable to good Nature, to the dictates of Reason, to the Will of God: Therein dis∣charging a good Conscience, and enjoying a Portion of that continual Feast. What Joy results to a Christian, from having an universal Complai∣sance in God's proceedings as grate∣ful? Relishing all dispensations;
as dispos'd to bless and praise him for all things Incident, (Joy being an inseparable companion of Gra∣titude and Praise,) as finding satis∣faction in poverty, disgrace, any di∣stress. To have his Spirit above grievous Solicitude, Anxiety, De∣sparation, Disconsolateness. To ap∣prehend himself the Child of a most kind and careful Father; that hath all things in Heaven and Earth at his disposal: Is infinitely tender of his good; so, assured he can never come into any want of what's need∣ful for him: And hath a Title to goods infinitely more desirable, pre∣cious, durable? How can he but pa∣tiently submit to his fatherly Cha∣stisements, which he is unwillingly forced by his own great Love, and our present pressing need to inflict, impose upon us? Chearfully undergo any Affliction, with the same mind wherewith a Patient swallows down an unsavory Potion he knows will conduce to his Health? How doth
our holy Confidence in his paternal care over us, exhilerate our Hearts? that all our Concerns are lodg'd in the hands of such a Friend; so wise, able, faithful, affectionate; that in due time, in the most expedi∣ent manner, we shall receive a com∣petent supply of our wants, a rid∣dance from all our dangers, harms and grievances.—In the shadow of thy wings will I rejoyce Psal. 63. 7.. Can any thing give such ease to humane Life, as to have wholly re∣sign'd our selves, and all our con∣cerns unto him? Let things be, and go how they will, our Heart, our Happiness is not concern'd in it. We depend upon God for every thing; so are satisfied with any thing, or condition; which should not be thus, were it not best for us. To have an agreeableness of will with the will of God, makes it as impossi∣ble any evil, as that, that which
is according to our Will, should make us sad. Ʋnto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness Psal. 112. 4.. What are the trials of the Righteous, to the many sorrows that shall be, that are to the wicked Psal. 32. 10.? What's poverty (which grates a little on the Senses and Fan∣cy) to the want of a good Consci∣ence? Sickness, compared to a di∣stempered Mind, and decay of spi∣ritual Strength? Any disappoint∣ment, to the being defeated, and over-thrown by a Temptation? What's any loss, to the being de∣prived of God's Love and Favour? or any disgrace, to the being out of esteem, and respect with him? What's any unfaithfulness, or in∣constancy of Friends, to the having deserted, or betrayed our own Souls? What can any danger signifie, to that of eternal Misery incurr'd by offending him? What pressure
can weigh against the load of Guilt? or what pain equal that of stinging Remorse? What condition can be so bad, as that of a wretched Sin∣ner? Any Case surely is tolerable, desireable, lovely, in comparison of this. What Pleasure (without any tin∣cture of sourness, bitterness, melan∣cholly Damps, consequent Qualms) to enjoy Hearty, Pure, Solid, Du∣rable, the only true ones; such as are at God's right Hand; the best Friend, the continual feast of a good Conscience, (is his Prerogative to be Master of) that purest delight, that richest Cordial, that universal sove∣reign Balm, that brazen Wall, that impregnable Fortress (against exter∣nal Assaults, and internal Commoti∣ons) that constant Repast, whereon the mind, destitute of all others, with a never languishing Appetite, en∣tertains it self; that faithful Witness, impartial Judge, whosoever accuses,
always acquits; that only support in old Age, in the evil Day; that cer∣tain never deserting, never failing Friend; that undecaying, unaltera∣ble, lasting, everlasting Satisfaction; that sure refuge in all storms of For∣tune, which renders his sleep Sweet; (undisturb'd with fearful Phantasms) his heart light, his steps Secure; arms him with invincible Courage; bears him up Chearfully, Undaun∣tedly, Triumphantly, against all malicious Reports and Disgraces, the worst bad Fortunes: being certain he's in the right way; not doubt∣ing he shall in good time come to his designed journey's End. Keep innocency, and take heed unto the thing that is right: for that shall bring a man peace at the last Psal. 37. 38. Old Translation.. Is he not freed from diffidence in himself? From distraction in his Mind? From frequently being on
the Rock? From leading an une∣qual Life, clashing with it self? From deluding, disappointing those he deals, converses with? being in all Cases, Conditions, (prosperous or adverse) the same Mind, and Man, going the same way. Con∣tingencies of Affairs, unhinge not his Mind from his good Purposes: Divert not his Foot from the right way. Let the Weather be fair, or fowl: The World frown, or smile: Let him get or lose, be favoured or crossed; commended or reproach∣ed, (by Honour or Dishonour, by evil Report, and good Report,) he will do his Duty: The external state of Things alter not with him, the morall Reason of them. A hopeful Confidence, a chear∣ful Satisfaction, ever waits him in this right way. Nothing within him to controul, countermand, di∣stract, disturb him. Nothing without, to dismay, discourage him. If he
has not the good will of Men, he cannot hugely dread their Opposi∣tion. He may strongly presume upon the propitious Aspect, the fa∣vourable succour of Heaven; which always smiles, and casts a benign influence on honest Undertakings. He can with assurance commend his ways to Gods Providence; depend upon him for his concurrent Benedi∣ction: With an humble boldness address Prayers to him for his Pro∣tection: Refer his cause to the se∣verest consideration; with Job, say∣ing, Let me be weighed in an even ballance, that God may know mine in∣tegrity Job 31. 6.. Whatsoever befals, howsoever the business goes, he shall not condemn, not punish him∣self with Remorse: But triumph in the integrity of his Heart (if not in the felicity of his Success) and innocency of his deportment—Till
I die, I will not remove my integrity from me, my righteousness I hold fast, and will not not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live Job 27. 5, 6.. His mind is not surprized, or his passions discompos'd, by a seeming adversness of Events to his endea∣vours. He's assured, missing, is bet∣ter than getting, when by sovereign Wisdom its so determin'd. So, in effect he can have no bad success: For, how can that occurrance be deemed Bad, which plain Reason dictates in certain Judgment to be most expedient for him; about which he ever was indifferent, and with which at present he's not hear∣tily displeas'd? How can it be ta∣ken for Misfortune, which one was prepar'd to imbrace with satisfacti∣on and complacency? So, let the worst that can come, he comes not off ill; or so, (matters being right∣ly
Stated) as to be a loser upon the foot of the Account. Must not upright walking yield perpetual Joy? Being attested to, approved by the sacred Oracles, by remarkable Providences, by the general consent of all wise and good Men; by experience; that all our Good and Happiness, abso∣lutely depends on God's Favour; that to please him, can only be true Wisdom, the surest safety; to of∣fend him, the greatest Folly, Ha∣zard, Danger. That Virtue is the best endowment, Sin the worst Mis∣chief: A bad Mind the sorest Ad∣versity can befal us. That no world∣ly good or evil, are considerable to those Spiritual. That nothing can be really profitable, advantagious to us, which consists not with our Duty to God; conduces not to our spiritual Interest, our eternal Wel∣fare; but is a frivolous Trifle, a dangerous Snare, a notable Da∣mage,
or a woful Bane unto us. Is there no comfort, in being sa∣tisfied, thall all the causes of Sor∣row are removed, and all the cau∣ses of true Joy secured? To be cer∣tain we are in a safe state of Salvati∣on? To know we▪ are passed from Death to Life: That the Seeds of all saving Graces, the foundation of all saving comforts, are firmly laid in our Souls? That we have the marks, dispositions, affections, are intitled to all the priviledges of Children, of the Blessed? To see our selves guarded here by the Al∣mighty Attendance, and afterwards carry'd by them into Abraham's Bo∣som Psal. 91. 11, 12. Luke 16. 22.. To lie down (and not be afraid) as in the everlasting Arms of the Watch-man of Israel, and when we awake to be still with him, satisfied with his likeness Psal. 17. 15. & 139. 18.. The
Lord will command his loving kindness in the day-time, and in the night his song shall be with me Psal. 42. 8.. Is it not a mighty reward even in this Life, of a holy and devout Life, to be secure of our main Stake, our final State? And from all Ill, Sin, Guilt, Satan, the World, the Flesh, Death and Hell; the most horrid, formidable, gastly, only dangerous Enemies? To have our hearts not condemn, but commend, and applaud us? To have a perpe∣tual Calm, (be the World never so unquiet) a constant peace of Mind, and Sense of the Divine Favour? To have all our Sins pardon'd, all our debts paid, all our iniquities for∣given? No old Scores, no after Reckonings to perplex, disturb, shame us, make our countenance fall before him. All occasions of displeasure, distances removed; be∣ing
reconciled through our Saviour's powerful Mediation. To have confidence towards God; freedom, li∣berty, assurance in Speaking, in putting up our Prayers to him, with∣out fear of a repulse, or a denial: To come with such a holy boldness, and confidence in our Requests, as those have, who are sure to be heard Heb. 4. 16. 1 John 5. 14.. What Thought can enter into the heart of Man more comfortable and delightful, than this? That the World's Sovereign, the great Ma∣ster of all Things, the most Wise, and mighty King of Heaven and Earth, hath entertained a gracious Regard, hath exprest a real Kind∣ness unto us? That we are in capa∣city to Honour, Praise, present an acceptable sacrifice unto him, who can render us perfectly Happy? That we are admitted to the practice
of that, wherein the supream joy of Paradise, the perfection of Ange∣lical Bliss, the most delectable busi∣ness of Heaven consists? Wherefore, a Christian, as such (according to the design of his Reli∣gion, and in proportion to his com∣pliance with its Precepts) is the most chearful Person in the World: Always in humour, and full of chear: continually bearing a sprightly, ele∣vated, well satisfy'd content of Mind, (which springs from innocency of Life, a faithful discharge of our Du∣ty, satisfaction of Conscience, ac∣quiescence in our Estate, a good hope in God, our Selves, and our future State) a light Heart, a calm Spirit, a smooth Brow, a serene Countenance, a grateful accent of Speech, a well-composed tenure of Carriage. Exhibiting triumphant demonstrations of Satisfaction and Alacrity: Every way signifying his
extream complacency in God, his dealings with him: The full content he takes in his Estate; as gratefully sensible of his felicity in his Favour; boasting in God all the Day long; and in a sort commending himself as very happy in Relation to him; with a sober Confidence, and chear∣ful Insult, upon vile, odious, baffled Impiety. By his expressions and de∣meanour, upbraiding the Folly, the Baseness, the Impotency, the wret∣chedness of it; in comparison with the Wisdom, in opposition to the Power of God, his Friend and Pa∣tron. All the upright in heart shall glory Psal. 64. 10.; no black Thought, no irksom Desire, no troublesome Pas∣sion, lodges in his Breast. Any Fur∣row, any Cloud, any Frown sits ill on his Brow. Any doleful com∣plaint, sounds ill out of his Mouth. The least dumpish Aspect, fretful
Word, or froward Behaviour, utter∣ly unbecomes him. If at any time it appears otherwise, 'tis a defecti∣on from his Character; a Blemish, a wrong to his Profession; It argues a prevarication in his Judgment, or Practice: He forgets that he is a Christian, or hath not preserv'd the the innocency belonging to that Name: For, if a Christian remem∣ber what he is, is sensible of his Condition, reflects on the Dignity of his Person, the nobleness of his Relations, the sublimity of his Pri∣viledges, the greatness of his Hope, the certainty of his State, how can he lament, or be out of Hu∣mour? Is it not absur'd for him that is at peace with God, his own Consci∣ence, all the World; for the posses∣sour of the best Goods, the Heir of a blessed Immortality, the Friend, Favorite, Son of the great King, to Fret or Wail? What account can
be given, that he that's settled in a most prosperous State, that's (if he please) sure of its continuance, and improvement: That hath the in∣exhaustible Spring of good for his Portion: His well-fare intrusted in most sure Hands; God's infallible word for his Security and Support; free access to him, in whose presence is fullness of Joy; frequent tasts of his Goodness, (in gracious dispensa∣tions of his Providence, intercourses of Devotion, influence of his Grace, chearing the Heart with his light∣some presence, and ravishing conso∣lations,) the infinite Beauty and Excellency, for the perpetual object of his Contemplation, and Affection: That enjoys the serenity of a sound Mind, a pure Heart, a quiet Con∣science, a sure Hope; What can he want to refresh, or comfort him? Whence can sorrow come? How can sadness creep into him, that is
a true, a perfect Christian? That hath no care to distract him, having discharged all his concerns on God's Providence. No fear to dismay him, being guarded by the Almigh∣ty Protection from all Danger and Mischief. No despair to sink him, having a sure refuge in the Divine Mercy and Help. No superstitious terrours, or scruples to perplex him, being conscious of his own upright intentions to please God, and con∣fident of God's merciful willingness to accept his sincere Endeavours. No incurable Remorse to torment him; the sting of guilt is pull'd out by his Saviour's Merits, apply'd by his Faith and Repentance. No long∣ing desires to disquiet him, being fully satisfied with what he possesses, or may justly expect from God's Bounty. No contentions to inflame him, knowing, nothing's here worth passionatly striving for; and being resolv'd to hold a friendly good-will
towards all Men. No repining envy, seeing none more happy than he may be; and that every Man's good by Charity, is made his own. No fretful discontent, seeing he gladly acquiesces in all successes al∣lotted him; resigning his will to God's; taking all for best, which thence accurs: Knowing all shall work together for his Good and Ad∣vantage. No spiteful rancour to corrode his Heart. No boisterous passions to ruffle his Mind. No inordinate Appetites, perverse Hu∣mours, corrupt Designs, to distem∣per his Soul, or disturb his Life. What is there belonging to a Christian whence grief naturally can Spring? From God, our exceeding Joy; the fountain of Happiness and all comfort? From Heaven, the region of Light and Bliss? From his Law, which inlightens, chears, rejoyces the Heart, is sweeter than the Honey, or Honey Comb? From
Wisdom, whose ways are pleasant∣ness, and all her paths Peace? From the contemplation of heaven∣ly Truth? From the sense of his Favour? From the pardon of our Sins? From the influences, the ef∣fects of Divine Grace? From the hopes, and anticipation of everlast∣ing Bliss. From virtue, which cures our afflictive Distempers, composes our vexatious Passions? From those sweet Sources, about which a Christian, as such, is only conversant, no Sorrow can be deriv∣ed, no bitter stream Flow. But Hell, the Flesh, the World, Dark∣ness, Error, Folly, Sin, Irreligion, (things with which a Christian hath nothing to do; from which he keeps aloof; which he utterly Renounces and Abandons) they only are the Parents of discomfort and anguish. Wherefore, there's the same Rea∣son, Obligation, Possibility, that we should rejoyce always, as that we
should always be Christians; exact∣ly performing Duty, totally for∣bearing Sin. For, innocence, and indolence; perfect Virtue, and con∣stant Alacrity, ever go together, are inseperable Companions, and consti∣tute Happiness.
PRAYERS FOR Procuring and Preserving THE Peace and Joy of the Soul. The Third Part. ASsist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our supplications and prayers; and dispose the way of thy servants towards the at∣tainment of everlasting Salvation,
that among all the changes and chances of this mortal Life, we may ever be defended by thy most graci∣ous and ready help, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. ALmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of all things, judge of all men; we ac∣knowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, which we from time to time most grievously have committed, by thought, word and deed, against thy divine Majesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation against us. We do earnestly repent, and are heartily sorry for these our mis-doings, the remembrance of them is grievous unto us, the burden of them is in∣tolerable. Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us most merciful Father, for thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ sake, forgive us all that is past, and grant that we may ever
hereafter serve and please thee in newness of life, to the honour and glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers, that we make before thee in allour troubles and adversities, when∣soever they oppress us; and graci∣hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the Devil or Man worketh against us, be brought to nought, and by the providence of thy goodness they may be di∣spersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no tryals, or temptations, persecutions, or afflictions; may e∣vermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities, and for the glory of thy name, turn from us all those evils, that we most righ∣teously have deserved: and grant, that in all our troubles, we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness of living, to thy honour and glory, through our only Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ, Amen. O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do proceed; give unto thy servants that peace which the World cannot give, that both our hearts may be set to obey thy com∣mandments, and also, that by thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and quietness, through the
merits of Jesus Christ our Saviour, Amen. O God, who art the Author of peace, and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom standeth our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom; defend us thy humble ser∣vants in all Assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy de∣fence, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Je∣sus Christ our Lord, Amen. LORD of all power and might, who art the Author and giver of all good things; graft in our hearts the love of thy Name, en∣crease in us true Religion, nourish us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
O Almighty God, who alone canst order the unruly wills and affections of sinful men; grant unto thy people that they may love the thing which thou commandest, and desire that which thou dost pro∣mise, that so among the sundry and manifold changes of the world, our hearts may surely there be fixed, where true Joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. ALmighty and everlasting God, who dost govern all things in Heaven and Earth; mercifully hear the supplications of thy people, and grant us thy peace all the days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O God, who knowest us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers, that by reason
of the frailty of our nature we can∣not always stand upright, grant to us such strength and protection, as may support us in all dangers, and carry us through all temptations, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. ALmighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon our In∣firmities, and in all our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy right Hand to help and defend us, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. ALmighty God, who seest that we have no power of our selves to help our selves; keep us both out∣wardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls, that we may be defend∣ed from all adversities which may happen to the body, and from all e∣vil thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.
WE beseech thee Almighty God, mercifully to look up on thy people; that by thy great goodness they may be governed and preserved evermore, both in body and Soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. ALmighty God, who through thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ hat overcome death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life; we humbly beseech thee, that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou dost put into our minds good desires, so by thy continual help, we may bring the same to good effect, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost, ever one God, world with∣out end, Amen.
O Lord, from whom all good things do come, grant to us thy humble servants, that by thy holy inspiration we may think those things that be good, and by thy merciful guiding may perform the same, through Jesus Christ, Amen. O God, who didst teach the hearts of thy faithful people, by sending to them the light of thy holy Spirit; grant us by the same Spirit to have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoyce in his holy comfort, through the me∣rits of Jesus Christ our Saviour, Amen. O Lord, who never failest to help and govern them whom thou dost bring up in thy steadfast fear and love; keep us we beseech thee under the protection of thy good providence, and make us to
have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O Lord, we beseech thee mer∣cifully to hear us, and grant that we to whom thou hast given an hearty desire to pray, may by thy mighty aid be defended and comfor∣ted in all dangers and adversities, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. LORD, we pray thee, that thy grace may always prevent and ollow us, and make us continually to be given to all good works, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. LORD, we beseech thee, grant thy people grace to withstand the temptations of the world, the flesh and the Devil, and with pure hearts and minds to follow thee the
only God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O Lord, forasmuuch as with∣out thee we are not able to please thee; mercifully grant that thy holy Spirit may in all things di∣rect and rule our hearts, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O Almighty and most merci∣ful God, of thy bountiful goodness keep us we beseech thee from all things that may hurt us: that we being ready both in body and soul, may chearfully accom∣plish those things that thou wouldest have done, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. GRANT, we beseech thee, merciful Lord, to thy faith∣ful people pardon and peace, that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with a quiet
mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. ALmighty and everlasting God, who art always more ready to hear, than we to pray, and to give more than either we desire or deserve; pour down upon us the a∣bundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those things whereof our Consci∣ence is afraid, and giving us those good things which we are not wor∣thy to ask, but through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord, Amen. WE do not presume to come unto thee most merciful Lord, trusting in our own righte∣ousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies. We are not worthy so much as to gather up the crumbs under the Table of thy meanest servants. But thou art the same Lord, whose property is always to
have mercy on those that fear thee; and whose promise is, to forgive our iniquities, and to remember our sins no more; to heal our back-slid∣ings, and love us freely, through him who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree: suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust, to bring sinners unto thee: who hath laid on him the iniquity of us all; who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justifi∣cation; and is entred into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, even Jesus who deli∣vereth us from the wrath to come. O let us enjoy the comfort, by un∣feignedly believing the certainty of so great salvation, and living in the joyful sense and praise of it, until we come eternally to sing Blessing,Jer. 31. 34. Hos. 14. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 24. & 3. 18. Isa. 53. 6. Rom. 4. 25. Heb. 9. 24. 1 Thessa. 1. 10.
and Honour, and Glory, and Pow∣er be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever, that loved us, and hath wash∣ed us from our sins in his own blood; and hath made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, and our Father, to his God, and our God; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. O Thou who hast extended thy mercy to so many and so great sinners as we find upon re∣cord; we believe thou who art infi∣nite in mercy, hast not less in store for us, than thou hadst for them; but so loved the world that thou gavest thy only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. O look down upon us in much mer∣cy, with the pity and tender com∣passionsRev. 5. 13. & 1. 5, 6. John 20. 17.
of a Father; deal with us with the loving kindness of a Savi∣our; with the favour of one that was sent, and came into the world, not to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved. O pardon all our past sins, defections, frailties; supply the wants, weaknessess, imperfections of our sin∣cere obedience, with a gracious ac∣ceptance; support, relieve us under all the tryals, sorrows, temptations of this World; and enable us to look up to thee in peace, and with a com∣fortable well grounded confidence of being at last received into thine e∣verlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. O Thou that dwellest in the high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and hum∣ble spirit, to revive the spirit of theJohn 3. 16, 17.
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones; pardon and speak peace unto us through him who is our peace, hath loved us, and given himself for us: justifie us free∣ly by thy grace through the re∣demption that is in Jesus Christ, whom thou hast set forth to be a propitiation for our sins. O let us not distrust the sufficiency, and acceptance of that sacrifice for all our offences, which was made for the sins of the whole world; scatter and disperse the clouds and darkness of our minds: clear up in us just ap∣prehensions of thee, and of our selves. Free us from all intangling scruples, dejecting cares, disquieting doubts and fears. Ease, quiet, compose our minds by thy holy Spirit, the Comforter, by a firm belief and hope of thy free grace and mercy to all true penitents, and by a stedfastEph. 2. 14. & 5. 2. Rom. 3. 24, 25.
reliance upon thy truth, thy faith∣ful promises, in and through Je∣sus Christ our Lord, Amen. HAVE mercy upon us, O God, according to thy loving kind∣ness; according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out all our transgressions: wash us throughly from our iniquities, and cleanse us from our sins. Create in us clean hearts, and renew a right spirit within us. Cast us not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from us. Restore unto us the joy of thy salvation, and uphold us with thy free spirit. Make us to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoyce. Make thy face to shine upon thy ser∣vants, O save us for thy mercy sake. give us comfort, and sure confidence in thee: defend us from the danger, and fear of the enemy, and keep us in perpetual peace and safety,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. BE thou, O Lord, our strong hold, whereunto we may always resort, save thy servants, who put their trust in thee. Send us help from thy holy place, and evermore mightily defend us, from the evil one, and every evil thing. Tread down Satan under our Feet; let the enemy have no advantage of us, nor approach to hurt us. Strength∣en us against evil suggestions, temp∣tations, and all our spiritual enemies. And grant, that by thy help and goodness, we may be defended, as∣sisted, and comforted in all our dan∣gers and adversities, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. GIVE ear, O Shepherd of Is∣rael, who out of thy tender care and compassion hast promised to feed thy Flock like a Shepherd;
to gather the Lambs with thy arm, to carry them in thy bosom, and gently lead those that are with young. In much mercy consider our weakness, frailties, and infirmi∣ties, who are thy people, and sheep of thy pasture. O forgive all our past errings and wandrings from thee, for his sake, who laid down his life for his sheep, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, to take away the sins of the world: and for the future, lead us in the paths of righteousness for thy name sake, to endless refreshment, ease and rest. By patient continu∣ance in well-doing and suffering thy will (which is always best) let us seek for and obtain glory and honour, and immortality; eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,Isa. 40. 11. Amen.
O Thou that art the God of our strength, send out thy light and thy truth into our souls, let them lead and bring us unto thy holy Hill, thy dwelling place. Let no distrust of thy merciful accept∣ance deprive us of the comforts of thy ways of pleasantness, thy paths of peace. Let us find and make it appear, that there is more in Religi∣on than a bare name for our support: that our Rock is not their Rock, our enemies themselves being judge. When we are ready to say, our foot slippeth, let thy mercy O Lord hold us up: and in the multitude of our thoughts within us, thy comforts refresh, delight our Souls. Keep us from murmuring or repining a∣gainst thee; from entertaining any hard, unbecoming thoughts of thee; let us ever say, good is the word of the Lord, be it unto us even as he will. Give us the guidance, the sup∣orts, the comforts of thy holy Spi∣rit. At what time we are afraid,
let us trust in thee, cast our burden, all our care upon thee, because thou carest for us, and hast promised then to sustain us; injoyned us to be careful for nothing, but in every thing, by prayer and sup∣plication, with thanksgiving (for all thy mercies) to make our re∣quest known unto thee; and let thy peace which passeth all un∣derstanding, keep our hearts and minds, in a sense of thy love and favour, and acceptance, through Je∣sus Christ our Lord, Amen. O Fountain, Father of mercies; God of all comfort, and con∣solation; quench not the smoaking Flax, break not the bruised Reed; revive, maintain, encrease and strengthen the smallest degrees and beginnings of grace in us, until we have overcome our doubts and fears, and all our spiritual enemies. When we are apt to be cast down, deje∣cted, and mistrustful of our selves,
let us not cast away our confidence in thee; not mistrust the God of truth; not call in question thy free promises of grace and mercy; not cast off the hope of thy gracious ac∣ceptance; not shut the door of mer∣cy upon our selves, which thou hast opened to all the world. Be our sup∣port and stay under all heaviness and dejection of spirit; stand by us in the hour of trouble, tryal, temptation, death: Let not thy mer∣cy, nor our faith fail us; when our flesh and our hearts faileth us, be thou the strength of our hearts, and our portion for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. REmember us, O Lord with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people: O visit us with thy salvation; that we may see the good of thy chosen; that we may rejoyce in the gladness of thy ser∣vants;
that we may glory with thine inheritance. Let perfect love cast out fear: And a comfortable hope of thy mercy, be as an Anchor of our Souls, both sure and stedfast; that we may be never driven from it or thee, by any outward or in∣ward storms or tempests. Let no temptation befal us, but such as is common to men, incident to thy Children: suffer us not to be temp∣ted above what we are able, but with the temptation give an happy Issue, make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear and over∣come through him who was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin, and hath overcome all his and our enemies; who was dead and is alive for evermore, making intercession for us; and hath the Keys of Hell and Death: To whom with thy blessed Majesty andHeb. 4. 15.
holy Spirit, be all honour, glory, and praise, now and ever, Amen. UNTO God's gracious mercy and protection, we commit our selves. The good Lord bless us, and keep us. The Lord make his face to shine upon us, and be gracious unto us. The Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon us, and give us peace, now and ever∣more, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for W. Freeman, at the Bible in Fleet-street. THE Devout Communicant, exemplified in his Behaviour, before at, and after the Sacra∣ment of the Lord's Supper, practically suited to all the parts of that solemn Ordinance. The seventh Edition Corrected and very much A∣mended by the Author. Price 1s. 6d. An Infallible way to Cententment, in the midst of Publick or Personal Calamities; with particular Encouragement against the fear of Fire and Poverty, evil Tidings, and Death it self. The fourth Edition, Corrected and En∣larged, by the Author of the Devout Communi∣cant. Price 1s. 6d. The whole Duty of a Christian: Containing all things necessary, both as to what he is to know, and do, for the obtaining a Happy Eter∣nity. To which is added more particular Di∣rections, how to prepare for a Comfortable Death. Price 1s. 6d. ☞ The three Books, above named, are now Printed on an Extraordinary good Paper and fair Character. A Manual of Private Devotions and Medita∣tions, with Directions for the Sick. By the Right Reverend Father in God L. Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester, in 12mo. Price 1s. 6d. A View of all Religions in the World, By Alexander Ross. in 8vo. Price 6s.
The Old Religion, a Treatise wherein is laid down the true state of the Difference betwixt the Reformed and the Roman Church, for the set∣ling of wavering Minds, and a Preservation against Popish Insinuations, By the Reverend Father in God Jos. Hall, late Lord Bishop of Exeter, in 12mo. Price 1s. 6d. Quarles Emblems: The last and best Edition, in 8vo. Price 5s. —His Argalus and Parthenia, in 8vo. with Cuts. —The same in 12mo. without Cuts. Price 1s. Miege's last and best French Grammar, 8vo. Price 2s. —His Grammar for Foreigners to learn English. Price 2s. Politeuphenia: Wits Common Wealth, or a Treasury of Divine, Moral, Historical, and Political Admonitions, Similies and Sentences, for the use of Schools: Newly Revised. Price 1s. 6d. The Manners of the Israelites, in three Parts, 1. Of the Patriarchs. 2. Of the Israelites after their coming out of Egypt until the Captivity of Babylon. 3. Of the Jews, after their return from the Captivity, until the Preaching of the Gospel. Price 1s. Directions for the due Observation of the Lord's Day. Price stitch'd 4d. Thesaurarium Mathematicae; or, the Treasu∣ry of the Mathematicks, containing variety of useful Practices in Arithmetick, Geometry, Trigonometry, Astronomy, Geography, Navi∣gation
and Surveying: As also the Mensuration of Board, Glass, Tiling, Paving, Timber, Stone, and Irregular Solids. Likewise it teach∣eth the Art of Gauging, Dialling, Fortification and Gunnery. Illustrated with several Mathe∣matical Sculptures on Copper Plates, By J. Taylor, Gent. The Elements of Euclid explain'd in a new, but most easie Method: by that excellent Mathematician, F. C. F. Milliet de Chales, of the Society of Jesus; now made English, in 8vo. Price 4s. Dr. Harvey's Treatise of the small Pox and Measles. in 8vo. Price 1s. 6d. The Art of preserving and restoring Health, in 12mo. Price 1s. A Compleat Body of Chyrurgical Operations, containing the whole Practice of Surgery, with Observations and Remarks on each case. By M. de la Vauguion, M. D. and Intendant of the Royal Hospitals about Paris; faithfully done into English, in 8vo. Price 6s. A new Voyage to Italy, By Maximilion Mis∣son, Gen. in 2 vol. 8vo. Price 12s. Of Wisdom three Books, Written Original∣ly in French by the Sieur de Charron, made Eng∣lish by G. Stanhope, D. D. Chaplain in Ordina∣ry to his Majesty, in 2 Vol. 8vo. Price 12s. The Roman History, By Laurence Echard, A. M. of Christ College in Cambridge, in 2 Vol. 8vo. Price 11s. Erasmi Colloquia, in 8vo. Price 2s. 6d. Cambridge Phrases, in 8vo. Price 5s.
A Compleat Guide for Justices of Peace: In two Parts; the first containing the Common and Statute Laws relating to the Office of a Justice of the Peace: The second consisting of the most Authentick and useful Presidents, which do pro∣perly concern the same: By J. Bond, of Grays-Inn, Esq; The second Edition, much Enlarg∣ed and continued down, in 8vo. Price 6s. Means to Preserve Peace in Marriage. By the Author of Rules of Civility. Price 1s. Zenophon's History of Greece, Translated by J. Newman, Gent. 8vo. Price 4s. ☞ There is newly Printedan Excellent Book, Entituled, Arithmetick; or, the Ground of Arts: Teaching that Science, both in whole Numbers and Fractions. Originally Composed by Dr. Record, and others. And now perused, Corrected, new Methodized, much approved; And thereto Added, I. A new Treatise of Decimals, with the Demonstration of each Rule, and the Relation it has to Vulgar Fracti∣ons; Also why Decimals are wrought as whole Numbers, &c. II. Tables of Simple and Compound Interest, with the manner of Cal∣culation, and use thereof in Resolving all the most necessary Questions, concerning Interest and Discount of Money; the Purchasing or Selling Estates, in Land or Houses, in Present, or Reversion, in Fee or for time Limited, and for Fining off Rent, &c. III. The easiest Me∣thod of Extracting the Square and Cube-Roots of Numbers, whole or broken, and the use thereof in many material Instances. Dedica∣ted to his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. By Edward Hatton, Philomercat. Price 5s.
