R2230 12436044 62034
TWO SERMONS Preached at the Meeting of the COUNCIL OF George Heriot's HOSPITAL, At EDINBURGH, EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Mosman, in the Year 1695.
TO THE READER. AMong the Sermons lately Preached, at the Meeting of the Governours of George Heriot's Hospital, Some who heard them thought fit to publish the two following, Hope∣ing they may be useful to excite people to Works of Charity especially such good Works, the Fruit of which is extended to many, and more parti∣cularly such as tend to promote the Education of Young Persons, who have none to care for them, and who may be afterwards useful, whither by publick or more private service to the Church or Nation: It hath been observed of late Years,
since this course of Preaching on such subjects began, more such Charity hath been given in this City then in many Years before, And that Fond designed for Erecting a Hospital for Main∣tainance and Education of Orphans of the Fe∣male Sex hath much encreased, to which many Pi∣ous Persons both Men and Women have contri∣buted Liberally, beside other pious Mortificati∣ons and Donations made in the City for other publick Vses. The hope, that these and other Sermons of the like Tendency may (by Gods Blessing) have further influence on well disposed Christians to whom God hath given Wealth, that they may also have a Heart to use it, for his Glory, and to serve the Lord with their sub∣stance, and that people may be perswaded thus to shew their Faith by their Works, Is that which moved the Publishers to send these two Sermons Abroad.
A SERMON Preached by Mr. GILBERT RVLE Minister of the Gospel, and Principal of the Colledge of Edinburgh. Munday, December 3d. 1694. Psal. 112. ver. 9. He hath dispersed, He hath given to the Poor, His Righteousness en∣dureth for ever, His Horn shall be exalted with Honour. THIS Psalm Informeth us of the Great Blessings that attend the Godly; As the Apostle also telleth us, that it hath the Promises of this Life, and that which is to come: And that it is profiteable for all Things. 1 Tim. 4. 8. And the Psalmist doth also give us some of the Characters of the Man that shall be thus Blessed, that he is one that fears the Lord ver. 1. Aweful Thoughts of the Holiness, Goodness, Power and Majesty of God do Influence him in the Course of his Life, Also He delighteth in God's Commandments ver. 1. his Will and Affections are gained to the practice of Holiness.
It is not barely the Terrours of a Natural Conscience that trouble him; He is called an Vpright Man, ver. 4. an Unbyassed Man, who singly mindeth Duty and the Glory of God. Likeways he is called a Good Man, ver. 5: a Benign Person, and of a Loving and Lovely Disposition. He is also Righteous ver. 6 Inclined to do Justice to all, and give every one their due. But the Commendation of this Hap∣py Man, that the Psalmist doth here most insist on, Is his Charity, his Affection and Regard to the Necessities of Men; which maketh him bestow liberally for their Relief, so far as he is able ver. 4. 5. and in the Text. In the words read we have two Things to be considered. 1. The practice of the Good Man. 2. The Blessings that follow on this pra∣ctice, The practice or Duty is set forth in two Expressions 1, he hath dispersed. The Chaldee Paraphrase hath it, He hath Dispersed his Money or Goods  for that is indeed meant, his work is not to scrape and hoord, and to keep, as they who set their Heart on the World, but as he is duely careful to get by good Means, and to be∣ware of wicked Lavishing; so his great care is, how to lay out for the Glory of God, and the good of Mankind; This word importeth. 1, The Good Mans communicating of his Goods, neither laying them up, not bestowing all on himself, his Pride, Vanity, or other Lusts; he believes that as God made him not for himself, so he should not live to himself, but for God's Glory, and the good of Men: this Com∣municating is enjoined Heb. 13. 16. 2dly. It implyeth not a Spare∣ing, but a Liberal Giving, he hath a large Heart and an open Hand, according to his Ability, and the Necessities of the Objects of Charity: It was counted Liberality in the Poor Widow to give a Mite or two, but it were penuriousness in a Richer Person. See 2 Cor. 9. 6. 3dly It implyeth giving to many, as Eccles. 11. 12. Not to make one poor-Body Rich; and let many Starve, there is Discretion to be used in Charity▪ Psal 112. 5. The other Expression qualifieth this Dis∣persing of our Goods, the Good Man disperseth his Goods by Giving of them to the Poor. There are some who disperse their Estate very fast and profusely, they quickly (as the saying is) let the Wind
among their Heaps of Treasure and Great Estates, but it is by Drunk∣eness, Whoredom, Gameing, spent on their Back and Belly, or on mi∣staken Credit; and Honour; on high and Luxurious Living: Some peo∣ples Cloaths, and House-hold Furniture Eat up what they should lay out on the Necessitous Poor: Others disperse on their Superstition, and out of a mistaken Zeal for Religion, as Isai 46. 6. They lavish Gold out of the Bag: what incredible Riches hath the Blind Superstition of Pa∣pists furnished some Churches and Monasteries with, while many Poor want Bread: here is a dispersing with a Witness; but the Good Man's dispersing is Giving to the Poor for their Relief: Which dispers∣ing does not use to Ruin Estates, and bring the giver to poverty, as the other doth. The 2d. part of the Text is the Blessings that follow on this Liberality. 1. His Righteousness endureth for ever, Some expound it thus: Bounty or Mercifulness (so the word is used, Dan. 4. 27. and often in the Old Testament) shall never want a Fond, his Rich∣es shall be like a Springing Fountain that goeth not dry: Others, the reward of his Bounty shall never fail: Others, his Bountiful Disposition will continue: Others, the effect of his Bounty is often abiding and conspicuous to the Glory of God, and Commendation of the Liberal Man, even after he is laid in the Dust. Many times the good works of Men that are bountiful are a lasting Monument: an instance of this, Wee have in the Famous Hospital that giveth the occasion to this Meeting: how many great Estates of Citizens, and others, which they had with great care gathered, are wasted by prodigal Heirs, since this Hospital was founded, while it is yet lasting to the use, it was appointed for. 2dly. Another Blessing, his horn shall be ex∣alted with honour, That is, Strength, Prosperity and Honour shall be the Fruit of such a practice; In a word, the Psalmist would have us look on this, as the best way to raise, and to establish a Family, which many are Ambitious of, but they take the wrong way to com∣pass their Design, by defrauding the Poor of what the Lord hath made their due out of Mens Estates. Several practical Truths may be here observed, which time will not allow to insist on, I shall summe up what Doctrine the Text affordeth, in this one Proposition, Libe∣rality,
for the Relief the Poor, is a Duty, that God requireth and will Reward. For clearing this, and convincing you of this Truth, I shall first prove this in the General, and then shall prove some particular Truths, that are comprehended under the General Doctrine For the General proposition, It is plainly, peremptorily and fre∣quently commanded▪ Lev. 25. 35 Deut▪ 15. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Isai 58 7. Luke 11. 41. Luke. 3. 11. 1 Tim 6 18. Heb 13. 16. If the Authority of God have any weight with us, this we will make Conscience of. 2ly. The Lord hath declared Himself well pleased with this, as a Christian Duty. Heb, 13. 16. 3ly. It hath alwayes been esteemed in the Church, and pressed by the Faithful Pastors of it. The Papists, it is true, carry it too high, make it Meritorious, and insist mostly on it, perverting the peoples Charity, which should relieve the Poor, to feed Idle Monks, and adorn and Enrich Monasteries: But the Fathers, and the Faithful Mi∣nisters in all ages thought it their duty to press this good work on the people: So doth the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. 1. and 9. 1. And with what Earnestness and strength of Argument, do the Fathers in their Ser∣mons, and Epistles urge this Duty on the people? Augustine sayeth, The poor Man is a Fruitful field, it quickly yeildeth Fruit to the Sower, Again, If thou be a good Merchant, an excellent Vsurer, give that which thou canst not keep always, that thou may receive that which thou canst not lose; give a little, that thou mayest receive a hundred-fold; give a temporal possession, that thou mayest receive an Eternal Inheritance. Ambrose, he is truely Blessed out of whose house the poor never goeth empty▪ Again, to with-hold relief from the Indigent for saving his Life is to kill him, Beware that thou hoord not up in thy Bags the health or safety of the poor; That is to Bury him, in thy heaps of Silver; Another saith, he doth in vain stretch forth his hand to God in Prayer who stretcheth it not out to the Poor by giving.
4ly. Nature teacheth this Duty. The Heathens both commended and used this practice; to the Shame of many, who own the true Re∣ligion; I shall forbear instances to spare time, only I cannot pass that of Xenophon, who used to say, That it was more Glorious, for one to leave many Deeds of Bounty behind him, than many Trophees of Victory. 5ly. For this end, The Lord (who could have levelled all the World) hath made some Poor, and others Rich, That the one may Exercise Dependence upon God, who feedeth all, and the other might shew their obedience to him in feeding the Poor, See Deut. 15. 10, 11 The Lord hath made the one His Stewards, and the other His Receivers. 6ly. It is the constant and unfailing Fruit of the Grace of God, And the footsteps that God's Flock hath always walked in: Abound∣ance of Instances may be given. See Prov▪ 21: 26. Obadiah is one Instance. 1 Kings 18▪ 13. Also Job▪ 31. 16. And Zacheus Luke 19: 8. Cornelius Act: 10 12▪ 13. 4 Dorcas Acts 9 36▪ The Church of Jerusalem in the time of great Persecution, had all things com∣mon Act: 2. 44, and 4 34. And we Read of Churches sending Re∣lief to other Churches in Distress. Under this General Truth, some particulars are to be proved, for further clearing the matter▪ 1st. It is certain, that this Liberal be∣stowing is not left at Liberty, it is not only a commendable thing, but a necessary Duty; Actual Giving, is necessar to all▪ as they have oc∣casion: and a Disposition or Inclination to it: is necessary in all Sim∣ply. This is clear, first, from the command of God, of which before considering, especially that breaking of one Command, is a Breach of the whole Law, being a despising of Gods Authority, See Jam. 2. 10. 11. Also from the Threatnings of the Wrath of God, against Ne∣glecters of this Duty Prov. 21. 13. and 28. 27. A Curse not only from the Poor who are defrauded, but from Angels and God Him∣self shall be on him, saith Gejerus (a Learned Interpreter) Matt, 25. 42. it bringeth a Consumption on peoples Estates, Prov. 11. 24.
Another Truth here comprehended is, As People must give ac∣compt to God of all other Actings, or omissions; so especially of this, how they have employed what God gave them in the World, you are not Accomptable to Men, how you spend what is your own (Though it is a pity that profuse Wasters are not punished as Posts among Men, and Destroyers, or Weakners of the Common∣wealth) yet God will surely call you to an Accompt▪ And particu∣arly what proportion of your Goods you have given to the Poor, or whether you have eaten your Morsel alone; This is no doubt a part of our Stewardship, or trust, that we have from the Lord, of which we must give an Accompt. Luke 16. 12. And that this is designed in that Parable may be gathered from verse 9. where the Application of the Parable is, That Men should make Friends of the Mammon, (or Riches) of Unrighteousness (Riches are so called, because much Unrighteousness is Acted in the World in getting, in keeping and in useing them) in order to Everlasting Habitations; The meaning is, that people should use their Riches, or what they Enjoy, with respect to their appearance at Judgement: Which if it were minded, the Poor would get a better share then they do; That this is aimed at, is also clear from ver. 11. 12. Where Faithfulness in useing Worldly Goods is mentioned, which could not be, if these were not a Trust, that Men have from God, the Giver of them, of which they must give ac∣count to him: This Truth is also manifest from the account we have of the last Judgement, Math. 25. Where peoples Charity, in reliev∣ing the Poor and distressed, is the one thing mentioned about which God will Reckon with Men: And surely it will be in a special manner taken notice of. A Third particular included in the Doctrine is, God will reward this Liberality to the Poor, the Text is a plain proof of this▪ Also Prov. 19. 17 where ye see, that they that lay out their Goods thus have Gods Word for a sure and abundant payment, and his Word is surer than Mens Bond, Yea then the surest Right, or even possession that ye can have, Mat. 10. 42. Heb. 6. 10. Ecl. 11. 1. And this Giving is called Sowing, which useth to yeild a plentiful Crop, much more
income, then is laid out. 2 Cor. 9. 6. Prov. 11. 24. Gal. 6, 7, 8, 9. 10. Prov. 3. 9. 10▪ This Reward is not of Debt, as if our Cha∣rity could merit, but of Grace; The Lords Gracious Testimony of approving so good a Work. The Blessings that are the Reward of this Good Work, are always real and sure, and to them who do it a∣right, and from a good Principle, they are Eternal: But often they are visible and observable by Men; sometimes the Lord Blesseth such with Riches and Increase of Goods, Whereas there is a secret Moth and invisible Consumption upon the Estates of them, who do no good Works this Way. A Blessing to posterity is often the fruit of this Grace, Psal. 112: 2. It is spoken of the Charitable Man▪ Instances of this may be given; if it were fit to mention the Names of persons so publickly. It is the way to raise or to Establish a Family, A good Name, Praise and Esteem among Men is often the Reward of this good Work, the Remembrance of such is savory and with respect; The Hospital hard by is an Instance of this, George Heriot is Remembred with Honour, when the Names of Hoording Misers, and profuse Wasters, on their Lusts, do Wither, are forgotten that they were on Earth, or are on∣ly spoken off to their Disgrace. And not only the founder, but such as have improved and promoted this good Work, and made this Chari∣ty to extend to 4 or 5 times as many moe as could have the benefite of it a few Years agoe,Tho. Fisher Treasurer. such I say God will Bless, and Man will praise. Vse. That which I shall chiefly insist on by way of Appli∣cation is▪ To press this Duty on them that hear me▪ many things which may be used as Motives are already and occasi∣onally mentioned: And I believe none of us, when we consider the Duty in it self, will deny that it ought to be our care to per∣form it, but most Men notwithstanding make a shift to excuse them∣selves and quiet their Consciences in the shameful neglect of it, I shall therefore speak but to Three Heads here. First. What Cha∣ritable Liberality should we use. Secondly, Who should use it. Thirdly, What usually hindereth it.
For the First. These Works Regard the Bodies of People, or their Souls, or the publick state of the Nation or Church. Charity to Peoples Bodies is manifold. By giving Liberally to the Weekly Col∣lection at the Church door, it is God's Ordinance, 2 Cor. 16. 1. 2. And it is the stock out of which many Poor are Relieved. Giving to particular needy persons, The Widows, the Fatherless, the Stran∣gers, the Sick, and Infirm, these who by any cross providences have had any such losses as bringeth them to need the Charity of others, poor Families who do what they can to live, and yet cannot subsist without the help of others. Lending to some without usury is as really a Duty, and as great a Work of Charity, as giving a little to others. Psal. 112. 5. Breeding of Young Ones, Boys, or Girles. If every Family that is Rich, or can live well, should take a Young one and feed them, and Cloath them, and breed them in Religion, and to such Learning as they are capable of, or is fitt for them, and put them to Trades, what a Blessing would it be to the Nation? There would not be so many Idle persons, Theives and other Debauched persons, who are a burden to City and Country, and it might entail a Blessing on such Families. 2dly. We should mind that Charitable bestowing that contribut∣eth to the good of peoples Souls, such as giving somewhat for the pro∣pagation of the Gospel in places of Ignorance and Barbarity; As great Men might contribute much to the Propagation of the Gospel in the Heathen and Turkish parts of the World, so Mean Men might do somewhat towards advancing Religion among our Highlanders: An excellent and worthy person in our Neighbour-Nation, hath late∣ly caused print the Bible in the Highland Language, and sent a great quantity of them to be distributed among that people O! that some among our Selves would imitate so worthy a Pattern. Wayes enough may be found how such Charity might be well employed;  's a good Work to contribute to the placeing of Ministers, where they are wanting, and Encourageing them where they are placed: Alas the Covetousness and perverseness of Men in some places of the Country doth much obstruct the Gospel, Some keep
places, as long vacant as they can. Others defraud Ministers of what is their due, so that in some places there is a necessity of re∣moving Ministers for want of Maintainance, as the Levits in Ne∣hemiahs time Neh. 13▪ 10, 11. Its sad when there is none to shw Charity in such a case, in setleing a Maintainance where it is not, and sadder when justice is wanting in getting of what is due, and that to the great detriment of the Souls of People, It's an Act of Charity to buy Bibles and practical Books, and give them to the poor: as some have done, and sent them from London unto the Remotest places of that Nation, to be distributed. 3dly. Publick Charity is a good Work, That is highly commend∣able, such as Building and Endowing of Hospitals for the poor, the Sick, the Aged, Strangers, but especially for Breeding of Young Ones, whether Boys or Girles. Examples of this kind are rare and followed but by few: In the Hospitl, that giveth occasion to our meet∣ing to day, we have a great instance of publick Charity for Breeding of Boys. And I understand there is a design on Foot in this City for the like Charity for Breeding of Girles, which is a pious and com∣mendable work, and which every one that is capable should contri∣bute toward setting it foreward, as some to their great Commendati∣on have already done: It is a work, that may not only be of advantage to the poor Young Ones, and their necessitous Parents, but may be of publick advantage (if wisely and faithfully managed) by furnish∣ing the City and other places with persons fit for service in Familys, and for all other Employments that are competent to that Sex, instead of a great many Theives and Whores, and persons good for nothing, which grow up without being bred either to Religion, or to any thing else that is good, It is a good Work to improve what is thus begun, and to make it as useful and extensive as possible, for the ends that it is  for. And when such Donations are embezled or dila∣pidated, whether by unfaithfulness, or Negligence, it is a Heynous Sin. It is als for the publick good to Erect Schools and Colledges to Bursarys, whereby many good Spirits, which through pover∣ty might be lost, are trained up for the publick Service; and they who
cannot do thus, might take a poor Student into their house for a time: Also helping of publick Libraries and augmenting them, that they may be stored with all the best Books for the help of them, that cannot buy of their own: It is very strange, that this age is so far short of former ages, in all these sorts of Liberality. 2dly. The second thing proposed is, Who should be thus Liberal for private Charity all are obliged to it, according to their Capacity: publick Charity is out of the reach of many, and there are more who do not what they well might do this way, it is true, it is only to be expected from them who have somewhat to spare from the Main∣tainance of their Familys: But if people were less profuse that way, they would have more to give for a pious and good use. I shall then shew you from whom such Charity might be expected, First, from Childless persons, it is they who have been ordinarily most Eminent in these good Works, especially if they have few necessitous Friends to relieve, and even they who have these; The publick Necessities should have a good share of their Means. Secondly, They who have much Wealth and few Children, it is a great evil in many, that they think nothing enough to provide for their Children, many give to their▪ Children so much, that it is a snare, maketh them mind no Industry nor Vertue, yea they destroy it and their Souls to the boot, in spending what their parents have laid up for them: Therefore it is the wisdom of Rich parents to give their Children what they may comfortably live on, useing Industry and Frugality, and the rest to lay out for good uses, especially if Children be not so wise, Sober, and Religious as they should be, they are to be entrusted with the less. 3ly, Thirdly, Even they who have much Wealth and many Chil∣dren, they should not be wholly wanting to this Duty, a little taken off every Childs portion and piously laid out may entail a Blessing on the Children to their greater Wordly Advantage, See Prov. 20, 7. If would consider that it is the Blessing of the Lord that maketh ; and it is that Blessing that raiseth and preserveth great Families, they would be more careful to lay up a Blessing for them, then to lay up great Riches for them.
3ly. The third thing is, What doth usually hinder this Charitable Liberality. The Love of the World: The Heart cleaving to it, too high esteem of it, whereby having it is preferred to the Souls good and peace, and to pleasing God. 2ly, Want of, or defectiveness in the Love of God. 1 Jo, 3, 17. 3dly. A narrow selfish temper, want of a publick Spirit; many act as if nothing were to be regarded but themselves, as if themselves were their last end. 4 Fourthly, Distrust of God's providence: people will not believe that their Bread cast on the Waters shall be recovered, or that if they Sow they shall Reap, they have no such perswasion of the Truth of the Word, as that they can venture any thing upon it. 5▪ Fifthly, Pride and Luxury: People that overvalue themselves and despise others, think nothing enough for themselves, and any thing too much for others, and people that profusely spend on their pride, Vanity, pleasures and Lusts, can spare nothing for any good use; It hath always been observed, that they who have done most good, were such as were Frugal in their Expences on themselves, they who spend least needlesly, do bestow most Charitably. 6. Sixtly, It hath been often a lett and discouragement to Liberal Charity when it is observed, that what is given that way is per∣verted or used amiss, by them who were entrusted with it, this, as it is a great guilt in it self, being Theft and Sacriledge, so it is the Ruin of publick good Works, but it will be a Moh, wherever it is found, and it is the part of them, who are in Capacity, to retrieve what others have done amiss this way;  some are endeavouring to do. Vse 2. What other Exhortation may be given on this occasion is often spoken to, wherefore I hint at but a few words. 2ly. Then, let Overseers of the Hospital and of other Mortifications, take care that what is given for so good Ends, may be employed to the best advan∣tage, according to the will of the Donor, it is a trust laid on them by God and Man, and they must Answer for it; It is not only the duty of such Trustees, to see that the Charity of others be not lost, or if lost, that it may be recovered, but also that it be not mis-placed, either on
such as need it nor: Exact Conscienciousness (is to be used here, so as not to be byassed by any Interest, or Entreaties) or on such as are wick∣edly inclined and debauched: (when such evils appear in them they should be turned out) nor on them who are uncapable to learn or ne∣glect to learn, what they are bred to: Benefices should be taken from such and conferred upon them who are like to improve them bette Vse. 3 Another Exhortation is to the Governours and Teachers of the Youth, who are partakers of this Charity for their Education▪ It lyeth on you to teach them carefully what they ought to Learn, espe∣cially the grounds of Religion, that they may not only Repeat the Ca∣techism, but understand it: you should put them in mind to pray and to Read the Scriptures daily, and curb any budding of Vice that may appear in them, as Swearing, Lying and such like: your Faithfulness or neglect in this may have much influence to attain the ends for which this Charity is given, or to defeat the design of it. Vse. 4 The last Address shall be to the Young Ones on whom this Charity is bestowed, and for whose good it is bestowed, Acknowledge God's goodness in providing so for you: Labour to fear God, without which it had been better for you ye had never been Born, or that ye had Starv'd in stead of being cared for: And if ye can apply your Minds to think on what is to come▪ Think what will become of Your Souls for ever, And consider also how ye shall live in the World, if you neglect and mis-spend your time, wherein ye should be sitted for Serving God, and providing for your selves, ye are like to live Miserably▪ and in Contempt all : And if ye give your selves to Wickedness now, Satan may go such hold on your Hearts as never to leave Tempting you, till he bring you to a woeful End; Pray that the Lord may win your Hearts to him betimes. FINIS.
