r561j 99825372 29753
REASONS Humbly Offered to the PARLIAMENT FOR THE Taking away the Office and Seal of the Aulnagers and Collecting the Duty of Aulnage (or a Duty in Lieu thereof) at the Custom-House. THE Office and Seal of the Aulnagers being no ways serviceable to the Woollen Manufactures, nor answering the End of their Constitution: And whereas the manner of Collecting the Subsidy of Aulnage is not onely very Chargeable to the Crown, but extreamly Grievous to the Subject: It is therefore Humbly Proposed, That this Office and Seal should be wholly taken away, and that the Subsidy of Aulnage (or a Duty not exceeding it) should be Collected at the Custom-House with the Rest of the Kings Customs payable there. And if the Duty hereafter mentioned be added to and Collected at the Custom-House, it will being in more Money to answer the Interest of the Crown and Dutchess of Richmond who has a Grant from the Crown than is now paid by the Earmers, as is thus Demonstrated.   l. By Accounts taken out of the Custom-House Books, it doth appear that the Subsidy of Poundage paid there for the Woollen Manufactures Exported, comes to one Year with another (for 18 Years last past) above per Annum.— 33000 By comparing the Aulnage Duty (as proposed) with the Custom-House Duty it doth appear that the Duty of Aulnage amounts to about a six part of the Custom-House Duty: So that if it had been Collected with the Customs it wiould have amounted per Annum— 5500 There is now paid to the Dutchess of Richmond and others who have an Interest in the Duty per Annum— 3138 There was paid by the present Farmers a Fine of 9000 l. as they set forth for a Lease of 21 Years, (made in 81.) which may be valued at if reduced to a yearly Rent per Annum— 900 Total— 4038 So that in case the Duty of Aulnage had been Collected at the Custom-House, it would have brought in sufficient to answer the Interest of the Crown and Dutchess, and a considerable overplus of per Annum— 1462 If the Subsidy of Aulnage would have amounted to 5500 l. per Annum, if it had been Received at the Custom-House as is demonstrated, then it may Rationally be concluded it may come to as much for the future if it be Collected there. The Advantages by this Change are very Obvious. A particular of the Rates that are Proposed to be added to the Custom-House Duty in lieu of the Aulnage. For every Long Cloth 6 d. Note, That 3 Spanish Cloths makes 2 Short Cloths, and 3 Kerseys one short cloth, ac∣cording to the Book of Rates. For every short Cloth according to the Book of Rates 6 For every Minikin Bay 6 For every Double Bay 3 For every single Bay 2 For every pound weight of old and new Drapery that is Entred and pays by weight, half a farthing For every doz. Mens Stockings half a peny. For every doz. child. ditto and Ends of ditto, 1 farthing. For every 100 Goads of Cotton 6 d. For every 100 yds of Flannels 4 For every 100 yds of Freeze 8 For every pair of Blankets half a peny. For every Rugg, half a peny. And for all sorts of Woollen or part Woollen Manufactures that are Chargeable by the Statutes or Book of Rates which are not here before-mentioned or included, do pay a six part more than they are Chargeable by the said Statutes or Book of Rates as aforesaid. And if these Rates as above be Added to and Collected with the present Customs, it will not be a greater Duty upon the Woollen Manufactures Exported than is now paid (taking one sort of Woollen Manufacture with the other) The difference will onely be, the Duty is now paid in two several Places, and then it will be paid at one, which will be both for the Country's Ease and the Crown's Advantage. Great Endeavours have been used, and Applications made by the present Farmers and their Agents to hinder if possi∣ble the Effecting of what is here proposed, and do by all ways and means industriously Misrepresent the design thereof, and Object. That what is proposed will not be sufficient to answer the Interest of the Crown, Objection. and of all other Persons that have a Legal Right and Title to the Profits arising by vertue thereof. For, First, That in a time of War the Duty if Collected at the Custom-House, will come to little. Secondly, That in a time of Peace it will not be sufficient to answer the Farmers for their Interest, they making above 3000 l. per Annum clear of all Rent and Charges. As to the first Objection its answered, Answer. That by Accounts taken out of the Custom-House Books it doth appear that if the Duty proposed had been Collected with the Rest of the Kings Customs from Dec. 25. 88. to Dec. 25. 89. it would have amounted to above 5000 l. And by Accounts likewise taken from Dec. 25. 89. to Nov. 1. 90. it doth appear that the Customs for the Port of London are higher than they were for the same space of time in the preceding Year. As to the second Objection it is answered, That the Methods which the Farmers have taken to raise their Profits to this height, are so well known to all Persons Conversant with the Dealers in the Woollen Manufacture that 'tis feared it would be as tedious as unneccessary to enter into a particular demonstration, But shall onely observe, That if they have made above 3000 l. per Annum, they have already got well by the Bargain; So that in case no further allowance be made they will be no loosers with reference to the Fine by them paid. It must be confessed that what is proposed will not be sufficient to answer the Farmers demands, But whether for the sake of these Farmers (Pretended or Real Profits) the Subjects shall be still continued under the Oppression, and Burden, they have so long, and so justly complained of, is with submission left to the Wisdom of the Parliament.
