R855 R26977 9601921 43772
A RELATION OF THE MOST Material Matters HANDLED IN PARLIAMENT: RELATING TO RELIGION, PROPERTY, AND THE LIBERTY OF THE SUBJECT. With the Answers unto such Addresses as were made unto His MAJESTY, in Order to the Redressing the several GRIEVANCES Complain'd of, and the Behaviour and Carriage of the Popish and French Court Party. Printed in the Year, 1673.
February the 6th. 1672. THe Parliament, where notwithstanding His Majesty told them in his Speach, he would stand by his Declaration of Indulgence. Yet the House of Commons, Febr. 10. upon Reading it, Resolved, That Penal Statutes in matters Ecclesiastical, cannot be suspended bu by Act of Parliament. And That a Humble Petition and Address upon this Vote, and the De∣bare of the House, be prepared to he presented to His Majesty, and a Committee appointed for that purpose. But yet it apeared that the Sence of the House was not against the Matter of Indulgence pretended to be Granted by that Declarati∣on to protestant Dissenters, but the manner of doing it (whereby the King assumed to himself Power to Suspend Penal Statutes in matters Ecclesiastical, which they thought was of very dangerous Conse∣quence, and might one day chance to Overthrow all our Laws and Liberties.) For Febr. 14. Resolved in the House of Commons, Ne∣mine contradicente. That a Bill be brought in for ease of His Majesties protestant Sub∣jects that are Dissenters in matters of Religion from the Church of England. and the House to be in a Committee on Monday, to consider the Subject Matter of this Vote. A Bill being drawn accordingly, received no great opposition in the House, but was looked upon by the Major part of the Members, as the onely means to keep Popery from flourishing in this Nation; and in time to expel that Religion, whose professors have in all Kingdoms and Nations, endeavoured by all ways Lawful and Un∣lawful, to establish their Suspition; and to that end and purpose, have troubled as they have had opportunity, the peace of the Christi∣an World: And had now by their great Interest at Court, sufficient∣ly strengthened (as they imagined and most honest mn feared)
that party to the overthrow of the Protestant Interest, whereof I shall hereafter discourse a little more at large, when I come to the Prorogation of this Session, October the 20th. But now I return to the Petition and Address, touching the matter of Indulgence. This Petition and Address being drawn and approved off. Febru∣ary the 19th. was presented to his Majesty in the Banqueting House by the whole House, which follows in these words: Most Gracious Soveraign, We your Majesties most Loyal and faithful Subjects, your Com∣mons assembled in Parliament; do in the first place, as in all duty bound, return your Majesty our most Humble and Hear∣ty thanks, for the many gracious promises and assurances, Which your Majesty hath several times, during this present Parliament, given to us, That your M jesty would secure and maintain unto us, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, our Liberties and properties: Which most gracious assu∣rance your Majesty hath out of your great goodness, been pleased to renew unto us more particularly at the ope∣ning of this present Session of Parliament. And further, we crave leave humbly to represent, that we have with all duty and expedition, taken into consi∣deration, several parts of your Majesties late Speech to us; and withal, the Declaration therein mentioned, for In∣dulgence to Dissenters: Dated the 15th of March last. And we find our selves bound to inform your Majesty, That Penal Statutes in matters Ecclesiastical, cannot be Suspen∣ded but by Act of Parliament. We therefore the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of your Ma∣jesties House of Commons; do most humbly beseech your Ma∣jesty, That the said Laws may have their free course, until it shall be otherwise provided for, by Act of Parliament. And that your Mjesty would be graciously pleased to give such Directions herein, That no apprehension or jealousies may re∣main in the Hearts of your Majesties good and faithful Subjects.
His Majesty was not a little concerned at this proceeding (It being so far from the former course of that House to do any thing against the Kings Inclination.) But the more because of his Re∣solution exprest in his Speech at the opening of this Session, to stand by his Declaration; and therefore would not remit that pretended Power of dispensing with Laws relating to the establish∣ment of Religion; and for that Reason delayed to answer the Pe∣tition and Address: But the House pressing by the Privy Coun∣cellers that were Members (according to a Vote of the 22th. of February) for an Answer thereunto; his Majesty upon ma∣ture deliberation returned by Mr. Secretary Coventry. February the 24th. this Answer: C. R. His Majesty hath received an Address from you which he hath seriously considered of, and returneth you this Answer, That he is much troubled, that that Declaration which he put out for ends so necessary to the quiet of the Kingdom; and especially in that Conjuncture, should have proved the cause of disquiet in the House of Commons, and have given occasion to question his power in Ecclesiasticks, which he finds not done in the Reigns of any of his Ancestors. And he is sure he never had thoughts of using it otherwise then as it has been entrusted in him to the Peace and Establishment of the Church of England, and to the ease of all his Subjects in general; Neither doth he pretend to the right of suspending any Laws, wherein the properties, Rights, or Liberties of his Subjects are concerned; nor to alter any thing in the Established, Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England. The onely design of this was to take off the penalties the Sta∣tutes inflict upon Dissenters, and which he believes when well considered of you, your selves would not wish executed according to the Rigour and Letter of the Law. Neither hath he done this with thought of avoiding or preclud∣ing the Advice of his Parliament. And if any Bill shall be offer'd him which shall appear more proper to attain the afore∣said
ends, and secure the Peace of the Church and Kingdom, when tendred in due manner to him, he will shew how ready he will be to concur in all ways, that shall appear good for the Kingdome. The thanks of the House was returned to his Majesty for his Gracious assurances and promises, but the Answer being not as they thought satisfactory; his Majesty seeming to justifie his proceeding in that affair, they resolved to make a Reply thereunto, and thereby secure both Law and property. Which endured some Debate, wherein was related a passage in a Speech of his Majesties, of February, 18th. 1662. to both Houses of Parliament (when other Councells were prevalent with his Majesty) whereby he wisheth that he had such pow∣er in matters Ecclesiastical, as he claimes to give by this De∣claration; which passage is as followeth: If the Dissenters will demean themselves peaceably and modestly under the Government: I could heartily wish I had such a power of Indulgence to use upon occasion, as might not needlesly force them out of the Kingdome, or staying here give them cause to con∣spire against the peace of it. February, the 27th. The Commons Reply to the Kings Answer, as followeth: Most Gracious Soveraign. WE your Majesties most humble and Loyal Subjects, The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in this present Parlia∣ment assembled; do render your Sacred Majesty, our most duti∣ful thanks, for that to our unspeakable comfort, your Majesty hath been pleased so often to reiterate unto us those gracious promises and assurances, of maintaining the Religion now Esta∣blisht and the Liberties and properties of the people. And we do not in the least measure doubt, but that your Majesty had the
same gracious intentions, in giving Satisfaction to your Subjects, by your Answer to our last Petition and Address; yet upon se∣rious consideration thereof, we fnd that the said Answer is not sufficient to clear the apprehensons that may justly remain in the minds of your People, by your Majesties having claimed a power to suspend Penal Statutes in matters Ecclesiastical, and which your Majesty doth still seem to assert in the said answer, to be intrusted in the Crown and never questioned in the Raigns of any of your Ancestors; wherein we humbly conceive your Majesty hath been very much misinformed, since no such thing was ever claimed or exercised by any of your Majesties Prode∣cessors; and if it should, might tend to the interruption of the free course of the Laws, and the altering of the Legislative Power, which hath always been acknowledged to reside in your Majesty, and the two Houses of Parliament. We therefore with unanimous consent, do become again most humble Suiters to your Sacred Majesty, That you will please to give us a full and Satisfactory Answer, to our said Petition and Address; and that your Majesty will take such effectual Order, that the proceeding in this matter, may not for the future be drawn into Consequence or Example. Whereunto his Majesty gave this Answer for the present, That indeed this was of consequence, and he would take it into con∣sideration. By this, f nding that the House would not rest Satisfied with his first Answer but expected a Disclaimer of his Assumed power, to dispence with Laws in matter of Religion; he had Repair to those Counellors that advised him to Attempt what was so Distastful to that House, who finding such great Opposition from those that must Furnish them with Money to carry on the present War, and know∣ing unless they made them some colourable Disclaimer, the Money Bill would not pass: Advised his Majesty as a fit means to put an end to the Controversie, to Appy himself to the Lords, thereby seeming not to Recede from his pretended Right, and yet willing to do something plausible, by making that House Partes and Judges of the Difference, and thereupon—
March, 1. 1672. His Majesty made this following Speech to the House of Lords. My Lords, You know that at the Opening of this Session, I spoke here to your satisfaction, it hath notwithstanding gotten a greater Disquiet in the House of Commons, then I could Imagine. I have received an Address from them, which I looked not for, and made them an Answer which ought to have contented them: But on the contrary, they have made such a Reply of such a Nature, that I cannot think fit to proceed any further in this Matter, without your Advice. I have Commanded my Lord Chancellor to Acquaint you with all the Transactions, wherein you will find Me and your selves highly concerned. I am sensible of what Relates to my Self: And I assure you, my Lords, I am not less for your Priviledg, and the Honour of this House. By this means, the Lords (that medled not before) became as it were Interessed in the Matter above Recited. And took the Kings Application unto them for their Advice, as such an extraordinary Favour, that the same day they shewed their Gratitude, by present∣ing him their humble Thanks, in these words: We the Lords piri∣tual amd Tempoal in Parliament Assembled, do unanimously present your Sacred Majesty our most humble Thanks, for having been pleased to Com∣municate unto us, what hath passed between your Majesty and the House of Commons; whereby your Majesty hath Graciously offered the Means of shewing our Duty to your Majesty, and of Asserting the Antient Just Rights and Priviledges, of the House of Peers. Whereunto the King returned this Answer: My Lords, I take this Address of yours very kindly, and will always be Affectionate to you, and I expect that you shall Stand by me, as I will always by you. Yet notwithstanding these sweet words, it was the next day only Resolved: That the Kings Answer to the House of Commons, in referring the Points now Contro∣verted to a Parliamentary Way by Bill, is Good and Gracious, that being a Good and Natural Course for Satisfaction therein. This Vote seemed to them the fittest Means to Reconcile the Matters Con∣troverted,
it neither determining one way or other, as to the rig of the matter in Debate; And yet for all this, the Commons receded not from their first purpose of setling the power claim∣ed by the King on it's old Foundation, as you shall see here∣after. In the mean time, whil'st this was in agitation in the House of Lords, the Commons taking notice of the extraordinary in∣crease of Popery and prevalency of that Faction at Court; who had so powerfully managed their Interest as to procure ve∣ry many paces of great trust and p ofit, conferred on men ei∣ther professed Papists, or surely obliged to their party, feared, and not without Grounds: The Ruine of the Protestant Interest might perchance take its Birth from hence, especially considering that at that time, the Ʋnited Netherlands were almost (in the eye of the Word) Ruined by the Victorious French, and three of the Seaven Provinces totally Conquered the last Summer. And the Most Christian King, coming into the Field with a powerful Army not only to defend what he had gotten the last year, but to Conquer the Residue: And besides this, two Royal Fleets pre∣pared (the one by his Majesty, the other by the French King) to Attack them by Sea and Land, as opportunity should serve; made many people imagine the Dutch upon their last Legs, and consequently this Nation in a tottering Condition, both as to Religion and property; so that an absolute necessity oblieged the Commons to shew then (if ever) what they could do, to∣wards the removal thereof- And therefore March the 3d. agreed to an Address, to be presented to his Majesty for Suppression of Popery; whereunto the Lords Concurrence was desired, and af∣ter a Conference obtained, the Address was presented to his Ma∣jesty in the Banquetting House, March the 7th. which is as fol∣loweth. Most Gracious Soveraign. We your Majesties most Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons, in this present Pariament assembled, being sensible of the great dangers and mischiefs may arise in this your Majesties Realm, by the encrease of Popish Recusants amongst us; and considering the great Resort
of Jesuits and Priests into this Kingdome, who daily en∣deavour to Seduce your Majesties Subjects from their Religion and Allegiance; and how much your Loyal Sub∣jects are disheartened to see such Popish Recusants ad∣mitted into Employments of great trust and profit, and especially into Milatary Commands, over the Forces now in your Majesties Service; and having a tender re∣gard to the preservation of your Majesties person, and the peace and tranquillity of this Kingdome, we in all humility desire, That your Majesty would be pleased to issue out your Roy∣al Proclamation, to Command all Priests and Jesuits, (other then such as not being Natural Born Subjects to your Majesty, are oblieged to attend upon your Royal Consort the Queen) to depart within thirty days, out of this your Majesties Kingdome; and if any Priest or Jesuit, shall happ n to be taken in Engln, after the expiation of the said time, that the Laws shall be put in due execution against them. And that your Majesty would be pleased in the said Pro∣clamation to Commnd all Judges, Justices o the Peace, Mayors, Bylffs an all other Officers, to put the aid Laws in Execution accordingly. That your Majesty would likewise be pleased that the Lord Chancellor o Eng∣land shall at or before the 25th. day f March Instant, Issue out Commissions of Dims Potestatm, to the Judge Advocate, and Comissaries of Musters, and sch other persons as he shall think fit (not being Officers com∣manding Souldiers) to tender the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, to all Officers and Souldiers now in your Majesties Service and Pay; and that such as re∣fuse the said Oaths, may be immediately disabled and not allowed or continued in any Pay or Pension. And that the Chancellor shall require due returns to be made thereof within some conveneint time, after the issuing out of these Commissions. That the Commissaries of the Musters be commanded and enjoyned by your Majesties Warrant, upon the Penal∣ty
of loosing their places, not to permit any Officer to be Mustered in the Service and pay of your Majesty, untill he shall have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the usage of the Church of Eng∣land; and that every Souldier by Law shall take the said Oaths before his first Muster, and receive the Sa∣crament in such manner before his Second Muster. And this we present in all dutifulness to your most princely Wisdom and consideration, as the best means for the Satisfying and composing the minds of your Loyal Sub∣jects; Humbly desiring your Majesty graciously to ac∣cept of this our Petition as proceeding from Hearts and Affections, intirely devoted to your Majesties Ser∣vice, and to give it your Royal Approbation. Whereunto his Majesty was pleased to return this Answer: My Lords and Gentlemen, I do heartily agree to the matter of your Address, and shall give speedy order to put it in Executin; but hope it was not ment in the parts thereof, that it should extend to the Forces im∣mediately to be imployed beyond the eas. This proceeding of the Parliament, was thought by all good men of great Consequence; and the Nation began to look upon them as their delivers (under God) from Popery and Slavery. The Kings Answer pleased too the Major part, though the most In∣telligent questioned the performance thereof, knowing there was very little Security in his Majesties Promises and Engagements, so long as that party which perswaded and advised his Majesty to such pernicious Designs, that had set the World in such a Combustion, contrary to the Interest of his Majesty and the Kingdom, were so prevalent and had the Ascendantin all his Councels. And also the time was a considerable Motive to make all men doubt. The Commons being at that time upon the point of giving his Ma∣jesty a considerable Supply, which was held back and retarded by the honest party, till they should if they could remove and
Redress the Grievances then complained of; and in Truth they were not far out in their Calculations; for no sooner was the Money Bill passed, and the Parliament thereupon Adjourned, but old Councels were reassumed and pursued with as great Ardor and mo At than before, and few or none of the Mtters and Grievances Complained of, Removed or Redressed; as shall in it's proper place be made manifest. But to Return, March, 8. The House of Commons attended his Majesty in the House of Lords, where he was Graciously pleased to give them a new Assurance of his performing their desires in all things, and fur∣thermore a potive and Satisfactory Answer to the House of Com¦mons Reply, concerning the Declaration of Indulgence, for want whereof the Money Bill was then at a stand: Whereby at that time it seemed to be done rather upon an absolute Necessity of having the Money, then with an Intention to Satisfie the Nat on in real per∣formances. His Majesties Speech is as followeth, My Lords and Gentlemen, Yesterday you presented me with an Address as the best means for the Satisfying and Composing the Minds of my Sub∣jects, which I freely and readily agreed to, and shall take care to see it performed accordingly. I hope on the other side, you Gentlemen of the House of Commons will do your part, for I must put you in mind it is near 5 weeks since I demanded a Supply; and what you Voted unanimously upon it, did both give Life to my Af∣fairs at Home, and disheartned mine Enemies abroad. But the seeming delay it hath met with since, has made them take new Courage: And they are now preparing for the next Summer a greater Fleet, as they say, then ever they had yet. So that if the Supply be not speedily dispatched, it will be altogether Ineffectual. And the Safety, Honour, and Interest of Egland, must of necessity be Exposed. Pray lay this to heart, and let not the Fears and Jealousies of some, draw an inevitable Ruine upon us all. M Lords and Gentlemen, If there be any Scruple yet remaining with you concerning the
Suspension of penal Laws, I here faithfully promise you that what hath been done in that particular, shall not for the Future, be drawn either into Consequence or Example. And as I daily expect a Bill from you for my Supply, So I assure you, I shall as willingly receive and pass any other you shall offer me, that may tend to the giving Satisfaction in all your just Grievances. This was full, and to the purpose; but yet fearing that not to be satisfactory to the Commons, Mr. Secretary Coventry by command of his Majesty informed the House that his Majesty had ordered the Declaration of Indulgence to be Vacated, and that he saw the Seal taken off accordingly, and to the same purpose my Lord Chan∣cellor acquainted the House of Peers. These proceedings were so pleasing to the Parliament, that both Houses concurred in returning Thanks to his Majesty for his most Gracious, Full, and Satisfactory Answer to their humble Petitions and Addresses, and the same day attended him therewith at Four of the Clock in the Afternoon in the Banqueting House, whereunto his Majesty was pleased to return this Gracious Answer ensuing: My Lords and Gentlemen, I hope there will never be any more Difference amongst us, I assure you there shall never be any occasion on my part. You see here are more and more assurances, which yet are not enough, as the Sequel will declare. By this means the Court thought to have had their En's, as to Money, answered with what Celerity the Parliamen could: But yet the Money Bill went not on faster, then that for Suppression of the growth of Popery, which controled the Statesmens greatest De∣signs, as appeared by my Lord Treasurers Speech in the House of Lords, whose Expressions were so Bitter and Malicious against the Act last mentioned: That it produced several Speeches against his Lord∣ship, in order to Impeach him of High Treason, which had certain∣ly at that time been Effected, had not some of the Members betray∣ed the design in not giving their Assistance therein, according to their solemn promises and Engagements.
But the House of Commons were not altogether satisfied with his Majesties Gracious Answer to the Two Petitions and Addresses and therefore resolved to proceed further, and to attempt the Redres∣sing of all Grievances whatsoever. Amongst which, finding by frequent Complaints that Ireland was likely to be Over-run with Popery, to the Overthrow of the Eglish Interest there, and having his Majesties Letter of the 26th. of February, 1671. and the Pro∣clamation thereupon produced, whereby general License was given to all Papists to live in Corporations, and exercise their Trades there, and to enjoy the same Priviledges as other his Majesties Sub∣jects ought to do, without any distinction; and several other Let∣ters and Proclamations to the prejudice of the English, and advan∣cing of the Irish Interest; they thought that this was the ready way to bring the English there to utter Ruine, and expose their Throats once more to the Irish mercy: And therefore March 18. the House of Commons resolved, That an Address be presented to his Majesty, representing the State and Condition of the Kingdom of Ireland, and the danger of the English Protestant Interest there; and that Mr. Richard Talbott, be inserted in the Address as a Papist, and not capable of any Command or Imployment either Military or Civil, and that he be not admitted any Access to the Court. And at the same time Ordered another Address to be drawn, where∣in several Grievances of this Kingdom were to be presented, which shall be hereafter related at large; That the Reader may the better discern the several Matters complained of. The Cout at these proceedings was in great Indignation, fearing that if the Parliament should be permitted to Sit long, they might chance fall upon the Advisers and Promoters of these Grievances, and punish them according to their Demerits, to prevent thereby such destructive Councels for the future; and therefore sent Mr. Secretary Coventry March 20. to acquaint the House, That his Majesty intended a Recess on the 27th. then instant. But this not taking such Effect as was desired, March 24. a Writing under his Majesties Hand was sent to the House of Commons by the same Secretary, which here In∣sues.
C. R. J Am commanded by his Majesty in pursuance of his late Message, to acquaint you that his Majesty intends you shall Rise before Easter, and therefore expects an Expe∣dition of such Bills as are most of Importance, the Bill of Popery, and that of Supply particularly; and for such other Bills as concern either the Publick or Particular, and cannot be so soon ready; that they may not receive a Dis∣appointment, his Majesty resolves to make this an Adjourn∣ment tll the beginning of October, when you may continue their prosecution; and in the mean time his Majesty will take such care of the Protestant Religion, as you shall have no cause to complain. At the Court at White-Hall, March, 24. 1672, Notwithstanding which, as well the several Addresses, as the Bill for Suppression of Popery kept pace with the Money Bill, which if assed first, the House feared they should be Prorogued the sam y, and all other Matters before them would thereby receive an absolute Dissolution. March, 26. The House attended his Majesty with the seve∣ral Addresses here Ensuing. Concern∣ing Ireland.Wee your Majesties most Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, taking into Conside∣ration the great Calamities, which have formerly befallen to your Majesties Kingdom of Ireland, hy the Popish Recusants there, who for the most part are profest Enemies to the Protestant Religion, and English Interest. And how they making ill use of your Majesties Disposition and Clemency, are at this time grown more Insolent and Presumptious then formerly, to the apparent Danger of that Kingdom, and your Majsties Prote∣stant Subjects there; the Consequence thereof may likewise prove
very fatal to this Kingdom of England, if not timely prevent∣ed: And having seriously weighed what Remedies may be most properly Applied to these growing Distempers, do in all Humi∣lity present your Majesty with these our Petitions. That for the quieting and establishing the possessions of your Ma∣jesties Subjects in that Kingdom, your Majesty would be pleased to maintain the Act of Settlement, and Explanatory Act thereupon; and to recall the Commission of Inquiry into Irish affairs, bearing Date the 17th. of January last, as ontaining many new and extraordinary powers not oely to the prjudice of particular persons, whose Estates and Titles, are thereby made liable to be questioned. But in a manner to the overthrow of the said Acts of Settlement. And if pursued may be of gret Charge and Attendance to many of your good Subjects in Ire∣land, and shake the Peace of the whole Kingdome. That your Majesty would give Order, That no Papist be either continued or admitted to be a Commander or a Souldier in that Kingdome: And that because the Irish Papists have fur∣nished themselves with great quantities of Arms: That your Majesty would please to give Directions so to Dis-arm them, that they may not be dangerous to the Government there; and that their Arms may be brought into the publick Magazeens. That the like Order may be given, That no Papist be continued, or hereafter admitted to be Judges, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Governours, Mayors, Soveraigns, or Port-reeves in that Kingdome. That the Titular Arch Bishops, Bishops, Vicars General Abbots, and all others exercising Ecclesiastical Iurisdiction by the Popes Authority: and in particular Peter Talbot, pre∣tended Arch Bishop of Dublin, for his notorious Disloyalty to your Majesty, and Disobedence and Contempt of your Laws, may be commanded by Proclamation, forthwith to de∣part out of Ireland, and all other your Majesties Dominions; or otherwise to be prosecuted according to Law. And that all Convents, Seminaries, and publick Schools, may be dissolved and supprest; and the Regular Priests be commanded to de∣part under the like Penalty. That no Irish Papist be admitted to inhabit in any Corporation of that Kingdome, unless duly Licensed according to the afore∣said
Act of Settlement. And th your Majsty would be pleased to recall your Letter of the 26th of February, 1671. and the Proclamation thereupon; whereby General Licence is given to such Papists to inhabit in Corporations there. That your Majesties Letter of the 28th. of September, 1672. And the Order of Councel thereupon; whereby your Ma∣jesties Subjects are required not to prosecute any Actions a∣gainst the Irish, for any wrongs or injuries committed, during the late Rebellion, may likewise be recalled. That Colonel Richard Talbot, who hath notoriously assumed to himself, the Title of Agent to the Roman Catholicks of Ire∣land, be dismist immediately out of all Commands, either Mi∣litary or Civil, and forbidden all access to your Majesties Court. That your Majesty would be pleased from time to time out of your Princely Wisdome to give such further Orders and Directions to your Lord Leiuetenant, or other cheif Governor for the time being as may most conduce to the incouragement of the English Planters, and the Protestant Intrest there, and the supression of the Insolencies and Disorders of the Irish Papists. These our humble desires we present to your Majesty, as the best means to preserve the peace and safety of that your King∣dome; which hath been so much of late endangered by the practices of the Irish Papists, and particularly of the said Richard and Peter Talbot. And we doubt not but that your Majesty will find the happy effects thereof, to the great satis∣faction and security of your Majesties Person and Govern∣ment; which of all earthly things is most dear to us, your Majesties most Loyal and Obedient Subjects. The Address concerning Grievances. We your Masesties most Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this pre∣sent Parliament assembled; conceiving our selves bound in ne∣cessary Duty to your Majesty, in Discharge of the Trust reposed in us; truly to inform your Majesty of the Estate of this your Kingdome; and though we are abundantly satisfyed that it hath always been your Royal Will and pleasure, that
your Subjects should be Governed according to the Laws and Customes of this your Realme; yet finding that contrary to your Majesties intentions, some Grievances and Abuses are crept in, and crave leave humbly to represent them to your Majesties knowledge, and to desire. That the Imposition of 12d. a Chaldron upon Coals, for the providing of Convoyes; by Vertue of an Order of Councel, Dated 15th. of May, 1672. may be recalled and all Bonds ta∣ken by Virtue thereof cancelled. That your Proclamation of the 4th. of December, for preven∣tion of Disorders, which may be committed by Souldiers; and whereby the Souldiers now in your Majesties Service, are in a manner exempted from the ordinary course of Justice, may likewise be recalled. And whereas great Complaints have been made out of several parts of this Kingdome, of divers abuses committed in Quar∣tering of Souldiers: That your Majesty would please to give Order, to redress these Abuses, and in particular, That no Souldier hereafter be Quartered upon any private Houses, and that due satisfaction may be given to the Innkeepers, and Victualers▪ where they lye before they Remove. And since the continuance of Souldiers in this Nation, will necessarily pro∣duce many inconveniences to your Majesties Subjects; we hum∣bly present it as our Petition and Advice, that when this War is ended; All the Souldiers that have been raised since the last Session of Parliament, may be disbanded. That your Majesty would likewise be pleased to consider of the ir∣regularities and Abuses in pressing Souldiers. And to give Order for the prevention thereof for the future. And although it hath been the course of former Parliaments, to desire redress in their Grievances, before they proceed to give a Supply; yet we have so full assurance of your Majesties tenderness and Compassion towards your People that we hum∣bly prostrate our selves at your Majesties Feet, with these our Petitions; desiring your Majesty to take them into your Princely Consideration; and to give such Order for Relief of your Subjects, and the removing these Pressures, as shall seem best to your Royal Wisdome.
To both which Addresses his Majesty made this Answer, by Mr. Speaker. That he observed the Addresses consisted of several different parts, and therefore it could not be expected there should be a present Answer, but for the several parti∣cular things contained in them, he would before the next meeting, take such effectual care that no man should have Reason to Complain. With which the House thought themselves and the Nation so well secured, that the next day they Voted their humble Thanks to be presented unto his Majesty, for his Gracious Answers to their several Addresses, and in particular, for his last Gracious Message; and for the care he hath declared he would take of the Protestant Religion: And so the Money Bill, and the Bill for the Suppressi∣on of the Growth of popery, were willingly passed, and obtained the Royal Assent at the same time; and thereupon the parliament was Adjourned, till the 20th. of October, following. This last Act, with his Majesties Gracious assurances before related; were esteemed by some a sufficient defence to the pro∣testant Religion, and the Liberties and properties of the Subject. But notwithstanding all these seeming probabilities of assurance, the Clifforaian and French Designs, were carried on in the Inter∣ceal of this Session, in as pernicious though different manner from their first Deign, whose Method they were forced to change, by reason that the Act of parliament for the Suppression of the Growth of popery, was so made that it executed it self; and the means of introducing that Religion seeming then at a stand, they thought of a new project, that in probability might not receive so great opposition nor attract that envy as the preferment of the papists in several great Offices and places of Trust had done, yet the same ends might be more certainly and easily though possi∣bly not so soon obtained. And to this end, a Marriage between his Royal Highness, and the princess of Modena, Sister to the present Duke thereof, was proposed; and the better to advance the same, and make the Match appear more considerable; his Most Christian Majesty had declared her an Adopted Daughter of
France, and would give her a potion suitable thereunto; which Match was concluded without any great difficulty, by the Earle of Peterborough; and afterward Consumated by the same person, by his Majesties Royal Consent and Authority; according to the Form used among princes (as his Majesty was pleased to express it.) Hereupon the popish and French party were grown extreamly insolent, having in most mens Judgments received a less check from the late Act of Parliament, then incouragement from the Marriage. But before her Highness could arrive in England, the Advisers of this Marriage perceived that the twentieth of October would come, and that it might probably receive some Obstructions from the Parliament, and that some other things contrived at their meeting in March before, to their prejudice; might chance in a short time to be perfected: and therefore ordered it so that the parliament should be prorogued till the 27th of the same Octo∣ber, whereby an end should be put to that Session, and all the business then unperfected fall to the Ground, contrary to his Ma∣jesties Gracious Assurances, and promises, in March last, propo∣sing these Consequences as certain First, Thereby to prevent and remove from his Majesty all Temptations to break the intended Marriage, and the French Alliance, knowing that the Parliament would use their utmost endeavours, to prevent the Consumation of that marriage; which was likely to render both the popish Religion and the French Alliance Impregnable. Secondly, Considering that a Bill of Ease for protestant Dissen∣ters (whereby 'twas intended that the major part of them should have Liberty of Conscience, and be capable of Church prefer∣ment) had passed the House of Commons, and had been sent up to the Lords in Mch before, where it then remained; and would not long stick there (as they feared) before it should ob∣tain the Royal Assent; which if once effected, They did ima∣gine and foresee that this uniting of Interests, would tend great∣ly to the Suppression of popery; and consequently, no hopes of replanting thereof in this Nation. But if they could by any means whatsoever prevent the passing of that Bill, they doubt∣ed not, notwithstanding all the Parliament could do, to be safe
amongst so many Dissenters, and drive on their Designs under∣hand, for the Ruine and Destruction of all parties  their own. Thirdly, and Lastly, Their chief Dsign was to  a Differ∣ence and Jealousie between the King and Parliament, whereby (if all other Devices fail) they hope by the help of French Forces to Introduce Popery into this Nation, and with it Arbitrary Govern∣ment, which last they have by all Arts imaginable cried up as the best Government; but at the same time deny it to be practicable here, unless Popery precedes, or comes in with it. But to pro∣ceed. This was not so closely carried but the Parliament had notice thereof, and the House of Commons hoping to prevent the Mis∣chiefs that might arise from this Match, Voted October the 20th. (before they were Prorogued) That the privy Councellors of the House should present an Address to his Majesty, whereby he should be desired to put an Effectual stop to the Consummation thereof; which was done accordingly, though not to that pur∣pose as it was hoped, as I shall presently shew. According to the time of Adjournment, October the 27th. the Parliament Assembled, where his Majesty made this following Speech. My Lords and Gentlemen, I Thought this day to have Welcomed you with an honoura∣ble Peace, my preparations for the War, and condis∣centions at the Treaty, gave me great reason to believe so. But the Dutch have disappointed me in that Expectation, and have Treated my Embassadors t Cologne, with the Con∣tempts of Conquerors▪ and not as might be expected from men in their Condition: They have other thoughts then Peace. This obligeth me to move you again for a Supply, the afety and Honour of the Nation, necessarily requiring it: It must be one proportionable to the Occasion, and I must tell you besides, tht if I have it not speedily, my Mischief will be Irreparable in my preparaions for the next Spring.
The great Experience I have had of you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, will not suffer me to believe, that the Artifices of our Enemies can possibly Divert you fom giving me this Supply, or that you can fail of Adjusting the proportion of it. I hope I need not use many words to perswade you, that I am Steady in maintaining all the Professions and Promises I have made you, concerning Religion and Property. And I shall be very ready to give you fresh Instances of my Zeal for preserving the established Religion and Laws, as often as any Occasion shall require. In the last place, I am highly concerned to commend to your conderation and care the Debt I owe the Goldsmiths, in which very many other of my good Subjects are Involved. I heartily recommend their Condition to you, and desire your assistance for their Relief. There is more that I would have you Informed off, which I leave to the Lord Chancellor. This Speech being ended, and the House of Commons Assembled in their own House, the consideration thereof (such vast Sums of Money being thereby demanded, as the Nation was unable, and the House thought not safe to give) was Adjourned till Friday, and the House Adjourned till Thursday following; at which time the House being met, Mr. Secretary Coventry brought the Answer ensuing, to the Address against the Match. C. R. That his Majesty having received an Address from the House of Commons, presenting their humble desire that the intended Marriage between his Royal Highness and the Princess of Modena may not be Consummated, commanded this An∣swer to be returned. That he perceived the House of Commons wanted a full Information of this Matter, the Match being not barely Intended, but Compleated accord∣ing to the Form used amongst Princes, by his Royal Con∣sent and Authority. Nor could he in the least suppose it to be disagreeable in the House of Commons, his Royal Highness having been in View of the World for several
Months ingaged in Treaty of Marrying with another Ca∣tholick Princess, and yet a Parliament held during that time, and not the least Exception taken of it. With this Answer the House were not satisfied, and were resolved not to give over the Defence of our Religion and Liberty at such an easie Rate, esteeming this Frenchified Match of far greater danger then the proposed Marriage with the Dutchess of In pruck, hinted in the Answer, was at that time of the Treaty thereof, if it should have taken effect; for then the Religion of his Royal Highness was unknown to most of the Nation, he having since that time refused the Tests provided in the late Act of Parliament for surpressing of Popery: And besides the House of Austria (whereof she was) did not then appear to be in a capacity to assist so powerfully the propa∣gation of that Religion, as the French at this time did: And therefore the House Voted another Address with Reasons against the Marriage, and the same day Voted, That a Bill should be prepared for a General Test betwixt Protestants and Papists, and that those that Refused to take it should be uncapable of bearing any Office Millitary or Civil, or to Sit in Parliament, or come within five Miles of the Court. By this Vote the chief Designs of the Popish and French party were intended to be disappointed; but they ordered their Affairs so that they soon Evaded it. Friday▪ October 31. the House in a Grand Committee, upon as serious Debate as ever was known there before, took into conside∣ration his Majesties Speech, and resolved, That the House considering the present condition of the Nation, will not take into any further Debate, or Consideration, any Aid, or Supply, or Charge upon the Subject, before the time of payment of the 18 Months Assessment granted by a late Act of Parlia∣ment, Intituled, An Act for Raising the Sum of 1238750 l. for Supply of his Majesties present Ocasions be expired, unless it shall appear that the Obstinacy of the Dutch shall render it ne∣cessary: Nor before this Kingdom be effectually Secured from the Danger of Popery and Popish Counsels, and Counsellors, and the other present Grievances be Redressed.
This last Vote nettled the Court not a little (which only stands in need of Parliaments to raise Money) and therefore were resol∣ved to give them one Remove more, but that it might not seem al∣together upon the Account of denying Money, they let the Parlia∣ment proceed: Who on Monday then following, attended his Ma∣jesty with the second Address, with Reasons against the Marriage (they being at that time assured that it was not so far concluded, but that for Reason of State it might have been Rejected, as it hath been practised in several Nations, and even by the French them∣selves in several Examples, (as do manifestly appear in the French Lustories) And to the end the Reader may take notice thereof, I have here inserted it. We your Majesties most Humble and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, being full of Assurance of your Majesties Gracious Intentions to provide for the Establishment of Religion, and the pre∣servation of your People in Peace and Security; and fore∣seeing the dangerous Cosequences which may follow the Marriage of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, with the Princess of Modena, or any other of the Popish Reli∣gion: Do hold our selves bound in Conscience and Duty to Represent the same to your Sacred Majesty, not doub∣ting but those constant Testimonies which we have given your Majesty, of our True and Loyal Affections to your Sacred Person, will easily gain a Belief that these our hum∣ble Desires proceed from Hearts still full of the same Af∣fection toward your Sacred Majesty, and with Intentions to Establish your Royal Government upon those true Sup∣ports of the Protestant Religion; and the Hearts of your People with all Humility desiring your Majesty to take the same into your Princely Consideration, and to Relieve your Subjects from those Fears and Apprehensions which at present they Lie under, from the progress hath been made in that Treaty. We do therefore humbly Beseech your Majesty to Consider, that if this Marriage do proceed, it will be a means to Disquiet the Minds of your Protestant Subjects at Home,
and to fill them with endless Jealousies and Discontents and will bring your Majesty into such Alliances abroad, a will prove highly prejudicial if not destructive, to the very Interest of the Protestant Religion it self. And we find by sad Experience, that such Marriages have Increa∣sed and Encouraged Popery in this Kigdom, and given opportunities to Priests and Jesuites to propagate their Opinions, and Seduce great numbers of your Majesties Subjects. And we do already observe, how much that party is Animated with the hopes of th s Match, who were lately Discoura∣ged by your Majesties Gracious Concess ons, in the last meeting of this Parliament. That we greatly fear this may be an occasion to lessen the Af∣fections of the People to his Royal Highness, who is so nearly Related to the Crown, and whose Honour and Esteem we desire always be intirely preserved. That for another Age more at least, this Kingdom will be un∣der the continual Apprehensions of the Growth of Popery, and the Danger of the Protestant Religion. Lastly we consider that this Princess having so near a Relation, and Kindred to many eminent persons of the Court of Rome, may give them great opportunities to promote their Designs, and carry on their practices amongst us; and by the same means penetrate into your Majesties most secret Counsels, and more easily discover the state of the whole Kingdom. And finding that by the Opinions of very Learned Men, it is generally Admitted, that such Treaties and Contracts by Proxie are dissolvable, of which there are several Instances to be produced: We do in all Humbleness beseech your Majesty to put a stop to the Consummation of this intend∣ed Marriage. And this we do the more Importunately desire, because we have not as yet the happiness to see any Issue of your Maje∣sty that may Succeed in the Government of these King∣doms; which Blessing we most heartily pray Almighty God in His due time to Bestow upon your Majesty and
these Kingdoms, to the unspeakable Joy and Comfort of all your Majesties Loyal Subjects, who desire nothing more then to continue under the Reigns of your Majesty and your Royal Posterity for ever. Whereunto his Majesty returned this Answer, That he would con∣sider thereof, and give a speedy Answer thereunto: But in stead of an Answer, he the next day Prorogued the Parliament to the 7th. of January folowing: But first Spake to them in this manner. My Lords and Gentlemen, I need not tel you, how unwillingly I call you hither at this time, being enough sensible what advantages my Enemies both abroad and at home will reap by the least appearance of a dif∣ference betwixt me and my Parliament; nay, being assured, they expect more success from such a Breach (could they pro∣cure it) then from their Arms. This I say, shall (whilest I live) be my chief endeavour to pre∣vent, and for that reason I think it necessary to make a short Recess, that all good men my cect themselves against the next Meeting and consider, Wer the present posture of Affairs wil not rather rquire their applications to matters of Religion, and Support against our onely Competitors at Sea, then to things of less importace; and in the mean while, I will not be wanting to let all my Subjects see, that no care can be greater then my own, in the effectual suppressing of Popery: And it shall be your faults, if in your several Coun∣tries the Laws be not effectually executed against the Gowth of it. I will not be idle neither in some things which may add to your Satisfaction, and then I shall expect a suitable Return from you. You see here his Majesties unwillingness to part without Money, and a so to leave the French, his trusty Friends, all your Grievances must be for this Post pon'd; those are but Trifles, if diffrence arise 'tis your faults that do Insist on things of small Importance; There∣fore
Recollect your selves, that is resolve, That Delenda est Carthago, and to Advance the French Interest, that there be no need of Parlia∣ments; Religion is concerned it seems (but which we know not) and Reformation promised, such as will make us all his Debtors, let's therefore state the Account, that you may pay what is owing.   l. s. d. 1. For turning out my Lord Chancellor for deserting the French and Popish Interest. 500000.     2. For making Sir Heneage Finch Lord Keep∣er, and giving him 4000 l. per annum, to es∣pouse the French Interest, and for his Aversi∣on to the privilege of the Subject, by Habeas Corpus; calling it a knack, which he would have no man make use of. And for his s ngle Advice on the late Chancel∣lors refusing to Seal a new Commission for the Duke of York to Evae the late Act against Po∣pery, That Commissions might be Surrendred and Renewed every 3 Months without taking the Oaths, and receiving the Sacrament and for be∣ing the Head of the 88 that declared themselves for the Dukes Marriage with the late Cardinal Mazarees Neece, and the first of the Trium∣virate, which against the Judgment of the whole House, and the Religion nd Interest of the Na∣tion, Voted for Money the last Session. 500000.     3. For the honest endeavour of the Cabal, to seduce Members of Parliament, and making them undertakers to get Money. 500000.     4. For the Credit procured to the Nation by one of our Plenpotentiaries by going to High Mass with the Bishop of Cologne. 200000.    
5. For Marrying his Highness (the undoubt∣d Successor to the Crown) to an Adopted Daughter of the Pope and the French King. 500000.     6. For providing an Admiral who never took the Sacrament, nor made the Renuntiation ac∣cording to the late Act of Parliament. 200000.     7. For the Courage and Resolution of the Caball, in tusting the French once more, who ate y by their treachery, hazarded our whole Naval Strength. 200000.     8. For the Dutchess of Modena slighting our nglish Ladies for professing the Protestant Re∣gion; and Prophesying our Conversion with∣n one year. 200000.     9. For the Caballs good intention to protect the Papists estates, which might if they were convicted, Supply his Majesty. 100000.     For the prudent disposing of the Nations Money given the last Session of Parliament, according to the following Account, Since May, 17th. 1673. A Warrant to the Earle of Arlington, 010000:00:00 To the Duke of Buckingham, 002032:00:00 To the Earle of Berks, 003000:00:00 To the Earle of St. Albans, 002500:00:00 To the Lord Buckhurst, 004400:00:00 To the privy Purse. 039000:00:00 To Sir John Woerden, 001090:00:00 To Thomas Elliot, 006000:00:00 To Sir Robert Pye, 000900:00:00 To the Lord Grandison, 000500:00:00 To the Earle of Bristol, 002120:00:00
  l. s. d. To the Earle of Arlington, 005338:00:00 To Mr. Harbord 009000:00:00 To Sir Robert Holmes, 000690:09:04 To the Duke of Landerdale, 001000:00:00 To the Lady Falmouth, 011289:00:00 To Sir John Duncomb, 002000:00:00 Defaulked to Sir George Carteret, 163036:00:00 To the Earle of Oxford, 002000:00:00 To the Marquess of Worcester, 001200:00:00 Granted to the Dutchesse of Cleveland and her Children for ever, out of the Wine Licence Office, 11300 l. per annum, at 18 years purchase. 203400:00:00 To the Earle of Bath and his Heirs, out of the preemtion of time, the yearly Sume of 3000 l. at 18 years purchase. 054000:00:00 Granted to the Lord Clifford and his Heirs Males a Fee-farm Rent, payable out of the Church of Exeter 145 l. per ann. at 18 years purchase. 2610.00:00 More to the Lord Clifford, 020000:00:00 A pension to the Earle of Anglesey, during life, 3000 l. per. an. payable by the Treasurer of the Navy. 021000:00:00 A pension to the Lady Falmouth, of a 1000 l. per. an. 007000:00:00 A pension to Sir John Holmes, of 500 l. per. an. 003500:00:00 A pension to Henry Savile, of 500 l. per. an. 003500:00:00 A pension to the Earl of Arlington, of 2000 l. per. an. 014000:00:00 A pension to the Duke of Monmouth, of 6000 l. per annum. 042000:00:00 A pension to the Lord Obian, of 100 l. per annum. 700:00:00
A Donative to the Earl of St. Albans, in trust for Richard Talbott of 2000 l. per annum. 14000. A pension to Hamilton 350 l. per ann. 2450. To the Dutchess of Clevelands Eldest Daugh∣ter, in case it could not be readily paid out of the Exchequer, then to be charged upon the re∣maining part of the Woods of the Forrest of Dean. 20000. To the Dutchess of Cleaveland, the renewing of the Dutchy of Lancasters Leases, amount∣ing to 40000. To the Lord Clifford. upon the Surrender of his Office of Treasurer of England, a pension du∣ring Life of 8000 l. per ann. 560000. To the Earl of Oxford, and his Lady 2000 l. per ann. during their Lives, to be paid out of the First-Fruits Office. 20000. A Grant made to the Marquess of Worcester, and his two Sons, of the Office of High Steward of the Honour of Forrest, in the Coun∣ties of Nottingham and Derby, in trust for the Earl Marshal Howard. 14000. In total valued at 805255:09:04. For continuing Pensions and Salleries to timo∣rous Papists, that have left their imployment, and for several marks of Favour privately shew them. 50000. For his Majesties mild Proclamation Banishing Papists from Court, when by the Statute of the 29th. of Elizabeth, they ought not to come with∣in 10. Miles of London. 00:04:06
For taking of Protections from his Majesties Extraordinary Servants, who had dearly paid for that priviledg, and therefore were continued till almost the meeting of the Parliament, that they might be protected by Court Members. 00:02:06 For Burning French Hats, and modestly term∣ing them in our Gazzette outlandish Hats, when at the same time the French Ambassadore Lady, publickly Traded for at least 20000 l. per annum, in prohibited Comodities. 00:01:00 For Redressing Grievances in Ireland accord∣ing to the late Address, 00:01:08 For the Cabals Care and Diligence in granting Conovys to our Coal Fleets, by reason whereof the extraordinary Charge of the City of Lon∣don, hath Amounted to more then the Sum of 500000 l. 00:00:01d: ob. And now Gentlmen you are dsied in His Majesties last Speech, to give a p  y, cheerful and  able Supply, FINIS. The Reader is desired to Correct these Faults with some others, Committed in Printing. PAge 3. l. 1. after Parliament, add Assembled. l. 27. for Suspition, read Super∣stition, page 8. l. 4. for gotten, r. begotten. l. 8. dele the first, such. l. 12. for wherein, r. therein: p 9. l. 1. for rig, r. right. p. 11. l. 24. delivers, r. deli∣verers: p. 18. l. 4. and, r. we: p. 19. l. 22. & 23. Interceal, r. Interval. P. 20. l. 1. Potion, r. Portion: l. 9. the, r. this: p. 21. l. 17. & 18. Purpose, r. Effect.
