S2053 12280055 58668
Imprimatur. CAROLUS ALSTON, R.P.D. Hen. Episc. Lond. à Sacris Do∣mesticis. nii 26. 1686.
THE Christian Life. PART II. Wherein that FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE OF Christian Duty, THE Doctrine of our SAVIOURS Mediation, is Explained and Proved. VOLUME II. By JOHN SCOTT D. D. Rector of S. Peters Poor, London. The Second Edition. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-head in S. Paul's Church-Yard, and Thomas Horn, at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1687.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER. THis second Volume of the second Part of the Christian Life, had long since been made Publick, had it not been for an unfortunate Accident which befel me when it was almost fi∣nished, by which I was necessitated almost to begin again, and cast the whole into a different Method from what I first designed; for according to my first Draught, this second Volume had not ammounted to much above half of what it now is, only I intended to have added some Notes at the end of it, for the fuller proof and explanation of several Points therein handled, which now I am forced to leave out, the Book
being already swell'd so much beyond my first Intention, only three or four of them I am forced to Print with it, be∣cause I had referr'd to them in two of the Sheets which were Printed before I new model'd the whole Design. I pray God prosper this Work, according to its honest Intention, and that will be an abundant compensation for all the Pains and Labor I have undergone in composing it.
THE CONTENTS. SECT. I. OF the Signification and Notion of a Mediator, pag. 4, &c. Six general Articles proposed to our belief in Scripture concerning the Person and Offices of the Mediator. First, That he is designed and authorized to this Office by God, who is our absolute Lord and Sovereign, 6. Vpon what accounts the belief of this is necessary, 8. Secondly, That this Office to which he is Authorized, consists in acting for, and in the behalf of God and Men, who are the Parties between whom he mediates, 10. the belief of which Article carries with it the most indispensible Obligations to Christian Piety and Vertue, 11. Thirdly, That his Mediation pro∣ceeds upon certain terms and stipulations between God and Man, which terms he obtained of God for us, and in Gods Name hath published to us, 17. what these terms are, ibid. the performance of these Terms, our Saviour solicits both of God and us, 18. Fourthly, That as he acts for and in the behalf of God and Men, so be partakes of the Natures of both, 23. That he should partake of the Nature of God, was highly necessary to qualifie him for this sublime Office of mediating for God with Men, 24. and the
same necessity there was, that he should partake of the nature of Man, 27. That he should also partake of the nature of both, no less requisite to qualifie him to Mediate for Men with God, 30. That he is God as well as Man, proved from Scripture, 34. and also that he is Man as well as God, 39. Fifthly, That as he partakes of the Natures of both, so that he might transact Personally with both, he was sent down from Heaven to us, and is returned from us to Heaven, 42. Of the Birth and Personal Vnion of the Divine and Humane Natures in Christ, 44. Of his Death, Re∣surrection and Ascension, 46, &c. Sixthly, That upon his return to Heaven, there to mediate Perso∣nally for Men with God, he substituted the Divine and Omnipresent Spirit, personally to promote and effectuate his mediation for God with Men, 49, 50. This Divine Spirit is the third Person in the Triune Godhead, 50. That there is a third Person subsisting in the Di∣vine Nature, and that he is the same with the Spi∣rit of God in the Old Testament, 51. And first, That this Spirit is a Person, ibid. Secondly, That he is a Divine Person, 53. Thirdly, That he is the third Di∣vine Person, 56. Of the subordination of these Divine Persons, and that it arises not from any inequality of Essence, but from the inequalities of their Personal pro∣perties, 57, &c. That there was always a subordina∣tion of the Son to the Father, and of the Holy Ghost to both, 58. That in the affair of the Mediation this sub∣ordination was founded, not only in the inequalities of their Personal properties, but also in a mutual compact and agreement, 59. That the Holy Spirit acts, and hath always acted under Christ in the Kingdom of God, 60. That by the Holy Spirit, Christ himself act∣ed while he was upon Earth, 60, 61. That this Spi∣rit
is sent, both from the Father and the Son, and of the different nature of their Missions, 61, &c. Some things which the Holy Spirit hath done in the pur∣suance of his Ministry to our Saviour, and hath long since ceased to do; as first he inspired the Apostles and Disciples of our Saviour with the gift of Langua∣ges, 65, 66. Secondly, He fully instructed them by his immediate Inspirations in the Doctrine which they were to teach the World, 67, &c. Thirdly, He gave the most convincing evidence of the Truth and Di∣vinity of their Doctrine, 70. Fourthly, He conducted them by his infallible advice through all the emergent difficulties of their Ministry, 72. Of the cessation of these miraculous Assistances, 74, &c. Other things which the Holy Spirit hath always done, and always continues in pursuance of this his Ministry, as being con∣tinually present with the Church, 76. We receive him in our Baptism, 77. Of the different manner of his ordinary Operations now, from what it was heretofore, 78, &c. That these his ordinary Operations are all per∣formed by impression of thoughts, 81, 82. they are all reduced to five Heads: First, Illumination, 83, &c. Se∣condly, Sanctification, 85. Thirdly, Quickning or Excitation, 88. Fourthly, Comforting and support∣ing, 90. Fifthly, Intercession, 93.
SECT. II. Concerning the particular Offices of Christs Mediation. From the respective states and conditions of the Par∣ties between whom Christ mediates, is shewn the ne∣cessity of his being Prophet, Priest and King, 98. The order in which our Saviour proceeds in the discharge of these Offices, 100. SECT. III. Concerning the Prophetick Office of Christ. The great need of this Office, 101. That the Mes∣sias was to be a Prophet, 102. Of the import of the word Prophesie, 103. The admirable accomplishments of our Saviour for this Office, shewn in three Particu∣lars: First, That when he came down to Prophesie to us, he came immediately from the Bosom of the Father, 104. Secondly, That he came down into our own Na∣tures, 160. Thirdly, That while he abode among us, he was always full of the Holy Ghost, 109. how effe∣ctualy he discharged this Office, shewn in six Particu∣lars▪ First, He made a full declaration of his Fa∣thers Will to the World, 113. Secondly, He proved and confirmed what he declared by Miracles, 116. Thirdly, He gave a perfect example of Obedience to what he declared and proved to be his Fathers will, 118. Fourthly, He sealed his Declaration with his own
Blood, 120. Fifthly, He Instituted an Order of Men to Preach what he had declared to the World, 121. Sixthly, He sent his Holy Spirit when he left the World, to recollect and explain his Doctrine to those whom he had ordained to Preach it, and to inable them also to prove it by Miracles, 123, 124. SECT. IV. Of Christs Priestly Office. To what persons the Priesthood antiently belonged, 130. What the Melchisedecan Priesthood was, and in what respects Christs Priesthood is of that Order, 132. what the old Priesthood was, and in what acts it con∣sisted, 136. That it consisted, first, in Sacrificing; and secondly, in presenting the Sacrifice to God by way of Intercession for the People, 136, &c. That this ancient Priesthood was in both these acts of it, intended by God for a Type of the Priesthood of our Saviour, 142, &c. SECT. V. Concerning the first Act of our Saviours Priesthood; viz. Sacrificing. That the death of Christ had in it all the requisite Conditions of a Sacrifice for Sin, and what those Con∣ditions are, shewed in five Particulars, 147, &c. these Conditions applyed to our Saviours death; as first, In
his death he was substituted in the room of sinful Men to be punish'd for them, in order to their being released from their personal Obligation to punishment, 151. Se∣condly, He dyed a pure and spotless Innocent. Third∣ly, His death was of sufficient intrinsick worth and va∣lue, to be an equivalent commutation for the punishment that was due to the whole World of sinners, 155. Fourthly, His death was on his part voluntary and un∣forced, 160, 161. Fifthly, His death was admitted and accepted of God in lieu of the punishment which was due to him from Mankind, 164. The wisdom of this me∣thod of Gods· admitting Christs sacrifice for sinners, in order to the reforming Mankind, shewn in five Particu∣lars.  First, That the Sacrifice of Christs death was a most sensible and affecting acknowledgement of the infi∣nite guilt and demerit of our sin, 167. Secondly, It was an ample declaration of Gods severity against sin, 169. Thirdly, It was a most obliging expression of the love of God and our Saviour to us, 171. Fourthly, It is a sure and certain ground of our hope of pardon, if we repent and amend, 174. Fifthly, It is a seal and confirmation of the New Covenant, 177. SECT. VI. Of Christs Intercession, or presenting his Sacrifice to God in Heaven, by way of Advocation for us. The Nature of it defined, 183. The definition ex∣plained in the several parts of it, which are four. First, It is a Solemn Address of our Blessed Saviour to God the Father in our behalf, 184. Secondly, This
Address is performed by the presenting his Sacrificed Body to the Father in Heaven, 186. Thirdly, it is continued and perpetuated by the perpetual Oblation of this his sacrificed Body, 190. Fourthly, In vertue of this perpetual Oblation, he doth always successfully move and solicit God, 193. And that which he moves him to, is, First, to receive and graciously accept our sincere and hearty Prayers, 196. Secondly, to im∣power him to bestow on us all those Graces and Favours, which in consideration of his Sacrifice, God hath pro∣mised to us, 199. The admirable tendency of this method of Gods communicating his Favours to us, through Christs Intercession, to reform Mankind, shewn in five Particulars. First, It naturally tends to excite in us a mighty awe of the Divine Majesty, 204. Second∣ly, It also tends to give us the strongest conviction of Gods hatred of Sin, 206. Thirdly, It secures us from pre∣suming upon Gods mercy while we continue in our sins, 208. Fourthly, It encourages us to approach God with chearfulness and freedom, 212. Fifthly, It as∣sures our diffident minds of Gods gracious intentions to perform to us all the good things which he hath pro∣mised to us, upon our performing the condition of them, 216. SECT. VII. Of Christs Kingly Office. Christs universal Royalty successe to his Sacrifice and Intercession, pag. 221, &c. Christ had a particu∣lar Kingdom in this World, viz. The ewish Church before his Incarnation, and during his abode upon
Earth, 225. and therefore that which he was exalted to upon his ascension, was the universal Kingdom of the World, ibid. Six Heads proposed to be treated of con∣cerning our Saviours Kingdom, 226. SECT. VIII. Of the Rise and Progress of Christs Kingdom from the Fall to his Incarnation. Of which an account is given at large in eight Pro∣positions, pag. 227. First, That the Kingdom of Christ is founded in the new Covenant, 228. Secondly, That the new Covenant commenced immediatly after the Fall, and was afterwards in a particular manner renewed to Abraham and his Posterity, ibid. &c. Thirdly, That from its first Commencement, Christ was Mediator of it, and so he continued to be all along under that particular renewal of it to the People of Israel, 233, &c. Fourth∣ly, Christs being always Mediator of this Covenant, ne∣cessarily implies his having been always King over all that were admitted into it, and particularly over the People of Israel, 235, &c. and that he was the Divine King that reigned over Israel, and who in the Old Testament is promiscuously called Jehovah, and the Angel of Je∣hovah, is proved in five Propositions, 238, 239, &c. Fifthly, That after his coming into the World, he still retained this his right and title of King of Israel in particular, 255, &c. Sixthly, That the main Bo∣dy of the Jews rejected Christ from being their King, and were thereupon rejected by him, yet was there a rem∣nant of them that received and acknowledged him, 258.
Seventhly, That this remnant still continued the same individual Church or Kingdom of Christ with what it was before its main Body revolted, they very much refor∣med and improved, 259, &c. Eighthly, That to this individual Church or Kingdom of Christ, thus reformed and improved, was superadded all those Gentiles that were afterwards converted to Christianity, 272, &c. SECT. IX. Of the Nature and Constitution of Christs Kingdom. The Kingdom and Church of Christ the same, 275. The universal Church or Kingdom of Christ defined, 277. This definition explained in the several parts of it, which are eight, 272, 278. First, It is one Vni∣versal Society, consisting of all Christian People, 278, &c. Secondly, It consists of all Christian People in∣corporated by the New Covenant, 280, &c. Third∣ly, These Christian People are incorporated by the New Covenant in Baptism, 283, &c. Fourthly, They are incorporated under Iesus Christ their supreme Head, 291. Fifthly, This one Vniversal Society thus incor∣porated, is distributed into particular Churches, 292, &c. Sixthly, These particular Churches are distributed under Lawful Governors and Pastors, 295, &c. Se∣venthly, These particular Churches thus distributed, hold Communion with each other, 298, &c. Eighthly, The Communion which these particular Churches hold, is first, in all the Essentials of Christian Faith, 303, &c. Secondly, in all the Essentials of Christian Worship,
307, &c. Thirdly, In all the Essentials of Christian Regiment and Discipline, 309. SECT. X. Concerning the Ministers of the Kingdom of Christ. Which are of a fourfold Rank and Order; First, The supreme Minister of it is the Holy Ghost, p. 315. Secondly, next to him are the whole world of Angels both good and bad; and as for the good, they are sub∣jected to Christ by the Order and appointment of God the Father, ibid. That the good Angels were not subject to him as Mediator till his ascension into Heaven; but had their distinct regencies over the several Gentile Na∣tions. 316, &c. But upon Christs ascension these their distinct regencies were all dissolved, and they subjected to Christs Mediatorial Scepter, 320, &c. And as for the bad Angels, they were subjected to him by just and lawful Conquest, 322. That this Conquest he obtained while he was upon Earth, but especially in his last ago∣ny, 323, &c. Seven particular instances of the Mini∣stry of good Angels under Christ; first, they declare up∣on occasion his mind and will to his Church and People, 331, &c. Secondly, they guard and defend his sub∣jects against outward dangers, 333, &c. Thirdly, they support and comfort them upon difficult undertakings and under great and pressing calamities, 334, &c. Fourth∣ly, they protect them against the rage and fury of evil spirits, 336, &c. Fifthly, they further and assist them in their religious Offices, 340, &c. Sixthly, they con∣duct
their separated spirits to the Mansions of Glory, 342, &c. Seventhly, they are hereafter to attend and minister to him at the general Iudgment, 345, &c. The Ministry of evil Angels to Christ in four parti∣culars: First, they try and exercise the vertues of his subjects, 347, &c. Secondly, they chasten and correct their faults and miscarriages, 351, &c. Thirdly, they harden and confirm incorrigible sinners, 354, &c. Fourthly, they execute the vengeance of Christ on them in another world, 357, &c. The third sort of the Mi∣nisters of Christs Kingdom are the Kings and Gover∣nors of the world, 361, &c. by their subjection to Christ they are not deprived of any natural Right of their So∣vereignty, 363, &c. But in the first place have the same commanding Power over all indifferent things, and that in Ecclesiastical Causes as well as Civil that they had under the Law of Nature, 364, &c. And secondly, are as unaccountable and irresistible as they were before, 365, &c. What thse Ministries are which Kings are obliged to render our Saviour, shewn in general from Isa. 49.23.476, &c. Particularly: first, they are to pro∣tect and defend his Church in the profession and exercise of the true Religion, 377.378. secondly, they are to fence and cultivate its peace and good order, 378, &c. they are to chasten and correct the irregular, 379, &c. they are to provide for the decency of its worship, and for the con∣venient maintenance of its Officers and Ministers, 381, &c. The fourth sort of Ministers of Christs Kingdom are the spiritual or Ecclesiastical Governors, 383. That Christ hath erected a spiritual Government in his Church, 384, &c. That this Government is Episcopal proved from four Arguments; first, from the institution of our Saviour, 388, &c. secondly, from the practice of the Apostles upon it, 393, &c. thirdly, from the Vniversal
Conformity of the Primitive Church to this Apostolick practice, 404. fourthly, from our Saviours declared al∣lowance and approbation of both, 421, &c. Of the Mi∣nisters of this spiritual Government, which are either such as are common to the Bishops, together with the in∣feriour Officers of the Church; as first to teach the Go∣spel, 427, &c. secondly, to administer the Evangelical Sacraments, 429, &c. thirdly, to offer up the publick Prayers and intercessions of Christian Assemblies, 431, &c. Or such as are peculiar to the Bishops; as first to make Laws for the peace and good order of the Church, 433. secondly, to ordain to Ecclesiastical Offices, 436. thirdly, to exercise that spiritual jurisdiction which Christ hath established in his Church, 439. fourthly, to confirm such us have been Baptized and instructed in Christianity, 446, &c. SECT. XI. Of Christs Regal Acts in his Kingdom. Which are of three sorts: First, such as he hath per∣formed once for all, of which there are four, first, his giving Laws to his Kingdom, 449, &c. That what Christ taught as a Prophet had the force of Law, ibid. His Law spiritual, 450. His Laws reduced under two heads, first, his Law of perfection, 452, &c. secondly, his Law of sincerity, 455, &c. The second of those Regal Acts which he hath performed once for all, is his mission of the Holy Spirit, 457. A third is, his erecting an external Polity and Government, 458, &c. Another sort of Christs Regal acts are such as he hath
always performed and doth always continue to perform, of which there are four: first, his pardoning penitent Offenders, the nature of which is explained, 461, &c. the Scripture attributes it both to Christ and God the Fa∣ther, 462. that both of them have an appropriate part in it, 463. The part of God the Father is, first to make a general Grant of Pardon, 464, &c. secondly, to make it in consideration of Christs death and sacrifice, 466, thirdly, to limit it to believing, and penitent sinners, ibid. &c. The part which Christ performs in it is, to make an actual and particular application of this gene∣ral Grant of his Father to particular sinners upon their faith and repentance, 474, &c. The second of these Regal Acts of Christ is, his punishing obstinate Offen∣ders, 476. A third is, his protecting and defending his People and Kingdom in this world, 479, &c. The fourth is, his rewarding his faithful subjects in the life to come, 483, &c. The third & last sort of Christs Regal Acts are those which are yet to be performed by him, of which there are three: first, he is yet farther to extend and enlarge his Kingdom by a more universal conquest of his Enemies, 485, &c. secondly, he is yet to destroy Death the last Enemy by giving a general Resurrection, 492, &c. this proved from his own Resurrection, ibid. The Objections against this argument, and the Doctrine of the Resurrection answered, 494, &c. The manner of the Resurrection described at large from 1 Cor. 15.42.501. First, this mortal body is to be the seed or mate∣rial principle of our resurrection, 502. secondly, this seed must die and be corrupted before it is to be raised and quickened, 503. thirdly, this dead seed is to be raised and quickened by the Power of God, 505. fourthly, it is to be raised and quickned into the proper form and kind of a human body, 508. fifthly, this human body is to be
very much changed and altered, 510. the change that will be made in the bodies of good men is fourfold: first, from base and humble into glorious bodies, 511. secondly, from earthly and fleshly into spiritual and Heavenly, 513. thirdly, from weak and passive into active and powerful, 514. fourthly, from corruptible and mortal into incorruptible and immortal, 517. They will differ in degrees of Glory proportionably as they differ in degrees of perfection, 518. Of the woful change which the bodies of the wicked will undergo, 521. The third and last of these regal Acts of Christ, is his judging the World; where first the thing is proved that he shall judg the world, 523. Secondly, an account is given of the signs and fore-runners of his coming to judgment, 524. Thirdly, the manner and circumstances of his coming, 526. as first, the place from whence he is to come, ibid. 527. secondly, the State wherein he is to come, 528. thirdly, the Carriage on which he is to come, 530. fourthly, the train and equipage with which he is to come, 533. fifthly, the place to which he is to come, 536. Fourthly, the process of this judgment, 538. And first of the judgment of the righteous, wherein is implied first their citation or summons, 539. secondly, their personal appearance, 540. thirdly, their trial, 54. fourthly, their sentence, 543. fifthly, their assumption into the clouds of heaven, 545. The Iudgment of the wicked implies also first their citation, 547. secondly, their personal appearance, 548. thirdly, their trial, 549. fourthly, their sentence, 551. fifthly, their execu∣tion, 552.
SECT. XII. Concerning Christs surrendring his Kingdom. Christ hath a twofold Kingdom, viz. His Essential Kingdom which is co-eternal with him and can never be surrendred, and his Mediatorial Kingdom which is founded upon a solemn compact and agreement with the Father, and this is the Kingdom which shall be sur∣rendred, p. 556, &c. At the conclusion of the day of Iudgment the whole Mediation will cease, the end of it being fully accomplished, 557. An account of the cessation of the Mediatorial Kingdom from 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 558. the whole passage resolved into five propositions, ibid. First, that the Kingdom there spoken of was committed to him by God the Father, 559. secondly, that he is to possess this Kingdom so long, and no longer, as till all things are actually subdued unto him, 560. thirdly, that during his possession of this King∣dom, he is in a state of subjection to the Father, 561. fourthly, that when he hath delivered it up to the Fa∣ther, he will be otherwise subject to him than he is now, 562. fifthly, that he being thus subjected to the Father, all Power and Dominion shall be thenceforth immediately exercised by the Deity, 565.
SECT. XIII. Of the Reason and Wisdom of this Method of Gods governing sinful men by his own Eternal Son in our Nature. Five reasons of this Method assigned: First, that he might govern us in a way more accommodate to this degenerate state of our nature, 567, &c. secondly, that he might the more effectually cure and prevent the spread∣ing contagion of Idolatry, 573, &c. thirdly, that there∣by he might give us the more powerful encouragement to Obedience, 582. fourthly, that he might the more powerfully excite our Gratitude and Ingenuity, 585. fifthly, that he might thereby give us the more ample assurance of our future Reward, 588. SECT. XIV. That Jesus is this Mediator of whom we have been treating. Three ways by which God hath testified that Iesus is the true Mediator; First, by Prophesie; secondly, by Voice from Heaven; thirdly, by Miracles, 591. The last of these only insisted on, as being that to which our Saviour most commonly appeals, 592. This, together with the goodness of his Doctrine a most certain evidence of his being the Mediator, ibid. The Miracle of his Re∣surrection was that which both our Saviour and his Apo∣stles
most insisted on, 594. The reality of this attestation capable of being proved only by credible Testimony, 596. The Testimony of our Saviours Resurrection accompanied with all the most credible circumstances, which are six, 597. First, they who testified it were most certainly informed whether it were true or no, 598. secondly, there was a concurrence of several Witnesses to the truth of the Fact, 600. thirdly, there was no visible reason to suspect their honesty and integrity, 603. fourthly, there was no apparent motive to induce them to testifie falsly, 609. fifthly, they gave the greatest security for the truth of what they testified, 612. sixthly, they gave certain signs and tokens that what they testified was true, 614. What a most convincing argument this of Miracles, and par∣ticularly of Christs miraculous Resurrection was of the truth of his being the Mediator, shewn in four particu∣lars; First, that it was the most proper and convenient Evidence, 622. secondly, that it was the most certain and infallible Evidence, 625. thirdly, that it was the plainest and most popular Evidence, 629. fourthly, that it was the shortest and most compendious Evidence, 631.
OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE. PART II. VOL. II. CHAP. VII. Of the necessity of acknowledging Jesus Christ to be the one and only Me∣diator between God and Man, in order to our Leading a Truly Chri∣stian Life. HITHERTO we have treated of the common Principles of Religion in General, but as for this last, it is the great Principle of Christian Re∣ligion, strictly so called, as it is distinguished from the Religion of Nature, and, as such, is properly the Religion of the Mediator, as containing only the Doctrines which concern the Mediator, and the Duties which result from those Doctrines, and owe their Obli∣gations to them; both which being taken away,
all the remaining Religion is purely Natural and Moral. So that this Principle we are now treat∣ing of, contains in it all that Religion which is strictly Christian, without believing of which, and practising upon it, we cannot be truly said to lead a Christian Life, how well soever we may live. For there is no doubt but upon the Motives and Principles of natural Religion a man to whom Christianity was never sufficiently proposed may upon due consideration and a hearty endeavour re∣claim himself to a very pious and vertuous life, as it is apparent many of the Heathen Philosophers did; but no man can be pious or vertuous in the Christian sence, who is not so upon the Christian Obligations: for the Principles from and by which we act are the very life and soul of our Religion; and therefore as it is the Rational Soul that speci∣fies the Man a Rational Animal, so it is our Chri∣stian Principles that specifie our Religion Christian Religion. Wherefore though the Piety and Ver∣tue of an Heathen may be materially the same with that of a Christian, yet it is impossible it should be formally Christian, unless it be animated and acted with the belief of Christianity. So that if we leave out this, and practise only upon the above-named Principles, we are at best but wise and honest Hea∣thens, and there is nothing in all our Religion but the simple Dictates of mere natural reason. 'Tis true, to live according to meer Natural reason is all that God expects from those to whom Chri∣stianity hath never been proposed; for how can he expect that they should live by Principles which they either never heard of, or have not sufficient reason to believe? But where Christianity hath
been made known, and sufficiently proposed, we cannot be good men unless we believe it, and if we believe it we cannot be good Christians unless we practise upon it. And since Christianity hath im∣proved the duties of Natural Religion upon new Principles, and enforced them with new Obligati∣ons, to render our Piety and Vertue strictly and properly Christian, it is necessary we should believe these new Principles, and act upon these new Ob∣ligations; otherwise we are at best but meer Na∣tural men, in the true sence of the Apostle, i. e. men who are meerly conducted by the light of na∣tural Reason, and have not received the things of the Spirit of God, that is, the new Principles and Obligations which Christianity superadds to natu∣ral Religion, 1 Cor. 2.14. In handling therefore of this great and necessary Principle of Christian Life, viz. the belief and ac∣knowledgment of Christ's being the one and only Mediator, I shall endeavour these three things: First, To shew what it is that we are to believe in general concerning the Person and Office of this Mediator. Secondly, What are the particular Parts and Offices of his Mediation. Thirdly, What Evidence there is to induce us to believe him to be this one and only Mediator.
SECT. I. What it is that we are to believe in general con∣cerning the Person and Office of this Me∣diator. THE Greek word , which we tran∣slate Mediator, signifies one that interposes between two Parties, either to obtain some favour from the one Party for the other, or to adjust or make up some difference between them. And this undertaking of his, is either, first, of his own head and voluntary, undertaking without any Warrant or Authority from the Parties between whom he interposes, in which case he acts altogether pre∣cariously, and as a meer Orator, and can only per∣swade and intreat on both sides; or secondly, it is Authoritative, and this is two ways; first, when the Person who mediates is Authorized thereunto by the consent and designation of both Parties, both being equal, and consequently having an equal right to Authorize him. For when the Parties are equal, he must be authorized by both before he can pretend to any right to oblige and determine them; but when once both Parties have agreed to put their case into his hands, and refer themselves to his determination, he from thence∣forth commences a Mediator by Office, and is the Legal Representative of both, as being Autho∣rized by them to act in their stead in all those points that are referred by them to his determina∣tion. So that whatsoever he doth in the matter
before him is in effect the act of both Parties, who having both submitted their wills to his, and vo∣luntarily impowered him to will for them both, are thereupon as effectually concluded and deter∣mined by what he doth, as if it were their own personal Will and Action. And in this sence a Mediator is the same with that which we in Eng∣lish call an Vmpire, who is one that acts for both Parties by Authority from both, and in whose judg∣ment and determination both have obliged them∣selves to consent and agree. But then secondly, the Mediation is authoritative when he who mediates is Authorized thereunto by a superiour Party, who hath a just Authority and Dominion over the infe∣riour. For when a Mediator acts the part of two unequal Parties, whereof the one is superiour, and hath a just dominion over the other, it is sufficient that he be Authorized by the appointment of the superiour, and the subject or inferiour Party will be as much obliged by his determination, as if he had voluntarily referred himself to him. For a Media∣tor between a Superiour, as such, and a Subject, is one who is Authorized to act on the part of the Superiour in requiring the Subjects Duty and Obe∣dience, and to act on the part of the Subject in im∣petrating the Superiour's favour and protection; and there can be no doubt but every absolute Supe∣riour hath right to Authorize a Mediator between him and his Subjects, to act for him in ruling them, and for them in soliciting his favour. For he who Mediates between a Sovereign and Subject, is the Sovereign's Vicegerent and the Subject's Advocate; and he who without our consent hath a right to our duty, and to all the favours he bestows upon us,
may, whether we consent to it or no, demand our duty by what Vicegerent, and bestow his favours by what Advocate he pleases. And as for the Subject, he will be obliged, whether it be by his consent or no, to abide by the Mediator whom the Sovereign appoints, and by the terms which he shall impose on him; otherwise he will be justly liable to punishment. Having given this short account of the general Notion of a Mediator, I proceed to shew what it is in the general that the Scripture proposes to our belief concerning the Person and Office of this great Mediator between God and men; the whole of which I shall reduce under these six heads: First, That he is Designed and Authorized to this Office by God who is our absolute Lord and Sovereign. Secondly, That this Office to which he is au∣thorized consists in acting for and in the behalf of God and men, who are the parties between whom he Mediates. Thirdly, That this his Mediation proceeds up∣on certain terms and stipulations between God and men, which he obtained of God for us, and in his name hath published and tendered to us. Fourthly, That as he acts for and in the behalf of God and men, so he partakes of the natures of both. Fifthly, That as he partakes of the natures of both, so, that he might transact personally with both, he was sent down from Heaven to us, and is returned again from us to Heaven. Sixthly, That upon his return from us to Hea∣ven, there to Mediate personally for Men with
God, he substituted the Divine and Omnipresent Spirit personally to promote and effectuate his Me∣diation for God with Men. I. That he is Designed and Authorized to this Office by God, who is our absolute Lord and So∣vereign. For since God for just and excellent rea∣sons was resolved not to converse with sinful men immediately, they having rendered themselves, through their woful degeneracy, utterly unsit for, and unworthy of any such near and close access to his most holy Majesty; and since his tender mercy and compassion towards us would not permit him utterly to reject and abandon us, there was no ex∣pedient, at least that we know of, in which the holiness of his Majesty could so fairly accord with the tenderness of his Mercy, as this of transacting with us by a Mediator, by whose inter-agency, he, though a most holy Sovereign, may without deba∣sing himself freely converse with us, and we, though his guilty subjects, may without terrour and anxiety as freely draw near unto him; But, by vertue of his essential Sovereignty and absolute Dominion over us, the right of choosing and ap∣pointing this Mediator was wholly in him, because, as I shewed just before, he only can have the right of appointing the person who shall be his Vice∣gerent and our Advocate, who is the Sovereign Lord of our beings, and the supreme disposr of all our blessings. And accordingly he hath constituted the holy and blessed Iesus to be the sole Mediator between himself and us, to exercise his authority over us, and to procure for, and convey his favours to us; and hence he is called the Christ or Messias of God, that is, his anointed, Anointing with oyl
being anciently the visible sign by which the Re∣gal, Priestly, and Prophetick Offices were conferred. This Title of the Lord's Anointed therefore be∣ing applied to Iesus, denotes his being designed, appointed, and authorized by God to this great Office of Mediator, in which all those three Offices are included. For so, Acts 5.31. we are told, him, i. e. Christ, hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour to give Repen∣tance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins; And Acts 2.36. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made that same Iesus whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ; and, 10 name no more, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, that at the name of Iesus every Knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Iesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. The belief of which is absolutely necessary to create in our minds the reverence that is due to our holy Religion. For unless we suppose the founder of it to be Au∣thorized and Commissioned by God, we must strip and disarm it of all its authority, and look upon it at best but as a Pious Imposture, contrived on pur∣pose to Chouce men of their Sins, and to train and delude them into Piety and Vertue. For as it is a Religion, it can have no Authority but Divine, and a Divine Authority it cannot have unless the Au∣thor of it had a Divine Commission; but supposing him to be Commissioned from God, we owe the sme respect and reverence to his Religion as if God himself had proclaimed it to us in an audible
voice from the Battlements of Heaven; and it will be no less disrespect to the Divine Majesty for us to contemn and slight what he, a God's mouth, hath delivered to us, than it would have been for a Iew to have laughed at the Ten Command∣ments while God himself was proclaiming them from Mount Sinai in a voice of Thunder. For if we believe that God authorized him to reveal his Will to us, we must believe his voice to be the voice of God, who spake to us by him as by a li∣ving Oracle; and consequently, that in refusing to hear and to obey him we stop our ears against God, and do in effect declare that we regard what he saith no more than we do the whistling of the Wind. And as the belief of Christ's being Com∣missioned and appointed by God is highly necessa∣ry to Create in us a due reverence for his Religion, so it is no less requisite to create in us a due trust and confidence in his Intercession for us. For had he thrust himself upon this Office without any Call or Commission from God, God would have been no way obliged to hear him how earnestly soever he had supplicated in our behalf; but since he inter∣cedes for us by God's own Commission, we may de∣pend upon it that God will be always ready to hear him, and graciously accept our addresses to him when ever they are presented by his hand. For since God appointed him to be our Advocate, it must be either with an intent to hear him in our behalf, and if so, we may be sure his Ears will be always open to him; or with a design to mock and ridicule him, and recreate his own inexorable spleen with the spiteful pleasure of denying and repulsing him, which to imagine of God is no less senseless
than blasphemous. Since therefore he Advocates for us by God's own Commission, we may be sure his Plea in our behalf will be always acceptable and successful, since in repulsing him, he must in effect affront his own Authority by which he inter∣cedes for us. II. That this Office to which he is authorized consists in acting for, and in the behalf of God and Men, who are the Parties between whom he Mediates. And this is implied in the very No∣tion of an authorised Mediator, who, as such, is an Agent between two Parties, acting by autho∣rity for both, in order to the adjusting some dif∣ference between them, and reducing them to a mutual accord and agreement; and if he act only for one Party, he is not a Mediator, but an At∣tourney; and accordingly the Apostle tells us, that a Mediator is not a Mediator of one, but God is one, Gal. 3.20. For the better understanding of which words it is to be considered that in the foregoing Verse the Apostle had asserted, that the Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, that is, in the hand of Moses, who was appointed to Mediate not only for God with the People of Israel, but also for the People of Israel with God; and this, saith he, is implied in the very Notion of a Mediator, for a Mediator is not of one, but God is one, that is, God is only one of the two Parties between whom this Media∣tion is made, and therefore Moses must be sup∣posed not only to act for God with the People as his Vicegerent, but also for the People with God as their Advocate; in short, he must act for both Parties, otherwise he acts not as a Mediator. And
accordingly as Moses who was the Mediator of the Iewish Covenant acted for and between God and the People, so Iesus Christ, who is Media∣tor of the Christian Covenant, is stiled the one Mediator between God and men, 1 Tim. 2.5. that is, that goes between the two opposite Parties, and transacts for both in order to their accord and re∣conciliation; that as God's Vicegerent acts for him with us in order to the reducing us to our duty and allegiance to him, and as our Advocate acts for us with God in order to the inducing him to be gracious and favourable to us; that so having prevailed with us to lay down our enmity against God, and obtained of God to remit his displeasure against us, he may effect a happy Reconciliation between us. Both which parts of his Mediation are expressed in those words of the Apostle, Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able to save to the utmost those who come unto God by him, that is, who by submitting to him, as mediating for God, submit to God himself, seeing he ever lives to make inter∣cession for them, or to Mediate with God in their behalf. The belief of which carries with it the most in∣dispensable Obligations to Christian Piety and Ver∣tue; but while we look upon Christ as acting only for one Party, whether it be for God or our selves, we do in a great measure enervate the Motives of Christianity. For thus while we look upon him as acting only for God, that is, as God's Vicegerent, we must necessarily conclude that he is concerned only for God's Authority, and that when he hath secured or vindicated that by reducing us to our duty, or punishing our disobedience, he will have no
more to do with us or our concerns, but even leave us to shift for our selves, and to seek our reward where we can find it; that he is substituted by his Father for no other end but to exact our Homage, or revenge our Rebellion, but that as for us, he is no way concerned either to procure us any par∣don for our past sin, or reward for our future Obe∣dience; and while we look upon him by whom alone we have access to God, as one that is ut∣terly unconcerned for our welfare, we must look upon our selves as desperate and abandoned Crea∣tures, that are utterly forsaken of all hopes and en∣couragements. For what hope can we have, when not only the Deity we are to address to is highly offended at us, but also the Mediator we are to ad∣dress by is utterly regardless of us? And in such a hopeless condition all the arguments in the World are void and insignificant. And so on the other hand, while we look upon Christ as acting only for us, that is, as our Propitiation and Advocate▪ we must unavoidably conclude that he is con∣cerned only for our preservation and happiness; that his Office requires no more of him but only to pay off the scores of our sins with his bloud, and by pleading that payment in Heaven to ob∣tain our actual release from the rigorous demands of divine Justice; in short that he hath nothing else to do but only to purchase and sue out our pardon, and to justifie and set us right in the Court of Heaven; but as for reducing us under his Fa∣ther's Authority, and subduing our Wills and Lives to his obedience, that is no part of his Mediatorship, nor consequently is he at all concerned about it; and if so, all that his Mediation can oblige us
to (supposing that he hath effectually discharged it) is to rest and relie upon it for our Pardon and Iustification with God; and if out of pure grati∣tude we will be dutiful and obedient to him for the future, he will kindly accept it, but if not, he hath no remedy against us; and what likelihood is there that any argument of Religion should e∣ver prevail with us to submit to the divine Au∣thority, so long as we presume upon Christ's Me∣diation for Pardon and Justification without it, and believe it to be left wholly to our own Ingenuity whether we will submit or no. Thus while we consider Christ's Mediation by halves, and mistake either part of it for the whole, we pervert and deprave it, and instead of what it is, viz. a most wise and powerful inducement to Piety and Ver∣tue, render it an inevitable temptation either to Despair or Presumption, both which are equally and utterly inconsistent with a holy and Christian Life. But if we consider this Doctrine in its full ex∣tent, as it takes in both parts of Christ's Media∣tion, it inforces our duty upon us with the most necessary and powerful obligations. For it ad∣dresses it self to every passion in us that is capa∣ble of being moved and perswaded, and at once proposes to our hope and fear, which are the most vigorous principles of action, the most encoura∣ging and dreadful considerations. For since his Office obliges him to act for God and men toge∣ther, we may depend upon it, that through the whole course of his Mediation he will be most just and impartial to both, and that as on the one hand he will not so act for his Father's Authority as to neglect our safety
and welfare, so neither on the other will he so concern himself for our safety and welfare as to expose his Father's Authority; and if he proceed with this exact equality between the Parties he acts for, we have all the reason in the World to conclude, that if we submit our selves to God we shall be graciously received and rewarded, but that if we persist in our Rebellion against him we shall be most severely punished. For in the first place his being concerned for us as well as for God, gives us the most ample security, that if we will submit to his Fathers Au∣thority, which he stands ingaged to secure or vin∣dicate, he will have a most zealous regard to us and our concerns, and be as mindful of our interest as if it were his own. For in undertaking to be our Advocate he assumed our Persons, and took our Affairs into his own hands, so that now he is another our selves, and stands obliged to act for us with as much care and concern as if our Persons and Interests were his; and therefore we may de∣pend upon it that he will act as much for our ad∣vantage as we our selves could do if we were in his place, and had the same power and interest with his Father that he hath▪ and that if we were sit∣ting in his room at the right hand of God, and there interceding for our selves, we could not justly wish for, or desire more or greater instances of Grace and Favour than he will ask and obtain for us. And what greater encouragement can we have to return to our duty than this very conside∣ration, that all our concerns with our offended God are deposited in the hands of a most faithful Mediator, who upon our return will concern
himself as zealously for our Good as for his Fa∣ther's Authority, and solicit our cause in the Court of Heaven as Industriously as we our selves could do if we were admitted to be our own Ad∣vocates? But then in the second place his being concerned for his Father's Authority as well as for our Interest, gives us as full assurance, on the other hand, that he is no less obliged by his Office to reduce us to our duty to his Father, or avenge him upon us for our disobedience than he is to re∣store us to his grace and favour; and if he should so attempt the later as to be any way deficient in the former, he would not perform the part of a just Mediator, which consists in acting impartially for both Parties. For should he favour our inte∣rest beyond his Father's Authority, he would be so far partial to us against his Father. Now though he loved us so well as to sacrifice his life for us on Earth, and in the vertue of that Sacrifice to ap∣pear our Advocate in Heaven, yet we can never be so fond sure as to imagine that he loves us bet∣ter than his own Father; and if he doth not, we may build upon it that he is as zealously concerned to assert his Authority as to prosecute our interest, and to provide that he be obeyed or avenged as that we be pardoned and rewarded; but for us to rely upon Christ as mediating for us, without submit∣ting to him as mediating for God, is in effect to hope that he will be so exceeding gracious to us as to betray his Father's trust for our sake, and sacri∣fice his authority to our safety. For should he take our part with God, and solicite him to favour us while we persist in our rebellions against him, he would in effect abandon the cause and interest of
God's Government, and endeavour all that in him lay to expose his authority to the scorn and con∣tmpt of Mankind. Whilst therefore we obstinate∣ly refuse to hearken to him in his Mediation for God, that is, to submit to his Laws, and return to our duty and allegiance, he will be so far from interceding for us in the vertue of his meritorious sacrifice, that he will appear against us as an in∣censed Judge in the quarrel of his Father's Autho∣rity, and dearly revenge upon our guilty heads all those shameless affronts and indignities we have offered it, and by making us everlasting Monu∣ments of his Vengeance, convince us by woful ex∣perience, that he is no less a just Mediator for God than a merciful Mediator for Men. So that by re∣solving to persist in our rebellion against God, we do in effect renounce the Mediation of our Saviour, and proclaim before God and Angels that we will not be beholden to the one and only Advocate of sinners. And when we have flung our selves out of this Protection, Lord! whither shall we go for sanctuary from thy vengeance? When there is but this one Mediator and he hath discarded me, O my wretched Soul, whither wilt thou betake thy self? Call now and see if there be any will hear thee, to which of all the Saints or Angels wilt thou turn thee? What Favourite of Heaven will plead thy cause when the only Advocate of Souls hath reject∣ed thee? For if he who is my only Mediator, be incensed against me, who shall Mediate between me and him? When God alone was angry with me, there was some hope, because my Saviour stands as a living Screen between me and his displeasure, to guard and defend me from it; but when that
is kindled against me too, what is there to inter∣pose between me and the devouring flame? Be wise therefore, O ye sinners, be instructed, ye ob∣stinate Rebels against God; Kiss the Son lest he be angry and ye perish from the way; for if his wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him, but Wo be to them that pro∣voke him. Thus the Mediation of Christ addresses to our fear as well as hope, in order to the subduing us to the Will of God, and presses at once upon both these great Avenues of our Souls with the most ir∣resistible Motives. III. That this his Mediation proceeds upon certain terms and stipulations between God and Men, which he obtained of God for us, and in his name hath published and tendered to us. For when Mankind, by reason of the degeneracy of hu∣mane nature, were cut off from all immediate in∣tercourse with God, and this most wise and holy Method of conversing with us by a Mediator was resolved on by the Divine Council, God, in con∣sideration of what our Mediator had ingaged him∣self to suffer for us in the fulness of time, granted to him in our behalf a most gracious and merciful Covenant, whereby he ingaged himself to bestow his spirit upon us to inable us to repent and return to him, upon condition that we should seek it, and co-operate with it; to pardon all our past sins, upon condition that we should unfeignedly repent of them; and to crown us with eternal life, upon condition we should persevere to the end in well-doing. This is the substance of that gracious Co∣venant which God hath granted to us for the sake
of our Mediator; who hath accordingly assured us from God, that he will give his holy Spirit unto them that ask, Luke 11.13. That if we will repent and be converted, our sins shall be blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts 5.19. And that if we will be faithful to the death we shall receive a Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. And upon this Covenant it is that our blessed Saviour proceeds in his Mediation between God and Men. For our Baptismal Vow is nothing else but only a solemn engagement of our selves to perform the condition of this Covenant, upon which there results to us a conditional right to all that God hath promised in it; and when by this fede∣ral solemnity of Baptism God and we have once obliged our selves to each other, by mutual promi∣ses and engagements, Christ's Office, as Mediator between us, is to solicite on both sides for mutual performance; and accordingly in Mediating for God with us, he requires nothing of us but what we promised to God, and in mediating for us with God he claims nothing of God but what God promised to us. And hence he is called, The Me∣diator of this better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. and The Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.24. be∣cause he transacts between both Parties to solicite the performance of their mutual engagements. For so the same Author in Heb. 9.14, 15. seems to ex∣plain it, How much more, saith he (having spoken be∣fore of the vertue of the bloud of Bulls and Goats) shall the bloud of Christ, who through the eternal Spi∣rit offered himself without spot to God, purge our Con∣sciences from dead Works to serve the living God; and for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Co∣venant,
that by means of death for the Redemption of transgressions, &c. they which are called might re∣ceive the promise of eternal Inheritance; where those words [and for this cause] seem as well to refer to what went before as to what follows, and then the sence will be this, For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Covenant, both that he might take care that our Consciences being purged from dead works we might serve the living God, and that having redeemed us by his Death, we might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance. And accordingly he proceeds in his Mediation; for in acting for God as his King or Vicegerent, he hath enacted the con∣ditions which this Covenant requires of us into the Laws of his Kingdom, and exacts them of us under the fearful Penalty of eternal Damnation; where∣by he hath taken effectual care that we shall either perform these conditions, or undergo a punishment as great as the guilt of our neglect and contempt of them; and having thus tied them upon us by the utmost force of Law, that is, by Law established on the most dreadful Penalty, he hath, so far as his Regal Authority extends, compelled us to the performance of our part of this Covenant; so that if we do not perform it, it is not to be attributed to any neglect or omission of the Mediator, who to oblige us to perform it hath most faithfully acted for God, even to the utmost extent of that power wherewithal he invested him. And so on the other hand, in acting for us as our Intercessor, he hath taken no less care to insure God's part of this Covenant to us than he did to in∣sure our part of it to God. For this Covenant be∣ing granted to us by God in consideration of a
valuable satisfaction for our sins, Christ hath not only rendered this satisfaction to God by dying for us, and thereby purchased for us a just right and claim to all the blessings which God hath promised on his part if we perform what he requires on ours, but in the vertue of this satisfaction he also ap∣pears for us at the right hand of God, there to plead our right, and to prefer our claim, by exhibi∣ting that vocal Bloud, and those importunate Wounds with the price of which he purchased and obtained it. So that now we are intitled to all the blessings of this Covenant, not only by God's Promise, but by Christ's Purchace too, and to secure both, we have Christ himself advocating for us in Heaven with the price of that Purchace in his hands. So effectually hath he transacted for us in his Mediation with God in our behalf, that we have the highest security imaginable, that if we perform our part of this Covenant, God will not fail to perform his; since in so doing he would not only violate his own truth which he hath engaged to us by promise, but also injuriously defraud his own Son of what he hath duly purchased for us by his Death, and claims upon that Purchace by his Intercession. For he intercedes for no other bles∣sings in our behalf but what he purchased for us upon a consideration that was not only infinitely valuable in it self, but also freely accepted by his Father; and he purchased no other blessings for us but what are specified in this gracious Cove∣nant; so that he asks nothing for us but what he hath a right to obtain, nothing but what he pur∣chased by his bloud, and is in strict Justice due to his meritoriou sacrifice, and consequently no∣thing
that his Father can deny him without doing him the most outragious wrong and injury; and therefore this we may be as confident of as we can be of any thing in the World, that whatso∣ever he hath purchased for us he will not fail to ask, and that whatsoever he asks he will be sure to obtain. Thus Christ by his Mediation between God and Men hath taken the most effectual care to insure the mutual performance of this everlasting Cove∣nant to both Parties. For to insure God of our per∣forming our part, he hath bound it upon us by a Law enforced with an everlasting Penalty; which is the strongest obligation he could lay upon us; And to insure us of God's performing his part, he duly purchased it for us by his Death, and in vertue of that just Right he ever lives to claim it by his Intercession, which is the strongest obligation he could lay upon God; so that now, as God cannot fail in his part without violating his Truth and Ju∣stice, which would be to destroy his own Being, and un-god himself, so neither we can in ours with∣out exposing our everlasting well-being, and plung∣ing our selves body and soul together into everlast∣ing wretchedness and calamity. And hence I sup∣pose it is that our Saviour is called the surety of a better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. or, as the Greek word may be rendered, the Trustee between both Parties, to see that they mutually perform their several parts of this Covenant to each other; which Office our blessed Lord hath faithfully performed, in that he hath taken the utmost care to oblige both God and us mutually to make good our several engage∣ments to each other. For though he hath not
undertaken for us that we shall certainly perform our part, yet he hath undertaken to oblige us to it by the highest and most urgent reason, which was all that he could reasonably undertake for Beings that are free to good and evil; and if notwithstanding he hath thus obliged us, we will be so desperately obstinate as not to comply, he hath undertaken to chastise our obstinacy with a most dire and exemplary vengeance. And since he thus proceeds in his Mediation up∣on the certain and stated terms of a Covenant, which he himself hath published and revealed to us, we may hereby most certainly inform our selves what he expects from us, and what we are to expect from him. For now we are sure that all he can expect from us is that we should faithfully perform our part of this Covenant, that is, that we should implore the assistance of God's holy Spirit, and diligently to co-operate with it, so as to repent and return from our evil ways to the sincere practice of all Christian Piety and Vertue, and that herein we should persevere to the end; and less than this he cannot admit without being an unfaithful Trustee for God of that blessed Covenant upon which he Mediates. And now we are also sure that all we can expect from him is, that if we implore the assistance of his Spirit we shall have it, that if with his assistance we repent we shall be pardoned, and that if being pardoned we persevere in well-doing, we shall be crowned with everlasting life; and less than this he cannot obtain for us without being an unfaithful Trustee for us. For if he should exact less for God of us, or procure less for us of God than that Covenant
upon which he Mediates obliges God and us to, he would be wanting in his care one way or t'other to see this Covenant with which he is intrusted duly and impartially executed, and either defraud God or us of some part of that right which it de∣volves upon us; which we have all the assurance in the world he will never do. So that now we proceed upon certain terms, and do know infal∣libly what to trust to; we know that our Mediator exacts of us the whole and intire condition of the Gospel-Covenant; that this he will certainly ac∣cept, but that this he expects without the least de∣falcation or abatement; so that if we heartily im∣plore the assistance of his holy Spirit, and co-ope∣rate with it, we have all the assurance in the world that we shall be effectually enabled to render him that sincere repentance and obedience he requires, and that if we repent we shall be pardoned, and if we persevere in our obedience, be advanced to everlasting glory. On the other side, we know infallibly before hand, that if we refuse to submit to this condition, or do any way fall short of it, instead of being our kind and merciful Advocate, our Mediator will become our implacable Judge, and doom us to a place of dismal torment, where we shall live with everlasting horrour and despair; so that now we can no longer persevere in our impenitence, without trampling at the same time on the highest encouragements, and charging head∣long through the most amazing danger. IV. That as he acts for, and in the behalf of God and Men, so he partakes of the natures of both. For that this high and important Office might be the more effectually executed and per∣formed,
the eternal Father thought meet to place it in the hands of his own eternal Son, the Son of his natural Generation, to whom he communicated from all eternity his own Divine Essence and Na∣ture, and whom in due time he appointed to as∣sume the Humane Nature into a personal union with his Divinity, that so being God-man in one person he might be the better fitted and accom∣plished to Mediate between God and Men. For in Mediating Authoritatively for God with us, he was to perform the Office of a divine King, to rule and Govern us, as God's Vicegerent, and either reduce us under his Authority, or chastise us for our Rebellion against him; which is a Sphere so vast, and so sublime, as needs no less than some divine Intelligence to inform and actuate it. For to wield the Divine Scepter and Government is a Province that requires a Divine Knowledge and Power; for the souls and hearts of men are the principal Seat and Subject of the divine Govern∣ment, and therefore it is very requisite that he who is intrusted with the administration of it should have a through and perfect inspection of all our most secret Thoughts, and Intentions, and Pur∣poses, and Resolutions, otherwise how is it possible he should take cognizance of them so as to com∣mand, and over-rule and reward, and punish them? But to know the hearts of men is in Scripture al∣ways appropriated to the divine Omniscience; so 1 Kings 8.3. Thou, even thou only knowest the hearts of the Children of men; and if only God's all-searching Eye can penetrate into the hearts of men, who but a God can Rule and Govern them? And accordingly our Saviour, upon whose shoul∣ders
this inward and spiritual Government rests, challenges to himself this divine Prerogative which is so necessary a qualification for it; Rev. 2.23. And all the Churches shall know, saith he, that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts, and will give to every one of you according to his works. Nor is it less requisite to qualifie him for this spi∣ritual Empire that he should be Almighty than that he should be Omniscient; for to enable him to rule the hearts and souls of men it is necessary that he should have the Command and Disposal of all those outward Events and Accidents in which they are any way concerned, since it is by these in a great measure that their hearts are swayed, their affections formed, their intentions and resolutions squared and regulated, and in a word, their good and evil actions rewarded and punished in this World; and to wield and manage, moderate and dispose such infinite numbers of Events as concern such infinite numbers of Men so vastly distant from one another in place, condition, and temper, requires a power that can do whatsoever it pleases both in Heaven and Earth, which the Psalmist ap∣propriates to the divine Power as its peculiar Pre∣rogative, Psal. 135.6, 7. and if it be only a di∣vine power that can manage and dispose all the affairs of all men, what can be more requisite than that he who rules and governs them should com∣municate of the divine Omnipotence? And ac∣cordingly our Saviour, upon whom this Govern∣ment is devolved, assures his Disciples that all power was communicated to him both in Heaven and Earth, Matt. 28.18. which being the Prerogative of the divine Power seems impossible to have been
communicated to any but a divine Person. And therefore the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the Go∣vernment of Christ, tells us, that his name should be called Wonderful, Counsellour, the mighty God, Isa. 9.6. where by Counsellour and mighty God he seems to design his infinite Knowledge and Power whereby he should be qualified for this his divine Government; for so Mighty God doth always in the Scripture-phrase signifie Almighty God; so in Deut. 7.21. Psal. 50.1. Ier. 32.18. Hab. 1.12. and elsewhere. By all which it is evident, that to Mediate Authoritatively for God with men is a Province so sublime as that it requires no less than divine perfections in the Person that undertakes and manages it, and consequently that it is requi∣site he should be God. Nor is it less requisite to render his Government more awful and Majestick. For though the con∣dition of the Person alters not the nature of the Authority he is vested with, yet in the estimation of men the same Authority is more or less ve∣nerable according as the quality and condition of he Persons cloathed with it is more or less consi∣derable. Since therefore the quality of the Per∣son doth always cast a Cloud or Lustre on the Of∣fice, it was very requisite that he who was Autho∣rized to Mediate for God with men, which is the highest Office under God the Father, should be a Person of the highest Rank and Dignity next to God the Father himself, and consequently that he should be God the Son; and hence the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 1. to render his Authority moe awful takes a great deal of pains to im∣blazon the dignity of his Person, in which he
gives him such Stiles and Characters, as cannot without extreme force be applied to any but a Per∣son divine; he stiles him The brightness of his Fa∣ther's Glory, and the express Image of his Person; the Founder of the Earth, and the Maker of the Heavens, and the Vpholder of all things by the word of his power, Vers. 3.10. he tells us, that he was set far above the Angels, and that the Fa∣ther had ordered all his Angels to worship him, de∣claring him to be God in these terms, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever; and then he concludes all with this application, Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard of him, Chap. 2. v. 1. which shews that in the Apostle's sense to Mediate for God is a station so sublime that it was very fit it should be supplied (as it was) with a Person of the highest Dignity, that so his Person might reflect a Majesty on his Office, and render it more awful and venerable in the World. And as to accomplish him for this high Office of Mediating for God with Men, it was most fit he should be God, so it was no less requisite he should be Man. For Man being naturally a sensi∣tive, as well as a rational Creature, in this de∣generate state of his nature, wherein his sensitive part is predominant, there are no sorts of objects do so vigorously impress and affect him, as those which strike immediately on his senses; and hence it is that he so greedily prefers carnal before ra∣tional, and sensitive before spiritual goods, not∣withstanding the later are in themselves infi∣nitely greater and more eligible, and that in his conceptions of spiritual objects he is so prone to
blend and intermix them with carnal and Corpo∣real Phantasms, because his mind is so estranged from spiritual objects by its continual intimacy and familiarity with sensual ones, that it can hardly frame any Idea of them without disguising them into some bodily semblance. God therefore being a spiritual and invisible Essence, and upon this account far removed out of the Ken and Pro∣spect of our sense, our sensual and depraved minds must either be naturally indisposed to think seriously of, and consequently to be duly affected by him, which renders us prone to Irreligion, or to sophisticate our conceptions of him with cor∣poreal Images and Phantasms which renders us prone to Idolatry; to prevent both which God in great condescension to this deplorable weak∣ness of humane minds hath always thought meet to converse with us under some sensible appearance or visible Symbol of his Divine Pre∣sence. Thus when God conducted his Chosen People through the Red Sea and Wilderness, he went before them in a Pillar of Cloud by day, and in a Pillar of Fire by night, and when afterwards he gave them his Law, he descended upon Mount Sinai in a bright and glorious flame, overcast with thick and solemn clouds, in which illustrious ap∣pearance he afterwards made his entrance into the Tabernacle, where he made his constant abode, and from whence he frequently exhibi∣ted himself to the Peoples eyes and senses in a body of visible light and glory, which visible light is in holy Scripture very often called the Glory of the Lord. And since God in condescension to the weakness of humane minds thought it
meet to present himself to the senses of men in some visible appearance, there is the same reason why the Mediator should assume some visible substance to his invisible Godhead, that therein he might exhibit himself to our sense, and thereby at once affect our minds with a great love and dread of his divine Majesty, and by vouchsafing us a visible presence prevent our fra∣ming Idols and false Images, and Representations of him in our own minds. Now of all sensible substance there was none so proper for this end as Humane Nature, which is that above all others that we are most intimately acquainted with and most accustomed to love, and reverence, and obey. It is true, had his design been to Govern us by terrors and affrightments, as he did the Iews, it would have been more proper for him to assume that dreadful appearance of a consuming fire, in which he was wont to converse with them; but his design being to erect his Empire in mens Souls, and to captivate their Wills into a free and generous obedience, he could not have appear∣ed to us in any visible substance so proper for this end, so apt to oblige and aw, to indear and terrifie us together, as Humane Nature. And accordingly as God dwelt of old in the Iewish Tabernacle, and thence displayed himself before the Eyes of that People in a visible Glory; so the Word, as St. Iohn tells, was made flesh, and tabernacled among us, (for so the Greek word  signifies,) i. e. as in condescension to the weakness of the Iews he pitched his Tabernacle among them, and thence frequently appeared in a visible Glory to their sense, so in condescension
to ours he pitched his Tabernacle in our flesh or nature, from whence, as he proceeds, we behold his Glory (i. e. at his Baptism and Transfigurati∣on) as the glory of the only begotten Son, or in which the only begotten Son was wont to display himself from between the Cherubins, Iohn 1.14. In short therefore since in Mediating for God with us it was very needful that in compliance with our weakness he should address to our sense in some visible appearance, and since there was no visible appearance in which he could so advantagiously address to us as that of Humane Nature, it hence evidently appears how requisite it was that he should assume our Nature to his Deity, and be Man as well as God. And as it was requisite he should be God-man in order to his Mediating for God with us, so was it also no less requisite in order to his Mediating for us with God; because, as I shall shew hereafter, to Mediate for us with God implies, first, his making an atonement for our sins with his Bloud; Secondly, his appearing for us as our Advocate in Heaven. Now as for the first, it was highly re∣quisite that he should be Man, that so he might suffer for us, his Divinity being wholly impas∣sible; and this reason the Apostle himself assigns, Heb. 2.14. Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of flesh and bloud, he also himself (speak∣ing of Christ) took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him who hath the power of death; and seeing he was to assume another Na∣ture to his Divinity, that so he might suffer for us, it was most fit and proper that he should as∣sume ours rather than any other. For since God
in mercy had consented to accept of another per∣son's suffering for our sins, it was very requisite that what he suffered for us should come as near to our own personal suffering as it was possible, that so it might be more exemplary to us, and more nearly affect us with dread and horrour for our sins; and next to our own personal suffering is the suffering of our Nature: and therefore since the punishment of our sins was to be transferred from our Persons, it was highly fit it should be in∣flicted on our Nature, which it could not have been had not he been Man who endured it. And as it was requisite that he should be Man, that so he might suffer, and that so the Nature at least that had sinned might suffer, so it was no less requisite that he should be God-man in one and the same person; to render his sufferings a valuable Consideration for all that Punishment that was due to God upon the score of the infinite sins of an infinite number of sinners. For how could the bloud of one man, though never so in∣nocent or excellent, have amounted to a valu∣able commutation for the forfeited lives and souls of a world of guilty sinners? Or what less than the bloud of God-man could have been any way equivalent to that Eternal Punishment that was due to God from the whole Race of Mankind? And yet that it should be in some measure equiva∣lent was highly requisite, as I shall shew hereaf∣ter, both to satisfie the divine Iustice for what is past, and to secure the divine Authority for the future; and accordingly we are said to be purcha∣sed with the bloud of God, Acts 20.28. not that the Divine Essence can suffer or bleed, but being
united into one Person with the Humane Nature, the Properties of this Nature, and also the Acti∣ons and Passions thence proceeding, may be truly attributed to it; and therefore since in the Per∣son of Christ God was united to Man, whatso∣ever his Humanity suffered may be truly called the suffering of God; and being so, it was a suffer∣ing every way equivalent to the Eternal damnation of the whole world of sinners. Lastly, As he was to appear as our Advocate at the right hand of God, it was very fit he should be Man, that so, as the Apostle discourses, ha∣ving an High Priest that was in all points tempted like as we are, as having been placed in our Na∣ture and Circumstances, he might be the more affectionately touched with the feeling of our infir∣mities, Heb. 4.15. i. e. that so our nature being a part of himself, and that himself having experi∣enced its weakness and infirmity, he might be the more nearly concerned for it, and be touched with a more tender compassion towards it, & con∣sequently solicite its cause and interest at the right hand of God with greater zeal and importunity. For so the same Author reasons, Heb. 3.17, 18. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the People, for in that himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted. And that he should be God as well as Man is no less requisite to create in us the greater confidence of the success of his Advocation. For what Rea∣son or Argument could be great enough to satisfie
our guilty, and therefore anxious minds, that ever a meer man, who had nothing beyond our selves to recommend him to God but only his In∣nocence and Vertue, should be able to obtain such a prevailing interest in Heaven, as not only to reconcile the Almighty Father of all things to a world of sinful men, against whom he was so justly and so highly incensed, but also to obtain of him to imbrace them with infinite Love, and crown them with eternal Favours; which is such a stupendous success as we could scarce have mo∣destly hoped for from the most importunate inter∣cession, not only of the best man that ever was up∣on earth, but of the highest Angel in Heaven? For unless we could reasonably suppose God to be more pleased with one innocent man or Angel than he is displeased with a world of guilty sinners, which is hardly supposable, we could have no just ground to hope that the cries of the ones in∣tercessions should be more prevalent with him than the cries of the others guilts. But when we consider, that he who hath undertaken our cause is the Son of God, the Son of his natural Ge∣neration, that from all Eternity was begotten of his Essence, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, what may we not expect from the Prayers of one so near and dear to the Eternal Father, that is fit either for him to ask, or for the Eternal Father to bestow? For this we may be confident of, that he can never be so highly dis∣pleased with us as he is pleased with his own Son, who is the stamp of his very Essence, and express Character of his Person, and that therefore his pleasure in him will be far more prevalent than
all his displeasure against us; and while it is so, we have all the security in the world that he will succeed in his Advocation, and prevail in our be∣half. Thus that Christ should be God-man was in it self highly expedient to qualifie him for all the Parts and Offices of his Mediation, and accor∣dingly the holy Scripture expresly declares him to be so. For first, That he is God is as plainly asserted as any Proposition in the Bible. For thus not to instance in the Old Testament, where he is fre∣quently stiled Iehovah, the incommunicable name of God, and the Mighty or Almighty God, and Immanuel, that is, God with us; In the New Testament he is not only called God, Acts 20.28. where the Pastors are exhorted to feed the Church of God which he hath purchased with his own bloud, which can be applied to none but Christ; and Iohn 20.28. where Thomas calls him my Lord and my God, which Confession of his our Saviour him∣self approves, Verse 29. but moreover he is called the true God, 1 John 5.20. And we are in him that is true, even in his Son Iesus Christ, he is the true God and eternal life, and God over all blessed for ever, Rom. 9.5. and accordingly the Father him∣self is brought in thus bespeaking him, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, Heb. 1.8. where his design is to shew the excellency of Christ above the Angels; for saith he in Verse 7. Of the Angels he saith, who maketh his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire, but unto the Son he saith, Thy Throne O God, &c. which stile, O God, here must necessarily import something greater than was ever attributed to Angels, and conse∣quently
something greater than a Nominal or Ti∣tular Deity, which our Adversaries in this Article allow was frequently given to the Angel of the Lord in the Old Testament. If therefore that Angel of the Lord were a meer created Angel, as they affirm, he had as much attributed to him as our Saviour, unless we suppose this stile, O God, to import real and essential Deity, and not meerly nominal. So also Iohn 1.1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. For the clearing of which noble Text, which our Adversaries with a world of Art have indeavoured to perplex and intangle, it is to be considered that this Phrase, , the Word, was a term of Art by which in that very Age when this Gospel was written, and long before and after it, both the Iewish and Heathen Writers were wont to express and signifie a divine Person, Vide Note ad finem. by whom the Ancient Jews understood the Messias, Vide Note ad finem. who is that very Person the Apostle here treats of. Since therefore by this Phrase the Word, both Jews and Gentiles, when S. Iohn wrote this Gospel, understood a divine Person; and since by this di∣vine Person the Jews understood the Messias, there is no reason to imagine that S. Iohn here meant it in any other signification, since in so doing he could not but foresee he should impose upon the World, and take an effectual course to make us believe he meant what he never intended. For he is so far from explaining this Phrase into any different sence from that of the Jewish and Gentile Writers, that he all along explains himself in the very same.Vide Note ad finem.
Now it is hardly to be imagined by any one whose mind is not deeply tinctured with Heretical Pravity, but that had the Apostle used this Tech∣nological Phrase in any different sence from its common acceptation, he would have told us of it, and not have given us such an unavoidable occasi∣on to mistake in so great a Doctrine, by clothing its sence in such Phrases as in the Language of the Age he wrote in signified so differently from what he meant and intended by them. And as in the above-named Texts he is expresly stiled God, so other Texts, to convince us that he is not a meer titular Deity, attribute sundry things to him which are peculiar to God Essential. For so the making of the World is in sundry pla∣ces expresly attributed to him, (which as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 3.4. is peculiar to God; For he, saith he, that made all things is God;) for so in the above-named Text we are told, That by him were all things made, and that without him was not any thing made which was made; where by all things we must necessarily understand the whole World, unless we will suppose the Apostle to equivocate, because it was then a common and re∣ceived Doctrine that the Word was the maker of the World. For so, besides the above-cited Au∣thorities, the Chaldee Paraphrase upon Isa. 45.12. instead of I made the Earth, and created man upon it, saith the Lord, renders it, I by my word made the Earth, and created man upon it; and on Gen. 1.27. instead of God created man, the Ieru∣salem Targum renders it, The Word of the Lord created man, and so in several other places. This therefore being the Doctrine of the Age, S. Iohn
could not but apprehend that they would certainly understand these words of his in their own sence, because in all appearance they are so to be under∣stood; if therefore he meant them in any other sence, he ought immediately to have explained himself, which since he hath not, it is plain either that he meant according to the common sence, or that he intended to equivocate; but that he meant according to the common Doctrine of the Age is sufficiently evident from other Texts of Scripture. For Heb. 11.3. the Apostle expresses this Article to the Jews in their own Language, through Faith we understand that the Worlds were made by the Word of God; now that by this Word he meant Christ, is plain from Heb. 1.1, 2. In these last days God spake unto us by his own Son, by whom also he made the Worlds; and that by these Worlds he means the whole Creation is evident from the 8, 9, and 10. verses of this Chapter, But unto the Son he said, thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, &c. Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity, &c. speaking still of the Son, and then it follows, And thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thine hands; for the conjunction (And) here plainly connects these words to the foregoing, viz. But unto the Son he said, &c. so that still it is the same Son of whom it is said, Thy Throne O God, &c. and thou Lord in the beginning, &c. the same Per∣son whose Throne in verse 8. is said to be for ever and ever, that is said in verse 10. to have laid the foun∣dations of the earth. So also Col. 1.15, 16, 17. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first-born of every Creature, for by him were all things created
that are in Heaven, and that are on earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Domini∣ons, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him, and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all things do consist; where to shew that he means a proper and literal creation, the Apostle describes it in those very words where∣in Moses describes the creation of the World, For by him were all things created that are in Hea∣ven, and that are on Earth; and to shew that he doth not mean by creating, renewing or regenera∣ting, as the Socinians will needs understand him, he tells us, that not only Men were created by him, who are the only Subjects of this new Meta∣phorical creation, but all things in general that are on Earth, and not only all things that are on Earth, but all things that are in Heaven too, where there never was any thing new-created or regene∣rated; for the Thrones and Dominions, the Prin∣cipalities and Powers, i. e. Orders of Angels that are here said to be created by him have never been renewed or regenerated, but those of them that fell fell for all eternity, and they which stand have always stood, and shall stand for ever; and there∣fore by his creating them must be meant his giving them their being and existence. And as the creation of the World is in Scripture attributed to Christ, which speaks him a divine Being, so there are other things ascribed to him which are peculiar to the Divinity, as particularly his being Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last, in Rev. 22.13. and seve∣ral other places, which is a stile that God hath appropriated to himself, Isa. 44.6. Thus saith
the Lord the King of Israel, and his Redeemer the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. If then Christ be the first and last, as he himself declares he is, Rev. 1.17. he must be that Lord the King and Re∣deemer of Israel. Hitherto we have been proving that he is God, but then there are other Texts that do as plainly prove him to be God-man. For so in 1 Tim. 3.16. Without controversie great is the mystery of Godliness, God was manifested in the flesh, which is the same with that of S. Iohn, John 1.18. And the Word (which in the first verse he saith was God) was made flesh; so also Phil. 2.6, 7. For be∣ing in the form of God he thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, but emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men; from which words it is plain that Christ was in the form of God before ever he was in the form of a servant, for it was by taking on him the form of a Servant that he emptied himself, and his being in the form of a servant consisted in being made in the likeness of men, so that his being in the form of God doth as much imply that he was God, as his being in the form of a servant doth that he was Man, and since in becoming man he em∣ptied himself, it necessarily follows, that be∣fore he became so he was full, and also that that fulness of his consisted in being in the form of God; if then he was full by being in the form of God, before he emptied himself into the form of a servant by being made in the likeness of men, it is certain that he was in the form of God before he was in the form of man, and that
his being in the form of God doth as much signifie his being really God as his being in the form of men doth his being really man: But for further satisfaction concerning these two last cited Texts I refer the Reader to that most learned and in∣comparable Treatise, Pearson's Exposition of the Creed, fol. 121, and 127. where the Cavils of the Socinians are all shamefully baffled with clear and convincing reasons. Thus as it is highly requisite in it self that the Mediator should partake of the Natures of both the Parties between whom he interposes, so we are sufficiently assured that he doth, by Scrip∣ture Testimony. So that now in his Mediation for God with us we have all the reason in the world to dread and reverence his Authority, and also to resign up our selves to its conduct with a free and chearful mind. For being God, we are sure that he hath an all-seeing Eye that inspects our hearts, and pries into the inmost thoughts and purposes of our Souls, and an Almighty Arm that can stretch forth it self to the remotest di∣stance, and reach us even to the bottomless Pit; and being thus exposed to the inspection of an all-seeing Eye, and the vengeance of an Almighty Arm, how dare we harbour any thought or pur∣pose, any desire or affection with which that Eye is offended, or that Arm provoked? But then being Man as well as God, his Authority comes armed to us with equal Sweetness and Majesty, and is every whit as apt to affect our love and in∣genuity, as our dread and reverence. For how can we refuse to obey him when he commands us in our own nature; a nature which is most intimate
and familiar to us, and which we are most inured to love and to obey; and above all, a nature where∣in he bled and died for us, and chearfully exposed himself to sorrow, and shame, and torment, that we might live and be happy for ever? And so on the other hand, in his Mediation for us with God we have all the reason in the World stedfastly to relie upon his meritorious Sacrifice and powerful Intercession; for as he was man, he was not only capacitated to suffer for us, but he actually suffer∣ed in our nature, that very nature wherein we had justly deserved to suffer for ever. So that what he suffered for us came as near to our suffering for our selves, and consequently did as much satisfie the ends of divine Justice in exacting punishment of Offenders, as it was possible for any substitu∣ted or vicarious punishment to do. For though our persons escape, our nature hath been punish∣ed in him. But then being God as well as Man, what he suffered for us was not only instead of what we ought to have suffered, but equivalent to it. So that our ransom from eternal punishment being paid with the bloud of one of our own kind, hypostatically united to God, we did as much suf∣fer in him as we could do without suffering in our own persons, and what we suffered in him was every way equivalent to what we had deserved to suffer in our own persons. So that now we have all possible assurance that the Divine Justice is so far satisfied by what Christ hath suffered for our sins, that if we repent and forsake them, we shall be freely discharged from all that infinite Debt of punishment which we have justly con∣tracted by them. And then again being Man, we
may be secure that he hath a most tender sympathy with the whole Mass of humane nature by what distances soever of time or place divided and dis∣pers'd, and consequently that having in himself experienced its weaknesses and temptations, so far as was consistent with his innocence, he must needs be a very concerned and zealous Advocate for us with the Almighty Father. And then being God-man, the Son of the Almighty Father's Es∣sence as well as the Son of man, we may be equal∣ly secure that he cannot fail being successful in his Advocation, especially when he pleads for us, as he doth in the right of his own meritorious Bloud by which he purchased our admission into the di∣vine Grace and Favour. So that considering all these things, it is evident that there could have been no Mediator between God and us so every way fit and proper to govern us for God, and intercede for us with God, none in whom both God and we could have reposed that Trust and Con∣fidence, as a Theanthropos or God-man. V. Another thing which the Scripture propo∣ses to our belief concerning this Mediator, is that as he partakes of the natures of both the Parties between whom he mediates, so, that he might transact personally with both, he was sent down from Heaven to us, and is returned again from us to Heaven. For since he was appointed to Medi∣ate between God and Men, it was highly expedi∣ent that he should personally address to both Par∣ties, that so he might more closely and effectually solicite a mutual reconciliation between them, and that being personally known to both, they might both repose their trust in him with greater
confidence and assurance. He was well known to the Father, in whose bosom he dwelt from all Eternity, to be a Person every way fitted to be intrusted with his authority and the administra∣tion of his Government, as communicating with him in the same divine Essence, and consequently essential Dominion; by reason of which no person in the World could be so much concerned for his Father's Authority as he was, and consequently no Person could be so proper to be intrusted with it; and therefore when upon the first breach be∣tween God and men there arose an occasion for a Mediator, God could not but be infinitely satis∣fied that there was none so fit to act on his part, or Mediate for him, as his own Son. But then since he was neither known to us by person, nor allied to us by nature, as he was to his Father, we could have no such reason as the Father had to place our trust and confidence in him; and there∣fore though when he first undertook his Mediator∣ship between God and us he was not related to us by nature as he was to the Father, yet it was upon an agreement between the Father and him that he should hereafter assume this relation to us, and be∣come the Son of Man as well as the Son of God, that he was admitted to this Office. So that though from our Fall to his Incarnation he was not Man but only God, yet all that time he Mediated as God-man between God and Men; he Mediated for God as actually subsisting in the Divine Nature, he Me∣diated for men as he was infallibly to subsist in the humane nature also. He having therefore vertu∣ally and intentionally assumed our nature from his very first entrance on his Mediatorship, did there∣upon
become equally related to both Parties, but till he had actually assumed our natures, and there∣in manifested himself unto us, we could not have that knowledge of him, nor of his relation to us, that the Father had, nor consequently that reason to repose our trust and confidence in him; and therefore that we might have the same reason to confide in him in his Mediation for us as God had in his Mediation for him, God so ordered it, not only that he should assume our nature, which, if he had so thought meet, he might have done without either being seen of us, or born among us, but also that he should so assume it as to be visibly born of humane kind, and manifested in it in the open view and sight of the World. For in the fulness of that time, which was long before prefixed in the Eternal Council of God, the Holy Ghost by an immediate, invisible, and miraculous operation on the pure and Immaculate Womb of a Virgin called Mary of the Lineage of David, inabled her without any Congress of Man to con∣ceive a Child of humane kind, consisting of a ra∣tional Soul in a mortal body, which the Eternal Word, or natural Son of God, who was before all Worlds, immediately assumed into a personal Vnion with himself, whereby he became God-man who before was only God; and this without ei∣ther commixing his two natures into one, or con∣verting either of them into the other, but under their Personal Union preserving them still di∣stinct and separate; which God-man the blessed Virgin that conceived him actually brought forth after the natural time of Women, and Nursed and Educated till he arrived to the Age of man,
at which time he began personally to treat with men in his Father's behalf, and, in order to the reducing them to their bounden duty and allegi∣ance to the Throne of Heaven, revealed his Mind and Will to them with his own mouth, and pressed and inforced it upon them with the most powerful Motives that ever were urged to mankind, and by his own miraculous Works and most holy Example abundantly demonstrated to them that what he revealed to be the Will of his Father was true and practicable. Thus far in his own person he Mediated for his Father with Men, as I shall shew more fully hereafter. The consideration of which ought in all reason and conscience to render his Mediation more pre∣valent with us. For when God the Father hath condescended so far as to send down his only Son from Heaven on an Embassie to us to propose to us terms of reconciliation who had so highly in∣censed and affronted him; when God the Son hath condescended so far as to cloath himself in our nature, that therein he might indear himself to us, and thereby oblige us to listen more atten∣tively to his gracious proposals, what a stupendous height of obstinacy will it be in us to stop our Ears against him, and reject those terms of Mer∣cy he proposes to us, by persisting in a wilful rebellion? Had God sent but one of the lowest Angels in Heaven to us to promise pardon and eternal life to us upon condition we would but sincerely submit to his Will, one would have thought a proposal so infinitely reasonable in it self, and advantagious to us, should have been imbraced by us with transports and raptures; but
to reject it now when he hath sent it to us by his own Eternal Son, whom all his Angels adore, and by his Son incarnate in our own natures, is such a degree of obstinacy and ingratitude together, as no Devil was ever guilty of. Suppose that you beheld this most glorious Person coming down to you from the right hand of God to tender you a Pardon and a Crown upon condition you would submit to his Father's Will, and denounce ever∣lasting vengeance against you if you persist in your rebellion, would you dare by refusing to submit, to reject that Pardon and that Crown, and defie that vengeance to his face? One would think it were impossible; but yet in effect you do the same thing, who believe that that Jesus who preached this Gospel to the World 1600. years ago was the Son of God in Humane Nature, and yet ob∣stinately refuse to submit to its proposals. Hence from this very Topick, that God hath in these last days spoken unto us by his own Son, Heb. 1.2. the Apostle himself makes this inference, There∣fore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip, Heb. 2.1. And now having finished his Personal Treaty or Mediation with us for God, he lays the foun∣dation of his everlasting Intercession for us with God before our own Eyes, viz. in the Sacrifice of himself for the sins of the World. He might, if he had pleased, have suffered death for us in the invisible state, and received those tortures from the malice of Devils which were inflicted on him by the malice of devilish men, but that would not have given so great a satisfaction to our Faith. For
for the Son of God to lay down his life for Sinners, is such a stupendous instance of love, as would have exceeded the belief of Mankind, had it not been openly and visibly transacted; and therefore he rather chose to resign up himself into the hands of the Iews his cruel Persecutors, and by them to offer up his Life upon the Cross in the Publick view of the World. And now having given this sensible evidence to our Faith that he died for us, to satisfie us farther that his death was accepted by his Father as a full atonement for our sins, he rose again from the dead the third day after his Crucifixion, which was a plain evidence that his Father was fully satisfied with what he had suffer∣ed for us, because he exacted no more, but by his Resurrection actually discharged him from any far∣ther suffering for ever. So that the Resurrection of Christ is not only an evidence of the truth of his Religion, under which notion I shall discourse of it hereafter, but also of the acceptation of his Sacrifice. For so the Apostle intimates in Rom. 8.33, 34. Who then shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that ju∣stifieth: Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen again, i. e. Who is there now that can presume to denounce eternal condemnation against any good Christian, since Christ himself hath laid down his life for him, yea rather since he is risen again from the dead, and hath thereby given sufficient evidence that God hath accepted his death as our ransom from eternal condemnation? And now having satisfied our Faith in these two great points, that he died for our sins, and that God hath accepted his
death in lieu of that eternal punishment that was due for them, all the farther satisfaction we can ask or need is, that as he came down from the Father to Mediate personally with us for him, so he should return back again to the Father to Me∣diate personally for us with him, to exhibite and plead his meritorious Sacrifice in our behalf, and in vertue thereof to solicite our pardon and accepta∣tion with God. And therefore to satisfie us in this also, after he had abode some time upon Earth af∣ter his Resurrection, and satisfied his Disciples by frequent converses with them that he was really risen, and given them all necessary Orders for their future conduct in the propagation of his Gospel, he carried them out to Bethany, where after he had lift up his hands and blessed them, he ascended before their eyes into Heaven, upon which it is said, Luke 24.52. That they worship∣ped him, and returned to Ierusalem with great Ioy; surely not because their dear Lord was gone from them, never in this World to be seen by them more, that was cause of sorrow rather than joy to them; but because he was gone to the right hand of the Father, there to intercede in Person for them, and for ever to exhibite that wounded and bleeding body of his, by which he had made expiation for the sins of the World, and purcha∣sed the promise of the Spirit, and of eternal life; upon this account indeed they had great cause to rejoyce, because now they knew they had a sure Friend in Heaven where their main hope and inter∣est lay, even that very Friend who not long before had freely exposed himself to a most shameful and tormenting death to rescue them from death
eternal, and who after such an instance of love they could not but conclude would employ his utmost interest with the Father in their behalf, and, in a word, who being the only begotten of the Father, whose precious Bloud he had graci∣ously accepted as a ransom for the sins of the World, could not but have an interest with him infinitely sufficient to obtain for them all the gra∣ces and favours that were fit either for them to ask, or for his Father to bestow. So that now if we heartily comply with him as Mediating for his Father with us, we have all the encouragement in the world to depend on him as Mediating for us with his Father, since he doth not Mediate with him by a second hand, or at a distance, but in his own Person, in that very Person which is not only infinitely dear to the Father as being his only be∣gotten Son, but hath also infinitely merited of him by offering him his own life at his command as a Sacrifice for the sins of the World. And ac∣cordingly upon this consideration the Apostle founds the hope of Christians, 1 Iohn 2.1, 2. My little Children these things write I unto you that ye sin not, but if any man sin, let him not presently give up himself as hopeless and irrecoverable, for we have an Advocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the Propitiation for our sins. VI. And lastly, Another thing which the Scripture proposes to our belief concerning this Mediator is that upon his return from us to Hea∣ven, there to Mediate Personally for Men with God, he substituted the divine and Omnipresent Spirit Personally to promote and effectuate his Me∣diation
for God with Men. When he went up to Heaven, there to Mediate for us with God, he did not thereby abandon his Mediation for God with us, but immediately substituted a certain mighty, spi∣ritual Being to act for him, whom he calls the Advocate, or, as we render it, the Comforter and the Holy Ghost, and who was to Mediate with Men in his behalf even as he Mediated with them in the behalf of his Father, and to Advocate for his Authority as he Advocated for his Father's. For so he tells his Ministers, whom he left be∣hind him to assert and propagate his Authority in the World, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter or Advocate, i. e. to plead for, and inforce your Ministry in my behalf, whose Ministers you are, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, &c. I will not leave you comfortless, or without an Advocate. I will come to you, that is, by this Spirit of Truth who is to be my Vicegerent even as I am my Fa∣ther's, Iohn 14.16, 17, 18. But for the fuller explication of this great and necessary Article I shall, first, shew what this divine Spirit is which Christ hath substituted to Mediate for God with us in his absence. Secondly, I shall explain his subordination, and substitution to Christ in this part of his Mediation. Thirdly, I shall shew what it is that he hath done, and still continues to do in order to the effecting this Mediation. First, What this divine Spirit is which Christ hath substituted to Mediate for God with us in his absence. I answer, it is the third Person in the Tri-une Godhead. For that besides the Father and the Son there is a third divine Person subsist∣ing
in the Godhead, seems to have been a current Doctrine among the ancient Writers both Vide Note d ad finem. Gentile and Iewish Vide Note e ad finem., and is most plainly and expresly asserted in holy Scripture; which third Person is known in Scripture by the name of the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of the Lord. For that the Holy Ghost so often named in the New Testament is the same with that Spirit of the Lord so much celebrated in the Old, S. Peter expresly asserts, 2 Pet. 1.2. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; from which words it is evident that this Holy Ghost whom S. Peter here mentions is the very same with that holy Spirit, or Spirit of the Lord, by whom, as we are told in the Old Testament, the ancient Pro∣phets were inspired, vid. Isa. 63.11. 2 Sam. 23.2. Mich. 2.7. and abundance of other places; and accordingly S. Peter applies that Prophecy of Ioel 2.28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, to that miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, Acts 2.16, 17. but this is that, saith he, which was spoken by the Prophet Ioel, &c. which could not be true if S. Peter's Holy Ghost were not the same with Ioel's spirit of the Lord. But it is most certain that the Holy Ghost whom S. Peter and the New Testament so often menti∣on, was in the first place, a real Person, and not a meer Quality, as the Socinians vainly dream. For so we every where find personal properties and actions attributed to him. Thus he is said to speak, Acts 28.25. and Heb. 3.7. yea, and his speeches are frequently recorded; so Acts 10.20.
The Spirit said unto Peter, arise therefore, get thee down, and go with them, for I have sent thee; and Acts 13.2. The Holy Ghost said, separate me Bar∣nabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them; and how can we without horrible force to such plain, historical relations, which ought to be literal and not figurative, attribute these speeches to a meer Vertue or Quality? And else∣where he is said to reprove the world, Iohn 16.8. and to search into and know the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. and to divide his Gifts severally to every man as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. And not only so, but such things and actions are attribu∣ted to him as can in no sence be attributed to the Father, which would be non-sence if he were only the vertue or power of the Father, and not a real Person, distinct from him. Thus the Holy Ghost is said to come, as sent from the Father, in the name of Christ, Iohn 14.26. and in Iohn 16. he is said to come, as sent from Christ, verse 7. And when he comes, Christ promises them, that he shall guide them into all truth, for he shall not speak of himself, saith he, but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak, ver. 13. Again, he shall glorifie me, saith Christ, for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it unto you, verse 14. And to name no more, the Holy Ghost is said to make Intercession for the Saints according to the Will of God, Rom. 8.27. none of which things can in any tolerable sence be said of God the Father. Since there∣fore not only personal actions, but such personal actions also as cannot be attributed to the Fa∣ther, are frequently attributed to the Holy Ghost; it hence necessarily follows, that he is
not meerly the vertue or power of the Father, but a distinct principle of action from him, that acts from and by himself, and consequently is a real person or subsistence. It being evident therefore, from what hath been said, that the Spirit of the Lord in the Old Testament is the same with the Holy Ghost in the New, and that the Holy Ghost in the New is a real person distinct from the Father, it hence fol∣lows in the second place, that this Holy Ghost is a divine person, because in the Scripture-forms of Baptism and Benediction he is always ranked with divine persons, viz. the Father and the Son; thus Baptism is in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matth. 28.19. And the Grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, is the usual form of Benediction, 2 Cor. 13.14. Now that the Father is a divine person all acknowledge, and that the Son is so too hath been proved at large, and therefore since the Holy Ghost is ranked with the Father and the Son, both in our Baptismal Dedication and form of Benediction, that is a sufficient evidence that he is a divine person also. For what likelihood is there that in such solemn acts of Religion a meer Creature should be taken into copartnership with the divine Father and Son? But besides both in the Old and New Testament divine actions and perfections are attributed to him. Thus in Iob 33.4. Creation is ascribed to him, The Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath given me life. So also Iob 26.13. By his Spirit he hath garnished the Heavens. Since
therefore to Create is a divine Act, and since eve∣ry Act flows from the Essence of the Agent, it follows that the Essence of this Spirit from which this divine Act of Creation flows, is divine. Again, in Psal. 139.7. Omnipresence is attributed to this divine Spirit; Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? And if there be no place whither we can go from him, as the Question plainly implies there is not, then he must necessarily fill all places, and be Omnipresent. So again, 1 Cor. 2.10. Omniscience is attributed to him, for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God; and that by searching here is not meant Enquiry, but Knowledge and Comprehension, the next verse will inform us, For what man knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man which is in him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man, save the Spirit of God. If then the Spirit's search be knowledge, and his Knowledge comprehends all things, what else is this but Omniscience? And as the Actions and Attributes which the Scripture attributes to the Holy Ghost are divine, so are the Honours also. For so 1 Cor. 6.19. our bodies are said to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost which is in us; now since there is nothing can make a Temple, which as such is the house of God, but only the Inhabitation of a divine Person, and since no person can have right to the honour of a Temple, which as such is made for divine Worship, but he to whom divine Wor∣ship is due; it will hence necessarily follow, both that the Holy Ghost is a divine Person, and that he hath right to divine Worship; and according∣ly, 1 Cor. 3.16. the Apostle makes the Inhabi∣tation of God's Spirit in us to be that which con∣stitutes
us Temples of God, but how could his Spi∣rit's dwelling in us constitute us Temples of God, unless he himself were God? Besides all which he is in express words affirm∣ed to be God. So in 2 Cor. 3.15, 16, 17. Even unto this day when Moses is read, the Vail is upon their harts; nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord, the Vail shall be taken away; now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; in which words the Apostle, as all agree, refers to Exod. 34.34. When Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, he took the Vail off until he came out; from whence I argue, that Lord whom Moses went in to speak with was Iehovah, the true God, this Iehovah, the Apostle tells us, is that Spirit, this Spirit he also tells us is the Spirit of the Lord, or the Holy Ghost, therefore the Holy Ghost is Iehovah, the true God. So also Acts 5.3, 4. Why hath Satan filled thy heart to lie unto the Holy Ghost, &c. Thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God, i. e. in Lying to the Holy Ghost, who is God; for if he were not God, as we are sure he is not man, it might as well have been said, thou hast not lied unto men only, no nor to the Holy Ghost only, but unto God; and indeed it ought to be so expressed, supposing that by the Holy Ghost and God he did not mean the same thing, because the design of the words was to aggravate Ananias his crime, from the consideration of the greatness of the Person against whom it was committed, and therefore had the Holy Ghost been any thing less than God, as we are sure the Apostles were, to whom the lye was immediately told, he ought
to have pursued the  as well to the Ho∣ly Ghost as to men, and then it must have been, it was not meerly to men that thou didst lye, no nor to the Holy Ghost meerly, but unto God him∣self; since therefore he places the Aggravation of his lying to the Holy Ghost in this only, that he lyed not unto men but unto God, it is plain that by the Holy Ghost and God he meant the same thing. From all which Testimonies it is very apparent that this great Spirit or Holy Ghost, whom Christ hath substituted to carry on his Me∣diation for God with men in his absence, is no other than the third divine Person subsisting in the eternal Godhead. And indeed considering the mighty part he was to act, viz. to Mediate under Christ for God with men, the same reason which rendered it necessary for Christ to be God to qua∣lifie him for this Office, vide Page 24. do render it altogether as necessary for the Holy Ghost to be so. And indeed how is it possible he should ope∣rate upon so many men together, at such remote distances as he is obliged to do by his Office, and at once move every member of that vast Body of Christ▪ the Catholick Church, dispersed over the Face of the whole Earth, unless like an Omnipre∣snt soul, he be diffused through the whole, and co-exists with every part; and if he be Omnipre∣snt, e must be God. And now having given an account of the Person and Quality of this Divine Spirit, I proceed Secondly▪ To explain his subordination and sub∣stitution to Christ, in this part of his Mediatorship for God with men. In order to which it is to be considered that this subordination of the sacred
Persons in the holy Trinity proceeds not from any inequality of Essence, but from the inequality of their personal Properties. For as to their Essence they are all of them God, i. e. infinite in being and perfections; and being infinite, they must all be equal, there being no such thing as more or less in infinity; and then being equal in Essence, they must necessarily be equal in essential Power and Domini∣on, and consequently, as such, are no way subject or subordinate to one another. But as to their per∣sonal Properties it cannot be denied but they are unequal; for the Father who begot, must in that respect be superiour to the Son, who was begotten, and the Holy Ghost who proceeded, must in that respect be inferiour to the Father and Son from whom he proceeded; and upon this inequality their subordination is founded. For as there is a stated Number in the Trinity, by which the sacred Persons are determined to Three, so there is also a stated Order, by which they are ranked into a First, a Second, and a Third; which Order is not made by mutual consent or arbitrary constitution, but founded in the nature of those personal proper∣ties by which they are distinguished from one ano∣ther. For as the Father, being the Fountain of Godhead to the Son, must be first in order of na∣ture; and as the Son together with the Father was the Fountain of Godhead to the Holy Ghost, and therefore must be second to the Father, and in order of nature before the Holy Ghost; so the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, must of the Three be in order of nature the Third. For so the Scripture expresly asserts that he proceeded from the Father, John 15.26. and
also that he is the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.6. and the Spirit of Christ, Rom. 8.9. and the Spirit of Iesus Christ, Phil. 1.19. And being the Spirit both of the Father and the Son, he must be sup∣posed to proceed from both. And where-ever the Holy Ghost is in the Old Testament called the Spirit of God, it is in the Hebrew Ruach Elohim in the Plural, which seems to intimate that he proceeded not from one, but from two divine Per∣sons, i. e. not from the Father alone, but from the Son also. So that though, as to their Godhead, they are all equal, yet in order of nature, and in respect of their personal properties, the third is inferiour, the second superiour, and the first su∣preme; and being unequal in those personal Pro∣perties by which they stand related to each other, it is very reasonable that according to these their personal inequalities they should be subordinate to one another, and consequently that the Father, who is the Fountain of the Divinity, should be su∣preme in the Divine Monarchy, and that the Son, who was begotten of him, should minister to him, and that the Holy Ghost, who proceeded from the Father and the Son, should minister to both. And accordingly in all its external actions and admini∣strations this hath ever been the Oeconomy of the Holy Trinity, for the Father to act by the Mini∣stry of the Son, and the Son by the Ministry of the Holy Ghost. For so before the Fall of man, and consequently, before this Mediation of the Son commenced, it is evident that even in crea∣ting the World the Father acted by the Son, and therefore is said to have made the World by him, Heb. 1.2. and the Son acted by the Spirit, who
is said to have moved upon the face of the Chaos, Gen. 1.2. for that by the Spirit of God there is meant the third Person in the Holy Trinity, we have reason to believe, because he is elsewhere said to have made man, and to have garnished the Heavens, as hath been already shewn. And in the same Method of subordination the Godhead hath always proceeded in its transactions with the world, and that more especially and remark∣ably in this great affair of Mediating with man∣kind; wherein the Father hath always used the Ministry of the Son, and the Son the Ministry of the Holy Ghost; but in the matter of the Media∣tion it is evident that this subordination of these sacred persons was founded not only in these their personal inequalities, but also in a mutual agree∣ment between them, in which the Son agreed with the Father that in case he would be so far reconci∣led to Rebellious Mankind as to grant them a Covenant of mercy, and therein among other bles∣sings to promise them his Holy Spirit, he himself would assume our natures, and therein not only treat with us personally in order to the reducing us to our bounden Allegiance, but also die a Sa∣crifice for our sins; upon which agreement the Father long before the Son had actually performed his part of it, even from our first Apostasie, gran∣ted his Spirit to mankind, which Spirit was gran∣ted to this end, that under the Son he should Me∣diate with men in order to the reducing them to their due subjection to the Father. For all that heavenly influence which the Holy Ghost sheds forth upon the minds of men is wholly Mediato∣rial in God's behalf, and in order to the reconci∣ling
men's minds unto him; and therefore in this his Mediation he must be supposed to act in subor∣dination to the Son who is supreme Mediator; and accordingly as the Son hath been, and will be al∣ways Mediating with men by this blessed Spirit, even from his Ascension to the end of the World, so I make no doubt but he always Mediated with them by the same Spirit, even from the Fall of man to his Incarnation. For so in the time of the Old World, we read of the Spirit's striving with men, i. e. in order to the subduing their stubborn Wills to a due subjection to the Will of the Fa∣ther, Gen. 6.3. in doing of which he even then Mediated for God with Men under the Great Me∣diator, and so he hath continued to do through all successive Ages of the World. For there is no∣thing more apparent from Scripture than that it is under Christ that the Spirit acts in the King∣dom of God, upon which account he is called the Spirit of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.11. even as by the an∣cient Jews he is called the Spirit of the Messias, as was observed before; and this Spirit whom St. Peter calls the Spirit of Christ, was, as he him∣self there tells us, the Spirit which was in the an∣cient Prophets; by which it is evident that long before Christ came, this Spirit was his, and that he acted by him. And even when he came down into the World to transact personally with men, he generally acted by this holy Spirit. For so at his Baptism we are told that the Holy Ghost descended on him in a bodily shape, Luke 3.22. up∣on which it is said, that he went away full of the Holy Ghost, Luk. 4.1. after which it is plain that it was by this Holy Ghost in him that he
Prophesied and wrought his Miracles; for so Isa. 61.1. the Prophet attributes the whole Prophe∣cy of Christ to the Spirit of the Lord which was upon him; and in Matt. 12.28. our Saviour him∣self affirms, that he cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, and therefore he calls the Jews attributing his miraculous works to the Devil, blasphemy a∣gainst the Holy Ghost, Matt. 12.31. because it was by the power of the Holy Ghost that he wrought them. Now as the Father's acting by the Son implies the Son's Subordination to him, so the Son's acting by the Spirit, implies the Spirit's subordi∣nation to him, which subordination of the Spirit in his Mediatorial Office is immediately founded in that Compact of the Son with the Father, upon which he undertook the Mediation. For the Spi∣rit was a part of the purchace of the Son's Bloud, and whatsoever he purchased he purchased of the Father by compact and agreement with him; so that now he hath a right to the Spirit's Ministry, not only by vertue of his proceeding from him, to∣gether with the Father, but also by the purchace of his own Bloud, whereby he obtained the pro∣mise of him from the Father. For so the Holy Ghost is said to be shed on us abundantly through Iesus Christ our Saviour, i. e. through the Inter∣cession he makes in vertue of his meritorious Sa∣crifice, Tit. 3.5, 6. For whatsoever comes to us from God through Christ, is part of what he hath purchased for us, and in Rom. 5.5, 6. he makes Christ's dying for the ungodly the reason of the giving the Holy Ghost to us. The promise of the Holy Ghost therefore being part of the pur∣chace of Christ's bloud, he by his Advocation in
Heaven obtained the performance of it of the Fa∣ther, even as he doth the performance of all his other promises. For the Father being the supreme person in the Holy Trinity is the prime and Ori∣ginal Fountain of all our blessings, and every good thing we receive is derived from him to us through the Son, and by the Holy Ghost; and even the Holy Ghost himself is derived to us from the Fa∣ther through the Advocation of the Son. For so he himself tells us, I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, namely, the Ho∣ly Ghost, Iohn 14.16. So that though Christ hath purchased the Holy Ghost of the Father as he hath also all the other blessings of the New Covenant, yet it is plain this Purchace vests him not with a right to bestow and send him without the Father, but only to obtain him of the Father upon his Prayer or Advocation; and so of all those o∣ther blessings. So that still the Father is the su∣preme Source from whence the Spirit and all those blessings are derived to us, and it is from his hands that the Son procures them by his powerful In∣tercession; in short therefore, Christ by his death purchased a right of the Father to obtain of him by his Intercession Authority to send the Holy Ghost to Minister for and under him in his Me∣diation for God with men; and accordingly he promises his Disciples that when he departed this World he would send the Comforter to them, Iohn 16.7. where he uses the very same phrase as he did when he Commissioned his Apostles to mini∣ster under him, As the Father hath sent me, so send I you, John 20.21. and accordingly his sending the Comforter must denote his Commis∣sioning
him by the Authority he had received from the Father to minister under him in his Mediati∣on for the Father. For so in Iohn 15.26. When the Comforter is come whom I will send to you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth which proceed∣eth from the Father, he shall testifie of me; where first, the Son is said to Commission or send him; Secondly, to Commission or send him from the Father, i. e. by Authority from him; And third∣ly, to Commission or send him to testifie of him, and therein to minister to him; and so in Luke 24.49. when he was just ascending into Heaven he tells his Disciples, Behold I send the promise of my Father upon you, i. e. the promise of the Holy Ghost; and accordingly, Acts 2.33. St. Peter tells us upon that miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost, that Christ being exalted to the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the pro∣mise of the Holy Ghost, (i. e. having by his Inter∣cession received authority of the Father to send the Holy Ghost, according to that promise which he had before purchased of him with his bloud) he hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear, i. e. this Miraculous Gift of the Holy Ghost; in all which places it is evident that the Holy Ghost was substituted, commissioned, and sent by the Son, authorized thereunto by the Father, to mi∣nister under him. For as the Son acts by the Fa∣ther's Authority as he is his Minister, so all that authority which he communicates to others to act under him, he must derive Originally from the Father, and consequently that Authority by which he sent the Spirit to act as his Minister, he must have derived from the Father whose Minister him∣self
is; and hence the Father is said to send the Spirit in the name of the Son, i. e. to appoint the Spirit to act under the Son, and by his autho∣rity, Iohn 14.26. as the Son is said to send the Spirit from the Father, i. e. by the authority which he had received of the Father; and this I ve∣rily believe is the reason why the Apostle in Eph. 4.8. quotes the Psalmist with that variation, he ascended up on high, saith he, speaking of Christ, he led Captivity Captive, he gave gifts unto men, whereas the words of the Psalmist are, He re∣ceived gifts for men, Psal. 68.18. to denote that that gift of the Holy Ghost which Christ gave to his Church, was nothing but what he himself had first received from the Father; so that though it was from the Father that the Son had his autho∣rity to send the Holy Ghost, yet it was from the Son that the Holy Ghost had his Mission immedi∣ately. And accordingly you may observe, that after Christ's departure from this World, the Holy Ghost acted immediately under Christ as the supreme Vicegerent of his Kingdom. For next and immediately under Christ he Authorized the Bishops and Governours of the Church, and con∣stituted them overseers of the flock of Christ, Acts 20.28. it was he that chose their Persons, and ap∣pointed them their Work, Acts 13.2. and gave them their several Orders and Directions, Acts 15.28. Acts 16.6. in all which it is evident he acted under Christ, and still continues to act as his su∣preme Substitute and Vicegerent; and accordingly he is stiled by Tertullian, the Vicarious vertue or power, as he was the supreme Vicar and Substi∣tute of Christ in mediating for God with Men;
so that now the Holy Ghost is subordinated to the Son, not only by vertue of his procession from him together with the Father, but also by vertue of his being purchased and obtained by him of the Fa∣ther by his meritorious Death and Intercession. I proceed, III. To shew what it is that this Holy Spirit hath done, and still continues doing in order to the effectuating this his Mediation. For there are some things which he hath done, and now ceases to do, and some things which he hath always done, and will still continue doing to the end of the World, of both which I shall give some brief ac∣count in order to the fuller explication of the Mi∣nistry of the Holy Ghost under Jesus the great Mediator. First therefore there are some things which he hath done, and now ceases to do, and of this sort were those extraordinary operations he performed in order to the Planting and Propa∣gating Christ's Gospel in the World, upon and after that his Miraculous Descent, of which we read in Acts 2. For when Christ was departing from his Disciples into Heaven, he ordered them to stay at Ierusalem, and not to undertake that mighty work of Planting his Gospel through the World till they were endued with power from on high, Luke 24.49. which power from on high was no other than that miraculous assistance which upon his Descent the Holy Ghost did afterwards vouch∣safe them; upon which Order they return to Ie∣rusalem, and there continue till the day of Pente∣cost, fasting and praying together in an Upper Room, when all of a sudden the Holy Ghost de∣scended upon them in a visible body of bright
shining fire, and endowed them with all those Heavenly powers which were requisite to qua∣lifie them for the propagation of Christ's Gospel through the World. For as they were to be the first Planters of the Gospel, it was requisite, First, that they should be able to speak the several Lan∣guages of those Nations to whom they were to preach; Secondly, that they should be fully and clearly instructed in the Doctrines which they were to preach; Thirdly, that they should be able to give the most convincing evidence of the truth and divinity of their Doctrines; Fourthly, that they should be conducted by Infallible advice through all the emergent difficulties of their Ministry; a∣gainst all which necessities the Holy Ghost abun∣dantly supplied them: For, First, He inspired them with the gift of Lan∣guages, without which they must have spent a great part of their lives, before they could have been capable of preaching the Gospel to the World, in learning the several Languages of the seve∣ral Nations they were to preach to; which must have very much retarded the progress of the Go∣spel. And therefore the Holy Ghost upon this his miraculous Descent, did in an instant infuse into them the Habit of speaking several Langua∣ges; insomuch that all of a sudden, and with∣out any Rules of Grammar or previous instructi∣ons, they were heard to speak, to the great asto∣nishment of their Auditors, in the fifteen several Tongues of fifteen several Nations, Acts 2.4, &c. And though they were immediately dispersed a∣broad in the World, and some of them into remote Countries, whose names perhaps they had never
heard of, yet still where-ever they came they were inspired with the Language of the Country, which they spake as freely as their own Mother Tongue. And this was a vast advantage to them in their Ministry, because they were not only en∣abled by it to preach the Gospel to all Nations, but were enabled in such a manner, as gave a mighty confirmation to their Doctrine. For their very gift of speaking being a miraculous effect of divine power was an undeniable demonstration that what they spake was divine. Secondly, The Holy Ghost fully and clearly in∣structed them in the Doctrines which they were to preach; and this was no more than what was necessary. For what they preached, who were the first Planters of the Gospel, was to be the standard of truth and falshood to all succeeding Generations, and therefore it was highly necessa∣ry that they should be fully and clearly instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel, that so their Successors in all Ages might safely relie on their Authority. But whilst they were under the Per∣sonal Discipline of our Saviour, who instructed them by Humane Methods, i. e. by proposing his Doctrine to their Ears, and through their Media∣tion to their Vnderstandings, it is plain they made but very slow and slender improvements. For after all his pains with them, they continued very ignorant of some of the most material Arti∣cles of Faith, and at best they had but gross Ap∣prehensions of the nature of Christ's Kingdom, and of the ends and reasons of his Death, and were very diffident even of his Resurrection; and the reason was, that Christ taught them as a man doth
a man, i. e. by words, which are only the audible Images and Representations of things, which be∣ing liable to misapprehension and oblivion, some of them they utterly fogot, and some of them they grosly misunderstood. But when the Spirit came upon them, a wondrous Light broke all of a sudden into their Vnderstandings, by which they discovered farther into the Gospel Myste∣ries in an instant than they had done under all our Saviour's teaching. For though the Spirit taught them no new Doctrines, but did only re∣peat and explain to them what our Saviour had taught them before, (for he shall receive of mine, saith Christ, i. e. of my Doctrine, and shall shew, or explain it unto you,) yet it is evident he taught them much more effectually than our Saviour. For he spoke not to their Ears, but to their Minds, and represented things more nakedly and immedi∣ately to their understandings; he conversed with their spirits, even as Spirits do with Spirits, without involing his sense in articulate sounds, or material representations, but objected it to them in its own naked light, and characterized it imme∣diately on their understandings. And as he im∣mediately proposed the divine light to their minds, so he also illuminated their minds to discern and comprehend it; he raised and exalted their intellectual faculties, and, as a vital form to the light of their reason, did actuate, and thereby enable it to comprehend his Revelations. And hence, Acts 19.6. we are told that the Disciples who upon St. Paul's laying his hands on them received the Holy Ghost, spake with Tongues, and Prophesied, i. e. explained the deep Mysteries of
the Gospel; for so Prophesying in the New Testa∣ment doth most commonly signifie; hence 1 Cor. 13.2. the Apostle makes Prophecy to consist in understanding divine Mysteries and Knowledge, and in ver. 9. We know in part, saith he, and we Prophesie in part; so that the effect of their re∣ceiving the Holy Ghost, you see, was Prophecy, that is, a clear understanding of, and ability to explain the Mysteries of Religion. A plain evi∣dence how effectually he taught them, in that they no sooner became his Scholars, but they were fit to be the Teachers of the World. For though it seems probable that he as well as our Saviour in∣structed them gradually in the knowledge of the Gospel, since it was some time after this first de∣scent that the Mystery of the calling of the Gentiles was revealed to them, yet it is very apparent that he instructed them much faster than our Saviour had done, and much fuller, and that those impres∣sions of divine truth which he made upon their un∣derstandings were much more vigorous and clear, and therefore could not be so easily either forgot∣ten or mistaken by them. And accordingly our Saviour himself tells them, that he had many things to say unto them, but they could not bear them, such was the narrowness of their capacity, and the way of his teaching: Howbeit, saith he, when the spirit of truth is come, he shall lead you into all truth, John 16.12, 13. and teach you all things, John 14.20. Thus the Holy Ghost fully instruct∣ed them what Doctrines they were to preach to the World, and by his immediate inspirations enabled them to deliver down the truth to us, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
Thirdly, The Holy Ghost enabled them to give the most convincing evidence of the Truth and Divinity of their Doctrines; without which it was impossible they should ever have succeeded in their Ministry. But the only certain evidence they could give that their Doctrine was divine, was the testimony of Miracles. For there is no∣thing which pretends to be divine can any other∣wise evidence it self to be so, but by something that is apparently divine; and there being nothing apparently divine but what is plainly and evidently a miraculous effect of divine power, it follows that Miracles only can attest the Divinity of any Do∣ctrines. Wherefore to enable the first Planters of the Gospel to convince the World that their Doctrine was divine, it was highly requisite that they should be endowed with this divine power of working Miracles; and accordingly so they were upon this miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost upon them. For so, Acts 2.43. upon this coming of the Holy Ghost on them we are told that many wonders and signs were done by the Apostles; so al∣so, Acts 4.30, 31. that upon their praying that God would stretch forth his hand to heal, and that signs and wonders might be done by the name of Ie∣sus; God in answer to their Prayer filled them with the Holy Ghost, that is, enabled them by his Spi∣rit to effect these signs, and wonders they had prayed for. It is true indeed, they had in some measure this gift of the Holy Ghost before this mi∣raculous Descent, even while our Saviour was among them, but that was very sparingly, and on∣ly upon some particular occasions, and for the ef∣fecting some particular Miracles; but our Savi∣our
promised them that upon his going to the Fa∣ther, to send the Comforter to them, They who believed on him should not only do the Works which he did, but greater works than those, John 14.12. and accordingly when after his Ascension the Holy Ghost came upon them, he continued with them▪ and upon all occasions impowered them to do all kinds of Miracles for the confirmation of their Doctrine; so that whereas before the greatest part of these miraculous signs of the divinity of the Christian Doctrine were performed by Christ him∣self in his own Person, and by that means confined to the place of his Personal habitation, which was too narrow a Theatre for many Spectators to be∣hold them, the Holy Ghost by working Miracles in his name of all sorts, and upon all occasions in and by his Ministers, who were presently to be dispersed over the face of the whole Earth, did much more amply display his divine power, and with greater speed spread the renown of it through the World, and by constantly im∣powering so many persons in so many parts of the World to perform so many miraculous things in Christ's name, did as it were carry him in open Triumph through the World, and at once display his Majesty and Power, over the face of the whole Earth. For what Christ did in his own Person while he was on Earth, that and much more the Holy Ghost did in the persons of all his Ministers; and the Holy Ghost did that at the same time in a thousand parts of the World which Christ did on∣ly in one; and by these miraculous effects, which are therefore called the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4. the Holy Ghost asserted
to the World the truth and divinity of those Do∣ctrines which the Ministers of Jesus taught. For this gift of Miracles expired not with those Primi∣tive Ministers, but was continued down to their Successors for several Generations together, until the Christian Doctrine was propagated through the World; and then, when it had done its work, and accomplished its end, it was withdrawn, as being no longer necessary. Fourthly and lastly, The Holy Ghost conduct∣ed them by his own infallible advice through all the emergent difficulties of their Ministry. For the work wherein they were ingaged was atten∣ded with difficulties that were utterly insuperable to Humane Wisdom and Power. For first their work being such as required an invincible courage and firm integrity of mind, a watchful prudence and spotless purity of manners, it was highly need∣ful, especially at first (a good beginning being of vast importance to all great undertakings) that they should be infallibly directed what persons were fit to be ordained to it, and which of those were mos fit and proper for the several Countries and Provinces of the World; and then through the whole course of their Ministry they were fain to contend with all the united Wit and Malice of the World, and were very often sent to preach among strange Nations, whose Tempers and Man∣ners they understood not, and still where-ever they came they had Spies upon them to watch their Designs, and observe their actions, and ever and anon they were accused and impleaded by subtil and insinuating Orators before the Tribunals of their Enemies, and there forced to answer for them∣selves.
Besides that they being to convert both Iews and Gentiles, between whom there was an inveterate aversion, and to unite them together into one communion, it could not be otherwise expected but that great dissentions should arise among their own Converts, as accordingly it hap∣ned; which if not managed with infinite pru∣dence, must needs give a great disturbance to them, and interrupt the course, and hinder the success of their Ministry. And in such difficult circumstances it was almost impossible for them not to miscarry without being conducted by an in∣fallible prudence and circumspection; under all which exigencies the Holy Ghost served the primi∣tive Church in the same capacity as the Vrim and Thummim did the ancient Iews, i. e. as an Oracle to advise them in all cases of difficulty, and direct them in the management of all their great and weighty affairs. Thus in that difficult case, which of the Apostles should be sent forth to the Gen∣tiles, the Holy Ghost either by a Bath Col, i. e. Voice from Heaven, or an immediate inspiration, thus directs them, Separate me Paul and Barnabas for the work whereunto I have called them, Acts 13.2. and when they went forth among the Gentiles, the Holy Ghost advises them where they should preach, and where not, Acts 16.6. and so also in the choice of their Bishops they had always the Direction of the Holy Ghost; so in Acts 20.28. it is said that it was the Holy Ghost that set them over the Flock, and S. Paul tells Timothy, that the , or Episcopal Office wherewith he was invested, was given him by Prophecy, i. e. by the immediate direction of the Holy Ghost; and
S. Clemens, who was a Disciple of the Apostles, tells us, that in those times they ordained Bishops, , discerning by the Spirit who should be ordained; and again, that they did it, , having a perfect fore-knowledge who they should chuse. And thus also for composing the differences which arose between their Iewish and Gentile Converts, they had the immediate advice of the Holy Ghost, who direct∣ed them to that wise expedient, Acts 15.28. by which the peace of the Church was secured for the present, and afterwards maintained in despite of all the attempts of seditious Incendiaries to break and divide it. And thus having recourse upon all occasions to this infallible Guide, they were never at a loss either what to say, or how to behave themselves; the Holy Ghost making good to them what our Saviour had promised them, When they bring you before Magistrates, take no thought what ye shall answer, for the Holy Ghost shall teach you at the same hour what ye ought to say, Luke 12.11, 12. These are the extraordinary things which the Holy Ghost acted for and under Christ, in order to the planting and propagating his Gospel through the World, and which he continued to act so long as it was necessary for that end. For as for the first, the Gift of Tongues, it seems to have been continued no longer than till the Gospel had been preached to, and some Converts made in the se∣veral Nations, the First-fruits of whom were al∣ways ordained to the work of the Ministry; and when once the several Nations had Natives of their own to preach the Gospel to them in their
own Languages, there was no farther necessity of this miraculous Gift of Tongues. And then as for the second, the Gift of Revelation, it seems to have been continued no longer than till the whole New Testament was revealed, and the several parts of it were collected into one Volume, and di∣stributed to the several Churches, after which there was no farther necessity of any new revela∣tion. But as for the third, the Gift of Miracles, it seems to have been continued much longer than either of the former, as indeed there was long∣er occasion for it, especially for that of ejecting evil Spirits, who for many Ages had been the Gods of the World, and detecting their frauds and impostures, that so by beholding the mani∣fold Triumphs of Christ's power over them, the Heathen might be at length convinced of the false∣ness of their own Religion, and of the truth of Christ's; and accordingly this gift, as I shall shew hereafter, was continued in the Church for above two hundred years together, till it had wrought its designed effect, i. e. had sufficiently detected the fraud and malice of those Idol Gods, to the conviction of all that were convincible, and then it was withdrawn as being no farther necessary. And then as for the last, viz. the Gift of Counsel and Direction, it seems to have been continued no longer than till the Government of the Church was every where established, and its Affairs redu∣ced into a stated course and method, by which suffi∣cient provision being made against those emergent difficulties with which the state of Christianity was perplexed, this Gift also ceased, together with the reason and necessity of it. Thus by these
extraordinary Gifts and Operations the Holy Ghost continued to sollicite the cause of Christ and his Religion in the World, till by their invin∣cible evidence he had baffled the malice and pre∣judice of a deluded World, and captivated Man∣kind into the belief and obedience of the Gospel; and this being effected he discontinued those Ex∣traordinaries, and now proceeds to solicite the same cause in a more ordinary and standing way and method, viz. by co-operating with mens minds and wills in a more humane and regular man∣ner, by joyning in with their Reason, and thereby influencing their Wills and Affections; which brings me to the 2. Second sort of the Holy Ghost's operations, viz. that which he ordinarily doth, and always hath done, and will always continue to do. For upon the cessation of these his miraculous operati∣ons the Holy Ghost did not wholly withdraw him∣self from mankind, but he still continues Media∣ting with us under Christ in order to the recon∣ciling our Wills and Affections to God, and subdu∣ing that inveterate Malice and Enmity against him, which our degenerate nature hath contracted. For it is by this blessed Spirit that Christ hath pro∣mised to be with us to the end of the World, Matth. 28.20. and Christ himself hath assured us that upon his Ascension into Heaven he would pray his Father, and he should give us another Comforter, meaning this Holy Ghost, that he might abide with us for ever, John 14.16. and accordingly the Holy Ghost is vitally united to the Church of Christ, even as Souls are united to their bodies. For as there is one body, i. e. Church, so there
is one Spirit, i. e. one Holy Ghost which animates that body, Eph. 4.4. and hence the Unity of the Church is in the foregoing verse called the Vnity of the Spirit, because as the soul by diffusing it self through all the parts of the body unites them to∣gether, and keeps them from flying abroad and dispersing into atomes, so the Holy Spirit by dif∣fusing himself throughout this mystical body joyns and unites all its parts together, and makes it one separate and individual Corporation. So that when by Baptism we are once incorporated into this body we are intitled to, and do at least de jure participate of the vital influence of the Holy Ghost, who is the Soul of it; and accor∣dingly, as Baptism joyns us to that body of which this divine Spirit is the Soul, so it also conveys that divine Spirit to us. So that as in natural bo∣dies those Ligaments which unite and tie the parts to one another, do also convey life and spirit to them all; so also in this mystical body those federal rights of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, which are as it were its Nerves and Ar∣teries, that joyn and confederate its members to one another, are also the conveyances of that spi∣ritual life from the Holy Ghost which moves and actuates them all. And hence the washing of Re∣generation, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, the being born of water and of the Holy Ghost are put to∣gether as concurrent things, and in Acts 2.38. Bap∣tism is affirmed to be necessary to our receiving the Holy Ghost; and if by Baptism we receive the Holy Ghost, that is, a right and title to his Grace and Influence, then must the Holy Ghost be still supposed vitally united to the Church,
whereof we are made members by our Baptism, and like an Omnipresent Soul, to be diffused all through it, and to move and actuate every part of it by his heavenly Grace and Influence. It is true, he doth not move and actuate us by meer force and irresistible power, so as to neces∣sitate us, or to determine our natural liberty one way or t'other; nor doth he ordinarily work up∣on men in such a strange and miraculous way as he did in the first Ministration of the Gospel, when he frequently transformed men in an instant from Beasts and Devils into Saints, and as it were at one act turned the whole Tide of their natures into a quite contrary Current. For so Origen a∣gainst Celsus very often triumphs in these sudden and miraculous Conversions wrought by the Chri∣stian Religion; so lib. 1. p. 21. should any man, saith he, release men's Souls from all sorts of wickedness, from Lust, and Unrighteousness, and Contempt of God, and this but in a hundred in∣stances, surely no man would imagine that he could ever have inspired so many men with rea∣sons strong enough to conquer so many Vices without a divine assistance; but if you enquire into the lives of those that have imbraced Chri∣stianity, you will find that whereas before they lived in all impurities and lusts, , i. e. from that very time where∣in they received the Word, how much more equal, and temperate, serious and constant are they grown? So again, li. 2. p. 78. in answer to Cel∣sus, who calls Christianity a pestilent Doctrine, neither Jew, saith he, nor any one else can ever
make it out, , i. e. that a pe∣stilent Doctrine should so wonderfully convert the most profligate persons that embraced it, to a life most sutable to Nature and Reason, and all man∣ner of Vertue. Such were the miraculous opera∣tions of the Holy Ghost in those days as to tran∣sport men in an instant from an inveterate habit of wickedness to a habit of Piety and Vertue. For so Lactantius de fals. sup. lib. 3. c. 26. what a mighty influence the divine Precepts have upon mens Souls daily experience shews, for, saith he, Da mihi virum qui sit iracundus, maledicus, effrae∣natus, paucissimis Dei Verbis tam placidum quam ovem reddam: da cupidum, avarum, tenacem; jam tibi eum liberalem dabo & pecuniam suam ple∣nis manibus largientem: da timidum doloris ac mor∣tis; jam cruces & ignes & Taurum contemnet: da libidinosum, Adulterum, Ganeonem; jam sobrium, castum, continentem videbis: da crudelem & san∣guinis appetentem; jam in veram clementiam furor ille mutabitur: da injustum, insipientem, peccato∣rem; continuò & aequus & prudens & innocens erit; i. e. Give me a man who is wrathful, reproachful, ungovernable, and with a few words of God I will render him as placid as a Lamb; give me a cove∣tous, a niggardly and tenacious man; I will return him to thee liberal and distributing his money with a bountiful hand; give me one that is timorous of grief and death, he shall despise all manner of tor∣ment; give me one that is lustful, adulterous, and a Buffoon, you shall presently see him sober, chaste, and continent; give me one that is cruel and
thirsty of bloud, his fury shall be immediately converted into pity and clemency; give me one that is unjust, foolish, and criminal, and he shall be presently rendred just, prudent, and innocent; which wondrous Changes were so very frequent in the Primitive times, that the Heathen, as St. Austin hath observed, were very much amazed at them, and therefore attributed them to the power of Magick, thinking it impossible they should ever be effected without the assistance of some very powerful Spirit. But since Christianity hath been spread through the World, and prevailed so far as to be the Re∣ligion of Nations, the divine Spirit doth not or∣dinarily work upon men in such a strange and mi∣raculous way, nor produce in them such sudden Changes and instantaneous Conversions, but pro∣ceeds more gradually, and more suitably to the Methods of Humane Nature, by joyning in with our understandings, and leading us on by reason and persuasion from Acts to Dispositions, and from Dispositions to Habits of Piety. So that whatso∣ever Grace he now affords us, it ordinarily works on us in the same way, and after the same manner as if all were performed by the strength of our own reason; so that in the Renovation of our na∣tures we cannot certainly distinguish what is done by the Spirit from what is done by our natural Reason and Conscience co-operating with him; on∣ly this we do most certainly know, that in this blessed work the Spirit is the main and principal Agent; that without him we can do nothing; and that he is the Author and Finisher of our faith, who worketh in us to will and to do according to his
own pleasure; but yet that he doth not work up∣on us as a Mechanick upon dead materials, but as upon living and free Agents, that can and must co∣operate with him; that he acts not on us by any necessary causality, but in such a way as is fairly consistent with the natural liberty of our Wills; and doth not renew us whether we will or no, but takes our free consent and endeavour along with him; and that having done all on his part, that is necessary to perswade us, he expects that we should consider what he saith, and upon that con∣sent to his gracious Motions, and express this con∣sent in a constant course of holy and vertuous en∣deavour; and that unless we do thus concur with him, we shall for ever remain and perish in our sin, notwithstanding all that grace which he af∣fords us. But as for the particular manner of the Holy Ghost's operation on our mind, it is not to be expected that we who know so little of the nature and intercourse of Spirits should be able to render a clear and distinct account of it; on∣ly thus much may be said, that our Soul being a thinking Spirit, whose very Essence consists in a power or principle of cogitation, seems natural∣ly incapable of any other passion from any ex∣ternal Agent, but only the impression of Thoughts. For how can a Spirit, whose very Essence is thinking, be any otherwise affected by any thing without it, but only by being made to think, or by having such thoughts and considerations impres∣sed on it? And by the same reason that bodies which are material substances are impressible on∣ly by matter, Souls which are thinking substan∣ces must be impressible only by Thought. And
hence we find by experience that there is no Ob∣ject we converse with can any otherwise affect our Mind, than by suggesting such thoughts and cogitations to it, and that all the pleasure and torment of our minds consists in joyful and tor∣menting thoughts; which are plain Arguments that our mind is a sort of Being which no∣thing but thought can strike or touch, and which hath no sense or feeling of any thing but only of dreadful or hopeful, pleasant or painful Cogita∣tions. And if this be so, then the way of the Holy Spirits working upon our minds, supposing that he works sutably to their natures, must be by inspiring or impressing them with thoughts. For as he is an infinite Spirit, he is always and every where present with our Spirits, and hath an immediate access to them, by vertue of which he can speak to our minds whenever and whatever he pleases, and also urge what he speaks with that life and power, as to excite our most serious consi∣deration and attention; and by this it is that he ordinarily works upon us in order to the reducing us to God, viz. by inspiring such good thoughts into our minds as are most apt to move and per∣swade us to believe and obey the Gospel, and by a continued repetition of them urging and pres∣sing them upon us in order to the reducing our vain and roving minds to a fixed and serious attention to them. For it is very apparent that our Faith and all our good Resolutions are the immediate ef∣fects of deep and serious consideration, I conside∣red my ways, saith David, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. So that in reducing us to God the great work of the Spirit is to reduce us to
a fix'd and steady consideration; which being once effected, there naturally follows a good reso∣lution, unless the Will be invincibly obstinate; and to this as naturally succeeds the actual return of the Soul to God. Now to reduce us to this fix'd consideration the Holy Ghost, in the first place, suggests good thoughts to our minds, and then to keep our minds fix'd and intent on them, that so our worldly cares or pleasures may not di∣vert us from them, he most importunately urges and repeats the same thoughts, or seconds them with a train and succession of new ones to the same pur∣pose; so that unless we are incorrigibly obstinate against all good motions, we cannot avoid ad∣mitting them into our most serious consideration, and when they are there, they cannot fail of rai∣sing in us good desires and affections, which if we carefully cherish will soon determine in holy pur∣poses and resolutions. In all which things, you see, it is only by impression of thoughts that the Holy Spirit operates on our minds. But this will more plainly appear by considering those particular o∣perations on our minds which the Scripture attri∣butes to the Holy Ghost, all which may be ranked under these five Heads: 1. Illumination. 2. Sanctification. 3. Quickening or excitation. 4. Comforting or supporting. 5. Intercession. First, Illumination or informing our minds with the light of heavenly truth; thus Eph. 1.17, 18.
the Apostle prays that the God of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Father of Glory, would give unto them the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, that the eyes of their understanding being en∣lightned, they might know what is the hope of Christ's calling, and what the riches of the glory of his in∣heritance in the Saints; and 1 Cor. 2.12. we are told, that it is by receiving the Spirit of God that we know the things that are freely given us of God. Now this illumination of the Spirit is two-fold; first, External, by that revelation which he hath given us of God's Mind and Will in the holy Scri∣pture, and that miraculous evidence by which he sealed and attested it; for all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Tim. 3.16. or as it is elsewhere expressed, was delivered by holy men, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. And all those miraculous testimonies we have to the Truth and Divinity of Scripture are, as hath been already proved, from the Holy Ghost, and upon that account are called, the demonstration of the Spirit. So that all that light we receive from Scripture, and all the evi∣dence we have that that light is divine, we derive originally from the Holy Spirit. But besides this external illumination of the Spirit, there is also an internal one, which consists in impressing that external light and evidence of Scripture upon our understandings, whereby we are enabled more clearly to apprehend and more effectually to believe it. For though the divine Spirit doth not (at least in the ordinary course of his operation) illuminate our minds with any new truths, or new evidences of truth, but only presents to our
minds those old and Primitive truths and evidences which he at first revealed and gave to the World, yet there is no doubt but he still continues not on∣ly to suggest them both to our minds, but to urge and repeat them with that importunity, and there∣by to imprint them with that clearness and efficacy, as that if we do not through a wicked prejudice against them wilfully divert our minds from them to vain or sinful objects, we must unavoidably ap∣prehend them far more distinctly, and assent to them far more cordially and effectually than other∣wise we should or could have done. For alas! our minds are naturally so vain and stupid, so giddy, listless, and inadvertent, especially in spiritual things which are abstract from common sence, as that did not the Holy Spirit frequently present, importunately urge, and thereby fix them on our minds, our knowledge of them would be so confu∣sed, and our belief so wavering and unstable,as that they would never have any prevailing influ∣ence on our Wills and Affections. So that our knowledge and belief of divine things, so far forth as they are saving and effectual to our renovation, are the fruits and products of this internal illumi∣nation of the Spirit. Secondly, Another of these ordinary operati∣ons of the Spirit is Sanctification; which consists in the purifying our Wills and Affections from those wicked Inclinations and inordinate Lusts, which countermand God's Will in us, and set us at enmity against him; and this also the Scripture attributes to the Holy Spirit. So Tit. 3.5. For according to his mercy he saveth us by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost;
and in 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of our Lord Iesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And this is the meaning of our being sealed by the Spi∣rit, so often mentioned in the New Testament, viz. our receiving his Image or Impression from him; which consists in holiness and righteousness, and by this Image or Impression we are discrimi∣nated and set apart from the rest of the World, as a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, and a peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2.9. and made Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. upon which account we are said to be anointed by the Spirit, 1 John 2.20. and by the same Image we are also intitled to, and secured of all the blessings of the New Covenant: upon which account it is called, The earnest of the Spirit, and the first-fruits of the Spirit. And this Image of himself the Ho∣ly Ghost produces in us by suggesting to our minds the powerful Motives and Arguments of Religion, and by often reiterating, imprints them upon us with all their native force and efficacy in the most lively and affecting Characters; and by these his blessed suggestions he by degrees perswades and bends our stubborn Wills, mlts and mollifies our hard hearts, reduces and tempers our wild affecti∣ons to a willing compliance with the Will of God, and at length to a hearty complacency in all those instances of Piety and Vertue wherein our Sanctifi∣cation, or this Image of himself, consists. Which operation of the Spirit we frequently experience in our selves. For how often do we find good thoughts injected into our minds, we know not how nor whence, which are many times improved
into such strong and vehement convictions of the folly and danger of our sin, as even in the midst of our loose mirth and jollity, and in despite of all our endeavour to chase them from our minds, and rock our selves into a deep security, cease not to follow, and haunt, and importune us, till they have scared us into wise and sober Resolutions; and though we, like ungrateful Creatures, do often∣times stifle the good motions of the Spirit, and turn a deaf Ear to his Calls and gracious Invitati∣ons, yet doth he not presently give us over, but still, as we are running away from him, we hear a voice behind us calling after us to return; and though we still run on, yet still he follows us with his importunities through the whole course of our sinful life, till either he hath brought us back, or sees us past all hope of recovery. And indeed such is the degeneracy of our Natures, the vanity of our Minds, and the prejudice of our Wills and Affections against God and Goodness, that with∣out this sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost it is certain no man ever was, or ever will be re∣claimed to a state of Piety and Vertue. For though our Religion furnishes with such Motives as are infinitely sufficient to perswade us, and though our Minds and Wills are not so depraved, but that still we are naturally capable to consider, and naturally free to follow those Motives; yet so vain and ro∣ving are our Minds, so averse to all serious and spiritual thoughts; so stubborn and inflexible are our Wills to those spiritual duties which those Motives perswade to; so cankered and prejudiced against them, that did not the Holy Ghost fre∣quently impress them on our Minds, and Patheti∣cally
urge and apply them to our Wills and Affecti∣ons, we should never of our selves so throughly consider them, as to be conquered and perswaded by them; but either our thoughts would presently fly away from them, and rove into sensual cares or pleasures, or our Wills and Affections, by ob∣jecting their prejudices and the interest of their Lusts against them, would infallibly bssle and de∣feat them. So that it is to this sanctifying influ∣ence of the Holy Ghost that all the Graces and good Dispositions of our Minds are owing. Thirdly, Another of thse ordinary operations of the Spiit is Quickning or Exciting us in the ways of Piety and Vertue. For as by his sancti∣fying influence he first inspires us with spiritual life, so he still proceeds to cherish and invigorate it, and to quicken it up into Activity and Motion, wheever he perceives it droop or languish. Hence the Apostle, Gal. 5.25. If we live by the Spirit, let us also walk by the Spirit; i. e. if we have re∣cied spiritul life from him, let us move and act by him; and hence also we are said to be led by the Spirit of God, i. e. to be moved and conducted in our motion by him, Rom. 8.14. And this he also doth partly by admonishing and putting us in mind of our duty, which in the Cud and Hurry of our Worldly occasions we are too prone to for∣get, and partly suggesting to our minds such consi∣derations of Religion as are most apt to quicken ou sluggish endeavour, to allure our hope, or alarm our fear, or ffct our ingenuity, and by thse to excite our zeal, and render us more active and vgorous in the ways of Piety and Vertue; and of this operation of the Holy Spirit there is
no good man but hath frequent experience. For thus when our thoughts are squandered abroad among our worldly cares and pleasures, we are many times assaulted with unexpected temptations, which inding our minds in a careless, forgetful, and incogitant posture, are apt to surprise and hurry us into sinful actions before we are aware, in which nick of time a good thought is suddenly shot into our minds to warn and admonish us of the precipice of sin and guilt we are falling into, by which, if we are not wilfully deaf and inadver∣tent to it, the temptation is discovered, and baf∣fled, and defeated; and thus also when through the many temptations that do here surround us, our zeal for God and goodness doth at any time languish, and we begin to grow cold and indiffe∣rent in Religion, we find a world of good thoughts pressing so hard upon our minds, as that without doing violence to our selves we cannot avoid listening and attending to them, and when they have almost forced themselves into our at∣tention, there they do so vigorously struggle with our reluctant Wills, so Pathetically address to our listless affections, that without equal violence to our selves we cannot avoid being moved by their perswasions, and at last conquered by their power∣ful importunities. Now these good thoughts are many times the immediate inspirations and whispers of the Holy Spirit to our minds, which he very often imprints on us with that life and vigour, and repeats and urges with that efficacious Ardour and restless Importunity, that unless we are strangely obstinate we cannot find in our hearts to repel or resist them.
Fourthly, Another of these ordinary operati∣ons of the Holy Spirit on mens minds is comforting and supporting them, or inspiring their minds with such joys and refreshments as are necessary to sup∣port them under the difficulties and temptations they are here exposed to. For this operation of the Spirit is a standing provision against such Dif∣ficulties and Temptations as are too great for an ordinary patience and courage to conest with, and is not ordinarily vouchsafed to us, but only at such times when we are called to do or suffer something beyond our selves, and above our own strength and ability; in which cases we are se∣cured of this supporting influence of the Spirit by that Promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not suffer ye to be tempted above what ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. For thus we read of the Primitive Church, that they walked in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. i. e. had the constant supporting influence of the Spirit of God to strengthen and bear up their minds under that mighty work and grievous per∣secutions they were to undergo; and the Apostle makes it his earnest Prayer to God for his Chri∣stian Romans, that he would fill them with all joy and peace in believing, that is, in their pro∣fession of the Christian Faith, and that they might abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost, Rom. 15.13. And accordingly we find the Ages of Persecution abounding with re∣markable instances of this operation of the Holy Ghost. For whereas constant Persecutions ne∣ver failed to exterminate false Religions from
the World, witness the Heathen Religion and the Christian Heresies, the Priscillians, Arians, and Donatists, which whilst they were tolerated or connived at, did mightily encrease and multiply, but under vigorous persecutions immediately shrunk, and in a little time dwindled into nothing; the true Christianity, on the contrary, bore up its head under the heaviest oppressions, and tri∣umphed in the midst of flames, and was so far from being vanquished by all the barbarous cruel∣ties of its Persecutors, that the more they perse∣cuted it, the more it conquered and prevailed, which doubtless is in a great measure to be attri∣buted to this supporting influence of the Holy Spi∣rit, which still accompanied its Confessors and Martyrs. For how was it possible that a compa∣ny of tender Virgins, delicate Matrons, and aged Bishops could ever have endured those long and dolorous Martyrdoms, as many times they did, when their Tormentors took their turns from morning to night, and plied them with all kinds of cruelties, till they were oftentimes forced to give over, and confess that they had not heart enough to inflict the Tortures which those poor Sufferers had courage enough to endure? How could they have sung in the midst of Flames, smiled upon Racks, triumphed upon Wheels and Catastaes, and there challenged their Executioners, as they often did, to distend their Limbs to the utmost stretch, to tear their flesh with Vngulae, to scorch their tender parts with fires, and rake their bowels with Spikes and Gaunches? How, I say, could they have endured all these miserable harrasings of their tender flesh with the most witty and
exquisite Tortures, and this sometimes for sun∣dry days together, when for one base and coward∣ly word they might have been released when they pleased, had they not been supported with an in∣visible hand, and refreshed with such strong con∣solations, as not only abated, but sometimes quite extinguished their pains? And the same comforts, though not perhaps in the same degree, other good men have frequently experienced; sometimes upon their undertaking some great and Heroick Office of Piety or Vertue, sometimes in their conflict with some great Temptation, some∣times when they have been sorely oppressed with some mighty sorrow or affliction, and sometimes in the hour and extremities of Death; for it is only upon these or such like extraordinary occasions that the Holy Spirit usually administers these great Consolations to our minds. And this he also per∣forms in the same manner as he doth the afore∣named operations, viz. by suggesting to, and vigorously impressing comfortable thoughts upon our minds; for there is no doubt but that as he can impress on us what thought soever he pleases, so he can also impress it with what strength and vi∣gour soever he pleases, and accordingly as he im∣presses a comfortable thought on us more or less vigorously, it must of necessity be a greater or a less consolation to us; if he think fit, and our state require it, he can imprint a comfortable thought on us with that strength and vehemence, as that it shall even ravish us from our sense, and so ingross all our attention to it as that we shall be altogether mindless and insensible of any pain or pleasure of the body. For thus it is usual
for serious Contemplators in their profound Muses to collect and call together all their animal spirits to attend that work, so as that many times there are none, or not enough at least remaining to sup∣ply the Offices of their sense, and carry on the inferiour operations of Nature; and if we our selves by intense thinking can thus alienate our minds from sense, we may easily suppose that the Holy Ghost, who hath the command of our minds, can when he pleases stamp a joyous thought so vi∣gorously upon them, as that it shall instantly tran∣sport them into an ecstasie, and ravish them from all Corporeal sensation. And that thus he hath done is notoriously evident in the above-named Martyrs, whose Senses were many times so in∣tranced by the rapturous contemplations their minds were seised with, that they lay smiling and sometimes singing under the bloudy hands of their Tormentors, without any apparent sense of those long and exquisite cruelties that were practised upon them. And though the blessed Spirit sel∣dom applies these strong and powerful Cordials to pious minds but in such great and urgent extre∣mities, it being much more for their interest to be kept humble and lowly than to be ravished with continued comforts, yet ordinarily he administers a standing peace and satisfaction to them, and when ever their necessities call for it, he inspires them with such degrees of joy and consolation as their case and condition requires. Fifthly and lastly, Another of these ordinary operations of the Holy Spirit on Men's minds is Intercession, by which he enables us to offer up our Prayers to God with such ardent and devout af∣fections
as are in some measure sutable to the matter we pray for. For Prayer being the imme∣diate converse of our Souls with God, wherein our minds are obliged to withdraw themselves from sense and sensible things, and wholly to re∣tire themselves from those Objects to which they are most endeared and familiarized, into the di∣vine and spiritual world, there is no one duty whatsoever to the due performance of which our carnal affections are naturally more listless and a∣verse; and therefore as herein we have most need of the Holy Spirit's assistance, so herein he more especially operates on our minds, exciting in us all those graces and affections which are proper to the several parts of our Prayer, such as shame and sorrow in the confession of our sins; a sense of our need of mercy, and a hope of obtaining it in our supplications for pardon and forgiveness; resigna∣tion to God's Will and dependance on his truth and goodness in our address for temporal mercies and deliverances; hunger and thirst after Righteous∣ness in our Petitions for his grace and assistance; and in a word, Gratitude, and Love, and Admira∣tion of God in our praises and thanksgivings for mercy; and in these divine affections the life and soul of Prayer consists. And accordingly in Gal. 4.6. the Apostle tells us, Because ye are Sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father; that is, by kindling devout and pious affections in your Souls, enabling you to cry to God with all earnestness and assurance, as to a kind and merciful Father; and hence also we are said to pray in or by the Holy Ghost, Iude 20. because all the proper graces and affe∣ctions
of Prayer are excited in us by him. And this his excitation of the graces of Prayer in us is called his making Intercession for us, Rom. 8.26, 27. which imports no more than his enabling us to offer up the matter of our Prayers to God in a most devout and affectionate manner, or as he there explains himself, with sighs and groans that are not to be uttered, that is, with such earnest and fla∣grant affections as are too big for words to express. And this is properly to intercede for us. For as Christ, who is our Advocate in Heaven, doth offer up our Prayers to the Father, and enforce them with his own Intercessions; so his Spirit, who is our Advocate on Earth, begets in us those affections which render our Prayers prevalent, and wings them with fervour and ardency; the one pleads with God for us in our own hearts, by kindling such desires there as render our Prayers acceptable to him, and the other pleads with him for us in Heaven, by presenting those desires, and soliciting their supply and acceptance. Now this Intercession of the Holy Spirit is also performed, as all the aforegoing operations, by suggesting to, and imprinting such thoughts upon our minds, as are most apt to raise and excite our affecti∣ons; which thoughts he often urges with that vehemence, and presses with that reiterated impor∣tunity, that if we do not wilfully repel them from our minds, and refuse them admittance to our hearts and affections, they cannot fail to stir up in us all the graces of Prayer, and enflame our Souls with a servent devotion; and accordingly whenever we harbour these suggestions of the Spi∣rit, and by seriously attending to them cherish
and encourage them, we find by experience they so affect and influence our devotions, as that in every Prayer our Souls take wing, and, like the Angel that appeared to Manoah, ly up to Heaven in the flames of our Sacrifice. And thus I have given a brief account both of what the Holy Spirit hath done, and of what he still continues to do towards the promoting and effectuating of Christ's Mediation for God with men. And by what hath been said it abundant∣ly appears that he hath done for us, and still con∣tinues to do all that our case and necessity requires; and that there is nothing imaginable wanting on his part towards the reducing and reconciling our minds to God. So that now he may just∣ly say to us what God doth to his Vineyard, Isa. 5.4. What could I have done more for my Vine∣yard that I have not done? Or, as the Hebrew expresses it, What is to be done more? Not but that by his omnipotent power absolutely considered, the Holy Spirit can do more for us than he ordi∣narily doth; he can in an instant infuse a new na∣ture into us in despite of all the resistance of our Wills, and make such irresistible impressions on our minds as our most inveterate prejudice and en∣mity against God shall never be able to withstand; but then his power always acts by the direction of his wisdom, and can do no otherwise, that is, it can do no more than it can wisely do; and it is certain that ordinarily and regularly it cannot wisely so act upon men as to determine their natural liberty to good and evil; since by so doing he must not only commit a perpetual violence on the frame of our Beings, and thereby
reverse the established course of our natures, but also destroy the very being of Vertue in us, which is no longer Vertue than while it is free and un∣constrained. But whatsoever he can wisely do, or, which is all one, consistently with the liberty of our nature, he hath done, and still continues do∣ing. So that now to the reduction of our Souls to God there is nothing wanting but our own con∣sent and free co-operation, which if we will re∣fuse we may; for for desperate obstinacy there is no remedy; if we will not comply with the blessed Spirit, it is certain he will not save us whether we will or no. So that when inquisition shall be made for the bloud of our Souls, the utmost we can charge him with is, that he did not drag us to Heaven in spite of our teeth, and bind up our hands in the Cords of an irresistible Fate to hin∣der us from murdering our selves; but if we have so little regard of our selves as to spurn at our own happiness, it is by no means fit that he should force it upon us, and it would be a very mean and unreasonable condescension in him to prosti∣tute his grace to such as scorn and refuse it. If therefore after all these things that the Spirit hath done for us we persist and finally perish in our en∣mity against God, he may fairly wash his hands in innocency over us, and charge our bloud upon our own heads; and how deplorable soever our condition proves in the future state, his Iustice will Triumph gloriously in our ruine, and our own Consciences, together with all the reasonable World, will be forced to be his Compurgators and to pro∣nounce him infinitely just and righteous in all his ways.
SECT. II. Concerning the particular Offices of Christ's Mediation. FOR the clearer stating what are the particu∣lar Offices of the Mediator, it will be necessa∣ry briefly to enquire into the state and condition of the Parties between whom he Mediates, as they stand related to one another. For he being to of∣ficiate for, and between God and Man, to be sure his Offices must be such as their respective states and conditions do require. For how can he offi∣ciate effectually between them, unless he performs all those good Offices on both sides, which, con∣sidering their states as they stand related to one another, are necessary to create a mutual accord and agreement between them? Now the state of God as he stands related to us, is that of a supreme and absolute Sovereign over blind and rebellious Subjects, who were so far depraved and degenera∣ted, as that we neither understood his Will, nor were at all disposed to obey it. Wherefore that he might officiate effectually for God with us, his ig∣norant and rebellious Subjects, it was necessary, First, that he should perform the Office of a Pro∣phet, in revealing God's Will and pleasure to us, of which the whole Race of Mankind was so de∣plorably ignorant. Secondly, That he should per∣form the Office of a King, in exacting our obedi∣ence to God, and subduing our stubborn Wills to his heavenly pleasure; so that in officiating for
God with us, it was necessary that he should both teach us as God's Prophet, & rule us as God's King. And then the state of man as it respects God, is that of a most guilty and criminal Subject, who by a continued course of Rebellion had justly and highly incensed and provoked his Sovereign Lord against him, in which state of things it was highly necessary that in officiating for us with God, our Mediator should in the first place, render him some great and honourable reparati∣on in our behalf, such as he in his infinite wis∣dom should think meet to exact for those high and manifold affronts and Indignities which we had offered to his Sacred Person and Authority. For without some such reparation he could not well have admitted of any reconciliation with us, without prostituting his own Authority, and rendring it cheap and vile in the eyes of bold and insolent Offenders. Now the greatest re∣paration he could make for us was to take our punishment on himself, by offering up his own life to God as a Sacrifice for the sins of the World. And then, secondly, it was necessary that having made this reparation for us, he should thereupon become our Advocate, and plead his Sacrifice to God in our behalf, that for the sake thereof he would be so far propitious to us as to admit us upon our unfeigned repentance, to his grace and favour. Both which are comprehen∣ded in the Priestly Office, which consists, as I shall shew hereafter, in atoning God with Sacri∣fice. So that the particular Offices which the respective states of God and Man require of him that Mediates between them, is to teach and
rule for God, and to expiate and Advocate for men. But for the better understanding of these particular Offices it is necessary we should briefly consider the Method and Oeconomy of them, and explain in what Order and Manner the Mediator hath proceeded and advanced in the exercise and administration of them. Which in short was thus; by Commission from God the Father he came down into this World, where the first Mediatorial Office he undertook was that of Pro∣phet, in the discharge whereof he made a full revelation of God's Mind and Will to the World. And having performed this, at least so far as was needful in his own Person, he next enters upon the first part of his Priestly Office, which was to make an expiation for the sins of the World, by the Sacrifice of himself; and this being finished, he a little after proceeded to the other part, which was to make an Oblation of his Sacrifice to God in Heaven, and in vertue thereof to Ad∣vocate for us, and solicite our Pardon and admis∣sion into the divine favour; upon the performance of all which, and as a glorious reward of it, he was admitted to sit down at the right hand of God in the Throne of Regal Authority next and imme∣diately to the Father. For so Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. the Apostle tells us, He humbled himself, and be∣came obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross; wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Iesus every Knee should bow. And in Heb. 12.2. his sitting down at the right hand of the Throne of God is the consequence of his enduring
the Cross, and despising the shame of it. So that in short, the Order and Method in which he pro∣ceeded in his Mediatorial Offices was this; First, he Prophesied, then he made expiation for our sins on the Cross, then presented his Expiation in Hea∣ven, and therein began to Advocate or intercede for us; and then he received that Regal Authori∣ty by which he is to reign till the Consummation of all things. And therefore for the more clear and distinct explication of these particular Offices, it will be most proper to treat of them in the same order wherein they are placed in the divine Oeco∣nomy, beginning first with the Prophetick, thence proceeding to the Priestly, and thence to the Kingly Office. SECT. III. Of the Prophetick Office of Iesus Christ. COnsidering the manifold Errors, and the deep Ignorance in which Mankind was almost universally lost and bewilder'd, it was absolutely necessary that he who Mediated for God with men, in order to the reconciling them to him, should in the first place take care to inform them of the Nature, and instruct them in the Will of God; without which it was impossible for them so much as to know what it is to be reconciled to him. And accordingly this was the first Me∣diatorial Office that our Saviour undertook,
viz. to Prophesie to the World, i. e. to reveal and publish the Gospel to Mankind, wherein the Na∣ture and the Will of God, and the Method of our Salvation, are plainly stated and described, so far forth at least as it is necessary to our reconcili∣ation to him. Upon which account he is called the Light of the World, the Sun of Righteousness, the Way, and the Truth, and the bright Morning Star; all which refer to his Prophetick Office, which is the fountain of all that spiritual light that shines through the World. For long be∣fore our Saviour was born, it was foretold of him that he should execute the Office of a Prophet; so Deut. 18.15. The Lord thy God shall raise up unto thee a Prophet, from the midst of thee, of thy bre∣thren, like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken; which prophecy S. Peter applies to our Saviour, Acts 3.22. And upon this and other Prophecies of the Old Testament it is evident, it was a ge∣neral anticipation among the Iews in our Savi∣our's time, that the Messias should be a Prophet. For thus upon Christ's feeding five thousand men with five Loaves and two Fishes, they cried out, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the world, John 6.14. so upon his resto∣ring the Centurion's Servant, they were ama∣zed, and glorified God, saying that a great Pro∣phet was risen up among them, Luke 7.16. And so also his own Disciples stile him, A Prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the People. Now this Prophetick Office of Christ consisted not so much in foretelling of future events (though this he also did so far as it was needful
for the Church) as in expounding, declaring, and making known the Will of God to us by divine re∣velation. For so, to Prophesie signifies no more than to speak from, or in the stead of another;  in composition, being all one with : thus Ex∣od. 7.1. God said to Moses, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet, that is, he shall be thy mouth to deliver to Pharaoh what I shall deliver to thee. For so the word is explained, Exod. 4.16. He shall be thy spokes-man, he shall be to thee instead of a Mouth. And in this sence the Poets were anciently called the Prophets of the Muses; so Theocritus, . i. e. the sacred Prophets of the Muses; and Saint Paul himself, Tit. 1.12. calls the Heathen Poets their Prophets, quoting a passage out of Epime∣nides, who though he is stiled by Laertius , a great Favourite of the Gods, and, as he relates the Story, directed the Atheni∣ans how to Lustrate their City in a time of Pesti∣lence, yet if we may credit Aristotle, , i. e. he never prophesied of things to come, Rhet. l. 3. c. 17. but was only a Divine, as Plutarch calls him, and , i. e. a friend of God, and one that had a deep insight into divine things. By which it is evident that Prophesying doth not ne∣cessarily include, in the true acceptation of it, foretelling futurities, but only denotes declaring the Mind and Will of God in any matter by divine inspiration. For so Iustin Mart. in Cohortat. ad
Graec. tells us, that the Prophets declared those things to the World, , i. e. which the Holy Ghost descending upon them had intended by them to teach those persons who were truly wil∣ling to be instructed in the true Worship of God. And accordingly S. Chrysostom, , a Prophet is only an Interpreter, but an Interpreter of God. And so also Dionys. the Areop. stiles the Prophets , i. e. the Fathers of secret wisdom, Epist. 9. because they discovered those things to the World which were discoverable only by divine inspiration. And in this large sence of the word, Christ's Prophetick Office is to be understood, viz. as a declaring and signifying the Will of God to Mankind, concerning the Way and Method of our reconciliation to God, and eternal salvation by him. But for the fuller ex∣plication of this his Mediatorial Office, I shall en∣deavour first, to shew how excellently he was fitted and accomplished for it; and secondly, how fully and effectually he hath discharged it. As for the first, how excellently he was fitted and accomplished for this Office will evidently appear by these three considerations: I. That when he came down to Prophesie to us, he came immediately from the bosom of the Fa∣ther. For as he was the Eternal Son of God he was always with him from all Eternity, and al∣ways intimate and infinitely dear and famili∣ar to him; and therefore as such, must not only be supposed fully to comprehend his Nature,
and perfectly to know his Will, but also to be pri∣vy to his most secret Thoughts and Councils. And it is upon this account perhaps chiefly that he is called the Logos, or Word of God, because as S. Gregory Nazianzen discoursed, Orat. 36. he hath the same relation to God the Father that a word or inward thought hath to the mind; not on∣ly in regard of his generation without any passion, but because of his intimate conjunction with him, by which he perfectly understands him, and so hath full power to declare him. For the Father is known, saith he, by the Son, and the Son is a brief and easie demonstration of the Father, as eve∣ry thing that is begotten is , the si∣lent word of that which begat it. So that as it is the Office of our Speech to declare our Minds to one another, so it is the Office of this Eternal Word of the Father to declare his Mind and Will to the World; and who can be so proper to declare the Father's mind to us as he who from all Eterni∣ty hath been so familiar to his inmost thoughts and purposes? Hence S. Iohn, John 1.18. No man hath seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him; and indeed his being in the bosom of the Fa∣ther, i. e. being most near and intimate to him, did perfectly qualifie him to declare him; for in that nearness and intimacy he could not but have a most perfect knowledge of him, and this not by the Instructions of Angels, nor by Dreams or Vi∣sions, as other Prophets had; no nor meerly by the Holy Ghost neither, but by an immediate per∣sonal Intuition of his Father's thoughts and purpo∣ses which from all Eternity were exposed to his view and prospect.
II. It is also to be considered, that as he came down immediately from God, to Prophesie to us, so he came down into our own nature, which gave a vast advantage to his ministry. For had he preached to us, as he did to the Iews, from Mount Sinai, in his divine person, the Glory and Majesty thereof would have so amazed and con∣founded us, that like them we should not have been able to attend to him, and our minds would have been so struck with the terrible manner of his Ministry, that we could never have fixed our thoughts as we ought upon the matter of it. For so the Jews upon God's preaching personally to them, in the proper equipage of his divine Majesty, were struck with such a sacred Horrour, as that they were not able to bear it, but made it their re∣quest that they might not hear the voice of the Lord any more, and that for the future he would speak with them by Moses, whose voice they could more easily bear, and better attend to; which request of theirs God thought so reasonable, that he promises to raise up unto them a Prophet of their own Brotherhood, like unto Moses, meaning the Word incarnate, and bids them hear∣ken to him, Deut. 18.15, 16. i. e. since you cannot endure to hear me speaking to you in the Maje∣sty of my Divinity, I will hereafter allay and qua∣lifie it, by assuming one of your own kind and kindred into personal union with it; in and by whom I will vouchsafe to speak to you in such a familiar and condescending manner, as that you shall be able freely to attend without any terrour or di∣sturbance. And indeed the most natural way of instructing humane minds is by humane means;
as for voices from Heaven, or from bright and glo∣rious appearances on earth, they are more apt to confound than to edifie our understandings, and therefore for this reason, among others, Christ thought meet to assume our natures, that so he might treat with us in such a way as is most ac∣commodate thereunto, and deliver his divine Do∣ctrines to us in a humane form and voice, that so being conveyed to us in the most natural and fa∣miliar manner, they might not so alarm our dread as to confound our attention, but might instruct our minds instead of scaring and amusing them. And therefore he did not only qualifie the terrour and dreadfulness of his divine Majesty by putting on our nature, but together with it he put on all the condescensions and sweetnesses of a most familiar and endearing conversation, and con∣versed among men in such a generous, friendly, and courteous manner, as charmed and enamoured all ingenuous minds, and thereby attracted their attention to his Doctrine. So that as Christ was the Son of God he perfectly understood his Father's Will, and as he was the Son of Man he was per∣fectly fitted to reveal and declare it to Mankind. And as by being God-man he was most perfectly accomplished to declare God's Will to us, so he was also to give us a perfect Example of Obedi∣ence to it; which, as I shall shew hereafter, was a necessary part of his Prophetick Office. For without assuming humane Nature he could never have been an example of humane Vertue, which consists in acting sutably to the nature of a Man, who is a Compound of Spirit and Matter, Rea∣son and Sense, Angel and Brute, from which con∣trary
Principles there arise in him contrary incli∣nations and affections, in the good or bad govern∣ment whereof all humane Vertue and Vice con∣sists. How then could he have practised those vertues which consist in the dominion of spiritual and rational faculties over brutal and sensitive, such as Temperance, Chastity, Equanimity, and the like, had he not assumed that nature which is com∣pounded of both? How could he have shewn us by his own example how to govern the Passions, and conduct our selves in the Circumstances of men, had he not communicated with us in the Passions and Circumstances of humane Nature? He might have come down from the Heavens to us inrobed with splendor and light, or have preached his Gospel to the World in the midst of a Choir of Angels from some bright Throne in the Clouds, and it would have been more convenient for him∣self to have done so, because more sutable to the natural Dignity and Majesty of his Person; but he consulted not so much his own convenience as ours; he knew well enough that his appearance among us in such an illustrious equipage would have been more apt to astonish than to instruct us, to have amused our thoughts into a profound ad∣miration of his glories, than to have directed our steps in the paths of Piety and Vertue, and that it would be much more for our interest that he should conduct us by his example than amaze us by his appearance; and therefore he rather chose to appear to us in our own nature, that so by going before us as a man, he might shew us by his example what became men to do, and trace out to us the way to our happiness with the print
of his own footsteps. So that his coming among us in our own nature was of vast moment to his Prophetick Office, both in declaring his Father's Will to us, and setting us an example of obedience to it. III. And lastly, It is farther to be considered, that as he came down immediately from the Fa∣ther to Prophesie to us in our own natures, so while he abode among us he was always endued with the Holy Ghost; the Spirit of the Lord, from whom all Prophetick Inspiration proceeds rested on him, and made its constant residence and abode in his humane nature. So that whereas it de∣scended upon other Prophets only at certain times, and upon certain occasions, by reason of which it was not in their power to Prophesie when they pleased, but they were fain to attend the arbi∣trary motions of the Holy Ghost, and, like dead Organ Pipes, were mute and silent as oft as he withdrew, and ceased to breath into them his di∣vine Enthusiasms; our blessed Saviour had the Prophetick Influx at command, and could Prophe∣sie whensoever he pleased. For the Holy Ghost resided in his mind, and like an assisting Form or Genius was always present with his Understand∣ing, and being, as was shewed before, subordi∣nate to him, both by personal Property and Agree∣ment with the Father, it operated in him when∣soever, howsoever, and whatsoever he pleased; and was as intirely at his disposal as his own most voluntary motions. So that whensoever he had occasion for a Revelation, he no soon∣er willed it, but the Holy Ghost immediate∣ly inspired it into him, and whensoever he
wanted a Miracle to confirm a Revelation, he no sooner called for it but the Holy Ghost immedi∣ately exerted it by him. For, as I shewed be∣fore, he did both Prophesie and effect his Mi∣racles by the Holy Ghost that was in him, and that was so entirely subject to him through the whole course of his Ministry, that he could Prophesie, and do Miracles by him whensoever he pleased; and hence he is said to be anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with power, Acts 10.38▪ that is, to be consecrated to the Prophetick Office by the descent of the Holy Ghost upon him, by whom he was impowered to Prophesie, and to confirm his Prophecy by Miracles; for so it follows, He went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed with the Devil, for God was with him; and accordingly at his Baptism he was solemnly consecrated the great Prophet of God by a visible Vnction of the Holy Ghost, who, as St. Luke tells us, descended on him in a bodily form or appea∣rance, Chap. 3. ver. 22. which St. Matthew thus expresses, the Spirit of God descended like a Dove, and light upon him, Chap. 3. ver. 16. not as if he descended in the form of a Dove, but, as it seems most probable, he assumed a body of light or fire, and therein came down from above, just as a Dove with its Wings spread forth is obser∣ved to do, and gathering about our Saviour's head crowned it with a visible Glory. For so in the Nazaren Gospel, as Grotius observes, it is said that upon this descent of the Holy Ghost, , i. e. there imme∣diately shone a great light round about the place; and Iustin Martyr tells us, that when Christ was
Baptized, , that there was a fire lighted in the River Iordan, that is, by the reflection of that bright and flaming appearance, in which the Holy Ghost descended, the River seemed to be all on fire. So that as God did sig∣nalize his presence in the Old Tabernacle by a visible Light or Glory, so the Holy Ghost by de∣scending on our Saviour in this shining appearance, declared him to be the Tabernacle of his divine Presence, wherein he meant from thenceforth to reside and make his constant abode, and from whence and by whom he would for the future com∣municate himself to Mankind. And accordingly the sign which God gave to Iohn Baptist, by which he might know the Messias when he saw him, was this, Vpon whom thou shalt see the Spi∣rit descending and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, i. e. who from himself, or from his own fulness shall com∣municate the Holy Ghost to the World, Ioh. 1.33. For so full was Jesus of the Holy Ghost, that he not only prophesied himself, and did miracles by it whensoever he pleased, but he also com∣municated it to his own immediate Disciples, and impowered them to communicate it to others; and hence it is said, that God gave not the Spirit by measure to him, John 3.34. i. e. with limita∣tions, and restrictions to such particular times, or ends and purposes, but in that unlimited manner, as that he could not only act by it himself when∣soever or howsoever he pleased, but also commu∣nicate it to others in what degree or measure so∣ever he pleased. For so Ioh. 20.22. it is said, that he breathed upon his Disciples▪ and bid them
receive the Holy Ghost; and Acts 8.17. we are told, that upon their laying their hands upon o∣thers they also received the Holy Ghost. And by this unlimited fulness of the Holy Ghost, which our Saviour received at his Baptism, he was per∣fectly accomplished for his Prophetick Office. For the Holy Ghost abode in him after that visible glory in which he descended, disappeared, even throughout the whole course of his Ministry; and hence Luke 4.1. we are told, that being full of the Holy Ghost he returned from Iordan; and af∣ter he had finished his forty days Fast in the Wil∣derness, he returned from thence in the power of the Spirit into Galilee, ver. 14. where in his own City of Nazareth he began to Prophesie, decla∣ring and manifesting that the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, vers. 18, to 23. and at Cana in Galilee he began to work Miracles, and thereby to manifest forth his Glory, Joh. 2.11. Thus by Prophesying, and confirming his Prophecies by Miracles, he exerted that fulness of the Holy Ghost which was communicated to him at his Baptism. And now, since before he came down to Prophesie to us he was from Eternity in the bosom of the Father, and since when he came down he was clothed in humane nature, and in that nature was inspired with such an unbounded fulness of the Holy Ghost, as that he could not only Prophesie himself, and confirm his Prophe∣cy by Miracles, when he pleased, but also com∣municate these his Gifts to others in what mea∣sures and proportions he thought fit, to enable them to Prophesie for him wheresoever he thought meet to send them, what can we imagine farther
necessary to compleat and accomplish him for the Prophetick Office? I proceed therefore in the next place to shew how throughly and effectually he discharged this Office; which will plainly appear by conside∣ring briefly what those things were which as a Prophet he performed; all which are reducible to these six Heads: First, He made a full Declaration of his Father's Will to the World. Secondly, He proved and confirmed what he had declared by Miracles. Thirdly, He gave a perfect Example of Obedi∣ence to what he had declared and proved to be his Father's Will. Fourthly, He sealed his declaration with his own Bloud. Fifthly, He instituted an Order of men to preach what he had declared to the World. Sixthly, He sent his Holy Spirit, when he left the World, to recollect and explain to those men what he had declared, and to enable them also to prove and assert it by Miracles. I. He made a full Declaration of his Father's Will to the World, viz. in those Sermons, Pa∣rables, and Discourses of his which we find recor∣ded in the four Evangelists, in which the whole Will of God concerning the Way and Method of our Salvation is fully and perfectly revealed. For thus S. Paul declares to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, that he had kept back nothing that was profitable for them, but had testified both to the Iews and Greeks repentance towards God, and Faith to∣wards our Lord Iesus Christ, Acts 20.20, 21. and
ver. 27. he tells them, that he had not shunned to declare unto them all the Counsel of God. Now it is certain that this whole Counsel of God, which he had preached, was only that account of our Sa∣viour's Discourses and Actions which S. Luke gives us in his Gospel, who, as Irenaeus tells us, was a follower of S. Paul, and did compile into one Book that History of our Saviour's Life and Do∣ctrine which S. Paul had taught and delivered; and if so, then the whole Counsel of God must be con∣tained in this Gospel; and accordingly S. Luke tells his Theophilus in the beginning of his Gospel, That forasmuch as many had set forth a declaration of those things that were surely believed among Chri∣stians, it seemed good unto him also, having had a perfect understanding of all things from the first, to write them down in order, that he might know the certainly of those things wherein he had been in∣structed. From whence I infer, that supposing that S. Luke performed what he promised, his Gospel must contain a full declaration of the Chri∣stian Religion. For, first, by promising to give an account of those things that were surely belie∣ved among Christians, he engaged himself to give an entire account of Christianity, unless we will suppose that there were some parts of Chri∣stianity which the Christians of that time did not surely believe. Secondly, In promising to give an account of those things of which he had perfect understanding from the first, and in which his Theo∣philus had been instructed, he also engaged himself to give a compleat account of the whole Religion, unless we will suppose that there were some parts of this Religion which S. Luke did not perfectly
understand, and in which Theophilus had not been before instructed. And the sme may be said of the three other Evangelists, viz. that their Gos∣pels do severally contain all the necessary Articles of Christianity, though the last of them seems to have been wrote upon a more particular design▪ viz. more fully to explain, than any o the former Evangelists had done, the Article of the Divini∣ty and eternal generation of Jesus Christ the Son of God. And if the whole of Religion be contained in these Gospels, which are only Histories of our Saviour's Preaching and Actions, then it cannot be denied but that he made a full revelation of God's Will to the World. It is true, there are sundry other divine Writings annexed to these Gospels▪ which together with them compleat the New Te∣stament, viz. the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles; but these pretend not to declare any new Religion to the world. For as for the Acts of the Apostles, it is only an Historical account of the Preparations of Christ's Ministers for the preach∣ing that Gospel to the World which he had taught them, and of the Way and Method of their pro∣cedure in it, in despite of all those oppositions they met with. And as for the Epistles, they are partly Comments and Enlargements on our Savi∣our's Actions and Discourses, and partly Decisions of such Controversies as arose among them, ac∣cording to the Analogie of that Faith which our Saviour had before declared and revealed; but in all these Writings there is no one Article of Faith but what was before declared and defined in the Sermons and Discourses of our Saviour. And then as for the Primitive Writers, who lived in or near
the Apostolical Age, and upon that account had much greater advantages of understanding the truths of Christianity than we who live at this re∣mote distance, they are at best but genuine Com∣mentators on that Doctrine which our Saviour first taught, and his Apostles afterwards more fully explained to the World; but as for declaring any new Doctrines, or defining new Articles of Faith, that is an upstart invasion of Christ's Prophetick Office, which they never so much as pretended to. So that the Prophecy of our Saviour is the Fountain from whence all Christian truth is deri∣ved, as containing in it a compleat and entire Sum of God's Will and Counsel concerning the Salvati∣on of Mankind. II. As he taught the whole Will of God, so he proved that what he taught was the Will of God by sundry miraculous operations, which are the great evidences by which God always demonstra∣ted the truth of his divine revelations, and which of all others are the most popular, easie, and con∣vincing proofs that can be given of them. For as for the Prophets themselves, they might be very well assured that their Enthusiasms were divine, by the vehement impressions they made on their minds, which were such as did as fully satisfie them that they were from God, as the strokes of the Sun beams on our eyes do us that it is day at Noon; but no other man could be satisfied that what they spoke was by divine inspiration, with∣out either being divinely inspired himself, or con∣firmed by them in the belief of it by some miracu∣lous sign of the Divine Power; which latter was the way by which the Prophets of Old did ordi∣narily
confirm their Doctrines, when they delive∣red any thing new to the World. And according∣ly though our Saviour had all along sufficiently confirmed his Doctrines to the Iews by the Autho∣rities of the Old Testament, yet this confirmati∣on of his Miracles he more particularly insists on, and appeals to; thus Iohn 10.25. The works, saith he, that I do in my Father's name they testifie of me; And again, vers. 37, 38. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not, but if I do, though ye be∣lieve not me, believe the works; and herein he pla∣ces the inexcusable sin of their unbelief, that they persisted in it notwithstanding he had done among them the works which none other man did, John 15.24. And indeed well he might, considering the miraculous powers he exerted among them; for how often did he even before their eyes subpoena in whatsoever was in Heaven, or Earth, or Sea, to give their testimony to his Doctrine; he made the Angels minister to him, and the Devils tremble and fly before him, and the Plants and Animals, the Winds and Seas obeyed him, and Health and Sickness, and Life and Death and the Grave did by their obedience to his Word bear witness to the truth of his Doctrine. By his powerful voice he shook the Heavens, and sent down the Holy Spirit on his Followers; he tore the Rocks, and opened the Graves, and at his command the bodies of his Saints arose; and, which was more miraculous than all, he raised himself the third day after his Crucifixion, and having finished his Course upon Earth, ascended Triumphantly into Heaven in the view of a numerous assembly of Spectators. All which were such illustrious demonstrations
of his being inspired by God, as nothing but an incurable infidelity could ever be able to withstand. But wht proper arguments these Miracles of his wee to convince men, and what evidence there is o the truth and reality of them, will be shewn at lrge hereafter, and therefore it will be need∣lss at present to insist any farther on this parti∣cular. III. Therefore as a Prophet he gave us a per∣fect Example of Obedience to that which he had declared and proved to be his Father's Will. He did not only reveal his Father's Will to mens Ear's in his excellent Sermons and Discourses, but he also set it forth before their Eyes in the glorious Example of his Actions. For what he taught in Words he exemplified in Deeds, and his Conversa∣tion was a lively Picture of his Doctrine, wherein all that Humility and Self-denial, that Temperance and Iustice, that Charity and Heavenly-minded∣ness, tht invincible Constancy of Mind, and ge∣nerous Contempt of the World, which he taught Mankind, were drawn to the life, and expressed in their fairest colours and proportions. So that what he taught in Words he taught over again in Actions, and explained his Rules still by his own Example; for his Conversation was all along a most genuine Comment and Paraphrase on his Re∣ligion; by casting their eyes on which those who did not fully understand the sence of his Precepts by his Words, might very easily expound it by his Actions. For there is no doubt but a good Ex∣ample doth far more effectually instruct than good Precepts; because it doth not only express the same vertues that the Precepts enjoyn, but also expresses
them with much more grace and Emphasis. For whereas Precepts and Discourses of Vertue are on∣ly the dead Pictures and artificial Landskips and Descriptions of it, a vertuous Example is Vertue it self, informed and animated, alive and in moti∣on, exerting and exhibiting it self in all its natural Charms and Graces. And therefore as we know a man much better when we see himself alive and in action, than when we only see his Picture, so we understand Vertue much better when we see it living and acting in a good Example, than when we only behold it described and pictured in vertu∣ous Precepts and Discourse. So that by giving us a compleat and perfect Example of Piety and Ver∣tue, the blessed Jesus hath far more effectually in∣structed us in our duty than by all those heavenly Sermons which he preached to the World; because his whole life was nothing else but a continued series of living and moving Vertue, or rather it was nothing but Piety and Vertue acting their se∣veral parts in their own proper Forms, and exhi∣biting themselves to the Eyes of men in all their natural Graces. And as the Holiness of his life did most effectually instruct men in their duty, so it could not but very much confirm them in the truth of his Doctrine; for it is certain if his Do∣ctrine were false, it was not a simple Error, but a downright Lye, i. e. a known and wilful false∣hood; because it depended, as I shall shew by and by, upon matters of fact, which he could not but know whether they were true or false. So that if these facts were false, he was a wilful De∣ceiver in affirming them, and building his Do∣ctrines upon them. But how could he be reason∣ably
suspected of lying whose whole life was such an illustrious example of goodness and unspotted integrity of manners? For it is to serve either their Covetousness or Ambition, their Envy or their Revenge, that men turn wilful Deceivers▪ none of which Vices, nor so much as the least ap∣pearance of them are visible in the life of Iesus, but their contraries continually shone through the whole course of his Actions; and if none of those Vices ever appeared in him, that could any way tempt him to lye and deceive, it is not only unjust but unreasonable to suspect him. Thus by the san∣ctity of his life he not only instructed men in his Father's Will, but also confirmed them in the be∣lief of it. IV. As a Prophet also he sealed his Doctrine with his bloud; which is the highest pledge that any Mortal can give of his truth and integrity. While he was preaching his Doctrine to the World, he foresaw all along that he must either recant it, or die for it; and therefore it is not imaginable that he would have proceeded to di∣vulge it, had he not believed it to be true. For what man in his wits would ever publish a lye to the world, when he knows beforehand he must either recant it with shame, or assert and main∣tain it with his bloud? But such was the nature of his Doctrine, that he could not believe it to be true, unless it were so; because the truth or false∣hood of it depended upon matters of fact, where∣in he could not be deceived; namely, that he was the Son of God, that he came down from him, and had dwelt with him in unspeakable glory and happiness from the foundations of
the world, Iohn 17.5. upon the truth of which facts depended the Authority of his whole Do∣ctrine; but whether these were true or false he could not be ignorant if he were in his wits, which no body can doubt, that considers the exactness of his Conversation, and the wisdom and depen∣dence of his Doctrine. Now if he were first in Heaven, and was sent down from thence to preach to the World, there is no doubt to be made of the truth of his Doctrine; and whether he were or no he could not be ignorant; if he were not there, he not only died with a wilful lye in his mouth, which is not reasonably imaginable of a person of his unspotted Piety and Vertue, but he also pub∣lished it to the World in his life, notwithstand∣ing he knew it to be a lye, and foresaw he must either dye for it, or shamefully recant it, which is not imaginable of a person of his wisdom and soundness of mind. So that considering that he could not but certainly know whether his Doctrine were true or false, his sealing it with his bloud is an unanswerable attestation of the truth of it; and accordingly his bloud is made a great Testi∣mony of the truth of his Gospel, 1 Iohn 5.8. and S. Paul tells us that he witnessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate, 1 Tim. 6.13. that is, in affirming before Pilate that he was the Son of God, and King of the Iews; even when he certainly foresaw that he should forfeit his life by it, he took it upon his death that he had preached nothing but the truth to the world. V. As a Prophet he also instituted an Order of men to publish and declare his Doctrine to the World. Whilst the gift of Prophecy conti∣nued
in the Iewish Church, there were certain Schools called the Schools of the Prophets, in which men were trained up under some great and eminent Prophets, who were the Masters of those Schools, in the knowledge of divine things, and the practice of Piety and Vertue, that so being educated in wisdom and goodness, they might be the better dis∣posed and qualified to receive the Prophetick in∣flux, and deliver God's Messages to the people. For out of these schools God ordinarily called those persons whom he imployed and sent forth to prophesie to their Kings and People; and accor∣dingly our Saviour, when he began to revive the spirit of Prophecy in his own Person, (which from Malachi till then, which was for the space of four hundred years, had been utterly extinct) immediately erected a School of Prophets▪ con∣sisting of his twelve Apostles and seventy Disciples, to whom, as it seems, he afterwards added thirty eight more, Vide Acts 1.15. over whom he him∣self presided as the great Master Prophet, in order to the instructing their minds in all divine wisdom, and forming their manners by the strictest rules of Piety and Vertue; that so, when ever occasion required, they might be duly qualified to Prophe∣sie to the World. And accordingly as those an∣cient Masters of the Prophetick Schools had ordi∣narily their Scholars personally attending on them, and, upon emergent occasions, did frequently send them forth as their Ministers upon Prophe∣tick Messages, Vid. 2 Kings 9.1. and 1 Kings 20▪35. so our blessed Saviour kept his in ordinary at∣tendance about him, that so they might hear his Doctrine, and see his Miracles, and observe his
Conversation; and, upon particular occasions, he sent them forth as his Ministring Disciples to Prophesie in his name; Vid. Luke 10.1. And out of this Prophetick School of our Saviour the Primi∣tive Prophets of our Religion were called and sent forth to preach the Gospel through the World. For that his Gospel might be taught through all succeeding Ages to the end of the World, he first erected this sacred School, and when he was to leave it, he deposited a standing Commission in the hands of his twelve Apostles, whom he ordained to preside in it in his room, by which he impower∣ed them not only to ordain and send forth the pre∣sent Disciples of it, viz. the Presbyters and Dea∣cons, to teach his Gospel to all Nations, but also to derive down the same authority to their Suc∣cessors through all Generations to come; For as the Father hath sent me, saith he, so send I you, Iohn 20.21. and as he sent them, so they still sent others, and so in an uninterrupted line of Succession hath this Commission been handed and derived from one Generation to another; the Bishops who next succeeded the Apostles in presiding over the Sacred School, not only still ordaining other Bi∣shops to succeed them, but also still admitting other Presbyters and Deacons, who are as the Disciples of that School to Minister under them in the propagation of the Gospel. Thus Christ as the Great Prophet of the Church hath erected a standing Prophetick School or Order of men autho∣ritatively to teach and declare his Gospel to all succeeding Ages of the World. VI. And lastly, As he was a Prophet also he sent his Holy Spirit, when he left the World, to
recollect and explain to his Disciples the Doctrine he had taught them, and to enable them also to prove and assert it by Miracles▪ For as Elias, the Great Prophet of Israel, when he was snatched up into Heaven, let drop his Mantle, and, with that, derived that holy Spirit on his Disciple Elisha, by which he Prophesied and wrought his Miracles, so Iesus, the Great Pro∣phet of the World, when he ascended into Hea∣ven, derived that divine Spirit upon his Apostles and Disciples, by which he himself Prophesied and confirmed his Prophecies by miraculous Evidences while he was upon Earth; Vid. supra p. 66, 67▪ &c. For in all likelihood the Holy Ghost descen∣ded on the day of Pentecost not only on the A∣postles, but also upon all the rest of the hundred and twenty Disciples, of whom we read in Acts 1.15. For of these consisted the Prophetick School of our Saviour, who in all probability separated them while he was yet upon Earth from the rest of his Followers to be the Heralds and Preachers of his Gospel to the World; and if so, we may rea∣sonably conclude that the Holy Ghost fell on them all as well as on the Apostles, to qualifie them for that work, which together with the Apostles they had been fore-ordained to. Indeed, as the Apostles were placed in a higher station than any of the rest, as being authorized by Christ to superintend and preside over them, so they re∣ceived a peculiar Gift of the Holy Ghost, in which none of the rest communicated with them, and that was conferring by imposition of hands the Holy Ghost upon others. For so in Acts 8. we find that when Philip had converted the People
of Samaria, he could not confer the Holy Ghost on them, but Peter and Iohn are sent thither for that purpose, who laid their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost, verse 17. Now by thus deriving his Holy Spirit on his Apostles and Disciples, the blessed Iesus still proceeded by them to Prophesie to the World, till through their Ministry he had fully consummated his Pro∣phetick Office, and revealed and explained the whole Doctrine of the Gospel. For till such time as the whole New Testament was compleated, his Ministers generally preached by the immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost, who, as I have shewn at large, p. 67, &c. not only recollected to their memories those Doctrines which Christ him∣self had taught them, but also explained them fully to their minds, and thereby enabled them to explain them fully to the World; and when this was once finished, and the whole Doctrine of the Gospel committed to Writing, and col∣lected into a Volume, the Spirit of Prophecy was withdrawn from the Ministers of Christianity, who were from thenceforth obliged to supply the want of it by their own study and industry. For now the Gospel being fully revealed, there need∣ed no farther Revelation; and for the Holy Spi∣rit to reveal over again to mens minds what he had plainly enough revealed already, and set be∣fore their eyes, would have been but actum agere, to multiply actions to no purpose. Whilst the Gos∣pel lay hid in the Eternal Counsel of God, out of the reach and prospect of humane understand∣ings, it was necessary that the Holy Ghost should immediately reveal it to the minds of
those who were to declare it to the World; other∣wise it is impossible it should ever have been known to Mankind; but when once he had fully revealed it to them, and declared it by them, and transmit∣ted their declaration by a standing Scripture to all succeeding Generations; to what end should he still proceed to make new Revelations of it, unless it were to gratifie mens sloth and idleness, and ex∣cuse them from the trouble of searching and study∣ing that Scripture in which he had taken care to transmit his Gospel to them? But though that blessed Spirit hath never been wanting to Mankind in any necessary assistance, yet when once he hath put things within our own power, he always ex∣pects that we should do them, and not sit still with our hands in our Pockets, expecting that he should do them for us. Since therefore by transmitting to us the Scripture, he hath put it within the pow∣er of its Ministers to understand and teach the Gos∣pel, he expects that they should exercise that power in a diligent study of those things which lead to the true understanding of Religion▪ and not depend upon new Revelations for the under∣standing of that which he hath already sufficiently revealed to them. For thus till the whole Old Testament was finished, God continued the Spirit of Prophecy in the Iewish Church, after which he immediately withdrew it, and wholly remitted his People to the conduct of the Priests and Levites, who in their forty eight Cities, which were so many Vniversities for their education in divine Learning, diligently read and studied the Law, and thereby accomplished themselves to preach and explain it to the People. And in like manner
God continued the same Spirit of Prophecy in the Christian Church till the whole New Testament was revealed and written, and Copies of it dispersed through all the Churches, and from thenceforth the Spirit of Prophecy ceased, and in the room of its first inspired Ministers there succeeded an ordi∣nary standing Ministry, who by their Learning, and Industry, and diligent search of Scripture were to supply the defect of immediate Revelati∣on, and to qualifie themselves to teach and instruct the several Flocks that were committed to their Charge. In short therefore, the Spirit of Prophe∣cy remained upon the Ministers of Christ till such time as it had fully revealed and clearly explained the Gospel to them, and when this was done, and they had transmitted its Revelations to writing, there could be no farther need of it, unless it be supposed either that he had not sufficiently reveal∣ed the Gospel to them, or that he hath some new Gospel to reveal. And thus you see what it is that our Saviour hath done in the discharge of his Prophetick Office. And considering all, I know not what farther he could have added to compleat and perfect it, and to render his Prophecy effectu∣al to teach and instruct the World. So that if after all these mighty performances we still remain in darkness and ignorance, the blame of it wholly redounds upon our selves; for he hath in all re∣spects abundantly performed his part towards the enlightening of the World, and chalked out to us the way to our happiness with such plain and vi∣sible lines, that if we are but willing to walk in it, we cannot mistake or wander from it; but if we will be so supine and negligent as to concern our
selves no more about it than if it were only a Fan∣ciful description of the Road to Vtopia, or the High-way to the World in the Moon, it is impos∣sible we should be throughly acquainted with it how plainly soever it is described. It is true, there are some Doctrines in Christianity which are not so clearly revealed, but that the most ho∣nest minds may be mistaken about them; but then these are such as are far remote from the necessary and fundamental Articles, upon which our Salva∣tion depends, all which are so clearly and distinct∣ly revealed, that there is nothing but a perverse Will, that is either prejudiced against them by some sinful affection, or through a profane disre∣gard of God and Religion utterly unconcerned about them, can hinder men from apprehending them; and if when the divine Light shines so clearly round about them, men will be so obsti∣nate as to shut their eyes against it, it is at their own eternal peril, and they are as justly accoun∣table for their ignorance, as if they had sinned against the clearest knowledge. For this, saith our Saviour, is the condemnation of the World, that light is come into the World, and men love darkness more than light. If therefore through any wicked prejudice against the truth, or through a profane neglect to enquire after it, we continue ignorant of it, this will be no excuse at all for our sinning against it, but we shall be as certainly condemned for our affecting Ignorance, and loving darkness more than light, as if we had sinned against the clearest light and conviction. For what a mon∣strous instance is it of stupidity and impiety toge∣ther to shut our eyes against that light which is of
such infinite moment to us, and which the Son of God thought worth his while to come down from Heaven to reveal to us; what is this, but to tell him to his face, that if he had pleased he might have spared his pains, and not have come so far on such an impertinent Errand as is not worth a man's while to listen to? O prodigious supineness and stupidity! that men who are so inquisitive about the little affairs of this life, as that when they receive but a Letter in which they imagine any of their worldly interests are concerned, they cannot forbear one moment breaking it open and perusing the Contents of it, should yet receive a Message from the God of Heaven by his own Son, in which their everlasting happiness or misery is concerned, and take no notice of it, but let it lie by them day after day without ever enquiring in∣to the Contents of it, or taking the least care and pains to inform themselves about it. Good God! what reverence have these wretched Creatures for thee, or what regard for themselves, that can thus receive thy Messages, and with them their own Eternal Fate, with the same unconcern and indifferency, as they would the most impertinent Tales of Bedlam? Wherefore as we regard either God or our own Souls, let us from henceforth be perswaded seriously to attend to this great and momentous Revelation of our Saviour, and throughly to inform our minds with its Doctrines and Precepts; for which end let us avoid, as much as in us lies, busying and entertaining our thoughts with nice and curious Speculations, or remote and disputable Opinions; and be∣take our selves to the study of things upon which
our Eternal life and happiness depends, viz. of the Duties which the Gospel exacts and requires of us, and of the Motives by which it presses and inforces them; which when once we have digested into a clear and distinct Scheme of practical knowledge, that will be a standing light to our Wills and Affe∣ctions, by which we shall always see our way be∣fore us, and be secured from wandering into dan∣gerous errors, and at length safely conducted to eternal light and happiness. SECT. III. Of Christ's Priestly Office. IN treating of which great and momentous Ar∣gument, I shall endeavour, first, to shew what the ancient Priesthood was, and in what Acts it consisted. Secondly, To prove that the ancient Priesthood in its proper Acts was a Type and Figure of the Priesthood of our Saviour. Thirdly, To explain the Priesthood, and Priest∣ly Acts of our Saviour corresponding to that anci∣ent Priesthood, in which they were prefigured. First, What the ancient Priesthood was, and in what Acts it consisted. In the first Ages of the World it is evident, that in matters which con∣cerned himself alone, every man was his own Priest. For thus in sacrificing to God upon their own particular accounts, both Cain and Abel offici∣ated for themselves, but in Family-Sacrifices the
Father of the Family was the Priest, as is evident by Noah and Iob, Gen. 8.22. Iob. 1.5. And when Families were multiplied into Tribes and greater Societies, the Prince of each Society was also the Supreme Priest of it; and hence before Aaron was consecrated, Moses, who was the Prince of Israel, officiated also as the Priest in that solemn Sacrifice by which the Covenant with Israel was confirmed, Exod. 24.6. And long before Moses, Melchisedeck, King of Salem, was also Priest of the most High God, Gen. 14.18. And it is evident that originally Kings were the High-Priests of their Countries. For so Aristotle ob∣serves, that , to Rule and Sacrifice were Offices conjoyned in the same Per∣son, Polit. l. 3. So also Virgil Aen. 3. Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum Phoebique Sacerdos, i. e. Anius in the same Person was King of Men, and Priest of Phoebus; upon which Servius hath this Note, Sane majorum haec erat consuetudo ut Rex esset etiam Sacerdos vel Pontifex; it was a Custom among the Ancients, that the King should be also Priest or High-Priest. Which Custom was continued for a long while in Aegypt, and from thence was derived to the Greeks, and from them to the Romans; for so Plut. Quaest. Rom. p. 279. tells us, , i. e. Of old Kings performed the most and greatest
parts of the Sacred Rites, and together with the Priests sacrificed the Victims; but upon their exceeding their due bounds, and taking upon them to domineer proudly and unjustly, many of the Greeks took from them all their Civil Pow∣er, and only left them their Authority to sacri∣fice to the Gods; but the Romans, as he goes on, utterly rejecting their Kings, appointed ano∣thr to succeed them in the High Priesthood, whom they wholly debarred from intermedling with secular Affairs. Dionysius Halicarn. speak∣ing of the power of Kings, expresly tells us, , i. e. That they had the Government of all Sacrifices and Sacred Rites, and whatsoever was to be done to the holy Gods was done by them. And therefore the reason why Melchisedeck here is more particularly taken notice of under the Character of a King and Priest, was, not be∣cause there were no other Kings so but he, but perhaps because all other Kings that were Co∣temporary with him were revolted to Idolatry, so that he only remained a Priest of the most High God. And in being a King and Priest together, he was a Type of our Saviour, who was a Priest, not after the Order of Aaron, but after the Order of Melchisedeck. Heb. 5.10. For in Aaron the Priestly Office was se∣parated from the Kingly, which later remained in Moses, after he by the command of God had devolved the Priesthood, which was ori∣ginally in himself, upon his Brother Aaron, and so according to divine institution the Priest∣hood
was to continue in the Family of Aaron, separate from the Regal Power, till the com∣ing of our Saviour, who reunited those Offices in himself, and became a Royal Priest after the ancient Order of Melchisedeck. For upon the separation of these Offices none could be a Priest of the Aaronical Order, but such as were de∣scended from the Family of Aaron, and there∣fore Christ could not be a Priest of that Order, because he descended from the Family of Iudah, and being of the Royal Lineage he resumed the Priestly Office from the House of Aaron, and joyned it to the Kingly Office again, with which it was originally united; by which he abrogated the Priesthood of the Aaronical Order, and in its room restored the ancient Melchisedecan or Royal Priesthood. And hence the Author to the He∣brews observes, that Christ pertaineth to another Tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the Al∣tar, for it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Iudah, of which Tribe Moses spake nothing con∣cerning the Priesthood, Heb. 7.13, 14. and therefore by being a Priest of a different Tribe from that to which the Aaronical Order was confined, he disannulled that Order, and erect∣ed another in the room of it, viz. the ancient Order of Melchisedeck, which was before the Aaronical. Hence S. Ambrose in Loc. & quo∣modo translatum est Sacerdotium? Ex tribu ad tribum, de Sacerdotali ad Regalem, ut eadem ipsa sit Regalis & Sacerdotalis; & intuere myste∣rium, primum fuit Regale Sacerdotium Melchi∣sedch secundum consequentiam hujus sermonis; se∣cundum etiam fuit Sacerdotale in Aaron; tertium in
Christo fuit iterum Regale; i. e. How was the Priesthood translated? Why from one Tribe to another, viz. from the Sacerdotal to the Regal, that so it might be both Regal and Sacerdotal; and this is the Mystery; the first Priesthood of Melchisedeck was Regal; the second was Sacerdo∣tal in Aaron; the third was Regal again in Christ. For that which distinguished the Melchisedecan from the Aaronical Priesthood, was not, as some imagine, the difference of their Sacrifice, viz. that Melchisedeck sacrificed only inanimate things, whereas Aaron sacrificed Animals also; for that Melchisedeck sacrificed, there is no doubt, because he was Priest of the most high God, but that he sacrificed inanimate things only, such as Bread and Wine, there is not the least intimation in Scripture; only it is said, that when he met Abraham he brought forth Bread and Wine, Gen. 14.18. that is, to refresh Abraham's Soldiers af∣ter their Battel with Chedorlaomer, as the manner was in those Countries, Vide Deut. 23.4. and Iudg. 8.15. and 6.15. And what is all this to his Sacrificing? But that he sacrificed Animate as well as Inanimate things, is evident, not only be∣cause animal Sacrifices were generally used before the institution of the Aaronical Priesthood, and it is very improbable that he who was so eminent∣ly the Priest of the most High God should never offer the accustomed Sacrifices; but also because Christ's Sacrifice was an animate one, who was a Priest after Melchisedeck's Order, and not of the Order of Aaron, Heb. 7.11. so that if the diffe∣rence between these two Orders consisted in this difference of their Sacrifice, Christ must be rather
a Priest of the Aaronick than the Melchisedecan Order. And how could the Acts of the Priest∣hood of Aaron be Typical of our Saviour's, which is Melchisedecan, as the Scripture all along makes them, if they were of a different nature from those of Melchisedeck? How could Aaron's bloudy Sa∣crifices be Typical of our Saviour's Priesthood, which was after the Order of Melchisedeck, if Melchisedeck's Priesthood admitted no bloudy Sa∣crifice? As to the Acts of their Priesthood there∣fore, for any thing that appears to the contrary, these two Orders were the same, but in this they apparently differed, that whereas the Regal Pow∣er was united to Melchisedeck's Priesthood, it was wholly separated from Aaron's, who in all proba∣bility was the first High Priest in the World that was not a King as well as a Priest. The Priestly acts therefore of these two different Orders being the same, we shall better understand the nature of our Saviour's Priesthood, though it be of the Order of Melchisedeck, by the account we have of the Aaronical, than by that of the Melchisede∣can Order; because the former is far more distinct and particular than the later. For of the Acts and Functions of Melchisedeck's Priesthood there is ve∣ry little mention in Scripture, whereas those of Aaron's are described at large in all their particu∣lar Rites and Circumstances. The Priestly Office therefore in general consists in officiating for sin∣ful men with God, in order to the reconciling of God to them, and obtaining for them his Favour and Benediction. To which end there are two Offices necessary to be performed, First, to offer Sacrifice for them, and thereby to make some fit∣ting
reparation to God for their past sins and pro∣vocations; Secondly, To present that Sacrifice to God, and in the Vertue and Merit of it to inter∣ceed with God in their behalf in order to the Re∣storing them to his Grace and Favour. And ac∣cordingly we read of the Iewish High Priest, who of all their other Priests was the most perfect Type and Representative of Christ in his Priestly Office, and this more especially in Celebrating the Myste∣ries of the great day of Expiation, that on this day he was appointed to bring the Beast to the door of the Tabernacle, which was set apart to die for the Sins of the People, and to kill it there with his own hands; by which action he did, as the Peoples Representative, offer a life to God as a reparation for those manifold sins, by which they had justly forfeited their own lives to him; after which he was to take the Bloud of it, and pre∣sent it before the Lord in the Holy of Holies, sprinkling it seven times with his finger upon and before the Mercy-Seat, by which action he inter∣ceded with God to accept that Bloud in lieu of the forfeited lives of the People; and accordingly the whole performance is called making an Atonement for the Children of Israel for all their sins once a year, Lev. 16 34. But for the fuller explication of the Priestly Office, it is necessary we should briefly ex∣plain these two essential Acts of it, viz. of sacri∣ficing, and presenting the Sacrifice to God by way of Intercession for the People. As for the first of these the Apostle tells us, that every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and Sacrifices, Heb. 8.3. And that he is ordained for men in things pertaining unto God, that he may
offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for sins, Heb. 5.1. It is true indeed to sacrifice, in a strict sence, i. e. to kill the Sacrifice, seems not to have been so pe∣culiar to the Priestly Office, as to present the bloud of the Sacrifice before the Lord by way of Inter∣cession, the later of which was so appropriate to the Priesthood, as that it was never allowed upon any occasion whatsoever for any but a Priest to perform it; but as for killing the Sacrifice, it seems that not only the Priests, but sometimes the Levites, vid. 2 Chron. 30.17. yea, and some∣times the People themselves were allowed to per∣form it, vid. Lev. 4.24, 29, 33. though it is probable that the Levites were allowed it only in cases of necessity, and the People only in pri∣vate and particular sacrifice; but in the publick and general Expiation wherein Christ's dying for the sins of the World was more eminently ex∣pressed and represented, not only the presenting the bloud of the Sacrifice, but the killing it too, was peculiarly appropriated to the Priesthood. So that though in private and particular Expiations the People had a right to sacrifice, or kill the Victim, yet in all publick ones, such as our Savi∣our's was, that right was incommunicably inhe∣rent in the Priesthood. Now the killing of those sacrifices which were designed for expiati∣ons of sin, was a transferring of punishment from the People to the Victim; for, you must know, the Iews had two sorts of Laws, viz. Civil and Ritual; their Civil Laws were enforced according to their strictest sanction, with the Penalty of death, which Penalty, in many cases, allowed by God, ad∣mitted of this mitigation, that the life of a Beast
should be accepted in exchange for the forfeited life of the Offender. Their Ritual Laws were in∣forced with the Penalty of legal uncleanness, and being separated upon that account from the Con∣gregation and Publick Worship; which Penalty al∣so was thus far relaxed, that if they offered the life of a Beast in Sacrifice, their uncleanness should be thereby purged, and themselves restored to the benefit of the publick Worship. In both which cases the Sacrifice was evidently substituted to suf∣fer for the Offender, and in the first case he was substituted to suffer that very punishment which the Offender had incurred. And therefore you find that the greater Crimes were no otherwise to be expiated, but by the bloud of the Offender him∣self, whereas for lesser ones the bloud of a Beast was accepted, which is a plain Argument, that that punishment which in greater sins was exacted of the Criminal himself, was in the case of smaller sins transferred from the Criminal to the Sacrifice, and that the punishment of the Beast was instead of the punishment of the Man. And this is most evident in the case of the Scape-Goat, who upon the High Priest's laying his hands upon his head had the sins of the People transferred on him, and was thereby so polluted, that he defiled the man that led him into the Wilderness, who was therefore obliged before he returned to the Camp to lustrate himself by washing his Cloaths, and bathing his flesh in water, Lev. 16.26. And so also those expiatory Sacrifices, whose bloud was carried into the Holy place, and their bodies burnt without the Camp, had the sins of the People so imputed to them, and were so defiled by that Im∣putation,
that they were ordered to be carried without the Camp immediately, lest they should defile the whole Congregation, and those who car∣ried them out and burnt them, were so far actually defiled by them, that it was unlawful for them to return to the Camp, till they were legally purifi∣ed; which is a plain argument, that in these Sa∣crificial Expiations the sin and guilt of the People was still transferred upon the Sacrifice, and con∣sequently that the death of these Sacrifices was in∣stead of the death of those Criminals; and accor∣dingly, Lev. 17.11. we are told that it is the bloud, i. e. of the Sacrifice that maketh an atone∣ment for the Soul. And indeed this was the sence which all Nations had of Expiatory Sacrifices, viz. that their death was instead of the Punishment due to the Offenders that offered them. For thus the Iews by making Expiation generally understand suffering Punishment for another in order to his be∣ing released from suffering it himself. For thus whereever it is said by them, Ecce me in Expiati∣onem, the meaning is, En me in ejus locum, ut por∣tm iniquitates ejus, i. e. I stand in such a ones place that I may bear his Iniquities; and so, Ecce me in expiationem R. Chijae & filiorum ejus, i. e. castigationes quae obveniunt mihi sint in expiationem R. Chijae & filiorum ejus; Behold I am for an ex∣piation of R. Chijah and his Sons, i. e. Let the af∣flictions that happen to me be for an expiation of R. Chijah and his Sons. So when all the People were to say to the High Priest, Simus nos expiatio tua, the meaning was, In nobis fiat expiatio tua, nosque subeamus tuo loco quicquid tibi evenire debet: Let us be thy Expiation, that is, let thy Expiation
be made upon us, and let us undergo in thy stead whatsoever evil thou hast deserved, of which see more, Buxt. Lexic. Chald. p. 1078. And accordingly in the Form of Prayer they used at the killing the Sacrifice, they plainly expressed the substitution of it in the room of their own for∣feited lives, Obsecro Domine, peccavi, rebellis fui, &c. O Lord I obsecrate, I have sinned, I have been rebellious, I have acted perversly, I have done this and that evil, of which I now heartily repent, let this be my Expiation, and let those evils which might justly fall upon my head fall upon the head of my Sacrifice, Outram de sacrif. p. 273. And so also for the Gentiles, Eu∣sebius Demonst. l. 1. tells us, that they looked upon their  or expiations, as , i. e. that their lives were a commutation for the lives of those that offered them, as who should say a life for a life; and accordingly Porphyry tells us, that the first original of the sacrifice of Animals was, , i. e. Certain occasi∣ons requiring that a life should be offered for a life, Abstin. l. 4. and hence they were wont to curse the Sacrifice, and solemnly to imprcate all those evils on it which themselves had deserved, vid. Herod. Euterp. & Serv. in Aeneid. 3. From all which it is abundantly evident that this Priest∣ly Act of sacrificing or killing the expiatory Sacri∣fice, was nothing else but a translating the punish∣ment that was due to the Offerer from his person to his Victim or Sacrifice. But then Secondly, Besides this, another Sacerdotal Act was presnting the bloud of the Sacrifice to
God by way of Intercession for the People. For when the Sacrifice was slain, the Priest was to take the bloud, and sprinkle some of it round about the Altar of burnt Offerings; and the rest of it, say the Jews, was poured out by the Priest on the Southside Floor of the Altar, where there were two holes through which it ran into a Channel that conveyed it into the Valley of Kidron; but in the Sin-Offerings for the High Priest and the Congre∣gation, he was to carry the bloud within the San∣ctuary, and to sprinkle of it seven times before the Vail of the Sanctuary, and to put some of it upon the Horns of the Altar of Incense, after which the Remainder of the bloud was to be dis∣posed of, as was said before, on the Altar of Burnt Offerings. And at the great day of Ex∣piation, the High Priest himself, having slain the Sacrifice, was to carry the bloud of it into the Holy of Holies, and there with his finger to sprinkle the bloud of it seven times before the Mercy-Seat. Now this sprinkling of the bloud was no∣thing else but a solemn presenting of the life of the sacrificed Animal to God, as an exchange or price of Redemption for the forfeited life of the Of∣fender. For whatsoever was offered upon the Al∣tar was always looked upon as religiously presen∣ted to God; so that by sprinkling the bloud on the Altar, which is the Vehicle of life, and there∣fore is sometimes called the Life, vide Gen. 9.4. the Life was solemnly tendered and presented to God as to the supreme Lord of life and death; and the meaning of this tendry, was to move God by way of Intercession to accept of that life instead of the Offenders, which was forfeited into his hands.
For since, as a Learned Author of our own hath observed, all Divine Worship, whether natural or instituted, was either to implore or to comme∣morate God's grace and favour, this solemn sprink∣ling of the bloud in expiatory Sacrifices must ne∣cessarily respect the imploring of God's Pardon of those sins for which the Expiation was designed. So that in performing this Rite the Priest was a silent Intercessor with God in the behalf of the People, and his action was a solemn Deprecation, of which this was the natural language and mean∣ing; O Lord I beseech thee be merciful to these guilty Supplicants, in lieu of whose bloud, which I acknowledge is justly forfeited to thee, I here present thee the life of this sacrificed Animal, whose bloud I am sprinkling on thy Altar, humbly imploring thee to accept it as a ransom for their lives, and in consideration of it to release them from that mortal penalty in which they stand bound to thy Iustice. Upon which Intercession of his, God's high displeasure was atoned, and the Priest thereupon Authorized to bless the People, i. e▪ to declare that God was appeased and reconci∣led to them. And thus you see what the Office of Priesthood is, and in what acts it consists; in sum therefore it consists in sacrificing to God for the sins of the People, and interceding with him in the vertue of the Sacrifice to be propitious and merciful to them. I proceed now in the second place to shew that both these Acts of the Priestly Office among the Iews, were designed and intended by God for Types and Shadows of the Priesthood of our Savi∣our.
For as for the first, viz. Sacrificing, the Scripture plainly tells us that it was instituted for a Typical representation of the death of our Savi∣our. For so the Author to the Hebrews makes the Sacrificed body of our Saviour to answer to, and succeed in the room of the whole body of the Iewish Sacrifices, as the true Antitype of those Types and Shadows, Heb. 10.5, 6, &c. Wherefore when he cometh into the World, speaking of Christ, he saith, Sacrifice and Offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me, that is, a body to be sacrificed in the room of that former Sacri∣fice and Offering; In burnt Offerings and Sacrifi∣ces thou hast had no pleasure; Then said he, verse 9. Lo I come to do thy will O God; that is, to die a Sacrifice for the sins of the world; and hereby, saith he, he taketh away the first, that is, those Typical Sacrifices, that he may establish the second, that is, that great Sacrifice of Christ's body; for so it follows, verse 10. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Iesus Christ once for all, in which words he plainly makes all the Jewish Sacrifices in general to be Types and Figures of the great Sacrifice of our Sa∣viour's Death. And indeed as those Sacrifices were all of them to be slain, and to be all sound and immaculate, they were so far forth at least ex∣press Types of our Saviour, both as to his death, and unspotted innocence and purity. But then as for those Sacrifices whose bodies were burnt with∣out the Camp, they were more peculiarly Types than any of the rest, of our Saviour's Sacrifice, because they had not only all those things apper∣taining to them by which the other Sacrifices re∣presented
it, but besides that they were Expiati∣ons for sin, as well as the Sacrifice of our Saviour, and by their being burnt without the Camp did more eminently prefigure our Saviour's being Crucified without the City. Hence the Apostle, Heb. 13.10, 11, 12. We have an Altar whereof they have no right to eat which serve the Taber∣nacle; for the Bodies of those Beasts whose bloud is brought into the Sanctuary by the High Priest for sin are burnt without the Camp, lest they should pollute the Congregation, as being defiled and cur∣sed upon the account of the Peoples guilts which were transferred upon them; Wherefore Iesus also that he might sanctifie the People with his own bloud suffered without the Gate, that is, as an Expiato∣ry Sacrifice, that took upon him the guilts of Man∣kind, and thereby became polluted and accursed; in which words the death of our Saviour is plain∣ly represented as the true Antitype of the Expia∣tory Sacrifices of the Iews; and accordingly, as all Types have much less in them of that which they prefigure than their Antitypes, so those Ex∣piatory Sacrifices had something of real Expiation in them, though much less than the Sacrifice of our Saviour. For so Heb. 9.13, 14. For if the bloud of Bulls and of Goats and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifie to the purifying of the flesh, (by which it is evident that there was a real Expiation made by those Sacrifices, so far as concerned the purifying mens flesh, i. e. relea∣sing them from corporal punishments and legal un∣cleannesses;) How much more, saith he, shall the bloud of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit of∣fered himself without spot to God, purge your Con∣sciences
from dead works; where the same expia∣tion in kind, that was made by those Legal Sacri∣fices, is expresly attributed, though in a much higher degree, to the Sacrifice of our Saviour; which plainly argues the former to be a Type and Shadow of the later. And then as for the second Act of the Jewish Priesthood, viz. his presenting the bloud of the Sacrifice to God by way of Intercession for the People, this was also instituted for a Typical re∣presentation of our Saviour's presenting the bloud of his sacrificed body to God by way of Inter∣cession for Mankind. And hence his bloud is called the bloud of sprinkling, which speaks better things for us than the bloud of Abel, Heb. 12.24. which is a plain allusion to the High Priest's sprinkling the bloud of the Sacrifice before the Mercy-Seat on the great day of Expiation, by which action, as I shewed before, he interceded with God to be propitious to the People in consideration of that bloud which he there presented in their behalf. And therefore as the Holy of Holies was a Type of Heaven, Heb. 9.24. and the High Priest's entering thereinto after he had slain the Sacrifice, a Type of our Saviour's entring into Heaven after the Sacrifice of himself, Ibid. verse 7, 11, 12. so the High Pries's sprinkling the bloud before the Mercy-Seat, was also a Type of our Saviour's presenting his bloud to the Father in Heaven, and there pleading it in our behalf; and hence he is said to have entered into the Holy place, that is, into Heaven the Antitype of the Holy of Ho∣lies, and to have obtained Eternal Redemption for us neither by the bloud of Bulls and Goats, as
the Jewish High Priest did, but by his own bloud, Heb. 9.12. where the High Priest's entering in∣to the Holy of Holies with the bloud of Bulls and Goats is plainly opposed, as a Type to its Anti-type, to Christ's entering into Heaven with his own bloud, and therefore the High Priest's interceding for the People in the Holy of Holies in vertue of the bloud of their Sacrifices must necessarily be Typical of Christ's interceding for us in Heaven in the vertue of his. Thus as God cast and con∣trived the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jewish Law in general into a prefiguration or visible Pro∣phecy of the Mysteries of the Gospel, that so by those Emblematical Predictions he might intimate before-hand those glorious truths to pious and in∣quisitive minds, which he intended afterwards more plainly to reveal, (vid. Col. 2.17. and Heb. 10.1.) so particularly in the Jewish Priesthood he drew a rude draught and representation of the future Priesthood of our Saviour, that so by that figurative Sacrifice and Intercession he might vi∣sibly foreshew and intimate to the World the Sa∣crifice and Intercession of our Saviour. For thus it is evident from Philo that the Jews understood their High Priest to be a Type of the Eternal Word or Messias; for thus in his Allegories he makes the Temple to be an Emblm of the World, , in which God's first-born Divine Word is the High Priest; and in several other parts of his Writings he makes the High Priests Crown and Vestments to be Types and Representations of the dignity and perfections of the Eternal Word, by which it is evident, that by their Typical High-Priest∣hood
the Jews were in some measure instructed in the nature of the Priesthood of our Saviour. Thirdly, and lastly, I shall now proceed to explain the Priesthood and Priestly Acts of our Sa∣viour corresponding to that ancient Priesthood in which they were prefigured. In General there∣fore the Priesthood of our Saviour corresponding to that ancient Priesthood consists in offering up himself a Sacrifice for our sins, and in presenting that Sacrifice to God in our behalf, and thereby interceding with him to be merciful and propitious to us. So that the Priesthood of our Saviour con∣sists in these two acts: First, In offering up himself a Sacrifice for our sins. Secondly, In presenting that Sacrifice to God by way of Intercession for us; of each of which I shall discourse at large. SECT. IV. Concerning the Sacrifice of our Saviour. IN handling the first of these, viz. the Sacri∣fice of our Saviour, I shall endeavour, first, to shew that the death of Christ had in it all the re∣quisite conditions of a most real and compleat Sa∣crifice for sin. Secondly, To make appear how effectually God's exacting such a Sacrifice in order to his being reconciled to sinners conduces to their reformation.
First, That the death of Christ had in it all the requisite conditions of a real and most com∣pleat Sacrifice for sin. Now to make both a true and perfect expiatory Sacrifice, there are five things indispensibly necessary: First, That in being sacrificed it should be sub∣stituted in the room of an Offender to be punished for him in order to his being released from his own Personal obligation to punishment. For in all those Legal expiations which prefigured this great Expiation of our Saviour, the killing of the Sa∣crifice, was, as I shewed before, a real transfer∣ring and inflicting upon it the punishment due to the Offender that offered it, in order to his being excused from suffering it in his own person. Secondly, Another necessary condition of an Expiatory Sacrifice is that it should be pure, sound, and unblemished; and indeed this condi∣tion is required in all kinds of Sacrifices, whether Expiatory, or Eucharistical, that they should be pure or Legally clean, and that they should be sound and without blemish. For so Lev. 22.20. But whatsoever hath a blemish that shall ye not offer, for it shall not be acceptable for you; and ver. 21. It shall be perfect, i. e. sound and entire, to be accepted: there shall be no blemish therein; and then he goes on to particulars, it shall not be blind, or broken, or having a Wn, or scurvy, or scabbed, verse 22. Now though the legal uncleanness and the natu∣ral blemishes here forbidden in Sacrifices had nothing of sin or immorality in them, yet the prohibition of these natural blemishes in Sacrifices that were incapable of moral ones, denotes the
necessity of a moral cleanness and unblemished∣ness in that great Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the World which they Typified and prefigured; and hence Christ is called, A Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. Thirdly, Another necessary condition to a perfect Expiatory Sacrifice is, that it should be of such an intrinsick worth and value as that its death may be, in some measure, an equivalent Commutation for the punishment which the Of∣fender deserves. For the end of punishing, whe∣ther it be the Offender himself, or another in his stead, is to secure and maintain the Authority of the Law; in order whereunto it is highly requi∣site that the punishment should ordinarily be equi∣valent to the demerit of the Crime; otherwise it will not be a sufficient motive to warn and de∣ter men from committing it. And herein con∣sisted the imperfection of the ancient expiatory Sacrifices, that what they suffered was much short of what the Offenders they suffered for deserved; for they only substituted the life of a Brute in the room of the life of a Man, which is of far greater worth and value; and therefore by how much less valuable the life of a Beast is than the life of a Man, by so much less was the punish∣ment transferred upon the Sacrifice, than the guilt contracted by the Offender. Fourthly, Another necessary condition to the making of a true and perfect Sacrifice was that it should be free and unforced on the part of the Offerer. For since he had deserved the punishment in his own Person, it was very fit, both that the Sacrifice that was to undergo it for
him should be something that was his own, other∣wise he could have no right to substitute it in his own stead, or to offer its life to God in exchange for his own; and that he should freely offer it to be killed in his stead, otherwise he had not been consenting to the exchange, without which it must have been invalid, and consequently the Expiation void; and hence Lev. 1.3. it is requi∣red that he should offer it of his own voluntary will at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation be∣fore the Lord. Fifthly, It is also a necessary condition to a true and perfect Sacrifice for sin that it should be admitted and accepted by God in the room and stead of the punishment that is due to him from the Offender himself. For by violating his Laws we give God a right to exact the Penalty of them at our own hands; so that if he pleases he may refuse to admit of any Substitute to suffer for us, and if he will insist upon his right to pu∣nish us in our own persons, and refuse to admit of any exchange; what another suffers for us will signifie nothing to our discharge or acquittal, be∣cause it is not our own suffering who stand perso∣nally obliged to God to suffer the utmost evil that our sin deserves; and therefore to admit another to suffer for us is an Act of pure Grace and Favour in him, which he may grant or refuse as he pleases. So that the Expiatory vertue of all Sacrifice lies in God's admitting and accepting it in exchange for that personal punishment we owe him; and hence he is said to have given them the bloud upon the Altar to make an atonement for their Souls, Lev. 17.11. that is, to have admitted and accepted that
Bloud which was offered on the Altar as an Atone∣ment for their lives which were forfeited to him. And thus you see what are the necessary conditi∣ons of a real, and perfect, Expiatory Sacrifice; all which, as I shall now shew you, do fully concenter in the Death and Sacrifice of our Saviour. As I. In dying or being sacrificed he was substituted in the room of sinful men to be punished for them in order to their being released from their personal obligation to punishment. And hence, Tit. 2.14. he is said to have given himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, that is, he gave his life in exchange for ours, and thereby became our . For by what follows, it is plain that his giving himself for us here is to be under∣stood by way of an expiation, for it was, first, to redeem us from all iniquity, which is the very phrase by which the vertue and efficacy of Propi∣tiatory Sacrifices is expressed; for so , which signifies to redeem in the Greek, is the same with  which signifies to expiate by Sacrifice in the Hebrew; and accordingly the Greek word , which in the Greek signifies the price of redemption, is frequently used for the Hebrew Copher, which signifies a price to reconcile or propitiate. So that Christ's giving himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity, must signifie, ac∣cording to the common acceptation of the Phrase, his laying down his life for us as the price of our propitiation with God. For so among the Jews that common form of speech, Let me be your redemption, was as much as to say, let me bear your Iniquities, and undergo the punishment of them that you
may escape, Buxt. Lex. Chald. 10.78. Agree∣ably to which in Heb. 9.15. Christ is said to die for the redemption of transgressions, that is, to buy off the punishment of them with his own bloud. For so he is said to have given himself , i. e. a ransom or price of Redemption for all, 1 Tim. 2.5, 6. and to have given his life as a  or ransom for many, Matth. 20.28. But then secondly, his giving himself for us was to purifie us, which also refers to the purifications which were made by Expiatory Sacrifices. For so the word  signifies, to cleanse from guilt by Sacrifice. Thus Lev. 16.30. On that day shall the Priest make Atonement for ye to purifie ye, that ye may be pure from all your sin before the Lord; and so the word is generally taken not only in the Writings of Moses, but also in all other Authors, by whom Expiatory Sacrifices are promiscuously called , and , i. e. ato∣ning, sanctifying, and purifying. Agreeably to which, the bloud of Christ is said to purifie us from all sin, i. e. from the guilt of all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7. For it was from that that the bloud of Sacrifices did immediately purifie men. And hence he is said to have died for our sins, 1 Cor. 15.3 to have given himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4. and to have once suf∣fered for our sins, the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.8. and his Bloud is said to be shed for many for the re∣mission of sins, Matth. 26.28. and to be a Propitia∣tion for our sins, 1 John 4.10. by which expressions it is evident that our sins were the cause, and the expiation of them the end of Christ's suffering; and it is upon this account that he is said to bear our sins in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. that is,
to undergo the punishment of them in those exqui∣site torments he endured upon the Cross, and to be made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. even as the Expi∣atory Sacrifices were made sin, i. e. Piacula, that underwent the punishment of sin for the Offenders that offered them, Lev. 4.3, 29. and also to be made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. that is, by having the guilts of our sins transferred on him, even as the Sacrifices were cursed, as was shewed before, by the very translation of the guilts of the people upon them; and accordingly, as by this Transla∣tion those Sacrifices were rendered cursed and un∣clean, and as such, were to be burnt without the Camp, so our Saviour upon the same account suf∣fered without the Gate, Heb. 13.11, 12. And to name no more, in Isa. 53. we are told, That he should bear our griefs, and carry our sorrows, and be wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; that the Chastisements of our peace were upon him, and that by his stripes we should be healed; that the Lord hath laid upon him the iniqui∣ties of us all, and that for our transgressions he was stricken, that his Soul was made an Offering for sin; that he should bear our iniquities, and be numbred with the transgressors, and bear the sins of many, and make intercession for the transgressors; all which expressions do as plainly denote him to be substi∣tuted to be punished for us, in order to our re∣lease, as it is possible for words to do; and, un∣less we will admit that to be the sence of Scripture, which the words of it do as plainly import as they could have done if it had been its sence, it will be impossible to determine it to any sence whatso∣ever; because men may prevaricate upon the
plainest words, and with quirks of Wit and Criti∣cism pervert them to a contrary meaning. And I dare undertake by the same Arts that our Adver∣saries use to avoid the force of these Testimonies, to elude the plainest words that the Wit of man can invent to express this Proposition, that Christ's Death was a punishment for our sins; which to any reasonable man is a sufficient answer to all the Socinian Cavils. And indeed the whole cur∣rent of Scripture runs so clear against them, that they do as good as acknowledge, that according to the most common and natural acceptation of its words, it fairly implies the Doctrine we contend for, viz. that the Death of Christ was a real pu∣nishment for the sins of the World; but their main Plea is, that it is unjust, in the nature of the thing, to punish one man for the sins of another, and therefore we ought rather to impose any sence on the words of Scripture, how forein soever, than attribute to God so great a piece of injustice, as the punishing his own Son for the sins of the World. But as for the Iustice of this procedure, I shall endeavour by and by to clear and vindicate it. II. He died in pure and spotless Innocence; and this was highly necessary to his being an Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of others. For had he been a sinner, he had deserved to die upon his own ac∣count, and the utmost effect of his Death could have been only the Expiation of his own sin, by which his life must have been forfeited to the di∣vine Justice; and it is impossible that he who hath forfeited his own life, should by his death re∣deem the forfeited lives of others. And accor∣cordingly,
Heb. 7.26, 27. we are told, that such an High Priest became us who is holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the Heavens, who needed not daily, as those High Priests, to offer up sacrifice first for his own sins, &c. because the Sacrifice which he offered was his own life; so that had he been obliged to offer that for his own sins, it could have made no Ex∣piation for ours; the bare payment of a man's own debt being no satisfaction for other mens. And therefore herein the Apostle places the vertue and efficacy of Christ's bloud, by which it was rendred sufficiently precious to be a ransom for the sins of the World, that it was of a Lamb without spot or blemish, i. e. the bloud of a most holy and innocent person, who never deserved the least evil on his own account, and therefore was truly precious, and sit to be a ransom for the sins of others, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. And accordingly he is said to be made sin for us, i. e. to be devoted as a Sacrifice for our sins, who knew no sin, 2▪ Cor. 5.21. where you see the great Emphasis of his Sacrifice is laid upon his Innocence, as that which was necessary to qualifie him to be a Sacrifice for others. So that by that spotless obedience of Christ's life, through the whole course of which he did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth, he consecra∣ted himself an acceptable Sacrifice to God for the sins of the World. III. His Death was of sufficient intrinsick worth and value to be an equivalent commutation for the punishment that was due to the whole world of sin∣ners. For the reason why God would not pardon sinners without some commutation for the punish∣ment
that was due from them to his Justice, was that he might preserve and maintain the Authori∣ty of his Laws and Government. For had he ex∣acted the punishment from the sinners themselves, he must have destroyed the whole Race of Man∣kind; and had he pardoned them, on the other hand, without any punishment at all, he must have exposed his authority to the contempt and outrage of every bold and insolent Offender; and therefore to avoid these dangerous extremities of severity and impunity, his infinite wisdom found out this expedient, to admit of some exchange for our persons and punishment, that so some other thing or person being substituted in our stead, to suffer and be punished for us, neither we might be destroyed, nor our sins be unpunished. This there∣fore being the reason of God's admitting of Sacri∣fice, it was highly requisite that the punishment of the Sacrifice should bear some proportion to the guilt of the Offenders; otherwise it will not an∣swer God's reason of admitting it. For since the reason of his admitting it was the security of his Authority, the less he had admitted, the less he must have secured his Authority by it. For to have ex∣acted a small punishment for a great demerit, would have been within a few degrees as destru∣ctive to his Authority as to have exacted none at all; to punish but little for great Crimes, is within one remove as mischievous to Government as total impunity; and therefore to support his own Authority over us, it was highly requisite that he should exact not only a punishment for our sin, but also a punishment proportionable to the guilt and demerit of it. For there is no doubt
but the nearer the punishment is to the demerit of the sin, the greater security it must give to his Authority. And upon this account the Sacrifices of the Iews were infinitely short of making a full expiation for their sins; because being but brute Animals, their death was no way a proportionable punishment to the great demerit of the sins of the People. For what proportion could there be be∣tween the momentany sufferings of a Beast, and those eternal sufferings which the sins of a man do deserve? The death of a Beast is a punishment very short of the death of a Man, but infinite∣ly short of that eternal death to which the man's guilts do oblige him; and accordingly the Expi∣ations which were made for Men by the death of those Beasts were very short and imperfect. For so the Apostle tells us, that they only sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9.13. that is, to the acquitting them from their Corporal Penal∣ties and legal Vncleannesses; but could not at all make them perfect as pertaining to their Con∣sciences, i. e. could not expiate the guilt of any wilful sin, by which their Consciences were laid waste and wounded, ver. 9. And accordingly the Heathen seem to be aware how short the death of Beasts was of the punishment which was due for the sins of Men. For though in ordinary ca∣ses they sacrificed Beasts, as well as the Iews, yet in great extremities, when they conceived their Gods to be highly displeased with them, even the most civilized of them sacrificed Men; which shews, that they thought the death of Beasts to be an insufficient expiation for the sins of men. And indeed it cannot be denied but that the Sacrifice
of a Man, as such, is much more proportionable to the punishment which the sins of men deserve, than the Sacrifice of a Beast; because a Man is a much nobler Creature, as being far advanced above a Beast by the Prerogative of his Reason; and con∣sequently his death, considered as a Man, must be a much more valuable exchange for the punish∣ment that is due to those he dies for. But herein the Heathen were miserably mistaken, that they did not consider that the men whom they sacrifi∣ced, were sinners as well as themselves, and that it is a much greater flaw in an Expiatory Sacrifice to be a Sinner than to be a Brute. For whereas the latter only renders it less effectual and valuable; the former, as was shewn before, renders it ut∣terly void and insignificant; and therefore though the death of a Man, considered as such, is of much more value than the death of a Beast, yet to expiate for the sins of men, there is more inter∣nal vertue and efficacy in the death of an innocent Beast, than of a sinful Man; because the latter can expiate only for his own sin, whereas the for∣mer can have no sin but that of others to expiate. Since therefore men were all spotted and blemished with Sin, there was no life so fit for them to offer to God, in commutation for their forfeited lives, as that of innocent Brutes; so that the best com∣mutation they could make was infinitely short of their demerit. And suppose that the men which the Heathen offered had been all pure and innocent, yet their lives would have been only an equivalent commutation for the forfeited lives of an equal number of sinners; unless therefore one half of Mankind had been innocent, and they had been sa∣crificed
for the other half that was guilty, it had not been an equal Commutation so much as for the temporal punishment which was due to God from the guilty; but then for their eternal punishment a Hecatomb of Angels had been short and insufficient. For what proportion is there between a temporary death and an eternal misery? Since therefore, in great compassion to us, God hath thought meet to accept of a Sacrifice in lieu of that punishment which was due to him from Mankind, and since to secure his own Authority, it was highly requi∣site that what this Sacrifice suffered for us, should be in some measure equivalent to what we had de∣served, and since we had deserved to suffer for ever, it necessarily follows that this Sacrifice must be something infinitely more precious and valuable than the bloud of Bulls and Goats, yea, than the lives of Men or Angels; and what can that be but the bloud of the Eternal Son of God, the infinite dignity of whose Person rendered his sufferings for us equivalent to the infinite demerit of our sins. For it was the dignity of his Person that gave the value to his sufferings, and inhanced his temporary Death to a full equivalence to those endless miseries which we had deserved. For if the life of a King be (as David's People told him) worth ten thou∣sand lives, of what an infinite value must the life of the Lord of glory and of the Prince of life be, who being the Son of God, of the same Nature and Essence with his eternal Father, must from thence necessarily derive upon his Sacrifice an immensity of worth and efficacy. And hence we are said to be purchased with the bloud of God, Acts 20.28. and to have the life of God laid down for us, Iohn
3.16. and to be redeemed not with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the precious bloud of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and accordingly the Author to the Hebrews makes the vertue and efficacy of Christ's bloud to consist in the worth and value of it; For if the bloud of Bulls and Goats, &c. sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the bloud of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.13, 14. By all which it is evident that it was the infinite dignity of Christ's Person which derived that infinite merit on his Sacrifice, whereby it became an equi∣valent to the infinite demerit of our sins. Nay, of such an infinite value and worth was his Sa∣crifice, that it not only countervailed for the punishment due for our sin, but did abundantly preponderate it; upon which account God inga∣ged himself, not only to remit that Punishment, in consideration of it, but also to bestow his Spi∣rit and eternal life on us; both which, as hath been shewn before, are as well the purchace of Christ's bloud, as the remission of our sins. For God might have remitted our punishment without superadding the gift of his Spirit and eternal life to it; and therefore since, in consideration of Christ's bloud, he hath superadded these Gifts to the remission of our punishment, it is evident that his bloud was equivalent to both, i. e. that it was not only a valuable consideration for the par∣don of our sins, but also for the assistance of his Spirit, and our eternal happiness. IV. His Death was on his part voluntary and
unforced. For since as a Sacrifice he was to be in∣nocent, and yet to undergo the punishment of our sin, he could not be the one, and do the other with∣out his own free consent and approbation. For no innocent person can be justly made obnoxious to punishment but by his own Act and Choice; be∣cause punishment bears a necessary respect to sin, and the desert of suffering evil doth originally spring out of doing evil. So that an innocent per∣son, considered as such, cannot deserve to be pu∣nished, nor consequently be justly obliged there∣unto; but yet, notwithstanding his innocency, he may by his own Will and Consent oblige himself to undergo a punishment which otherwise he did not deserve, and when he hath so obliged him∣self, the punishment may be justly exacted of him. For though he hath no sin of his own to be punished for, yet he may by his own act oblige himself to undergo the punishment of another man's. And therefore though merely as an inno∣cent person he cannot deserve to be punished, either upon his own account, or any other man's, because having no sin of his own he cannot be guilty of another man's; yet so far as he hath the free dis∣posal of himself, he may substitute himself in the room of one that is guilty, and thereby render himself obnoxious to his punishment. As for in∣stance, suppose that by some criminal action of his own a man hath forfeited his liberty or life to the Law, it is certain that no innocent man, as such, can be thereupon obliged to suffer death or im∣prisonment; but suppose that this innocent man having the free disposal of himself shall volunta∣rily offer his own life or liberty to the Magistrate
in exchange for the forfeited life or liberty of the Criminal, and the Magistrate shall think meet to accept it, in this case he is justly liable, notwith∣standing his innocence, to undergo the punishment that was due to the Offender. For if he may justly offer this exchange, as there is no doubt but he may, supposing that he hath the free disposal of him∣self, to be sure the Magistrate may justly accept of it, because the life of the Offender is as much in his disposal as the life that is offered him in ex∣change for it, is in the disposal of the Offerer; so that he hath as much right to give the Offerer the Offender's life for his, as the Offerer hath to give his own life for the Offenders; and when both Parties have a right to the goods which they ex∣change with each other, and the goods which they receive are on both sides equivalent to the goods which they give, it is impossible the exchange should be injurious to either; the Magistrate can∣not be injured, because for the life of the Offen∣der which he gives he receives the life of the Of∣ferer which is equivalent; the Offerer cannot be injured, because for his own life which he gives he receives the life of the Offender which is dearer to him; and neither Party being injured, the ex∣change must be just and equal on both sides. Now that Christ had the free disposal of his own life, he himself tells us,Iohn 10.18. No man taketh my life from me, but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again, this commandment have I received of my Father; And that the lives of our Souls were in God's free disposal, as being justly forfeited to him by our sins, the Scripture assures us when it
tells, that all have sinned, and that the wages of sin is death. Christ's life therefore being in his own free disposal, he had an undoubted right to exchange it with God for the lives of our Souls, and the lives of our souls being in God's free dis∣posal, he had as undoubted a right to exchange them with Christ's for his life upon the free Tendry which he made of it. And in this ex∣change neither Party could be injured, because they both received an equivalent for what they gave; Christ gave his own life to God, for which God gave him the lives of our Souls in exchange, which were far dearer to him; God gave the lives of our Souls to Christ, for which Christ gave him his own most precious life in exchange, which, considering the infinite dignity of his Person, was at the least tant-amount. It is true indeed, both Parties having a right to the free disposal of the goods which they exchange with each other, to render the exchange just and valid it was ne∣cessary that both should be freely consenting to it; now that God was freely consenting I shall shew by and by; and that Christ was so too the Scri∣pture expresly testifies; for so we are told, that he gave himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4. and that he gave his life a ransom for many, and gave his flesh for the life of the World, Matt. 21.28. and in a word, that he gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. and that he laid down his life for us, 1 John 3.16. all which plainly imply, that by his own voluntary consent he substituted himself to suffer in our stead that we might escape, and freely exchanged his own life with God for the lives of our Souls which were
forfeited to him. And if, notwithstanding his innocence, it were just in God to expose him, without any respect to our sins, to all those bitter sufferings he endured, (and that it was so the Socinians themselves must acknowledge, or charge God with injustice) how much more was it just when of his own accord he substituted himself to bear our punishment for us, and freely exchanged his life for our Salvation? V. And lastly, His Death was admitted and accepted by God in lieu of the punishment which was due to him from Mankind; and it is this that compleats it an Expiatory Sacrifice, and with∣out this it had been altogether insignificant to the expiation of sin, notwithstanding all the above-named qualifications. For it is the personal pu∣nishment of the Offender which sin gives God a right to, and which the Obligation of his violated Law exacts; since therefore all Mankind had sinned, they all stood bound to God to suffer the desert of their sin in their own persons, and there∣fore the suffering of another in our stead can sig∣nifie nothing towards the releasing us from this Obligation, unless God in pure Grace and Favour to us shall please to admit and accept it; because anothers suffering is not ours, and it is ours that God hath a right to. Indeed the punishment of the guilty person himself, supposing it to be equal to his fault, doth without any interposal of Grace, extinguish the guilt of it, and by its own force and vertue dissolve his Obligation to punishment; because when a man hath suffered as much as he deserves, he hath suffered as much as the Law can oblige him to, and so consequently cannot
be obliged to suffer any more; but should another suffer for me even as much as I deserved to suf∣fer my self, it will be altogethr insignificant to the expiation of my guilt, unless God in meer grace will accept it for my suffering, because it is not anothers suffering but my own that the obli∣gation of his Law demands and exacts of me; and although the others suffering for me may as effectu∣ally secure the Honour and Authority of God's Law as if I had suffered what I deserved in my own person, yet it is evident that in admitting the others suffering instead of mine, God remits and relaxes the Obligation of his Law, which re∣quires that I should suffer in my own person. And therefore notwithstanding that Christ hath suffered for us, and God hath admitted his suffer∣ing for ours, yet this being out of meer grace and favour to us, he is still truly said to pardon and forgive us for Christ's sake, Eph. 4.32. be∣cause for the sake of Christ's suffering he graciously remits to us the Obligation of his Law which re∣quires the punishment of our sin at our own hands; and since his remitting to us the Obligation of his Law for the sake of Christ's suffering was pure grace and favour, he was not at all obliged to remit it unconditionally, but being absolute Ma∣ster of his own graces and favours he might remit it upon what terms and conditions he pleased. So that though if we had suffered in our own per∣sons the utmost of what our sin doth deserve, he had been obliged in justice to discharge us without any farther condition, yet since out of his own free grace he hath admitted another to suffer for us, he may admit it with what limitations he pleases,
and if he shall think meet (as he hath done) to limit it to our repentance and amendment, all that Christ hath suffered for us will be insignificant to our discharge from our obligation to punishment unless we repent and amend. So that the Death of Christ, you see, doth not expiate mens sins as their personal punishments do, by their own na∣tural vertue, but by vertue of God's accepting it upon his own terms and conditions. And with∣out God's accepting it, it would not have been at all an expiation for the sins of the World, and with∣out the conditions upon which he accepteth it, viz. our repentance and amendment, it will not be at all an Expiation for ours. Now God hath so∣lemnly declared his acceptance of Christ's Death as an Expiation for our sins; for it was God that laid upon him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6. that gave his only begotten Son, John 3.16. and sent him to be a propitiation for us, 1 Joh. 4.10. which plainly imply his free acceptance of him; And therefore Christ is said to have given himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour, Eph. 5.2. i. e. for an Expiation that was highly grateful and acceptable to him. So that now the expiation of our sins by the bloud of Christ wholly depends on our performing the con∣dition on which God hath accepted it, and since it is upon condition that we repent and amend, that God hath accepted the bloud of Christ in ex∣change for the eternal punishment we owe him, unless we perform this condition, the Bloud of Christ will not at all avail us, but we shall still re∣main as much obliged to undergo that punishment, as if he had never died for us at all. God's accep∣tance
indeed hath made the Death of Christ available for us under those conditions and limita∣tions upon which he accepted it, but if when he hath accepted it conditionally, we expect that it should avail us absolutely and unconditionally, we miserably deceive and abuse our own souls. Thus far therefore God's acceptance of Christ's Death instead of the punishment we have deserved hath rendred it an effectual expiation and ransom for sin∣ners, that if they repent and amend they shall be released and acquitted from the obligation they lie under to suffer eternal punishment in their own persons, and entitled to everlasting life and hap∣piness. And thus the Death of Christ, you see, had in it all the necessary qualifications of a real and compleat propitiatory Sacrifice; I proceed therefore in the second place to shew what a wise and effectual method this of God's admitting Christ's Sacrifice for sinners is to reduce and reform Mankind, which will evidently appear by conside∣ring these five things: First, That the Sacrifice of Christ's Death was a most sensible and affecting acknowledgment of the infinite guilt and demerit of our sin. For thus under the Law the offering of Propitiatory Sa∣crifices implied a most solemn and sensible con∣fession of the guilt of the Offerer. For his laying his hand upon the head of his Sacrifice, was a Symbolical action by which he solemnly acknow∣ledged to God that he had justly deserved to suf∣fer that death himself which his Sacrifice was suffering for him; and accordingly the Jews have this Maxim, Vbi non est peccatorum confessio, ibi non est impositio manuum, quia manuum impositio
ad confessionem pertinet; where there is no con∣fession of sins there is no imposition of hands, because the imposition of hands appertains to Con∣fession. For so Lev. 5.5. they are particularly directed to confess their sins upon their bringing their Trespass-Offering before the Lord, and, as hath been shewn before, they had a set Form of Confession in all their expiatory Sacrifices, and particularly in that solemn Propitiation, viz. the dismission of the Scape-Goat, the High Priest is directed to lay both his hands upon the Goat's Head, and to confess over him all the iniquities of the Children of Israel, Lev. 16.21. so that as Con∣fession is a kind of audible Sacrifice, so Sacrifice was a kind of visible Confession; and the demerit of their sin being thus represented to their Eyes by the death of their Sacrifice, was far more apt to move and affect them with horror and detestation of it, than any audible Confession how severe or pungent soever. And accordingly our Saviour in offering up himself as an expiation for our sin, did as it were, lay his hand upon his own head, and, as our Representative, solemnly acknowledge to God that we had justly deserved to suffer for our sin a punishment equivalent to that which he was undergoing for us. And what a dreadful one must that be which is equivalent to the Death of the Son of God? What less punishment than our everlasting misery can countervail the temporary death of him who was so eminent and innocent, who was God-man united in one person, and the Lamb of God without spot or blemish? If the Iews by sacrificing a Beast did make such a moving ac∣knowledgment, that they themselves deserved to
die, how much more did Christ by sacrificing himself for us, acknowledge in our stead that we deserved to die eternally? So that whatsoever vertue there is in the most bitter and pathetick con∣fession to create in mens minds a horrour and de∣testation of their sins, all that and much more there is in the Sacrifice of our Saviour, whose Bloud cried louder against our sins, and made a far more Tragical confession of their demerit than it's possible for the most sorrowful Penitent to do with all the Eloquence of his grief and bitter strains of self-abhorrence. And hence our Saviour is said to have condemned sin in the flesh, Rom. 8.3. i. e. to have solemnly acknowledged by his dying for it, what a dreadful punishment it de∣serves. Secondly, It is to be considered also, that the Sacrifice of Christ's Death was a most ample declaration of God's severity against our sins. All wise Governours ought so to exercise their Mercy, as that it may not be prejudicial to their Authority by giving Offenders encouragement to kick against it; but whilst their mercy is easie, and apt to be moved by slight Reasons and Motives, it will infallibly expose their Authority, and render it cheap and vile in the eyes of bold and insolent Of∣fenders; the Reasons therefore which move a Prince to pardon Criminals ought to be such, if pos∣sible, as give all manner of discouragement to them from presuming upon impunity for the future. God therefore being inclined by the infinite benignity of his Nature to shew mercy to sinners, was obliged in wisdom to shew it in such a way, and upon such reasons as might sufficiently discourage them
from presuming upon his Mercy to the prejudice of his Authority; and there is no reason could be so sufficient to this end, as a valuable Sacrifice to suffer in our stead, and bear the punishment of our sin; which reason carries with it such an awful severity, as must needs dishearten any considering sinner from presuming upon impunity if he go on in his sin. For next to exacting the punishment of the Offender himself, the most dreadful severi∣ty he could have expressed was not to remit it up∣on any consideration but this, that some other should undergo it in his stead; and by how much greater and more valuable the person is, who un∣dergoes it for us, so much greater and more for∣midable God's severity appears in remitting it to us. Since therefore in consideration of our Par∣don, God would admit no meaner Sacrifice than the precious Bloud of his own Eternal Son, he hath hereby expressed the utmost indignation against our sin, that he could possibly do, unless he had absolutely resolved never to pardon it at all. So that now we have all the reason that Heaven or Earth can afford us, to tremble at his severity, even while we are within the Arms of his mercy. For what man in his Wits would take encourage∣ment to sin on from a mercy that cost the Bloud of the Son of God? He that can presume upon such a reason of mercy hath courage enough to out-face the flames of Hell, and if Hell it self had stood open before us, and we had seen the damned Ghosts weltering in the flames of it, it would not have given us such a loud and horrible warning of God's severity against our sin as this tremendous Sacrifice of the Son of God doth. If then a mercy that is
so secured from being made an encouragement to sin by the terrible reason and consideration upon which it is founded cannot deter us from sinning on, there is no wise mercy that we are capable of, and consequently no mercy that the great God can in∣dulge with safety to his Authority. For what mercy can be safe from our abuse and presumption, if this be not that is thus guarded with thunder, and attended with the utmost severity that mercy could possibly admit of? Wherefore if after I have seen my Saviour in his Agony deprecating with fruitless cries that fearful Cup which I deser∣ved; if after I have beheld him hanging on the Cross, covered with Wounds and Bloud, and in the bitter Agony of his Soul heard him crying out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And, in a word, if after I have seen that God, to whom he was infinitely dear and precious, turn a deaf ear to his mournful cries, and utterly refuse to abate him so much as one degree or circumstance of a most shameful and tormenting death in consi∣deration of my Pardon; If, I say, after such a horrible spectacle I have heart enough to sin on, I am a couragious sinner indeed, or rather a despe∣rate one, not to be affected or restrained by all the terrors of Hell. Thirdly, This Sacrifice of Christ is also to be considered as a most obliging expression of the love of God and our Saviour to us. For if God had so pleased he might have exacted our punishment at our own hands, and made us smart for ever in our own Persons, and this notwithstanding we had heartily repented. For though to repent is the best thing a sinner can do, yet it doth not alter the na∣ture
of the sin he repenteth of, so as to render it less evil or less deserving of punishment; nor in∣deed is Repentance a sufficient reason to move the all-wise Governour of the World to grant a pub∣lick Act of pardon and indulgence to sinners; it be∣ing inconsistent with the safety of any Govern∣ment, Divine or Humane, so far to encourage Offenders, as to indemnifie them by a publick De∣claration meerly upon condition of their future re∣pentance and amendment. For all men are naturally apt to presume that God will be better to them than his word, and therefore had he declared that he would pardon them upon their repentance with∣out any other reason, this would have encouraged them to hope that he might pardon them, though they repented not at all, or at least though they repented but by halves. Wherefore since our repentance is not a sufficient reason to oblige God to grant a publick Pardon to sinners, and since this was the best reason we could offer in our own be∣half to move him thereunto, it hence necessarily follows, that he might have justly exacted the pu∣nishment of our sin of us, and made us smart for it for ever, notwithstanding the best reason we could have offered him to the contrary. But such was his goodness towards us, as to admit another to suffer in our stead, that so neither we might be ruined, nor our sins be unpunished. And then that the punishment of our sin might be a sufficient re∣paration to his injured Authority, he admitted his own Son upon his voluntary offering himself to un∣dergo it for us, who by the dignity and innocence of his Person rendered that temporary Death he un∣derwent for us equialent to that eternal Death
which we had deserved. Now what a Prodigy of love was this, that the God of Heaven whom we had so infinitely offended, should part with his own Son for us, and freely consent that he should undergo our punishment! Which while I seriously consider, it puzzles my conceit, and out-reaches my wonder; so that though I have infinite reason to rejoyce in it, yet while I am contemplating it, I seem to be looking down from some stupendious Precipice, whose height fills me with a sacred hor∣rour, and almost oversets my Reason. But Oh! the amazing love of the Son of God towards us, that he should put himself in our stead, and inter∣pose his own Breast as a living Shield between ours and his Father's Vengeance! which, consi∣dering the greatness of his Person, and of our un∣worthiness, is such a stupendious expression of Love, as no Romance of Friendship ever thought of! And what is the proper influence of all this love, but to oblige us for ever to God and our Sa∣viour, in the bands of a reciprocal affection; to melt down our stubbornness and enmity against them, and draw us on to our duty with the Cords of an invincible indearment? For is it possible my sins should be as dear to me as the Son of God was to his own Father, and yet the Father left him out of love to me, and shall not I leave them out of love to him? And when the Son of God hath been so kind to me as to lay down his life for me, can I be so ingrateful to him as to doat upon those sins which he hated more than all the shame and torment which he endured on their account; those sins that were the cause of all his sufferings, the Thorns that gored his Temples, and the Nails that pierced
his hands and feet? Sure if we are not utterly lost to all that is modest and ingenuous, tender or appre∣hensive in Humane Nature, it will be impossible for us to resist these endearing instances of the love of God and our Saviour, which carry warmth and fervour enough with them to melt the most obdu∣durate natures. Fourthly, Christ's Death and Sacrifice is also to be considered as a sure and certain ground of our hope of pardon, if we repent and amend. For it was upon the vertue of Expiatory Sacrifices that all Mankind depended for their reconciliation with God; and therefore these Sacrifices were a princi∣pal part not only of the Religion of the Iews, but of the Gentiles too, who besides their Eucharisti∣cal, had their constant Expiatory Oblations to atone and pacifie their Gods. And this more especially in times of publick Danger and Calamity, when they conceived their Gods to be most offended with them; at which Seasons they were wont to offer up their most costly Sacrifices, and devote not only Hecatombs of Beasts to their Altars, but many times the more precious lives of Men, Women, and Children, imagining that the more valuable the life was, the greater vertue there was in it to appease the angry Deity. And upon this sacred Rite did all the World build their hope of reconci∣liation with God, as being conscious that by their sin they had forfeited their own lives to him, and that there was no other way to redeem them, but by making a commutation with him, and offering him another life for their own, which was there∣fore called , i. e. a life for their life, and , i. e. the price of their Redemption.
But alas so miserably defective were the very best of their Sacrifices, that they could not rationally depend on them with any confidence or assurance. For as for the Heathen Sacrifices, God had never promised to accept them, and it being an act of pure grace and favour in him to admit of such a commutation, it wholly depended on his own good∣will, whether he would admit it or no; and without some express revelation it was impossible for them to know which way his Will was determined in the case. And then even their most precious Sacrifi∣ces, which were the lives of Men, were infinitely short in value to redeem the Lives and Souls of those that offered them; those sacrificed men be∣ing sinners themselves, and they but a few sinners for many. And as for the Iewish Sacrifices, though God in many cases had promised to accept them in commutation for the lives of their Bodies, yet those being only the lives of Brutes, which were but negatively innocent, as being incapable of Sin or Vertue, could merit nothing of God, and consequently were infinitely short of a valu∣able commutation for the forfeited lives of their Souls. All which considered, there was no rely∣ing on them for Redemption from the Obligation they lay under to eternal punishment. But now all these defects are abundantly supplied in the Sa∣crifie of our blessed Saviour. For his life was not only infinitely valuable by reason of his personal Union to the Godhead, and so in it self an equi∣valent Ransom; he was not only no Sinner, which the best of the Heathen Sacrifices were; he was not only Negatively innocent, which was all that the Iewish Sacrifices were; but he was also per∣fectly
righteous, and by vertue thereof infinitely dear and acceptable to God; and, to crown all, God himself both by express Revelation, and by raising him from the dead, hath openly declared his acceptance of his precious bloud, as a Ransom for the sins of the World. And upon this most sure and certain ground stands our hope of pardon and reconciliation with God. So that in the pre∣cious bloud of this our meritorious and accepted Sa∣crifice we openly behold the mercy of God invi∣ting us into grace and favour, and with out-stretch∣ed arms ready to receive and embrace us; which gives us the most effectual encouragement in the World to return to our duty. I confess if we had no such Sacrifice to depend on, the sence of our past guilts might justly discourage us from all thoughts of future repentance; for though the natural goodness and benignity of God might hap∣pily give us some small hope, yet on the other hand the consideration of his natural abhorrence of sin, and the mighty Obligations he lies under to punish it, as he is a wise and righteous Governour, would very much dash our hope out of countenance. So that the utmost encouragement we could have had, would be that which the King of Nineveh gave his People, Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not? Jonah 3.9. But now we can certainly tell, that if we will turn from our sins, he will turn from his anger; for our hope depends not on a doubtful peradventure, but upon a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, paid down to, and accepted of God. What then should hinder us from re∣turning to him, who are thus firmly assured of his
gracious reception, and do certainly know be∣fore-hand, that all our past provocations shall be blotted out, and our penitent Souls embraced with the same grace and favour as if we had never of∣fended? Fifthly, and lastly, This Sacrifice of Christ is also to be considered as the Seal and Confirmation of the New Covenant. For thus of old Cove∣nants between God and Men were wont to be seal∣ed and transacted by Sacrifice. So Gen. 15. Abra∣ham, by God's Command, being to strike Cove∣nant with him, offered a Sacrifice, which he di∣vided in the middle, laying each Moyety one against the other, between which God passed in the likeness of a burning Lamp, and so made a Cove∣nant with him, saying, Vnto thy Seed will I give this Land; in which Rite of passing between the parts, God condescended to the manner of Men; for so the Iews, when they struck Covenant with God, were wont to cut the Sacrifice in sunder, and pass between the parts thereof, Ier. 34.18, 19. by which action they made this imprecation on themselves, Thus let me be divided and cut in pieces if I violate the Oath I have now made. And accordingly, the bloud of the Sacrifice is called by Moses, The bloud of the Covenant, Exod. 24.8. and the Iews are said to make a Covenant with God by Sacrifice, Psal. 50.5. For all Expiatory Sacrifices were regularly attended with Peace-offerings, in both which the Priest or the People were God's Guests, and in token of reconciliation did eat and drink with him of the provisions of his Altar or Table. For in the burnt-offerings, the sin-offerings, and the trespass-offerings, the Priests only,
as the Proxies and Representatives of the People, were admitted to be God's Guests; but then in the Peace-offerings which followed them, the People themselves were admitted to his Table to partake with him of those sacred Viands. So that in the first the Priests, as the Peoples Representa∣tives, struck Covenant with God for them, in the second they struck Covenant with God for them∣selves. Thus as it was the Custom of all Nations to solemnize their Covenants with one another, by eating together, so God, in condescension to the manner of men, and to confirm their Faith in his Promises, did by the same Rite engage himself in Covenant with them. And in the same manner the Sacrifice of our blessed Lord was a Seal and Ratification of the New Covenant; upon which account it is called, as the Iewish Sacrifices were, the bloud of the Covenant, Heb. 10.29. Heb. 13.20. For his Sacrifice upon the Cross was the meritorious Sin-offering, in which he, as the High-Priest, the Head and Representative of his Church, did solemnize the New Covenant be∣tween God and us, and obtained of his Father an inviolable Ratification of his Promise of Grace and Eternal life. For in that dreadful transaction God did solemnly engage himself to Christ in the behalf of his Church, to perform to her what he had promised, to the utmost, upon the terms spe∣cified in the New Covenant. And therefore Christ is said to have made reconciliation in his own body on the Cross, and to have slain the enmity there∣on, Eph. 2.16. and to have made peace, that is, a Covenant of peace, through the bloud of the Cross, Col. 1.20. But then to this Sin-offering there
follows a Peace-offering, and that is the Lord's Supper, in which the Church, for her self, by eating and drinking at this Table, strikes Cove∣nant with God, and upon those holy signs of Christ's Body and Bloud, gives to, and receives from God assurance of mutual Amnesty and Friend∣ship; and hence, 1 Cor. 10.16, 20. this holy Sup∣per is called, The Communion of the Body and Bloud of Christ, and drinking the Cup of the Lord, and being partakers of the Table of the Lord. For when God in this Supper doth by the hand of his Priest present his Bread and Wine to us, he doth thereby renew his Covenant with us, and when we receive, and eat and drink God's Viands, we thereby renew our Covenant with him. Thus God in great condescension to our desponding minds hath been pleased to ratifie his Covenant with us in our own way and manner; not that this ratification doth render his Covenant surer in it self, for nothing can be surer than his promise; and yet for the confirmation of our diffident minds, he is sometimes pleased to add his Oath to his Pro∣mise, and, for the same reason, to his Promise and Oath he hath superadded these federal Ratifi∣cations, which being the same with those legal Forms and Rituals by which men were wont to ra∣tifie their Covenants and Agreements with one another, are upon that account more apt to assure and confirm our minds. And now what a mighty influence must this solemn confirmation of the New Covenant have upon us, to excite and quicken our Piety and Vertue, and render us actively zealous of good Works? For when God hath not only owned all the promises of the New Covenant to be
his, by the many miraculous attestations he hath given them, but hath also vouchsafed by all those federal Rites, that were most sacred among men, to oblige himself to perform them, we have abun∣dant reason to believe, not only that it is he that hath promised all the good things of this Cove∣nant, but also that he is fully resolved to perform those promises to us, if we perform the conditions of them; since by the Bloud of his own Son he hath engaged himself to him in our behalf, and by the Sacramental signs of the Body and Bloud of his Son he hath engaged himself to us in our own per∣sons to perform what he hath promised to the ut∣most punctilio. So that now our Faith in the Covenant stands upon a firm and immoveable foun∣dation, as having not only the Promise ad the Oath, but also the Seal of God to depend on; and having all the good things of the Covenant thus solemnly consigned to us, what abundant encouragement doth it give us to return to God and our Duty? For now we are not only assured of his pardon and gracious reception, but also of the as∣sistance of his blessed Spirit to back and enforce our pious endeavours, and to enable us to conquer all those resistances of flesh and bloud with which we are to contend; and to encourage us to contend with all our might, we have an immortal Crown of Glory proposed to us as the reward of our victory, and are firmly assured, that after we have spent a few moments here in the practice of Piety and Vertue, we shall be removed from hence into that triumphant state of Immortality, there to reign in unspeakable glory and delight among the blessed Conquerors above, and sing Hallelujahs with them
for ever. For to all these blessed things we are en∣titled by the ratifications of the New Covenant. Having therefore these great and precious Promises sealed to us by the bloud of Iesus, Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord▪ 2 Cor. 7.1. And thus you see how effectually the Death of Christ, as it is a Sacrifice for sin, contributes to our reformation. But after all, it must be ac∣knowledged that it contributes only as a concur∣rent cause with our own endeavours; it doth not work upon us as if we were dead Machines, that have no vital principle of action in us; nor yet as necessary Agents, that have no free-will or prin∣ciple of self-determination; it draws us indeed, but it is with the cords of a man, i. e. with a pow∣erful grace and perswasion, but doth not drive or hale us with any violent or irresistible Agency. For after all the powerful influence of his Death to re∣form and amend us, we are still in our own disposal, and so may resist and baffle the efficacy of his Death, and in despite of it continue in our wickedness if we please. But if we do, it is at our own eternal pe∣ril, and we must one day expect to answer, not only for the bloud of our own souls, which in de∣spite of the most powerful method of saving them we have wilfully ruined and destroyed, but also for the bloud of our Saviour, which we have not only defeated, but trampled on; and if both these be brought to our account, it had been better for us, not only that we had never been born, but that our Saviour himself had never been born, since all that he hath done to save us will be brought in judgment against us, as an horrid aggravation
of our guilt, to inflame the reckoning of our pu∣nishment. So that unless we concur with this great design of Christ, by endeavouring our own reformation to the utmost of our power, his Death will not only be as insignificant to our happiness as it is to the redemption of Devils, but even those vocal wounds of his, which were made to plead for, will accuse and condemn us, and that eloquent Bloud, which in its Native Language speaks better things for us than the bloud of Abel, will like the Souls under the Altar, raise a cry of vengeance on us as high as the Tribunal of God. Wherefore as we would not find this blessed Sa∣crifice, which was designed for our City of refuge, converted into an avenger of bloud let us dili∣gently concur with it to our utmost ower in this ncessary design of our reformation, that so be∣ing washed white and clean in the bloud of it, we may appear before God holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight. And thus I have given an account of the first Act of Christ's Priesthood, viz. his Sacrifice.
SECT. V. Of Christ's Intercession, or presenting his Sacrifice to God in Heaven, by way of Ad∣vocation for us. I NOW proceed to the second Act of our Sa∣viour's Priesthood, corresponding to that an∣cient Priesthood, in which it was typified and pre∣figured, viz. his presenting his Sacrifice to God in Heaven, thereby to move God, as our Advocate, to be merciful and propitious to us. In discoursing of which I shall endeavour, First, To explain the nature of that Advocation which he performs by presenting his sacrificed body in Heaven. Secondly, To shew the admirable tendency of this Method of God's communicating his graces and favours to us, through the Intercession and Advocation of our Saviour to reduce and reform Mankind. As for the First, viz. the Nature of this our Saviour's Advocation for us in Heaven, it may be thus defined, It is a solemn address of our blessed Saviour to God the Father in our behalf, wherein by presenting to him his own Sacrificed body, and by continuing and perpetuating the presentation of it, he doth effectually move and solicite him graciously to receive and accept our Prayer, and to impower him to bestow on us all those graces and favours, which
in consideration of his Sacrifice God hath promised to us. For the better understanding of which De∣finition I shall distinctly explain the several parts of it, which are these four: First, It is a solemn address of our blessed Savi∣our to God the Father in our behalf. Secondly, This Address is performed by the presenting his Sacrificed body to the Father in Hea∣ven. Thirdly, It is continued and perpetuated by the perpetual Oblation or presenting of this his sacri∣ficed body. Fourthly, In vertue of this perpetual Oblation he doth always successfully move and solicite God; and this, First, To receive and graciously accept our sin∣cere and hearty Prayers; and, Secondly, To impower him to bestow on us all those graces and favours which in consideration of his Sacrifice God hath promised to us. I. This Advocation of Christ in Heaven is a solemn address to the Father in our behalf. And this is implied in the very word Advocation; for the proper business of an Advocate is to address in the behalf of his Client, to the Party with whom he is concerned, or to plead the Cause of his Client with some Person with whom he hath some difference, or from whom he expects some favour. Now S. Iohn tells us, that we have an Advocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the righte∣ous, 1 John 2.1. which must therefore necessarily imply his addressing to the Father in our behalf, in order to the composing that difference which sin hath made between him and us, and to the ob∣taining
for us his mercy and favour. For in this sence the Greek word , which we here render Advocate, is generally used among all Au∣thors, vide Outram de Sacrif. p. 360. And so also the word Intercession signifies to address for one person to another, in order to the reconciling some matter of difference between them, or to the ob∣taining from the one some favour for the other. And therefore since Jesus Christ is said to inter∣cede for us at the right hand of God, Rom. 8.34. this Intercession also must necessarily imply his ma∣king application to God in our behalf. For so the Phrase , which we render to inter∣cede for, signifies to advocate or plead the cause of another; as on the contrary  doth always signifie to accuse, Rom. 11.2. 1 Maccab. 8.32. and 1 Maccab. 10.61. and 1 Mac. 11.25. And consequently when our Saviour is said , it must necessarily denote his ad∣dressing himself to God as our Advocate, to plead our cause, and solicite our interest; and according∣ly, Heb. 9.24. we are told that Christ is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, which phrase cannot without infinite force be otherwise understood, than of his appear∣ing for us as our Advocate to God. By all which it appears that in this his intercession for us, our Saviour addresses to God the Father, from whose bountiful hands he procures and receives all those blessings and favours which he derives to us. So that the Father is the Fountain whence all our bles∣sings flow, and the Son is the Channel that receives them thence, and conveys them down to us. For, as he is Mediator, the Son can bestow nothing
on us in his own right, independently from the Father, whose Minister he is, and by whose Com∣mission and Authority he acts; And since they are all his Father's goods which he bestows upon us, he cannot justly bestow them without his leave and consent, the obtaining of which is the great business of his Intercession, whereby he continu∣ally moves and solicites the Father to grant to him those good things in our behalf, which as the high Almoner of the Father's graces and favours he bestows upon us. So that whatsoever he gives to us he receives of the Father, and whatsoever he receives of the Father he procures by his inter∣cession with, and address to him in our behalf. II. This address is performed by the presenting his sacrificed body to the Father in Heaven. For thus, as was shewed before, the High Priest's address to God, for the People, consisted in present∣ing the bloud of the sacrifice to him, in sprink∣ling it upon and before the Mercy-Seat, which was the Throne of the divine Majesty. For he made no vocal Prayer for them in the Holy of Holies, and consequently he performed not his intercession by words, but by actions; and the principal action he performed there was sprink∣ling the bloud of the Sacrifice, which action was a very significant Intercession, importing this Sense, O God, I beseech thee, accept this bloud which I of∣fer thee for the lives of thy People which are forfei∣ted to thee. And accordingly our blessed Saviour after he had offered up himself a Sacrifice for our sins upon Earth, ascends into Heaven, the true Antitype of the Holy of Holies, and there pre∣sents not his bloud but his sacrificed body to the
Father, that body which not long before bled and died on the Cross, and which, as it seems proba∣ble, carried with it all the wounds it received in its Crucifixion; for by the story of Thomas it is certain it retained them after its Resurrection. And by thus presenting his sacrificed body to the Father, he did what the High Priest did when he sprinkled the bloud of his Sacrifice, i. e. he inter∣ceded for us with God; and indeed he interceded more prevalently by this significant action, than if he had used all the Eloquence of Men and Angels. For his wounds are vocal, and his bloud speaks, yea, and not only speaks better things for us than the bloud of Abel spoke, but also expresses what it speaks far more powerfully and emphatically than it is possible for any verbal Oratory to do. So that by the presenting to his Father his wounded and bleeding body, which carries with it an inex∣haustible fountain of Rhetorique and Persuasion, he makes the most moving and pathetical interces∣sion for us, the sense of which is this, though the full force and Emphasis of it no Language can express, O my Father behold this sacrificed body of mine, which, by thy consent and approbation, hath been substituted to bear the punishment which was due to thee from Mankind; and through the wounds of which I have chearfully poured out the precious bloud of God, as a ransom for the sins of the World; for the sake of this bloud therefore be thou so far propitious to those miserable sinners it was shed for, as, upon condition they shall repent, to accept it in exchange for the lives of their Souls which are forfeited to thee, to release them from the Obligation they are under to die eternally, and
upon their final perseverance in well-doing to crown them with eternal life; and that this bloud which at thy command I have willingly shed for them may not, through their inability to repent and persevere, be utterly ineffectual to them; O send thy Holy Spirit to assist their weak faculties, to excite their endeavours, and co-operate with them. This is the Language of Christ's sacrificed body in Heaven, and these are the better things which his bloud bespeaks for us. For his bloud bespeaks those good things for us in Heaven for which he shed it upon Earth, i. e. the remission of our sins, and our eternal life; of which blessings his bloud be∣ing the price that God had promised to accept, his presenting it to him in Heaven not only speaks for, but humbly demands them, as carrying with it the unanswerable claim of an accepted Price to a stated Purchace. So that this address which Christ makes for us to God in heaven is not performed by him after the manner of a prostrate Suppli∣cant, with bended knees, up-lifted hands, and lowly supplications, but in such a manner as comports with the Kingly Majesty he is advanced to, and so as at the same time to assert his own right of purchace in the blessings he addresses for, and yet to acknowledge God to be the supreme fountain and disposer of them. And this the Scri∣pture tells us he performs by appearing in the pre∣sence of God for us, and presenting his sacrificed body to him as a standing motive to prevail with him to be propitious to us, and to crown us with all those graces and favours in consideration of which he laid down his life for us. And accord∣ingly he is said to offer himself to God for us in
heaven, Heb. 9.25. and to offer his one Sacrifice, i. e. to God in heaven, for sin for ever, Heb. 10.12. By which offering or presenting his Sa∣crifice to God, he doth at once claim for us by the right of his purchace all those good things for which he paid down the price of his bloud, and also by a silent desire pray to God to bestow them upon us, whereby he acknowledges him to be the so∣vereign disposer of them. So that this significant action of Christ's presenting his sacrificed body to God is both a Claim and a Prayer, or rather it is a Prayer backt and enforced with a rightful claim to the blessings he prays for. For so for that par∣ticular blessing of the Spirit, he himself tells us, I will pray the Father and he shall give you ano∣ther Comforter, that he may abide with you for e∣ver, John 14.16. not that he offers up any other Prayer to the Father but what his wounds and bloud continually make, which with incessant importunity do move and solicite God in our behalf; but his meaning is this, by presenting that Sacrifice to my Father in Heaven, which I am going to offer on the Cross, and by which, a∣mong other blessings, I shall purchace of my Fa∣ther his Holy Spirit for you, I will pray him to send his Holy Spirit to you, I will pray him by my wounds and bloud, which are a thousand times more moving and eloquent than any vocal Prayer I can offer in your behalf; for while they pray him to send his Spirit to you, they lay an undeniable claim to what they pray for, as being the dear and inestimable price by which I am purchasing his Spirit for you. From all which it is evident that this address which Christ now makes for us to his
Father in Heaven, consists in the presenting his sa∣crificed body to him, by which he both prays to him, and claims what he prays for. III. It is by the continued and perpetual obla∣tion or presentment of this his sacrificed body to the Father that Christ continues and perpetuates this his address or intercession in our behalf. For the fist presenting or olation of his sacrificed body in Heaven was the beginning and commence∣ment of his intercession, and the whole progress of his intercession is nothing but that same oblation continued and perpetuated. For as the High Priest was interceding for the people all the time that he was presenting the bloud of the Sacrifice be∣fore the Lord, so Christ is interceding for us all the while that he is presenting his sacrificed body in Heaven. For it is by the presence of his sa∣crificed body that he intercedes, and therefore so long as his body is present in Heaven, so long he must be interceding by it in our behalf. So that between the Iewish High Priest's Intercession and Christ's there is this vast difference, that the for∣mer presented himself in the Holy of Holies with his Sacrifice, and consequently interceded by it, but once a year, viz. on the great day of Expia∣tion, whereas the latter continually presents his Sacrifice in Heaven, and so doth continually inter∣cede by it; and whereas the bloud which the High Priest presented was so mean and inconsiderable that the whole vertue of it was still spent in one Act of Intercession, as not being available enough for him to intercede with it twice, insomuch that in every new act of Intercession he was still fain to present new bloud; the bloud of Christ was of
that infinite moment and value as that though he makes a continued and perpetuated Intercession by it, yet the vertue and efficacy, the power and pre∣valency of it with God remains fresh and unim∣paired, so that he needs not sacrifice again that so he may have new bloud to present, but with that which he shed 1600. years ago he still inter∣cedes for us with the same effect and success as when he first presented it to his Father in Heaven. Upon which account there was no need that he should offer himself often, as the High Priest en∣tered into the holy place every year, with bloud of others: for then must he have often suffered, since the foundation of the World; but now once in the end of the world hath he appeared to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.25, 26. So that Christ's one Sacrifice being of perpetual ver∣tue and efficacy, and being, as such, perpetually presented to the Father in heaven, he therewithal makes a continued and uninterrupted Intercession for us, and will continue to do so to the end of the World. Hence we are said to be sanctified through the offering of the body of Iesus once for all, Heb. 10.10. And whereas every Priest stand∣eth daily ministring and offering oftentimes the same Sacrifices which can never take away sin, this man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever sate down on the right hand of God, vers. 11, 12. and this offering his one Sacrifice for sins in hea∣ven being for ever, it is a perpetually continued act of Intercession for us. For so it is said that he ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. i. e. he ever lives in Heaven, so as by his perpe∣tual presence there to make perpetual Intercession
for us. And upon the account of the perpetuity of this his Priestly Act of Intercession he is said to have an unchangeable Priesthood not barely be∣cause he continues for ever, for so he might have done and yet eased to have been a Priest, but be∣cause he continues for ever exercising his Priest∣hood, or presenting his Sacrifice, Heb. 7.24. And hence also he is said to be a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, that is, not only to be a Royal Priest, as Melchisedeck was, which, as I shewed before, was the proper Character of Mel∣chisedeck's Priesthood, but to be a Royal Priest for ever, Heb. 7.17. For Melchisedeck was not only a Royal Priest, but also a Type or Shadow of an eternal Royal Priest; and that, as he was without Father, and without Mother, without de∣scent, or Genealogy, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God, abideth a Priest continually, Heb. 7.3. where the Phrase , without descent, or Ge∣nealogy, explains what is meant by without Fa∣ther, and without Mother, i. e. without any Father or Mother mentioned in the Genealogies of Moses; so the Syriac version, whose Father and Mother are neither of them recorded in the Genealogies; in which he very much differed from the Aaronical Priests, whose Fathers and Mothers names were constantly recorded in the Jewish Genealogies, as appears from Esdr. 11.62. and so also Philo on the Decalogue tells us, , i. e. the descent and Progeny of the Priests is kept with all manner of exactness. So that there being no Genealogy at all of Melchisedeck in Scri∣pture,
he is introduced into the History like a man dropt down from Heaven, for so the Text goes on, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, i. e. in the History of Moses, which, con∣trary to its common usage, when it makes menti∣on of great men, takes no notice at all of the time, either of Melchisedeck's birth or death; and here∣in he is made like unto the Son of God, i. e. by the History of Moses, which mentions him appearing and acting upon the Stage without either entrance or exit, as if like the Son of God he had abode a Priest continually. So that as Moses's History treats of Melchisedeck, without taking any notice of his beginning or end, as if he were a Royal Priest for ever, so Christ in truth and reality is a Royal Priest for ever, because by the perpetual Oblation and presenting his Sacrifice to the Fa∣ther, he perpetually exercises his Priesthood, and makes a continued intercession for Mankind. IV. This address being made by the continued Oblation or presenting of his sacrificed body to the Father, is in the vertue thereof always effectual and successful. For his Sacrifice, as hath been shewn at large, was the price of his purchace of those blessings he intercedes for; the price which God by a solemn agreement with our Saviour had obliged himself to admit and accept. For the only blessings he intercedes for, are those which are specified in the New Covenant, which New Cove∣nant God granted to Mankind in consideration of the meritorious Death and Sacrifice of our Saviour; and accordingly when he went to offer up himself a Sacrifice for us, he tells us that it was , according to what was determined, or
agreed on between his Father and himself, Luke 22.22. And hence our Saviour tells us, that his Father in consideration of what he was to suffer, did , Covenant to him a King∣dom, Luke 22.29. which Kingdom includes a Kingly power to bestow upon his faithful Subjects the Rewards of his Religion, which are the blessings of the New Covenant; and of this Covenant, by which God obliged himself in consideration of Christ's Death, to bestow this Kingly power up∣on him, that of Heb. 10.7. seems to be intended, then said I, Lo I come, in the Volume of the Book it is written of me, to do thy will O God; where , which we render the Volume of the Book, may perhaps be more truly translated the Instrument, Indenture, or Covenant that is be∣tween thee and me. For so the Hebrew , to which the Greek  answers, signifieth any sort of writing, and particularly a Bill, Deut. 24.1. according to which sence,  must here signifie the volume or folding of a Bill, or, which is all one, an Indenture or Covenant. When therefore he sith, Lo I come, in the In∣denture or Covnant which is between thee and me, by which thou has bequeathed or covenanted to me a Kingdom, or power to bestow such and such bles∣sings on my faithful Subjects, in this Covenant, I say, it is exprest or written, that I should come to do thy will, i. e. to offer up that body which thou hast prepared for me, a Sacrifice for the sins of the World, ver. 5. And indeed how could it have been foretold of him, as it is Isa. 53. that he should justifie many by bearing their iniquities, and that he should see the travail of his soul, i. e. for our
Salvation, and be satisfied, had not the Father obliged himself by Contract and Covenant to justifie and save us, in consideration of his Sacrifice? And indeed this whole Prediction carries with it a Pro∣mise from the Father to Christ, that upon the consideration of his Death and Sacrifice he should be effectually impowered to save and justifie us. Since therefore the Sacrifice of Chrit was the great consideration upon which the Father granted to him the blessings of the New Covenant in our behalf, and since it is by presenting that Sacrifice, and in the vertue of it, that he intercedes with the Father for those blessings, we may confidently assure our selves he cannot fail of success, because he intercedes with a righteous God, of whom by presenting to him the consideration of his grant, he hath acquired a right to obtain the blessings he in∣tercedes for. For now he intercedes for us with the price of our Redemption in his hands, so that he doth not act precariously, or as a meer Orator, that begs and supplicates without any claim, and so may be denied and rejected without any injustice, but whatsoever he asks he asks in the right of his Sacrifice, by accepting of which inestimable consi∣deration the Father hath obliged himself to grant what he aks for. So that now he cannot be denied those Favours which he craves in our behalf, without manifest injustice, because by mutual Contract between himself and his Father he hath purchased to himself a right to obtain them, and hath bought and paid for them with his own bloud. And how can we imagine that the most just and holy God can ever be so outragiously unjust to his own Son, as to be deaf to his Intercessions, while
he intercedes in the right of that precious bloud, which his Son freely paid, and he as freely accep∣ted, in consideration of those blessings he inter∣cedes for? It being therefore evident, by what hath been said, that the Intercession of Christ is a most effectual and successful address to the Father, to all the intents and purposes for which it is made, it now remains only that we give an account to what intents and purposes it is that he makes this address to the Father: First, Therefore it is to move and solicite him graciously to receive and accept our sincere and hearty Prayers; and, Secondly, To obtain of him Power and Autho∣rity to bestow on us all those Graces and Favours which in consideration of his Sacrifice God hath promised us. I. One intent or purpose of Christ's making this address to the Father, is to move and solicite him graciously to receive and accept our sincere and hearty Prayers. For thus the Incense which the Priests offered twice a day upon the Golden Altar, and which the High-Priest offered once a year in the Holy of Holies, was a Symbol or Em∣blem of the Prayers of the People, which they mystically offered up to God with it; and hence the Psalmist, Let my prayers be set forth before thee as Incense, Psalm 141.2. and S. Iohn calls the Odours that filled the Golden Vials, the pray∣ers of the Saints, Rev. 5.8. and that the Prayers of the Saints were offered with the Incense upon the Golden Altar, is evident from Rev. 8.3. And accordingly while the High-Priest was offering the Incense in the Holy of Holies, the People
in their Court offered up their silent and mental Prayers to God; for so Ecclus. 50.15, 18, 19, 21. we read that whiles Simon the High-Priest was offering the Incense to God, all the People fell on their faces to the ground, and besought the Lord most High in prayer, till the Ministry of the Lord was done, i. e. till the High-Priest had offered the Incense; and S. Luke makes mention of the Peoples praying without in the time of Incense, Luke 1.10. By all which it is evident, that this fuming of the Incense by the Priests and High-Priest, was nothing but a mystical Obla∣tion of those Prayers to God, which the People were pouring out while the Mystery was perform∣ing. Since therefore the High-Priest was a Type of Christ, and his entrance into the Holy of Ho∣lies a Type of Christ's entrance into Heaven, his offering Incense there, which was a mystical Ob∣lation of the Prayers of the People, must neces∣sarily be a Type of Christ's offering and recom∣mending our Prayers to his Father, which he pro∣mised his Disciples he would perform when he came to Heaven, John 16.26, 27. In that day ye shall ask in my name, and I say not unto you that I will pray the Father for you, which in our Saviour's way of expression (which is, when he mentions two things, to pass by, and seemingly deny the one, that so he may the more illustrate and amplifie the other, Vide John 12.4. Joh. 5.45, 46, 47.) plainly implies that he would, for the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me. And therefore it is through him that we are said to have access unto the Father, Eph. 2.18. and by him to have access to the divine grace, Rom. 5.2. and in him to have
boldness and access with confidence, Eph. 3.12. and Rev. 8.3. he is represented as that Angel of the Covenant, who at the Golden Altar before God, doth offer up the prayers of the Saints, incensed by the merit of his Sacrifice. For it is the Sacrifice of Jesus that hallows and consecrates all our pray∣ers and good works, the best of which have so many sinful defects and imperfections cleaving to them, as would render them abominable to the pure and holy God, were they not purged and expiated by this great Propitiation. And though Prayer be a duty we stand eternally obliged to by our continual dependence upon God, yet in this degeneracy of our Nature there are so ma∣ny sins do still accompany our Prayers, as that were they not expiated by some very acceptable and meritorious satisfaction, the cry of them would drown the cry of our Prayers, and for ever hinder their access to the divine ear and aceptance. So that it is only in the vertue of that Sacrifice with which our Saviour intercedes for us in Hea∣ven, that our Prayers have admittance thither; it is his bloud alone that purifies our polluted Sup∣plications, and out-cries the guilt of those sins that go along with them. For by presenting that Sacrifice to his Father, with which he made satis∣faction for our sins on the Cross, he continually moves and solicites that those sinful defects which cleave to our Prayers may be pardoned and remit∣ted; upon which motion of his our Prayers are continually purged from the guilt of those defects, and thereupon introduced into the divine accep∣tance as pure and innocent, spotless and unblemished devotions. And as by presenting his Sacrifice
he purges the guilt of our Prayers, so he enfor∣ces and seconds them. For, as hath been shewn before, the very presenting his Sacrifice is a Sym∣bolical Prayer for those very blessings which we pray for; and not only so, but a Prayer that is enforced with a just claim, and doth plead the right of Purchace to all the blessings it sues for, and so cannot justly be denied or rejected. And when he thus prays with us, and continually joyns the cry of his Bloud to the cry of our Prayers, we may safely depend upon it, that we shall pre∣vail, and find free access to the Throne of God's grace and acceptance. And hence we are said to have boldness to enter into the Holy of Holies, that is, to draw near by Prayer to God, by the Bloud of Iesus, by a new and living way which he hath consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, Heb. 10.19, 20. And our Saviour him∣self assures us, that whatsoever we shall ask in his name, he will do it; and again he repeats it, If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it, John 14.13, 14. that is, he will procure it for us, by joyning his Intercessions with our Prayers, for so ver. 16. he explains himself, I will pray the Father. II. The other intent and purpose of his making this Address or Intercession for us to the Father, is, to obtain of him Power and Authority to bestow on us all those graces and favours which in consi∣deration of his Sacrifice God hath promised us. It is not to move the Father to bestow on us the blessings of the New Covenant immediately with his own hand that our Saviour intercedes, but to impower himself, as Mediator between the Father and us, to bestow them upon us, according
to the terms and conditions upon which they are proposed to us. For though it is most certainly true, that every good and perfect gift comes down from above, even from the Father of Lights, yet it is as certain that they come not down to us from the Father immediately, but are all deri∣ved to us through the hands of the Son, who by his continual Intercession obtains continual power and authority of the Father to derive and confer on us all those heavenly gifts. So that as the High Priest, when he had presented the bloud of the Sacrifice in the Holy of Holies, was Authori∣zed by God to bless the people, vide 1 Chron. 23.13. even so our blessed Saviour▪ by presenting his meritorious Sacrifice in Heaven, and in the vertue thereof interceding for us with the Father, is con∣tinually authorized by him effectually to bless us, i. e. to confer on us the blessings of the New Cove∣nant upon the terms and conditions that they are therein proposed. For this power he obtains of God by his perpetual Intercession; and hence he is said to be able to save all those to the utmost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. where his power, or ability to save us to the utmost, i. e. to confer on us all the blessings of the New Covenant, is expres∣ly attributed to his ever living to make intercession for us, which is a plain Argument, that the in∣tent of his Intercession is to move God to authorize him to save us, seeing that in answer to his Inter∣cession he is continually impowered and authorized thereunto. For it is to be considered, that this power and authority, and the exercise of it, ap∣pertains to his Kingly Office, which he first arri∣ved
to, and still continues in, by vertue of his In∣tercession; and indeed herein consists the Royalty of his Priesthood, in that by interceding for us as Priest in the vertue of his Sacrifice, and continuing to do so, he first obtained, and still continues vest∣ed with Kingly Power and Authority to bestow on us those heavenly blessings he intercedes for; and it is to this purpose that he intercedes, not that the Father would bestow them on us immediately, but that he would put and continue it in his power to bestow them, as Mediator between the Fa∣ther and us; so that he acquired and holds his Royalty by his Priesthood, and that Kingly Power by which he gives us the blessings of the New Co∣venant, God gave and continues to him by way of answer and return to his Priestly Intercession. And hence he is said upon his offering one sacri∣fice for sin for ever, i. e. upon the perpetual Ob∣lation of his Sacrifice in Heaven, to have sate down on the right hand of God, i. e. in the Throne of his Kingly Power and Authority, Heb. 10.12▪ and accordingly Eph. 4.8. we are told, that upon his ascending up on high, i. e. to present his sacri∣ficed body in heaven, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, which necessarily implies, that he had received power and authority from his Fa∣ther to give them; and so Psal. 68.18. whence these words are quoted, expresses it, He received gifts for men, i. e. upon the presenting his Sacrifice, as Priest, he received of the Father those Gifts for men which by his Kingly power he afterwards di∣stributed among them. So that what he gives by his Kingly power, he receives by his Priest∣ly, and both the gifts which he gives, and the
authority by which he gives them, are the fruits and returns of that perpetual Intercession which he makes by his Sacrifice. And that by his Inter∣cession our Saviour hath acquired this Royal power of giving us the blessings of the New Covenant he himself doth plainly enough intimate; for thus of the Spirit, which is one of those great bles∣sings, he tells his Disciples, It is expedient for you that I go away, i. e. to Heaven to intercede for you, for if I go not away the Comforter will not come, i. e. he will not come but upon my Inter∣cession; but if I depart I will send him unto you, namely, by that Royal Authority which upon my Intercession I shall receive from the Father, Ioh. 16.7. And accordingly St. Peter tells the Jews that Christ being exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, i. e. upon his Intercession in Hea∣ven, he hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear, i. e. the miraculous vertues of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.33. And so for remission of sins, he tells us, that he hath the Keys of hell and death, Rev. 1.18. i. e. power to bind or loose, to par∣don or condemn; and lastly for eternal life, he expresly tells the Church of Laodicea, To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I have overcome, and am sate down with my Father on his, Rev. 3.21. By all which it is abundantly evident that Christ hath a Royal pow∣er delegated to him from the Father upon his in∣tercession, to grant and bestow all the blessings of the New Covenant upon those that comply with its terms and conditions. For so all the graces and favours of God are in Scripture said to be
derived in, by, or through Jesus Christ; for so Eph. 1.3. God the Father is said to bless us with all spiritual blessings in or through Christ; and Rom. 6.23. Eternal life is said to be the gift of God through Iesus Christ our Lord; and we are said to be heirs of God, or inheritors of his bles∣sings, through Christ, Gal. 4.7. which plainly implies, that though it is from God the Father originally that all our mercies are derived, yet it is through God the Son immediately that they are all derived to us, and that whatsoever God be∣stows upon us he bestows by the hand of Jesus Christ, whom upon his first Oblation of his pre∣cious Sacrifice in heaven, and continual interces∣sion with it, he constituted and continues the Royal distributer of all his graces and favours to the World. And therefore since there is no doubt but that that which he obtains by his intercession is the thing which he intercedes for, it necessarily follows, that the thing which he intercedes for is power to bestow on us the blessings of the New Co∣venant, because he hath actually obtained that po∣wer by his Intercession. Having thus given as plain and as brief an ac∣count as I could of this second Priestly Act of our Saviour, viz. his Intercession for us in Heaven by the continual Oblation of his Sacrifice there, I pro∣ceed in the second place to shew the admirable ten∣dency of this method, of God's communicating his Graces and Favours to us through the interces∣sion of our Saviour, to reduce and reform Man∣kind; which will plainly appear by considering the following particulars:
First, This method naturally tends to excite in us a mighty aw and reverence of God's Majesty. Secondly, It also tends to give us the strongest conviction of God's hatred and abhorrence of our sins. Thirdly, It also tends most effectually to secure us from presuming upon God's mercy while we con∣tinue in our sins. Fourthly, It tends to encourage us to draw near to God with Chearfulness and freedom. Fifthly, It tends to give us the most ample as∣surance of his gracious intentions towards us if we repent and return to our duty. I. This method of God's communicating his Favours to us through our Saviour's intercession is naturally apt to excite in us a mighty aw and reverence of the divine Majesty. For in this de∣generate condition wherein our Nature is inverted and turned upside down, and our sensitive facul∣ties have got the ascendant of our Reason, rational Objects have incomparably less force on, and prevalence with us, than material and sensitive. And hence it is that we are so unapt to be affected with the Majesty of God, though in it self infinite and incomprehensible, because it be∣ing purely spiritual, is objected only to our Faith and Reason, and doth not strike upon our sense with the Rays of a visible glory. And hence it was that under the Old Testament God so frequent∣ly exhibited himself to mens eyes, in sensible ap∣pearances, as particularly sometimes in a humane shape, and sometimes in a body of light or of shi∣ning flame, that so by making an impression of his great Majesty on their sense he might affect them
with a sutable aw and dread of it. And for the same reason that he conversed with them in these sensible appearances, he also treated with them by a Mediator on Mount Sinai; for God command∣ed that bounds should be set round about the Mountain which the People were forbid upon peril of death to break through unto the Lord to gaze, and only Moses, their Mediator, together with his Brother Aaron, were permitted to ascend the Mount, and to have immediate access to him; and by thus keeping them at a distence from his sacred presence, and only suffering them to ap∣proach him by their Mediator, he took an effectual course to inspire their minds with a reverential aw of his divine Majesty, which is in it self so in∣finitely sacred and August that it seems it would have been an high Prophanation in them to have conversed with it immediately. And accordingly God by keeping us at a distance from him, and al∣lowing us to have access to him only by our Me∣diator, expresses the greatness of his Majesty, which is too sacred to be mingled in conversation with us, too sublime to admit of the immediate addres∣ses of poor Mortals, yea, and which no Mortal must approach without the Mediation of his own Eternal Son; for thus Plato in his Sympos. gives it as an instance of the Majesty of God, . i. e. God doth not mingle himself with men, but all the converse and intercourse between him and us is transacted by the Mediation of Demons. And if it were thought so great an instance of God's Majesty, that he would not be approached
by us without the Mediation of Angels, to what an infinite height must he be exalted above us, when no less a person than he who is God-man can so much as give us access to him, or present our Prayers and Supplications at his feet. O! what an awful sense therefore of the Majesty of God should this consideration beget in our minds! For how can we think of him without dread and re∣verence when we consider how he is secluded by the infinite sacredness of his own Majesty from all immediate converse and intercourse with us, and how he is exalted so infinitely above us, as that we cannot have access to him so much as by our Prayers and Supplications without the interpositi∣on of a Mediator who is greater than the greatest of all the Kings on Earth, or Angels in Heaven? Surely he who can thus think of God without be∣ing struck into a profound aw and reverence of his Majesty, must have a mind so hardened against all the impressions of Reason, as that no wise thought can ever move or affect it. II. This method of God's communicating his favours to us through our Saviour's Intercession tends also to give us the strongest conviction of God's hatred and abhorrence of our sins. For doubtless to convince us how deeply he resents our sinful behaviour towards him, the most effectual course he could take, next to that of banishing us from his presence for ever, was to exclude us from all immediate intercourse with him, and not to admit of any more addresses or supplications from us but by the hand of some Mediator. Hereby he plainly demonstrates how infinitely pure and abhorrent to sin his nature is, that he
will not suffer a sinful Creature to come near him but by Proxy, nor accept of a service from a guil∣ty hand, nor listen to a Prayer from a sinful mouth, till it is first hallowed and presented to him by a pure and holy Mediator. If therefore we are not infinitely conceited of our selves, this proce∣dure of his cannot but lay us low in our own eyes, and make us deeply sensible of our own vileness and baseness. For how infinitely detestable must our sins be in his eyes, when notwithstanding all his kindness and benevolence towards us, he keeps us at such a distance from him, and will not be prevailed with, without some powerful interces∣sion, so much as to hear our Prayers, or to have any kind of communication or intercourse with us? And accordingly you find that when the three Friends of Iob had treated him so despitefully and uncharitably, God to manifest his displeasure a∣gainst them, commands them to make use of Iob's Mediation, Iob 42.7. My wrath, saith he to Elephas, is kindled against thee, and against thy two Friends, for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Iob hath: therefore take unto you seven Bullocks and seven Rams, and go to my servant Iob, and offer up for your selves a burnt Offering, and my servant Iob shall pray for you, for him will I accept, lest I deal with you af∣ter your folly; as if he should have said, that you may see how ill I resent your severe and cruel u∣sage of that good man, know, that if you offer to address to me immediately for your selves, I will certainly throw your Prayers back upon your faces; as therefore you hope to be restored to my favour, go to that injured Friend of yours, and
beseech him to mediate for you, and I will hear him though I will not hear you. And after the same manner doth God manifest his high displea∣sure against our sins, that he will not suffer us to approach him immediately, to present our Petiti∣ons to him with our own hands, but will have them all presented to him by a hand that is more accep∣table to him than our own, and not only so, but by the greatest and most acceptable hand in the World, even that of his own Eternal Son, the Son of his Essence and delight, in whom he is for ever well pleased. For it is through him alone that we have access to the Father, whom our sins have so horribly incensed against us, that no Ad∣vocate in Heaven or Earth, less great and less dear to him than his own Son, can prevail with him to be reconciled to us upon our most unfeigned re∣pentance, or so much as to accept of our humble Supplications. O good God! what a woful di∣stance have my sins made between thee and me, that notwithstanding the infinite goodness and be∣nignity of thy nature I cannot be admitted to thee, nor expect any favour at thy hands upon any less powerful interest or application than that of thine only begotten Son; but O stupid creature that I am, to make light of those sins that have so high∣ly incensed thee against me, that none in Heaven or Earth but only that dearly beloved Son can prevail with thee to cast a propitious eye on me, or so much as to give me access to the footstool of the Throne of thy grace! III. This way of God's communicating his fa∣vours to us through the intercession of Christ is also most apt to secure us from presuming upon
God's mercy while we continue in our sins. There is no one thing doth more universally obstruct the reformation of men, than their confident pre∣sumption, that God will be merciful to them not∣withstanding they persist in their rebellions against him. For all men have a natural notion of the in∣finite goodness and benevolence of the Divine Na∣ture, together with which all bad men have a na∣tural desire to sin without disturbance; when therefore their Conscience begins to clamour against their wickedness, and to vex and persecute them for it, the mercy of God is the usual Sanctuary they fly to. Peace, froward Conscience, cry they, God is a most gracious and merciful Being, hard to be provoked, and easie to be pacified; fear not there∣fore, his mercy is infinitely greater than my faults, and I am sure so good a God as he is can never find in his heart to destroy his Creature and Off-spring for such Peccadillo's as these. With such pre∣sumptions as these they commonly lull their Con∣sciences asleep, and so sin on securely in despite of all the threats and warnings of Heaven that Thun∣der about their ears. Now to prevent such pre∣sumptions as these, and dash them quite out of countenance, there is no consideration in the world can be more effectual than this of God's communi∣cating his mercies to us through the intercession of our Saviour. For if, notwithstanding the good∣ness of his nature, he will not be propitious to us, no not upon our repentace, without being moved thereunto by the powerful intercession of his own Son, how can we ever expect that he should be propitious to us whether we repent or no? Is it likely he should be more indulgent to us for our
own sake, than he is for his Son's sake and our own together; or that, when all that his Son can ob∣tain for us is to receive us into favour in case we will lay down our Arms, that we by our own in∣terest should prevail with him to receive us while we persist in our obstinacy and rebellion; in short, if our repentance, which is the best thing we can render him, be not sufficient to move him to par∣don us, without being seconded and enforced with the powerful Oratory of our Saviour's Intercession, what should move him when we have neither re∣pentance nor a Saviour to intercede for us? For our Saviour will not intercede for us unless we re∣pent, and our repentance will not prevail for us, unless he intercede; what hope have we therefore while we continue impenitent, when our repen∣tance it self, which is the best thing we can do to move God to be propitious to us, is insufficient without Christ's intercession, and when without our repentance Christ will not intercede for us; and if the tears of a penitent suppliant will not prevail with him without an Intercessor, what hope is there that the affronts of an impenitent rebel should? But suppose we might reasonably pre∣sume upon the benignity of God's nature, that he will be propitious to us, notwithstanding our impe∣nitence, yet it is to be considered, that now he hath placed the dispensation of his mercy in the hand of a Mediator, who is not left to dispose of it arbi∣trarily, as he shall think fit, but is confined and li∣mited to dispose of it only to penitent offenders. For Christ's Trust can extend no farther than to dispence God's mercy to us upon the terms of that Covenant of which he is Mediator, which Cove∣nant
proposes mercy to us only upon condition of our repentance. So that now we can expect no mercy from God, but what passes through the hands of Jesus our Mediator, who cannot, with∣out violating his trust, dispence the mercy of God to us except we repent and amend. For now God cannot dispence his mercy to us immediately, without displacing his Son from his Mediatorship, and his Son cannot dispence his mercy to us uncon∣ditionally, without transgressing the bounds and li∣mits that are prescribed to him; and therefore since God hath restrained himself to dispence his mercy only through his Son, and restrained his Son to dispence it only to penitents, for us to pre∣sume upon the mercy of God while we continue impenitent, is the greatest nonsense in the world; it is to suppose either that God will cancel the Oe∣conomy of his mercy for our sakes, and resume the dispensation of it immediately into his own hands, meerly to favour and encourage us in our Rebelli∣on against him, or that Christ will betray the trust which his Father hath reposed in him, and dispence his mercy to us contrary to his Orders; that is, either that God the Father will depose his Son for our sakes, or that God the Son will be unfaithful to the Father for our sakes, both which suppositions are equally absurd and blasphemous. Whilst therefore God proceeds with us in this established method of granting his mercy to us only through his Son, and confining his Son to dispence it to us only upon the conditions of the New Cove∣nant; to flatter our selves with hopes of mercy while we continue impenitent, is to presume both against reason and possibility.
IV. This way of God's communicating his Fa∣vours to us through the mediation of Christ is also most apt in it self to encourage us to approach him with Chearfulness and freedom. For it is a natural effect of guilt to suggest to mens minds dreadful and anxious thoughts of God, and whilst we are under such thoughts of him, how is it possible for us to approach him immediately, and without any Friend or Advocate to introduce and speak for us, with any chearfulness or freedom? For with what confidence can I address to an incensed and offended God, purely upon my own fund or interest, when I am conscious of a thousand times more evil in me to provoke him against me, than of good to recom∣mend me to his favour? Unless therefore I am se∣cured of some powerful friend in Heaven, that is infinitely more acceptable to God than I can mo∣destly hope to be, and that will agitate for me, and solicite my cause with all his power and interest, my sense of the innumerable provocations I have given him to turn his back upon me, must either render me quite desperate of success at the Throne of his grace, or cause me to approach it with un∣speakable horrour and confusion. So that my in∣tercourse with God must either be wholly inter∣rupted, or rendred very difficult and uneasie to me; because my slavish dread of him must either chase me from his Altars, or drag we to them with vio∣lence and reluctancy. And hence it is, that under the sense of our guilt we naturally fly to the Inter∣cessions of others whom we believe to have more interest with God than our selves; because we cannot modestly promise our selves a free admit∣tance and access to him upon our own account.
Which probably was the Reason of the first insti∣tution of Demon-worship among the Heathens, whose minds being stung with the sense of their own guilts, they were not able to approach God without fearful despondence and anxiety; whereup∣on they began to cast about (as it is natural for guilty minds to do) how they might procure some other Beings, that were in great favour with God, to interpose with him in their behalf; and having learned by an universal Tradition, that there was a sort of middle Beings, called Angels or Demons, between the Sovereign God and Men, they began to address to these, and to bribe them with Sacrifi∣ces and sacred honours to intercede with God in their behalf. And hence Apuleius de Daemon. Soc. calls these Demons, Mediae potestates per quas & desideria nostra & merita ad Deos commeant; inter terricolas coelicolasque vectores hinc precum inde do∣norum; qui ultro citroque portant hinc petitiones inde suppetias, seu quidam utrumque interpretes & saluti∣geri; i. e. They are middle powers by whom our desires and merits are presented to the Gods; they go between Heaven and Earth, and carry from hence the Prayers of men, and from thence the Gifts of God; from Earth they go with Pe∣titions, and from Heaven they return with Sup∣plies, or they are the Interpreters of both Worlds, that do continually carry and report the mutual salutations of both to each other. By which it is evident that they thought it very ne∣cessary, in order to God's accepting their addresses, that they should be presented and recommended to him by some better Beings than themselves; their guilty minds, it seems, suggesting to them that
it would be high presumption for such great offen∣ders as themselves, to approach the divine Maje∣sty, without being introduced and Patronized by some more pure and holy Beings. And I am very apt to think that the great cause of that Spirit of bondage which possessed the ancient Iews, and rendred them so diffident and tremulous in all their approaches to God, was their want of an explicite knowledge of the Mediator. For what dismal and melancholy expostulations do we frequently meet with in their addresses to God; such as, Wilt thou be angry for ever? Hast thou forgotten to be gracious? Wilt thou remember thy loving kind∣ness no more? Which plainly shews, that their guilt suggested to them such frightful apprehensi∣ons of God, as did very much cramp their hope and confidence in him. And hence the Apostle op∣poses this Spirit of bondage in them to that Chri∣stian Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry Abba Fa∣ther, i. e. by which we approach God with great freedom and assurance, and go to him as Children to a kind and merciful Father, Rom. 8.15. Now if you would know from whence this Christian freedom and assurance proceeds, the Author to the Hebrews will inform you, Heb. 10.21, 22. Having therefore an High-Priest over the houshold of God, i. e. to mediate and intercede for us, let us draw near with a true heart and full assurance of faith; and Heb. 4.14, 15, 16 the Apostle urges our having a compassionate High-Priest in Heaven to intercede for us, as an argument to encourage us to come boldly to the Throne of grace. And indeed what greater encouragement can we have to draw nigh unto God with an humble confidence, than this
consideration, that the highest Favourite he hath in Heaven or Earth is our Advocate; and that he is not only infinitely concerned for us, as being akin to us by nature, and having a compassionate sense of our infirmities; that he doth not only im∣ploy in our behalf all the favour and interest he hath with God as he is the Son of his Essence, and the Object of his delight, but that he ever intercedes for us in the right and vertue of that Meritorious Sacrifice with which he bought and purchased all those heavenly blessings he intercedes for. So that now all we have to do is to return to God by an unfeigned repentance, which if we do, he stands engaged to undertake our cause; and what may we not expect from the Patronage of so great and powerful a Mediator? For how great soever our past sins are, his interest in Heaven is far greater; how loud and clamorous soever our past Provoca∣tions are, his Bloud and Wounds are far louder; and how importunately soever our past guilts may imprecate the divine Vengeance upon us, his In∣tercessions do far more importunately and preva∣lently deprecate it. So that now we cannot rea∣sonably doubt of a free admission to God in any case whatsoever wherein our Saviour will make use of his interest for us with God, and therefore since in all cases he doth continually imploy his in∣terest for us, but only in that of our impenitence, eve∣ry Penitent sinner in the World hath a door of access set open to him by the Intercession of Iesus, through which he may freely enter, and with an humble con∣fidence apply himself to God for mercy, and for grace to help him in the time of need. Thus by the Mediation of our Saviour, God hath taken off that
Imbargo which mens guilts had laid upon their commerce with Heaven, and made way for a free and generous intercourse between himself and his Creatures. V. And lastly, This way of communicating his Favours to us through the Mediation of Christ, is most apt to assure our diffident minds of God's gra∣cious intentions to perform to us all the good things which he hath promised us upon our performing the conditions of them. It is true, if God had on∣ly promised them, we should have had abundant reason to believe him on his own bare word, with∣out any farther security; but alas, to be diffident and distrustful is the inseparable property of guilty minds, and so great is our guilt and ill desert, and so inestimable are the blessings and favours which God promises us, that when we reflect upon both, and compare them together, it so confounds our Reason, and astonishes our Faith, that notwith∣standing all the security God hath given us, we can hardly believe without trembling and diffidence. So that had not God given us some other security besides that of his own bare word and promise, it would have extreamly puzled our Faith to believe that God sincerely intended such mighty goods for such unworthy Subjects. For when ever we reflect∣ed on our own guilt and ill-desert, we must have looked upon God as our adverse Party, as one that was concerned only for his own right and honour, to retrieve from us that natural homage we owed him, and had hitherto unjustly detained from him; and we should have been but too apt to sus∣pect, that when once he had obtained this end of us, he would be much less concerned to make
good our right to his promise, than he was to re∣cover his own to our duty. Now although this had been a most unreasonable suspicion after the God of Truth had passed his word to the contrary, yet there is nothing so unreasonable which guilty minds are not apt to suspect; and therefore out of great con∣descension to this pitiable infirmity of his sinful Creatures, God thought meet, upon his entrance into a New Covenant with us, not only to oblige himself thereby to bestow on us the most inesti∣mable favours if we performed our part, but also to put the making good of his Obligation into a third hand, namely, into the hand of a Media∣tor, who by the nature of his Office is as much obliged to secure our right as God's, as being equally concerned for both parties; as well that God should make good to us what he hath pro∣mised, as that we should make good to him what he requires. So that now we have no longer to do with God immediately as our adverse party, but all our intercourse with him is by a Media∣tor, who by his Office is obliged to be on our side as well as God's, and to see that what he hath promised be performed to us, as well as that what he requires be performed by us. And hence our Sa∣viour is called the Mediator of the New Covenant, and the Mediator of a better Covenant; which ex∣pressions plainly bespeak him to be an Authorized security on both sides, for the mutual performance to each other of what they stand respectively obli∣ged to by this Covenant; and hence also he is cal∣led the Sponsor or surety of a better Covenant, be∣cause he stands engaged for the performance of both Parties, so far as it was possible for him
to oblige them thereunto; for us, to oblige us by the strongest motives to repent and persevere in well-doing; and for God, to oblige him by the most powerful pleas to pardon and crown us with eternal life; the later of which he performs by his Intercession, wherein by continually pleading that precious bloud which God hath long since ac∣cepted in consideration of our pardon and eternal life, he continually obtains Power and Authority from God to bestow on us the blessings he inter∣cedes for. So that now we have not only God's Word, but also the Suretiship of our Saviour to depend on; who not only stands engaged to us for God, that he shall perform all his promises to us, but hath also right and power upon the just claim of his Sacrifice to oblige him to perform them. So that, as God, in condescension to the pitiable diffidence of guilty minds, hath been graciously pleased to seal his Promises with his Oath; so, that he might leave us no umbrage of distrust, he hath superadded to both the collateral security of a Mediator for the performance of them; of a Mediator that hath purchased of him all the blessings he hath promised us, and paid for them with his own bloud, and so is not only obliged to sue for them at the Throne of his grace, but also Authorized to claim them at the Tribunal of his Iustice; and, in a word, of a Mediator in whose hands he hath actually deposited all the blessings he hath promised us, and made his Executor in trust for the performance of his bequests to the heirs of promise. So that now to distrust the per∣formance of his Promise to us, is not only to su∣spect God's Word and his Oath, which are alto∣gether
as sacred and inviolable as his God-head, but also to question the security, and arraign the fidelity of a Mediator that died for us; that pur∣chased for us with his own bloud all the blessings which God hath promised us, by vertue whereof he not only rightfully claims them of God, but hath also actually received them in our behalf. So that now we cannot be defeated of them unless he will with-hold them from us, and he cannot with∣hold them from us without violating his trust, since it is for us, and in our behalf that God hath deposited them in his hands; and can we imagine that he who was so true and kind a friend to us, as to lay down his life to purchase them for us, will be now so unkind and unfaithful together, as to detain them from us, when God hath intrusted him with them in our behalf, and fully impowered and authorized him to bestow them upon us? Ha∣ving therefore the security not only of God's Pro∣mise and Oath, but also of our Saviour's kindness and fidelity, for the performance of God's part of the New Covenant if we perform ours, what an infinite encouragement must it give us to for∣sake our sins, and return to our duty? For now, if we repent, we have no more reason to question God's pardoning and forgiving us; if we perse∣vere to the end in well-doing, we have no more cause to doubt of his crowning us with eternal happiness, than we have to distrust our present being and existence. If therefore the most ample assurance that God himself can give us of his mercy and our happiness, hath any force in it to oblige us to repent and amend, this our Saviour's Inter∣cession you see fairly proposes to us; so that if
this proposal doth not effectually influence our hope, and thereby excite and animate our endeavours, it is impossible that any encouragement should ever move or affect us. And thus you see, in all these several particu∣lars, how effectually this way of God's communi∣cating his Favours to us through the Intercession of our Saviour, tends to our reformation and a∣mendment; what a fruitful Topick of motives it is to induce us to repentance, and how pathetically it addresses to every affection in us that is ca∣pable of persuasion; what awful and reverential thoughts of Almighty God it suggests to our minds, to dispose our stubborn Wills to an humble submission to him; what a horrible representation it makes of our sins, and of God's wrath and in∣dignation against them, and what a dreadful alarm it gives to our fear to rouse and awake us out of our sinful security; And, in a word, how pow∣erfully it encourages us to draw near unto God, and to make our addresses to him with an humble and generous freedom, and what vast assurances it gives to our hope of his gracious intentions to∣wards us, if we repent and amend. All which considered, one would think it were impossible for any man that believes and understands this won∣derful method of mercy, not to be moved and affected by it; and certainly that man who hath obstinacy enough to withstand all its persuasions, and finally to defeat and baffle those powerful at∣tempts which it makes to reclaim him, is a Crea∣ture not to be moved by Reason and Argument. For in this he hath conquered the greatest motives of all sorts that can be urged to persuade men, and
when once he is got beyond the reach of persua∣sion, and no motive of ingenuity, or hope, or fear can affect him, his condition is desperate, and his obstinacy incurable. Wherefore, as we would not finally disappoint this wonderful contrivance of God to reclaim us, and thereby render our selves for ever desperate, let us at length be persuaded seri∣ously to consider the Motives and Arguments it proposes to us, and never to cease urging and pres∣sing them upon our own souls, till they have con∣quered our obstinate Wills and prejudiced Affecti∣ons, and finally captivated us into a free compli∣ance with their powerful persuasions. For if through our wilful neglect and inconsideration this migh∣ty project of mercy prove utterly unsuccessful with us, it is certain we have sinned our selves past all hope of recovery, and it will be in vain to make any farther experiment on us. And when we have once baffled this last and most powerful remedy of the divine Goodness, what remains but that it should give us up, and utterly abandon us to the just desert and dire effects of our own folly and obstinacy! SECT. VI. Of the Kingly Office of our Saviour. WHen I first entred upon this Argument of the particular Offices of our Mediator, I proposed to handle them in the same order that he performed and executed them; and accordingly,
as he began with his Prophetick Office, of which his whole life was a continued Ministry, so I have treated of this Office in the first place; and as from his Prophetick he proceeded to his Priestly Office, one part of which he executed on the Cross, where he offered himself a Sacrifice for the sins of the World, and the other upon his Ascen∣sion into Heaven, where he presented, and still continues to present his Sacrifice to the Father by way of intercession for us, so I proceeded in the next place to treat of his Priesthood in both the parts of it; and now in the last place, in pursuit of the same order, I proceed to his Regal or King∣ly Office, which was the last he entered upon, after he had finished his Prophecy, offered his Sa∣crifice, and presented it to his Father in Heaven. For so in Scripture the Regality of Christ is al∣ways spoken of as successive to both his Prophe∣tick and Priestly Office, and as the fruit and re∣ward of his faithful discharge and execution of them. So Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. it was because he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, that God highly exalted him, and gave him a name which is above every name, that at the name of Iesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth▪ And Rom. 14.9. the Apostle tells us, that it was for this end that Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living; and accordingly the Angels in St. Iohn's Vision, attribute his advance∣ment to his Regal dignity to the merit of his Death and Sacrifice, Rev. 5.12. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honour, and Glory, and Blessing. And hence his sitting at the right hand of God, which is the great Scripture-Metaphor by which his Regal Authority is expressed (of the sense and meaning of which vide Pearson's Exposition of the Creed, p. 277, 278, 279.) is mentioned as the fruit and consequence of his Death and In∣tercession. So Heb. 1.3. When he had by himself purged our sins, i. e. by dying for us on Earth, and presenting his Sacrifice in Heaven, he sate down on the right hand of the Majesty on high; and Heb. 10.12. But this man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sins for ever, sate down on the right hand of God; and so also 1 Pet. 3.22. we are told, that it was upon his going into Heaven, i. e. to present his Sacrifice to his Father there, that he was advanced to the right hand of God, and that Angels, and Authorities, and Powers were made subject to him. For his going into Heaven was a Priestly Act, corresponding to the High Priest's going into the Holy of Holies, to present his Sacrifice to God there; so that Christ's first arrival into Heaven, and presenting his Sacrifice there, is the beginning and commencement of his Intercession, in answer to which he first received of his Father that Royal Power and Authority which he exercises both in Heaven and Earth; and it is by vertue of the continuance of that his Priestly Intercession, that this his Royal power is continued and perpetuated to him. So that as he is a Royal Priest, i. e. a Priest invested with Regal power to bestow the blessings he intercedes for, so he is a Sacerdotal King, i. e. a King that holds his Regal power in the right and virtue of his
Priestly Intercession. For it is by the continuance of his Intercession that he obttains the continuance of his Royal Authority to bestow those blessings on us which he intercedes for. So that as Christ intercedes in the vertue of his Sacrifice, so he rules in the vertue of his Intercession. And according∣ly you find in Scripture his Ascension into Heaven, there to intercede for us, represented as a Tri∣umphal progress to his Coronation, wherein, after the manner of Princes in that glorious Solemnity, he scatters a Royal Largess among his Subjects, Ephes. 4.8. It is true, before his Ascension he tells his Disciples, that all power was given him in Heaven and Earth, Matth. 28.18. but this it is evident he spake by way of Prolepsis or An∣ticipation, a very usual Scheme of speech in Scri∣pture, which is to express things of certain futu∣rity as if they were actually existing; according to which Scheme all power is given me imports no more than all power is shortly to be given me, i. e. up∣on my Ascension into Heaven. For so it is evident our Saviour must be understood in that parallel ex∣pression, Iohn 5.22. The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son; which words he spake long before his Death, when it is evident, that all judgment, i. e. Vniversal, Re∣gal authority was not actually committed to him▪ but there was only a certain futurity of it. For so he himself tells us, that his sitting down with his Father on his Throne, or investiture with that Re∣gal Authority which he now exercises, was the reward and consequence of his overcoming, or con∣summate victory on the Cross, Rev. 3.21. By all which it is evident, that it was upon his Ascension
into Heaven, and Oblation of his Sacrifice there, by way of Intercession, that Christ was installed in his Vniversal, Mediatorial Kingdom. It is true, our Saviour had a particular Kingdom in this World, viz. the Iewish Church, not only be∣fore his Ascension, but before his Incarnation, as I shall shew hereafter; but as for that Right of Dominion over the Gentile world too, by which he became universal Lord and King, he was not invested with it till his Ascension into Heaven. And therefore he himself tells us, that his Mission into this world was purely to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel, Matth. 15.24. and accordingly in the pursuance of this his Mission, when he sent forth his Ministers to preach his Gospel, he or∣ders them not to go into the way of the Gentiles, nor to enter into the City of the Samaritans, but to go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matth. 10.5, 6. which implies that at that time he was not actually authorized to subdue and re∣duce the Gentiles under his dominion, but that his Authority extended only to the Iewish Nation: but when he had told his Disciples, in that prolep∣tical speech after his Resurrection, that all power was given him in Heaven and Earth, it immediate∣ly follows, go ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, &c. as if he had said, now my Commission and Authority is inlarged, and I am made Vniversal Lord and King, go ye therefore in pursuance of it, and by your Ministry endeavour to reduce all Nations un∣der my dominion. And hence it was that the My∣stery of the calling of the Gentiles into the Kingdom of Christ was not revealed till after his Ascension▪
vid. Acts 11.18. because it was upon his Ascension that he received his Vniversal, Kingly Authority over them, and till then it was to no purpose to reveal it. So that it was over the Gentile world peculiarly that he received Power and Dominion upon his Ascension into Heaven; he was King of the Iews long before, but upon his Ascension he was invested with a right of Dominion over the Gentiles too, and thereupon became the Vniversal Lord and Monarch of the World under the most High God and Father of all things: but this I shall have occasion farther to explain hereaf∣ter. In the prosecution of this great Argument I shall endeavour these six things: First, To give an account of the Beginning and Progress of this Kingdom of Christ. Secondly, To explain the Nature and Constitu∣tion of it. Thirdly, To shew who are the Ministers of it under Christ. Fourthly, To assign and explain the Regal Acts which Christ hath, and doth, and will hereafter exercise in it. Fifthly, To give an account of the End and Conclusion of it. Sixthly, and lastly, To shew the reason and wisdom of this method of God's governing sinful men by this his Mediatorial King Christ Iesus.
SECT. VII. Of the Rise and Progress of Christ's King∣dom. AS for the first, viz. the beginning and pro∣gress of Christ's Kingdom, I shall endeavour to give an account of it in these following Propo∣sitions: First, That the Kingdom of Christ is founded upon the New Covenant. Secondly, That the new Covenant commenced immediately after the Fall, and was afterwards particularly renewed to Abraham and his Poste∣rity. Thirdly, That upon its first Commencement Christ was the Mediator of it, and so he continued all along in that particular renewal that was made of it to the People of Israel. Fourthly, Therefore that as Mediator of this Covenant Christ was King of all that were admit∣ted into it, and particularly of Abraham and his Posterity, or the People of Israel with whom it was renewed. Fifthly, That after his coming into the world he still retained his Title of King of Israel in parti∣cular, till they finally rejected him, and the Cove∣nant in which his Kingdom is founded. Sixthly, That though the main body of that Na∣tion rejected him, yet there was a Remnant of it that received and acknowledged him as their right∣ful Lord and King.
Seventhly, That this Remnant still continued the same individual Kingdom of Christ with the former, though very much reformed and impro∣ved. Eighthly, That to this individual Kingdom of Christ thus reformed and improved was super∣added all those Gentiles that were afterwards con∣verted to Christianity. First, That the Kingdom of Christ is founded in the New Covenant. For it is by the New Co∣venant that he engages himself to us to be our gracious and merciful Lord, and that we engage our selves to him to be his faithful and obedient Subjects; and from these mutual Engagements results the relation of King and Subjects between him and us. So that the Church or Kingdom of Christ consists of all those People, Nations, and Kindreds, who have been admitted into this Co∣venant-relation to him, wherein by a solemn Vow of Fealty and Allegiance, they have indispensably obliged themselves to serve and obey him; but of this I shall have occasion to discourse more largely hereafter. Secondly, Therefore this new Covenant com∣menced immediately afer the Fall, and was af∣terwards in a particular manner renewed to Abraham and his Posterity. For the New Cove∣nant was a Plank thrown forth to Mankind imme∣diately after that woful Shipwreck that was made by the Fall. For no sooner had God denounced his deserved Doom on our lapsed Parents, but to support them from sinking into utter desperation, he subjoyns that gracious promise, Gen. 3.15. The Seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpent's head;
where by the Seed of the woman, not only Christi∣an, but the ancient Iewish Interpreters understand the Messias, and by the Serpent the Devil, who in the form of a Serpent had tempted our first Pa∣rents to that fatal revolt which drew after it all those miserable consequents which their Poste∣rity have groaned under ever since; by the Mes∣sias his bruising the Serpent's head, is meant his assaulting and crushing under foot the very seat of all his strength and power, and finally rescuing mankind from under his Dominion and Tyranny. For this Promise was the first dawning, the morn∣ing Twilight of the New Covenant; and, so far as we can find, the only discovery of it to the Old World, and therefore in all probability was the sole ground and object of that faith by which Abel and Enoch were justified in the sight of God, Heb. 11.4, 5. For though that Promise was but a dark and obscure intimation of the Gospel-Covenant, yet thus much it plainly proposed to them, that from the first Parents of the World there should descend a certain Person, who should conquer the Devil that had conquered them, and thereby repair the damage of their Apostasie; by believing of which, it seems, and acting ac∣cordingly, they found grace and favour in the sight of God; but however it is apparent that the New Covenant was in force in the time of the Old World, because it is evident both that the faith of the Ante-diluvian Patriarchs was actually accepted by God, and that their faith could up∣on no other account have been accepted by him, but only in the vertue of this New Covenant.
But after the Floud God more clearly and ex∣presly renewed this gracious Covenant with Abra∣ham and his Children, Gen. 12.2, 3. where he promises to bless him, to make his name great, and himself a blessing, and to bless them that blessed him, and curse them that cursed him, and in him, that is, in the Messias, who should descend from him, vid. Gal. 3.16. to make all the Families of the Earth blessed; which Covenant he again renews to him, Cap. 13. and Cap. 15. and then in Chap. 17. he yet again renews it more largely and solemnly, assuring him not only that he should be a Father of many Nations, &c. but that that Covenant should extend to his Posterity as well as to him, and that he would be a God to him, and to his Seed after him; immediately after which he institutes the Ceremony of Circumcision for a perpetual Seal and Ratification of his Covenant between him and them; and upon this Covenant it was that the Iewish Church was founded. For so Circum∣cision, which was the standing Seal of this Cove∣nant, was also the standing Rite of admission into that Church; which is a plain argument, that to be a Member of that Church, and a Confederate in this Covenant was one and the same thing, because they were admitted both by one and the same Rite. Now from the New Testament it is evi∣dent, that this Covenant with Abraham, upon which the Iewish Church was built, was the Go∣spel or New Covenant. For so Gal. 3.8. the Apostle calls the delivery of this Covenant preaching the Gospel to Abraham, which must be apparently fals, if this and the Gospel Covenant were not the same; and in verse 29. he tells them, if ye be
Christ's, i. e. true Christians, then are ye Abra∣ham's Seed, i. e. that spiritual Seed to whom the Covenant with Abraham extends, and heirs ac∣cording to the Promise, i. e. of that Covenant; but how could they be Abraham's seed, by being Christians, and heirs to the promise of Abraham's Covenant, if the Seed with whom Abraham's Covenant was made, were of a different Religion from Christians, and the Covenant it self were of a different kind from the Christian Covenant? But that it was the very same, appears yet fur∣ther, because, in the first place, it requires the same Condition, viz. an obediential or practical Faith. For so, Gen. 15.6. it is said, that Abra∣ham believed in the Lord, and he accounted it to him for righteousness, i. e. though he had formerly been guilty of many sins, and at present could not chal∣lenge any reward from God, yet upon that obedi∣ent faith which he exercised, God acquitted and justified him, or, which is the same thing, dealt with him as if he had been perfectly righteous; and accordingly his Circumcision, which was the Ratification of that Covenant, is in Rom. 4.11. called the Seal of the righteousness of faith, i. e. of his Iustification, or being accounted righteous, and dealt with accordingly by God, upon his Faith or practical Assent to God's Promise. And ac∣cordingly the Apostle, Gal. 3.9. thus concludes, so then they which be of faith, i. e. sincere Belie∣vers, as Abraham was, are blessed with faithful Abraham; in which words he expresly asserts that Abraham and Christians are blessed upon the same terms, viz. upon an obediential and pra∣ctical Faith.
And as Abraham's required the same Conditi∣on with the New Covenant, so it also contained the same Promises. For although those Pro∣mises according to the outside and literal sence of them, do contain only temporal blessings, yet it is apparent, that they had all the eter∣nal blessings of that New Covenant lock'd and treasured up in the mystical sence of them. For thus S. Paul expresly tells us, that the Iustifi∣cation of the New Covenant was couched in that Promise that was made to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justifie the Heathen through faith, preached the Gospel be∣fore unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nati∣os be blssed; which necessarily implies, that in that blssing was included their Iustification in the sight of God. And as for divine Grace and Assi∣stance to inable men to repent and persevere in well-doing, the Prophet Micah tells us, that one part of God's performing his truth unto Iacob, and his mercy to Abraham, consisted in his subduing our iniquities, and casting our sins into the depths of the Sea, Micah 7.19, 20. And lastly, as for eternal life, the Apostle plainly tells us, that God gave the inheritance, i. e. of Justification to eter∣nl life, to Abraham by promise, Gal. 3.18. up∣on which gift we are assured that Abraham looked for a City which hath fundations, whose builder and makr is God, Heb. 11.10. Since therefore both the conditions required, and the blessings promi∣sed, in Abraham's and the New Covenant were in all particulars the same, it necessarily follows, tht they were one and the same Covenant. It is true indeed, as to the manner of the revelation
of it there was a vast difference; for whereas in the Gospel it is revealed throughout with the grea∣test clearness and perspicuity, and in plain and lite∣ral terms, it was delivered vailed to Abraham and his Posterity under general and obscure expressions, which at best exhibited to them but a dark and con∣fused apprehension of it. But however it is still the same Covenant, notwithstanding it be thus differently expressed, even as it is the same Sun that sometimes is overcast with clouds, and other times shines forth with a full splendor. Thirdly, From the very first Commencement of this Covenant Christ was Mediator of it, and so hath continued all along under that particular Renewal of it, which God made to the People of Israel. For the Scripture expresly affirms, that he is the Mediator and Surety of this New and better Covenant, that is, that it is he who as our Advo∣cate with God obtains for us the Blessings of this Covenant, and who as our King under God dis∣penses thm to us; and if he be thus the Media∣tor of this Covenant now, he must have always been so, even from the Fall, upon which it com∣menced, to his Ascension into Heaven, other∣wise the New Covenant, upon which he now Me∣diates, must have been four thousand years with∣out a Mediator; which, considering the whole state and condition of it, can by no means be allow∣ed. For besides that, the Fall of man was the rea∣son why God withdrew himself from all immedi∣ate converse with him, and that therefore it is reasonably to be presumed, that whatsoever converse he had with him afterwards, it was through a Mediator, there is nothing more evident
from Scripture than that this very Covenant, which is the standing Medium of God's converse and intercourse with men, was granted to us by God in consideration of Christ's Death and Sacri∣fice. Since therefore it was granted long before Christ died, even from the Fall of Adam, it must be granted upon Christ's obliging and engaging himself to the Father to die for us in the fulness of time; which engagement of his was virtually and in effect an offering up himself a Sacrifice for us; God being as much secured of it upon his en∣gagement, as if he had actually performed it. Upon which account he is called the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. be∣cause upon his obliging himself to die for us, which was immediately after the Fall, the Event became as certain and infallible as if in that very moment he had breathed out his Soul upon the Cross. And accordingly God proceeded on it as on a sure and certain Fund, and in consideration of it granted the new Covenant to the World. Hence the Apostle tells us, that it was by means of his death that there was redemption for the trans∣gressions that were under the first Covenant, Heb. 9.15. Since therefore it was in consideration of Christ's future Sacrifice that God first granted this Covenant to men, it necessarily follows, that upon the same consideration he at the same time appointed Christ to be the Mediator of it, be∣cause, as I shewed before, he is Mediator in the right and vertue of his Sacrifice by which he ob∣tained it; and therefore since his Sacrifice had the same vertue in it when it was future, as it hath now when it is past, he had the same right to be
Mediator of it then, as he hath now. In short, Christ's Sacrifice was as certain in God's account, and therefore as prevalent with him, before, as after it was offered; and therefore since his Me∣diatorship of the New Covenant is wholly owing to the prevalence of his Sacrifice, there was the same reason why God should admit him to be Me∣diator of it before it was offered as after; and ac∣cordingly long before he offered up his Sacrifice, he is called the Angel or Minister of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. And St. Paul expresly tells us, that four hundred and thirty years before the Law of Moses this Covenant was confirmed of God to A∣braham in Christ, Gal. 3.17. and if it was then confirmed in Christ, it is certain that then Christ was the Mediator of it. Fourthly, Christ's being always Mediator of this Covenant necessarily implies his having been always King under God of all that ever were ad∣mitted into it, and particularly of the People of Israel; because his Kingly Office is so necessary and essential a part of his Mediatorship, that he cannot be properly a Mediator without it. For to mediate as he doth between God and men, is to act Authoritatively for and in the behalf of both parties; so that if he act only for one, he can∣not be truly said to be a Mediator between both; but in his acting Authoritatively for God consists his Royalty or Kingly Office, as you may see p. 7, 8. and if his Mediatorial Office necessarily includes a Kingly power, to be sure that power must ex∣tend to all that ever were admitted into the Cove∣nant upon which he Mediates. For how can any man be admitted into that Covenant, of which he
is the authorized Mediator, without being subject to all the Authority which his Mediatorship neces∣sarily implies? Hence therefore it follows, that Christ hath been always King of the Church of God, or con∣federate Society of the true Worshippers of him, in all Ages of the world. For thus in the Old world St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 3.19. that by that very Spirit whereby Christ rose from the dead he went and preached to the spirits in prison, i. e. by Noah, who by the immediate inspiration of the Holy Spirit was a Preacher or Herald of Righteousness, Christ preached to the Spirits or Souls of men, whilst they were yet shut up in, and united to their bodies, long before that general separation of their Souls from their Bodies which was made by the Floud; vid. Dr. Ham. in Loc. at this time, I say, whilst they were yet alive, Christ preached to them, to warn them of that general destruction which was pursuing them, and would ere long overtake them, unless they spee∣dily repented; which shews that long before the Floud Christ acted as a King in issuing out by his Heralds his Royal Proclamations to men to de∣clare his Will and Pleasure to them, and warn them of the fatal consequence of their disobedi∣ence to it. Soon after the Floud mankind almost universally Apostatized from God to Idolatry; so that the Church or Society of the true Worshippers of him was quickly reduced into a very narrow com∣pass; so that four hundred years after it seems very probable tht Melchisedeck was the only King in the world who was not an Idolater. And
now God seeing his Church almost totally extin∣guished by this general defection of mankind from his Covenant; to recover and repair it, he calls Abraham out of his Idolatry and Idolatrous Coun∣try, and with him and his Posterity renews the New Covenant which the rest of mankind had renounced and deserted; and to secure them from ever revolting from it, he seals and ratifies it with them by a sign in their flesh, viz. that of Circumcision, which he gave them as a mark to distinguish and preserve them distinct from the Idolatrous Nations round about them. And when afterwards the Posterity of Abraham was multi∣plied in Aegypt into a numerous Nation, and this Rite of Circumcision being by Ishmael and Esau derived to their Posterity, and so made common to other Nations with Israel, God to renew this distinction gives them the Ceremonial Law upon their coming out of Aegypt; one great design of which, even as that of Circumcision, was to diversifie them from their neighbouring Idolaters by contrary rites and observances; and hence the Mosaick Law is called by the Apostle a middle Wall of partition, Eph. 2.14. alluding to that middle Wall in the Temple which divided the Court of the Iews from the Court of the Gentiles, or Gen∣tile Proselytes of the Gate, who because they were not circumcised, were counted unclean, and up∣on that account divided from the Circumcised by a Wall of stone of three Cubits high; and a little after, ver. 15. he calls this Law the enmity between the Jews and Gentiles, because one great design of it was to divide and separate the Jews from the Gentiles, and thereby to secure them
from revolting from the New Covenant by ming∣ling and confounding themselves with Idolaters. By which means the New Covenant became in a manner appropriate to Israel, none being allowed admission into it but only such as freely submitted themselves to the distinguishing Laws of that Communion by which they were separated from all other Nations. Hence the Apostle tells us, that to them pertained the Covenants, Rom. 9.4. i. e. the New Covenant it self, together with Circumcision the Seal of it, which is also called a Covenant. And the same Apostle puts together being Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the Covenants of Promise, as insepa∣rable Concomitants, Eph. 2.12. And hence it is that they are stiled God's peculiar People, Deut. 14.2. and his peculiar Treasure, Psal. 135.4. because by this Covenant which pass'd between God and them they were separated to God from all other Nations; and upon the same account also they are called the Lord's portion, and the Lot of his inheritance, Deut. 32.9. The New Cove∣nant therefore being thus particularly confined to the People of Israel, whilst it continued so, Christ who was always the Mediator of it must be parti∣cularly the Mediatorial Head and King, that under the most High God and Father ruled and governed that Church and People. But because upon the truth of this Assertion this whole Argu∣ment depends, I shall endeavour, as briefly as I can, to evince and prove it in these following Pro∣positions: First, That there was a certain extraordinary Angel who frequently appeared and spake to the
Jewish Patriarchs, who is sometimes called Ieho∣vah, and sometimes the Angel of Iehovah, who ordinarily assumed to himself divine Appellations, and to whom those holy men ordinarily rendered divine Honours, and Vows, and Sacrifices. Secondly, This extraordinary Angel was a di∣vine Person, and no created Being. Thirdly, That he was that divine Person that descended upon Mount Sinai, and from thence re∣moved into the Tabernacle, and thence into the Temple. Fourthly, That this divine Person was not God the Father. Fifthly, That he was God the Son. First, That there was a certain extraordinary Angel, who frequently appeared, and spake to the Jewish Patriarchs, who is sometimes called Iehovah, and sometimes the Angel of Iehovah, &c. Of which I might give innumerable in∣stances, but for brevities sake shall only mention two; the first is that of Gen. 18. where we read of three men, that is as all agree, three Angels in humane shapes, one of which in verse 13. is ex∣presly called Iehovah; after which upon their going towards Sodom, the same Iehovah speaks to Abraham again, ver. 17. And Iehovah said, shall I hide from Abraham that which I am doing? and so again ver. 20. then in ver. 22. it is said, that the men turned their faces from thence▪ and went up to Sodom, but Abraham stood yet before Iehovah, i. e. two of the Angels went their way to Sodom; for so Chap. 19. v. 1. we read but of two of them that arrived thither; so that the Iehovah before whom Abraham stood must be the third who
stay'd behind conferring with Abraham, in which Conference Abraham several times addresses to him under the name of Iehovah, and verse 25. calls him the Iudge of all the earth, and then verse 33. it is said, that Iehovah went away when he had made an end of speaking unto Abraham. The other instance is in Genes. 28. from verse 12. where you have recorded the Vision of Iacob's Ladder, above which, ver. 13. it is said, Iehovah stood and said, I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father, &c. upon which Iacob when he awaked cries out, Surely Iehovah is in this place, ver. 16. thereupon he sacrifices to him, ver. 18. calls the place Bethel, or the House of God, ver. 19. and offers a Vow to him, ver. 20. wherein he obliges himself to acknowledge him for his God, ver. 21. but Chap. 31. ver. 11, 13. this divine Person is cal∣led both the Angel of God, and the God of Bethel; and Iacob himself in Gen. 48 15, 16. calls him the God before whom his Father Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed him all his life long, and the Angel which redeemed him from all evil. And with this God in the form of a man we find Iacob wrestling a whole night together, supposing him, as it seems, to be an ordinary Angel, Chap. 32. ver. 24. but understanding afterwards who he was, he calls the name of the place Peniel, be∣cause he had seen God face to face, ver. 30. which God in Hos. 12.4, 5. is called both the Angel, and the Lord of Hosts. And this divine An∣gel, or Angel of God, if you pursue the sacred Hi∣story, you will find is the very same that afterwards appeared to Moses in the burning bush, & under him conducted Israel through the red Sea and Wilderness
in the appearance of a Pillar of fire and cloud. For so he is all along called promiscuously Iehovah, and the Angel of Iehovah, vid. Exod. 3.2, 4. Exod. 13.21. compared with Chap. 14.19. Secondly, That he was a divine Person and no created Angel, is evident not only from his assuming to himself the incommunicable Name, but also the incommunicable Attributes of Ieho∣vah. For so he tells Iacob, not only that he was Iehovah God of Abraham his Father, and the God of Isaac, Gen. 28.13. not only that he was the God of Bethel, where he anointed a Pil∣lar, and vowed a vow to him, Gen. 31.13. but also that he was God Almighty, Gen. 35.11. whereas the Psalmist tells us, that Iehovah is God's name alone, Psal. 83.18. and Almightiness, as all agree, is an incommunicable perfection of God; so that had this Angel been a created Being, it would have been the highest degree of Sacriledge and Profaneness in him to arrogate to himself that incommunicable Name and Attribute. I know it is usually objected, that he assumed God's Name and Attributes, not as due to his Person, but to his Character, as he was the Embassador of God, and so represented his Majesty; but where, I beseech you, was it ever heard that an Embassador was allowed to assume the Name and Titles of his King? Would it not be deemed high Arrogance at least, if not High Treason, for an English Embassador in the delivery of his Embas∣sie thus to declare himself, I am that high and mighty Prince James the Second, King of England, &c. And can it be thought that God, who un∣der the Iewish Oeconomy was so peculiarly
jealous of his honour, and had such peculiar reason for it, considering the infinite proneness of that people to Idolatry, would not only permit, but authorize a Creature to assume his Name and At∣tributes, and not only avouch it self to be God, but also arrogate his incommunicable Perfections and Prerogatives? The Prophets, we know, were God's Embassadors as well as the Angels, but yet they never presumed to call themselves God or Iehovah, or to arrogate Omnipotence to themselves, which yet they had as much right to do as this Angel, supposing him to be a created Being; but on the contrary, whereas this Angel always spake in his own name, and delivered what he said as his own word, the Prophets always spake in a different stile, and still ushered in what they delivered with a thus saith the Lord; and the same to be sure this blessed Angel would have done, had he been only an Embassador from God. But besides that he assumed God's Name, and Attributes; he not only admitted but required divine honours to be rendered to him. For so, as hath been shewn before, he not only admitted Iacob to offer Sacrifice, and a religious Vow to him, and therein to devote himself to him as to his God, but also required him to make and dedi∣cate an Altar to him at Bethel, Gen. 35.1. so also he admitted Ioshuah to fall on his face to the Earth and worship him, and not only so, but bids him loose his shooe from his foot, telling him that the place whereon he stood was holy, as being conse∣crated by his divine Presence, Iosh. 5.14, 15. and the same command, inforced with the same reason, he gave before to Moses out of the burning
bush, Exod. 3.5. and to name no more, he recei∣ved a burnt-offering, and a meat-offering at the hands of Manoah and his Wife, Iudg. 13.23. And is it likely that any created good Angel would ever have admitted these things, especially con∣sidering how strictly S. Iohn was forbid by the An∣gel, at whose feet he fell down to worship him, See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant — wor∣ship God, Rev. 19.10. and so again, Rev. 22.9. Thirdly, That he was also that divine Person that descended upon Mount Sinai, and from thence removed into the Tabernacle, and thence into the Temple, is evident from what is recor∣ded of him, Numb. 22.22, &c. where we have the History of the Angel of the Lord's meeting Balaam on the way as he was going to curse the People of Israel; now that by that Angel there is meant this divine Angel, or Angel Iehovah appears, first, from verse 32. where he tells Balaam, Behold I come out to be an Adversary, be∣cause thy way is perverse before me, i. e. it is con∣trary to that will of mine which I declared to thee, verse 12. where it is said, That God said unto Balaam, thou shalt not go with them, thou shalt not curse the People, for they are blessed, which is a plain evidence, that this God and that Angel of Iehovah were the same Person. And then, secondly, verse 35. it is said that this An∣gel of Iehovah said unto Balaam, go with the men, but only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that thou shalt speak, whereas he that afterwards spake unto him, and instructed him what he should say to Ba∣lak, is expresly called God and Iehovah; for so Numb. 23.4, 5. it is said, that God met Balaam, and
that Iehovah put a word into his mouth; whence it appears, that this God and Iehovah was the same Person with that Angel of the Lord tht gave him that charge, but only the word that I shall speak unto thee, that shalt thou speak. But then, thirdly and lastly, Balaam himself calls the apprition of this Angel, the vision of the Almighty, Numb. 24.4, 16. which shws that this Angel was the Almighty himself. Now this Angel Iehovah, Balaam in his inspi∣red Parable calls Iehovah the God and King of Is∣rael, and the God that brought them out of Aegypt, Numb. 23.21, 22. which is the very stile of that. God that descended upon Mount Sinai, I am Ie∣hovah thy God that brought thee out of the Land of Aegypt, Exod. 20.2. which is a plain argument, that it was all but one and the same Person. But then Iudg. 2. we have the History of ano∣ther Appearance of this great Angel of Iehovah, who, as we are told in verse 1. came from Gilgal unto Bochim, and by what he there saith of him∣self, it is evident that he was that very God that came down upon Mount Sinai, and afterwards dwelt in the Tabernacle; for there he declares, that it was he that made them go up out of Aegypt, and brought them to the Land which he sware unto their Fathers, which is the language of that God that dwelt in the Tabernacle, vid. Exod. 33.1. that it was he that said, I will never break Cove∣nant with you, and ye shall make no League with the Inhabitants of this Land, and that they should throw down their Altars: but, saith he, ye have not obey∣ed my voice; why have ye done this? Wherefore I said, I will not drive them out from before ye, but they
shall be as thorns in your sides, and their Gods shall be a snare to you, ver. 1, 2, 3. which are the very words of God from the Tabernacle, as you may see Exod. 34.12, 13. Numb. 33.55. which is a plain Argument, that this Angel and that God that dwelt in the Tabernacle were one and the same Person. And then that he was the God that afterwards fix'd his abode in the Temple is very apparent. For, besides that no body questions but that it was the same divine Person that brought Israel out of Aegypt, led them through the Wilder∣ness, came down upon Mount Sinai, resided in the Tabernacle, and that afterward removed in∣to the Temple, we have a particular evidence, that this person was the Angel Iehovah, in Isa. 6.1. where the Prophet tells us, that he saw Iehovah sitting on a Throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the Temple; by which it is evident that he appear'd to him in a visible form, else how could the Prophet have seen him? and that sitting, which is a Corporeal Posture; but this the second ver. puts out of all doubt, which attributes to him a face and feet, implying that his appearance was in a humane form, the very same in which this Angel Iehovah was wont to make his appearances to men; and then that Prophet concludes, that he should certainly die, because his eyes had seen the King, the Lord of Hosts; which is the same ter∣rible apprehension that men always expressed up∣on the appearance of this Angel Iehovah. Thus upon the sight of him Manoah cries out, We shall surely die, because we have seen God, Judg. 13.22. and so also Gideon, Judg. 6.22. and the
Children of Israel, Exod. 20.19. and Moses him∣self, Exod. 3.6. So that among the Ancients it seems it was a received opinion, that the appea∣rance of this illustrious one did commonly abode death unto those that beheld him. Since there∣fore the Prophet had the same dreadful apprehen∣sion upon his vision of God in the Temple, that all men had before him upon the appearance of this Angel Iehovah to them, it is at least very probable that that God and this Angel were the same divine person. Fourthly, That this divine Person was not the most High God the Father. For besides that our Saviour tells the Jews, that they had not heard the Father's voice at any time, nor seen his shape or appearance, John 5.37. which is a plain evidence that that divine Person who spake and appeared to their Fathers in a humane voice or shape, was not God the Father, of whom the same Apostle tells us, that no man hath seen God at any time, John 1.18. whereas it is expresly said of Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and the seventy Elders of Israel, that they saw the God of Israel, viz. upon Mount Sinai, and, as it is evident from the Text, it was in a humane shape that they saw him, for there was under his feet as it were a paved work of Saphir stone, Exod. 24.9, 10. and if he appeared to them with feet, it is reasonable to suppose that he appeared with all the other parts of a humane body, for though Mo∣ses tells the People, that they saw no similitude on the Mount, but only heard a voice, Deut. 4.12. yet this doth not at all hinder, but that Moses and the seventy Elders with him might and did; for
so when Moses desired to see the glory of God up∣on the Mount, God tells him, thou art not able to see my face, i. e. by reason of the glory and lustre of it, for no man shall see my face and live, i. e. no man can endure without great hazard of his life the brightness and splendor of my countenance, and from this passage in all probability sprang that common opinion in mens minds, that they should surely die whenever they saw God or the Angel Iehovah; and then God proceeds, and tells Moses, that he would place him in the Clift of the Rock, and cover him with his hand whilst he passed by, and that when he was passed by he would take away his hand, and permit him to see his back parts, Exod. 33.20, 21, 22, 23. by all which it seems evident that this Apparition of God upon the Mount, which Moses and the Elders saw, was in a humane form, since it had not only feet, but face, and hands, and back parts, which is not only a farther Evidence that this God was the same di∣vine Person with that Angel Iehovah, who ap∣peared so often in humane shape, but also a plain argument that he was not God the Father, who, as S. Iohn tells us, was never seen in any shape or ap∣pearance whatsoever; besides all which, I say, how can the Father, who is the first and supreme person in the holy Trinity, from whom both the Son and holy Spirit are sent, be in any sence stiled (as this divine Person of whom we are treating is) the An∣gel of Iehovah? For the word Angel, which im∣ports a Messenger, implies some kind of Inferiori∣ty to him whose Angel or Messenger he is, & there∣fore can in no sence be truly and properly applied to the most high God and Father.
Fifthly, and lastly, That this divine Person was God the Son. For, First, that it was he who appeared to the Patriarchs, and particularly to Abraham, those words of our Saviour plainly im∣ply, in Ioh. 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoyced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad; where by Abraham's seeing of Christ's day, must necessa∣rily be meant his real, and actual, and personal sight of Christ himself; for so the Jews understood it, Thou art not yet (say they in the following verse) fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? As much as if they should have said, How is it pos∣sible that ever thou shouldest personally and actually see Abraham, or he thee, as thy words do import, when as yet thou art not fifty years old, and it is many Ages since that Abraham died. If there∣fore the Jews did not mistake Christ's sence, it is plain that by seeing his day he meant personally and actually seeing himself; but that they did not mistake him is evident, because if they ad, Christ ought to have corrected them by explaining himself into some other sence, and not suffer them to run away with such a gross mistake in a matter of such mighty moment; instead of which he plainly allows and cuntenances their sence in the Answer which he gave them, verse 58. Verily, verily I say unto you, before Abraham was I am; as much as if he had said, it is no such impossible matter as you imagine that Abraham should see me and I hm, because I have a fix'd and eternal existence, and therefore was in being before ever he was bon. So that either the Jews apprehended Christ aright, and if so, Abraham really and actually saw him, or Christ in his Answer prevaricated
with them, and meerly plaid upon their mistake; and if Abraham personally saw Christ, it is certain that Christ must be that divine Person that ap∣peared to him. But then Secondly, That it was he also that brought Israel out of Aegypt, and descended upon Mount Sinai at the giing the Law to them, i. e. who de∣clared himself to be the Lord their God that brought them out of the Land of Aegypt, is apparent from Heb. 12.26. where it is expresly affirmed, that it was Christ's voice which then did shake the Earth, i. e. when the Law was delivered in Thunder from Mount Sinai, which is a plain argument, that Christ was that Iehovah, who came down upon Mount Sinai, and whose voice caused the whole Mount to quake greatly, Exod. 19.18. the same also is evident from Eph. 4.8. Wherefore he saith, i. e. the Psalmist, Psalm 68.18. when he, i. e. Christ (of whom he had been speaking just before, verse 7. ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men; so that either Christ must be the Person of whom the Psalmist speaks, or the Apostle must grosly mis-quote and mis-apply him; and if he be the same Person, then from that Psalm it is evi∣dent: First, That it was he that went before the People, and marched with them through the Wil∣derness, verse 7. to 15. Secondly, That it was he that was among the thousands of Angels in Sinai in the holy place, and by their Ministry pro∣mulgated the Law from thence; verse 17. Third∣ly, That it was he who was the God and King, whose goings were seen in the Sanctuary, ver. 24. Fourthly, That it was he who was the God of the Temple
at Ierusalem, vers. 29. For all these things are ex∣presly spoken of him that ascended on high, and led captivity captive, and received gifts for men, vers. 18. which the Apostle tells us was Christ. Thirdly, That it was he also that conducted them through the Wilderness into Canaan, appears from that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10.9. Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them, i. e. of the Peo∣ple of Israel in the Wilderness, also tempted, or as some Copies read it, as some of them also tem∣pted him, and were destroyed by Serpents; and although in most Copies him be not expressed, yet in all it is necessarily implied; for if they tempted in the Wilderness, it is certain that they tempted some body, and to understand by that some body any other than Christ, who is the only Person before mentioned, is against all Grammar and reason; against Grammar, which allows no other Accusative to be understood by the Verb than that of some thing or person aforesaid in the same Sentence; against Reason, because if we un∣derstand any other Accusative but him or Christ who is the only Person afore-mentioned, we must make the Apostle speak loosely and indeterminately, whereas otherwise it is evident he speaks most strictly and certainly; for there is no word in the Text but only Christ which determines the Accusative that the Verb tempted implies; so that if that doth not determine it, it must be left wholly indeterminate, but if it doth, it must be him or Christ; and to make the holy Oracles speak loosely and vagrantly where they may as well be understood to speak strictly and determinately, is not only impious but unrea∣sonable.
If therefore it was Christ that some of the Jews tempted in the Wilderness, it necessarily follows in the first place, that Christ was with them there, and secondly, that he was that God against whom they spake, Numb. 21.5. which is the place the Apostle here refers to, where it is said, that the People spake against God and a∣gainst Moses, for which God sent fiery Serpents among them, ver. 6. If therefore Christ was with them in the Wilderness, and was that God a∣gainst whom they spake in the Wilderness, there is no doubt but that he was that God that led them through it, and brought them into Canaan. Fourthly, That it was he who dwelt in the Jewish Tabernacle and Temple is evident from Iohn 12.41. These things said Isaias when he saw his glory and spake of him; the occasion of which words is this; at ver. 37. St. Iohn takes notice of the perverse Infidelity of the Iews in not believing in Christ, notwithstanding all the Miracles he had shewn them, ver. 38, 39, 40. which he shews was no more than what the Prophet Isay had long before foretold of them, Isa. 6.9, 10. and then he concludes, ver. 41. These things said Isaiah when he saw his glory and spake of him, where by his glory it is evident the Apostle means Christ's glory, and by speaking of him, speaking of Christ; for so in ver. 37. where the discourse begins, it is plain he means Christ when he tells us, that yet they believed not on him, and in ver. 42. it is as plain that he means him still, when he tells us, that nevertheless among the chief Rulers also many believed in him; and if by him he means Christ, as all agree he doth, both in
ver. 37. and 42. either the four Verses between must be included within a Parenthesis (which we have no reason to imagine, seeing there is o note of a Parenthesis to be found in any Copy, nor doth the discourse it self require it, which from Verse to Verse runs all along in a close and continued dependence) or by him, must be meant Christ, in ver. 41. also; and if it was Christ's glory which Isaiah saw, and Christ of whom he spake, then it is evident that Christ was the God who inhabited the Temple. For so in Isa. 6.1. which is the place St.Iohn here refers to, Isaiah tells us, that in the year that King Vzziah died he saw the Lord sitting on a Throne high and lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple; if there∣fore Christ was this Lord, as St. Iohn affirms, it is certain from these words that it was he who sate upon the Throne in the Temple, and had his Train or Retinue of Angels there. Fifthly and lastly, That Christ also was that Iehovah and divine Lord and King who under the most high Father presided over the Iewish Church, is evident from several places of the New Te∣stament, compared with the Old, from whence they are cited. I shall only instance in two, the first of which is Eph. 5.14. Wherefore he saith, that is the Prophet Isaiah, awake thou that sleep∣est, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light; which words are a Paraphrastical re∣ference to Isa. 60.1. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; but now unless we suppose Christ to be this Lord or Iehovah, the Prophet is so far from saying here, that Christ shall give thee light, as St. Paul af∣firms,
that he makes no mention at all of him; either therefore Isaiah says no such thing as, Christ shall give thee light, which is to give the lie to St. Paul, or else the true sense of that saying of Isaiah, The glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, must be, that Christ shall give thee light; which it cannot be, if Christ and that Lord were two distinct persons; but that they are one and the same, is evident from Isa. 44.6. Thus faith Ie∣hovah, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God; which divine Cha∣racter of I am the first, and I am the last, he else∣where gives himself in Chap. 41.4. and Chap. 48.12. of this Prophecy. Now this very Cha∣racter of the God of Israel Christ assumes to him∣self, Rev. 1.11. I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; so again, ver. 17. and Chap. 2.8. and Chap. 22.13. Now how can we, with any reverence to our Saviour, suppose that he would ever have assumed to himself this distinguishing Character of the God of Israel, and that in the very same words, and without ever explain∣ing them into a different sense, had he not been the very same Person? since he could not but foresee that he should hereby endanger the mis∣leading of his Church, and tempting her into a false opinion of his Person. For what man that was not prepossessed with a contrary opinion, would ever have thought that our Saviour did not mean him∣self to be the God of Israel, when he thus verbatim applies to himself his personal Character without any kind of restriction or explication? Should any man hear a voice from an invisible Person seriously
pronouncing, I am William the Conqueror, (as S. Iohn did this voice from Christ, I am the first and the last) would he not presently conclude either that this Person was the Ghost of that vi∣ctorious Prince, or that that voice was a designed delusion? Since therefore our Saviour declares, that he is the first and the last, which is the essenti∣al Character by which Iehovah the King of Israel describes himself, and doth no where intimate a different sence of this Character as applied to him∣self, from what it signified as applied to the Ieho∣vah, it necessarily follows, that either he meant not sincerely, or that himself and that Iehovah the King of Israel were the same Person. And accor∣dingly, Zach. 9.9. which all agree is a Prophecy of our Saviour, he is expresly called the King of Israel, Rejoyce greatly, O Daughter of Sion, shout O Daughter of Ierusalem, behold thy King cometh unto thee; the most natural sence of which Phrase thy King, is he that is now thy King, not he that is hereafter to be so; and if then when this Pro∣phecy was delivered, he was King of the Daugh∣ter of Zion, or People of Israel, to be sure he was always so; and therefore the Prophet Malachi calls the Temple which was the Palace of the di∣vine King of Israel, the Temple of Christ, Mal. 3.1. Behold I will send my Messenger, i. e. John Baptist, and he shall prepare my way before me, and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Angel of the Covenant whom ye delight in, behold he shall come, saith the Lord of Hosts; from whence I infer, first, that this Lord of Hosts, which is the ordinary stile of the God of Israel, was Christ, whose Messenger and
fore-runner Iohn Baptist was, vid. Luke 1.76. And secondly, That the Temple, which was the abode of this Lord of Hosts, was the Temple of Christ; the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple; which cannot be meant of God the Father, because in the next words he is called the Angel of the Covenant, which all agree is Christ; if then the Temple of Ierusalem was the Temple of Christ, and he was that Lord of Hosts that dwelt in it, it necessarily follows, that he was that divine King of Israel who under God the Father governed the Iewish Church. And now having proved at large this fourth Proposition, which is the principal Hinge upon which the whole Argument turns, I proceed, Fifthly, That after his coming into the World he still retained this his Right and Title of King of Israel in particular, till they finally rejected him, and Apostatized from that Covenant on which his Kingdom is founded. For he did not at all divest himself by his Incarnation, of that Royal Authority he was vested with as he was the Eternal Word and Son of God, hereafter to be in∣carnate. For this his Royal Authority, as I shew∣ed before, is necessarily implied in his Media∣torship of the New Covenant, of which, as I have also shewed, he was always Mediator without any discontinuance or interruption. So long there∣fore as the New Covenant continued in force with the Iews in particular, so long he was their Mediatorial King in particular, under God the Father. Now it is certain that the New Co∣venant continued in force with them so long as they continued to be the Church of God, because
it was the New Covenant that made them so; and it is certain they continued the Church of God many years after the Incarnation of our Saviour, even till such time as by their obstinate rejecting of our Saviour, and incurable Apostasie from that Covenant which made them the Church and Peo∣ple of God, they had finally incensed him to re∣ject them, to break off his Covenant-relation to them, and utterly to dispark and un-Church them. And therefore we find that for several years both our Saviour and his Apostles conti∣nued in close Communion with the Iewish Church, frequented their Temple and Synagogues, and joyned with them in all the Solemnities of their Publick Worship; by which they owned them to be the true Church of God, and consequently to be yet in Covenant with him. Since there∣fore they continued in the New Covenant after Christ's Incarnation, Christ must also continue the Mediator of that Covenant to them, and consequently their Mediatorial King. And hence he is stiled, the King of the Iews in particular, af∣ter his Incarnation; for so the Wise-men in their enquiry after him, Where is he that is born King of the Iews? Matt. 2.2. And that he was born King of the Iews, not merely as he was descended from the Loins of David, but by a Title that he had Antecedent to his birth, viz. as he was the Son of God, hereafter to be Incarnate, is evident by that confession of Nathanael, Joh. 1.49. Rabbi thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel; where his being the King of Israel is consequent to his being the Son of God; and so Iohn 12.13. they who attended him in his progress to Ierusalem
salute him with a Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord; which S. Iohn makes the accomplishment of that forementioned Prophecy, Zach. 9.9. Rejoyce greatly, O daugh∣ter of Zion — behold thy King cometh unto thee sitting on an Asses Colt, verse 14, 15. And this Title our Saviour assumes to himself in that good confession he made before Pontius Pilate, who asking him, Art thou King of the Iews? He answered him, Sayest thou this of thy self, or did others tell it thee of me? And when Pilate presses him for a more explicite answer, he tells him, My Kingdom is not of this world; as much as if he had said, I know the Jews, mine enemies, have insinu∣ated to thee, that by assuming to my self this Title of King of the Iews, I design to usurp the temporal Dominion of Caesar thy Master; but let not that trouble thee, for though it is most certain that I am King of the Jews, yet my Kingship and Caesar's are of a quite different nature, and do no way clash or interfere with one another; for whereas his Kingdom is Temporal, mine is purely spiritual, and not of this world; and when Pilate insists far∣ther, Art thou a King then? Jesus answers, Thou sayest I am a King, i. e. thou sayest truly so, to this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness to the truth, John 18.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. And as he retained the Title of King of the Jews after his Incarnation, so we frequently find him exercising his Royal Authority among them. For in the first place, he not only authoritatively explained to them those old and eternal Laws of Morality which he delivered to them
from Mount Sinai, and inforced them with new Sanctions and Motives; but he also gave them two new Laws, viz. that of Baptism, and that of the Lord's Supper, to be continued in force to the end of the world. Secondly, He erected a perpetual form of Government and Discipline in his Church, and gave Commission to his Apostles to exercise and administer it, and to derive down their Commission to all succeeding Generations. Thirdly, he actually forgave sins, Matth. 9.2. compared with the sixth, where he doth not only pronounce to one that was sick of the Palsie, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee; but declares that he did it by that power and authority which he had upon earth to forgive sins. All which be∣ing acts of Regal power, do sufficiently manifest that, even whilst he was upon Earth, he was vest∣ed with Royal Authority, and that by assuming our nature he did not divest himself of his ancient Royalty, but still continued King of the Iews so long as they continued a Church. Sixthly, That though the main body of the People of Israel rejected Christ, and were there∣upon rejected by him, yet there was a Rem∣nant of them that received and acknowledged him for their rightful Lord and King. For so, as S. Paul observes, it is foretold of Isaiah con∣cerning Israel, Though the number of the Children of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, a remnant shall be saved, Rom. 9.27. and accordingly it proved in the event. For though the much greater part of the Jewish Nation obstinately persisted in their Infi∣delity and Rebellion against the blessed Iesus their King, notwithstanding all those powerful Arts and
Methods he had used to reclaim and save them; yet there was a great number of them that willing∣ly received and loyally adhered to him. For not only the Disciples which he gathered whilst he was upon Earth, but also the first Converts af∣ter his Ascension into Heaven, were generally of the Iewish Nation, within which not only his own Personal Ministry was confined, but also the Mi∣nistry of his Apostles for some time after his As∣cension. For so S. Paul and Barnabas tell the Jews, that it was necessary the Word of God should first have been spoken to them, Acts 13.46. But this Proposition is so manifest from the whole Gospel, that I shall not need to insist any farther upon it. Seventhly, Therefore that this Remnant still continued the same individual Church or King∣dom of Christ with the former, though very much reformed and improved. For it still remained upon the same basis with the former, as ha∣ving the self-same Covenant for its Charter, which is the form that Identifies all Societies, and, notwithstanding the perpetual change and renova∣tion of their parts, still continues them the same individual Politick bodies. Since therefore that remnant of Israel, who believed in Christ, conti∣nued still in the same Covenant with that where∣upon the old Jewish Church was founded, it ne∣cessarily follows, that they were not a new or distinct Church, but still remained the same in∣dividual sacred society with the old. So that they were the unbelieving Jews that revolted from their old Church, by rejecting the Mediator of that Covenant by which it was formed and
constituted; but as for the believing Jews, who imbraced and acknowledged him, they still conti∣nued in it, and so remained the same continued Church, as being still united and incorporated by the same Charter. But though it was the same continued body with the old Jewish Church, yet was it very much reformed and improved by our blessed Savi∣our. For, in the first plce, whereas before it was extremely corrupted through the many false glosses and superstitious traditions of their Elders, and like an unest Garden, was all overgrown with Thorns and Weeds, its Religion being almost dwindled away into Ceremonies, and outward ob∣servances, and evaporated into a dead shew and formality; our blessed Saviour repaired its ruines and decays, removed its rubbish, and re∣formed its disorders, and restored it to its pri∣mitive beauty and purity. For the great design of all his Sermons and Parables was to explain the Laws of it into their Genuine sence, and to rescue them from the false Glosses and Comments of the Scribes and Pharisees; to reprehend and ex∣pose its hypocrisie and formality, and to refine its Religion from all those corrupt and heterogeneous mixtures with which it was dasht and sophisticated. That Remnant of the Jews therefore who believed in Christ, and submitted to his Doctrine, when all the rest of them finally rejected him, were the same individual continued body with the Old Jew∣ish Church, as purified and reformed from its errors and corruptions. For by submitting to our Saviour's regulations they did not commence into a new Church, but still continued the same body,
only with this difference, that whereas before it was distempered with sundry corrupt humours, now it was throughly purged and recovered. And as our Saviour restored that Church to its ancient purity, so, secondly, he advanced and improved it to a far more perfect state than it was in even under its primitive Constitution. It is true, as for the Religion of that Church it was for substance the same with that which our Saviour and his Apostles taught; it proposed to them the same Covenant, and the same Media∣tor, and the very same Doctrines, and Articles concerning this Mediator, to create in them the same belief, and oblige them to the same practice, only with this difference, that whereas it proposed him to their belief as hereafter to be incarnate and sacrificed, to rise and to ascend into heaven; it proposes him to ours as actually incarnate and sacrificed, and as actually risen and ascended; but this is only a circumstantial diffe∣rence, since that, as to all the purposes of his Mediation, his future Incarnation and Sacrifice, &c. had the same vertue and influence with his actual. But though as to the main the ancient Iewish Religion was the same with ours, yet in re∣spect of clearness, and easiness, and amplitude, there is a vast difference between them. For, first, as to clearness, it is evident that it was much more dark∣ly and obscurely revealed to the ancient Iews than it is to us; for to them it was revealed only either in general Promises, out of which they were fain to argue and deduce particulars; or in temporal Pro∣mises, that carried a mystical sence with them, and obscurely implied the spiritual blessings which
the Gospel proposes; or in dark Types and mate∣rial Figures and Emblems, which were Prophetick Pictures, or, as the Apostle calls them, shadows of good things to come. For thus in that general Promise, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, was included Christ, and all those particular blessings which we receive by and through him; under those temporal promises of deliverance from their enemies, and peaceble possession of Canaan, was couched their delive∣rance from sin and hell, and their eternal rest and happiness in heaven; and under their legal Sacrifices, the all-sufficient Sacrifice of the blessed Mediator was exhibited and represented to them; and in a word, under the High Priest's offering the bloud of the Sacrifice in the Holy of Holies, was intimated the Mediator's intercession for them in heaven. Thus both the Promises and Types of the Iewish Religion were all of them obscure revelations of Christianity, which is nothing but Mystical Judaism, or Judaism explained in∣to its spiritual sence and meaning. And accor∣dingly the Apostle makes a Iew, according to the spiritual sence of the Iewish Religion, to be the same with a Christian; for he is not a Iew, saith he, i. e. in a spiritual sence, that is one out∣wardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Iew who is one in∣wardly, i. e. who is a Jew according to the inward and spiritual sence of Judaism; and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit and not in the Let∣ter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, Rom. 2.28, 29. and if the spiritual Iew be a Christian, then the spiritual Iudaism must be Christianity.
But though this obscure revelation of Christianity was sufficient to enable men, that sincerely atten∣ded to it, to grope out their way to eternal hap∣piness; yet it is impossible it should ever give them, without some farther revelation, a distinct and explicite understanding of it. In general they understood that there was a rich vein of spiritual sence running all through the Letter of their Law; that there were glorious myste∣ries wrapt up within those weak and beggarly ele∣ments, like precious Diamonds under a rough coat. For so not only the Author to the Hebrews, but also Philo the Jew in his Allegories of the Law, and almost in all his other Writings, makes the Rites and Ceremonies of the Jewish Religion to be Types and Figures of Divine and Moral truths; and particularly the High Priest and his Vestments to be a figure of the eternal Word and his perfections. And as they understood this in general, so from sundry passages in the book of the Psalms it is apparent that the good Jews had a prospect beyond the outside and letter of their Law, even into the Mystical sence and mean∣ing of it; and that through its dark shadows they saw a great deal of the substance and reality of the Gospel. Hence David observes in Psal. 25.14. that the secret, i. e. mystery, of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he shall shew them his Cove∣nant; which implies that there was something of a Cabala of the spiritual sence of the Law among the true Israelites, by which they were in∣structed a great deal farther than the bare Letter and outside of it; especially considering that Prayer of David, Psalm 119.18. Open thou mine
eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law, which is a plain argument, that under the literal snce of that Law which was plain and obvi∣ous, and had nohing of depth or mystery, he saw a spiritual and mystical sence, in which some very wonderful truths were included. For if there had ben no more in it than the literal meaning, it is not to be imgined he would have prayed as he doth, ver. 19. Hide not thy Commandments from me; and ver. 27 Make me to understand the way of thy Precepts, so shall I talk of thy wondrous works; which plainly shws that there were mysteries cohed under the Letter of the Law, which were both wonderful in themselves, and very difficult to be understand; and accordingly, ver. 69. he tells us, that he had seen an end of all perfections, but that God's Commandments were exceeding broad, which shews that he had discovered something in that Law beyond the literal sence of it (which was far from being exceeding broad) even a vast Mine of mystical sence, whose bottom he was not able to reach. Now this mystical sence, as hath been shewed, was Christianity, which under that dis∣pensation of it was so overcast with clouds and darkness, that in all probability the most pious and inquisitive minds had but very imperfect and confu∣s ppehensions of it. But when our Saviour came into the World he unveiled the Jewish Religion, and decyphered all hose mystical Characters wherein its spiri∣tual sce was expressed; and what he had reveal∣ed before only in obscure generals, and mysterious types▪ he now delived to the world in plain and ex∣plicite Articles of Faith. And having unriddled
all those Types and Shadows, and turned them in∣side outwards, and revealed their hidden sence to the world in plain and naked Propositions, he ut∣terly repealed and abrogated them as things of no farther use; those sacred truths which they con∣tained, and darkly intimated, being now made manifest, and set forth to open view in a far more clear and glorious light. For the proper use and design of all those Types was to teach the Gospel; so the Apostle, the Law was our School-master to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. but it is evident they were designed to teach it but dark∣ly and mysteriously. For the Iews being bred among the Aegyptians, who were wont to ex∣press their dvine and moral Doctrines by sensible Images or Hieroglyphicks, God in compliance therewith (the Jews being infinitely fond of the manners of Aegypt) thought it meet at first to ex∣press the Gospel to them in the same typical man∣ner, i. e. to represent the whole method and Oeco∣nomy of it in visible signs and figures, which he intended only for a rude draught of the Gospel, which he purposed afterwards to draw to the life, and express more clearly and exactly. When therefore our Saviour had fully revealed to the World the sence and meaning of those Types, and expressed what they did so mysteriously signifie in plain and clear Propositions, they from thenceforth became altogether useless, and for that reason were repealed, and utterly expunged out of the Rubrick of divine Worship. So that now the Gos∣pel which hitherto ran under ground in a dark and mysterious Channel, broke forth into a visible stream from underneath that surface of Types
and Shadows which had hitherto covered and in a great measure concealed it from the sight and view of the world. And therefore we need no longer grope after it among Shadows and Vmbra∣ges, as the good Jews were fain to do under the Mosaick Dispensation, those Doctrines of it which before were all Mystery and overcast with Types and Shadows, being now brought forth from behind the Curtain into open view, and pre∣sented barefaced to our understandings in a most plain, and easie, and familiar sense. Since there∣fore the Types of the Law, and Iesus Christ taught the same Religion, and only he taught more plainly and clearly what they taught more darkly and my∣steriously, it hence necessarily follows, that those believing Jews who received and acknowledged Christ, espoused no new Religion, but still ad∣hered to that good old Religion which the signi∣ficant Rites and Ceremonies of their Law had all along preached to them; and that it was only the unbelieving Jews who rejected Christ's Do∣ctrine, that were the true Apostates from the an∣cient Judaism, which preached and exhibited to them all those holy mysteries of which the Religion of our Saviour is composed; but as for those of them who believed in Jesus, they continued sted∣fast in the mystick and spiritual sense of their an∣cient Religion, and though they forsook their old School-master, the Law, under which they had been trained and educated, yet still they retained their old Lesson. For the Doctrine of Iesus was the standing Doctrine of their Legal Types, which they taught darkly and obscurely, but he most clearly and distinctly; and therefore though
those believing Jews still continued in the same Doctrine, yet they had very good reason to change their Teacher, and from being the Disciples of the Law to become the Disciples of Iesus, under whose instruction they were sure to improve far beyond what they had hitherto done under their old Master. Since therefore Christianity is no∣thing but the ancient Judaism explained and un∣riddled, it hence necessarily follows, that the believing Jews, by embracing it, did not com∣mence a new Church distinct from the ancient Jewish one, but were the same Church, still continued and improved; the same Church, be∣cause founded on the same Religion; but the same Church improved, because enlightened with a far more distinct and explicite knowledge of that Religion. And as our Saviour did very much improve the Religion of the Jewish Church in respect of clearness and perspicuity, so he did also in re∣spect of easiness. For besides those many Rites and Ceremonies which the Law of Moses super∣added to it, as Types and Shadows of the Gospel, there were sundry others superadded to it by the same Law, partly in conformity to the more in∣nocent Rites of the Aegyptians, among whom the Jews were educated, and of whose Rites and Man∣ners they were pertinaciously fond; and partly in opposition to their Magical and Idolatrous ones, vid. Vol. 1. p. 45, 46. For the Primitive Jewish Religion was that which the Patriarchs and their Posterity professed and practised before the giving of the Law, and to which the Ceremonial Law was but a superaddition; but by reason of the
vast number of Rites and Ceremonies which this Law contained (which yet considering their state and temper was very necessary for them) their Religion was rendered exceeding cumbersom and grievous to them; and therefore the Apostle justly calls it a yoke which neither they nor their fore-fathers were able to bear, Acts 15.10. But our Saviour when he came into the World, who was the substance and accomplishment of all those Ceremonial Types and Prophetick Pictures, unload∣ed it of all those burthensom appendages, and there∣by restored it to that ancient ease and liberty in which it was before that yoke of bondage was im∣posed on it: nay, and not only so, but also ren∣der'd it more easie than ever, for whereas be∣fore the Law it had annexed to it that painful Rite of Circumcision, which was the Primitive Seal of that Religion or Covenant, our blessed Saviour exchanged it for a much gentler and easier, viz. that of Baptism. For whereas Circumcision was not only an infamous Rite among the greatest part of the Gentile World, and upon that account unfit to be the sign of initiation into the Church of Christ, which was now to be enlarged and propagated through the World; but also a blou∣dy and painful one, and upon that account more apt to affright men from, than to iniiate them into his Church; Baptism was a Rite that both Jews and Gentiles reverenced, and that is very easie and practicable in its own nature. So that whereas the ancient Judaism was rendered a yoke of bondage (as the Apostle calls it, Gal. 5.10.) through those numerous Rites and Ceremonies that were superinduced upon it, our Saviour disbur∣thened
it of them all, and thereby rendered it an easie yoke, as he himself calls it, Matt. 11.30. Since therefore Christianity, for the main, is nothing but the ancient Judaism released from the bondage of the Ceremonial Law, and restored to its Pri∣mitive easiness and freedom, it hence follows, that by embracing Christ and his Doctrine the believing Jews did not turn to a new Religion, nor conse∣quently constitute a new Church, but still conti∣nued in their Old Religion, which our Saviour only bettered and improved, and rendered far more easie and practicable. Thirdly and lastly, Our Saviour very much improved the Jewish Church and Religion in re∣spect of the extent and Amplitude of it. It is true, the Gentiles who embraced the Jewish Re∣ligion were always allowed admission into the Jew∣ish Church. For so at first not only Abraham himself and his Children, but his Servants also were admitted into Covenant with God, and there∣by made his Church and People. And in the Reigns of David and Solomon, as Mr. Selden de Iure l. 2. cap. 2. observes, there were vast numbers of Converts to the Jewish Church out of all the Neighbouring Nations; and in Ahasuerus's Reign many of the People of the Land, of Media and Persia, became Iews, Esther 8.17. and after∣wards in Hyrcanus's Reign the whole Nation of the Idumeans embraced the Jewish Religion; all which, and many more, as the true Children of Abraham's faith, were by Circumcision initiated into the Co∣venant God made with him and his Posterity, and thereby became Co-members with them of the same Corporation, and Coheirs to the same Promises.
But though the Gate of the Jewish Church was never shut against the Gentiles, yet, as I shewed before, there were sundry of the Rites of that Church instituted on purpose to divide and sepa∣rate the Jews from the Gentiles, to create a distance and mutual strangeness between them, that thereby the Jews might be preserved and se∣cured from mingling with the Gentile Idolatries. Now by these distinguishing Rites, which begat an inveterte mutual prejudice between the Jews and Gentiles, the Jewish Church was very much narrowed and contracted. For in the first place thse distinguishing Rites by prejudicing the Iews against the Gentiles restrained them from all free converse and communication with them, and thereby from propagating their Religi∣on among them; and secondly, by prejudicing the Gentiles against the Iews, they also prejudiced them against the Jewish Religion, and rendered their minds extremely averse to the entertain∣ment of it. Thus as these Ceremonious singula∣rities of the Jewish Church were to the Iews great preservatives against the Idolatries of the Gentiles, so to the Gentiles they were very great hinderances of their conversion to the Religion of the Jews. And therefore our Saviour, in order to his de∣sign of propagating Christianity among the Gen∣tiles, which is the true Spirit and Mystery of Iu∣daism, found it necessary to remove from it these offensive Rites, which lay as so many stumbling blocks in the way to the conversion of the Gentiles to it, and so by pulling down this middle Wall of partition between the Jews and Gentiles, and abolishing this enmity of Ordinances which created
such a vast distance between them, he opened and prepared the way to the conversion of the Gen∣tiles, and took a most prudent and effectual course to make peace between them and the Jews, and to reconcile them both into one body in the Cross, and and hereby to extend and enlarge the Church into an universal Corporation. In short therefore Christianity being nothing else but only Judaism separated from all those Appendages of it, which rendered it obscure, and burthensom, and narrow, it hence follows that that Remnant of Jews who received and embraced it, were so far from renouncing their old Religion, that they still admitted, and professed, and ad∣hered to it under its greatest advantages and im∣provements; that they renounced nothing of it but only its comparative defects, and did only admit of these new reformations of it, by which our Saviour advanced it to its utmost lustre and perfection, and rendered it infinitely more clear, and easie, and extensive; and since it was their old Religion thus reformed and improved that they still embraced and continued in, upon their turning Christians, it necessarily follows, that they did not become a new, distinct Church, but were only a continued succession of the Old one. And hence it is that Christians in the New Testament are sometimes called Iews, Rev. 2.9. i. e. reformed Jews, or, which is the same, true Christians; and sometimes the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. and some∣times the Children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. and some∣times a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, which is the proper Character of the Iews, because by their Faith
and Religion, which is nothing but the true spiri∣tual and mystick Judaism, they were Iews and Is∣raelites, and the Children of Abraham, though they were not all so according to the Flesh, as the Apostle distinguishes, 1 Cor. 10.18. and hence also it is that the Christian Church is cal∣led the new Ierusalem, Rev. 3.12. because it is nothing but the Old Ierusalem or Jewish Church renewed and enlarged. Eighthly and lastly, That to this individual Church or Kingdom of Christ, thus reformed and improved, was superadded all those Gentiles that were afterwards converted to Christianity. When the main body of the Jews had rejected our Sa∣viour, his Kingdom was reduced to a very nar∣row compass, and consisted only of one single Congregation of Christians in Ierusalem, which, through the blessing of God upon the indefa∣tigable industry of his Apostles and Disciples, was by degrees spread and dilated over all the World. For this single Congregation was the Primitive root out of which the vast stock of the Catholick Church sprung, which hath since branch'd forth it self into particular Churches to all the ends of the Earth; for it is of this Church that the Apostle speaks, Acts 2.47. when he tells us, that the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. So that all that were converted to the faith of Christ were but so many additions to this Primitive Church, so many living stones incorporated into this spiritual building, which by the industry of its builders did soon encrease and multiply into several other Congregations;
and these Congregations, though they were seve∣ral, yet were not separate or independent, but continued all of them united to the first, as Homo∣geneous parts growing out of the same body, or distinct Apartments superadded to the same build∣ing. So that the Christian Church began in one Congregation, and by degrees enlarged it self, like a fruitful stock, by branching forth it self into other Congregations in a continued unity with its own body, which for the convenience of Worship and Discipline were afterwards formed into seve∣ral (though not separate) particular Churches un∣der the conduct of their particular Pastors and Governours. And thus all the particular Churches that are now in the World are only so many Lines drawn from this Primitive Centre, and united in it; and it is upon this account particularly that they all of them constitute but one Catholick Church, because they all grew out of one, and so are but comparts of the same body, and branches of the same root, and are only that one Primitive Church multiplied into several Churches living in the same Catholick Communion and Vnity. And accor∣dingly the Gentile Converts are said to be graf∣ted into the Jewish Church, which the Apostle calls the good Olive tree in Rom. 11.17, 18 For if some of the branches, that is, the unbelieving Jews, be broken off, i. e. rejected from being any more the Church and People of God, and thou being a wild Olive Tree, growing in the wild common of the World without the Pale and Inclosure of God's Church, wert grafted in among them, i. e. incorporated with the believing Jews, and made a member of the body of their Church, and with
them partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree, i. e. communicatest with them in all the blessings of God's Promise to Abraham, which is the foundation of their Church, boast not against the branches, but if thou boast, consider thou bear∣est not the root, but the root thee, i. e. the Jewish Church grew not out of thee, but thou out of that; she is no branch of thee, but thou of her, as being ingrafted into her Stock, and added to her Communion. By which it is evident that the converted Gentiles were all but so many superad∣ditions to that Primitive Church of Ierusalem, which was the only remainder of the ancient Jew∣ish Church, and which from one single Congrega∣tion did by degrees increase and multiply it self in∣to an infinite number of particular Churches in Vnion with it self from one end of the World to the other. And this, in short, is the Progress of Christ's Kingdom, which from Adam to Abraham consist∣ed of all such as were true Worshippers of God of whatsoever Kindred or Nation; from Abraham to Jesus Christ principally of the Iewish Nation; and when the greatest part of that Nation had re∣volted from Christ, and renounced their relation to him, his Kingdom extended no farther than to the small Remnant of the Jews that adhered to him, who made up but one single Congregation, which Congregation by the diligence of its Mini∣sters, and the blessing of God increased and propa∣gated from it self vast numbers of other Congre∣gations, and these were formed into particular Churches, which like so many conquered Provin∣ces were still united to that Primitive Kingdom,
till at last by a continued accession of new Conquests it was spread and enlarged into an universal Empire. SECT. VIII. Of the Nature and Constitution of Christ's Kingdom. THE Kingdom of Christ and the Church of Christ are phrases of a promiscuous use in holy Scripture, and do import the same thing. Thus Matth. 16.18, 19. Thou art Peter, and up∣on this Rock will I build my Church, and I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, where the Church and the Kingdom of Heaven are the same thing. And thus to be translated into the Kingdom of Christ, Col. 1.13. and called to the Kingdom of Christ, 1 Thess. 2.12. imports no more than to be made a member of the Church of Christ. And thus also by the Kingdom, Matt. 13.38. by the Kingdom of God, Matth. 21.31. by the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 11.12. and by the King∣dom of Christ, Rev. 11.15. no other thing can be intended but only the Church of Christ. I confess the Kingdom of Christ taken in the largest sence extends a great deal farther than the Church of Christ. For under God the Father he is universal Lord and King of the World, his Kingly power being upon his Ascension into Hea∣ven extended, as was shewn before, to the ut∣most limits of the Vniverse. For so he himself tells us by way of Anticipation, that God hath
given him power over all flesh, John 17.2. i. e. over all mankind. For his Regal power extends as far as his power of judging which is one of the principal Acts of his Regality, and his power of judging is over all mankind; for so we are assured that God hath appointed a day in which he will judge the World by the man Christ Iesus, Acts 17.31. and that Christ is ordained of God to be the Iudge of quick and dead, Acts 10.42. and not only so, but that when he shall sit down up∣on the throne of his glory all Nations shall be gathe∣red before him, Matth. 25.31, 32. Since there∣fore by the right of his Royalty he shall judge all Nations, it necessarily follows, that all Nations are under his Empire and Dominion; and accor∣dingly the Apostle tells us, that God hath set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not on∣ly in this world, but also in that which is to come, and hath put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the Church, Eph. 1.20, 21, 22. So that the Kingdom of Christ in a large sence extends to all Nations in the World, even to the Heathens and Infidels that never heard of his name, and upon this account he is stiled, The blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Tim. 6.15. and so also Rev. 17 14. But the Church is more peculiarly his Kingdom, as consisting of that part of the World which owns and acknowledges his authority, makes a visible profession of fealty to him, and submission to his Laws and Regulations. As for the other parts
of the World, they are all of right his Subjects, by vertue of that Vniversal Regal Authority wherewith the most High God and Father of all things hath invested him, but de facto they are Slaves to the Prince of darkness, all whose Domini∣ons in this World are nothing but usurpations on the Kingdom of Christ. But the Church is that part of the World that hath thrown off the yoke of this Vsurper, and by a solemn Profession surrende∣red up it self to the Authority of Christ its rightful Lord and Sovereign; and hence the Members of the Church are said to be translated out of the King∣dom of darkness into the Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, Col. 1.13. The Church therefore being more peculiarly Christ's Kingdom, as being that part of the World which is actually subjected to him, and under his Government, I shall, with as much brevity as the Argument will admit, inquire into the nature and constitution of it. In general therefore the Church or Kingdom of Christ may be thus defined: It is the one universal society of all Christian People in∣corporated by the new Covenant in Baptism under Iesus Christ its supreme head, and distributed un∣der lawful Governours and Pastors into particular Churches holding Communion with each other in all the Essentials of Christian Faith, and Worship and Discipline. For our better understanding of which definition it will be necessary to explain the several parts of it. First Therefore it is the one universal Society of all Christian People. Secondly, Of all Christian People incorporated by the New Covenant.
Thirdly, Of all Christian People incorporated by the New Covenant in Baptism. Fourthly, Of all Christian People incorporated under Iesus Christ its supreme Head and Gover∣nour. Fifthly, It is a Society of all Christian People distributed into particular Churches. Sixthly, It is distributed into particular Church∣es under lawful Pastors and Governours. Seventhly, It is distributed into particular Churches holding Communion with each other. Eighthly, The Communion which these parti∣cular Churches hold with each ohr is, First, In all the Essentials of Christian Faith; and Secondly, In all the Essentials of Christian Wor∣ship. Thirdly, In all the Essentials of Christian Dis∣cipline. First, The Church or Kingdom of Christ is one universal Society consisting of all Christian People, who, as was shewn before, were at first comprised in one single Congregation at Ierusalem, and then this single Congregation was the whole Church or Kingdom of Christ, which by the continual accession of new Converts, increased and multi∣plied by degrees, till at length it was spread over the whole Earth. So that the Christian Society as it is now enlarged is nothing but that Primi∣tive Church diffused and dilated. For it was not diffused into separate and independent Socie∣tis, but into similar parts and members of the same Society, and therefore as a man is one and the same person when he is full grown, as he was when
he was an Infant but of a span long, because his growth consists not in an addition of other persons to him, but only of other parts of the same per∣son; so the Church of Christ is the same individu∣al Church now, since it is grown to this vast Bulk and Proportion, that it was in its infant state, when it extended no farther than one single Con∣gegation, because it grew not into other divided Churches, but only into other distinct parts of the same Church; and therefore since its growth con∣sisted only in new accessions of similar parts to the same body, it must be as much one Body or Socie∣ty now, as it was at first, when it was but one single Congregation. For this Congregation was the root out of which the Catholick Church sprang, or, as our Saviour phrases it, the grain of mu∣stard-seed, which, though a very small seed, shot up into a mighty tree, in whose far-spread branches the Birds of the Air came and lodged; and therefore as the stock and branches grow up from the root in a continued Vnion with it, and all together make but one Tree, so all the Christian People in the World sprang out of this single Con∣gregation, and as they sprang were still incor∣porated and united to it, so as that all together they make but one Church. And this is that which in our Creeds is called the holy Catholick or uni∣versal Church. For so the Apostle tells us, that there is but one body, or Church, as well as one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism, Eph. 4.5, 6. and our Saviour tells us, Other sheep have I, meaning the Gentiles, which are not of this fold, meaning the Iewish Church, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold
and one shepherd, John 10.16. For so the Gen∣tiles, added to the Christian Iewish Church, are said of twain to make one new man, Eph. 2.13. and both together are compared to a building fitly fra∣med together, growing into an holy Temple in the Lord, Ibid. ver. 21. And indeed since all Christi∣ans do enjoy in common, and without any distincti∣on the same priviledges and immunities, they must of necessity be all of the same Community. For it is by thei peuliar Faith, and Laws, and Rights of Worship, and Promises, and Priviledges that the Christian Society is distinguished from the rest of the World; and therefore since these peculia∣riies are by the very institution of Christian Socie∣ty mde common to all Christian People, it is non∣sense to suppose them distinguished by that insti∣tution into separate and independent Communities. For how can they be separate Societies which have nothing to separate and distinguish them, but enjoy all things in common with one ano∣ther. Secondly, The Church is one universal Socie∣ty of all Christian People incorporated by the New Covenant: For this is that which distinguishes rgular Societies from confused multitudes, that whreas the latter are only locally united, so that as soon as ver their parts are dispersed into di∣stant places they cease to be, and are utterly dis∣solved; the former are united by Laws and mu∣tal stipulations, which are the Political Nerves and Arries, by which their several parts, how remote nd distant soever, are united to one another. Even as it is in our City Companies, which are not only united while their Members
are met together in their Common Halls, but do al∣so continue united after they are dispersed abroad to their several homes, because that which unites them is not their being together in the same place, but their being obliged together under the same Laws and stipulations, and communicating with one another in the duties and priviledges of one and the same Charter; by reason whereof though they suffer a continual defluence of old and access of new parts, yet still they remain the same Societies, (even like natural bodies that are under a perpetual flux of parts) because they still retain the same Laws and Charters which are the satique Principles or Forms that indivi∣duate them, and keep them still the same. And thus it is with the Church, which partakes of the common nature of all other formed and regular Societies. For hence in Scripture it is called a Kingdom, a City, or Commonwealth, and com∣pared to a natural Organized body, to denote that it is a Regular Society, all whose parts are united together by legal bonds and ligaments. Now the legal bond which unites the Church, and renders all its Members one regular Corporation, is the New Covenant, by which all Christian People are in one body obliged to all the duties it requires, and entitled to all the Priviledges it pro∣poses, and by being all engaged together in this one Covenant, whereby they are all concerned together in the same common duties and priviledges, they are all incorporate together into the same Commu∣nity. And thus it was that the Iewish People were all united into one Church, by their being all confe∣derated as one party in one and the same Covenant,
whereby they all engaged themselves, as one bo∣dy, to be God's People, and God engaged him∣self to them, as to one body, to be their God; which in Deut. 26.17, 18. is thus expressed, Thou hast avouched this day the Lord to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, and his Commandments, and the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar People as he hath promised thee. This therefore was that which united them into one Religious Society, that they were all con∣federated with God in one and the same Covenant. For thus saith God, I entered into Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezek. 16.8. and hence God is said to be married to tht People, Ir. 3.14. and to be their Husband, Isa. 54.5. because by the Covenant, which like a Matrimo∣nial engagement was transacted between God and them, they were all united into one Spuse, and contracted to one Husband. And in th same sense the Christian Church is called the Bride and the Spouse of Christ, vid. Rev. 22.17. and Christ is called her Husband, 2 Cor. 11.2. because we by contracting our selves to him in one and the same Covenant, do all become one Party, and are incorporate together into one Spouse, and he by contracting himself to us in one and the same Counterpart unites us in one common Husband, and endows us in common with all his spiritual Goods and Blessings. So that by the New Cove∣nant, which is the Nuptial Contract between Christ and Christians, and in which we are said to be married to Christ, Rom. 7.7. we are not only uni∣ted to one head and Husband, but are also incor∣porated into one body and Spouse. And accordingly
as the Iews by vertue of their Covenant with God, were separated from all Nations, and uni∣ted together into a distinct body, upon which ac∣count they are called God's peculiar Treasure, a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, Exod. 19.5, 6. so we Christians by vertue of our Cove∣nant with God in Christ are separated from all other Societies, and made a distinct Corporation from the World; upon which account we are also called, a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, and holy Nation, and a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. Thirdly, The Church or Kingdom of Christ is the universal Society of all Christian People in∣corporated by the new Covenant in Baptism. For so in humane Contracts it hath been thought meet even by the unanimous consent of all pru∣dent Law-givers, that the mutual engagements of the contracting Parties should not be legally Pleadable, till they have been first mutually sealed and solemnly confirmed before witness. And ac∣cordingly God, who is wont to proceed with men in humane Methods, hath always thought meet to strike and ratifie his Covenants with them by some visible sign, or solemnity. For thus he struck his Covenant with the Iews in that visible solemnity of Circumcision, which was the sign by which God and that People sealed and consigned to each other their respective parts of that Cove∣nant, by which he stipulated to be their God, and they to be his People. And till such time as this outward sign was transacted between God and them, the Covenant it sealed was not in force so as to oblige either Party, or give them a mutual claim in one another. And hence it
is called God's Covenant in their flesh for an ever∣lasting Covenant, and they who refused to admit this sign, unless it were under some great necessity (in which case God accepted the sincere desire for the deed) were to be cut off from that People, i. e. to be treated as Aliens from that Church, and that because they had broken or rejected God's Co∣venant, i. e. by refusing that sign which was the Seal and ratification of it, Gen. 17.13, 14. But this bloudy sign, as was shewn before, be∣ing not so commodious for the state of the Chri∣stian Church, which was to be diffused over all the World, our Saviour abolished it, and in its room introduced the sign of Baptism, which was before used by the Iews for the initiation of their Females and Proselytes, and which was much more acceptable to the Gentiles, as not being at all offen∣sive to them, (as Circumcision was) it being one of their own Religious Ceremonies, and much less painful in its own nature. But though this was of a quite different nature from Circumcision, yet it was instituted by our Saviour to supply its room, and to serve its religious ends and purposes, viz. to transact, and seal, and ratifie the new Cove∣nant between God and us. For in Baptism the Party Baptized makes a solemn Vow and Professi∣on, by himself or his Sponsor, of fidelity and Al∣legiance to God through Jesus Christ; and hence Baptism is called the answer or promise of a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21. For in the Apostolick Age, as Orign tells us, in Num. Homil. 5. there were certain questions proposed by the Mi∣nister to the Person to be Baptized, which St. Cy∣prian calls Interrogatio Baptismi, the Interrogation
of Baptism; Now the questions proposed were first, ; Wilt thou renounce the Devil? To which the Party answered, , I do renounce; then he was asked again, ▪ Dost thou consent to resign thy self to Christ? To which he answered, , I do consent; and this answer or promise being made with a sincere intention, was that in all Probability which the Apostle here calls the answer of a good Conscience, and if so, it is certain that these words do imply our formal Covenanting with God in Baptism. Of the truth of which we have a large account in Rom. 6.3, 4, 5. Know ye not that so many as were baptized into Iesus Christ were baptized into his death, there∣fore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life, for if we have been planted to∣gether into the likeness of his death, we shall be also into the likeness of his Resurrection; where it is plain that those Phrases, buried with Christ, and risen with Christ are only the sense and signification of that Eastern custom in Bap∣tism, viz. of Plunging the Baptized person un∣der water, and raising him up again, which be∣ing Sacramental actions must be supposed to have a peculiar import and significancy, and the signifi∣cancy of them the Apostle here plainly tells us wholly refers to the Death, and Burial, and Resur∣rection of Christ; and therefore the plunging under water must necessarily refer to Christ's Death and Burial, and the raising up again, to his Resurrection. The true import therefore of these Baptismal actions
must be, First, a solemn profession of our belief, that as we are buried under water and raised up again, so Christ died, and was buried, and raised up from the dead, which being the principal Ar∣ticles of Christianity do include all the rest. Se∣condly, They also import a solemn engagement of the Party baptized to die to, and endeavour ut∣terly to extinguish all his sinful lusts and affe∣ctions, even as Christ died and was buried, and to rise from the spiritual death of sin into newness of life, even as Christ rose from his natural death to live for ever. Since therefore in their Bap∣tism they did by the same actions signifie their belief of the Death, and Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, together with their own resolution of dying to sin, and rising to righteousness, they might very well be said to dye with Christ in those acti∣ons, to be buried with Christ, and to rise with Christ, since what is represented as done toge∣ther, is representatively done together, and it is usual in Sacraments to call the representing signs by the names of the things which they represent. For so the Paschal Lamb is called the Passover, and the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper the Body and Bloud of Christ; and for the same reason the plunging under water and rai∣sing up again in Baptism is here called dying with Christ, and rising with Christ, because in the same actions Christ's natural Death and Resurrection and our spiritual Death and Resurrection are re∣presented together. The meaning therefore of the above cited passage is plainly this, You can∣not be ignorant that when you were baptized into Jesus Christ you made a solemn Pro∣fession
that you would conform your selves to his Death in dying to sin even as he died for it, so that in your Baptismal immersion you were representatively buried with him, that so as Christ was raised from the dead, so you in conformity thereto might live a new regenerate life; for if we conform to his Death in dying to sin, as we promised to do in our immersion, we shall be sure to conform to his Resurrection also in living to Righteousness, as we promised to do in our rising out of the water again. By which it is evident that Baptism is on our part a solemn engagement of our selves to perform the conditions of the New Covenant. And indeed the very phrase Baptized into Iesus Christ can im∣port no less than a solemn resignation of our selves to Christ in Baptism. For so the phrase Bapti∣zed into Moses, 1 Cor. 10.2. plainly denotes the Jews giving up themselves to him, to be governed by him, as the Minister of God. And accordingly the Apostle tells us, that so many as have been Bap∣tized into Christ have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. and putting on Christ is opposed by the Apo∣stle to making no provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof, Rom. 13.14. and therefore must necessarily denote an ingagement of our selves to a strict observance of the Laws of Christian purity; or, which is the same thing, a promise or stipulation, on our part, of universal obedi∣ence to his Laws. By all which it is evident that in this solemnity of Baptism we put our selves under Christ, as our Head, and Cove∣nant with him to be ruled by him in our Faith and Manners.
And as in this Ceremony of Initiation we strike Covenant with him, so doth he with us. For in this sacred Action the Minister is the authorized Proxy of Jesus Christ, and therefore his giving the holy Sign is Christ's own action, and doth to all intents and purposes as much oblige him, as if he did it in his own Person. For since Christ is not upon Earth, and so cannot transact the New Covenant with us in his own Person, it is necessary he should do it by Authorized Proxies, impowered by himself to do it in his Name; which Proxies being thus Authorized by him, do as effectually oblige him by those federal Rites which they perform in his Name, as if he himself had performed them in his own Person. For he doth what they do by his Authority, and is as effectually obliged by what he doth by them mediately, as by what he doth by himself im∣mediately. For thus his Commission runs, by which he Authorized them and their Successors to the end of the World, Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; where that Phrase, in the Name, plainly imports (as it generally doth in other places of Scripture) by the Authority. So that by this Commission Christ's Ministers are authori∣zed and constituted the legal Proxies of the holy Trinity, in the stead of those blessed Persons to seal the New Covenant with the Baptismal sign to those whom they baptize, and thereby legally to oblige the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to perform the Promises of it to all those Baptized persons who perform the conditions of it. For that the Baptismal sign is a legal ingagement upon God as
well as us to perform the New Covenant, is evi∣dent from Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved; where it is evident, that Baptism as well as Faith doth confer a right to Salvation; and therefore since Faith confers it only as it is the Condition of the Covenant, Bap∣tism must confer it as it is the Seal of the Cove∣nant. And accordingly S. Peter exhorts his Con∣verts to repent and be baptized for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; from whence it is evident, that Baptism as well as Repentance has a great influence on our remission of sins, and our communication of the Holy Ghost. Since therefore Faith and Repentance are the whole condition of the promise of remission, and of the Holy Ghost, it necessarily follows, that Bap∣tism doth not influence it as it is the Condition, but as it is the Seal of the Promise. And so also in Baptism we are said to wash away our sins, i. e. the guilt of them, Acts 22.16. because the sign of Baptism seals to us on God's part the Promise of Forgiveness. By all which it is evident, that Baptism is a federal Rite in which God and we do seal and ratifie to one another each others part of the New Covenant; and it is this sealing that makes the Covenant obliging to both Parties, and gives to each a legal Claim and Title to each others promise and engagement; to God it gives a legal Title to all that duty which we promise, and to us it gives a legal Title to all those blessings which God promises. So that till such time as we are Baptized, the New Covenant is not struck be∣tween God and us, nor have we any right or title to any of the blessings promised in it. And
though we should perform all that duty which the Covenant requires, yet this will not at all intitle us to the blessings it promises. For he who en∣gages to walk a Mile for me upon my promise to give him a thousand pounds, hath upon his per∣formance a just claim and title to the whole Sum; whereas he that walks ten Miles for me without any such promise, hath a right to no more than what in strict justice he deserves. And therefore since what God promises in the New Covenant in∣finitely exceeds the merit of what he requires, our performance of what he requires doth not at all oblige him to bestow the blessings of his promise on us, unless we perform it upon a Covenant-en∣gagement; and therefore till this engagement is made and sealed in our Baptism, we can have no promise to rely upon; and though we should nevr so heartily endeavour to repent, we can∣t claim the divine grace and assistance, and though we should actually repent, we can plead o title to remission of sins, and though we should prsevere in well-doing to the end, we cannot challenge eternal life. And since our endea∣vours do not merit God's grace, nor our repen∣tance his Pardon, nor our perseverance eternal life, he is no more obliged to bestow these blessings on us by his Iustice than he is by his Promise. So that in this state all we have to rely upon is the hope of an extraordinary mercy; that God will do for us that which he never promised, and bestow upon us that which he is not obliged to. But when once we have struck Covenant with him in Baptism, we have him fast obliged to us to perform his part of the Covenant, whenever
we perform ours; and our being thus tied toge∣ther as one party in one and the same Covenant by this federal Rite of Baptism, is that which makes us one Catholick Church or Community. For our admission into this New Covenant, which is the Churches Charter, is our admission into the Church it self; and it is by being intituled to all the blessings that belong to Christians in common, by vertue of the New Covenant, that we be∣come Members of the Christian Community. And hence we are said to be Baptized into the bo∣dy or Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13. because Baptism, which is our admission into the Christi∣an Covenant, is only in other words our admission into the Christian Church, which is nothing but the Body of Christian People joyned and confede∣rated by the New Covenant. Fourthly, The Church or Kingdom of Christ is one universal Society of all Christian People incorporated by the New Covenant in Baptism under Iesus Christ its supreme head. And it is this also that makes all Christian People one Body and Society, because they are all united under one and the same supreme head and Governour. For as several neighbouring Congregations are called in Scripture one Church, as I shall shew hereafter; because they were all under the Government of one and the same Bishop; so all the Churches under all the Bishops in the World are in Scrip∣ture called one Church, because they are all un∣der one Governour, even Iesus Christ the supreme Bishop of our souls: And accordingly the Apostle tells us, that as there is but one body, i. e. one Church, so there is but one Lord or supreme Go∣vernour
of that Church, Eph. 4.4, 5. and in Col. 1.18. he tells us, that Christ is the head of this body the Church; and again, Eph. 5.23. that the Husband is the head of the Wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church. For Christ being Media∣tor of the Covenant, by which we are incorporated into a Religious Society, it must be under him, as our immediate head and Governour, that we are incorporate by it; because as he is Mediator of it for God, his Office is to govern us for and un∣der God, according to the terms and conditions of it. Fifthly, The Church or Kingdom of Christ is one universal Society of all Christian People [di∣stributed into particular Churches] which distri∣bution is made for the convenience of divine Wor∣ship▪ For the Catholick Church being a vast Bo∣dy composed of infinite parts which are separated from each other by vast distances of place, it is impossible for it to celebrate the Offices of Divine Worship in any one Assembly or Congregation. At first indeed the whole Catholick Church was only a single Congregation; but this in a little time encreased and multiplied so fast, that they could no longer exercise the Publick Worship of God together in one place or Assembly; and there∣fore the first distribution of it was into several Congregations which in Scripture are called by the name of Churches, as being similar parts of the Catholick Church, even as every breath of Air is called Air, and every drop of water, water. For thus those Believers who were wont to assemble in any one particular house to worship God toge∣ther are frequently called Churches: as for in∣stances,
the Church in the house of Priscilla and Aquila, Rom. 16.5. The Church in the house of Nymphas, 1 Cor. 16.19. The Church in the house of Philemon, Col. 4.15. In which houses in all probability there was an upper Room Consecrated and set apart according to the Custom of the Jews for divine Worship, in which upper Rooms not only the Believers of the Family, but several other neighbouring Christians were wont to as∣semble for the publick exercise of Divine Wor∣ship. And so where ever the Scripture speaks of several Churches in the same Country; as for instances, the Churches of Iudea, Gal. 1.22. of Samaria and Galile, Acts 9.31. it is evident, that by these Churches no more is meant but only the several Congregations of Believers in those se∣veral Churches. But these Congregations growing numerous, there was a second distribution made of them, by which many of those Congregations neighbouring upon one another, were collected into one body, under one head or Bishop, who was the common guide and Pastor of all the Members, whether Lay or Clergy, appertaining to them. And these Collections of several Congregations under their several Bishops or Governours, are in Scripture also frequently called Churches; for thus for instance, the Church of Corinth contained in it several Congregations, and therefore though in the Dedication of his Epistle the Apostle calls it, the Church of God, in the singular number, which is at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2. yet in the Epistle he enjoyns, that the women should keep silence in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14.34▪ which is a plain
Evidence, that in that Church there were several Churches or Congregations; and so also we read of the Churches of Asia, and Syria, Cilicia, and Macedonia, all which were large Countries; and did without doubt contain in them several Congre∣gations of Christians; and thus also we read of the Church of Ierusalem in the singular number, and so of Antioch, Ephsus, &c. which Churches doubt∣less consisted of several Congregations in and about thse Populous Cities; which were all united into one body under the care and inspection of one Bi∣shop or Governour. Now as the first distribution of the Catholick Church into distinct Congregations was made for the convenience of Worship, it being impossible for the whole Church, when it began to encrease and enlarge it self, to celebrate the divine Of∣fices by the Ministry of one and the same Pastor; so this second dstribution of it into particular Churches, consisting of several Congregations, was made for the convenience of Government and Discipline; it being impossible for the whole Church to maintain its Order, Government, and Discipline, under the single inspection of any one Bishop or Governour: But yet notwithstanding thse distributions the Churches unity still re∣mains; for as the Empire was but one, notwith∣standing that for the convenience of Society and Government it was distributed into several Cities and Regions, and those into several Provinces, because they were all incorporated together un∣der one Civil head, the Emperor; so the Church is but one, though for the convenience of Worship and Government it be distributed into several
Congregations, and those into several particular Churches or Episcopacies; because they are all incorporate under one spiritual Head, even Jesus Christ the supreme Bishop and Pastor of our Souls. Sixthly, It is the universal Society of all Chri∣stian People distributed into particular Churches under lawful Governours and Pastors, and it is this indeed that constitutes them distinct Church∣es, viz. their being joyned and united together under distinct Pastors and Governours: For thus a single Congregation is a distinct Church, because all the Members of it do locally Commu∣nicate together in all the Offices of Divine Wor∣ship administred to them by a distinct Pastor; and so also a Collection of several Congregations is a distinct Church, because they all participate toge∣ther of the direction and conduct of a distinct Go∣vernour. For, as I shewed before, the reason of these distributions of the Catholick Church first into single Congregations, was the Convenience of Worship, and then into several Collections of several Congregations was the Convenience of Go∣vernment; and therefore since that which serves the convenience of Worship is the having distinct Pastors to administer it, and that which serves the convenience of Government is the having distinct Rulers to exercise it, it hence necessarily follows, that that which makes a Congregation a distinct distribution of the Catholick Church, must be its worshipping together under a distinct Pastor; and that which makes a Collection of Con∣gregations a distinct distribution of the Catho∣lick Church, must be its being united together un∣der a distinct Governour; because without their
Pastor or their Governour they want the formal reason of their being distributed into distinct Churches. And indeed there is no Church what∣soever, whether it be a single Congregation or a Collection of Congregations, can act as a Church without a Pastor or Governour. No Congregati∣on can lawfully communicate in the publick Offi∣ces of Divine Worship without a lawful Pastor to administer it: no Collection of Congregations can lawfully exert any act of Church-Government without having an authorized Governour to exer∣cise it. For the administration of all Church-Of∣fices is committed by our Saviour into the hands of the Churches Officers; it is to them that he hath given the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. Authority to admit, or exclude, or readmit men into the Communion of the Church: It is they alone whom he hath made the Keepers of the Seals of the New Covenant, viz. Baptism and the Lord's Supper; they alone whom he hath autho∣rized to teach the Gospel, to bless the People, and to offer up the Publick Prayers of Christian Assemblies. And these are the proper acts of a Church considered as a Church; so that without Pastors or Governours there is no Church can per∣form any of those acts that are proper to a Church: and therefore since all action proceeds from the Essence of the Agent; Pastors and Governours, without which Churches as such cannot act, must necessarily be essential to Churches: and hence the Apostle tells us, that the great purpose for which Christ ordained Apostles, Prophets, Evange∣lists, and Pastors, and Teachers was, , for the compacting or joyning together the
Saints as one body in Church-Communion and Society, Eph. 4.11, 12. and hence also you find the Churches of Asia following the number of the Angels or Rulers of them; Rev. 1.20. which plainly implies, that therefore they were se∣ven distinct Churches, because they had seven distinct Rulers or Bishops; and therefore though the Ordination of Pastors and Bishops is not con∣sined to the Ministry of any particular Church, but extends to the Ministry of the Church Catho∣lick, for so S. Paul, Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, all are yours, and you are Christ's, that is, they are all Ministers of the Catholick Church in common, of which you are Members, and as such you have all a share in them, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. yet it is the particular application of this their general capacity to this or that particular number of Christians or Congregations of Chri∣stians, that constitutes them particular Churches; and being first authorized Ministers of the Ca∣tholick Church, they carry along with them in∣to the particular Church they are sent to, all that Church-Authority and Power by which it acts and operates as a Church: So that without Pastors or Governours particular Churches are nothing but so many Bodies without Souls, to animate and act them; and therefore as in natu∣ral Bodies the form that acts them doth also con∣stitute their Kind and Species, so in these Ecclesi∣stical Bodies the Pastors and Governours, that move and act them as Churches, do also constitute them Churches. What these lawful Pastors and Governours are, I shall have occasion to discourse hereafter, when I come to treat of the Ministers of
Christ's Kingdom; it being sufficient at present to shew the necessity of them to the constituting particular Churches. Seventhly, The Church is one universal Socie∣ty of all Christian People distributed into particu∣lar Churches [holding Communion with each o∣ther] by holding Communion with each other, I mean, owning each other as parts of the same body, and admitting each others Members, as occasion serves, into actual Communion with them in all their Religious Offices. It is true, in the Primitive Churches there were sundry pruden∣tial acts of Communion pass'd between them, such as their formed and communicatory Letters, by which the holy Bishops gave an account to each other of the state and condition of their re∣spective Churches, and consulted each others judg∣ment about them; but these were not at all essen∣tial to that Communion which they were obliged, as true Churches, to maintain with one another. All the Communion which they are obliged to, as they are similar parts and distributions of the Catholick Church, is that they should not di∣vide into separate Churches, so as to exclude each others Members from Communicating in each others Worship, when ever they have oc∣casion to travel from one Church to another. For so long as there is no Rupture between distant Churches, no declared disowning of each other, no express refusal of any act of Communion to each others Members, they may be truly said to maintain all necessary Communion with each o∣ther. And that this Communion is absolutely necessary between all those particular Churches
into which the Catholick Church is distributed will evidently appear from these four considera∣tions. First, that by Baptism, as was shewed before, all Christian People are made Members of the Catholick Church, and by being made Members of it they are all obliged to Communi∣cate with it; for how can they act as parts of the whole, that hold no Communication with the whole? They who are Members of any Society have not only a Right to communicate in all the common Benefits of it, but also an Obligation to communicate in all common Offices of it; and therefore since by Baptism we are made Members of the Catholick Church or Society of Christians, we are thereby not only entituled to partake with it in all its Priviledges, but also obliged to joyn with it in all its Offices. But then secondly, it is farther to be considered, that the Catholick Church being all distributed into particular Churches, we can no otherwise communicate with it, than by communicating with some particular Church; for how can we communicate with the whole, that is all distributed into parts, without communicating with some part of the whole? And since the whole is nothing but only a Collection of all the parts, what Communion can they hold with the whole, who hold no Communion with any part of it? So long therefore as there is any such thing as a visible Catholick Church upon Earth, we are obliged by our Baptism, unless necessity hinder us, to maintain a visible Communion with it; and so long as this Catholick Church is all distributed into so many particular visible Churches, we can∣not visibly communicate with it, unless we com∣municate
with some one of those particular Chur∣ches. For how can we be in Communion with the whole body, when we are out of Communion with all the parts, unless we can find a body to commu∣nicate with without all its parts, or some universal Church without all particular Churches. But then thirdly, it is also to be considered that as we can∣not Communicate with the universal Church with∣out Communicating with some particular one, so neither do we Communicate with the univer∣sal Church by Communicating with any particu∣lar one, unless that particular one be in Commu∣nion with the Church Universal. For if I can∣not communicate with the whole without being in Communion with some part of the whole, it is impossible I should communicate with the whole unless I communicate with some part that is in Communion with the whole. It is as possible for a Finger to communicate with a body by be∣ing joyned to an Arm that is separated from the body; as it is for a Christian to Communicate with the Church Catholick by being joyned to a Church that is separate from the Church Ca∣tholick. But then fourthly and lastly, There is no particular Church can be in Communion with the Catholick, that separates it self from the Communion of any particular Church that is in Communion with the Catholick. For they who separate from any part of any whole, must ne∣cessarily separate from the whole, because the whole is nothing but all the parts together; and it is a contradiction to say, that they who are se∣parated from any one part are yet united to all. How then is it possible for any Church to sepa∣rate
it self from the Communion of any other Church, which is a true part of the Church Catho∣lick, without separating it self from the Commu∣nion of the Church Catholick it self; since the Church Catholick is nothing but a Collection of all true Churches; and to be at the same time united to all true Churches, and separated from one true Church, is the same absurdity as to be separated from all true Churches, and yet united to one. In short, the Catholick Church is one, by the Communion of all its parts, and therefore they who break Communion with any one part must necessarily disunite themselves from the whole. For when two Churches separate from one ano∣ther, it must be, either because the one requires such terms of Communion as are not Catholick, or because the other refuses such as are. Now that Church which requires sinful or uncatholick terms of Communion, doth thereby exclude not only one, but all parts of the Catholick Church from its Communion, because they are all equally obliged not to Communicate with any Church upon sinful terms of Communion, and that Church which ex∣cludes all parts of the Catholick Church from its Communion, must in so doing separate it self from the Communion of the Catholick Church. And so on the other hand, that Church which re∣fuses the Communion of any other Church upon lawful and Catholick terms, doth thereby separate it self from Communion of all parts of the Church Catholick, because it separates from a part that is in Communion with all the parts of it; for that Church which may be lawfully Commu∣nicated with is in Communion with all other
Churches that are in Communion with the Catho∣lick Church; and therefore that Church which separates from its Communion cannot be in the number of those Churches that are in Commu∣nion with the Catholick Church; and how then can this separating Church be in the Com∣munion of the Catholick Church, when it is out of the Communion of any one of those Churches of which the Catholick Church consists? All those particular Churches therefore into which the Catholick Church is distributed, must be in Communion with each other, otherwise they are so far from being distributions of the Catholick Church, that they are only so many Schisms and divisions from it. For if every Christian is obli∣ged by his Baptism to Communicate with the Catholick Church; and if he can no otherwise Communicate with it than by Communicating with some particular Church, which is in Com∣munion with the Church Catholick; and lastly, if no particular Church can be in Communion with the Church Catholick which is not in Com∣munion with all the Churches of which the Church Catholick consists; then it is absolutely necessary that all those Churches into which the Church Ca∣tholick is distributed should maintain a Catholick Communion with one another. Eighthly and lastly, The Communion which these particular Churches into which the Catho∣lick Society of Christians is distributed, hold with each other is threefold: 1. In all the Essentials of Christian Faith: 2. In all the Essentials of Chri∣stin Worship. 3. In all the Essntials of Christian Discipline.
I. In all the Essentials of Christian Faith; By the Essentials of Christian Faith, I mean those Doctrines, the belief of which is necessary to the very being of Christianity; for as in all Arts and Sciences there are some first Principles upon which the whole Scheme of their Doctrines depends, and the denial of which like the removing the foun∣dations of a building dissolves and ruines the whole structure; so in Christianity there are some Principles so fundamental to it, as that the re∣moval of them shakes the whole Scheme of it in pieces. Now the great Fundamental, as the A∣postle tells us, is Jesus Christ, for other foun∣dation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Iesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. so that by remo∣ving the belief of Iesus Christ from the Christian Religion, we necessarily sink and dissolve the whole structure; and accordingly the Apostle pronoun∣ces those men Apostates from Christianity who hold not the head, which is Jesus Christ, Col. 2.19. but yet the bare belief of Iesus Christ, or of this Proposition, that Christ came from God, and was his Messias and Anointed, is not all that is essential to the Christian Faith, which includes not only his Mission from God, but also the end of his Mis∣sion, viz. to be a Mediator between God and Man. For Christianity, as it is distinguished from Na∣tural Religion, is nothing but the Religion of the Mediator, as consisting wholly of the Doctrine of the Mediator, together with the duties thence ari∣sing; so that whatsoever Proposition the Media∣torship of Christ necessarily and immediately im∣plies, it is a fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, which no man can deny, without innovating
the whole Religion, and turning it into a quite different Doctrine from true and real Christianity. For this Proposition, that Christ came from God to Mediate between God and Man, includes the whole Doctrine of the Gospel: and therefore whatsoever Proposition is either so necessarily included in it, or so inseparably conjoyned with it, as that the denial of it doth by necessary and im∣mediate consequence overthrow the Mediation of our Saviour, it must be essential to the Christian Faith; and the more necessary Connection there is between any particular Doctrine, and this all-comprehending Doctrine of the Mediation, the more necessary and essential it is to the Christian Faith. Now whosoever believes not, or at least de∣nies any Essential part of the Christian Faith, is not a Christian, and that not only because he wants a part of that Faith which denominates men Christians, but also because by disbelieving that part he doth by necessary consequence over∣throw the whole of Christianity, for so Tertul. de Praescr. c. 37. expresly asserts, Si Haeretici sunt, Christiani esse non possunt, i. e. they who are Hereticks cannot be Christians; and hence it is that Hereticks, who are such as obstinately deny any fundamental Article of Christianity, are in Scripture ranked in the same Cass with Heathens and Infidels; for all true Christians are required to shun and avoid them as unclean per∣sons, the very touch of whose conversation was enough to defile them, Rom. 16.17. and the Go∣vernours of the Church are required to anathe∣matize or exclude them from all Christian Commu∣nion,
Gal. 1.8. to reject them, Tit. 3.10. and withdraw themselves from them, 1 Tim. 6.5. that is, to treat them as Heathens and Infidels, who have no right or title to Christian Communion; and if Heretical persons are to be thus treated, then much more are Heretical Churches, and if every single Heretick be condemned of himself, as the Apostle affirms, Tit. 3.11. i. e. excommu∣nicated by his own Sentence or Doctrine, where∣by he voluntarily departs from the Church, and so cuts off himself from its Communion, then cer∣tainly so is every Heretical Community; and therefore as such must be utterly unqualified for Christian Communion. And if Heresie excom∣municates not only Heretical Persons, but Here∣tical Societies, then a common Agreement in all the Essentials of Christian Faith, which is the opposite of Heresie, is necessarily included in Catholick Communion; and accordingly the Scripture frequently presses all Christian People to this common agreement, as to a most essential part of their Communion with each other: For so they are required to mind or think one and the same thing, Phil. 2.2. to stand fast in one spirit with one mind, 2 Cor. 13.11. to walk by the same rule, and think the same thing, Phil. 1.27. to be joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. To hold fast the form of sound words, 2 Tim. 1.13. to strive together for the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. and to keep that which is committed to us, 1 Tim. 6.20. which is that one form of Doctrine which was delivered to us, Rom· 6.17. The meaning of all which is not to oblige us to be of one mind and judgment
in all points of Religion; for that is no more in our power than it is to be all of one stature or com∣plexion; but that we should all unanimously con∣sent in all those fundamental Articles of which that one Faith consists, which is the common Creed of Christians: So that it is not the differing of one Church from another in Doctrines that are either remote from or near the foundations of Christianity, that dissolves their Communion in the Christian Faith; but so long as the essential Doctrines of the Gospel are secured on both sides, no corrupt Doctrines on either side can warrant a breach of Communion between them. It is true, if the erring Church imposes the belief of its errors as a Condition of its Communion, no Church or Christian, that believes them to be errors, can lawfully Communicate with it, be those errors never so small or inconsiderable; not that in themselves they are a sufficient cause of separation, but because they who do not believe them cannot profess they do, without telling a lie, which is a condition that is simply unlawful: And so also when the errors are such as do corrupt the vital and essential parts of her Worship, so that there is no communicating with her in her Worship without communicating in her corruptions; all Churches and Christians are obliged to abstain from its Communion, not because of the errors simply considered in themselves, but because they profane and desecrate her Worship with those sinful intermixtures they infuse into it; so that we cannot joyn with her in her Worship, without joyning with her in her sin: so that there is no error can separate any Church or Christian from
the Catholick Communion of Faith, but only He∣resie, which is a perverse renunciation of some essential part or fundamental Article of that Faith. Secondly, The Communion which the particu∣lar Churches, of which the Catholick Church consists, hold with each other is in all the Essen∣tials also of Christian Worship. By the Essentials of Christian Worship, I mean the Invocation of the one Eternal God through the one Mediator Jesus Christ, and the participation of the two Sa∣craments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Hence the Apostle tells us, that as there is but one common Faith wherein all true Christians com∣municate with each other, so there is but one Lord, Eph. 4.4. and but one God for us to address to, and one Mediator between God and man for us to ad∣dress by, 1 Tim. 2.5. and therefore to address to this one God by this one Mediator, is an essential part of Christian Worship. And the same Apostle tells us, that there is but one Baptism, Eph. 4.4. and but one bread of which we are all partakers, 1 Cor. 10 17. and therefore to participate of these Sacraments must also be essential to Christian Wor∣ship; so that all those particular Churches that admit each others Members upon lawful terms to communicate with them in worshipping this one God, through this one Mediator, and in this one Baptism, and one Eucharistical Bread and Cup, are so far in Communion with the Church Catholick. For in these acts of Christian Worship consists the principal part of Christian Communion, and therefore that Church which refuses either to admit other Churches to communicate with her
in these acts of Worship, or to communicate with them in them upon lawful terms, doth so far separate it self from the Christian Communion, I say upon lawful terms, because if it either require unlawful, or refuse lawful ones, it utter∣ly excludes all other Churches from its Commu∣nion. If on the one hand it hath sophisticated its Worship with any unlawful intermixtures, so that there is no participating with her in the one, without partaking with her in the other; If we cannot pray with her to the one God by the one Mediator, without praying to Creatures too, or praying by other Mediators also: If we cannot partake with her in her Baptism, without parta∣king with her in some sinful and impure Rites of Baptism: In a word, if we cannot be admitted to receive the Lord's Supper with her, without re∣ceiving it by halves, or being obliged to pay di∣vine homage to its Elements; in this case, I say, all Christians and Christian Churches are utter∣ly excluded by her from communicating with her in the Essentials of Christian Worship. And so on the other hand, if a Church forbid its Mem∣bers to Communicate upon occasion with any other Church in these acts of Christian Worship, upon lawful terms, in so doing it divides it self from the Communion of the Church Catholick; and though that Church it refuses to communicate with, should through the neglect of its Discipline have a great many bad men as well as good in it; though it should require the observation of a great many indifferent Rites, Customs, and Ceremo∣nies, yea, and of contrary Rites and Customs to its own; yet so long as the Essentials of its
Worship are kept pure and entire, and are not so blended with unlawful intermixtures▪ but that we may safely partake of them, without being at all obliged to partake of any sin; in this case I say to refuse to Communicate with it, is to sepa∣rate from the Communion of the Catholick Church. For for the same reason that any Church refuses to Communicate with this Church, it must refuse to Communicate with all other Churches in the World, because we cannot to this day, nor ever could Com∣municate with any Church in the World in which there was not some defect of Disci∣pline, some intermixture of bad men with good, and some indifferent Modes and Ceremonies of Worship. Thirdly and lastly, Another thing wherein those particular Churches into which the Ca∣tholick Church is distributed do communicate with each other, is in the Essentials of Chri∣stian Regiment and Discipline; for though the particular Modes and Circumstances of Christi∣an Government and Discipline are not determi∣ned by divine Institution, but left for the most part free to the prudent ordering and disposal of the Governours of particular Churches; yet there is a standing form of Government and Discipline in the Church instituted by our Saviour himself, which, as I shall shew hereafter, is this, that there should be an Episcopacy, or Order of men au∣thorized in a continued Succession from the A∣postles (who were Authorized by himself) to over∣see and govern all those particular Churches into
which the Church Catholick should be hereafter distributed▪ to Ordain inferiour Ministers to teach, and instruct, and administer the holy Offices to particular Congregations; and having Ordained them, to guide and direct them in the discharge of their Functions, to prescribe the particular Rules of outward Order and Decency to the People of the respective Churches com∣mitted to their Charge, to confirm the weak, and admonish the disorderly, and correct the ob∣stinate, by excluding them from the Communi∣on of the Church of Christ. These things there∣fore being all of divine Institution, are the Essen∣tials of Christian Government and Discipline, in which all Christian Churches are obliged to Com∣municate with each other. And this being the standing Government and Discipline of the Ca∣tholick Church, no particular Church or Com∣munity of Christians can refuse to communicate in it without dividing it self from the Communion of the Church Catholick; I say, refuse to Commu∣nicate in it, because it is possible for a Church to be without this Government and Discipline which yet doth neither refuse it, nor the Communion of any other Church for the sake of it. A Church may be debarred of it by unavoidable necessities in despite of its power, and against its consent, and under this circumstance I can by no means think such a Church to be separated from the Church Catholick; it is indeed an imperfect and defective part of the Catholick Church, and if this defect of it be any way owing to its own negligence, it is a very great fault in it, as well as an unhappi∣ness. But though this instituted Government
is necessary to the perfection of a Church, yet it doth not therefore follow that it is necessary to the being of it. For even in the Jewish Church, wherein all things were determined by divine institution, even to the minutest Circumstances, there were sundry notorious deviations from that Institution, which yet did not un-church them. It was a great deviation in them to offer Sacri∣fice in their High Places, after God had de∣termined them to Sacrifice only at the Temple at Ierusalem: It was another great deviation in them, to make Priests out of other Families, after God had determined them to the Family of Aaron; and yet it is certain, that neither the one nor the other did un-church them: And if these deviations from divine Institution, which were the effects of their negligence, did not yet un-church them, it is not to be imagined that such deviations from it as are the pure effects of necessi∣ty should un-church others. For though no neces∣sity can dispence with the Eternal Laws of good and evil, because the observance of them de∣pends wholly upon our Wills, and there is no such necessity can happen to us, as can put them out of the power of a willing mind, yet as for positive Institutions, there are a thousand necessities may occur, any one of which may render them wholly unpracticable, and then no man can be obliged to do that which is impossible; as for instance, the whole Family of Aaron might have been extinct, and if it had, it is evident that positive institution by which God required the Jews to chuse their Priests out of the Family of Aaron, must have been wholly unpracticable, and consequently the
Obligation of it must have for ever expired; and they must have been obliged, notwithstanding that positive Institution, either wholly to have dropt their Priesthood, and with that their Publick Worship, (which was much more neces∣sary to them than that their Priests should be all of such a Family,) or to have chosen their Priests out of other Families of the Tribe of Levi; and if in this exigence they had done the later, there is no doubt but that the Divine Providence which created the necessity, must thereby have designedly dispensed with its own institution, and so have left them free to make Priests out of other Families. And by the same reason, when ever the divine Providence doth by unavoidable necessity deprive any Church of its Episcopacy, it thereby, for the present at least, and whilst the necessity continues, releases it from the obli∣gation of the Institution of Episcopacy, and allows it to administer its Government and Dis∣scipline by a Parity of Presbyters. And there∣fore so long as it doth not renounce the Episco∣pacy, but still continues in Communion with other Churches that enjoy it, it ought to be look'd upon and communicated with as a true Member (though a maimed one) of the Church Catholick; For the Catholick Church never denied her Com∣munion to any Christian or Community of Christi∣ans upon any unavoidable deviation from positive Institution. It was without doubt as great a devi∣ation from positive Institution for Lay-men to Bap∣tize, as for a Parity of Presbyters to Govern or Ordain, &c. and yet in cases of necessity the Catho∣lick Church always allowed the Baptism of Lay∣men,
as deeming Baptism in it self more necessa∣ry than the administration of Baptism by persons in Holy Orders, and therefore where such persons could not be had, she thought meet rather to admit that Lay-men should administer it, than to suf∣fer such as were qualified for it to die unbapti∣zed. And why may we not reasonably suppose that the Catholick Church will admit Presbyters to Govern and Ordain, where there are no Bi∣shops to be had, since it hath admitted Lay-men to Baptize, where there are neither Bishops nor Presbyters to be had? Since the later is as great a deflection from positive Institution as the former: And if the Catholick Church may be reasonably presumed to allow it in such necessary cases, we must acknowledge either that she hath not Au∣thority enough to provide against her own necessi∣ties, which supposes her to be very defective; or that her allowance is sufficient to authorize such persons to Rule and Ordain, as well as to Baptize, in case of necessity, as are not authorized by posi∣tive Institution. But though a Community of Christians may be a true part of the Catholick Church, and in Communion with it, though it hath no Epis∣copacy; yet it is plain case, that if it rejects the Episcopacy, and separates from the Com∣munion of it, it thereby wholly divides it self from the Communion of the Catholick Church. For whether Episcopacy be of divine Institution or no, this is matter of fact granted on all hands, that for twelve hundred years at least all those Churches into which the Catholick Church hath been distributed have been subject to the
Episcopal Government and Discipline, and there∣fore they who now separate themselves from the Episcopal Communion as such, must in so doing separate themselves from the Communion of all Churches for twelve hundred years together, and then either all those Churches must be out of the Communion of the Catholick Church, and consequently during all that time there must be no such thing as a visible Catholick Church upon Earth; or else those Communi∣ties of Christians which separate from all those Churches must be Schisms and Separations from the Catholick Church. SECT. IX. Concerning the Ministers of the Kingdom of Christ. HAving in the foregoing Section treated at large concerning the Nature and Consti∣tution of Christ's Kingdom, I shall in the next place shew who the Ministers are, by whom he Rules and Governs it. And these are all inclu∣ded under a fourfold Rank and Order. First, The first and supreme Minister by which Christ rules his Kingdom is the Holy Ghost. Secondly, The second and next to him are the Angels of God. Thirdly, The third are Princes and Civil Go∣vernours.
Fourthly, The last are the Bishops and Pastors of the Church. I. The supreme Minister by which Christ rules his Kingdom is the Holy Ghost, or Third Person in the Holy Trinity, of whose Person and Mini∣stry under our Saviour in his Kingdom I have trea∣ted at large from P. 49. to P. 98. II. Therefore the next Order of Ministers by which Christ rules his Kingdom are the Angels of God, that is, the whole world of Angels, whether they be good or bad, Angels of Light, or Angels of Darkness. In the prosecution of which Argument I shall endeavour first to prove the thing, viz. That the Angels, both good and bad, are the Ministers of Christ in the Government of his Kingdom. Secondly, To shew wherein their Ministry doth consist. First, That the Angels, both good and bad, are Christ's Ministers in his Kingdom; For as for the good Angels, they are subjected to Christ by the Order and Appointment of God him∣self; who is the Father of Spirits, and to whom they are inviolably obedient: And for the bad, they are subjected to him by just Conquest, con∣trary to their own Wills and Inclinations. Of each of which I shall endeavour to give some brief account. First, The good Angels are subjected to Christ by the Order and Appointment of God, to whom they are always inviolably obedient. It seems at least very probable, that before our Saviour was Exalted upon his Triumphant Ascension into Heaven to the universal Empire of the
World under God the Father, the Angelical Po∣wers were not all of them subjected to his Media∣torial Royalty, but that some of them had their distinct Regencies and Presidentships, immediately under God the most high Father, over such and such Nations and Countries as he in his Grace thought meet to allot to them, for so it is evident the Septuagint thought, when in Deut. 32.8. in∣stead of he, (i. e. God,) set the bounds of the Na∣tions according to the number of the Children of Is∣rael, they render it, He set the bounds of the Na∣tions according to the number of the Angels of God; for as the ancient Jews distributed the Gentile world into seventy two Nations, so they also reckoned seventy two Angels that presided over them; and indeed considering what follows, ver. 9. For the Lord's portion is his People, Iacob is the lot of his inheritance, it seems very probable that this translation of the Septuagint was the true sense of the Original, viz. that whereas God distributed the Gentile world into so many Nations as there were President Angels to be their Guardians and Governours, he reserved Israel to himself as his own Lot and Portion, over which he intended to preside immediately in his own per∣son; and therefore, as a learned Writer of our own hath observed, it is not at all improbable but that instead of  i. e. the Sons of Israel, as it is now in our Hebrew Copies the ancient reading whence the Septuagint translated might be  i. e. the Sons of God, and that El might either be mistaken by the Transcribers for a final abbreviation of Israel, or changed into Il, which is the contraction of Israel, and if in the ancient
Hebrew it was the Sons of God, it is no wonder that the Septuagint rendered it the Angels of God; the Sons of God being in Scripture a very common Appellation of Angels. But whether this be so or not, it is evident, that when God threatned to withdraw his per∣sonal presence from Israel upon their worshipping the golden Calf, and to put them under the Con∣duct of an Angel, Exod. 33.2, 3. the meaning of it was, that he would no longer preside over them in his own Person, but subject them to the Government of a President Angel, and therefore ver. 20. he bids them beware of this Angel, and obey his voice, and not provoke him; for, saith he, he will not pardon your iniquities: which plain∣ly shews, that this Angel was to have had a ru∣ling power over them to pardon or punish them at his own pleasure; so that that which God here Threatned was, that he would put them in the same condition with other Gentile Nations, who were subjected to the Government of particular Guardian Angels, and so change their Theocracy into an Angelocracy. And so as it is evident Moses understood him, for ver. 15, 16. he thus prays, If thy Presence go not with me, carry us not up hence, for wherein shall it be known here that I and thy People have found grace in thy sight, is it not that Thou goest with us, so shall we be separated, I and thy People, from all the People that are on the face of the Earth: where it is very plain, that that which distinguished Israel from all other Nations was this, that God himself in his own Person immediately presided over them, and that if this distinction were taken away by God's with∣drawing
from them, and subjecting them to the Presidence of an Angel, they would be left in the same condition with other Gentile Nations, who must therefore be supposed to be under the im∣mediate Conduct of President Angels. And this is most evident of the Kingdom of Persia, and the Kingdom of Greece in particular, Dan. 10.13, 20. where there is mention made of two Angels under the Character of the Prince of Per∣sia, and the Prince of Greece, and also of a Third, viz. Michael who is stiled one of the chief Princes, and Michael your Prince, ver. 21. and elsewhere the great Prince which standeth for the Children of thy People, Dan. 12.1. and upon what other account can we suppose them to be stiled the Princes of those Countries, but because they presided over them as their Guardians and Go∣vernours. It is true, as for the last of them, viz. Michael, he is supposed by very learned Ex∣positors to be no other than God the Son, who, as I have proved at large, was always the Prince and Guardian of Israel; but if he were not God the Son, but merely a created Angel, it is certain he was not the President or Guardian of Israel; since, as was shewn before, they had no other Guardian but God himself; but in all probability he was the Prince of those Angels that ministred to God the Son in his Guardianship and Government of Israel; and consequently that Angel of his to whom he intended to subject them, when he threatened to withdraw his personal Conduct from them, upon which account he might be called their Prince, because under Christ he had a Principal share in the Protection and Government
of them. Now these Guardian Angels seem to have been Archangels, or the Princes of the di∣stinct Orders of Angels; for so Michael is not on∣ly stiled an Archangel, Iude 9. but he is also said to have an Army of Angels under his Command and Conduct, and with them to have fought with the Dragon or Satan (who was also an Archangel) and his Angels, Rev. 12.7. Now though Mi∣chael (supposing him to be a created Spirit) was not a Guardian Angel, yet the Prophecy of Daniel by stiling him one of the Chief Princes plainly assures us that he was an Angel of the same Rank and degree with the Princes or Guar∣dian Angels of Persia and Greece; from whence it follows, that those Guardian Angels were Arch∣angels, as well as he, and consequently that they also had their Angels or appropriate Armies of An∣gels, under their Conduct and Command, in which Armies of theirs (whose Ministry without doubt they always used in the Administration of their respective Guardianships) there is no question but there was an exact Order and Regi∣ment, which cannot well be supposed without supposing in them particular Officers subordinated to each other under their respective Princes or Archangels; and this seems to be implied in that distinction which the Apostle makes be∣tween these heavenly Spirits, Col. 1.16. Whe∣ther they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principa∣lities, or Powers; where by Thrones he seems to mean the respective Princes or Archangels of the several Orders; by Dominions or Lordships, the Reguli or chief Dignitaries under the Archan∣gels; by Principalities, their Governours of such
Provinces or Cities as were within their Guardi∣anships; by Powers, their inferiour Magistrates or Officers. These Archangels therefore, who were the Tutelar or Guardian Angels of Countries, toge∣ther with their respective Cohorts or Armies of Angels, seem not to have been subjected to the Mediatorial Dominion of our Saviour, till after his Ascension into Heaven; at which time it seems God totally dissolved those Angelocra∣cies, or Angelical Governments of Countries and Nations, and subjected both them and the Arch∣angels (together with their Armies of Angels) that governed them to the Mediatorial Scepter of our Lord and Saviour; upon which he who before was King only of the Iews, vid. P. 224, 225. became universal Lord and Emperour of the World, for so Heb. 2.5. we are told, That to the Angels God hath not put in subjection the World to come, or future Age, as it is in the Greek; where by the future Age it is evident he means the time of the Gospel; for this is the very Phrase used by the Septuagint: to express the State of Chri∣stianity, Isa. 9.6. where Christ is called , The Father of the future Age. This passage therefore of God's not subjecting the future age to the Angels, plainly implies that he had subjected the past age to them, by constituting them the Guardians of Nations, but that now in this age of the Gospel he hath wholly dissolved that Oeconomy by subjecting both the Guardians, and the Nations they guarded, to the Dominion of our Lord and Saviour; so that now the whole world of Angels is in the same subjection to Jesus
Christ, as it seems Michael and his Angels were before Christ's Exaltation, that is, they are now no longer subject as Deputy Governours of Pro∣vinces and Nations, who as such were impower∣ed to do good or hurt to those who were under their Government, according to their own dis∣cretion, but as the immediate attendants of his person to whom nothing is left arbitrary, but all they do is determined by the sovereign Will of him who imploys them; for thus the Scripture de∣clares, that upon his Ascension into Heaven he was vested with a new Dominion over the Angeli∣cal World; so 1 Pet. 3.22. we are told, that it was upon his going into Heaven, and sitting down at the right hand of God, that Angels, and Autho∣rities, and Powers were made subject to him; and in Eph. 20.21. that God raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in heaven∣ly places far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion, i. e. above all Angels of what rank and quality soever, and every name that is named, not only in this World, but also in that which is to come; and accordingly, Col. 2.10. he is said to be head of all Principality and power, i. e. of all the heavenly Hierarchy, as well as earthly Dominions; thus also the Apostle tells us, that upon his Ascension into Heaven God hath given him a name above every name, that at the name of Iesus every knee should bow, i. e. that every Being should acknowledge subjection, either of things in Heaven, or of things on Earth, or things under the Earth; i. e. whether of Angels, or Men, or Devils. And as all these Angelical Powers are now subjected to Christ, so do they all of them minister
under him in his Kingdom; for so Heb. 1.14. they are said to be all of them ministring Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, and in so doing they must ne∣cessarily minister under him who is the Captain of our salvation; and accordingly in Rev. 5.6. those seven Angels which in Zch. 4.10. are said to be the seven eyes of the Lord which run to and fro the whole Earth; and therefore stiled the Watchers, Dan. 4.13. as being the chief Instru∣ments of the divine Providence, are called the se∣ven eyes of the Lamb, by whose Ministry and Agency he inspects and governs his Kingdom, which plainly implies, that they now minister to the Exalted Mediator in the same capacity that they heretofore ministred to God Almighty himself. 2. And then secondly, as the good Angels are subjected to Christ by the Ordination and appointment of God, so the bad are subjected to him by just and lawful Conquest, for so the Scrip∣ture assures us, that our blessed Saviour subdu∣ed them to his Mediatorial Empire by pure dint of just force and violence; for so we find in his life-time he frequently contested with these evil spirits, and in despite of all their power and ma∣lice continually vanquished and repelled them. Thus in his Temptation in the Wilderness with on∣ly that powerful Command, Get thee hence Satan, he put the Devil to flight, Matth. 4.10, 11. so also upon his approach towards the two possessed Gergesens the Devils that possessed them made a hideous outcry, What have we to do with thee Ie∣sus thou Son of God, art thou come hither to torment
us before the time? and were forced to depart immediately upon his Command, Matth. 8.29.— Nor did he only vanquish them himself in all the personal conflicts he had with them, but he also gave his Disciples authority over all Devils, Luke 9.1. insomuch that, Luke 10.17. his Disciples acquaint him, Lord even the Devils are subject unto us through thy Name; but these were only so many successful skirmishes with those Powers of darkness in which they fought against him, sometimes in single Combate, and sometimes in smaller Parties; but the main Battel in which they engaged him with all their power and might, and by winning of which he compleated his Conquest, and finally subdued them to his Empire, seems to have been that which he fought in his last Agony, wherein after they had reduced him to the utmost distress, he struck them with the spiritual Thunderbolts of inward horror and confusion, and in a Panick Dread forced them to turn their backs and flee from him. For first, it is evident that before he en∣tered the Garden where his Agony seized him, he expected some terrible assault from these In∣fernal Powers; so he tells his Disciples just be∣fore he went thither, Hereafter I will not talk much with you, for the Prince of this world com∣eth and hath nothing in me, i. e. give me leave now to discourse freely with you, because within a very little while I shall be so engaged, that I shall not be at leisure to discharge my mind to you; for the Prince of Devils is just now mustering up all his Legions against me, and is coming to make his last effort upon me; but this is my comfort, he will find
nothing in me, no sinful inclination to take part with him, no guilty reflection to expose me to his Tyranny, Iohn 14.30. and accordingly, Luke 22.53. when the Jews had apprehended him, he expostulates the case with them, why they did not lay hands on him before, when he was daily with them in the Temple; and then answers himself, But now is your hour and the power of darkness; as much as if he should have said, I need not wonder you did not seize me sooner, for this alas is the appointed time wherein my Father had decreed to let loose the Devils and you upon me. Which plainly shews that in that dismal hour he was assaulted by the Devils as well as by the Iews; for in all probability those crafty and sagacious spirits had smelt out the merciful design of his ap∣proaching death, viz. that it was to be a ransom for the sins of the World; and therefore though they were desirous enough of his death, as is ap∣parent by their animating Iudas and the Jews against him, yet dreading the end and intention of it, they resolve to imploy all their Art and Power to tempt and deter him from undergoing it, and either to prevail with him to avoid it by a shame∣ful Recantation, or at least not to consent to it; that so being forced and involuntary, it might be void and ineffectual. In which black design of theirs God himself thought meet so far to favour them as to give them his free permission to try him to the utmost; that so having experienced in him∣self the utmost force of Temptation that Hu∣mane Nature is liable to, he might thereby be touched with a more tender sympathy with it, or as the Author to the Hebrews expresses it, That
having suffered himself being tempted he might be able to succour them that are tempted, Chap. 17.18. But then secondly, if we consider the woful Circumstances of his Agony, it is evident, that it was the effect of some far more powerful cause than meerly a natural fear of his ensuing Death and bodily Torment; for no sooner was he entered on that Tragick Stage, but he began to be sor∣rowful, saith S. Matthew, Chap. 26.37. or to be sore amazed, as S. Mark, Chap. 14.33. or to be very heavy, as both; which words according to their native signification declare him to have been all on a sudden oppressed with some mighty damp, which arising from some fearful spectacle or imagination, overwhelmed his Soul with an unknown and inexpressible anguish, an Anguish that sunk and depressed him into as deep a de∣jection as it was possible for an innocent mind to endure, causing him to groan out that sad com∣plaint, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death, , i. e. My Soul is encompassed with grief, and like a desolate Island surrounded on every side with an Ocean of sor∣rows, and that even unto death, as if it had been strugling under some mortal Pang, and the pains of Hell had got hold upon it. And so in∣tolerable was his Passion, that though he liberal∣ly vented it both at his Eyes and Lips in Tears, and Sighs, and sorrowful complaints; yet that was not a sufficient discharge for it, but through all the innumerable Pores of his body it poured out it self as it were in great drops of bloud, Luke 22.44. All which considered, I can by no means think that that which occasioned this bitter Agony
was meerly the prospect of what he was going to suffer from the hands of men, since not only some Martyrs, but some Malefactors have suffe∣red much more with less dejection; and if you consult the History, you will find that he bore his death far better than his Agony, from whence we have just reason to believe that the later was more grievous to him than the former, and that the Crucifixion of his body on the Cross was nothing near so painful to him as the crucifixion of his mind in the Garden. And since his suffer∣ings in his Agony are described with more Tra∣gical Circumstances than his sufferings on the Cross, we have just reason to conclude they were inflicted on him by more spiteful and powerful exe∣cutioners, and consequently that he endured the Tortures of men only on the Cross, but of Devils in the Garden, where being left all alone naked and abandoned of the ordinary supports of his Godhead, and having only an Angel to stand by and comfort him (i. e. to represent such conside∣rations to him of the benefits and advantages of his Death, as were most proper to fortifie him against the Temptations which the Devils were then urging to deter him from it) he was in all probability surrounded with a mighty Host of Devils, who exercised all their power and malice to persecute his innocent soul, to distract and fright it with horrid Phantasms, to afflict it with dismal suggestions, and vex and cruciate it with dire imaginations and dreadful spectacles. Third∣ly, If we consider that strange unaccountable drowsiness which seized his Disciples whilst he was in his Agony, it seems to have been the effect
of a Diabolical power; for before he entered into the Garden he had expresly told them that the Hour was come, wherein he was to be taken from them by an untimely death; so that one would have thought the dear love which they bore him, together with the infinite Concern they had in him, might have been sufficient to have kept them awake for a few hours; yet, notwith∣standing he desired them to watch with him, (be∣ing loth it seems to be left alone in a dark night among a company of horrid and frightful Spe∣ctres) upon his return to them he found them fast asleep, and though he gently upbraided them with their unkindness, What could ye not watch with me one hour? Yet he no sooner left them but they fell asleep again; for as the Text tells us, their eyes were heavy. Heavy indeed, that could not hold up for a few hours upon such an awakening occasion. It is true indeed S. Luke at∣tributes this prodigious drowsiness of theirs to their sorrow, and so it is usual in Scripture to put the apparent cause for the real, when the real cause is secret and invisible. But how can we ima∣gine that meer sorrow should necessitate three men to fall asleep together under the most awakening Circumstances, all things considered, that ever hapned to Mortals? Why did it not as well force them to fall asleep again afterwards, when their Lord was apprehended, condemned, and cru∣cified? At all which times they were doubtless rather more sorrowful than they were in the Gar∣den; and therefore it seems very probable that there was a much more powerful cause than sorrow in the case, viz. a preternatural stupfaction of
their senses by some of those malignant spirits that were then conflicting with our Saviour, who perhaps to deprive him of the solace of his Disciples company, did by their Diabolical Art produce that extraordinary stupor that oppressed them; that so having him all alone, they might have the greater advantage to tempt and terrifie him. Fourthly and lastly, If we consider the warning our Saviour gave his Disciples, when they entered the Garden with him, of the extra∣ordinary danger they were in of falling into tem∣ptation, it seems very probable that he expected and found there an extraordinary Concourse of Tempters or evil Spirits; for as soon as they were entered with him into the Garden, S. Luke tells us, that he bid them pray that ye enter not into Temptation, Luke 22.40. and when notwith∣standing this admonition they fell asleep the first time, he bids them again, watch and pray that ye enter not into Temptation, Matth. 26.41. which words plainly imply our Saviour's apprehension of some extraordinary danger they were in of be∣ing tempted in the very time and place of his Ago∣ny, and what more probable account can be given of this apprehension of his than this, that he ound vast numbers of evil spirits there, by whom he himself at that very time was furiously tempt∣ed and assaulted, and that therefore having ex∣perienced their power and malice in himself, he thought meet to admonish his Disciples (who were much less able to resist them than he) to stand upon their guard lest they should tempt them as they had tempted him.
For these reasons it seems highly probable that this last Agony of our Saviour was nothing else but a mighty struggle and conflict with the powers of darkness, who having by God's per∣mission mustered up all their strength against him, intending once more to try their for∣tune against him, and if possible to tempt or deter him from prosecuting his design of redeem∣ing the World, were in the end gloriously re∣pulsed by his persevering resistance, and forced to flee before him; and of this his glorious victo∣ry over them he made an open shew upon the Cross, where in despite of all those terrors and temptations they had exercised him with, if pos∣sible to divert him from laying down his life for the World, he freely and voluntarily poured out his Bloud as a Sacrifice for the sins of man∣kind. And hence the Apostle tells us, Col. 2.15. that on his Cross he spoiled Principalities and Powers, viz. in that victorious Act of laying down his life to ransom us from their power in despite of their most exquisite temptations to the contrary, and made an open shew of them triumph∣ing over them. And by this glorious Victory he finished his Conquest of those Infernal Powers, so that from thenceforth they never durst assault him more, but like vanquish'd Slaves, were for∣ced to yield their unwilling Necks to the yoke of his Empire, and (though with infinite Relu∣ctance) to obey his Will, and execute his Orders; and hence we are told, that by his Death our Saviour hath destroyed him that hath the power of Death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. so that now at his power∣ful Name every knee must bow, or every Being
yield obeisance, not only of things in heaven, and of things on earth, i. e. of Angels and Men, but of things under the earth too, i. e. of Devils, who notwithstanding they are incensed with an impla∣cable animosity against him, and would gladly pull him down from his Throne, if they had but Po∣wer answerable to their Malice, yet having long since experienced the might of his victorious Arms, even then when they had him at the grea∣test advantage, and being thereby driven into everlasting despair of prevailing against him, they have from thenceforth been forced by the mere dread and terrour of his power, to submit them∣selves to him, and to become his Servants and Ministers in his heavenly Kingdom; so that now whatsoever they do, it is by his Permission or Order who holds their mischievous power in Chains, and lets it loose, or restrains it as he pleases. And thus having proved at large that both the good and bad Angels are Christ's Subjects and Ministers, I proceed in the second place to shew wherein their Ministry to Christ in his Kingdom consists. And in the first place, I shall shew wherein the Ministry of good Angels consists. And secondly, wherein consists the Ministry of bad Angels. And because the Philosophy of the Nature and Operations of Angels is far above the ken of our short-sighted understandings, I shall not presume to inquire any farther into the Mi∣nistry of either good or bad Angels than the Scri∣pture gives me light, in which we find these seven following instances of the Ministry of good Angels under Christ.
First, They declare upon occasion his Mind and Will to his Church. Secondly, They guard and defend his Subjects against outward dangers. Thirdly, They support and comfort them upon great undertakings, and under pressing Calamities. Fourthly, They protect them against the rage and fury of evil spirits. Fifthly, They further and assist them in all their Religious Offices. Sixthly, They conduct their separated Spirits into the Mansions of Glory. Seventhly, They are to attend and assist Christ in the great solemnity of the day of Iudgment. I. One instance of the Ministry of Angels in the Kingdom of Christ is their declaring upon occasion his Mind and Will to his Church and People; for thus most of those Prophetick Messa∣ges which God from time to time sent to the World were conveyed to the Prophets by the Ministry of Angels; so Daniel for instance had all his Visions from an Angel of God, vid. Dan. 8.16. and Chap. 9.22, 23. as also Chap. 10.11. so also the Prophet Zechariah, vid. Chap. 1.9, 14, 19. and Chap. 2.3, 4. and sundry other instances there are of it in the New Testament, vid. Matt. 1.20, 21. as also Chap. 2.13, 20, 22. and Luke 1.13, 30, 31. and many other places; and it was an ancient and Catholick Doctrine among the Jews, that all Prophecy was communicated by the Media∣tion of Angels; whence the Pharisees, describing St. Paul as a Prophet, thus pronounce concerning him, We find no evil in this man, but if a Spirit or Angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight against
God, Act. 23.9. And accordingly we find our Saviour sending forth his holy Angels on Prophe∣tick Messages to his Church; for so St. Iohn re∣ceived his Revelations from Christ by the hand of an Angel, Rev. 1.1. Rev. 22.16. And an Angel is sent from Christ to Philip to bid him go to the Ethiopian Eunuch to expound to him the Prophecy of Isaiah, Acts 8.26. And Cornelius received a Message from Christ by an Angel, re∣quiring him to send to Ioppa for St. Peter to in∣struct him in the Christian Religion, in Acts 10.3, 4, 5. But since that Christ hath revealed his whole Will to his Church, and transmitted it down by a standing Scripture, this Ministration of the holy Angels is in a great measure ceased, and to this written Word of his we are intirely re∣ferred, as to the perpetual Rule of our Faith and Manners; insomuch that if thenceforth even an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel to us than what we have there received, he is pro∣nounced accursed, Gal. 1.8. Not but that some∣times, and upon great Emergencies, they may be still sent from heaven with new Messages to us to discover some useful secret, or to inspire our minds with the notices of some future contingen∣cies, that are of great moment to us, though this very rarely, it being no part of their ordinary Ministry. But since the Revelation of the Go∣spel was compleated, to be sure they never reveal any new Doctrine to us; they may be assisting Geniuses to our understandings, to excite in them a true apprehension of what is already revealed, by impressing our imaginations with clear and distinct Idea's and Representations of things
that are revealed more obscurely: But to suppose that they still reveal new Doctrinal truths to us, is not only to deny the perfection of written Revela∣tion, but to open a wide door to all manner of Enthusiasm. II. Another instance of the Ministry of An∣gels in the Kingdom of Christ is their guarding and defending his Subjects against outward dan∣gers; for thus the Angels are said to encamp round about those that fear God to deliver them, Psal. 34.7. And though I see not sufficient reason to be fully persuaded that every faithful Subject of the Kingdom of Christ hath an appropriate Guar∣dian Angel appointed to him, yet from that Cau∣tion of our Saviour, Matt. 18.10. it is evident that he imploys his Angels to attend as an invisi∣ble Lifeguard upon the persons of all good Chri∣stians; for, saith he, Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you that in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven, i. e. those blessed spirits which are appointed by God to be their Guardians upon Earth have yet their continual returns and recourse to God's glorious Presence in Heaven; and having always access to him to of∣fer up requests or complaints in their behalf, it must needs be a very dangerous thing for any to presume to despise or offend them, lest he thereby provoke those mighty spirits to sue out and exe∣cute some Commission of vengeance upon him. From whence it is evident that the blessed An∣gels are greatly concerned in the vindication and protection of the faithful, and that that promise, Psal. 91.10, 11, 12. is still in force, viz.
There shall no evil befal thee, for he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee up in their hands left thou dash thy foot against a stone: And this they do sometimes by removing such evil accidents from us as in the course of necessary causes must have befaln us; for there is no doubt but these pow∣erful Spirits have a mighty influence upon neces∣sary causes, (at least upon a great many of them) and can retard, or precipitate, or vary, or di∣vert their motions, as they see occasion, and thereby prevent a great many accidents which must otherwise have befaln had they permitted them to proceed in their natural courses. Other times again they divert the mischievous inten∣tions of our Enemies by injecting sudden fears into them, and brandishing horrid Phantsms before their imaginations (as the Angel did the flaming Sword before Balaam) when they are just upon executing their Malice. Sometimes again they warn us of dangers approaching, either by some external sign, or unaccountable impression on our fancies, by which we are vehemently soli∣cited, without any visible Cause or Reason, either to proceed very cautiously in the ways where our danger lies, or to stop and forbear a while, or steer some other course. Of all which there are innumerable instances to be found in Hi∣story. III. Another instance of the Ministry of An∣gels in the Kingdom of Christ, is their supporting and comforting his faithful Subjects upon diffi∣cult undertakings, and under great and pressing
Calamities: for thus not only our Saviour himself was comforted in his last Agony by an Angel from Heaven, Luk. 22.43. but St. Paul also tells us, that being in imminent danger of being ship∣wreck'd in a storm in his voyage to Rome, there stood by him in the night an Angel of God, whose he was, and whom he served, saying, fear not, Paul, thou must be brought before Caesar, and lo God hath given thee all them that sail with thee, Acts 27.23, 24. So also when the Apostles by an Order from the High Priest were cast into the common Pri∣son, the Text tells us, That an Angel of the Lord by night opened the Prison doors, and brought them forth, and said, go stand and speak in the Temple to the People all the words of this life, Acts 5.19, 20. So also in the ancient Martyro∣logies of the Church we meet with sundry relati∣ons of the appearances of Angels to the suffering Martyrs, and of the wonderful Comforts they ad∣ministred to them to support their Faith and Pati∣ence under their Agonies and Torments. And al∣though since the Cessation of Miracles they do not Ordinarily perform this Ministry to us in visible appearances, yet there is no doubt, but as they are Spirits, they have spiritual and invisible ways of conversing with our Spirits, and of administring Comforts to us in our needs and extremities; for though they can have no immediate access to our mind, which is a dark Mysterious Chamber, into which no other Eye can penetrate but his who is the searcher of all hearts, yet that they can vehe∣mently impress our Fancies with joyous Represen∣tations, and thereby exhilarate our drooping spirits to that degree, as to transport us into Raptures of
bodily passion, is not to be doubted, there being so many sensible experiments of it in the ancient Prophets, whose imaginations were sometimes so vehemently impressed with frightful Idea's by the Angels which conversed with them, as that they immediately fell into an Agony, and were seized with unaccountable horrors and tremblings; and not only the Prophets themselves that saw the Angel were thus affected, but sometimes their Companions too that saw him not, of which you have an instance in Dan. 10.7. where Daniel tells us, that he alone saw the vision of the Angel, and that the men that were with him saw not the Vision, but a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves; which is a plain evidence of the great power which the Angels have over our bodily passions, even when they are invisible to us; so as to strike what note soever they please upon them, whether it be Fear, or Sorrow, or Ioy; and it being in their power to excite our Passions to what degree they please, there is no doubt but that being ministring Spirits they can and do mi∣nister Ioy and Comfort to us, when ever our case and circumstances require it. IV. Another instance of the Ministry of An∣gels in the Kingdom of Christ is their protecting his Subjects against the Rage and Fury of evil Spi∣rits; for considering with what a fierce and inde∣fatigable malice those malignant spirits, which in vast numbers rove about in the Air, are anima∣ted against mankind, and especially against the Sub∣jects of Christ, their most dreaded and implacable enemy, and considering also the mighty power they have, as they are Angels, to do mischief,
it is not to be imagined but that were they not opposed and restrained by a mightier power than their own, they would never be able to forbear exercising their direful rage and cruelty upon us, till they had converted this Earth into Hell, and made this School of our Probation the place of our Torments; and as for the Kingdom of Christ, whose Subjects have so solemnly re∣nounced their Yoke and Dominion, to be sure they would never cease infesting it with the fiery darts of their malice, till they had utterly ruined and destroyed them; and therefore to prevent their mischievous attempts, God in mercy hath thought meet to commit us to the Guardianship of his ho∣ly Angels, and to send them forth under the Con∣duct of Iesus our Mediator, to fight against these Hellish powers in the defence of his Church and People, for so God promised Ierusalem, Zech. 2.5. that he would be as a wall of fire round about her, i. e. as the most learned Expositors sup∣pose, by surrounding her with a Guard of An∣gels, whom in the defence of his People against evil Angels he maketh a flaming fire, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psal. 104.4. and in Rev. 12.7. we read of a War in Heaven, (or the airy Region, of which the Devil is called the Prince) Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dra∣gon fought and his Angels; which War Michael un∣dertook, as the foregoing verses tell us, in the de∣fence of the Woman that was cloathed with the Sun, which all agree was the Christian Church; so also in verse 9. of S. Iude's Epistle we read that Michael the Archangel contended and disputed with the Devil about the body of Moses, or Jewish Church,
so called for the same reason that the Christian Church is called the Body of Christ. And it is ve∣ry probably supposed, that that Hedge which the Devil complained God had set about Iob, and about his house, by which he was hindered from breaking in upon him, was no other than a Guard of Angels, by which he was driven back as oft as he attempted to execute his Rage and Malice up∣on him, Chap. 1.10. Now by what means or instruments the good Angels war against and re∣pel the evil ones, is, I conceive, an enquiry be∣yond our Cognisance, Revelation (from whence we receive all our notions of the state and Oecono∣my of the invisible world) being wholly silent in the case, only thus much we may say without any way presuming beyond our Capacity, that spiritu∣al Agents can as easily strike upon spirits as bodily Agents do upon bodies; and though we, who are Spectators only of corporeal motion, can give no account of the manner how one spirit acts upon another, yet there is no reason at all to doubt but that they have some way of impressing one another, and communicating to each other a mutual sense and feeling of each others pleasures and displeasures; and if so, then it is easie to suppose, that the more powerful any spirit is, the stronger and more exquisite impressions of its displeasure it can make upon other Spirits, and consequently that the Good Angels, who by preserving their innocence, and improving their perfections, have augmented and redoubled their na∣tural strength and vigour, are much more powerful than the bad ones, (who have rather impaired it) and so are much more able to withstand and repel
the violent impressions of the bad Angels, than the bad Angels can theirs; so that though the bad Angels may, and oftentimes do resist and oppose the good, yet they can never conquer them, but in the conclusion are still forced to flee before them, as being unable to withstand their more power∣ful impressions. Since therefore we wrestle not with flesh and bloud, i. e. only with flesh and bloud, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this World, against spiritual wickednesses in high Places, i. e. against the several Ranks of Devils that are in the Air under the Command and Conduct of Beelze∣bub their Prince, Eph. 6.12. And since these Apostate Spirits are by much too strong and power∣ful for us; so that were we left to grapple with them alone, by our own single strength, they would infallibly vanquish and lead us captive to eternal ruine, God hath thought meet to subject his holy Angels to the command of our compassi∣onate Mediator; that so when ever we are too hardly beset by these evil spirits, he might send them forth to guard and protect us against them, and either to assist us in our conflicts with them, or to chase them away from us, when we are no long∣er able to withstand them; and accordingly we have a sure word of promise, that if we resist the Devil he shall fly away from us, Iam. 4.7. not that our weak resistance is in it self sufficient to put those daring and mighty Spirits to flight, but the meaning without doubt is, that if when they as∣sault us with any temptation to sin, we do but op∣pose them with a sincere resolution, God will not permit us to be vanquished by them; but when ever
they press too hard upon us, will be sure to send down some good Angel to us to repel and drive them away from us; for so he hath promised, that he will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but will with the Temptation also make a way to escape that we may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10.13. which plainly implies, that should God suffer him, the Devil can tempt us above what we are able; and this without doubt he is ordinarily hindered from by the timely interpositions of the holy Angels, who when our strength begins to fail, are always ready to second us, and with their victorious arms to encounter and put to flight those evil spirits that do so importunately tempt us. V. Another instance of the Ministry of An∣gels in the Kingdom of Christ is their furthering and assisting his Subjects in the Works and Offi∣ces of Religion; for since they are said to mini∣ster to them who shall be heirs of salvation, there is no doubt but that they minister to them in the discharge of their Religious Obligations, up∣on which their Salvation depends; and since, as our Saviour assures us, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents, Luke 15.10. we cannot but suppose that so far as their own ability, and the Laws of the invisible World will permit them, they do promote and further our repentance; since in so doing they contribute to their own joy; and in a word, since the Scripture assures us, that the Angels are pre∣sent in our holy Assemblies (which that passage of S. Paul seems necessarily to imply, 1 Cor. 11.10. For this cause ought the woman to have
power over her head, i. e. to be veiled in the sa∣cred Assemblies, because of the Angels, or out of a decent respect and reverence to those blessed Spi∣rits who are supposed to be present there) since, I say, they are present in our Religious Assemblies, we cannot reasonably suppose them to be present merely as Idle Auditors and Spectators, who have nothing else to do but only to observe and gaze upon our holy solemnities; and therefore must conclude that their great business there is to assist us in the performance of them, to remove our indispositions, and recollect our wandrings, to fix our attention, excite our affections, and inflame our devotions: for besides, as they are the Ministers of the divine Providence, they have ma∣ny opportunities of presenting good objects to us, and removing temptations from us, of disciplining our natures with prosperities and afflictions, and of so ordering and varying our outward Circum∣stances, as to render our duty more facile and ea∣sie to us; besides which I say, as they are Spirits they have a very near and familiar access to our souls; not that they can make any immediate im∣pressions on our Vnderstanding or Will, which are a sphere of light to which no created spirit can ap∣proach, it being under the immediate Oeconomy of the Father of Spirits; but yet being Spirits there is no doubt but they may, and oftentimes do insinuate themselves into our fancies, and mingle with the spirits and humours of our bodies, and by that means never want opportunity both to suggest good thoughts to us, and raise holy affe∣ctions in us. For that they can work upon our fancies, is apparent, else there could be neither
Angelical nor Diabolical dreams, and if they can so act upon our fancies, as to excite new images and representations in them; they may by this means communicate new thoughts to our under∣standig, which naturally Prints off from the fan∣cy those Ideas and Images which it there finds set and composed. And as they can work upon our fancies, so there is no doubt but they can influence our spirits and humours; else they have not the power so much s to cure or inflict a disease; and by thus working pon our spirits they can moderate as they please the violence of our passions, which are nothing but the flowings and reflowings of our spirits to and fro from our hearts; and by influ∣encing our humours they can compose us, when they please, into such a sedate and serious temper as is most apt to receive religious impressions, and to be influenced by the Heavenly motions of the Holy Ghost. These things I doubt not the bles∣sed Angels can and frequently do, though we per∣ceive it not, and though by the Laws of the world of Spirits they may probably be restrained from doing their utmost for us, that so we may still act with an uncontrouled freedom, and be left under a necessity of a constant and diligent endeavour; yet this we may be sure of, that as the evil Angels are always busie to pervert and seduce us from our duty, so the good are no less active to reduce us to, and assist us in it. VI. Another instance of the Ministry of An∣gels in the Kingdom of Christ is, their conducting the separated Spirits of his faithful Subjects to the Mansions of Glory. It was an ancient Tradition among the Jews, that the Souls of the Faithful
were conducted by Angels into Paradise, of which the Chaldee Paraphrase makes mention on Cant. 4.12. and this Tradition of theirs is confirmed by our Saviour, Luke 16.22. where he tells us, that when Lazarus died, he was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, i. e. into that place of refreshment where the Soul of Abraham, who was the Father of the Faithful, dwells, and in all probability that fiery Chariot and Horses where∣in Elias was mounted up to Heaven, 2 Kings 2.11. was nothing but a Convoy of Angels; and accordingly Tertullian de anima, c. 52. stiles the Angels Evocatores animarum, i. e. the Mes∣sengers of God, that call forth the lingring souls out of their bodies, and shew them the Paratu∣ram diversorii, the preparation of those blessed Mansions where they are to abide till the Resur∣rection. And this Office the good Angels do per∣form to the Souls of the faithful, not meerly to congratulate their safe arrival into the world of blessedness, though there is no doubt but that they, who do so heartily rejoyce in the Conversion of sinners, are ready enough to congratulate their Glorification; but that which seems to be the great reason of this Ministration of theirs, is to guard holy Souls, when they leave their bodies, through those lower Regions of the Air, which are the Seat and Principality of the Apostate Angels, who may therefore be very reasonably supposed to be continually lying in wait there, like birds of prey to seize upon the Souls of men, as soon as they are escaped out of the Cage of their bodies into the open Air, and either to sare and terrifie them in their passage to Heaven, or
to lead them away captive into their dark Prisons of endless horrour and despair; and therefore to prevent their affrighting good souls (which is all the hurt they can do them) as they pass along through their Territories, they are no sooner parted from their bodies, but they are taken in∣to the custody of some good Angel or Angels, who guard them safe through the Enemies quarters, and beat off those evil Spirits from them that would fain be infesting and assaulting them; and it is not at all improbable, but that by this very thing those evil Spirits do distinguish what Souls do belong to them from what do not, viz. their being destitute of, or attended with this holy Guard of Angels. When they behold a separated Spirit under this Heavenly Convoy, they fly away from it with infinite rage and envy to see it irrecoverably rescued out of their power to make it miserable; but when they per∣ceive one destitute and abandoned of this Ange∣lick guard, they immediately seize it as their own, and so commit it to their Chains of darkness. And as the good Angels do guard good Souls as they pass through the Air, against the power and malice of the Prince of the power of the Air; so they also conduct and guide them to their Man∣sions of blessedness. For when the departed Soul is wafed through the Air into those immense tracts of Aether, wherein the Sun and all the Heavenly bodies swim, how would it be pos∣sible for it in such a vast and unknown Continent ever to find its way to the Seat of the blessed, without the conduct of some experienced guide? And who can be better experienced in that Celesti∣al
Road, than those winged Messengers of the Al∣mighty King, who in the execution of his high behests are always travelling to and fro between Heaven and Earth? And therefore our Saviour hath committed the separated Spirits of his faith∣ful Subjects to these most skilful and faithful Guides, who in pursuance of his Commission are some or other of them still attending upon every good man's decease, to receive his Soul into their Custody, as soon as ever it is expired, and to guard it against evil Spirits, as it passes through the Air, and thence to conduct it through all those spacious fields of Aether, which extend them∣selves far and wide beyond all the visible lights of Heaven, to those happy abodes which the divine goodness hath prepared for glorified Spirits. VII. And lasty, Another instance of the Mi∣nistry of Angels to our Saviour in his Kingdom, is their attending and assisting him in the great solemnity of the day of Iudgment; for thus in all his most solemn and conspicuous works of Pro∣vidence our Saviour hath still been pleased to make use of the Ministry of his holy Angels; so when he came to ratifie his Covenant with Iacob, the mysterious Preface of that great solemnity was a Ladder reaching from Heaven to Earth, and the Angels ascending and descending upon it, which was doubtless intended for an Emblem of that Everlasting Covenant by which Man was to ascend to God, and God to descend to Man; so also when the Law was delivered by him upon the Mount, the Angels descended with him, and pitched their Tents about it in Circles of flaming fire, to signifie to the People those flames
of vengeance that would certainly pursue and seize them, if they were not obedient to those words that were thence delivered to them; so also when he was born into the world, the holy Angels came down to sing his Christmas Carol, and at once to proclaim and celebrate his Nativity; and it is the opinion of some learned men, that that multitude of the heavenly Host, which St. Luke speaks of, and who sang that Anthem of Glory be to God on high at our Saviour's Nativity, Luke 2.13. contained the whole Nation of Angels, because in Heb. 1.6. it is said, that when God brought in the first begotten into the world he said, let all the Angels worship him, that is, as they understand it, when our Saviour was born, God gave order to all the Angels of Heaven to come down and do homage to him, who was ere long to be their Sovereign Lord under the most high Father. Thus also a little before Ierusalem was destroyed, Iosephus tells us, that the Heavens were spread with Troops of armed men, who with∣out doubt were the blessed Angels that by their phantastick combats in the Air did presignifie the ensuing Tragedy of that bloudy City. It is no won∣der then if the great solemnity of Doomsday, of which Ierusalem's desolation was only a mourn∣ful Type, shall also be adorned and illustrated with the presence and attendance of the holy Angels: For this great Transaction is to be the winding up of the vast bottom of divine Providence over the whole Race of faln and degenerate Mankind, and the close and conclusion of the Mediatorial Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour; and there∣fore will without doubt be performed with
the greatest Grandeur and Magnificence. This is to be the great Day of our Saviour's Triumph, wherein his Friends shall be Crowned, and his Ene∣mies made his foot-stool; and such a solemnity may well deserve the attendance and Ministry of all the heavenly Angels, who accordingly shall then descend with our Saviour from the highest Heavens in bright aetherial bodies, such as shall render them gloriously conspicuous to all the lower world, and so fit to adorn the Triumphs of that glorious day; for so the Scripture assures us, not only that he shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, 1 Thes. 4.16. but also that he shall come in his glory, and all his holy Angels with him, Matt. 25.31. and that he shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, and that he shall come in his own glory, and in his Father's, and of his holy Angels, Luke 9.26. and in a word, that he shall come in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels, Mar. 8.38. But what their Ministry is to be in that great Day, I shall hereafter have occasion to shew, when I come to discourse of that solemn transaction. And now having explained the Ministry of the good Angels under Christ, I proceed to treat of the Ministry of the evil Angels to him, which princi∣pally consists in these four particulars: First, In trying and exercising the vertues of his Subjects. Secondly, In chastening and correcting their faults and miscarriages. Thirdly, In searing and hardening his incorri∣gible Rebels.
Fourthly, In executing his vengeance on them in another World. I. The Ministry of evil Angels to Christ, con∣sists in trying and exercising the vertues of his Sub∣jects; for this being the state of our trial and pro∣bation, wherein we stand Candidates for those everlasting preferments in the other World, our blessed Lord hath thought meet to surround us with Difficulties and Temptations, that so being in continual conflict with them we may never want opportunity to exert and exercise our vertues, and to give the most glorious proofs of our Courage and Constancy: For difficulty is the Spur of En∣deavour, and the Whet-stone of Vertue, without which the fairest Graces that belong to Humane Nature would be altogether Vseless, Worthless, and Vnactive; such as Faith and Patience, Temperance and Equanimity, Courage and Resignation to God, all which would scarce deserve the name of Ver∣tues, if they had not some difficulties to contest withal. Now one of the greatest difficulties with which our blessed Lord tries and exercises these Graces of our Nature, is the Temptations of evil Spirits, who as so many assisting Geniuses to the corrupt inclinations of our Nature, are permitted by him to rove about the World in innumerable swarms to Tempt and Elicite those inclinations in∣to action, and these being Spirits, have a much nearer access to the Souls of men than any material Agents whatsoever; for though they are totally debarred from all kind of intercourse with the immediate operations of the reasonable Soul, and can no more look into its thoughts, than we can into the bowels of the Earth, yet our Fancies and
Imaginations lying open to them, there is no doubt but they can and oftentimes do make what use they think fit of the Animal Spirits there, and dispose, and order, and distinguish them, just as the Painter doth his numerous Colours that lie confusedly be∣fore him in their several Shells into the Pictures and Phantasms of whatsoever Objects they please, and continue and repeat those Pictures in our fan∣cies as long and as oft as they think meet; and then considering what the natural use of the fancy is, both to the Vnderstanding and Will, and how it prompts the one with matter of Invention, and sup∣plies it with variety of Objects to work on, and draws forth or elicits the other to choose or refuse those Objects it presents according as they are a∣miably or odiously represented; considering these things, I say, it is notorious what mighty advan∣tages the evil Spirits have of insinuating their black suggestions to our minds. And then they being very subtil and sagacious by nature, and having had a∣bove five thousand years experience to cultivate their Talent of tempting and seducing us, (that having been their trade ever since they became De∣vils) to be sure they can never be at a loss when or how to apply themselves to us, and to nick us with such temptations as are most convenient to our seve∣ral inclinations, conditions, and circumstances; and accordingly, 2 Cor. 2.11. the Devil is said to have his Methods or Devices, i e. his stated Rules by which he governs his mischievous pra∣ctice of tempting and seducing souls, and 2 Tim. 2.26. we are told of the snare of the devil, or his crafty devices to intangle and captivate mens Souls.
Now though the design of these evil Spirits in tempting Christ's Subjects is doubtless to seduce and ruine them, yet it is evident that the design of Christ in permitting them to tempt them is only to try and exercise them, and rouse them out of their sloth and inactivity, and by the continual alarms of these their restless Adversa∣ries to keep them upon their guard, and make them more watchful and vigilant; and accord∣ingly from the consideration of that permission which these evil Spirits have to tempt us, we are in Scripture frequently exhorted to activity and vigilance; so 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigi∣lant, for the Devil your Adversary goeth about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; So also, Ephes. 6.11. Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil. Since therefore the Devil's tempting us is used by Christ as a motive to excite our activity, it is evident that Christ's intention in permitting him to tempt us is to excite and stimulate us thereunto. It is true, the Devil's Temptations may, and often have a quite con∣trary effect on us than Christ intended; they may seduce us from our innocence and duty, and thereby involve us in everlasting perdition; but if they do, it is our own fault, and through our own consent, without which they can never prevail against us, for we are assured, that if we resist the Devil he will fly away from us, and that we shall not be tempted by him above what we are able: and we are furnished by our Sa∣viour with sufficient strength and assistance to repel his most powerful temptations; but if in∣stead
of imploying our strength, and exercising our vertue in a vigorous resistance of him (which is the thing Christ intended in permitting him to tempt us) we will tamely suffer our selves to be led Captive by him, we must thank our selves for all the dire and miserable consequents of it. II. Another instance of the Ministry of these evil Angels to Christ is their chastening and cor∣recting the faults and miscarriages of his Sub∣jects. Thus upon great and high provocations he many times lets loose these evil Spirits upon us, and permits them to pain and punish us either immediately by themselves, or mediately by their Instruments; for so only to prevent St. Paul's being exalted above measure through the abundance of his revelations, there was given a Thorn in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet him, i. e. as it seems most probable, some evil Spirit was sent to him from Satan, the Prince of Devils, to in∣flict some corporal pain or disease on him (for so the grieving thorn, Ezek. 28.24. signifies a sore bodily affliction) and though he sought the Lord thrice for this thing that it might depart from him, yet could he receive no other Answer, but My grace is sufficient for thee, see 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. and it is very probable that those weak∣nesses, diseases, and deaths which were inflicted on the Corinthians for their irreverent commu∣nication of the Lord's Supper, vid. 1 Cor. 11.30. were inflicted by the Ministry of evil Angels, to whose power and malice they were abandoned by our Saviour, as a just Chastisement of their prophaneness; for so it is evident the incestu∣ous person was corrected upon the Sentence
of his Excommunication, which was, that he should be delivered up unto Satan for the destructi∣on of his flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5. where the delivering him up to Satan seems to have been in answer to Satan's demanding of him; for so in Scri∣pture the Devil is sometimes called, The accuser of the Brethren, which accuses them before God day and night, Rev. 12.10. and sometimes the , which signifies, an Adversary in Court of Iudicature, that impleads and accuses us before God, 1 Pet. 5.8. Now this accusation of his is sometimes false and groundless, as in the case of Iob, upon which account he is called, , the Calumniator; but sometimes he accuses us truly, for faults that are real and highly criminal, upon which he requires us of God as he did St. Peter, Luke 22.31. i. e. he requires us as the Executioner doth a Malefactor, to sift or winnow us as Wheat, i. e. to shake and afflict us; and when ever God is pleased to answer this request, he is truly said to deliver us up to Satan; and this power of delivering up to Satan such per∣sons as are justly accused of great and scandalous sins, God hath communicated to his Church, up∣on which delivery in the Primitive Ages (when there were no Magistrates to second the Churches Censures with Corporal punishments) Satan as the Lictor or Executioner of our Saviour imme∣diately seized the Criminal, and inflicted on him some bodily disease or torment, which St. Igna∣tius calls, , the punishment of the Devil, Epist. ad Roman. for so in our Saviour's time, and before and after it, it was usual for evil Spirits, by God's permission, to inflict diseases
and torments on mens bodies, of which there are innumerable instances in the Gospels, and the Writings of the Primitive Fathers; and that this was then the usual consequence of Excommunication, is evident from that phrase, For the destruction of the flesh, which plainly signifies some corporal pu∣nishment consequent to that Tremendous Sentence▪ which is therefore called a Rod, 1 Cor. 4.21. be∣cause of the bodily correction that followed it. But since the power of corporal punishments hath been derived by Christ upon Christian Magi∣strates, he very rarely chastens his Subjects with any bodily pains by the immediate Agency of evil Spirits, but hath wholly deposited it in the hands of the Temporal Powers, who are now his sole Mi∣nisters and Revengers to execute wrath upon those that do evil. But yet still upon occasion he so far makes use of the Ministry of the Devils in correcting us, as to permit them to excite wicked men, and especially wicked Princes and Governours to plague and per∣secute us: When he sees his Church or any parti∣cular part of it degenerating from the purity of his Religion, or waxing cold and remiss in their love and duty to him, he many times gives a loose to these malignant Spirits, who always burn with in∣veterate rancour against it, and permits them to provoke and stimulate its Enemies to exert and im∣ploy their power against it; So that whatsoever mischiefs wicked Princes or men do to the Church of Christ, or to any part of it, they do it on∣ly as the Instruments of these evil Angels▪ and by their mischievous suggestions and instigations; for so Christ tells the Church of Symrna in Rev. 2.10. The Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that is,
the wicked Governours there shall do it by the insti∣gation of the Devil, to whom I will certainly give permission to instigate them thereunto, for so Christ is said to have the Keys of the bottomless Pit, Rev. 1.18. that is, power to confine or let loose those evil Spirits, that inhabit it, at his pleasure; and when he thinks fit, to confine them, we find the Church enjoys peace, and rest, and prosperity, Rev. 20.1.2, 3, 4. but no sooner doth he let them loose again, but they are immediately instigating the wicked powers of the Earth to fight against it and persecute it, Ibid. ver. 7, 8, 9. from whence it is evident that the power of these evil Spirits to excite evil Princes or men to persecute his Church is under the restraint and determination of our Saviour, that they can proceed no farther in this their mischie∣vous design, than he thinks meet to permit them, and consequently, that in all those persecutions to which they excite their Instruments, they are but the Ministers and Executioners of Christ, even as the Dog is the Shepherds in worrying the straying sheep into the fold. III. Another instance of the Ministry of evil Spirits to Christ is their hardening and confirming incorrigible and obstinate sinners in their wicked purposes. For when notwithstanding all those powerful Methods which in the administration of his Government Christ uses to reduce and reclaim men, they still persist in their Rebellion, when they have conquered his Grace, quenched his Spi∣rit, broke through all his persuasions, and baffled all his Arts of saving them, he many times with∣draws from them those powerful aids of his Spirit, and of his holy Angels, which they have wilfully
neglected, and utterly abandons them to the powers of Darkness, whom from thenceforth he freely permits to tempt and seduce them, and to oul them on at their pleasure from sin to sin, and from one degree of sin to another, till they have filled up the measure of their iniquities; and this without doubt is the severest punishment that Christ inflicts upon sinners on this side Hell; for this is a kind of Damnation above ground to be delivered up alive to those restless Furies, who having free leave to back and ride us at their pleasure, to be sure will never cease stimulating and spurring us on from wickedness to wickedness, till they have leapt us headlong into the everlasting burnings. And this, I conceive, is the meaning of Gods harden∣ing sinners so often mentioned in the holy Scri∣pture, which doth not at all imply, that God by any positive act of his own infuses any sinful qua∣lity into mens Wills to excite or stimulate them to sin, as some men have blasphemously enough as∣serted, for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man; but when men have a long while hardned themselves against all the powerful impressions of his Grace, and in the pursuit of their wicked courses have turned a deaf ear to all his persuasions to the contrary, then as a just punish∣ment of their incorrigible obstinacy, he many times withdraws from them the influences of his Grace, and delivers them up to Satan, or, which is the same thing, permits him to seize them as his own, and to take possession of them, and as a wicked soul to animate and act them in all their wickedness; for so the Devil is said , to work in the Children of disobedience, so that these Children of disobedi∣ence
are a sort of , of persons that are possessed and acted by the Devil. And too many deplorable instances there are of wicked men that sin on at that rate as if they were really acted by some Diabolical Genius, that are hurried into such monstrous extravagancies of wickedness, as are nei∣ther pleasant, nor profitable, nor reputable; so that they gratifie no passion or appetite in humane nature by committing them, but do seem to sin merely for the sake of sinning, out of a kind of preter∣natural malice, when they can scarce give any other reason to themselves why they do such an action, but only this, because it is wicked; so truly Diabolical is their love of wickedness, so abstract from all those motives which are wont to affect the passions and appetites of men, that it is hardly resolvable into any other reason, but that they are delivered up by God to be informed and acted by the Devil; who having once obtained the possessi∣on of them, continually plies them with Tempta∣tion, and never ceases urging and pressing them forward from one degree of wickedness to ano∣ther, till at length he hath seared and hardened them into final and incurable Impenitence. And this in particular was the case of Iudas, who ha∣ving long persisted in his Thievery and Sacriledge, notwithstanding all those warnings and admoni∣tions our Saviour had given him to the contrary, was at length abandoned to that Devil to whose Temptations he had been so obsequious, upon which it is said, that the Devil entered into him, Luke 22.3. and the Devil being in possession of him, immediatly provokes and irritates him to the foulest and most horrible villany that ever any mor∣tal
Creature was guilty of; for so, Iohn 13.2. we are told, that the Devil put it into the heart of Iu∣das to betray Christ. But as yet it seems he was not totally abandoned to the Devil, who had only per∣mission to make that black and dire proposal to him; after which our Saviour attempts by the most Pa∣thetick persuasions to prevent his compliance, Mark 14.21. notwithstanding which, the Wretch be∣ing still enticed by his own covetousness to listen to that horrid suggestion, our Saviour having marked him out for a Traytor by giving him the Sop, it is said again, that Satan entred into him; and upon this second entrance our Saviour gives him up for desperate; for, that thou dost, saith he, do quickly, John 13.27. as much as if he had said, now I find the Devil has the full possession of thee, and that henceforth there remains no more hope of re∣claiming thee, go therefore and dispatch thy wicked purpose as soon as thou pleasest. So that now, it seems, he was entirely delivered up to the Devil, who thereupon immediatly hurries him to the execution of his black design. IV. And lastly, Another instance of the Mi∣nistry of evil Spirits to Christ is their executing his vengeance on incorrigible sinners in the other World. For since, as I have shewn before, our Saviour makes use of the power and malice of these evil Spirits to correct and chasten men in this life, why may we not thence conclude, that he makes use of the same to plague and punish them in the life to come; especially considering that they bear the same malice to us in the other life that they did in this; for they tempt us to sin here for no other end but that they may make us miserable
there; and therefore to be sure that same malice of theirs which excites them now to contribute all they can to our sin, will equally provoke them then to contribute all they can to our misery, and render them altogether as active in tormenting us in Hell as they were in tempting us upon Earth; and then con∣sidering that Spirits can act upon Spirits, as well as Bodies upon Bodies, and that the more powerful any Spirit is, the more vigorously it can act upon other Spirits, we may be sure that those evil Spirits being Angels by nature, are incomparably more powerful than the souls of men, and therefore can act upon them with unspeakable more force and vigour than one Soul can on another; for the weaker any Spi∣rit is, the more passive it must necessarily be to those Spirits that are stronger and more powerful, and therefore by how much weaker wicked Souls are than wicked Angels, by so much more passive must they be to their power, and consequently, be so much more liable to be vexed and tormented by them; and since in all probability the dispro∣portion which Nature hath made between the pow∣er of Angls and Souls is far greater than that which sin hath made between the power of one Angel and another, we may reasonably conclude, that wicked Souls are far more impressible by the power of wicked Angels than wicked Angels are by the power of good Angels; and therefore since the good Angels can make such violent impressions up∣on the wicked ones as they are not able to endure, but are still forced to fly before them, as oft as they encounter them, vid. P. 965. what intolera∣ble impressions can wicked Angels make upon wicked Souls when they are abandoned by God to
their malice and fury, for though our Souls are no more impressible by corporeal action than the beams of the Sun are by the blows of a Hammer, yet that they can feel the force of spiritual action, we find by every days experience; for so a thought which is a spiritual action, if it be very horrible or dismal, doth as sensibly pain and aggrieve our Souls, as the most exquisite Corporeal torment can our Bodies. Now there is no doubt but evil Spirits can suggest preternatural horrors to our minds, and repeat and urge them with such Importunity and vehemence, as to render them most exquisitely painful and do∣lorous, of the truth of which we have a woful Ex∣ample in that miserable Wretch, Francis Spira, who upon that woful breach he made in his Con∣science by renouncing his Religion, notwithstand∣ing he had received several kind admonitions from Heaven to the contrary, was forsaken of God, and delivered up alive into the hands of those dire Tormenters of Souls; whereupon though he had not the least symptome of bodily melancholy, he was immediatly seized with such an inexpressible Agony of mind, as amazed his Physicians, asto∣nished his Friends, and struck terror into all that beheld him; for he was so near to the con∣dition of a damned Spirit, that he verily believed Hell it self was more tolerable than those invisible la∣shes that his Soul endured without any intermissi∣on, and therefore he often wished that he were in Hell, and as often attempted to dispatch him∣self thither in hope to find sanctuary there from those direful thoughts which continually preyed upon his Soul. Now that these Horrors were inflicted on him by Diabolical suggestion is evident
both by the impenetrable hardness and obstinacy of his mind against all the motives of Repentance that accompanied them, and by the horrible bla∣sphemies they frequently extorted from him. And if now in this life they have so much power to torment our minds, whenever God thinks it meet to let them loose upon us, what will they have hereafter, when our wretched Spirits shall be ut∣terly abandoned to their mercy, and they shall have a free scope to exert their fury on us; and glut their hungry malice with our Torment and vex∣ation? And since it is evident they do not want power, we may certainly conclude even from that natural malignity that is in the temper of a Devil, they do not want Will to plague and torture us in the other World. And this Will and Power of theirs our Saviour makes use of as the Common Executi∣oner of his Vengeance upon incorrigible sinners in the other Life; for as soon as ever a wicked Soul departs from its Body, it is immediatly con∣signed into the hands of those Diabolical Furies, who like so many hungry Hounds seize it with infinite greediness, and fall a tearing and worry∣ing it with horrible suggestions without any pause or intermission, and by continually recording its sins to it, and reproaching it with the folly of them, and putting it in mind of that dismal eternal futu∣rity it must suffer for them, do incessantly sting and vex it with swarms of dire reflections and tor∣menting thoughts, which are the only Instruments of Torment that can fasten upon a Soul. And hence in Matt. 18.34. the Devils, to whom the wicked Servant was delivered up by his Master for his cruelty toward his fellow Servant are cal∣led
Tormenters, as being the Ministers of our Sa∣viours just Vengeance upon wicked and incorrigible offenders. And thus having shewn at large that the good and bad Angels are the Ministers of Christ, and where∣in their Ministry to him consists, I proceed to the III. Third sort of the Ministers of Christs King∣dom, viz. The Kings and Governours of the World; for though there are many Infidel Kings in the World that know not Christ, and that ne∣ver submitted themselves to his Empire, but in∣stead of that do openly defie and persecute his holy Religion, yet these of right are subject to him, though in fact they are inslaved to the De∣vil, and he hath the disposal of their Crowns, and the command of their power, and doth actually imploy and use it, even as he doth the power of the Devils, in the prosecution of the righteous ends of his Government. And though too many of those Kings who by their visible profession of Chri∣stianity, have actually submitted themselves to the Scepter of Christ, have yet together with Chri∣stianity espoused the Interest of sundry Antichri∣stian Principles, in pursuance of which they have been as inveterate Enemies and Persecutors of the truth as it is in Iesus as any of the Heathen Kings or Emperors; yet these also, notwithstanding their male-administration are the Subjects and Ministers of our Saviour, and it is by his Authority and Commission that they Reign, and by his Om∣nipotent Providence that all their wicked designs and actions are over-ruled to gracious ends and purposes: so that all the Sovereign Powers of the Earth are subjected by God to the Dominion of
our Saviour, and in their respective Kingdoms and Empires are only his Substitutes and Vicege∣rents; for so we are told not only that all judg∣ment is committed to him, and that all power is committed to him in heaven and earth; and that he is Heir of all things, and hath power over all flesh, but also that he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the only Potentate, the head of all Principality and Power, and the Prince of all the Kings of the Earth, vid. P. 810. and so the Fathers of the Council of Ariminum tell Constantius the Arrian Emperor, that it was by Christs Donation that he held his Em∣pire, , by him, i. e. Christ thou art appointed to Reign over all the World, upon which account Liberius advises him, , do not fight against Christ who hath be∣stowed this Empire upon thee; do not render him Impiety instead of Gratitude: and to the same purpose Athanasius tells us, . (i. e.) that Christ having received the Throne, hath transla∣ted it from Heathen to holy Christian Kings to return them back to the House of Iacob. So that both from Scripture and the current Doctrine of the Primitive Church, it is evident that all the Sovereign Powers upon Earth are subjected to our Saviour, and are only the Ministers and Viceroys of his universal Kingdom. But for the farther prosecution of this Argu∣ment I shall shew in the first place, that by this their subjection to Christ they are not deprived of
any natural Right of their Sovereignty, and se∣condly, that they are obliged by it to certain Mi∣nistries in the Kingdom of Christ. First, That by their subjection they are not de∣prived of any natural Right of their Sovereign∣ty, for when our Saviour pronounced the Sen∣tence Give unto Cesar the things that are Cesars, he thereby renewed the Patent of Sovereign Pow∣ers, and reinvested them in all the natural Rights of their Sovereignty which doubtless are included in the things that are Cesars, for upon the Phari∣sees asking him that captious question, Is it law∣ful to pay Tribute to Cesar? He doth not answer yes it is lawful, which yet had been a suffici∣ent reply to their Question, but calls for a Tri∣bute Peny, and having asked them whose I∣mage and Superscription that was upon it, and be∣ing answered Cesars, he returns them an Answer much larger than their Question, Give unto Cesar the things that are Cesars, (i. e.) it is certain that you are obliged not only to pay Tribute to Cesar, but also to render him whatever else is due to him by vertue of his Sovereign Power, for Sovereign Power being immediatly founded on the Domini∣on of God hath from thence these two unaliena∣ble Rights derived to it, to which all the essential Rights of Sovereignty are Reducible: First to Command in all things as it judges most conve∣nient for the publick good, where God hath not Countermanded, for the Power of Sovereigns de∣scending from God can only be limited by God or themselves; for if they are limitable by any other Power, they are Subjects to that Power, and so can no longer be Sovereigns, and if they are li∣mitable
only by God or themselves, then where they are not limited either by God or themselves, they must necessarily have a right to command. Second∣ly, The other unalienable Right that is derived to them from God is to be accountable only to God; for by deriving to them Sovereign Power God hath exalted them above all Powers, but his own, and therefore since no Power can be accountable but to a superiour Power, and since Sovereigns have no Superiour Power but God, it is to God on∣ly, from whom they received their Power, that they are accountable for the administration of it. These therefore are the natural Rights of Sove∣reign Powers, and these Rights remain intire and inviolate in them notwithstanding their subjection to the Mediatorial Scepter of our Saviour, as I shall endeavour to shew in the particulars. First, Therefore by this their subjection to Christ they are not deprived of their natural Right of Commanding in all cases as they shall judge most convenient for the publick Good, where God hath not countermanded them, For the Christi∣an Religion is so far from any way retrenching the power of Princes, that it abundantly confirms and enforces it, by requiring us to submit to every Or∣dinance of man for the Lords sake, to be subject to the higher Powers, and that not only for wrath, but for conscience sake, to submit to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates, to render Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honour to whom Honour, (i. e.) to submit to all the lawful impositions of our Prin∣ces, whether it be of Taxes, or of any other matter whatsoever, and in all the New Testa∣ment
there is only one limitation made of our obe∣dience, which is a natural and eternal one, and that is that we ought to obey God rather than Man, that is, when Mans Command and Gods do ap∣parently clash and interfere with each other; for in this case the Magistrate hath no Right to be obeyed, because his Will is countermanded by a Su∣periour Authority, by which Exception this general Rule is confirmed, that in all cases whatsoever, whether Temporal or Spiritual, Civil or Ecclesiasti∣cal, Sovereign Powers have an unalienable right to be obeyed. For if their Right to be obeyed in the Kingdom of Christ extended only to Civil and Temporal causes, their Authority would be very much lessened and Retrenched by their subje∣ction to our Saviour; since before their subjection to him it undoubtedly extended to all causes what∣soever; because being Sovereign under God, it could have no other bounds or limits but what God had set to it; and therefore since before their sub∣jection to Christ, God had bounded their Authority by no other Law but that of Nature, it must either be made appear that the Law of Nature did then limit their Authority only to Civil causes, (which I am sure is impossible) or it will necessarily follow that it extended also to Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, and if it did so then, it must do so still, unless it be made appear that Christianity hath retrenched and lessened it. It is true, Christ hath erected a standing form of spiritual Government in his Church, and it is as true that all Government, whether Spi∣ritual or Temporal, includes a Legislative Power in it, or a power of commanding its Subjects; but this is no limitation of the commanding power of
Sovereign Princes, who must still be obeyed in all things where Christ hath not countermanded, though the Church should command the contrary, for Christ never authorized the Governours of his Church to controul the commanding Power of Prin∣ces, but hath left all matters of indifference as ab∣solutely to their disposal and determination as ever they were before his spiritual Government was erected, and matters of indifference are the sole matter both of purely Civil and purely Ecclesiasti∣cal Laws, and therefore after the Church by its Legislative power hath restrained any matter of Indifference, the Civil Sovereign, in whose dispo∣sal all matters of indifference are, may, if he see good occasion, release and free it again, and im∣pose the contrary matter of indifference, and if he doth so, all Christian People are obliged by the express Commands of Scripture to obey him; for the Scripture-commands of obedience to the Temporal Sovereignty have no such exception as this annexed to them, except the Church command the contrary; and in matters of duty what have we to do to make exceptions where God hath made none? And indeed where there are two Le∣gislative Powers, the one must necessarily be sub∣ject to the other, or it will be impossible for the Subject in many cases without sinning to obey either. For when ever the Commands of the Civil State do happen to clash with the Commands of the Church, either the Church must be obliged to submit to the State, or the State to the Church, or the Subject cannot possibly obey the one with∣out sinning against the other. If it be said, that the Church must submit to the State, in things
appertaining to the State; and the State to the Church, and so both are supreme in their own Pro∣vince, I would fain know what is to be done when these two Powers differ about the things which appertain to the one and to the other; the State saith this appertains to me, and so commands it, the Church saith this appertains to me, and so forbids it; now in this case it is certain that one or the other must be obliged to give way, or the Subject can neither obey nor disobey either without sinning▪ and which soever of the two it be that is obli∣ged to give way, by vertue of that Obligation it must be subjected to the other. So that now the Question is only this, which of the two Legisla∣tive Powers is Supreme, and it would be imperti∣nent to say that they are both Supreme in their proper Province, the one in Civil, and the other in Spiritual causes, because it is in suspence whe∣ther the cause in which they countermand each other be Civil or Spiritual, so that in this case I must either be obliged to obey neither, which is notoriously false, or whatsoever the cause be in it self, to yield obedience to the one, and to dis∣obey the other, and if I must obey the Civil Power, whether the cause be Civil or Spiritual, then the Civil Power must be supreme in both; as on the contrary, if I must obey the Church Pow∣er whether the cause be Spiritual or Civil, it will as necessarily follow that the Church Power is supreme in both. Which later we are as sure is false, as the Scripture is true; for in  matters it is agreed on all hands, that the Scripture concludes all men, as well Clergy as Laity, under the obligation of Obedience to the Civil Sovereign, and that none are
exempt, no not the Apostles themselves, or the Bishops succeeding them in the spiritual Govern∣ment, whether we consider them separately or conjunctly; and if in all Civil Causes I am obli∣ged to obey the command of the Civil Power, then it is most certain that if the Cause in contest between that and the spiritual Power be really Ci∣vil, I am obliged to disobey the countermand of the spiritual Power; but if on the contrary I must disobey the Command of the Civil Power, supposing the cause to be spiritual, which way can I turn my self without danger of sinning, so that unless one of these two Powers are Supreme in both causes, when ever any cause happens to be conte∣sted between them, (as to be sure many must between two Rival Powers) I can neither obey nor disobey without sinning against one or both; and can we imagine that God, who is the God of Or∣der and not of Confusion, would ever involve us in such inextricable difficulties by subjecting us to two supreme Powers, that are so subject to clash and interfere with one another? Wherefore although, as I shall shew by and by, the Church is invest∣ed with a Legislative Power, whereby it can re∣strain things that were free and indifferent for its own security, and decency, and order; yet this Power is subordinate to the Civil Legislation (which is in all causes Supreme) and cannot en∣act against it, controul or countermand it in any indifferent matter, whether Temporal or Spiritual, but stands obliged to recede to the Civil Sovereign who hath the supreme disposal of all indifferent things, and in all contested cases to veil its Au∣thority to his.
And accordingly we find that during the first three hundred years when the Civil Powers were Enemies to Christianity, and did no otherwise con∣cern themselves with it than to ruin and extirpate it, the Church made Laws for it self, and by its own Legislative Power enacted whatsoever it judged convenient or necessary for its own security or edification; but yet it never presumed in any indifferent matter to contradict the Laws of the Empire, nor did ever any Christian, because he was a Subject of the Church, refuse to obey his Prince in any case whatsoever, where God had not countermanded him; as is most evident from hence, because in all the History of those times we do not find one instance of any Christian that suffered for so doing. In those days, there were no Martyrs for indifferent things, which to be sure there must have been, had the Church then taken upon it to determine indifferences contrary to the Edicts of the Emperour; but the only thing they then suffered for, was their refusal to disobey the express Will of God, in compliance with the wicked Wills of men; which is an unan∣swerable Argument, that in those days the Church never assumed to it self any supreme Authority over indifferent things, either in Spirituals or Tem∣porals, but left that in those hands where God had placed it, viz. in the hands of the Civil Sovereign, with whose Imperial Laws its Canons never inter∣fered, with whose Legislative Power it never justled for the Wall, but chearfully submitted to it in all things, wherein it was not determined to the con∣trary by the express Will of God. And when afterwards the Civil Sovereign embraced Christia∣nity,
he did not thereby devest himself of his Su∣premacy over all indifferent things in all causes what∣soever, but by his own Authority he not only con∣vened General Councils, and for the most part presided in them (as particularly in that of Ephe∣sus, Chalcedon, the sixth General one in Constan∣tinople, called Trullo, and several others) and in∣forced their Canons with his own Imperial Edicts, but many times made Laws, even in Church matters without them; to which the Ecclesiastical Governours yielded the same Obedience as they did to the Decrees of the most oecumenical Councils: for so, not only Constantine, who was the first Christian Emperour, made Laws concerning the Festivals of the Church, Ordaining what might, and what might not be done upon the Lords Day, and not only several of those Ecclesiastical Laws in Gratian's Collection are now confessed on all hands to be the Laws of Princes, but the first Ti∣tles of the Code are all of them concerning E∣clesiastical matters, and so also in the Laws of the Goths and Vandals, the Authenticks and Capitulars of the French Kings, there are numerous instan∣ces of the Legislative Power of Kings in Ecclesiasti∣cal matters, and this power was openly asserted by the French Embassadours in the Council of Trent, viz. that the Kings of France following the ex∣amples of other Christian Emperors had fre∣quently made Laws for the Church, which were so far from being countermanded by the Bishops of Rome, that they received many of them into their own Canons, and that the Gallican Church had been always governed by the Ecclesiastical Laws which were made by their Kings, and Car∣dinal
Cusanus tells us, lib. 2. Cath. Concord. c. 40. that he himself had collected Eighty six Chapters of Ecclesiastical Laws, made by the ancient Em∣perors; besides many others of Charles the Great and his Successors, in which there are many things concerning the Popes and all other Patriarchs, de∣claring that he never read that ever any Pope was asked to confirm those Laws, or that ever they were accounted the less obligatory because they wanted the Papal confirmation. And indeed before Pope Hildebrand, who was the first Bishop that challenged the Supreme Legislation in Ecclesi∣astical affairs, it is notoriously known that the greatest Prelates of the Church frequently ad∣dressed themselves to the Emperor for such good Laws, as the present necessities of the Church cal∣led for. Thus Pope Damasus intreated the Em∣peror Honorius to make a Law for the more Re∣gular Election of the Popes. Thus also Sergius, Pa∣triarch of Constantinople, supplicated the Empe∣ror Heraclius to forbid by a Pragmatick Sanction the admission of any man into the Clergy, unless it were into a dead Place; and it was, (as it is thought,) upon S. Ambrose's intreaty that Theodo∣sius made a Law for the disanulling of Marriages within the Prohibited degrees: so when the Em∣peror Iustinian turned the ancient Canons of the Church into Imperial Laws, he was so far from being accused of being an Usurper of the Ecclesi∣astical Power, that Pope Adrian IV. highly extolls him for so doing, though in his 133 Novel that Emperor affirms, that , nothing is impervious to the inspection and cognisance of the King, in which S. Austin
accords with him, when he affirms the Kings do nothing but their duty, Cum in suo regno bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam quae pertinent ad divinam Religionem, i. e. when they make good Laws, not only concerning humane Society, but also concerning divine Religion; by all which it is evident that the Civil Powers for several ages after they became Christians did claim and exercise a supreme Legislative Power in causes Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, and this without any contradiction from the Bishops and Governours of the Church; for as for that saying, Quid Imperatori cum Eccle∣sia? What hath the Emperor to do with the Church? It was not the Language of the Church, but of that fireband Donatus, who was the Ring-leader of one of the most factious and turbulent Heresies that ever infested the Christian World; and if in those instances wherein they exerted their Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical Causes, the Church had no power to Controul or Counter∣mand them, then neither hath it in any other in∣stance of the same nature; and if so, then not∣withstanding their subjection to our Saviour, they still retain their Supreme Commanding Power over all matters of indifference, whether it be in Civil or Ecclesiastical causes. But then Secondly, By this their subjection to our Saviour, they are not deprived of their natural Right of being unaccountable to any but to God alone through Jesus Christ; for all the difference be∣tween the state of Sovereign Powers in this mat∣ter, before and after their subjection to Christs Mediatorial Scepter, is only this, that before they
were accountable to God only immediatly, where∣as now they are accountable to God only through Iesus Christ; for Christ being Authorized by God to Mediate for him, or, which is the same thing, to be his Vicegerent in the World, all things are now subjected to him, and God now rules and judges, rewards and punishes all men by him whether they are Subjects or Sovereigns, Vassals or Emperors; for so in the great transaction of the last day we are told that the Kings of the Earth shall be arraigned before his Judgment Seat, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17. but though they are now accounta∣ble immediately to Christ, who during this Evan∣gelical Oeconomy is to rule and judge for God; yet in respect of any Earthly Tribunal, they remain altogether as Sovereign and unaccountable as ever: for to be Sovereign and unaccountable are conver∣tible terms, and it is nonsense to say, either that any Power is unaccountable which hath any Supe∣riour, or that any Power is accountable which is Sovereign and Supreme, so that by necessity of nature those Powers which are Sovereign upon Earth must be unaccountable to any Power upon Earth, because to call to account is an Act of Superiority, and that which is Supreme can have no Superiour to account to; so that unless it be made appear that Christ hath erected some earth∣ly Tribunal that is Superiour to the Tribunals of the Supreme Civil Powers, he must of necessity have left them as unaccountable as he found them. Now it is plain, that our Saviour erected no other Tribunal in this World, but only that of the Spi∣ritual or Ecclesiastical Government, which he was so far from advancing above the Tribunal of the
Civil Sovereign, that while he was upon Earth he acknowledged himself to be subject and accoun∣table thereunto, though he was then the Supreme Bishop and Head of that spiritual Regiment, and this he did not only by Recognizing Cesar's Right of receiving Tribute from him, of which I have spoken before, (for by bidding them render to Cesar the things that are Cesars he leaves Sovereign Princes in the quiet possession of all those Rights which he found them possessed of, and requires their Subjects to pay them whatsoever is essential∣ly due to their Sovereignty, and whatsoever the Laws and Customs of Nations had before deter∣mined to be their Right) but also by acknowledg∣ing before Pilate the Right of the Civil Tribunal to call him to account, Ioh. 19.1. where he confes∣ses that the Power by which Pilate arraigned him was given him from above, and by reprehending S. Peter for endeavouring by force to rescue him out of the hands of the Civil Powers, Put up thy Sword, saith he, into his place, for all that take the sword shall perish by the sword, Matth. 26.52. in which words it was far from his intention to pro∣hibite the use of the Sword either to Governours, who, as S. Paul tells us, bear not the Sword in vain, or to private persons in their own lawful defence; for he commands his own Disciples to buy them swords to defend themselves against Robbers and lawless Cut-throats, who, as Iosephus tells, did very much abound in those days, Luke 22.36. but all that he intended was to forbid drawing the Sword against lawful Authority in any case what∣soever, though it were for the defence and security of his own person; for this was S. Peter's case,
who in the defence of his Saviour resisted the High Priests Officers who came armed with a lawful Authority to seize and apprehend him; in which our Saviour plainly owns himself accountable to the Civil Authority of his Country: for if he had not been so, it could be no fault in S. Peter to endea∣vour to rescue him from its Ministers, and if Christ himself, while he was upon Earth, were subject to the Civil Authority, what an high piece of arrogance is it for those who are at most but his Vicars and Ministers, to claim or pretend an exemption? And if it were so great a fault in S. Peter, to draw his Sword against lawful Au∣thority, though it were in the defence of his Savi∣ours Person, then doubtless it is no less a fault in his Successors to pretend a Right from S. Peter to draw their Swords against Sovereign Princes, though it be in the defence of their Saviours Reli∣gion. And as our Saviour owned himself subject and accountable to the Civil Tribunal, so S. Paul's injunction is universal, Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers; and surely every Soul must in∣clude the whole body of the Clergy as well as of the Laity, unless we can produce some clear and express exception to the contrary, and as the Com∣mand extends universally to all, so doth the rea∣son of it also, for the Powers that are, are ordained of God; and if we must be subject to them, be∣cause they rule by God's Authority, then it is cer∣tain there are none that are subject to God, but are under the force and obligation of this Rea∣son. And then he goes on, Whosoever resisteth the Power (of whatsoever Degree or Order of men he be) resisteth the Ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation; and if, according to the Law of our Saviour, it be a damnable sin for any person or persons whatsoever to resist the Civil Authority, then it is a plain case, that our Saviour hath not at all depres∣sed the Sovereignty of the Secular Powers by sub∣jecting it to any Superiour Tribunal; but hath left it as absolute and unaccountable as ever it was before it was subjected to his Empire. And thus having proved that Sovereign Princes are not devested of any natural Right of their Sovereignty by their subjection to the Mediatorial Scepter of our Saviour, I proceed in the Second place, To shew what those Ministries are, which they are obliged to render to our Savi∣our by vertue of this their subjection to him. In general it is foretold, that upon their Subjection to Christ they should become nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to his Church, Isa. 49.23. that is, that they should tenderly cherish, protect, and de∣fend it, and liberally minister to it whatsoever is necessary for its support and preservation; and to be sure Christ expects of them that they should ac∣complish this Prediction by doing all those good Offices to his Church which the relation of a foster Father or Mother imports: For when God Pre∣dicts any good thing of men, it is plain that he would have them be what he foretels they shall be; so that in this case the Prophesie carries Precept in it, and doth not only signifie what shall be, but also what ought to be. When therefore God Pro∣phesies of Kings that they shall be nursing Fathers to his Church, he doth as well declare what they should be as what they shall be; and so he foretels
of them, and commands them in the same breath. If therefore we would know what those Ministries are, which Christ now requires Sovereign Powers to render to his Church, our best way will be to inquire what those Duties are which are implied in the relation of a foster Father to his foster Child. Now the Duties of this Relation may be all of them comprehended under these four particulars: First, To protect and defend it against harms and injuries. Secondly, To Cultivate its manners with good Precepts and Counsels. Thirdly, To correct and chasten its faults and irregularities. Fourthly, To supply it with decent Raiment and convenient Sustenance, answerable to which Sovereign Powers being constituted by our Savi∣our the foster Fathers of his Church are by vertue of this Relation obliged. I. To protect and defend it in the Profession and exercise of the true Religion. II. To fence and Cultivate its peace and good Order, either by wholesom Laws of their own, or by permitting and requiring it to make good Laws for it self, and if need be, inforcing them with Civil Coercions. III. To chasten and correct the irregular and disorderly members of it. IV. To make provision for the Decency of its Worship, and for the convenient Maintenance of its Officers and Ministers, which answers to the decent Raiment and convenient Sustenance with which the Foster-Father is oblig'd to supply his Foster-Child.
These Particulars I shall but very briefly insist on, it being none of my Province to instruct Princes and Governors. I. One of those Ministries which Princes by virtue of their Subjection to Christ, are obliged to render to his Church, is to Protect and Defend her in the Profession and Exercise of the true Religi∣on, that is, not only to permit her openly to Profess the true Religion and to perform the publick Offi∣ces of it without disturbance or interruption, but also to fence her with legal securities, and guard her with the Temporal Sword against the power and malice of such as would disturb and persecute her; and therefore Sovereign Powers are con∣cerned above all things impartially to inquire and studiously to examine what the true Religion is, lest being imposed upon by false pretences, they misemploy that Power in the Patronage of Error, which was given 'em for the Protection of the Truth. II. Another of those Ministries which Princes are obliged, by virtue of their Subjection to Christ, to render his Church, is to Fence and Cultivate its Peace and good Order, either by wholsom Laws of their own, or by permitting and requiring it when occasion requires to make good Laws for it self, and if need be, by inforcing 'em with Ci∣vil Coercions: for so when the Church was either broken by Schisms or corrupted by Errors and disorderly Customs; it was always the practice of Christian Kings and Emperors, even from the time that they became Christians to restrain and give a check to those Divisions and Disorders, ei∣ther by their own Royal and Imperial Edicts, or
by convening the Ecclesiastical Governors to Councils, there to consult and agree upon such good Laws and expedients as the present necessities of the Church required; and because these Laws being grounded upon mere Spiritual Au∣thority could as such be inforced by no other Pe∣nalties than Spiritual, which by bold and obstinate Offenders were frequently despised and disregard∣ed, therefore those holy Kings and Emperours thought themselves obliged, as they were the Mi∣nisters of Jesus, to strengthen and reinforce 'em with temporal Sanctions and Penalties, by which means they became the Laws of the Empire, as well as of the Church: Of all which I have given sufficient Instances, and all this was no more than what they were obliged to by vertue of their Subjection to Christ; for being subjected to him they are his Viceroys in the World, and do Reign and Govern by his Authority; and since their Authority is his, they must be accountable to him, if they do not imploy it for him in Ministring to the necessities of his Church and Kingdom; and therefore if when it is in their power to check a prevailing Schism or Corruption in the Church by wholsom Laws and Edicts, they refuse or neglect to do it, they must doubtless answer to him from whom they received their power, and who being himself the Supreme Head of the Church, hath constituted 'em its Guardians and Nursing-Fathers. III. Another of those Ministries which Princes are obliged to render his Church is to Chasten and Correct the irregular and disorderly Members of it; for though there are Spiritual Rods and Cor∣rections
which Christ hath solely committed to the Spiritual Government, and which if men un∣derstood and considered the dire effects and con∣sequences of 'em, are sufficient to restrain and keep in awe the most obstinate Offenders, yet when men are stupified in sin and do feel no∣thing but only what pains or pleases their bodies, these Spiritual Corrections are insignificant to 'em, they being such as make no impression on their corporeal Senses, and so when men are hardened in Schism or Heresie, to be sure they will despise the Ecclesiastical Rods, as being confi∣dently perswaded that they cannot be justly ap∣plied to 'em, and that where they are applied un∣justly they are only so many Spiritual scare-crows that can only threaten, but not hurt 'em; and therefore in these cases the Secular Powers are ob∣liged by vertue of their Subjection to Jesus, to se∣cond the Spiritual with the Temporal Rod, and to awe such offenders with corporeal corrections as are fearless and insensible of the Censures of the Church. And conformable hereunto hath been the constant practice of all good Kings and Emperors, even from their first Conversion to Christianity, as might easily be demonstrated by innumerable Instances out of Ecclesiastical History; for they not only made Laws inforc'd with temporal Penalties for the regulation of the Clergy, as well as Laity, not only commanded and obliged their Bishops in case of notorious neg∣lect to execute the Church Censures on the Schismatical, Heretical and disorderly of both sorts; but when they found those Spiritual Exe∣cutions ineffectual, they very often seconded 'em
with temporal, such as pecuniary mulcts, Impri∣sonments and Banishments; and though in the case of error and false belief they were always very tender and gentle, yet whenever they found men busily propagating their Errors into Sects and Divisions, to the disturbance of the Churches peace, they thought themselves obliged to restrain their petulancy with temporal Chastisements. And indeed as they are the Vice-roys of our Saviour they are ex officio the conservators of the peace of his Kingdom, and stand obliged to exert that Au∣thority he hath devolved upon 'em in the defence of its Unity and good Order, which in many cases they can no otherwise do, but only by restrain∣ing the Schismatical and disorderly with the ter∣ror of temporal corrections, so that as well in the Church as in the Civil State they are the Ministers of God to us for our good, and therefore if we do that which is evil, we have just cause to be affraid, for they bear not the Sword in vain, for they are the Ministers of God, Revengers to execute wrath upon them that do evil, Rom. 13.14. IV. And lastly, Another of those Ministries which Princes are obliged to render to Christ's Church by vertue of their subjection to him, is to make good provision for the Decency of its Wor∣ship, and for the convenient maintenance of its Offi∣cers and Ministers; to take care that it hath de∣cent and commodious places set apart for the pub∣lick Celebration of its Worship, and that those places be supplied with such Ornaments and Accom∣modations as are sutable to those venerable Solem∣nities that are to be performed in them; that so its Worship may not be exposed to contempt by
the slovenliness and Barbarity of its outward ap∣pendages; and this is the clothing of the Church, which as it ought not on the one hand to be too Pompous and Gaudy, that being naturally apt to distract and Carnalize the minds of its Votaries, and to divert their attention from those spiritual exercises, wherein the life and soul of its Worship consists; so neither ought it on the other hand to be sordid and nasty, that being as naturally apt to prejudice and distaste men against it, and to create in their minds a loathing and contempt of it. Now the furnishing the Church with such decent Places and Ornaments of Worship, as do become the grave Solemnities of a spiritual Reli∣gion, being a matter of Cost and Charge must necessarily belong to the Civil Powers who alone can lay Rates upon the Subject, and have the sole Command and disposal of the publick Purse; and therefore by vertue of their subjection to Christ, they are obliged to take care that such Religious Places and Ornaments be provided as the Decency and convenience of his Worship do require. And then as for the Ministers and Officers of his Church they are under the same Obligation to take care, that they whose Office it is to serve at the Altar should live upon the Altar, and that according to the different stations and degrees wherein they are placed, that so they may neither be necessita∣ted for a subsistence to involve themselves in se∣cular affairs, and thereby to neglect their spiritual Calling, which is Burthen enough of all conscience for any one mans shoulders, nor be tempted to base Compliances with the lusts of men and the iniqui∣ties of times for a maintenance; and that so Religi∣on
it self may not be exposed to contempt through their wretched Poverty and indigence who are the Ministers of it, and who for want of a fair and honourable subsistence can never obtain Credit and Authority enough to do any considerable good in the World. And this is the food and sustenance of the Church, without which it cannot long flourish either in true Knowledge, or true Piety, but must insensibly wither away, and degenerate into Barbarity and Ignorance. And accordingly, if you consult Ecclesiastical History you will find that it was ever the practice of Pious Princes and Emperors to take care both for the erecting of decent and convenient Churches in all parts of their Dominions for the Celebration of Divine Worship, and to furnish them with all the decent Accommodations and Ornaments that were proper thereunto, and also for the endowing the Bishops and Pastors of the Church with such honourable subsistences as becomes the Port and Dignity of their several Orders and Offices; in which they did no more than what they stood obliged to, as they were the Viceroys of Jesus, and the foster Fathers of his Church, by vertue of which Re∣lation to it they are bound in duty to supply it with decent Raiment and convenient Food. And now having explained the subjection of the So∣vereign Powers of the Earth to our Lord and Savi∣our, and shewn what those Ministries are which they are obliged to render to him in his Kingdom, I proceed to the Fourth and last sort of his Ministers, by which he governs his Kingdom, viz. the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Governours, in treating of which I shall endeavor these three things:
First, To shew that Christ hath erected a spiritual Government to minister to him in his Church. Secondly, To shew in what hands this spiri∣tual Government is placed. Thirdly, To shew what are the proper Mini∣stries of this Government. I. That Christ hath erected a spiritual Govern∣ment in his Church. And indeed, supposing the Church to be a regular and formed Society, sub∣sisting of it self, distinct from all other Societies, it must necessarily have a distinct Government in it, because Government is essentially included in the very notion of all regular Society, which with∣out Rule and Subjection is not a formed Society, but a confused multitude; for what else do we mean by a Humane Society, but only such a com∣pany of men united together by such and such Laws and Regulations? But how can any compa∣ny of men be united by Laws, without having in it some Governing Power to rule by those Laws, and exact obedience to them? So that we may as well suppose a compleat Body without a Head, as a Regular Society without a Government. Now that the Church is a Regular Society, utterly distinct from all Civil Society, is as evident as the truth of Christianity, which all along declares and Re∣cognizes the Law or Covenant upon which it is founded, and by which it is united, to be Divine, and consequently to be superior to, and indepen∣dent upon all Civil Laws; and if that which constitutes the Church be Divine Law and not Civil, then the Constitution of the Church must be Divine and not Civil: for that which
makes us Christians, at the same time makes us parts of the Christian Church; and that which makes all the parts of the Church makes the Church it self; which is nothing but the whole, or Collection of all the parts together; and there∣fore as we are not made Christians, so neither are we made a Christian Church by the Laws of the Commonwealth, but by the Laws and Consti∣tutions of our Saviour, which were promulgated to the World long before there were any Laws of the Commonwealth to found a Christian Church on; for there was a Christian Church for three hundred years together before ever it had the least favour or protection from the Laws of Nations. In all which time it subsisted apart from all other Societies, and was as much a Church or Christian Society as it is now; and as it is now it is only a continued Succession of that Primitive Church, and therefore, as to the Constitution of it, must ne∣cessarily be as distinct now from all other Socie∣ties, as it was then, when it subsisted not only apart from, but against the Laws and Edicts of all other Societies in the World; in short therefore, since the Church of Christ is founded on a Char∣ter, and incorporated by a Law that is utterly di∣stinct from the Charters and Laws of all Civil So∣cieties, it hence necessarily follows, that it self is a distinct Society from them all; because that which individuates any Society, or makes it a di∣stinct body from all other Societies, is the Charter or Law upon which it is founded; and accord∣ingly our Saviour tells Pilate when he asked him whether he was a King, that he was a King in∣deed, but that his Kingdom was not of this world,
Joh. 18.36. i. e. though my Kingdom be in this World, yet is it not of the World; for neither are the Laws of it Humane but Divine, nor the powers of it external but invisible, nor the Rewards and Punishments of it temporal but Spiritual and eternal. From the whole therefore these two things are evident; First, That Government is Essential to formed and regular Societies. Secondly, That the Church of Christ is in the Nature and Constitution of it a formed and regular Society, distinct from all other Societies: from both which it necessarily followeth, that it must have a distinct Government included in the very essence and being of it. And accordingly in the New Testament besides the Civil Magistrates, we frequently read of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Governors, so Heb. 13.17. there is mention made of the Rulers that watch for our souls, and a strict injunction to obey and submit our selves to 'em; and so again in the 7th. and 24th. Verses, and in 1 Tim. 5.17. The Apostle speaks of the Elders that Rule well who are to be accounted worthy of double Honour. And indeed the Greek Word , which signifies a Bishop or Overseer, doth in Scri∣pture always import, a Ruler or Governour: Vid. Hammond, Acts 1. Note 1. and therefore being applied, as it is frequently in the New Testament, to a certain Order of Men in the Christian Church, it must necessarily denote 'em to be the Rulers and Governors of it; and this power to  i. e. Oversee, and Rule and Govern the Church was derived to 'em from Christ the Su∣preme
Bishop of our Souls, even by that Commissi∣on he gave 'em, John 20.21. As the Father hath sent me so send I you, i. e. so I Commission you with the same Authority in kind to Teach and Go∣vern in my Kingdom, as I my self have received from the Father; and accordingly as Christ is called the Pastor or Shepherd, which name im∣ports Authority to Govern his Flock (for so to feed and to rule are of the same significancy in Psalm 8.72. and Philo tells us, , i. e. that the name of She∣pherds implyed Ruling and Governing Power) so they who were sent and Commission'd by our Saviour are stil'd  the Bishops and Overseers or Shepherds in the Flock, to feed the Church of God, Acts 20.28. and they are else∣where commanded to feed; the Flock of God, and to take the oversight thereof, 1 Pet. 5.2. And as they are called the Shepherds of Christs Flock, so they are also the Stewards of his Family, and as such they are constituted by him the Rulers of his Houshold, to give them their portion of meat in due Season, Luke 12.42. and, elsewhere they are cal∣led Governments or Governors, (the Abstract, as it is very usual in Scripture being put for the Con∣crete;) 1 Cor. 12.28. and their Authority is said to be given from the Lord, 2 Cor. 10.8. and they ae said to be our Rulers in the Lord, i. e. by the Lords Commission and Authority, 1 Thes. 5.12. and as such they are commanded to Rule with diligence, Rom. 12.8. from all which it is abundantly evident that the Church of Christ is a formed Society sub∣sisting of it self, distinct from all other Societies, under a distinct Rule and Government. But this I
shall make yet more fully appear▪ when I come to treat of the several Ministries which the Go∣vernors of the Church of Christ are obliged to ren∣der him. I proceed therefore at present to the Second thing proposed, which was to inquire into the nature of this Government in what hands Christ hath placed it; now the two main Rival forms of Church Government pretending to divine Institution are the Presbyterial and Episcopal; the Presbyterial is that which is seated in an equality or parity of Church Offi∣cers, the Episcopal is that which is placed in a supe∣rior order of Church Officers, called Bishops; to whom the other Orders of Presbyters and Deacons are subject and subordinate: the latter of which I shall endea∣vour to prove, is the true form of Government institu∣ted by our Saviour, and that First, from the Institution of our Saviour. Secondly, From the practice of the Holy A∣postles. Thirdly, From the punctual conformity of the Primitive Church to both. Fourthly, From our Saviours declared allow∣ance and approbation of the Primitive practice in this matter. I. That the Government of the Church of Christ is Episcopal, is evident from the Institution of our Saviour, who in his life-time instituted two distinct Orders of Ecclesiastical Ministers, the one superiour to the other, viz. that of the twelve Apostles, and that of the seventy or seven∣ty two Disciples; for that these two were of di∣stinct Orders, is evident from their being always distinguished from one another and mentioned
apart by different names and in different Ranks and Classes; for to what purpose should the Scri∣pture mention the twelve and the seventy so di∣stinctly as it every where doth, if there were not some distinction in their Office and Employment, for in Luke 6.13. we are told that Christ called unto him his Disciples, and of them he chose twelve, whom also be named Apostles, and Mark 3.13, 14. it is said that he called unto him whom he would, that is, of his Disciples, and ordained twelve that they should be with him and that he might send 'em forth to Preach, and what less can this imply than that the twelve were separated by this Call and Ordination of Christ to some distinct Office and Employment from the rest of the Disciples. And that the Office of the twelve was superiour to that of the seventy, is evident not only from their be∣ing still placed first in the Catalogues of Ecclesi∣astical Officers, see Eph. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. in the latter of which we are told that God constitu∣ted in the Church, first Apostles wherein the Prima∣ry is attributed to the Apostolical Office; and not only from the particular care which Christ took of these twelve above the rest of his Disciples both in praying for and instructing them, of which there are a great many notorious in∣stances in the Gospels, but also from hence that their immediate Successors were for the most part Chosen out of the seventy; for so Simeon the Son of Cleophas succeeded S. Iames at Ierusalem, Philip S. Paul at Caesarea, Clement S. Peter at Rome, and divers others of the seventy according to Do∣rotheus, Eusebius and others of the Fathers succee∣ded the Apostles after their death in the Govern∣ment
of their several Churches, and Matthias, who as Eusebius Epiphanius and S. Ierom affirm, was one of the seventy that was Chosen and Or∣dained by the other Apostles to succeed Iudas in the Apostolate, Acts 1.26. from whence it is e∣vident that the Apostles were superiour to the se∣venty, otherwise it would have been no advance∣ment to the seventy to succeed 'em; for all that Superiority which they acquired by their Successi∣on, must necessarily be inherent in the Apostles be∣fore they succeeded 'em; else how can they be said to succeed 'em in it? and if we suppose 'em to be equal with the Apostles in Office before they suc∣ceeded 'em, it is nonsense to say they succeeded 'em; for how can a man be said to succeed another in any Office who is actually vested with the same Office before he succeeds him. If therefore the seventy received no more power after the Apo∣stles, than they had under 'em, they were as much Apostles before they succeeded 'em, as after; but if they did receive more power, then the Apostles to whom they succeeded had more power than they before they received it, and consequently were their Superours, because a man can receive no more power by succeeding another in any Office, than he to whom he succeeds had before, by vertue of the same Office. By all which it is most evi∣dent, that by the Institution of our Saviour the Apostles were superiour to the seventy, and yet it is as evident that the seventy were Ecclesiastical Ministers, as well as they; for in Luke 10.1. we are told that after these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent 'em two and two before his face, that is, to Preach his Gospel, and that
by this Mission of his they were authorized to be the Ministers of Religion, is evident from what he tells 'em, Verse 16. he that heareth you heareth me, and he that despiseth you despiseth me, and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me; from whence it is plain that they were his Authori∣zed Ministers, even as he was Gods, because as the despising of him was a despising of God, by whom he was sent; so the despising of them was a despising of Christ, by whom they were sent; and accordingly by vertue of this Mission we find 'em acting as Authorized Ministers of the Gospel; for so Ananias, who was one of 'em, Baptized Saul, Acts 9.18. and Philip who was another Preached and Baptized at Samaria. Acts 8.5. So that here are plainly two sorts of Ecclesia∣stical Officers, the one superiour to the other, of our Saviours own Institution and appointment; and therefore if his institution be still valid, there must still be a superiority and subordination between the Officers and Ministers of his Church, and con∣sequently the Government thereof must still be Episcopal, i. e. by some superiour Officers presiding and superintending over other inferiour ones. I know it is objected that this superiority of the A∣postles over the seventy was only in Office but not in Power or Iurisdiction; but since it is the Office that is the immediate Subject of the Power belonging to it, I would fain know, whether superiority of Office must not necessarily include superiority in Power; for Office without Power is an empty name that signifies nothing, and eve∣ry degree of superiority of Office must be ac∣companied with Power to exert it self in Acts of
superiority; otherwise 'twill be utterly in vain and to no purpose. So that either the superiority of the Apostolick Office over other Church-Offices must be void and insignificant, or it must have a proportionable superiority of power over 'em inseparably inherent in it. But it is farther object∣ed, that supposing the Apostolate to be superiour to the other Ecclesiastical Orders in Power and Office, yet it was but temporary, it being institu∣ted by our Saviour in subservience to the present exigence and necessity of things, without any in∣tention of deriving it down to the Church in a continued Succession. To which I answer in short, that this is said without so much as a plausi∣ble colour of reason; for they allow both that our Saviour instituted this Office, and that in his institution he never gave the least intimation to the World that he intended it only for a certain season. Now if men will presume to declare Christs Institutions Temporary, without producing the least intimation of his Will, that he so design∣ed 'em, they may with the same warrant repeal all the Institutions of Christianity; and even the two Sacraments will lie as much at their mercy as the Institution of the Apostolick Order, which unless they can prove it repealed by the same au∣thority which established it, will be sufficient to prescribe to all Ages and Nations; for the obligati∣ons of divine Commands are dissolvable only by divine countermands; and for men to declare any divine Institution void before God hath so decla∣red it; is to over-rule the Will of God by their own arrogant Presumptions, for though the matter of the Institution be mutable in it self, yet the
form and obligation of it is mutable only by the authority which made it; and therefore though God hath not declared that he instituted it for perpetuity, yet till he declares the contrary, it must bind for perpetuity; especially if the reason of the institution of it be not apparently altered, which cannot be pretended in the case under de∣bate, there being the very same reasons for a supe∣riority and subordination between Ecclesiastick Officers now, as there was when our Saviour first appointed and instituted it. Until therefore they can shew either that the reason of the institution is ceast, or that the institution it self is repeal'd by some other Law; (neither of which was ever yet pretended,) they may as reasonably dispence with most of the precepts of the Gospel (which are no more declared perpetual than this) as with this of superiority and subjection among the Eccle∣siastical Orders, which is the proper form of the Episcopal Government. II. That the true Government of the Church is Episcopal, is evident also from the Practice of the holy Apostles, who pursuant to the institution of our Saviour, did not only exercise that superiori∣ty in their own persons which their Office gave 'em over their inferiour Clergy, but also derived it down with their Office to their Successors, which is a plain argument that they looked upon our Saviours institution of this superiour Office of the Apostolate, not as a temporary expedient, but as a standing form of Ecclesiastical Government, to be handed down to all succeeding Generations: for though during our Saviours abode upon Earth and sometime after his ascension into Heaven, the
number of the Apostles was confined to twelve, yet when afterwards, thro their Ministry the Church was spread and dilated not only through Iudea, but into the Gentile Nations, they added to their number several other Apostles to whom they com∣municated the same Office and Degree of superio∣rity over the other Clergy, that our blessed Savi∣our had communicated to them, for so Eusebius lib. 1. cap. 11. , i. e. besides the twelve there were many other Apostles in that Age after the similitude of the twelve; and of the truth of this I shall give three or four instances. The first is that of S. Iames of Ierusalem, the Brother of Iesus, who though he was none of the Twelve, (for in that number there were but two Iameses, viz. the Son of Alpheus, and the Son of Zebedee, neither of which was he, whom S. Paul calls the Lords Brother, and S. Paul reckons him apart from the Twelve, 1 Cor. 15.5, 6.7.) is yet stiled an Apostle by S. Paul, Gal. 1.19. but other Apostles saw I none save James the Lords Brother. And S. Ierom in his Comment on Isaiah stiles Iames the thirteenth Apostle, that is, the first that was made an Apostle after the Twelve, and that he was not merely a nominal Apostle, but actu∣ally endowed with Apostolical Power and Superi∣ority, is evident both from Scripture and the una∣nimous consent of Ecclesiastical History: from Scripture it is evident that this Iames was a man of great preheminence in the Church of Ierusalem; for in the first Council that was held there we find him giving a discisive Sentence in the mat∣ter of Circumcision, Acts 15. for after there
had been much disputing, ver. 7. and S. Peter, and S. Paul, and S. Barnabas had declared their Judg∣ment in the case, ver. 7.13. S. Iames after a short Preface thus delivers himself, Wherefore my Sentence is that we trouble not them which from among the Gentiles are turned unto God, and this Sentence of his determines the Controversie, and puts a final end to all farther debate, which plainly argues his great authority and preheminence in that place. Again Acts 21.17, 18. we are told, that when S. Paul and his company were come to Ie∣rusalem, the Brethren received him gladly, and that the next day following Paul went in with them unto James, and all the Elders were present. Now for what other reason should Paul go in to Iames more especially, or upon what other account should all the Elders be present with Iames, but that he was a person of the greatest note and figure in the Church of Ierusalem, and for the same reason in all probability S. Paul mentions Iames before Peter and Iohn, discoursing of a meeting he had with them at Ierusalem, Gal. 2.9. be∣cause though Peter and Iohn were two of the Principal of the twelve Apostles, and S. Iames was not so much as one of that number, yet in the Church of Ierusalem he had the Priority of them both; now considering that S. Iames is called an Apostle, and considering the Preference he had in all these instances above the other Apostles at Ie∣rusalem, it is at least highly probable that he was peculiarly the Apostle of the Church of Ierusa∣lem; but if to all this evidence we add the most early Testimonies of Christian Antiquity, we shall advance the Probability to a Demonstration;
for by the unanimous consent of all Ecclesiasti∣cal Writers S. Iames was the first Bishop of Ieru∣salem, for so Hegesippus, who lived very near the times of the Apostles, tells us, that Iames the Brother of our Lord, called by all men the Iust, received the Church of Ierusalem from the Apo∣stles, vid. Euseb. lib. 2. c. 23. so also S. Clement, as he is quoted by the same Author, l. 2. c. 1. tells us, that Peter, Iames, and Iohn, after the As∣sumption of Christ, as being the men that were most in favour with him, did not contend for the Honour, but chose Iames the Just to be Bi∣shop of Ierusalem; and in the Apostolical Consti∣stitutions that pass under the name of S. Clement, (which though not so ancient as is pretended, yet are doubtless of very early Antiquity) the Apo∣stles are brought in thus speaking, Concerning those that were ordained by us Bishops in our life time, we signifie to you that they were these, Iames the Brother of our Lord was Ordained by us Bishop of Ierusalem, &c. so also S. Ierom. de script. Eccles. tells us, that S. Iames, immediately after the Passion of our Lord, was ordained Bishop of Ierusalem by the Apostles. And S. Cyril, who was afterwards Bi∣shop of that Church, and therefore a most Au∣thentick Witness of the Records of it, calls Saint Iames the first Bishop of that Diocess, Catech. 16. To all which we have the concurrent Testimonies of S. Austin, S. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, S. Ambrose, and a great many others; and S. Ignatius him∣self, who was an immediate Disciple of the Apo∣stles, makes S. Stephen to be a Deacon of S. Iames, Ep. ad Trall. and therefore since Stephen was a Deacon of the Church of Ierusalem, S. Iames,
whose Deacon he was, must necessarily be the Bishop of it. Upon this account therefore S. Iames is called an Apostle in Scripture, because by being Or∣dained by the Apostles Bishop of Ierusalem, he had the Apostolick Power and Authority conferred on him, for since it is apparent he was none of the Twelve, to whom the Apostleship was at first confined, he could no otherwise become an A∣postle, than by deriving the Apostleship from some of the Twelve, and therefore since that Apostleship, which he derived from the Twelve, was only Episcopal Superiority over the Church of Ierusalem, it hence necessarily follows that the Episcopacy was the Apostleship derived and commu∣nicated from the Primitive Apostles. The second Instance of the Apostles Commu∣nicating their Apostolick Superiority to others is Epaphroditus, who in Phil. 2.25. is stiled the Apostle of the Philippians, But I suppose it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus my Brother and companion in la∣bour, and fellow souldier, , but your Apostle: for so S. Ierom Com. Gal. 1.19. Paulatim tempore precedente & alii ab his quos Dominus elegerat, Ordinati sunt Apostoli sicut ille ad Philippenses sermo declarat dicens necessarium existimavi Epaphroditum, &c. i. e. by degrees in process of time others were ordained Apostles by those whom our Lord had chosen, as that passage to the Philippians shews, I thought it necessary to send unto you Epaphroditus your Apostle. And Theodoret upon the place gives this reason why he is here called the Apostle of the Philippians; , i. e. he was intrusted
with Episcopal Government as being their Bi∣shop; so that here you see Epaphroditus is made an Apostle by the Apostles, and his Apostleship con∣sists in being made Bishop of Philippi. A third instance is that of Titus and some others with him, 2 Cor. 8.23. Whether any do in∣quire of Titus, he is my partner and fellow helper con∣cerning you: or our Brethren be inquired of, they are , the Apostles of the Churches, and the glory of Christ, where it is plain they are not called the Apostles of the Churches merely as they were the Messengers of the liberality of the Churches of Macedonia, for it was not those Churches, but S. Paul that sent them, vers. 22. and therefore since they were not Apostles in relation to those Churches whose liberality they carried, it must be in relation to some particular Churches over which they had Apostolical Authority; and that Titus had this Authority over the Church of Crete, is evident both from S. Pauls Epistle to him, and from Primitive Antiquity: As for Saint Pauls Epistle, there are sundry passages in it, which plainly speak him to be vested with A∣postolical Superiority over that Church; so Chap. 1. vers. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete that thou shouldst set things in order that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City as I have appointed thee. For in the first place, S. Paul here gives him the supreme judgment of things that were wanting, with an absolute power to reform and correct them; which is a plain demonstration of his Superiority in that Church. Secondly, he Authorizes him to ordain Elders in every City, and whether these Elders were Bishops or Pres∣byters
is of very little consequence as to the pre∣sent debate; for first it is of undoubted certainty that there were Presbyters in the Church of Crete, before Titus was left there by the Apostle; and secondly, it is as evident that those Presbyters had no Power to ordain Elders in every City, as Titus had; for if they had, what needed S. Paul to have left Titus there for that purpose? What need he have left Titus there with a new power to do that which the Presbyters before him had suffici∣ent power to do? For if the Presbyters had before the power of Ordination in them, this new power of Titus's would have been not only in vain, but mischievous; it would have look'd like an invasion of the Power of the Presbyters, for S. Paul to re∣strain Ordination to Titus, if before him it had been common to the whole Presbytery; and upon that account have rather proved an occasion of strife and contention than an expedient of peace and good order. From hence therefore it is evi∣dent, that Titus had a Power in the Church of Crete which the Presbyters there before him had not, and this Power of his extended not only to the establishment of good Order and the Ordaining of Elders, but also to rebuking with all authority, i. e. correcting obstinate offenders with the spiri∣tual Rod of Excommunication, chap. 2. vers. 15. and taking cognisance of Heretical Pravity, so as first to admonish Hereticks, and in case of Perti∣nacy to reject them from the Communion of the Church, chap. 3. vers. 10. from all which it is evi∣dent that this Apostolate of Titus consisted in his Ecclesiastical Superiority, which was the very same in the Church of Crete that the first Apostles
themselves had in the several Churches that were planted by them. And accordingly he is decla∣red by the concurrent Testimony of all Anti∣quity to be the first Bishop of that Church; so Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 4. affirms him, , to have received Episco∣pal Authority over the Churches of Crete. So also Theodoret. in Argum. Ep. ad Tit. tells us, that he was ordained by S. Paul Bishop of Crete, and so also S. Chrysostom, S. Ierom, and S. Ambrose, and several others of the Fathers and Ecclesiasti∣cal Writers. This Episcopal Authority therefore which S. Paul gave Titus over the Church of Crete is another plain instance of the Apostles making Apostles, or deriving to others their Apo∣stolick Power and Superiority over particular Churches. The fourth and last Instance I shall give is that of Timothy, who as it appears by S. Pauls E∣pistles to him, had Episcopal Authority over the Church of Ephesus; and this not only over the Laity to command and teach 'em, 1 Tim. 4.11. to receive Widows into the Churches Service or re∣ject and refuse 'em, 1 Tim. 5.4.9.16. and to oblige the Women to go modestly in their Apparel and keep silence in the Church, 1 Tim. 2.11, 12. but also over the Clergy, to take care that sutable pro∣vision should be made for 'em, 1 Tim. 5.17. that none should be admitted a Deacon till after com∣petent trial, nor Ordained an Elder, till after he had well acquitted himself in the Deaconship, 1 Tim. 3.10.13. to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdi∣ction over 'em, to receive Accusations against 'em, and if he found 'em guilty to put 'em to
open shame, 1 Tim. 5.19, 20. and S. Paul charges him to exercise this his Jurisdiction without prefer∣ring one before another, and without partiality, ibid. ver. 21. which if he had no Jurisdiction over 'em, had been very impertinent; and as he had Ju∣risdiction over the Clergy concredited to him, so had he also the Authority of Ordaining 'em; for the due exercise of which S. Paul gives him that necessary rule, 1 Tim. 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other mens sins. And that this Authority of his in the Ephesian Church over both the Laity and Clergy was given by S. Paul for a standing form of Government there, is evident from hence, because it was conferred on him after the Presbytery was formed and setled in that Church; for in planting and cultivating this large and populous Church which extended it self over all the Proconsular Asia, S. Paul had la∣boured for three years together with incredible diligence; which is a much longer time than he spent in any other Church, and therefore by this time to be sure he had not only constituted a Pres∣bytery in it, as he did in all other Churches, Acts 14.23. but also reduced it to much greater perfe∣ction than any other, that so in the constitution of it, it might be a pattern to all other Churches; and if so, then to be sure the Government which he had now at last established in it was such as he intended should continue, viz. by a single Person presiding over both Clergy and Laity. And that de facto it was so, we have not only the Authority of S. Pauls Epistles to Timothy, but also the con∣current Testimony of all Ecclesiastical Antiqui∣ty; for so Euseb. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 4. tells us
he was the first Bishop of the Province or Diocess of Ephesus and the Anonimous Author of his life in Photius, that he was the first that acted as Bishop in Ephesus, and that he was Ordained and Enthroned Bishop of the Metropolis of Ephesus by the great S. Paul; and in the Council of Chalcedon twenty seven Bishops are said to have succeeded in that Chair from Timothy who was the first, and Saint Chrysostom Hom. 15. in 1 Tim. 5.19. tells us that it is manifest Timothy was intrusted with a Church, or rather with a whole Nation, viz. that of Asia, upon which account he is stiled by Theodoret in 1 Tim. 3.1. , Timothy the Apo∣stle of the Asiatiques, and (to name no more of the great numbers of Authorities that might be cited) in the Apostolical Constitutions we are ex∣presly told, that he was Ordained Bishop of Ephesus by S. Paul. This therefore is another evident in∣stance of the Apostles deriving down their Apo∣stolick Authority. Other instances might be gi∣ven, but these are sufficient to shew that the A∣postles did not look upon our Saviours institution of a superiour Order of Ecclesiastical Officers, as a temporary thing that was to expire with 'em, but as a standing Model of Ecclesiastical Government, since they derived to others that superiority over the Churches of Christ which he communicated to them. For from all these instances it is most evident, both that the Apostolical Office did not expire with the Twelve, but was transferred by 'em to others, and that that which is now called the Episcopacy was nothing else but the Apostolical Office derived from the Apostles to their successors: for in the Primitive Language of the Church, Bishops
are generally stiled Apostles; for which no other reason can be assigned but that they succeeded in the Apostolical superiority. Thus, as hath been shewn before, S. Iames, Epaphroditus, Titus, and Timothy are stiled Apostles in Scripture, and by the Primitive Writers; Clemens Bishop of Rome who was a Disciple of the Apostles is called  i. e. Clemens the Apostle, vid. Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 4. and Ignatius Bishop of Antioch,  Apostle and Bishop by S. Chryso∣stom; and Thaddaeus, who was sent b S. Thomas to the Prince of Edessa  by Euse∣bius, and so are also S. Mark and S. Luke by E∣piphanius; and Theodoret lays it down for a general rule, , i. e. those whom we now call Bishops were anciently called Apo∣stles; but in process of time the name of Apostle was left to them who were more strictly Apostles (viz. the Twelve) and the name of Bishop was restrained to those who were anciently called Apostles. If therefore the practice of the Apo∣stles, proceeding upon the express institution of our Saviour, be sufficient to found a Divine Right, we have this you see to plead for a superiority and subordination of Ecclesiastical Offices; since the Apostles did not only Ordain Presbyters and Dea∣cons in the several Churches they planted, but al∣so Apostles or Bishops to preside over 'em; and if their Ordaining of Presbyters be an argument of the perpetuity of the Office of a Presbyter (as the Presbyterians themselves contend it is) why should
not their Ordaining Bishops also be as good an Argument of the perpetuity of the Office of a Bi∣shop? If either be perpetual, why not both? if not both, why either? and how can we argue a perpetu∣al power of Ordination in the Church from the Or∣dination of Timothy and Titus for instance (as the Presbyterians do, Vide Ius Divin. p. 159.167.) if the Office they were Ordained to were not perpe∣tual, and if it were perpetual, then so is Episcopa∣cy, which is in nothing different from that which they exercised in their Churches. III. That the true Government of the Church is Episcopal, is evident also from the Universal Con∣formity of the Primitive Church thereunto. It is objected by the Adversaries of the Episcopal Go∣vernment, that though our Saviour indeed Insti∣tuted a superior Order of Church Officers, viz. his Twelve Apostles to precide over the rest, and Govern his Church, yet this was an extraordinary Commission which he never intended they should derive down to the Church as a perpetual Model of Government, but was limited to the persons of the Apostles, and was to expire with 'em. Now that it was not limited to the persons of the Apostles is evident, since as it hath been shewn before, the A∣stles derived it to others; which they could not have done without violating their trust, and ex∣ceeding the bounds of their Commission, had it been appropriated to their persons, so that it must be al∣lowed either that they proceeded irregularly in transferring their superiority to others; or that their Commission did impower them to trans∣fer it; and therefore if it appear not only that they might transfer it to some for the Go∣vernment
of some Churches, by vertue of their Commission (of which the above cited instances are a full demonstration) but also that they U∣niversally transferred it to others for the Govern∣ment of all other Churches, then it is certain that either they mistook the intent of our Saviours Commission, or the intent of it was to impower 'em to transfer it unversally as a standing and per∣petual Form of Ecclesiastical Government; in short, if they understood the intendment of their own Commission (as to be sure they did being guided by the Spirit into all Truth) to be sure they would ne∣ver have communicated their Apostolick Superiority to any, had it not been our Saviours intention when he Commissioned 'em to Authorize 'em so to do; and for the same reason we may be sure that so far forth as they did communicate it, it was our Saviours intention that they should, now, as was shewn before, to some they did communicate it for the Government of some Churches, as to Ti∣mothy and Titus for instance, for the Government of the Churches of Ephesus and Crete; from whence it is evident that it was our Saviours in∣tention that they should communicate it to some; and for the same reason if it be made appear, that they did communicate it universally for the Go∣vernment of all other Churches, it will necessarily follow, that it was our Saviours intention they should communicate it as an universal form of Church-Go∣vernment. Now whether they did communicate it universally or no, is a question about matter of Fact, and as such, is decidable only by the Testi∣mony of the most competent witnesses, and the most competent witness, in this case, is the Chri∣stian
Church in the Ages next succeeding the Apo∣stles, which Church attests with one universal consent the universal derivation of a Superiour Or∣der of Ecclesiastick Officers from the Apostles to preside over the Churches of Christ. And some Christian Writers we have who were living in the very days of the Apostles, and were their immediate Scholars and Disciples; others again, who lived in their days and were their Disciples, who lived in the Apostles; and others who imme∣diately succeeded these: from all which we have ample Testimonies of the continued Succession of this superiour Order, even from the Apostles to whom our Saviour first derived it. Out of all which I shall only produce some few instances out of an infinite number that might be given. Of the first sort are S. Clement Bishop of Rome, and S. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch. S. Clement, who as Frenaeus tells us, saw the Apostles, and conversed familiarly with 'em, makes mention in his Epistle to the Corinthians of three Orders of Ecclesiastical Officers in his time, whom he calls the High Priest, the Priests, and the Levites, which words can be no otherwise understood than of the Bi∣shop, Presbyter and the Deacons: S. Ignatius who was the Disciple of S. Peter, and in his life-time Bishop of Antioch is so full and express in all those six Epistles he wrote on the way to his Martyr∣dom, for the derivation of this superiour Order from the Apostles, that the adversaries of this Or∣der have no other way to evade him but by con∣demning those Epistles for Counterfeits; from which injurious sentence they have of late been so triumphantly vindicated by a Learned Pen of
our own, that I dare say no man of Learning for the future will so far expose the Reputation of his Understanding and Modesty as to call 'em in question again. Now in all these Epistles the holy Martyr not only distinguishes the Clergy in∣to Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, but strictly in∣joyns the two latter as well as the Laicks to be Dutiful and Obedient to the former; and particu∣larly in his Epistle to the Trallians, what is the Bi∣shop, saith he, but he that hath all Authority and Power, what is the Presbytery but a sacred Constitu∣tion of Counsellors and Assessors to the Bishop, what are the Deacons but imitators of Christ, and Mini∣sters to the Bishop as he was to the Father, and as he every where enjoyns obedience to the Bishops as to the supreme Order in the Church of Christ, so in the beginning of his Epistle to the Philadelphians he tells them, that so many as belong to Christ are united to the Bishop, and that so many as depart from him and his Communion, and associate themselves with the accursed shall be cut off with them. And in his Epistle to the Magnesians he tells them, that it highly became them to obey their Bishop, and not to contradict him in any thing, for it is a terrible thing to contradict him, because in so doing you do not so much despise him who is visible as the invisible God who will not be despised, for his promotion is not from men but from God. And several of his Cotem∣porary Bishops he mentions by name, viz. Onesi∣mus Bishop of the Ephesians, Policarp of the Smyr∣nians, Polybius of the Trallians, and Damas of the Magnesians, and still as he mentions them he high∣ly commends the Presbyters and Deacons for their obedience to them. So in the beginning of
his Epistle to the Magnesians, Having been so hap∣py as to see you by your worthy Bishop Damas, and your worthy Presbyters, viz. Bassus, and Apollinus, and Zotion your Deacon, whom I cannot but com∣mend for his obedience to the Bishop and the Presbyte∣ry — you ought not to contemn the youth of your Bishop, but to pay him all veneration (as I know your holy Presbyters do) according to the appointment of God the Father. And in his Epistle to the E∣phesians, Let us be careful, saith he, that we do not oppose the Bishop as we would be obedient to God; and if any man observe the silence of his Bishop, let him reverence him so much the more, for every one that the Master of the Family appoints to be his Steward, we ought to receive him as the Master himself, and therefore it is evident we ought to re∣spect the Bishop as our Lord himself: from whence I infer first, that at the writing of these Epistles, which was not above eight or nine years after the decease of S. Iohn, there were Bishops every where constituted over the Churches of Christ; for he not only mentions several Churches that had Bishops actually presiding over them, but de∣clares Bishops to be of Divine Ordination, and that they were to be obeyed,  according to the appointment of God the Father, and that , that they had their promotion not from men, but from God; and not only so, but in his Epistle to the Trallians, he bids them obey their Bishop as Christ and his Apostles had commanded them, in which he necessarily supposes Bishops to be insti∣tuted by Christ and his Apostles, and then he goes on; He who is within the Altar, that is, with∣in
the Communion of the Church, is clean, , i. e. He is without the Altar who doth any thing without the Bishop and Presbyters and Deacons, and if any Christian act∣ing without the Bishop, &c. was without the Communion of the Church, then to be sure no Community of Christians that did so could be esteemed a part or Member of the Church; and therefore since according to the Doctrine of this Primitive Age, Bishops were a Divine Ordinance, and were looked upon as necessary to the very Con∣stitution of Churches; we may from hence justly conclude that there were then no Churches with∣out them. And secondly, we may from hence also infer, that since there were Bishops in this early Age presiding over the Churches of Christ, several of them at least received their Episcopal Orders immediately from the hands of the Apostles: For at the time when these Epistles were writ∣ten, Ignatius himself had been above forty years Bishop of Antioch, at which time sundry of the A∣postles were living; and therefore considering the singular Eminence of the Church of Antioch, whereof he was Bishop, as being immediately planted by S. Peter and S. Paul, and that where∣in the Disciples of Iesus first received the name of Christians; and considering also that it was the constant practice of the Apostle to Ordain El∣ders in all the Churches they planted, it is highly probable that he received his Ordination immedi∣ately from their hands; and so S. Chrysostom Tom. 5. Edit. Savil. p. 499. expresly tells us, that he did not so much admire Ignatius for that he
was accounted worthy of so great a Dignity, , i. e. but because he obtained his dignity from those holy men, and the sacred hands of the blessed Apostles had been laid upon his head. And the same may be said of Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna, of whom Ignatius makes honourable mention; and indeed it is not to be imagined that the Christian Chur∣ches would ever have so universally admitted of Bishops as it is apparent they did in Ignatius's time, when the Apostles were living, had not some of them at least derived their Authority from the A∣postles immediately; and considering how much S. Iohn, who survived the Apostles, was reve∣renced to the last through all the Christian Chur∣ches, what likelihood is there that those very Churches should so far contemn both him and them, even whilst they were living among them, as to admit of a new order of men without their Authority, to Oversee and Govern them? but that de facto the Apostles did with their own hands Ordain several Bishops to preside over several Churches, is most certain, if any credit may be given to Ecclesiastical History, which assures us, that they ordained Dionysius the Areopagite Bishop of Athens, Caius of Thessalonica, Archyppus of Colosse, Onesimus of Ephesus, Antipas of Pergamus, Euphro∣ditus of Philippi, Crescens of the Gauls, Erastus of Macedonia, Trophimus of Arles, Iason of Tarsus, Titus of Corinth, Onisiphorus of Colophon, Quartus of Berytus, Paul the Proconsul of Narbona. Vid. Bishop Tailor of Episcopacy, Sect. 18. But then thirdly and lastly, from hence I also infer, That
the Bishops of this Age were look'd upon as a Supe∣riour Order to all other Ecclesiastical Officers; for Ignatius not only enjoyns the Presbyters and Deacons to obey their Bishops, but also presses them thereunto by the Command of Christ and if by Christs Command they were to obey their Bi∣shops, then by Christs Institution their Bishops were their Superiours. Thus much therefore we are as∣sured of by the Testimony of Ignatius, that in the Apostolick Age Bishops were universally admit∣ted in the Churches of Christ, that they derived their Authority from the hands of the Apostles, and that by vertue of that Authority they were Su∣periour to all other Ecclesiastical Officers; and this is all we contend for. And now let us proceed to the Testimony of the Writers of the next Age, who conversed with those that were Conversant with the Apostles, of which number are Iustin Martyr, Hegesippus, Dio∣nysius Bishop of Corinth, Irenaeus, and Clemens A∣lexandrinus. The first of which was converted to Christianity about the year of our Lord 133. which is not above twenty five years after the death of S. Iohn. This Writer in his Apology for Christianity to the Emperour Antoninus, giving an account of the manner of their Publick Worship, makes mention of a , i. e. a President, or presiding Ecclesiastick in the Mother Church, who did there Consecrate the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, and give it to the Deacons to distri∣bute it to such as were present, and carry it to such as were absent, and who did receive the Charities of the People, and dispose and ma∣nage the Stock of the Church. Now that
was the Bishops Title is evident, for so Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, who was Iustin Martyrs Co∣temporary, uses the word  and , promiscuously stiling Publius Bishop of Athens  or President, and Quadratus his Successor  or Bishop, vid. Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 23. Next after him we have the Testimony of Hegesippus, who as S. Ierom de script. Eccles. tells us, lived very near to the Apostolick Age, he wrote five Books of Commentaries, some fragments of which are preserved in Eusebius his History, in which he not only makes mention of several Bishops with whom he conversed in his Journey from Iudea to Rome, and of Primas Bishop of Corinth by name, and afterwards of Anicetus, So∣ter, and Elutherius Bishops of Rome successively, but also tells us, that after Iames the Iust, who was the first Bishop of Ierusalem, had suffered Martyrdom, Simeon Cleophae was made Bishop of that Church, because he was of the Kindred of our Lord, vid. Euseb. lib. 4. cap. 22. Not long af∣ter him Dionysius, Bishop of Corinth, makes men∣tion in several Epistles of several Bishops by name, and particularly of Publius, and Quadratus, successive Bishops of Athens, of Dionysius the A∣reopagite the first Bishop of that Church, of Phi∣lip Bishop of Gortyna in Crete, of Palma Bishop of Amastris in Pontus, of Pinytus Bishop of the Gnossians, and of Soter Bishop of Rome, vid. Eu∣seb. lib. 4. cap. 23. About the same time lived Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, who, as himself tells us in his Epistle to Florinus, had often seen Polycarp the Disciple of S. Iohn, and did very well remem∣ber his person, and behaviour when he discoursed to
the Multitude the intimate conversation he had with S. John, and the rest of the Apostles who had seen our Lord. And from him we have this express Testimony concerning the matter in debate, We can reckon up those who were Ordained Bishops by the Apostles in the Churches, who they were that suc∣ceeded them even down to our times — for the Apo∣stles would have them to be in all things perfect and unreprovable whom they left to be their Successors, and to whom they delivered their Apostolick Autho∣rity. And then he goes on, and gives us a Ca∣talogue of Eleven Bishops of Rome by name, be∣ginning from Linus, to whom he tells us S. Peter and S. Paul Episcopatum administrandae Ecclesiae tradiderunt, i. e. delivered the Episcopal power of Governing that Church, and ending with Elutheri∣us who was the twelfth▪ and did then actually preside in the Episcopal Chair, and that by Bi∣shops in this Age was meant such as presided over Presbyters as well as Laicks is evident by the de∣monstration Clemens Alexandrinus makes, who was Irenaeus his Cotemporary, between the , Strom. 6. i. e. the Processes of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons: and a little before, speaking of the dignity of the Presbytery, he tells us, , — i. e. that it was not honoured with the first Seat, or placed in the first Class of the Ecclesiastick Orders; which plainly shews that then there was an Order above the Presbytery, viz. the Bishops, whom presently after he mentions as the first Order of Ecclesiasticks. And that passage which Eusebius quotes from him out of his Book, , lately published,
is a plain Argument that in his time Bishops were look'd on as a distinct Order from the rest of the Clergy; for he tells us, that when S. Iohn re∣turned from Patmos to Ephesus, he visited the neighbouring Provinces, , i. e. partly that he might ordain Bishops, and partly that he might set apart such for the Cler∣gy as were pointed out to him by the Holy Spirit; by which it is evident that, in Clement's time at least, and, if he be not mistaken, in S. Iohn's too, the Bishops were a distinct Order from the rest of the Clergy, viz. the Presbyters and Dea∣cons. Thus both in the Apostolick Age, and that succeeding it, we have abundant Testimony of the derivation of the superiority of the Apostolick Order from the Apostles to the Bishops of the Churches of Christ. And then for the next Age we have the concur∣rent Testimonies of Tertullian, Origen, and S. Cy∣prian, not only of the continuance of this Apostolick superiority in the Church, but also of the deriva∣tion of it from the Apostles themselves; but we need not cite their words, it being granted by the most learned Advocates of the Presbyterian Go∣vernment that for several years before these Fa∣thers, viz. about the year of our Lord 140. the Episcopacy was every where received in the Church; for they tell us, that though the Apostles exercised a superiority over the other Ecclesiasti∣cal Orders, yet they left none behind to succeed them in that power; but the Church was every where governed by a Common Council of Presby∣ters; but this Form of Government being found
inconvenient, as giving too much occasion for Schisms and Divisions, it was at last universally agreed upon that one Presbyter should be chosen out to preside over all the rest; and this, say they, was the beginning of the Episcopacy; for which they cite that famous passage of S. Ierom, Ante∣quam Diaboli instinctu, &c. i. e. Before such time as through the instinct of the Devil divisions in Religion began, and it was said among the People, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, and I of Cephas, the Chur∣ches were Governed by Common Councils of Presby∣ters, but afterwards every Presbyter reckoning such as he baptized to be his and not Christs, it was de∣creed over all the World, that one from among the Presbyters should be chosen and set over all the rest, to whom should belong all the care of the Churches, that so the seeds of Schisms might be destroyed; which universal Decree, as they guess, was made about the year 140. Now not to dispute with them the sense of this passage, but allowing it to bear their sense I shall only desire the Reader to consider, First, That it is the Testimony of one who lived long after the afore-cited Witnesses, and so far less capable of attesting so early a matter of fact; for some of the Witnesses above-cited were such as lived in the days of the Apostles, others, such as lived in their days who lived in the days of the Apostles, and certainly these were much more competent Witnesses of what was done in the Apostles days than S. Ierom, who was not born till about the year 330. almost one hundred years after Origen the latest, and three hundred years after Clemens the earliest of the above-cited Wit∣nesses;
and certainly to prefer the Authority of one single Witness, who lived so long after the mat∣ter of fact, to the unanimous attestations of so many earlier Witnesses, is both immodest and irra∣tional. II. It is also to be considered, that S. Ierom was a witness in his own cause, in which case men of his warmth and passion are too too apt to exceed the limits of truth; for the design of that passage was to curb the insolence of some Prag∣matical Deacons, who would needs advance themselves above the Presbyters, which Saint Ierom, being a Presbyter himself, takes in high disdain, and, as the best of men are too prone to do, when their own concerns are at stake, bends the stick too much t'other way, and depresses the Deacons too low, and advances the Presbyters too high. For, III. In other places, where he is not Biassed by partiality to his own Order, he talks at a quite different rate; so in Dial. advers. Luciferian: dost thou ask why one that is not Baptized by the Bi∣shop doth not receive the Holy Ghost? why it proceeds from hence that the Holy Ghost descended on the A∣postles. Where it is plain he places the Bishops in the same rank with the Apostles, so also in Ep. 1. ad Heliodor. speaking of the Bishops of his time, they stand, saith he, in the place of S. Paul, and hold the place of S. Peter, and in Psal. 45.16. Now because the Apostles are gone from the World thou hast instead of those their Sons the Bishops, and these are thy Fathers because thou art Governed by 'em: and Ep. ad Nepot. What Aaron and his Sons were, that we know the Bishops and the Presbyters
are. And therefore as Aaron by Divine Right was superiour to his Sons the Priests, so is the Bishop above his Presbyters; all which are as plain con∣tradictions to that famous passage of his (under∣standing it as the Presbyterians do) as one propo∣sition can be to another: and whether is a man more to be credited when he speaks without Bias or Partiality, or when he speaks in his own cause and under the influence of his own Interest? VI. It is further to be considered, that the De∣cree of which S. Ierom here speaks, by which the Government of the Church was translated from a Common Council of Presbyters to a single Bishop, must according to his own words be Apostolick, and consequently much earlier than the Presby∣terians will allow it; for it was made at that time when it was said among the People, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos, and I of Cephas; and this as S. Paul tells us, was said in his time, and therefore this Decree must be made in his time, and that S. Ierome did mean so, we are elsewhere assured from his own words, for so in his Book de Eccles. Script. he tells us, that im∣mediately after the ascension of our Lord S. James was Ordained by the Apostles to be Bishop of Jerusa∣lem, Timothy by S. Paul Bishop of Ephesus, Ti∣tus Bishop of Crete, and Polycarp by S. John Bishop of Smyrna. So that either he must here expresly contradict himself, or else the Decree of which he speaks must have been made immediately after the Ascension of our Lord, and consequently be a De∣cree Apostolick. V. It is yet farther to be considered that if any such Decree, of changing the Church Govern∣ment
from Presbyterial to Episcopal, had been made by the Apostles; it is strange we should not find the least mention of it in Scripture, and if it had been made after the Apostles, about the year, 140. it is as strange we should have no mention of it in Ecclesiastick Antiquity; for an universal Change of the Government of the Church from one kind to another, is a matter of such vast moment, that had the Apostles made a Decree concerning it, they would doubtless have been very solicitous to publish it through all the Churches, and to have transmitted down to Posterity some standing re∣cord of it; which yet they were so far from do∣ing, that they have not given us the least intimati∣on of it in all their Writings: And had it been made afterwards about the year 140. to be sure all Primitive Antiquity would have rung of such a publick and important alteration; but on the con∣trary you see both Clemens and Ignatius, who li∣ved before that period, testifie that the Church was not Governed in their time by a Common Council of Presbyters, but by Bishops; Hegesyp∣pus, Irenaeus, and Dionysius of Corinth, who li∣ved in that period are so far from taking notice of any such Decree of alteration, that they testifie the Government of the Church by an uninter∣rupted Succession of Bishops, even from the Apo∣stles themselves; and as for Irenaeus who gives us an account of the Succession of the Roman Bi∣shops from S. Peter down to the time when he himself was at Rome, it was as easie for him to know who they were that succeeded from S. Pe∣ter, as it is for us to know who succeeded from Arch-Bishop Whitgift in the Chair of Canterbury,
he being no farther distant from the one than we are from the other; and though through the Ambiguity or defect of the Records of some Chur∣ches, this succession be not equally clear in all, yet in the most eminent Churches, such as Ierusalem, Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, the successions are as clear as any thing in Ecclesiastical History; and is it not much more reasonable to conclude what was the Government of those Churches that are not known, from what we find was the Govern∣ment of those that are, than to question those Ec∣clesiastical Records that are preserved, because of the uncertainty of those that are not? for though we do not find in all Churches an exact Cata∣logue of all their Bishops; yet we cannot produce any one instance in any one ancient Church of any other form of Government than the Episco∣pal, and therefore we may as well question whe∣ther ever there was any such thing as an ancient Monarchy in the World, because many of the Histories of the Monarchs are defective as to their Names and the Order of their Succession, as whe∣ther there was ever any such thing as a Primitive Episcopacy in the Church, because the Records of several Churches are defective as to the Names and Successions of their Bishops: Since therefore this Story of S. Ieroms universal Decree is not on∣ly altogether unattested, but also directly contra∣dictory to the concurrent Testimony of all Anti∣quity, how can we reasonably look upon it other∣wise than as a mere figment of his own fancy? especially considering VI. And lastly, How odiously this conceit of his reflects upon the Wisdom of our Saviour and
his Apostles: for the Apostles, devolving the Go∣vernment of the Church upon Common Coun∣cils of Presbyters was, as he himself tells us, the occasion of sundry Schisms and Divisions; for the removal of which, the Church afterwards found it necessary to dissolve those Presbyteries and intro∣duce Episcopacy in their Room; and this S. Ierom approves as a very wise and prudent action, for saith he, the safety of the Church depends upon the Authority of the High-Priest or Bishop, to whom if there were not given by all supreme Authority, there would be as many Schisms in the Churches as there are Priests. So that according to him, had the Church continued under that Government which the Apostles left in it, it must unavoidably have been torn in pieces with endless Schisms and Divi∣sions; and if so, either the Apostles were very imprudent in not foreseeing this, or very neglective in not preventing it; so that had not the after-age taken care to supply the defect of their Con∣duct, by erecting a wiser-form of Government than they left, the Church had infallibly run to ruin. This is the unavoidable consequence of S. Ieroms Hypothesis; which therefore I can look upon no otherwise than as a mere device of his own brain snatched up in hast to defend his Order against the Insolence of those Factious Deacons, that flew in the face of the Presbytery. This therefore being removed, which is the main, and indeed the only considerable Objection against the universal conformity of the Primitive Church to the Episcopal Government, it remains, that if any credit may be given either to those Writers that lived in the Apostolick age, or to those
who immediately succeeded 'em, it is evident from their unanimous Testimonies, that the Episcopacy is nothing else but only the Apostolick superiority derived from the hands of the Apostles in a conti∣nued succession from one Generation to another; and to reject their Testimony is not only very unreasonable (there being at least as much reason why we should reject all ancient History) but al∣so of very dangerous consequence, since 'tis from thence that we derive the very Canon of Scripture, and so we may as well reject it in this instance as in the other. IV. And lastly, That the rightful Government of the Church of Christ is Episcopal, is evident also from our Saviours declared allowance and ap∣probation of the Primitive practice in this matter, viz. in those seven Epistles which he sent by S. Iohn to the seven Churches of Asia, all which he directs particularly to the seven Angels of those Churches, whom he not only stiles the seven Stars in his own right hand or the seven lights of those seven Churches, Vid. Rev. 1.20. and Rev. 2.1. but in every Epistle particularly owns 'em for his Angels or Messengers: if therefore we can prove that these seven Angels were at that time the seven Bishops that presided over both the Clergy and Laity of those seven Churches, they will be an unanswerable instance of our Saviours allowance and approbation of the Episcopal Order. In or∣der therefore to the clearing this matter I shall shew, First, That they were single persons. Secondly, That they were persons of great Authority in those Churches.
Thirdly, That they were the Presidents or Bi∣shps of those Churches. First, That they were single Persons, is evident because they are all along mentioned as such; the Angel of the Church of Ephesus in the singular number, the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, and so of all the rest; and so every where in the Bo∣dy of the Epistles they are all along addrest to in the singular number; I know thy works and thy la∣bour, nevertheless I have a few things against thee, remember whence thou art fallen, repent, and do thy first works, and the like; in all which our Savi∣our plainly writes to 'em as to single persons: It is true what he writes to them, he writes not only to them personally, but also to the People under their Government and inspection; and therefore sometimes he mentions the People Plurally; so Chap. 2. ver. 10. The Devil shall cast some of you in∣to Prison, and so ver. 13. and ver. 23. but this is so far from arguing that these Angels were not single persons, that it argues the quite contrary; since if they had not, what reason can there be assigned why our Saviour should not mention them plu∣rally, as well as the People? I know it is objected that the Angel of the Church of Thyatira is men∣tioned Plurally. Chap. 2. ver. 24. but unto you I say, and unto the rest of Thyatira, where by you, it is sup∣posed must be meant the Angel, and by the rest of Thyatira, the People. To which I answer, that in the ancient Greek Manuscripts, and parti∣cularly in that at S. Iames's , or and is left out, and so the words run thus, but unto you the rest of Thyatira, or to the rest of you at Thyatira, which is set in opposition to those of Thyatira that had been
seduced into the Sect of Iezebel, and therefore cannot be understood of the Angel who is all a∣long mentioned in the singular number, where∣fore had he not been a single person, no account can be given why he should be mentioned singly, and the rest of Thyatira Plurally. But then Secondly, That these single persons were of great Authority in those Churches is evident not only by that honourable title of Angel, that is gi∣ven them, which plainly shews them to be per∣sons of Office and Eminence, and that not only by our Saviours directing his Epistles to them, to be communicated by them to their several Churches, but also from that authority which the Angel of Ephesus exercised there, and which the Angels of Pergamus and Thyatira ought to have exercised, but did not: For as for the Angel of Ephesus, he is commended for trying them which said they were Apostles, and were not, and discovering them to be liars, which words plainly denote a Iuridical Trial and Conviction of some person or persons, who pretended to Apostolical Authority, but upon examination were found to be Cheats and Impo∣stors: and then as for the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, he is blamed for having in his Church those that held the Doctrine of Balaam, or of the Nicolaitans; which plainly shews that he had power to remedy it by casting them out of the Church; for if he had not, how could he have been justly blamed for suffering them? And the same may be said of the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, who is also blamed for suffering the woman Jezebel, which was not in his power to prevent, unless we suppose him to have Authori∣ty
to eject her and her Followers. But then Thirdly and lastly, That these single persons were the Presidents or Bishops of those Churches, is also evident from the most Primitive Antiquity; for so in the Anonymus Tract of Timothy's Mar∣tyrdom recorded in Biblioth. Pat. n. 244. we are told, that when S. Iohn the Apostle returned from his Exile in Patmos, which was two or three years after he wrote his Revelations, , i. e. that being assisted with the presence of the seven Bishops of that Province he assumed to him∣self the government of it. Now that these seven Bishops were the same with those seven Angels he wrote to in his Revelations is evident, because all those seven Churches in which those seven Angels presided, lay within the Circuit of the Lydian or Proconsular Asia, of which Ephesus was the Metropolis; and therefore who else can we so fairly suppose these seven Bishops to be, by whom he governed the Province of Ephesus, as the seven Angels of those seven Churches which were all of them within that Province? and S. Austin expresly calls the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, the Proepositus Ecclesiae, i. e. the Governour of the Church, Ep. 162. and speaking of those seven Angels, he stiles them Episcopi sive praepositi Eccle∣siarum, the Bishops or Governours of the Churches, Comment. in Revel. so also the Commentaries un∣der the name of S. Ambrose referring to these An∣gels in 1 Cor. c. 11. expresly tells us, that by those Angels he means the Bishops, and that they were so, is most indubitably evident of the Angel of the Church of Smyrna in particular, who could be
no other than S. Polycarp, who was most certainly made Bishop of Smyrna some years before the wri∣ting these Epistles, and continued Bishop of it a great many years after; for so Ignatius, who was his Cotemporary, in his Epistle to that Church stiles him Polycarp your Bishop, and earnestly ex∣horts his Presbyters and Deacons as well as the Lai∣ty to be subject to him; and Irenaeus who perso∣nally knew him hath this passage concerning him: , &c. Polycarpus was not only instructed by the Apostles, and did not only converse with many of those who had seen our Lord, but by the Apostles who were in Asia, was made Bishop of Smyrna, Euseb. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. and in their Encyclical Epistle of his Martyrdom the whole Church of Smyrna stile him Bishop of the Catholick Church of Smyrna, ibid. So also Po∣lycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, who was thirty eight years old when Polycarp suffered, tells us, that he was Bishop and Martyr in Smyrna, Euseb. Hist. l. 5. c. 24. And the same is attested by Tertullian, Eu∣sebius, and S. Ierom, and indeed by all Ecclesia∣stick antiquity: so that it is a plain case, that one of these Angels, to whom S. Iohn writes, was Bi∣shop of the Church whereof he stiles him the Angel, and since one was so, to be sure all were so; especially considering that very near, if not at the very time when these Epistles were written, we have certain accounts that there were Bishops actually presiding in these seven Churches. So within twelve years after these Epistles were written, Ignatius, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, makes mention of Onesimus their Bishop, whom he exhorts them all, as well Presbyters and Dea∣cons
as Laity, to obey. That there was also at the same time a Bishop in Philadelphia is abundantly evident from Ignatius his Epistle to that Church though he doth not name him; and about the same time Carpus was Bishop of Thyatira as the ancient Roman Martyrology testifies, and Sega∣sis of Laodicea, Vid. Euseb. Hist. lib. 4. c. 25. And Melito Bishop of Sardis, ibid. And as for the Church of Pergamus Paraeus in his Commentary on Chap. 2. of the Revelations proves out of Are∣tas Caesariensis that Antipas that faithful Martyr mentioned, Rev. 2.13. was Bishop of it immedi∣ately before the Angel of that Church to whom S. Iohn wrote, and that that Angel was one Gaius, who as he proves out of Clemens immedi∣ately succeeded Antipas in the Episcopal Chair. Since therefore it is apparent that at the writing these Epistles to these seven Churches there was a Bishop actually presiding in one of them, and that about the same time there were Bishops presiding also in all the rest, there can be no colour of Rea∣son to doubt, but that all those Churches had Bi∣shops in them when S. Iohn wrote to them; and if so, to be sure those Bishops being the Governours of those Churches, and having the charge of them committed to them, were those very Angels whom S. Iohn wrote to, because he all along writes to them as to those who were the Overseers and Governours of their respective Churches; and if those Angels were Bishops, then in them our Sa∣viour expresly allows and approves of the Episco∣pal Order, since he not only dignifies them with the name of Angels, but calls them stars in his own right hand.
The sum of all therefore is this, If our Savi∣ours own institution, seconded by the practice of his Apostles upon it, and succeeded by the Con∣formity of all the Primitive Churches to it, and this Conformity of theirs authorized by the ex∣press approbation of our Saviour, be a sufficient ar∣gument of the Divine Right of any form of Church-Government, then must the Episcopal form, which hath all these things you see to plead for it self, be of Divine Right and Ordination. Ha∣ving thus shewn at large what that Ecclesiastick or spiritual Government is which Christ hath esta∣blished in his Church, I proceed Thirdly and lastly, To shew what are the pro∣per Ministries of this Government in the King∣dom of Christ; and these are of two sorts: First, such as are common to the Bishops, or Governours of the Church with the inferiour Officers; and se∣condly, such as are peculiar to the Bishops or Go∣vernours. First, Such as are common to the Bi∣shops together with the inferiour Officers of the Church; and these are 1. To teach the Gospel: 2. To administer the Evangelical Sacraments: 3. To offer up the Publick Prayers and Intercessi∣ons of Christian Assemblies. I. To teach the Gospel, which is the first Mi∣nisterial Act mentioned by our Saviour in the Commission which he gave his Apostles, Go teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19. and accordingly the A∣postles declare, Acts 6.2.4. that preaching the Word was one of the principal imployments ap∣pertaining to their Office; but yet it is evident that it never was restrained to their Office; for not only the Apostles, but the seventy Disciples also
were Commissioned to Preach the Gospel by our Saviour, Luke 10.9, 10, 11. and even in the A∣postles days, not only they, but Philip also, and Stephen, and Lucius of Cyrene, who were no Apo∣stles, did yet preach the Gospel to the World; and besides the Apostles there were Prophets, Teachers, and Evangelists, that preached the Gospel as well as they. But yet as for the Office of Preaching, it is plain that none were ever admitted to it, but either by immediate Com∣mission from our Saviour, or by Apostolick Or∣dination, or by an immediate Miraculous Un∣ction of the Holy Ghost, by which they were inspired with the gift of Preaching, and en∣abled freely and readily, and without any study of their own to explain, and prove, and apply the Doctrines of the Gospel to their Hearers; and that, either in their own or other Languages, as occasion required; which gift was the same with that which is called in Scripture, the gift of utterance; and it being bestowed upon them for the publick benefit and edification of the Church, the very bestowing it, (without any other Ordina∣tion,) was an immediate Mission from the Holy Ghost; only they who pretended to it, were to be tried by such as had the gift of discerning of Spirits, vid. 1 Cor. 12.10. compared with 1 Cor. 14.29. and if upon that trial their pretence was found real, they were owned and received with∣out any more ado as authorized Preachers sent by the Holy Ghost; and it was upon this extraordi∣nary Mission, as it seems very probable, that those extraordinary Offices of Prophets and Evan∣gelists were founded, both which included Au∣thority
to preach the Gospel; and therefore upon the Cessation of this extraordinary Mission those Offices ceased immediately with it, as depending wholly upon it, and from thenceforth none were ever admitted to the Office of Preaching, but by ordinary Mission and Ordination from the Aposto∣late derived to the Bishops and Governours of the Church. For though there are some very early instances of learned Lay-men that were admitted to preach upon some emergent occasions, and upon special license from the Bishop, yet can there no one instance be produced of any that were ad∣mitted to the Office of Preaching, without Episco∣pal Ordination. II. Another of the Ministries Common to the Bishops with the inferiour Clergy, is the admini∣stration of the Evangelical Sacraments; for it was to his Apostles, and in them to their Successors, that our Saviour gave the Commission of Baptizing all Nations, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and of doing this (i. e. of consecrating and administring the holy Eucharist) in remembrance of me: but yet it is evident that this Ministry was not so confined to the Apostolick Order, as that none but they were allowed to exercise it; for even in the Apostles days Philip and Ananias, who were no Apostles, Baptized, and S. Peter com∣manded the Brethren with him, (who were no Apostles neither,) to Baptize those Gentile Con∣verts, upon which the Holy Ghost descended, Acts 10.48. and there is no doubt, but when those three thousand Souls, Acts 2. were all Baptized at one time, there were a great many other Baptizers besides the Apostles; and that pas∣sage
of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. where he tells us, that he baptized none in the Church of Corinth, though it were of his own planting, except Crispus, Gaius, and the Houshold of Ste∣phanus, is a plain Argument that when the Apo∣stles had converted men to the Christian Faith, they generally ordered them to be baptized by the inferiour Ministers of the Church that attended them; and then as for the Consecration of the ho∣ly Eucharist, though when any of the Apostles were present, it was doubtless ordinarily perform∣ed by them, yet considering how fast Christia∣nity encreased, and how frequently Christians did then partake of this Sacrament, it is not to be supposed that the Apostles could be present in all places where it was administred, nor conse∣quently that they could consecrate it in every par∣ticular Congregation: For though it was a very early Custom for the Bishop to consecrate the Ele∣ments in one Congregation, and then send them abroad to be administred in several others; yet this was only upon special occasions: but ordinari∣ly they were consecrated in the same places where they were administred; in all which places it was impossible either for the Apostles at first, or after them for their Successors, the Bishops, to be pre∣sent at the same time; and therefore there can be no doubt but the Consecration as well as the Administration was ordinarily performed by the inferiour Presbyters, in the absence of the Apo∣stles and Bishops. But it is most certain, that none were ever allowed in the Primitive Church to consecrate the Eucharist, but either a Bishop or a Presbyter. And as for Baptism, because it is in
some degree more necessary than the Eucharist, as being the sign of admission into the New Covenant, by which we are first intitled to it, not only Bishops and Presbyters, but in their absence, or by their allowance, Deacons also were Authorized to ad∣minister it; for so even in the Apostles days Phi∣lip the Deacon baptized at Samaria, Acts 8.12. and afterwards not only Deacons but Lay-men too were allowed to administer it in case of necessity, when neither a Deacon, nor Presbyter, nor Bishop could be procured; that so none might be debar∣red of admission into the New Covenant that were disposed and qualified to receive it; but the Churches allowing this to Lay-men only in cases of necessity, is a plain Argument that none had a standing Authority to administer it, but only per∣sons in holy Orders. For that authority which a present necessity creates, is only present, and ceases with the necessity that created it. III. And lastly, Another of the Ministries com∣mon to the Bishops with the inferiour Clergy is to offer up the Publick Prayers and intercessions of Christian Assemblies: For to be sure none can be authorized to perform the publick Offices of the Church but only such as are set apart and or∣dained to be the publick Officers of it. Now Prayer is one of the most solemn Offices of Chri∣stian Assemblies, and therefore as in the Jewish Church none but the High Priest and Priests and Levites, who were the only publick Ministers of Religion, were authorized to offer up the publick Prayers of the Congregation, vid. 2 Chron. 39.27. so in the Christian none but Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, who alone are the publick Ministers
of Christianity are authorized to offer up the publick addresses of Christian Assemblies; it is their peculiar , i. e. to perform the publick Offices to the Lord, Acts 13.2. for so the word  signifies Publick Service, and is used to denote those publick services (of which one was offering up the Common Prayers of the People) which the Priests in their turns perform∣ed in the Temple, Vid. Luk. 1.23. and hence it is, that the Ministers of Christian Religion are called , Rom. 15.16. because it is their proper business to officiate the publick services of the Christian Church, and accordingly in Rev. 5.10. the four and twenty Elders, (that is the holy Bishops of the Church as appears by their having Crowns of Gold or Mitres on their heads in al∣lusion to the High Priests Mitre, Chap. 4. ver. 4. are said to have every one of them Harps and gol∣den Vials full of Odours which are the Prayers of Saints, referring to the Incense which the Priests were wont to offer in the Sanctuary, which Ob∣lation was a mystical offering up the Prayers of the People, vid. Luk. 1.10. which plainly intimates, that as it was one part of the Office of those Iewish Priests to offer the Incense, and therewith∣all the Prayers of the People, so is it also of the Publick Ministers of Christianity, to offer up the Prayers of Christian Assemblies. And as in the Jewish Church not only the Priests, but the Le∣vites also Communicated with the High Priest in this Ministry of offering up the Prayers of the Congregation, so in the Christian Church not only the Presbyters, but the Deacons also, always Communicated in it with their Bishop. Having
thus given an account of those Religious Mini∣stries which are common to the Bishops with the in∣feriour Officers of the Church, I proceed in the next place to shew what those Ministries are which are peculiar to the Bishops or Governours of the Church, all which are reducible to four particu∣lars: 1. To make Laws for the peace and good order of the Church. 2. To Ordain to Ecclesia∣stical Offices. 3. To execute that spiritual Juris∣diction which Christ hath established in his Church. 4. To confirm such as have been instru∣cted in Christianity. I. One peculiar Ministry of the Bishops and Go∣vernours of the Church is to make Laws and Ca∣nons for the security and preservation of the Churches peace and good order; and this is im∣plied in the very Essence of Government, which necessarily supposes a Legislative power within it self, to command and oblige the Subject to do or forbear such things as it shall judge conducive to the preservation or disturbance of their Common∣weal, without which power no Government can be enabled to obtain its end, which is the good of the Publick. Since therefore the Church, by Christs own institution, is a governed Society of men, we must either suppose its Government to be very lame and defective, which would be to blaspheme the Wisdom of our Saviour, or allow it to have a Legislative Power inherent in it. But that de facto it hath such a Power in it is evident from the Practice of the Apostles; who, as all agree, had the Reins of Church Government delivered into their hands by our Saviour; for so in Acts 15.6. we are told, that upon oc∣casion
of that famous Controversie about Cir∣cumcision, the Apostles and Elders came together to consider of this matter; where by the Elders, by the consent of all Antiquity is meant the Bishops of Iudea, Vid. Dr. Hammond on Acts 11. Note B. And after mature debate and deliberation this is the result of the Council, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay upon you no greater burthen than these necessary things, ver. 28. so that those necessary things specified in the next verse were, it seems, laid upon them as a burthen, i. e. legally imposed on them as matter of duty; for herein it is plain the Apostles exercised a Legisla∣tive Power over those Christian Communities, they wrote to, viz. in requiring 'em to abstain from some things which were never prohibited before by any standing Law of Christanity: and as the Apostles and Primitive Bishops made Laws by common consent for the Church in general, so did they also by their own single authority for particular Churches, to which they were more peculiarly related. Thus St. Paul after he had prescribed some Rules to the Corinthians for their more decent communication of the Lords Supper, tells them, that other things he would set in order when he came among them, 1 Cor. 11.34. but how could he otherwise do this than by gi∣ving them certain Laws and Canons for the bet∣ter regulation of their Religious Offices: so also 1 Cor. 16.1. the same Apostle makes mention of an Order or Canon, which he gave to the Chur∣ches of Galatia, which he enjoyns the Church of Corinth also to observe, and in 1 Tim. 5. he gives Timothy several Ecclesiastical Rules to give in
charge to his Church, ver. 7. so also Tit. 1.5. he tells Titus, that for this cause he left him in Crete with Apostolick or Episcopal power that he might set in order the things that were wanting, i. e. that by wholsom Laws and Constitutions he might redress those disorders, and supply those defects which the shortness of S. Pauls stay there would not permit him to provide for. By all which in∣stances it is abundantly evident that the Gover∣nours of the Church have a Legislative Power in∣herent in them both to make Laws by common consent for the Regulation of the Church in general, and to prescribe the rules of Decency and Order in their own particular Churches. For what the Apostles and Primitive Bishops did, to be sure they had Authority to do, and whatsoever Authority they had, they derived it down to their Successors. And accordingly we find this Ecclesiastick Legisla∣tion was always administred by the Apostles Successors the Bishops, who not only gave Laws both to the Clergy and Laity in their own parti∣cular Churches, but also made Laws for the whole Church by common consent in their holy Coun∣cils, wherein during the first four general Coun∣cils no Ecclesiastick beneath a Bishop was ever al∣lowed a Suffrage, unless it were by deputation from his Bishop; and though in making Laws for their own Churches they generally conducted themselves by the advice and counsel of their Presbyters, and sometimes also admitted them in∣to their debates both in their Provincial and Ge∣neral Councils, yet this was only in preparing the matter of their Laws. But that which gave them the form of Laws was purely the Episcopal Autho∣rity
and Suffrage; and whatsoever was decreed either by the Bishop in Council with his Presby∣ters, or by the Bishops in Council among them∣selves, was always received by the Churches of Christ as Authentick Law. It is true, this Legisla∣tive Power of the Church (as was shewn before,) extends not so far as to controul the Decrees of the Civil Sovereign, who is next to, and imme∣diately under God in all Causes, and over all Persons Supreme, and is no otherwise accounta∣ble by the Laws of Christianity, than he was by the Laws of natural Religion; and therefore as the Civil Sovereign cannot countermand Gods Laws, so neither can the Church the Civil Sovereigns: but yet as next to the Laws of God the Laws of the Civil Sovereign are to be obeyed, so next to the Laws of the Civil Sovereign the Laws of the Church are to be obeyed. II. Another peculiar Ministry of the Bishops and Governours of the Church is to Consecrate and Or∣dain to Ecclesiastical Offices. For that those ho∣ly Ministries which Christ himself performed while he was on Earth, such as preaching the Gospel, administring the Evangelical Sacraments, &c. might be continued in his Church throughout all Gene∣rations, he not only himself ordained his twelve Apostles a little before he left the World, to per∣form those Ministries in his absence, but in their Ordination transferred on them his own mission from the Father, deriving upon them the same authority to ordain others that he had to ordain them; that so they might derive their Mission to others as he did his to them through all succeeding Generations; for this is necessarily implied in
the Commission he gave them, Iohn 20.21. As my Father hath sent me, so send I you, that is, I do not only send you with full authority to act for me in all things as my Father sent me to act for him; but I also send you with the same authori∣ty to send others, that I now exercise in sending you; for unless this be implied in their Mission, he did not send them as his Father sent him, un∣less he gave them the same authority to propagate their Mission to others, that his Father gave him to propagate his Mission to them, how could he say that he sent them as his Father sent him? since he must have sent them without that very authority from his Father, which he then exercised in send∣ing them. Now the Persons whom he sent were the Eleven Apostles as you will see by comparing this of S. Iohn with Luke 24.33.36. Mar. 16.14. Mat. 28.16. in all which places we are expresly told, that it was the Eleven he appeared to when he gave this Commission, and consequently, it must be the Eleven to whom he gave it. This Com∣mission therefore of sending others being originally transferred by our Saviour upon the Apostolick Order, no others could have right to transfer it to others, but only such as were admitted of that Order; none could give it to others, but only those to whom Christ gave it; and therefore since Christ himself gave it to none but Apostles, none but Apostles could derive it: and accordingly we find in Scripture that all Ecclesiastick Commissions were either given by the hands of some of those first Apostles who received their Commission im∣mediately from our Saviour, or else by some of those secondary Apostles, that were admitted into
Apostolick Orders by them; which secondary Apo∣stles, as was shewn before, were the same with those whom we now call Bishops; for so in Acts 6.3.6. the seven first Deacons we read of were Ordained by the Apostles, the whole number of the Disciples being present, but the Apostles on∣ly appointing and laying their hands on them, and in Acts 14.23. we are told, that Paul and Barna∣bas, two of the Apostles, ordained Elders in every Church, that is, of Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch; and though these two were Ordained Apostles of the Gentiles by certain Prophets and Teachers in the Church of Antioch, Acts 13.1.3. yet there is no doubt but those Prophets and Teachers where such as had received the Apostolick Character, (be∣ing ordained by the Apostles Bishops of the Churches of Syria,) for otherwise how could they have derived it? For so Iudas and Silas are called Prophets, Acts 15.32. and yet ver. 22. they are said to be , that is, Rulers among the Brethren, or Bishops of Iudea, and afterwards we find that Ordination was con∣fined to such as had been admitted to the Aposto∣late; for so the power of laying on of hands in the Church of Ephesus was committed by S. Paul to Timothy, whom he himself by the laying on of hands had ordained the Apostle or Bishop of that Church, 1 Tim. 5.22. 1 Tim. 1.6. so also the power of Ordaining in the Church of Crete was by S. Paul committed to Titus, whom he had also Ordain∣ed the Apostle or Bishop of that Church, Tit. 1.5. for this cause left I thee in Crete to ordain El∣ders in every City. Thus all through the whole Scripture History we find the power of Ordinati∣on
administred by such, and none but such as were of the Apostolick Order, viz. either by the Prime Apostles, or by the secondary Apostles or Bi∣shops. And if we consult the Primitive Antiqui∣ties, which to be sure, in matters of fact at least, are the best Interpreters of Scripture, we shall always find the power of giving Orders confined and limited to Bishops, which is so undeniable that S. Ierom himself, who endeavours his ut∣most to equalize Presbyters with Bishops, is yet fain to do it with an excepta Ordinatione, Ep. ad Evagr. Quid facit excepta Ordinatione Episcopus quod Presbyter non faciat? What can the Bishop do, except Ordaining, that the Presbyter may not do also? III. Another peculiar Ministry of the Bishops and Governours of the Church is to execute that spiritual Iurisdiction which Christ hath esta∣blished in it, i. e. to Cite such as are accused of scandalous offences before their Tribunals, to inspect and examine the Accusation, and upon sufficient evidence of the truth of it, to admonish the offender of his fault, and in case he obsti∣nately persist in it, to exclude him from the Com∣munion of the Church, and from all the Benefits of Christianity, till such time as he gives sufficient evidence of his Repentance and amendment, and then to receive him in again. For that Christ hath established such a jurisdiction in his Church is evident from that passage, Mat. 18.16, 17, 18. Moreover, if thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go tell him his fault between him and thee alone, if he shall hear thee, thou hast gain'd thy Brother, but if he will not hear thee, then take with
thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses every word may be established, i. e. that thou mayst be able, in case he doth not then a∣mend, to produce sufficient testimony of his guilt before the Churches Tribunal, to which thou art next to apply thy self; and if he shall neglect to hear them, i. e. to promise amendment upon their admonition, take them along with thee and tell it to the Church, that so she may examine the matter, and upon thy proving his guilt by sufficient witness may Authoritatively admonish him to amend, but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a Pub∣lican, i. e. give him over for a desperate sinner, as one that is to be ejected from the Communi∣on of the Church, and no longer to enjoy the common benefits of a Christian, for verily I say unto you, that it is to you of the Church, before whom this obstinate Offender is cited and accu∣sed, (for now he speaks no longer in the singu∣lar number) Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven, i. e. whomsoever ye shall for just cause eject from the Communion of the Church into the state of a Heathen man and a Publican, I will certainly exclude out of Heaven, unless he reconcile himself to you by Confessi∣on, and promise of amendment, and if there∣upon you pardon him, and receive him into the Churches Communion, I will most certainly par∣don him too if he perform his promise; for that by binding and loosing upon Earth our Saviour means excluding out of the Church, and receiving in again, is evident from that Parallel passage, Mat.
16.19. I will give unto thee the Keys of the King∣dom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven; where by the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven, is plainly meant the Authority of a Steward to go∣vern his Church or Family, for so Isa. 22.21, 22. God promises Eliachim that he would cloath him with the Robe of Shebna who was over the Houshold, ver. 15. i. e. Steward of the Kings Family, and that he would commit Shebna's Government into his hand, &c. and then it follows, And the Key of the House of David will I lay upon his shoulders, so he shall open and none shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open, that is in short, I will make him the Go∣vernour of the Family, and give him power to ad∣mit or exclude what Servants he pleases, and ac∣cordingly by the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven must be meant the Government of the Church, for so Keys denote Authority to Govern, vid. Rev. 3.7. and by binding and loosing, the power of shutting out of or readmitting into it, and therefore in Iohn 20.23. this binding and loosing is thus expressed, whose sins ye remit or loose shall be remitted or loosed, whose sins ye retain or keep bound shall be retained or kept bound, for though the words are different from those in S. Matthew, yet they are of the same import and signification; and consequently our Saviours meaning must be the same here as there, viz. whose sins you loose from the penalty of exclusion from the Church I also will loose from the penalty of exclusion out of Heaven, and whose sins you keep bound or obli∣ged to that Penalty I also will keep bound and ob∣liged to this.
This is the Spirtual Iurisdiction which Christ hath established in his Church, to bind or loose, suspend or restore, excommunicate or absolve; and this he hath wholly deposited in the Episcopal Order: For in all the above-cited places it was only to his Apostles that he derived this Iurisdiction, they alone were the Stewards to whom he commit∣ted the Keys and Government of his Family, and it was to them alone that he promised that they should sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, that is to Rule and Govern the spi∣ritual Israel, which is the Christian Church, even as the Phylarchae or Chiefs of the Tribes governed the twelve Tribes of natural Israel, Mat. 19.28. and hence in that Mystical representation of the Church by a City descending from Heaven, Rev. 21. the Wall of it is said to have twelve foundati∣ons, and upon them twelve names of the twelve Apo∣stles, ver. 14. and those twelve foundations are compared to twelve precious stones, to denote their power and dignity in the Church, ver. 19, 20. and the Wall being exactly meted is found to be 144 Cubits, that is twelve times twelve, to denote that these twelve Apostles had each of them an equal portion allotted him in the Government and administration of the Church, ver. 17. This spi∣ritual Iurisdiction therefore of governing the Church, and administring the Censures of it, being by our Saviour wholly lodged in the Apo∣stolate, none can justly claim or pretend to it but such as are of the Apostolick Order, and according∣ly in the Apostolick Age we find it was always administred either immediately by the Apostles themselves, or by the Bishops of the several Chur∣ches
to whom they communicated their Order; for thus in the Church of Corinth it was S. Paul who pronounced the Sentence of Excommuni∣cation against the incestuous person; for I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit have judged or pronounced Sentence already as though I were present concerning him that hath done this deed, 1 Cor. 5.3. and what he orders them to do, ver. 4, 5. was only to declare and execute his Sen∣tence, and 2 Cor. 13.2. he threatens them that heretofore had sinned that if he came again he would not spare them, and that by his not sparing them he meant that he would proceed against them with Ecclesiastical Censures is evident from ver. 1. In the mouth of two or three Witnesses shall every word be established, which are the very words of our Saviour, Matt. 18.16. when he instituted the power of Censuring; and then ver. 10. he tells them, that he wrote these things being absent, lest being present he should use severity according to the power which the Lord had given them to edification, and not to destruction, by which it is plain he means the power of Excommunicating: and 1 Cor. 4.21. he threatens to come to them with a Rod, that is to chastise them with the Censures of the Church, and with this Rod, as he himself tells, he chastised Hymenoeus and Alexander, two stick∣ling Hereticks in the Church of Ephesus whom he delivered unto Satan that they might learn not to blaspheme, 1 Tim. 1.20. and as he frequently ex∣ecuted the Censures of the Church in his own Per∣son, so he derived this spiritual Iurisdiction to Timothy and Titus, whom he Ordained Apostles or Bishops of the Church of Ephesus and Crete,
for so he orders Timothy, against an Elder, Receive not an Accusation but before two or three Witnesses, which plainly implies his Authority to examine and try the causes even of the Elders themselves, when they were accused, and to punish them if he found them guilty, for so it follows, Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear, 1 Tim. 5.19, 20. so also he exhorts Titus to exer∣cise this his spiritual Jurisdiction; A man that is an Heretick, after the first and second admonition re∣ject, Tit. 3.10. which plainly implies, that he had an Authority inherent in him, as he was the Apo∣stle or Bishop of Crete, to Cite, Examine, Admonish, and Censure persons of erronious Principles; and the same Authority, it is evident, was inherent in the Angels or Bishops of the seven Churches of Asia. Thus the Bishop of Ephesus had Authority to try such as said they were Apostles and were not, and to convict them for Liars, Rev. 2.2. and the Bishop of Pergamus is blamed for tolerating the Sect of the Nicolaitans in his Church, ver. 14, 15. and so also is the Bishop of Thyatira for suffering that woman Iezebel, ver. 20. which plainly im∣plies, that the Authority of curbing and correcting those profligate Sectaries, was inherent in them; else why should they be blamed any more than others for not restraining them? From all which it is evident that the power of Christian Jurisdicti∣on was Originally seated in the Apostolate, and that throughout the Apostolick Age it was always exercised by such, and only such as were admit∣ted into that sovereign Order, viz. either by the twelve Prime Apostles, or by those secondary Apo∣stles whom they ordained Bishops of particular
Churches; and accordingly we find in the Pri∣mitive Ages the Bishops were the sole administra∣tors of this spiritual Iurisdiction, and though ordi∣narily they administred it with the advice and concurrence of their Presbytery, yet this was more than they thought themselves obliged to; for thus S. Cyprian in the time of his recess did by his own single Authority Excommunicate Felicissimus, Augen∣dus, and others of his Presbyters, Ep. 38, 39. and when Rogatianus a Bishop of his Metropolitick Church complained to him in a Synod of a dis∣orderly Deacon, he tells him, that pro Episcopatus vigore & Cathedrae authoritate, i. e. by his own E∣piscopal authority, without appealing to the Sy∣nod, he might have chastised him. And the fifth Canon of the first Nicene Council plainly shews, that it was then the judgment of the Ca∣tholick Church that the power of spiritual Iuris∣diction was wholly seated in the Bishops: for it de∣crees that in every Province there should be twice a year a Council of Bishops, to examine whe∣ther any person, Lay or Clergy, had been un∣justly excommunicated by his Bishop; which shews that then this Sentence was inflicted by the Bi∣shop only; though afterwards to prevent abuses it was decreed in the Council of Carthage, that the Bishop should hear no mans Cause but in the presence of his Clergy, and that his Sentence should be void unless it were confirmed by their presence; but yet still the Sentence was peculiarly his and not his Cler∣gies. In some Churches indeed the Bishops did many times delegat power to their Presbyters, both to excommunicate and absolve (as perhaps S. Paul himself did in the Church of Corinth) but
in this case the Presbyter was only the Bishops mouth, and his Sentence received all its force from that Episcopal Authority he was armed with. IV. Another peculiar Ministry of the Bishops and Governours of the Church, is to Confirm such as have been Baptized and instructed in Chri∣stianity; which Ministry was always performed by Prayer and laying on of hands, upon which the Party so Confirmed received the gift of the Ho∣ly Ghost. It is true, upon the first institution of this Imposition of hands the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, such as speaking with Tongues, &c. were many times consequent, but from hence it doth no more follow that it was intended only for an extraordinary Ministry that was to cease with those extraordinary Gifts that accompanied it, than that Preaching was so which at first was also attended with miraculous operations. The great intendment of those extraordinary effects was to attest the efficacy of the Function; and doth it therefore follow that the Function must cease, because those extraordinary effects did so, after they had sufficiently attested its efficacy, and consequently were of no farther use? If so, then all the other Ministries of Christianity must be expired as well as this. And what though those extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit are ceased? Yet since our Saviour hath promised a continual Com∣munication of his Spirit to his Church, is it not highly reasonable to believe, that he still continues to communicate it by the very same Ministry of Prayer and Imposition of hands, whereby he com∣municated it first; and that he now derives to us
the ordinary operations of it in the same way that he first derived the extraordinary ones? Especially considering that this laying on of hands is placed by the Apostle in the same Class with Baptism, and made one of the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1, 2. and therefore must without all doubt be intended for a standing Ministry in the Church, and as such the Church of Christ in all Ages has thought her self obliged to receive and practise it; but as for the administration of it, it was always appropriated to the Apostles and Bishops. So in Acts 19.5, 6. it was S. Paul that laid his hands on the Ephesians after they were Baptized in the name of Jesus, whereupon it is said that the Holy Ghost came upon them; and in Acts 8. we read, that when S. Philip by his Preach∣ing and Miracles had converted the Samaritans, and afterwards Baptized them, S. Peter, and S. Iohn, two of the Apostles, were sent to lay hands on them, upon which it is said, that they received the Holy Ghost, ver. 17. by which it appears that this Ministry of Confirmation appertained to the Apostles; since S. Philip, though a worker of Miracles, a Preacher, a Prime Deacon; and, if we may believe S. Cyprian, one of the seventy two Disciples, would not presume to assume it, but left it to the Apostles as their peculiar Province: And accordingly in the Primitive Church it was always performed by the hands of the Bishops; for though from later Ages some probable instan∣ces are produced of some Presbyters that Confirmed in the Bishops absence, or by his delegation, yet in all Primitive Antiquity we have neither any one Canon, nor example of it; from whence we may
fairly conclude that this imposition of hands for Confirmation was peculiar to the Apostles in the O∣riginal, and to their Successors the Bishops in the continuation of it. SECT. X. Of Christ's Regal Acts in his Kingdom. HAving in the foregoing Section given an ac∣count of the several Ministers which Christ imploys in the Administration of his Kingdom, we proceed in the next place to inquire what those Acts of Royalty are, which he himself exerts in his Kingdom, and by which he perpetually rules and governs it; and these may be distribu∣ted into three Orders: First, Such as he hath performed once for all. Secondly, Such as he hath always performed, and will still continue to perform. Thirdly, Such as are yet to be peformed by him before the surrender of his Kingdom. First, One sort of the Royal Acts of our Saviour are those which he hath performed once for all; and these are reducible to three particulars: 1. His giving Laws to his Kingdom. 2. His Mission of the Holy Spirit to subdue mens minds to the obedience of those Laws and to govern them by them. 3. His erecting an External Polity or Form of Government in his Kingdom.
I. One of those Regal Acts, which Christ hath performed in his Kingdom once for all, is giving Laws to it; and this he performed while he was upon Earth in those excellent Sermons and Di∣scourses which he then preached and delivered to the World. For though he preached as a Prophet, yet it was as a Royal Prophet, as one that had Re∣gal authority to Enact what he delivered into Laws; for he was a King while he was upon Earth, vid. p. 853, 854, &c. so that all his Pro∣phesies were inforced with his Regal Authority, and he commanded as he was a King whatsoever he taught as he was a Prophet. Indeed, had he been a mere Prophet, he could not have obliged men by any Legislative Authority of his own to believe and obey him; his Declarations had had no farther Force in them than as they expressed the Will and Command of the Almighty Sovereign of the World, and if what he declared had not been Law before, it could not have been made Law by his declaring it. But being a Royal Prophet, his words were Laws, and all his Declarations carri∣ed a commanding power in them. And hence the Gospel is called the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. and the Law of the Spirit of life in or by Christ Iesus, Rom. 8.2. and that command of loving our Neigh∣bour as our self is called the Royal Law, i. e. the Law of Christ our King, Iam. 2.8. for this our Saviour calls his Commandment, John 15.12. and his new Commandment, viz. that ye love one another even as I have loved you, Joh. 13.34. and not on∣ly this, but all other duties of the Gospel are cal∣led his Commandments, Ioh. 14.21. and Matt. 28.20. by all which it is evident, that in revealing
his Gospel to the World he did not only perform the part of a Prophet, but also of a Legislator, and that by his own inherent Authority, as he was a King, he stamp'd those Doctrines into Laws which he taught and delivered as a Prophet. And such as his Kingly power is, such are his Laws and Com∣mandments; he is a spiritual King, a King of Souls, of Wills, and of Affections, and accordingly his Laws are spiritual, and do extend their obliga∣tion to the Souls, and Wills, and Affections of his Subjects. For they not only oblige our outward man, but also the inmost motions of our heart, they lay their reins upon our thoughts and desires, as well as upon our words and actions, and give di∣rections to our inward intentions, as well as to our outward actions: so that to satisfie their de∣mands, it is not sufficient that we do well, unless we also intend well, that the matter of our actions be good, unless the aim and design of them be so also: for according to the tenor of these spiritual Laws, a bad intention unconsecrates the best acti∣ons, and converts even our Prayers and our Alms into the most loathsom Cheats and Dissimulations, vid. Matt. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.16, 17, 18. and as they ob∣lige our inward intentions to good ends, so they al∣so restrain our inward concupiscence from evil ob∣jects, so far forth at least as it falls under the command and disposal of our Wills. For they not only forbid us the doing of evil actions, but also the consenting to them, and even the taking plea∣sure in the contemplation of them, and the very affection to any bad action if it be voluntary and consented to, is in the construction of these Laws the same with the Commission of it; for so Hatred
is construed Murder, 1 John 3.15. Covetousness, Theft or Robbery, Mark 7.22. inordinate lusting af∣ter a woman Adultery, Mat. 5.28. and so in gene∣ral the wicked Will is in the construction of these Laws, the wicked action it chooses and consents to. Thus the Laws of our Saviour (to whose all-seeing eye our inmost motions are as obvious as our most open practice) do as well take notice of our vicious affections, those internal springs, and fountains of iniquity as of the vicious actions which stream out from them, and we are as well ac∣countable to them for harbouring the desire of sin, when we have not the convenience or opportuni∣ty to act it, for consenting to it (though we never commit it) when ever opportunity occurs▪ yea, and for indulging to our selves the Phantastick pleasures of sinful Meditations, which are but the antepasts of the actions, and as the Twilight to a dark night, but the first approaches towards the deeds of darkness, as for the sinful actions themselves. This therefore is the common na∣ture of the Laws of our Saviour, that they are all of them spiritual▪ and do in the first place lay hold upon our Wills, and bind our inward-man, and from thence extend their obligation to the outward actions. They begin with that which is the Principle of all moral good and evil, and by rectifying the Spring and Wheels of our Will and Affections within, communicate a regular motion to the hand of our practice without. But for our better understanding the nature of these Laws and the Obligations they devolve upon us, it will be necessary to consider them more particularly, they being all reducible under two
Heads; First, The Law of Perfection: And se∣condly, The Law of Sincerity. Both which re∣quire of us the same instances of Piety and Vertue, though not in the same degree, nor under the same Penalty. I. There is the Law of Perfection, which re∣quires the utmost degrees of every Christian Vertue, which in the several states and periods of our lives we are capable of attaining to. For so we are injoyned not only to do, but to abound in the work of the Lord; not only to have grace, but to grow in it, to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, and to be perfect as our Father in Heaven is perfect. For the nature of God is the Standard of that Per∣fection whereunto we are obliged to aspire, and our growth in Piety and Vertue is never to come to a period, till we are pure as he is pure, and holy as he is holy, i. e. till we are arrived to infinite holi∣ness; which because our finite nature can never do in any period of Duration, therefore we are to be growing on to Eternity. So that this Law by prescribing no limits to the degrees of our growth, hath cut out work enough for us to imploy all our Faculties for ever. Not that it is a sin against it for a man to be short or defective of the utmost degree of perfection; for it requires no more of us than what is within our present possibility, which always increases proportionably to our present improvements. When we are arrived but to one degree of Vertue it is no sin against this Law of Perfection that we do not thence immediately a∣scend to six or seven, because it is not in our pow∣er, and no Law can oblige to an impossibility; but when we have acquired one, that gives us power
to acquire a second, and that a third, and so on ad infinitum. Thus our Obligation to be more and more perfect increases proportionably to the im∣provement of our power; for the end of all power either to be good, or to do good, is to be good, and to do good; and therefore the more power we have to be good the better we ought to be, other∣wise our power is in vain; while we are but Babes in Christ, or beginners in Religion, we have not that strength and power as when we are men, and have made a considerable progress; and therefore we are not then obliged to all those degrees of growth and perfection, but whatsoever degree is within our power in the different stages of our growth and progress, that we are actually and immediately obliged to; and so long as we are de∣fective in it, we are offenders against the Law of Perfection. As for example, Mar. 12.13. our Saviour commands us to love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our mind, and with all our strength; that is, that we should always love him as much as we can; but it is as much in our power to love him still more when we love much, as when we love him little; and so we are equally bound still to love him as much as we can, when we have ten degrees of power, as we were when we had but one. So that by this command we are ob∣liged always to love God as much as we are able, and thereby to be always augmenting our ability to love him, and as our ability increases, to be al∣ways loving him more and more for ever. Now the Penalty by which this Law obliges us is not eternal damnation, (and God forbid it should, for then I doubt no flesh would be saved) but only
the deprivation of some degrees of future happiness, which is no more than what is the natural conse∣quence of all defects of goodness: for so essential is goodness to our future happiness, that proportiona∣bly as we fall short of the one we must necessari∣ly be defective of the other; and accordingly the Scripture tells us, that proportionably to our non-improvements in this life God will substract from our reward in the life to come. For he that sow∣eth sparingly, saith the Apostle, shall reap sparingly, and he that soweth abundantly shall reap abundantly, 2 Cor. 9.6. And our Saviour by a Parable doth expresly teach us that our future reward shall be apportioned to the degrees of our present improve∣ments, Luk. 19. where he represents himself as a Master coming to take account of his Servants, among whom he had intrusted a stock of ten pounds, delivering to every one an equal share. The first by an extraordinary diligence had improv'd his Pound into ten, and he is rewarded according∣ly with the Government of ten Cities, ver. 16, 17. the other had been faithful, though not altoge∣ther so diligent, and by his one pound had gain∣ed five, and accordingly he is made Lord of five Cities, ver. 18, 19. By which he plainly declares, that by so much as we fall short of those improve∣ments we might have made in Piety and Vertue, so much he will substract from our furure reward. So that the sense of the Law of perfection is this, as you would not incur the forfeiture of some de∣grees of your happiness in the other life, be sure you imploy your utmost diligence in this to improve your selves in every grace and vertue of Religion.
II. There is the Law of sincerity, which re∣quires the being and Reality of all Christian Graces and vertues in us, together with the proper Acts and Exercises of them, as we have opportunity, and doth no farther forbid those gradual defects of them which are within our possibility to supply, than as they are the effects of our gross, continu∣ed, and wilful neglect, and so inconsistent with sincerity. Now the Reality of these Christian Vertues in us consists in the universal and pre∣vailing consent and resolution of our Wills to regu∣late our practice by them, so as not wilfully to ad∣mit of any thing that is contrary to them upon a∣ny occasion or temptation whatsoever, and so long as this resolution continues firm and prevails in our practice, we are just in the eye and judg∣ment of this Law of sincerity, though we do not always exert it to the utmost of our possibility. He therefore who hath so submitted his Will to God as to be throughly resolved, without any re∣serve, to obey him, and not to do any thing that is contrary to his Will, either against knowledge, or through affected ignorance, or inconsidera∣tion, hath in this resolution the real being of all Christian vertues in him; and so long as this holds he stands uncondemned in the judgment of the Law of sincerity. But though this resolution includes in it the being and reality of all Christian vertue, yet doth it not include the utmost possibi∣lity of it; nor doth it at all follow, that because I am sincerely resolved to conduct my life by the Laws of Piety and Vertue, therefore I must be in all respects as Pious and Vertuous as it is possible for me to be, considering my present state and cir∣cumstances.
I may be sincerely resolved, and yet not be always equally diligent and active. I may now be exceeding vigilant and watchful, and what I am now I may always be, if I always exert the utmost of my possibility; yet it may so happen anon, that though I am sincerely resolved still, I may be more remiss, supine, and inadvertent, and in this posture a temptation may surprize me, be∣fore I am aware, and hurry me into an action against which I am firmly resolved: And there is no doubt, but even the best of men might have ben much better than they are, had they always  their possibilities, and applied them∣se  their utmost skill and diligence to the methods and Ministries of improvement. Now though not to exert our utmost power in the a∣voidance of evil, and the improvement of our selves in vertue and goodness, is doubtless a sin, yet it is only a sin against the Law of perfection, the Penalty of which is only deprivation of some de∣gree of our future reward; but so long as we keep up a prevailing resolution in our Wills to govern our  by the Laws of Piety and Vertue, we stand ear in the eye of the Law of sincerity, the Penalty of which is no less than everlasting Exile from the presence of God into the dark and hor∣rible Regions of endless misery and despair; only this proviso it admits, that if after we have sinned against it we reassume our good Resolution, and heartily repent and amend, we shall be released from the obligation to this dreadful Penalty, and be restored to that happy state of grace and favour, from whence we fell by our transgression. So that the great difference between the Law of
Perfection and the Law of Sincerity is this, that the penalty of the later is much more severe: but the duty of the former much more comprehensive. Having thus given this brief account of our Saviours Legislation and Laws, I proceed to the II. Of those Regal Acts which Christ hath performed in his Kingdom once for all, and that is his Mission of the Holy Spirit to subdue Mens minds to the Obedience of his Laws, and to go∣vern them by them. For so the Apostle makes the Mission of the Spirit to succeed the Triumphal progress of our Saviour to his Coronation in Hea∣ven, Eph. 4.8. He ascended up on high, he led capti∣vity captive, he gave gifts unto Men; where by the gifts which he gave, we are to understand the Holy Spirit, and in him all those extraordinary Gifts which he poured out upon his Church on the day of Pentecost, for so Acts 2.33. S. Peter makes the effusion of the Spirit by Christ to be the consequence of his advancement to his uni∣versal Royalty, therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear. Now the end for which he sent his Spirit, was to supply his room when he went from earth, and in his absence to preside as his Vicegerent in his Kingdom below. Since therefore this blessed Spirit acts as our Sa∣viours Agent, whatsoever he doth, that our Sa∣viour doth by him. So that all those operations he performs in order to the subduing us to the obedience of Christ, and to the governing of us when we are subdued, are truly the operations of Christ himself. It is he that conquers and go∣verns
us by his Spirit, our hearts are the Terri∣tories which Christ invades by him, and his in∣spirations are the victorious Arms by which Christ conquers and subdues them. Our Wills are the Thrones on which Christ sits, and rules, and governs by him, and his holy suggestions are the awful powers by which Christ himself commands our obedience. But what it is that this blessed Spirit doth, and hath done in order to the subduing Men to Christs Laws, and govern∣ing them by them hath been already shewn at large: and therefore of this I shall need say no more at present. III. And lastly, therefore, another of those Regal Acts which Christ hath once for all per∣formed in his Heavenly Kingdom is, his erecting in it an external Polity and Government. What this Polity is, and what are the functions of it hath been shewn at large, and it is as well by this external Government, as by the internal Ministry of his Spirit, that Christ now rules his King∣dom; for in all just and lawful things the lawful Governours of his Church do act by his Com∣mission and Authority, as being substituted by him the visible representatives of his Person, and the Executors and Administrators of his Power and Dominion. Whilst therefore they act with∣in the compass of their Commission, they act in his stead, and as his Vicegerents; and whatsoever they bind he binds, and whatsoever they loose he looses; their Commands are his, their Decrees and Sentences are his, and all their authoritative Acts carry with them the same force and obliga∣gation as if they had been performed by him in
his own person. For it is he that wills, and speaks, and acts by them, because they Will, and Speak, and Act by his Authority. For so he himself de∣clares to them, Luke 10.16. He that heareth you hear∣eth me, i. e. because I speak by you, and he that despiseth you despiseth me, and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me; because my Authority is in you even as my Fathers is in me; and there∣fore he who despises mine in you, despises my Fathers in me, whence mine in you is derived. Your Authority is mine, and mine is my Fathers, and therefore he who rejects yours doth therein re∣ject both my Fathers and mine. And this autho∣rity is given them by Christ for the same end that his Authority was given him by the Father; for he came into the World to seek and to save lost souls, Luk. 19.10. He came not to judge the world, but to save the world, Joh. 12.47. And to call sinners to repentance, Mar. 2.17. And upon the very same errand he sent all those whom he ap∣pointed to propagate and govern his Kingdom in his absence; for he set them up as so many Lights to the benighted World, to reduce Men from those dangerous paths in which they were wandering to eternal misery, and shew them the way to everlasting happiness: and all the power he devolved upon them was for edification, and not for destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10. and to them he hath committed the care and charge of Souls, whose blood he will one day require at their hands, if they miscarry through their neglect or default, Heb. 13.17. and that he might the bet∣ter secure these precious beings for whom he shed his blood from miscarrying for ever, he placed
this spiritual Polity in a subordination of Officers, and made the inferior accountable for their charge to the superior Officers, as well as both accountable to himself. So that whereas had he placed it in co-ordinate hands there had been only one soul accountable to him for each particular Cure or Charge of Souls, because then each single Pastor would have been supreme in his particular Cure, and consequently no other Pa∣stor, or Pastors would have been accountable for not calling him to account; now each par∣ticular Cure of Souls is under the charge and in∣spection of several orders and degrees of Pastors; who in their several stations are all accountable for it to the Tribunal of Christ. For first the inferior Pastor, who hath the immediate Charge of it, and is obliged by his Office to teach and instruct it by good Example and Doctrine, and to administer to it the holy Ordinances of Chri∣stianity, stands accountable to Christ for every soul in it that miscarries through his neglect or omission; next, the Bishop stands accountable for not correcting the neglects and misdemeanours of the inferior Pastor, and then the Metropolitan for not taking Cognizance of the default of the Bishop. Thus in that excellent form of Government which Christ hath established in his Kingdom he hath made all possible provision for the safety and welfare of Souls; for according to this Oeco∣nomy he hath taken no less than a threefold secu∣rity, every one of which is as much as a Soul amounts to, that every Soul within every Cure shall be plentifully supplied with the means of Sal∣vation, that so none of them might miscarry,
but such as are incorrigibly obstinate. So that now if any Soul within the Dominions of our Saviour perish for want of the means of Sal∣vation, there are no less than three Souls one after another besides it self, accountable to him for its ruin. Having thus shewn what these Regal Acts are which Christ hath once for all performed in his Kingdom, I proceed II. To declare what those Regal Acts are which he hath always performed, and doth al∣ways continue to perform: and these are recu∣cible to four particulars: First, His pardoning penitent sinners. Secondly, His punishing obstinate Offenders. Thirdly, His protecting and defending his faith∣ful Subjects in this life. Fourthly, his blessing and rewarding them in the life to come. I. One of the Regal Acts which our Saviour always hath, and always continues to perform, is his pardoning and forgiving penitent sinners, which being one of the Articles of our Creed, I shall endeavour to give an account of it more at large; the Apostle defines sin to be a transgressi∣on of the Law, 1 Joh. 3.4. Now the Law ob∣liges us under a certain stated Penalty to do and forbear what it commands and forbids; whenever therefore we transgress the Law, we are thereby obliged to undergo the Penalty it denounces; and this is that which we call the guilt of sin, viz. its obligation to punishment, and it is this guilt which pardon and forgiveness relates to. For to pardon is nothing else but only to release the sinner from the obligation he lies under to suffer
the penalty of the Law. Now the penalty of the Law of God for every known and wilful sin is no less than everlasting perdition; and therefore from this it is that we are released by that pardon and indemnity which the Gospel proposes. So that the pardon or remission of sins, whereof we are now treating, consists in the loosing of sinful men from that obligation to eternal punishment, whereunto they have rendered themselves liable by their wilful disobedience to the Law of God. Since therefore this pardon consists in the release of offenders from the penal Obligation of the Law it must be a Regal Act; because the Obli∣gation of the Law can be dispenced with by no other Authority but that which made it; and therefore since to make the Obligation of the Law is an Act of Regal Authority, to release or dispence with it must necessarily be so also; and accordingly forgiveness of sin is in Scripture at∣tributed to our Saviour as one of his Regal Rights, Acts 5.51. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour for to give re∣pentance to Israel and forgiveness of sin. So that now it is by Christ immediately that our sins are pardoned, and our Souls released from those Ob∣ligations to eternal punishment in which they have involved us: for the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.22. So that now it is by him immediately that the Father judgeth us, i. e. absolves and condemns us; for so Col. 3.13. the Apostle exhorts them to forbear and forgive one another even as Christ forgave them: and Col. 2.13. Christ is said to have forgiven them all trespasses. It is true, for∣giveness
of sin is in Scripture frequently attribu∣ted to the Father as well as to the Son: So 1 Iohn 1.9. If we confess our sins he (i. e. the Father) is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; and Eph. 4.32. Forgiving one another even as God for Christs sake hath forgiven you. From whence it is plain that forgiveness of sin appertains to God as well as Christ, and that both have their appro∣priate shares in it; and therefore since it is im∣possible that the same individual action should proceed from two distinct Agents; in this Act of forgiveness the Father must do something which the Son doth not, and the Son must do some∣thing which the Father doth not. They must both of them act an appropriate part in it, and each have a distinct agency from each other. For the fuller explication therefore of this Ar∣ticle I shall endeavour to shew, first, what it is which the Father doth in forgiving sins, and se∣condly, what the Son doth. I. What is it that the Father doth in this Act of forgiveness of sin? To which in short I an∣swer, That the Fathers part herein is to make a general grant of pardon to offenders, upon such a consideration as he shall think meet to accept, and with such a limitation and restriction he shall think fit to make; which general Grant is no∣thing else but those glad tidings of the Gospel, which he proclaimed to the World by Jesus Christ; viz. that in consideration of Christs Death and Sacrifice he would freely forgive all penitent and believing sinners their personal obligation to eternal punishment, and receive
them into grace and favour. So that in for∣giving our sins there are these three things pecu∣liar to God the Father: First, His making a ge∣neral Grant of Pardon to us. Secondly, His ma∣king it in consideration of Christs Death and Sa∣crifice. Thirdly, His making it with those re∣strictions and limitations of Faith and Repen∣tance. First, One thing peculiar to God the Father in forgiving sins is his making a general Grant of pardon and forgiveness to sinners. For the Law against which all men had sinned, and by which they were obliged to eternal punishment, was strictly and properly the Law of God the Father, who being the first and supreme person in the Godhead, was consequently always the first and supreme in the divine Dominion. Now the divine Dominion consisting (even as all other Domini∣ons do) of a Legislative and executive power, the Father must be supreme in both, and conse∣quently the Laws of the divine Dominion must be more especially and peculiarly his. And hence it is called, The Will of the Father, Mat. 7.21. so in the Lords Prayer the Divine Law is in a peculiar manner stiled the Will of God the Fa∣ther: Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Hea∣ven; Matth. 12.50. our Saviour stiles it, the Will of his Father which is in Heaven; and elsewhere the Commandment of his Father, vid. Ioh. 12.5. Mat. 15.3.6. Mar. 7.8, 9. by all which it is evi∣dent that the Divine Law against which we have all offended, and by which we are obliged to punishment is appropriately and peculiarly the Will and Commandment of God the Father; and it
being so, the right of exacting or remitting the punishment of this Law must be peculiarly and appropriately inherent in him. For the penalty of the Law is due to him whose Law it is, and it is he alone can loose us from it who bound it upon us; so that it was the Fathers peculiar, as to give the Law, so to indemnifie offenders from the Pe∣nalty of it; and accordingly we find that publick Grant of pardon, which through Jesus Christ is made to sinners, is in Scripture every were attri∣buted to the Father; so we are told that it is God who for Christs sake hath forgiven us, Eph. 4.32. and that it is God who hath set forth Christ to be a Pro∣pitiation though faith in his bloud to declare his Righ∣teousness for the remission of sins that are past, that he might be just, and the justifier of them that believe in Iesus, Rom. 2.25, 26. that it was God who was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not impu∣ting their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. And in a word, that it is God who is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighte∣ousness, 1 John 1.9. where his being faithful and just, plainly refers to some publick Grant and Pro∣mise by which he hath obliged himself to penitent offenders. And indeed the whole new Covenant, in which this publick Grant of remission of sins is contained (vid. Heb. 8.12.) is the act and deed of God the Father; It was he that in consideration of Christs Death and Sacrifice granted this grand Charter of mercy to the World; for seeing it was to the Father that that Sacrifice was offered, in consideration of which the new Covenant was granted (vid. Eph. 4.2. compared with Col. 1.20.) the grant of it must necessarily be from the Fa∣ther.
And as it was the Father that made this publick grant of Remission to sinners; so II. It was he that made it in consideration of Christs Death and Sacrifice, for so Christ himself tells us, that it was by commandment which he re∣ceived from his Father that he laid down his life, Iohn 10.17, 18. and when he was going to offer up himself upon the Cross he tells his Disciples, As the Father gave me Commandment even so do I, arise let us go hence, i. e. to execute that Com∣mand which the Father hath given me, to lay down my life for the sheep, Ioh. 10.15. from whence it is evident, that it was the Father who exacted the Death and Sacrifice of Christ in consideration of that publick Grant of forgive∣ness which he made to the World; for it was through his blood that we have redemption, the forgive∣ness of sins, according to the Riches of his (i. e. the Fathers) grace, Eph. 1.7. and that blood of his was an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour, Eph. 5.2. So that it was God the Father that did both exact and accept the sacrifice of Christ▪ which as I have shewed at large Sect. 4. was in consideration of his pardoning and forgi∣ving Sinners. III. And lastly, It was God the Father also that made this Grant of forgiveness to us with these restrictions and limitations of our believing and re∣penting For as the promises of the Covenant were his, in which remission of sin is proposed to us, so must the conditions of it be also, by which it is limited and restrained. Because it can belong to none but the giver to limit and conditionate his own Gifts and Grants: Now the Conditions of
our forgiveness are faith and repentance, o ather the condition of it is such a Faith, such a lively and active belief in Jesus Christ as doth beget in us sincere repentance and renovation of life; for so S. Paul tells us again and again, that it is by faith that we are justified or pardoned, Rom. 3.28. c. 5. v. 1. Gal. 2.16▪ Chap. 3.24. Where by faith its e∣vident he doth not mean any one single act of Faith, of what kind or denomination soever, but faith as it is the pregnant Root and active principle of repentance and newness of life. For it is grant∣ed on all hands, that that faith which acquits and justifies us before God must be lively and opera∣tive; and indeed unless it be so, it is not distin∣guishable from persumption, which is only the Car∣cass or lifeless image and Portraiture of Faith. So that if this be Justifying, it is all one whether you call it justifying faith or justifying presumpti∣on; and he that can lay hold on the Righteous∣ness of Christ, though it be with prophane and sacrilegious hands, will be as certainly justified as the most humble and penitent soul. At which rate a man may rest upon Christ without coming to him, and lay hold upon him at the greatest di∣stance from him; he may lean upon his merits in open defiance to his Laws, and embrace and cru∣cifie him together. It being granted therefore, that that Faith which justifies us must be lively and operative; it is from hence most evident that the condition of our Justification is no one single act of Faith, but comprehends in it all that Re∣pentance and new Obedience which is the effect of the life and operation of Faith. For if to make it the condition of our Justification, it be ne∣cessary
that our faith should work by Love and be operative and obediential; then that it should be lively and operative is as necessary to our justifi∣cation as that it should be faith; for where only an accident or mode of a thing is made a conditi∣tion with the thing, it is equally a condition with the thing it self. As for instance, if I promise one such a reward upon condition he presents me with such a Book, so bound and of such an Edition, it is equally a condition and as much in∣fluential on the mans right to my promise, that it should be so bound and of such an Edition, as that it should be the Book for which I conditioned. And so in any other instance you can bring, ei∣ther in fact or fiction, and the same reason holds good, whether we take Faith for a condition or an instrument (as some improperly enough call it) for if to be lively and operative is a necessary qua∣lification to make Faith an instrument of our justification, then its liveliness and operation is in∣strumental too: For that mode of a thing which makes it instrumental is as really instrumental as the thing it self. As for instance, a Knife is an instrument of cutting, but it is its sharpness that makes it to be so, and therefore 'tis as instrumen∣tal to cutting that it should be sharp, as that it should be a Knife. And indeed whether we con∣sider either the form or matter of our justification and pardon, it will evidently appear that that faith which justifies us must be such as includes in it Re∣pentance and New Obedience. For as for the form of Justification it is a juridical act founded upon a legal process, in which there is always a Iudge, a Criminal and a Law, and here the Judge is God,
the Criminal, man, the Law, the law of sincerity, or those affirmative and negative commands of the Christian Religion that are established with the threats of eternal condemnation; for so Iames 2.12. the Apostle tells us, that we must be judged by the Law of liberty, i. e. the moral Law, as it is expounded and perfected by our Saviour: for so ver. 8. If ye fulfil the Royal law▪ Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self, ye do well. So that that Law of liberty by which we must be judged s this Royal Law, and this Royal Law is the moral Law which requires us to love our Neighbour as our selves; now this moral Law is to be considered under a twofold notion, as it is a Law of works, and as it is a Law of grace. As it is a law of works, it exacts perfect and unsinning obedience, and neither promi∣ses Grace to inable us to keep it, nor admits repen∣tance, when we have broken it. As it is a Law of grace it exacts only sincere obedience, and both promises grace to inable us thereunto and admits repentance, in case of wilful disobedience. Now considering it under the first notion, it is the same with the law of Nature, and as such, it obliges all men that are in the state of Nature or without the Pale of Chri∣stianity, who have neither promise of grace to in∣able them to obey, nor yet of pardon upon Re∣pentance after they have once disobeyed it. In which forlorn condition they remain till such time as they embrace Christianity and are by Ba∣ptism admitted into the Kingdom of Christ, and from thenceforth the obligation of it, as it is a law of works ceaseth and it obliges them only as it is a Law of Grace, i. e. as it is a Law which ex∣acts of them only sincere obedience, and promises
both to assist them to obey, and upon their repen∣tance to pardon their disobedience, so that consi∣dering the moral Law, as it is a law of works, it neither justifies nor accounts just any but the per∣fectly innocent, nor yet indulges pardon to any that have offended upon any condition whatso∣ever; and therefore the Infidel World who alone are under the obligation of it, are said to be strangers from the Covenants of Promise having no hope, i. e. no hope founded upon Promise, none but what an absolute and unpromised mercy affords them, Eph. 2.12. And then if we consider it, as it is a law of grace, it justifies or accounts just none but the sincerely obedient, and indulges par∣don to no offenders whatsoever, but such as are sincerely penitent; so that we Christians who alone are under the obligation of it can neither be justi∣fied by it but upon our sincere obedience, nor when we fail of that be pardoned by it, but upon our un∣feigned repentance. Since therefore it is by the mo∣ral law, considered as a Law of Grace, that God doth judge us, he can acquit us by it upon no other terms but only our performing of what it requires, i. e. our hearty repentance for our past sins and sin∣cere obedience for the future. For seeing it requires this of us under the penalty of eternal condemna∣tion, we are obliged by it to this penalty, till we have performed what it requires, and to be at the same time acquitted by a law and obliged to the Penalty of it is a contradiction; did this law of grace require of us nothing but faith, and threa∣ten condemnation for nothing but infidelity, then indeed our bare believing in Jesus were sufficient to discharge us from our obligation to its penalty;
but since it also requires of us repentance and sin∣cere obedience under the same Penalty that it re∣quires faith, our faith cannot be sufficient to dis∣charge us from its penalty, unless it be such as in∣cludes in it repentance and sincere obedience. In short, the law of grace condemns us as well for impiety, injustice and uncharitableness, as for infideli∣ty; and therefore we cannot be acquitted by it upon forsaking our infidelity, unless we also for∣sake our impiety, &c. and while we continue in any one wilful sin for which it condemns, it is im∣possible that at the same time we should be ac∣quitted and pardoned by it; so that unless our faith be such as doth include in it a renuntiation of all wilful sin, or which is the same thing, re∣pentance and sincere obedience, we cannot be ac∣quitted upon it by the Law of Grace. And then if we consider the matter of our Pardon and Remission, which is nothing but a releasing us from our obligation to punishment, it will from thence also appear, that that faith upon which we obtain our pardon must be such as works in us sincere repentance and obedience. For the punishment to which we are obliged by the Law of grace, consists in the loss of Heaven, as well as in the positive Torments of Hell; and therefore our pardon must include a release from both: but to be released from our obligation of losing Heaven is the same thing as to have a right of enjoying it confer'd upon us: so that the Faith upon which we are pardoned and forgiven is the Faith upon which we are intitled to Heaven as all agree, in∣cludes in it repentance and sincere obedience. For these two things are of undoubted certainty,
that every man shall go to Heaven that dies in∣titled to it, and that no man shall go to Heaven that dieth in impenitence and wilful disobedience. For it is our keeping the Commandments of God that gives us a right to the Tree of life, Rev. 22.14. And our keeping Gods Commandments is that Holi∣ness without which no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. And accordingly in Scripture the Remission of our sins is attributed to our repentance and obe∣dience as well as to our faith: so Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore and be converted that your sins may be blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. And in Eph. 1.7. If ye walk in the light as he is in the light you have com∣munion with him, and the blood of Christ cleanseth you from all sin. So also Acts 10.34, 35. God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fearth him and worketh righteousness is accepted of him. From whence it is evident, that when the Scripture makes mention of faith only in the mat∣ter of our Justification, it is to be understood of faith in the greatest latitude, as comprehending Repentance and sincere obedience, for how can we be justified by faith only and yet be justified by obedience too, unless our obedience be included in our faith: and indeed the Scripture plainly declares that faith it self is not at all available with God, unless it be accompanied with sincere obedience. So Gal. 5.6. In Christ Iesus neither Circumcision availeth, nor Uncircumcision, but faith whick work∣eth by Love, and what he means by faith work∣ing by love, he tells us, Gal. 6.16. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but the new Creature, and what he means by the new Creature,
he also tells us, 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but keeping the Com∣mandments of God: so that the only thing which avails us with God is faith working by love. Faith working by Love is the new Creature, the new Creature is keeping the Commandments of God; and in Iames 2.26. we are told, that as the body with∣out the spirit is dead, so faith also is dead without works, that is, it is altogether ineffectual. For so if you compare the 14. and 17. Verses of this Chapter, you will find that those two phrases, faith cannot save, and faith is dead, do both signi∣fie the same thing. Since therefore faith it self without obedience is unavailable, when the Scri∣pture makes mention of our being justified by faith, it must necessarily be understood of faith, comprehending Obedience. And thus you see what God the Fathers part is in remitting our sins, viz. that it consists in grant∣ing to us an universal act of pardon, and Indem∣nity in consideration of our Saviours Sacrifice, and upon Condition of our sincere Repentance and future obedience. And this is the ground-work and foundation of all remission of sins; without which our Saviour himself hath no right to pardon and forgive us; for since the Law against which we have all sinned was peculiarly from God the Father, as he is the fountain of Divinity, and con∣sequently the head of the divine Dominion, it was he peculiarly that was the party offended, and consequently it was he to whom our obligation to punishment was due, and by whom alone it can be released and remitted; and as the grant of Re∣mission was wholly in his will and pleasure; so
was it also to accept the consideration and appoint the Conditions of it. So that now as none can be pardoned but upon his Grant, so neither can his grant be available to any, but upon that conside∣ration which he hath accepted, viz. the precious sacrifice of his own Son, and upon such conditions as he hath appointed, viz. faith working in us sincere repentance and obedience; and accordingly our Saviour, in all that he doth in the part he acts in forgiving sins, proceeds upon, and accord∣ing to this Grant of his Father: for 'tis in the right and upon the consideration and condition of this Grant that he forgives us, nor can he forgive a∣ny by any other right than that which it gives him, or upon any other consideration than that which it hath admitted, or upon any other condition than that which it hath specified and determined. And this brings me to the second Head I proposed, which was to shew what it is that the Son doth in forgiving Sins. In short therefore, the part which our Saviour bears in it, consider'd as King under God the Fa∣ther, is to make an actual and particular application of this general Grant of his Father to particular Sinners upon their faith and repentance. For the Fathers grant is only a general promise that we shall be pardoned for Christs sake, whenever we sin∣cerely believe and repent; but the actual pardoning us consists in the application of this general Pro∣mise to us in particular, by which the general pro∣mise of pardon is converted into a particular sen∣tence of pardon. For the promise says thus, Who∣soever believes and repents shall be pardoned; the particular application of the Promise says thus,
Thou doest believe and repent, and therefore by vertue of that Promise I pardon and forgive thee. And this is the proper part of our blessed Saviour, who having first obtained this Promise of his Fa∣ther by his sacrifice upon Earth, and then still con∣tinuing to obtain of him by his continual intercessi∣on in Heaven, Royal Authority to dispense that Pro∣mise to us, doth by vertue of that Authority actually pardon us upon our actual repentance. So that as soon as ever we perform the condition of Gods grant of pardon, our Saviour (who knows the inmost thoughts of our hearts and perfectly di∣scerns our sincerity) immediately pronounces our sentence of pardon, and by a particular applicati∣on of that general grant to us, absolves us from our obligation to eternal punishment, and freely receives us into Grace and Favour. For though the completion and publication of our pardon is re∣served for the day of judgment, when we shall be absolved from all punishment, (i. e. not only of eternal misery, but also of corporal death and temporal sufferings) in the publick view and au∣dience of the World; yet it is certain that every penitent Believer in Jesus is actually pardoned by him in Heaven, as soon as ever he believes and re∣pents; that is, he is, in foro Christi and before the Tribunal of his Royal Judgment Absolved from the obligation to suffer eternal misery which he lay under during his state of impenitence; and Christ in his own mind, judgment and estimati∣on hath, Judicially thus pronounced concerning him, By vertue of my Fathers grant to all penitent offenders and of that Royal Authority which he hath committed to me, I freely release thee from all that
vast debt of everlasting punishment which thou hast too justly incurr'd by sinning against him. Thus as the Father forgives us vertually by that publick grant of mercy which for Christs sake he hath made to all penitent offenders; so the Son for∣gives us actually by that Royal Authority which the Father hath given him to make a particular ap∣plication of that his general grant to us upon our actual repentance; and as it is by the Fathers grant that the Son pardons us, so it is by the Sons appli∣cation of it that the Father pardons us; and there∣fore we are said in or by Christ to have redemption through his blood even the forgiveness of sin, Col. 1.14. i. e. to be forgiven for the sake of his blood, in consideration whereof God the Father hath given him power to forgive us; for so he himself tells us, that all power in Heaven and Earth was gi∣ven him, Matth. 28.18. and there is no doubt but in all power, the power of forgiving sins was included; for so S. Peter tells us, that through his Name, i. e. by his Authority or judicial sentence, Whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins, Acts 10.43. And thus you see what the first Regal act is, which our Saviour hath always performed and will always continue to perform, viz. forgiving of sins. II. Another of his Regal acts of this kind is, punishing obstinate offenders: For as he mediates for his Father in ruling and governing us, he must be the Minister of his Fathers providence, and being so, whatsoever divine punishments are inflict∣ed upon offenders, are to be look'd upon as the stroaks of his hand and the Ministries of his power,
for he hath the Keys of Death and Hell, i. e. the power of punishing both here and hereafter, Rev. 1.18. and accordingly he threatens the corrupt Churches of Asia, that he would remove their Can∣dlestick, and that he would fight against them with the sword of his mouth, that he would come upon them as a Thief, and that he would spew them out of his mouth, Rev. 2.5.3.16. and Chap. 3. Vers. 16. all which is a sufficient proof that the punishment of offenders both here and hereafter is committed to him as a branch of that Royal Authority with which he is invested by the Father; in the execu∣tion of which Commission he many times Cha∣stens bad men in this life in order to their refor∣mation and amendment; for as many as I love saith he, (i. e. wish well to) I rebuke and chasten, Heb. 3.19. and many times he persecutes them with exterminating judgments, thereby hanging them up in Chains, as it were, as publick examples of his vengeance, to warn and deter the World from treading in their impious footsteps. For so he threatens Iezebel and her followers; I gave her space to repent of her fornications and she repented not; behold, I will cast her into a bed, i. e. into a Bed-rid and irrevocable condition and them that commit A∣dultery with her into great tribulation, and I will kill her Children with death, and all the Church shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and heart, and I will give unto every one of you according to your works, Rev. 2.21, 22, 23. And though for wise and gracious ends he oftentimes spares bad men in this life, and sometimes shines upon them a continued day of prosperity, without any cloud or interruption; yet he always overtakes them
with the fearful storms of his vengeance in the life to come. For no sooner do their souls depart from their bodies, but they are immediately con∣signed by his warrant into the hands of evil An∣gels▪ those skilful spiteful, and powerful executio∣ners of his justice, under whose savage Tyranny they indure all the tortures and Agonies that the wrath and power of Devils, together with their own awakened consciences and furious and unsa∣tisfied affections are able to inflict. Of which see Part 1. Ch. 3. For that the souls of bad men are transmitted into a state of wretchedness and mi∣sery immediately upon their separation from their bodies is evident from the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, wherein in the first place Dives immedi∣ately after his death is said to be in great torment in Hell, and this while his body lay buried in the grave, Luk▪ 16.22, 23. which is a plain argument that in all that interval between death and the re∣surrection of the body, the souls of bad men abide in a state of torment; for secondly, this torment of Dives's soul in hell was then when his Brethren were living upon earth and under the teaching of Moses and the Prophets ver. 27. and 28, 29, 30, 31. which shews that our Saviour supposes it to be at that very time when he delivered this Para∣ble, and consequently he supposes all bad men who were then dead and whose condition he re∣presents by that of Dives to be then in Hell, and there suffering unspeakable Agonies and Torments: and if so, then it's plain, that when ever impenitent souls leave their bodies they are carried by Devils into some dismal abode and there kept under a perpetual discipline of torment; and in this de∣plorable
state they remain expecting that fearful day of accounts, when their condition, through their reunion to their bodies and that dread bodily Torment, they must then be condemned to, will be rendered yet far more intolerable. III. Another of those Regal Acts which our Saviour hath always, and always will continue to perform, is his protecting and defending his King∣dom in this World. For thus he promises his faithful Church of Philadelphia, Because thou hast kept the word of my Patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the World to try them that dwell upon the Earth, Rev. 3.10. By which it is plain, that the power of protecting and defending his Subjects is inherent in Christ as an essential part of his Regal Authority; and this power he continually exercises now he is is heaven; for it was for this end among others that he promises to be with his Church to the end of the World, Mat. 28.20. namely to guard and defend it by his Providence against the outragious attempts of its numerous enemies. For it is for this end that the Father hath put all things in subje∣ction under him, and that he hath left nothing that is not put under him, Heb. 2.7, 8. that so having the Universal Government of all things in his hand he might by his over-ruling Providence ren∣der them all subservient to the interest of his Church. For so Eph. 1.21. we are assured that the Father hath put all things under his feet, and given him to be head over all things to his Church, i. e. hath vested him with an universal power over all things, that so he might order and direct them all to the interest and advantage of his Church. And ac∣cordingly
now he is in heaven, the defence and preservation of his Church is the great business which he intends upon earth: there he now sits looking down from his Throne with a watchful eye to observe all the motions, and trace out all the dark designs of her enemies, and from thence he stretches forth his Almighty hand to guard and defend her against them, to repel or over-rule their malice, to drive back their venemous Darts upon themselves, or to temper their Poyson into Physick, and extract a healing Balm out of the Stings of those Scorpions. In which how careful and diligent he hath been is abundantly manifest from the glorious success: for considering the vast opposition that hath been made against it even from its infancy, how is it possible it could ever have subsisted had it not been guarded by an in∣visible hand? No sooner did this light upon a Hill appear in the World but all the four Winds im∣mediately conspired to blow it out, yet, (which is miraculous to consider,) still the harder they blew the brighter it flamed; and though for the first 300 years it was the main and almost con∣stant exercise of the Power and Policy, the Wit and Cruelty both of Devils and Men to suppress and ruine it, yet still it thrived and encreased un∣der the most powerful means of its extirpation. It conquered by suffering, gathered strength by bleed∣ing, and, like a head-strong Floud, still the more it was checked the more it swelled and over-flowed, till at length it filled the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea. Which, if well considered, is an amazing instance of the vigilant and powerful Providence of our Saviour, which hath not only preserved
this burning Bush from consuming, but made it spring and flourish in the flames. And though since those Primitive Persecutions he hath many times for wise and gracious ends let loose the Wolves upon his Flock, and permitted them to worry, and sometimes almost to devour it, yet still he hath kept a strict and steady Reign upon their Power and Malice, and when they have served his ends, hath check'd and stop'd them in their savage career, and when they have thought the trembling Prey their own, hath stretched out his own Almighty Arm, and snatched it from their devouring jaws. So that while they are clubbing all their Power and Policy against it, he that sits in the Heavens laughs them to scorn, the Lord hath them in derision, and doth contemn their impotent malice, which he can manage as he pleases; he can either prevent the mischievous effects of it, or cause them to recoile upon them∣selves, or make those very persecutions, with which they design to destroy his Church, the means of its enlargement and propagation; and what in his own infallible Wisdom he thinks best, that he hath always done, and will always do for his Church and People: For many a time have they afflicted me from my youth may Israel, or the Church of Christ, now say, many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet have they not prevailed against me, the Plowers have plowed upon my back, they have made long furrows, but the Lord is righteous, he hath cut asunder the Cords of the wicked, and in his own due time will confound and turn back those that hate Sion.
And as he exerciseth a most vigilant Provi∣dence over his Church in general, so doth he also over all the faithful and obedient Subjects of it, whose interest is as dear and precious to him as his own bloud; for they are not only the purchase of his bloud, but also the Trophies and Conquests of his Spirit, which makes them his by a double Pro∣priety, and more peculiarly entitles them to his care and protection; they are living Members of his own Body, and as such he feels their pains by a most tender sympathy, and therefore his Provi∣dence is as much concerned for their defence, as his Eye-lid is to defend the Apple of his own Eye, Zech. 2.8. and therefore though he exercises a merciful Providence over all men, yet these he incloses out of the Common of the World, and fen∣ces about with a peculiar care. These are his Iew∣els, and he keeps them in his Treasury under the strongest and most inviolable security. He is al∣ways watching over them for good, and it is his peculiar and continual concern to protect and de∣fend them, to keep off Temptation from their Souls, and Calamities from their Bodies, and so to over-rule and direct the course of things, as that whatever befals them may concenter in their happiness. For though he many times corrects them with his own hand, and permits them to be oppressed and afflicted by others, yet still he doth it with a most gracious intention, either to cure or prevent some disease in their minds, or to ex∣cite and exercise their graces, or to wean them from the love of this vain World, and discipline them for a blessed Eternity; and whatsoever evils happen to them in the course of his Providence,
still he takes care to extract good out of them, and so to contrive and order the whole Scene of Affairs, as that in the issue all things may still work together for good to them that love God, and are called according to his purpose, Rom. 8.28. IV. And lastly, Another of those Regal Acts which our Saviour hath always, and doth always continue to perform, in his blessing and rewarding all his faithful Subjects in the Life to come; for this, as he himself declares, he hath power to do, so Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, i. e. I will admit him in a parti∣cipation of the blessed immortality of Heaven; so also Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I have overcome, and am sate down with my Father on his Throne; And he promises the Bishop of the Church of Smyrna in particular, Be thou faith∣ful to the death, and I will give thee a crown of life, Rev. 2.10. In all which places he expresly declares his Royal Authority to reward his faith∣ful Subjects, when they leave this World with the joys and felicities of the World to come; and this Authority he is continually exercising in his heavenly Kingdom. For when ever any faith∣ful and obedient Souls depart from their bodies, he presently sends forth his Angelick Messengers to conduct them safe to the immortal Regions, and there to lodge them in some one of those blissful Mansions in his Fathers House which he went before to prepare for them; where free from all the disturbances of flesh and blood, and
of a vexatious and tumultuous World, they live in continued ease, content, and joy, wrapt up with the ever-growing delights of contemplating, loving, and imitating God, and of the most wise and amicable Society and Communication with each other, in the enjoyment of an endless bliss and pleasure; for so we are assured from Scripture that the happiness of the righteous doth com∣mence from the moment of their departure hence. So Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works do follow them; and with St. Paul it was the same thing to depart from hence and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. which necessarily implies, that upon his departure he expected to be immediately with Christ; and elsewhere he teaches, that to be at home in the body was to be absent from the Lord, and to be absent from the body to be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. neither of which can be true if the Souls of good men go not to Heaven im∣mediately when they go from hence: but that they do so is as plain as words can express it, in that promise of our Saviour to the Penitent Thief, Verily verily I say unto thee this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. From whence it evidently follows, that even in the very Article of a true Penitents death, Heavens joys do attend his departing Soul to receive it imme∣diately when it is dislodged from the body. Thus in the very moment of its departure hence the Pious Soul is transported to those blessed abodes be∣yond the Stars, which are the proper seat and pure Element of Happiness, where the blessed in∣habitants
live in a continued fruition of their ut∣most wishes, being every moment entertained with fresh and enravishing Scenes of pleasure, where all their happiness is eternal, and all their eternity nothing else but only one continued Act of Love, and Praise, and Ioy, and Triumph, where there are no sighs or tears, no intermixtures of sorrow or misery, but every heart is full of joy, and every joy is Quintessence, and every happy moment is crowned with some fresh and new enjoyment. But of this blessed state I have given an account at large, Part. 1. Chap. 1. and 3. And this is that blessed reward with which our Saviour crowns his faithful Subjects immediately upon their departure hence; so that he doth not permit them to lie sleeping in the dust unrewarded, till the end of the World, but as soon as they have finished their work upon Earth, admits them to the joy of their Master, to all the felicities that their separated spirits are capable of in those several de∣grees and measures of perfection which they there arrive to; in which happy state they remain du∣ring their separation from the body, expecting the farther completion of their happiness in a glorious Resurrection, by which their Bodies and Souls be∣ing reunited, their whole Humane Nature shall be filled with bliss to the utmost stretch of its Capacity. And now having shewn what those Regal Acts are which Christ hath always performed, and doth always continue to perform, I proceed in the III. And last place, To shew what those Regal Acts are which are yet to be performed by him, before he surrenders up his Kingdom; and these are reducible to three Heads:
First, He is yet farther to extend and enlarge his Kingdom by the Conquest of its enemies. Secondly, He is yet to destroy Death, the last Enemy, by giving a general Resurrection. Thirdly, He is yet to judge the World. I. He is yet farther to extend and enlarge his Kingdom by a more universal conquest of its Enemies. For if we consult the ancient Prophe∣sies concerning the vast extent of our Saviours Kingdom, we shall find that there are a great ma∣ny of them which as yet were never accomplished. So Psal. 2.8, 9. Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession, thou shalt break them with a Rod of Iron, thou shalt dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel, whereas hitherto it is certain Christ was never possessed of the uttermost parts of the earth; nor did he ever yet break his incorrigible opposers with a Rod of Iron, or dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel; so also Dan. 7.4. it is foretold of Christ, that there should be given him Dominion, and Glory, and Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve him, and that all Dominion should serve and obey him, ibid. ver. 27. so also Dan 2.34, 35 44, 45. that the stone cut out without hands, by which all agree is meant the Kingdom of Christ, should become a great Mountain, and fill the whole earth, and that it should break in pieces, and con∣sume all those other Kingdoms. Thus also it is fore∣told, that the Lord should be King over all the Earth, Mich. 5.4. and that there should be but one Lord, and his name one, Zech. 14.9. and that he should have Dominion from Sea to Sea, and from the Ri∣vr to the  of the Earth, Psal. 72.8. and that
all Kings should fall down before him, and all Na∣tions serve him, ibid. ver. 11. and that all the ends of the earth should remember and turn to the Lord, and all the kindreds of the Nations worship before him, because the Kingdom shall be the Lords, and he shall govern among the Nations. These, and sundry other such like Prophesies there are which as yet it is certain, were never accomplished accor∣ding to the full import and intent of them. Wherefore we may certainly conclude that there is a time yet to come before the consummation of all things, wherein our Saviour will yet once more display the victorious Banner of his Cross, and like a mighty man of War march on conquering and to conquer, till he hath confounded or con∣verted his Enemies, and finally consummated his victories in a glorious Triumph over all the Powers of the Earth. For the Scripture not only foretels this universal conquest of his, but also describes and delineates the whole method and progress of it, which upon laying the Scripture Prophesies to∣gether in their proper Train and Series seems to me to be this, that the opening of this great Scene of Providence will be the conversion of the Iewish Nation, those obstinate and hitherto im∣placable Enemies of our Saviour, whom not∣withstanding they have been a thousand times over conquered, slaughtered, and oppressed, and do to this day continue scattered over the face of the whole Earth, he hath preserved by a strange and unparalleled Providence for above sixteen hundred years together a distinct and separate people from all the Nations of the Earth, to shew his mighty power in them, and once more
render them, what they have always been, the Subjects of his miraculous conduct. For by a won∣derful effusion of his Holy Spirit upon them, such as that was on the day of Pentecost, though far more extensive, Ezek. 39.28, 29. Isa. 32.13, 14, 15. Isa. 59.20, 21. compared with Rom. 11, 26, 27. he will all of a sudden, and in a most surprizing manner, Isa. 66.8. Zach. 3.9. open the eyes of this blinded Nation, and pow∣erfully convince them of the er∣ror and wickedness of their infi∣delity and malice against him, whereupon with one heart and one mind they shall return to the Lord, and with penitent tears wash off the guilt of the blood of their Saviour Zach. 12.10. which like an Heir-loom, hath hitherto descended upon them from one Generation to another, for thus, Rom. 11.25, 26. I would not brethren that ye should be ignorant of this mystery that blindness in part is hapned to Israel, , till when the ful∣ness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, there shall come out of Zion the deliverer, &c. From whence it is plain, that that blindness which then hapned to Israel, and which continues on them to this day, shall one day be removed, viz. about that time when the Conversion of the Gentiles shall be compleat∣ed, and that then all Israel, (and not a small rem∣nant of them as at first) shall be saved, so also, 2 Cor. 3.14, 16. But their minds are blinded, (mean∣ing the People of Israel) for until this day remain∣eth the same vail untaken away in the reading of the Old Testament, nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord the vail shall be taken away; where he
first supposes that Israel that till then was blind∣ed, and that till now remains so, should turn un∣to the Lord, and then asserts, that then the vail of ignorance, which hindered 'em from discerning Christ in the Figures and Prophesies of the Old Testament should be removed from before their eyes. And now the Jews being thus converted by the power of our Saviour shall under his victorious Banners be conducted into the Holy Land, and repossessed of their ancient native Country, Jer. 32, 37, to 41. Ezek. 36.24, 25. Chap. 37.21, 22.25. Amos 9.14, 15. Isa. 11.11, 12. whither they shall be close pursued with mighty Hosts of the Eastern Infidels, and be reduced by them into imminent danger of utter desolation, in which extremity of theirs our blessed Saviour will make bare his Almighty Arm, and in a most miraculous manner confound and scatter those mighty swarms of Infidels, and crown his Israel with Victory and Triumph Joel 3.1, 2.9.14. Mich. 4.11, 12. Isa. 24.21, 22. Zeph. 3.8. Isa. 63.1.6. Isa. 34.1. Isa. 59.16, 17. Zech. 14.13. Hag. 2.22. Zech. 12.2, 3, 4.. The fame of which miraculous events, spreading far and wide, even to the utmost ends of the Earth, shall in a lit∣tle time convince all the Heathen World of the truth of Christianity, and prevail with the Kingdoms of the earth to become the King∣doms of our Lord and of his Christ Isa. 66.16.18, 19, 20. Isa. 60.1.6. Jer. 14.33. Isa. 7.61. Ezek▪ 38.16.21, 22, 23. Rom. 11.12.. And now the Kingdom of Christ in this World being ar∣rived to its full extent and growth, Truth and Peace, Charity and
Justice shall reign and flourish over all the Earth. Now all the World shall be Christen∣dom, and Christendom shall be restored to its ancient Purity. For now he who is to come with the Fan in his hand will throughly purge the Floor of his Church from all that Chaff of Superstition and Idolatry, Schism and Heresie, Irreligion and Immorality with which it is almost totally covered, and the true Faith, the sincere Piety, the generous and unaffe∣cted Vertue which Christianity teaches and pre∣scribes shall be the universal livery and cogni∣sance of the Christian World Psal. 72.7. Isa. 66.12. and Chap. 23.4. Mich▪ 4.3 Jer. 32.39. Zeph 3.8, 9. Ezek. 19.21, 22. Isa. 9.7. and Chap. 2.20. Hab. 2.14.. For much about the time of this Conversion of the Iews, and that glorious Call of the Gentiles thence ensuing, that corrupt and degene∣rate Faction of Christians whom the Scripture calls the mystical Babylon, and the Antichrist, and which for several Ages hath been the great Nuisance of Christendom, will in these Western parts of the World muster up all its Forces to destroy and extirpate the purer Profes∣sors of Christianity by a general persecution Rev. 13.7., in which attempt for some time this Faction will be very prevalent and successful, Dan. 7.21, 22. when all of a sudden the Kings and Princes of the Earth, who have thitherto been partakers with it in its foul Impostures and corruptions (being either awakened by those mira∣culous Conversions of the Jews and Eastern Gen∣tiles, or convinced of their errors by the powerful
impressions of his Spirit in whose hands the hearts of Kings are) will turn their Swords upon this Antichristian Faction, whose Cause they have hi∣therto espoused, and conspire to root it out from off the face of the Earth Rev. 17.16, 17., which being effected, the Western Church will universally reform it self according to the Standard of the Church of Ierusalem, which will then be in a literal sense the Mother of us all Isai 60.1, 2, 3, 4, 5., Thus partly by destroying, and partly by convert∣ing its Enemies, our Saviour will yet mightily enlarge the borders of his Kingdom, and advance it to the utmost pitch of purity and splendour that this state of mortali∣ty will admit, and in this happy state he will preserve and continue it for seve∣ral Ages, Rev. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. till a little before the commencement of the General Iudgment, at which time the De∣vil, who had been hitherto chained up, will be loosed again to work in the Children of disobe∣dience to excite them to delude and deceive the World again, and to persecute the sincere Pro∣fessors of Christianity with inces∣sant cruelties Rev. 20.7, 8, 9▪, when all of a sudden, and while they are secure∣ly triumphing in the success of their Villanies they shall be surprized with the Day of Judgment Rev. 20.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15., which like a Thief in the night shall come upon them, and put an end to all their mischiefs for ever.
II. Another of those Regal Acts which he is yet to perform is to destroy Death, the last Ene∣my, by causing a general Resurrection of the Dead, which being one of the great Articles of our Creed, I shall insist more largely upon it, and endeavour, First, To prove the certainty of the Fact; and Secondly, To explain the manner how it will be performed. I. I shall endeavour to prove the certainty of the Fact, viz. that our Saviour shall raise the dead; which is as plainly and frequently asserted in holy Scripture as any Proposition contained in it; for so 2 Cor. 4.14. we are assured that God will raise us up by Iesus Christ, i. e. by his personal Power and Agency, and accordingly, Iohn 6. 39, 40.44.54. Christ promises us over and over again, that he will raise us up at the last day; and Iohn 11.25▪ he thus declares himself to Martha, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that belie∣veth in me though he were dead yet shall he live; and Iohn 5.28. he tells us, that the hour is com∣ing in which all that are in the Grave should hear his voice. And of the truth of this he hath given a most sure and certain pledge by his own Resurre∣ction, which not only demonstrates the possibility of the thing, that the dead may rise, but also gives ample assurance that they shall. For that he hath in him a power to raise the dead is evi∣dent by his raising himself; and to be sure that Power and Spirit that was in him when he rai∣sed himself, is able to raise all those in whom it resides. Whoever therefore hath the Spirit of Christ, that Spirit by which he rose from the dead,
hath the power of the Resurrection in him, which power to be sure will not be always in vain, but one time or other will most certainly be redu∣ced into Act: For so the Apostle assures us, Rom. 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Ie∣sus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mor∣tal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in us. And indeed considering that Christ in dying and ri∣sing from the dead acted as our Head and Repre∣sentative, we may justly conclude, that as when he laid down his life, he laid it down for ours; so when he took it up again, he took up ours with it; and consequently that he vertually rai∣sed us by the same Spirit whereby he actually raised himself: because he hath not only Power, but also Will, as he is our Head and Representa∣tive, to raise us even as he raised himself. So that we are already risen in our causes since our Head and Representative is risen, and hath the same power to raise us as he had to raise himself; and hence he is called, the first-born from the dead; and we the Sons of the Resurrection, Col. 1.18. because our Resurrection is now in the same causes (that is, in the same Will and Power) as his was before he arose. And therefore also he is called the first fruits of them that rise, that is, the pledge and handsel of the general Resurrecti∣on; because he is risen with the same Will and Power to raise us, that he had when he arose, to raise himself; and hence we find the Apostle ar∣gues from the Resurrection of Christ to the gene∣ral Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.12. Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some
among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? If we are all agreed that Christ is risen, what reason can any man have to doubt of the gene∣ral Resurrection? But if there be no resurrection from the dead, then is Christ not risen, ver. 13. To say that we shall not rise, is by consequence to deny the resurrection of Christ, because that very same will and power which must have been the cause of Christs resurrection; if he be risen, must be the cause of ours, if ever we rise; and therefore if it be insufficient to raise us, it could never have been sufficient to raise him, and con∣sequently he cannot be risen. If it be objected against this reasoning of the Apostle, that our re∣surrection will be far more difficult to accomplish than Christs was, because his body was never cor∣rupted, nor were the parts of it ever dispersed, as ours will be, long before the resurrection; and therefore that cause which was sufficient to raise Christ, may not be sufficient to raise us: It may easily be answered, that to the infinite power by which Christ was raised, all possible things are equally easie; and therefore allowing our resur∣rection to be but possible, it must be every whit as easie to that infinite power by which Christ was raised, to reduce all our scattered atoms into one mass again, and to reorganize them into a humane body and reunite it to its ancient soul, as it was to quicken the yet uncorrupted body of our Saviour. So that all the question is whether the thing be possible, for if it be, it will be every whit as easie to the omnipotent cause of our Saviours resurrection, to raise our bodies as it was to raise his. But, I beseech you, why should it be thought
more impossible for God to raise a dead corrup∣ted body, whose parts are all dispersed and scat∣tered throughout the vast wilderness of matter, and reunite it to its primitive soul, than it was at first to create the matter of it, and then form it into a humane body and animate it with a humane soul? He who at the first cre∣ation could separate the confused mass of matter into so many distinct kinds and spe∣cies of Beings, can doubtless at the gene∣ral resurrection as easily separate the same matter into its distinct and several individuals. For, what should hinder him who numbers the stars of the Heavens, the sands of the Sea and the hairs of our heads, from keeping an exact ac∣count of all our scattered particles, and from knowing what dust belongs to every body, and what body to every soul? Or how can it be diffi∣cult to him, whose power is as immense as his knowledg, to recollect all the parts of this curious piece of Clockwork which he both made and took in sunder, and to restore every pin into its proper place, every spring to its due vigour and activity, and every wheel to its primitive figure and motion? If it be farther objected that there is an impossibility in the nature of the thing, for the same dead body after it is corrupted and its parts all disperst, to be reunited and raised to life again; I answer, that since these dispersed parts of our bodies do not perish, but are safely laid up in the Chambers of Nature, however they are scattered or wherever lodged, they are all with∣in the ken of Gods knowledg and within the reach of his power; and so long as they are so,
why should their separation render it impossible for them to be reunited how and when he pleases? If you say, that in that perpetual course of trans∣mutation which the matter of humane bodies runs, it may happen, and sometimes doubtless it doth, that the same particles at several times are incorporated into several bodies; As for instance, when one man eats either the flesh or that which hath the flesh or substance of another in it, and digests it into a part of his own body and sub∣stance, in which case how is it possible at the re∣surrection that the substance or matter of this part should be reunited to them both? To this I answer, that considering that scarce the hun∣dredth part of what we eat is digested into the substance of our bodies, and that all the rest we render back again into the common mass of matter by sensible or insensible evacuations; though we should suppose one man to have eaten up the whole substance of anothers body, yet he retains but one part of an hundred, and what should hin∣der an omnipotent power from raising the body he hath devoured out of the ninety nine parts which he lets go again? And then considering that in seven years time the whole substance of our body Changes, he must if he live so long evacuate that one part which he retain'd, and so the whole will be at last worn off from the matter and sub∣stance of his body. Nay, suppose this Devourer to feed altogether upon mans flesh, as some affirm the Canibals do, and that in the last seven years before his death, he devours one hundred humane bodies weighing two hundred pound a piece; ac∣cording to this computation the utmost he can
be supposed to digest of the flesh of these hun∣dred bodies into the substance of his own, amounts not to above two pound of each, so that of the two hundred weight of bodily substance whereof these devoured bodies did consist, there will still remain one hundred ninety eight undigest∣ed into the substance of the Devourer; which we may easily conceive is sufficient matter out of which to re-produce the same bodies: For we many times lose as much of our substance in a sweat, and a great deal more in a consumption as these devoured bodies do in their being eaten and digested; notwithstanding which our bodies continue numerically the same; But as for the bodies of these Man-eaters there is no doubt but they carry with them a great deal of other sub∣stance to their graves besides that of mans flesh; for the liquor which they drink with it, and the bread which they eat with it, and the other acci∣dental nourishments which they receive with it, goes into the substance of their bodies as well as that; and these being at least one half of their nourish∣ment, must constitute at least one half of their bodies. What then should hinder but that at the re∣surrection the other half of them which consists of mans flesh may be separated from them and re∣stored to those humane bodies they devoured; and if so, then each of them shall recover its whole substance again, and not want so much as one particle of all that matter whereof they were composed when they were eaten; for it is but just that they should be made to refund those unnatu∣ral spoils which they barbarously ravished from the bodies of other men. But then you will say,
How shall the body of the Cannibal that eat them be raised, when according to this account it be must deprived of one half of the substance it died withal? I answer, that to this remaining half of his bodily substance there may, without any repugnance to its being raised the same body, be added out of the common mass of matter as much new bodily substance as is sufficient to red∣integrate it in all its parts; for the resurrection of the same body, doth not necessarily imply that all the same matter shall be raised, and no other, and no more. For if all shall be raised in the most per∣fect stature and proportion of humane bodies, as there is no doubt but they shall, then Infants and Dwarfs, and such as die of Consumptions must have new matter added to that which they die withal; and therefore the resurrection of the same body can imply no more than this, that every bo∣dy shall be raised out of the same matter, so far as it will go; and therefore if this remaining half of the substance of the Canibals body will not go far enough to redintegrate his whole body at the resurrection, there is no doubt but God will add new substance to it, which will no more hinder it from being the same numerical Body, than the re∣paration of an house with new stones and Timber hinders it from being the same numerical house. For suppose that God by a Miracle should in an instant restore a man to his full Bulk, the sub∣stance of whose body is half pined away by a lin∣gring Consumption, this would not at all hinder but that still it would be the same numerical Body. Why then should the Addition of new bodily sub∣stance to the remaining half of the matter of the
Canibals body at the resurrection, hinder it from being raised numerically the same. And this I conceive is sufficient to clear the do∣ctrine of the general Resurrection from all pre∣tence of Repugnancy and Contradiction. But sup∣pose after all that there should be some rare and singular instances wherein it will be impossible in the nature of the thing for the same numerical Body to be raised again; this would no more impeach the truth of a general resurrection of the same bodies; than Enoch's and Elias's not dying, do the truth of the Maxim of the Author to the He∣brews, It is appointed for all men once to die. If there∣fore in any instance it should be impossible in the nature of the thing for God to raise the same bo∣dy, it will be sufficient to serve the purpose of rewards and punishments, for God to cloath the same soul in a new body. For it is the soul that in∣dividuates the man, and makes him to be the same person though he hath not the same body. We have not the same matter about us when we are ten years old, that we were first cloathed with when we were born, and as he who shall be rewarded or punished ten years hence for a Vertue or a Crime which he acts now will be rewarded or punished in the same body, though not in the same matter; so he who shall be rewarded or punished at the resurrection for the good or evil which he doth in this life, will be rewarded or punished in the same person, though it should not be in the same body. But it being more congruous to the accuracy and exactness of the divine justice that it should be in the same body as well as in the same person, and it being every whit as easie to an infinite power to
restore to our souls the same bodies as to cloath them in new ones (for within the compass of pos∣ssibilities all things are equally within the reach of Omnipotence) mens bodies shall be universally rebuilt at the Resurrection out of those old Ruins and Materials, in which they did good or evil in this life; and if there should happen some par∣ticular instances wherein such a numerical resur∣rection should be in it self impossible, these will be only a few exceptions from that general rule, which rather confirm than destroy it. For thus from Scripture we are assured that they who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, Dan. 12.2. and that all that are in the grave shall hear Christs voice and come forth. John 5.28, 29. that the Sea shall give up the dead which are in it, and that death and Hell, i. e. the grave shall deliver up the dead which are in them, Rev. 20.13. All which expressions according to the literal sense of them (from which without necessary reasons we ought not to depart) do plainly import a resurrection of the same numerical bodies. Our Resurrection therefore being a possible thing, is as easie to an omnipotent Power, as Christ's was, and therefore his re∣surrection is a most certain pledge of ours; since he rose as our common Head and Represen∣tative, and consequently rose with the very same Will and Power to raise us which he had to raise himself. Having thus proved the Truth of the matter of Fact, viz. that Christ will raise us at the last day; I proceed in the next place to the manner of the Fact, how it is that he will raise us. In treating of which, I shall regulate my self by that ac∣count
which the Apostle gives of it, 1 Cor. 1.5. in which he having proved at large the truth of the Resurrection from ver. 12. to the 35th. he comes to answer an Objection concerning the manner of it; but some man will say, how are the dead raised up and with what body do they come? In answer to which he gives a large description of it, and by the similitude of seed, explicates the manner how it shall be performed, till he comes to ver. 42. where he applies the similitude to the matter in hand; so also is the Resurrection of the Dead; and then goes on with a farther enlarge∣ment on it to the end of the Chapter. So that this so also refers both to what went before, and to what follows. So also, i. e. so as I have al∣ready in part described and shall farther explain in my ensuing Discourse; This so therefore refer∣ring to the whole description, implies these five par∣ticulars of which the whole consists. First, So is this mortal body to be the seed and material Principle of our Resurrection. Secondly, So must this Seed die and be corrupted, before it be quickned and revived. Thirdly, So is this dead corrupted body to be raised and quickned by the power of God. Fourthly, So is it to be raised by the Divine Power into the proper and natural form of an humane body. Fifthly, So is this humane body to be changed and altered in its Resurrection. I. So is the Resurrection of the dead, i. e. so is this mortal body to be the seed and material prin∣ciple
of the Resurrection. For this is plainly im∣plied, ver. 36. Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickned except it die. Intimating, that as the Seed is the material cause of the Ear of Corn which afterwards springs up, so are these mortal bodies which we sow in the Earth, at least the main ma∣terials of those immortal ones into which we shall be quickned at the Resurrection. Perhaps as the Seed digests and incorporates into it self the juyces of the Earth, and shoots them up together with its own substance into the Stalk and Ear; so in some particular instances at least, there may be other matter at our Resurrection interwoven with the appropriate substance of our mortal bodies, and together with it spring up into immortal ones. Yet from the Apostles comparison it is apparent that this very mortal body which we sow in the Grave shall be at least the Seed and Embryo which shall receive our Soul at the Resurrection, and by that (supposing other matter be added to it) assi∣milate and digest it into its own substance. Now though to reproduce the scattered particles of our dissolved flesh, and extricate them out of all those other substances whereinto they have been woven and entangled, may seem to us at first view an impossible performance; yet that it is not so, I have already demonstrated; and if a parcel of Quicksilver after it hath run a tedious course of alteration, shifted it self out of its natural form into that of a vapour, out of a vapour into an in∣sipid water, out of water into a white or red or yellow powder, out of that into a salt, and thence into a malleable Metal, may by a skilful Artist be reduced out of all these various contextures
into its natural form of plain and running Mercu∣ry, why should we think it either impossible or dif∣ficult for a Being of immense knowledge and power to watch the wandering particles of our corrupt∣ed bodies through all their successive alterations, and to retrieve them out of all those substances into which they shall be finally resolved; to take out of one body what belongs to another, and restore to each its own; and finally to incorpo∣rate them all together into their natural forms and figures? II. So is the Resurrection of the dead, i. e. so is this Seed of our mortal body to die and be cor∣rupted, before it shall be raised again. That which thou sowest is not quickened unless it die; in∣timating, that as the parts of the Seed are separa∣ted in the ground, and dissolved into a liquid Jelly before it springs up into a Stalk and Ear; so this mortal body of ours must be corrupted, its parts must be dispersed and dissipated from one another, before it quickens and springs up again at the general Resurrection; and indeed the body must naturally corrupt, when once it is separated from the Soul that enlivens it; and that before it is rais∣ed and glorified the Soul should remain for some space separated from it, seems highly necessary. For the nature of Souls is such as requires a gra∣dual and leisurely progression out of one state into another; their faculties are such as cannot in a natural way be improved but by degrees, or quali∣fied in an instant for two extream conditions, with∣out a miracle. But as for this mortal State and that of the Resurrection, they are two such remote and distant extreams, as that our slow paced natures
cannot travel from one to the other under a long space of time; and for a Soul to pass in one instant out of an Earthly into an Heavenly, out of a fleshly into a spiritual, out of a mortal in∣to an immortal body, seems too great a leap for a Being whose nature confines it to a gradual improvement. For how should a Soul which hath been so long immured in mortal flesh, so long accustomed to its sensual pleasures, so clog∣ed and incumbered with its unwieldly organs, so pinioned and hampered by its brutish appetites; How, I say, is it possible in a natural way for such a Soul to be immediately disposed to act and animate an Heavenly Body? And therefore it is requisite that for some time at least it should con∣tinue in a separate state, there to inure it self to a heavenly life, and by a continued contemplati∣on, and love, and imitation of God to ripen gradually into the state of the Resurrection, and to contract a perfect aptitude to animate an hea∣venly body, that so its powers being enlarged and improved by exercise, it may be able to manage that active fiery Chariot, and be prepared to o∣perate by its nimble and vigorous Organs, which till the Soul is rendered more sprightly and active by long and continual exercise, will be perhaps two swift for it to keep pace withal. It is true, the Apostle tells us of some Souls that in an in∣stant shall be fitted for and with these heavenly bodies, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. Behold I shew you a my∣stery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be chang∣ed in a moment, i. e. those good men who are li∣ving just before the Resurrection shall suffer no separation of their Souls from their Bodies; but
the beggarly vestment of their flesh, while it is up∣on them, shall in an instant be transformed into a glorious and immortal Robe; which to be sure it would not be, unless in the same instant also their Souls were made fit to wear it. But then it is to be considered that both will be miraculous▪ And, for ought I know, it will be as great a Mi∣racle immediately to fit an imperfect Soul for a glorified body, as immediately to change a gross and corruptible body into a glorious and immortal one. And therefore though some Souls shall be imme∣diately qualified to operate by glorified bodies, without any intermediate space of separation; yet this being extraordinary and miraculous, is only an exception from the general rule of Providence, which is to leave things to proceed and act ac∣cording to the regular course of their Natures; and if Souls are so left, as ordinarily to be sure they are, it is highly requisite that they should be allowed some space of separation from their mor∣tal bodies before they are cloathed with their immortal ones; and consequently, that this mor∣tal body should be corrupted and dissolved before it is quickened and glorified. III. So is the Resurrection of the Dead, that is, so is this dead corrupted body to be raised and quickned by the power of God; so Ver. 37, 38. That which thou sowest thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, perhaps of Wheat, or of some other grain, but God giv∣eth it a body as it pleaseth him; in which he plainly intimates, that as a grain of Wheat sown in the ground is only the Seed or ma∣terial Principle of the Stalk and Ear that spring
up from it, but God is the principal efficient cause that forms the matter, and enlivens it, and cau∣ses it to spring up and ripen; so though these mortal bodies which we sow in the Grave are the Seed and matter out of which our immortal one shall spring, yet it is God that must recollect this matter, reduce it into a body again, and reunite it to its ancient Soul. For this is such a performance as doth require an Almighty Agent; it is he alone can trace our scattered Atoms through all those Generations and Corruptions wherein they have wandered, and retrieve them out of all those other bodies whereinto they have been finally resolved. It is he alone can separate them into the several Masses whereunto they originally appertained, and order, distinguish, and distribute those rude Masses into their various parts, and connect and joyn one part to another. It is he alone that can reorganize those undistinguished heaps into humane bodies, and reunite them to their Primi∣tive Souls. And accordingly we find that this great Article of the Resurrection is in Scripture resolved into the power of God: for so our Sa∣viour attributes the Sadduces denial of the Re∣surrection to their not knowing the Scripture and the power of God, Mat. 22.29. which plainly implies, that the power of God must be the cause of the Resurrection. So 2 Cor. 1.9. S. Paul tells us, that he was brought into a great extremity, that so he might not trust in himself, but in God that raiseth up the dead; and 1 Tim. 6.13. I charge thee, saith he, before God that quickeneth all things. And in∣deed to quicken our bodies when they are dead, re∣quires the same power as it did at first to create
and form them. For as at their first Creation they were formed out of the pre-existing matter of the Earth, so at the Resurrection they must be repro∣duced out of the same matter again; and as at the Creation all those distinct kinds of Beings we behold lay shuffled together in one common Mass, till the fruitful voice of God separated this united Multitude into their distinct Species; so at the Resurrection, after these mortal bodies are crumbled into dust, and that dust is scattered through all that confused Mass again, it is God a∣lone whose powerful voice can command them back again in their proper shapes, and call them out again by their single individuals: so that as our first existence was only a real Eccho to Gods omnipotent Fiat, so will our return into existence be to his Almighty Surge. The Scripture indeed seems to affirm, that the holy Angels will be im∣ployed in this great transaction, though what they are to do in it is not expresly related; only 1 Thes. 4.16. the Apostle seems to intimate that their Office will be to collect the scattered relicks of our mortality; for there he tells us, that the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and the Trump of God, upon which the dead in Christ shall rise first. Which popular description seems to import, that as by a loud voice or a Trumpet it was anciently the custom of the Jews, and other Nations, to sum∣mon Assemblies, and particularly by a Trumpet to collect and rally their Armies; so at the Resurre∣ction our Saviour by the Ministry of his Angels, un∣der the conduct of their Archangel, will assemble and rally our scattered Atoms, and then by his
divine power Organize them into humane bo∣dies again, and reunite them to their proper Souls. For so Mat. 24.31. Christ tells us, that his Angels shall with the sound of the Trumpet gather together his Elect from the four Winds. Which if you compare with the above-cited Text, you will find that this sound of the Trumpet by which the Elect are to be gathered is to precede their Resur∣rection, and consequently, that it is not to ga∣ther them when they are raised, but to gather them to be raised; that is, to collect their dispers∣ed dust which hath been blown about upon the Wings of the Wind, in order to their being red∣integrated into humane bodies, and reinformed with their Primitive Souls. IV. So is the Resurrection of the dead, i. e. so are our dead bodies to be raised again into the proper form and kind of humane bodies; and this is im∣plied in ver. 38. but God giveth it a body as it plea∣seth him, and unto every Seed his own body, i. e. as to the seed of Wheat which dies in the Winter, God gives in the Spring the Body, or Stalk, and Ear of Wheat; so to this mortal body which we sow in the Grave, God will give at the Resurre∣ction its own proper and specifick form. For the Soul will have the same faculties at the Resurrecti∣on that it hath now in this mortal state, and the Body is only in order to the Soul, its parts and members being all purposely contrived into fit in∣struments for the Soul to work withal. These inward faculties therefore continuing still and for ever the same, it is highly requisite that at the Re∣surrection they should be refitted with the same corporeal instruments of action: for the Soul is
to the Body what the art is to the thing that is formed by the Art; and therefore as the thing formed is not perfect so long as it is any way dis∣proportionable to the Art which formed it; so neither can the Body be perfect till in all its parts it is every way apportioned unto the faculties of the Soul, and how can the matter of this corrupt∣ed body be readapted to the natural faculties of a humane Soul, unless it be raised again into an hu∣mane body, and restored to its Primitive figure and proportion? For should it be raised with more or fewer parts than those it now consists of, it must either be defective or superfluous in its parts, or the Soul must have more or fewer faculties to employ them. It is true, after the Resurrection the Scripture plainly tells us, that our Souls shall no longer exercise those their Animal faculties of nourishing and propagation; that the Sons of the Resurrection shall neither marry, nor be given in mar∣riage, but that they shall be equal to the Angels of God, Mat. 22.30. and indeed since every individual man will then be raised into an immortal state, there will be no need either that they should be nourished themselves, or that they should propagate any more individuals to preserve their kind. But it doth not hence follow, either that the Soul shall be deprived of those Animal faculties, or con∣sequently that the Body shall be raised without the Organs by which those Animal operations are per∣formed: for though our Saviours Body after the Resurrection had no need of nourishment, yet it is plain it was raised again with its natural instru∣ments of eating and drinking, which he once actually used to assure his Disciples of the reality
of his Resurrection; and though now those parts are useless to him, as to that particular animal operation, yet there is no doubt but his Soul still uses them for other unknown purposes peculiar to his glorified state; or if he do not, yet since those parts were necessary to the perfection of a hu∣mane body, and consequently, to the redintegrati∣on of his humane nature, it was requisite he should be raised with them, that so he might have corporeal Organs adapted to his animal faculties, which it is plain were not extinguished by his Re∣surrection; and since the Resurrection of our Sa∣viours body is in Scripture represented as the pat∣tern of ours (for he shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, Philip. 3. Vers. 21.) we may hence warranta∣bly conclude that ours shall be raised as his was, compleat in all the parts of an humane Bo∣dy. V. And lastly, So is the resurrection of the dead, i. e. so are these humane bodies to be changed and altered by the resurrection. So ver. 37. That which thou sowest thou sowest not that body that shall be but bare grain; intimating, that as the seed when it is sown is nothing but bare seed, though when it is quickened it springs up into a long stalk and ear, which many times contains in it an hundred grains; even so this mortal Bo∣dy which is only the naked seed of our Resur∣rection, shall be very much altered from what it is, and changed into a more compleat and perfect substance. For the more clear and distinct ex∣plication of which, we will first consider the Change that will then be made in the bodies of
good men; and secondly, the change that will be made in the bodies of the wicked. First, We will consider the Change that will then be made in the bodies of good men; which consists of four particulars. First, They will be changed from base and humble into glorious Bodies. Secondly, From earthly and fleshly into spiritual and heavenly Bodies. Thirdly, From weak and passive into active and powerful Bodies. Fourthly, From mortal and corruptible into im∣mortal and incorruptible Bodies. I. The Bodies of good Men will be changed from base and humble into bright and glorious ones; so ver. 43. It is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory, that is, when it is sown in the grave, it is a base and abject thing, not to be indured above ground for its gastly looks, and nauseous stink and putrefacti∣on; but at its resurrection it shall come forth in a bright, and beautiful and venerable form; for so our Saviour assures us, that after their resur∣rection the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, Mat. 13.43. that is, the matter of their bodies shall be refined and ex∣alted into a bright and lucid substance, which shall glitter like the Sun and cast forth rays of glory round about them; and this perhaps is that inheritance of the Saints in light, that is, em∣bodied in light, which the Apostle speaks of Col. 1.12. for when this dull matter comes to be re∣animated with a blessed and glorified Soul, it will doubtless derive from it a great deal of beauty and lustre. For if now our Soul when it is overjoyed
can so transfigure our Bodies, fill our eyes with such sprightly flames, overspread our countenances with such an amiable air, and paint our faces with such a serene and florid aspect, what a change will it make in our Resurrection-body, which being incomparably more fine and subtil than this, will be far more pliable to the motions of the Soul? When therefore the happy Soul shall re-enter this softned and liquified matter, ravished with un∣speakable joy and content; how will its delight∣som emotions change and transfigure it, how will its active joys shine through and overspread it with an amiable Glory? especially when with this natural energy of its glorified Soul, our Savi∣our himself shall cooperate to change this vile bo∣dy that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. Though now therefore the matter of our bodies is vile and sor∣did, and such as seems altogether incapable of such a glorious change; yet according to the best Philosophy there is no specifick difference in mat∣ter, and if the vilest and most ignoble matter may by mere motion, not only be Crystallized but transformed into a flaming brightness, as we are sure it may; if in lighting of a Candle that is newly blown out, by applying another to the ascending smoke, this dark and stinking substance may in the twinkling of an eye be changed into a bright and glorious flame, into what a refulgent substance may the matter of this mortal body be changed by the concurrence of an infinite power with the vigorous activity of a glorified Soul?
II. The Bodies of good Men will be changed from earthly and fleshly into spiritual and heaven∣ly. So ver. 44. It is sown, saith he, a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, where those words , which we render a natural body may perhaps be better translated an animal Body, i. e. a body suted and adapted to this ani∣mal life which the beasts that perish enjoy in common with us; a body that is sustained by animal operations and recreated with animal pleasures, and which by reason of its gross sub∣stance doth continually crave to be supplied with suitable nourishment, and treated with gross and carnal pleasures, which is the very thing that ren∣ders it so great a Cumber to the immortal Spi∣rit that animates it. But at the Resurrection it will be improved into a spiritual body, not that it will be converted into a spiritual substance; for the Apostle's own words do assure us that it will still remain a body, but the spirituality of it will consist in this, that being wrought into a purer and finer substance, it will no longer need or crave these animal nourishments and plea∣sures, but be perectly fitted for and contemper'd to the soul and intirely resigned to its use and ser∣vice; for it will then be refined from all those animal appetites of eating, drinking and carnality, which do now too often not only render it un∣serviceable to the soul, but also hurtful and inju∣rious: so that then it will be in intire subjection to the mind, and all its members will be devoted Instruments to the service of Righteousness; so that now there will be no longer any Law in its members to wage war against the Law in the
mind, but the mind will govern, and the body obey without any contest or reluctancy; and as the body will be wholly obedient to the mind, so it will be perfectly adapted to its service; for whereas now by reason of its gross consistency, it is an unwieldy Luggage to the Soul, and doth very much clog and incumber her in her opera∣tions; it will then be wrought into so fine and tenuious a substance, as that instead of a clog it will be a wing to the Soul: for its consistence will be subtil as the finest Aether, and active as the purest flame; it will have nothing that is gross or burdensom in it to retard or weary it in its flights, to rebate its vigour or slacken its mo∣tion, but it will be all life and spirit and wing, and like a perpetual motion be carried on with unwearied swiftness by its own internal springs, and being freed from all that weight which now renders it so slow and heavy, it will be able to move like a thought, and to keep pace with the most nimble wishes of the Soul; so that what Hierocles saith of his spiritual Body, , i. e. that it is such a body as is every way fitted to the intellectual perfections of the Soul, will be true of this resurrection body, which will be perfectly attempered to a perfect mind, and fashioned into a most convenient Organ for it whereby to exert its purest and most spiritual operations. III. The Bodies of good Men will be changed from weak and passive into active and powerful Bodies; so ver. 43. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; that is, whereas the body which we sow in the grave is exceeding weak and in∣firm,
liable to infinite passions and diseases, and can do but little, but suffers much; it shall be raised with a temperament so pure and just, so hail and vigorous that no disease or infirmity shall ever find any place in it, or be able to cramp it in its operations; For besides that, its elementary qualities (if any such remain in it) shall be turned into such an exquisit temper that they shall never jar or disagree with each other, it shall be so spirited and invigorated by the blessed Soul that animates it, that nothing shall be able to impair its health or discompose its Harmony. So that it shall live for ever without decay, move for ever without weariness, fast for ever without hunger, and wake for ever without either need or desire of refreshment. And indeed, considering for what purpose our Bodies shall be raised, they have need to be very strong and vigorous; for they shall be raised on purpose to be the Organs and Instruments of the operations of our glorified Souls, which being exceeding active, as they are spirits, but exceedingly more active as they are glo∣rified spirits will require bodies suitably strong and vigorous, such as can support their joys, express their activities, and keep pace with their raptu∣tous emotions; to do which will require a mighty firmness and vigour of temper. Since therefore at the Resurrection God will fit and adapt our bodies to the utmost activity of our glorified spirits, they must necessarily be supposed to be endued with unspeakable strength and agility, upon which account they are called by the ancient He∣brews, Eagles wings, upon which they suppose our glorified Souls shall be able to fly as fast
and as far as they please, and this I am apt to think is intimated in that passage of S. Paul, 1 Thes. 4.17. And they that are alive, and whose bodies are changed in the state of the resur∣rection shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, the meaning of which is, not that they shall be snatched up from the Earth by any external cause of Agent, but that their Bodies be∣ing changed into pure aetherial flame, they shall of their own accords ascend in them as in so ma∣ny fiery Chariots to the Throne of their Redeemer in the Clouds: and from thence when the judgment is concluded, shall as nimbly ascend with him through all those spacious Fields of Air and Aether, that lie between that and the eternal Paradise of Blessedness. For that they shall be caught up by Angels, as some imagin, I see no reason to think, since our Saviour him∣self assures us, that at the Resurrection they shall be , and therefore shall not need their help in this angelified state, either to waft them up into the Air, or from thence into the Heaven of Heavens; and if by their own activity they shall be able to perform so vast a flight as 'tis from the earth into the uppermost Region of the Air, and from thence into the supreme Region of ever∣lasting glory, we may from thence collect what a vast power they will be endued with at their Resurrection. But this is most certain that then they shall be perfectly released from all dolo∣rous passion, and continue in perfect strength and health and vigour for ever. So that whereas now our Bodies are exceeding weak and passive, a kind of walking Hospitals of pains, infirmi∣ties
and diseases; the time will come when our soul shall be accommodated with a much more easie and convenient, as well as glorious habitation, wherein it shall for ever forget those dismal Cries, O my Head, my Heart, my Bowels, and enjoy everlasting rest and freedom. Now she is in a travelling condition, and the Inn she lodges at is mean and inconvenient, her Provision is course, her Bed hard, and her Rest continually interrup∣ted with noise and tumult, but when she is once got home to her own House, her house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens she shall there live in perfect ease and pleasure, free from all the annoyances of flesh and blood, from all the di∣sturbances of pain and sickness, and from all the toil and fatigue▪ the noise and hurry of this mortal condition, and with splendid State, delicious fare, soft and quiet repose recompence her self a thou∣sand fold for all her present travel and weariness. IV. And lastly, The Bodies of good men will be changed from corruptible and mortal into incor∣ruptible and immortal. So ver. 42.53. it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption, and this corruptible must put on incorruption, this mortal must put on immortality, i. e. Whereas this body which we lay down hath in the very constitution of it the seeds of mortality and corruption, at the Re∣surrection it shall spring up into an incorruptible and immortal substance, perfectly refined from all mortal and corruptible principles; for so our Sa∣viour pronounces of those who shall be accounted worthy to attain to this blessed Resurrection, that they cannot die any more, Luke 20.36. which is a plain argument that our mortal body shall not be
merely varnished and gilded over with an external glory and beauty, but that all inward principles of corruption shall be utterly purged out of its na∣ture, so that it shall not be preserved immortal merely by the force of an external cause, but be so far immortal in it self, as not to have any tendency to death in its nature and constitution: For either it will be so liquid, that should its parts be separated by any external violence, like the divided Aether they will immediately close again, or else so firm and compact that no external vio∣lence will be able to divide them; and thus ha∣ving no alloy of corrupt principles in its nature, no quarrels or discords between contrary qualities, and being perpetually acted by a most happy, sprightly and vivacious soul, which will every mo∣ment diffuse a vast plenty of life and vigour throughout all its parts, it will be also secure from all inward tendencies to mortality, and be∣ing thus fortified both within and without against all attempts towards a dissolution, what should hinder it from living for ever and flourishing in immortal youth? And thus I have endeavoured to give an account of the happy Changes which good mens Bodies will undergo in the general Re∣surrection. But though they shall all of them be raised with unspeakable advantages and improvements, yet it is apparent from this, 1 Cor. 15. that they shall vastly differ in the degrees of their glory; so ver. 41. There is one glory of the Sun, and ano∣ther glory of the Moon, and another glory of the stars, for one star differeth from another star in glo∣ry, so also is the resurrection of the dead, i. e. As
the Sun is more glorious than the Moon, the Moon than the stars, and one star than ano∣ther, so shall our bodies at the Resurrection be arrayed with different degrees of glory; and doubtless these differences of Glory in our raised bodies will arise from those different degrees of perfection to which their respective Souls have ar∣rived; for the more perfect those souls are, the more improved and accomplished bodies they will re∣quire, because according as they rise in degrees of perfection, their powers will be enlarged and their faculties rendered more active, and conse∣quently will require bodies more active and pow∣erful. And therefore since at the Resurrection God will accommodate every soul with a body suta∣ble to it in its utmost exaltations and improve∣ments, we may reasonably conclude that the se∣veral bodies that are raised shall be more or less glorious, as the several souls to which they apper∣tain are more or less advanced in degrees of per∣fection. For the fitness and congruity of souls to glorified bodies consists in their moral perfection; and if upon an impossible supposition, a wicked soul should be mistaken for a pious one and thrust into a glorified body, it would not know what to do with, or how to behave it self in it, but like a Swine in a Palace would soon be weary of its habitation and impatiently long to be restored to its beloved stye and mire. For a glorified body is an Instrument proper only for a glorified soul to act and work with; It is purposely framed and composed for contemplation and love for joy and praise and Adoration, and, what should a vicious soul do with such a body to whom those
heavenly exercises it was designed for are unna∣tural? 'Tis piety and vertue that fits and dispo∣seth a Soul to animate and act in a glorified body; and therefore I am apt to think, that as the ani∣mal disposition of our soul doth now co-operate with the divine Providence in the forming its ani∣mal body in the womb, so that divine and spiri∣tual disposition which the Soul doth contract be∣fore, and improve after its separation from the body will co-operate with the Almighty Power of our Saviour in the forming its new body at the Resurrection; and that as by the Animal Plastick power of our souls, God did first form our Ani∣mal bodies, so by this spiritual Plastick power of it which is nothing but its moral perfection, he will hereafter form our spiritual bodies; and if so, then the more of that perfection the Soul arrives to at the Resurrection, the more it will spiritu∣alize and glorifie its body; and so still the more perfect it grows, the more it will improve its glo∣rified body in beauty, lustre and activity, so that as through a transparent Glass we plainly discern the size and colour of the substance contained in it, so perhaps through the still encreasing de∣grees of the bodies glory, the degree and size of the Souls perfection will appear. But whether this be true or no, which I confess is only my conje∣cture, thus much is certain, that the bodies of men will be raised with different degrees of glory; and therefore since we are assured that the great end of the last judgment will be to distribute to every one according to his Works, we have suf∣ficient reason to conclude that the bodies will be glorified more or less in proportion to the perfecti∣on of their Souls.
And thus I have endeavoured to give a brief account of those happy changes which good mens bodies must undergo at the Resurrection; I pro∣ceed therefore in the next place to shew the wo∣ful change that will then also be made in the bo∣dies of wicked men: In which I shall be very brief, because we have but a very short and ge∣neral account of it in Scripture, where we are only told that they shall awake to everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2. and that they shall come forth to the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5.28. and that upon their Resurrection they shall be judged according to their works, and cast into the Lake of fire, Rev. 20.13.15. from whence it is apparent that they shall be raised for no other end, but to be punished, to endure that ven∣geance which shall then be rendered to them, even the vengeance of eternal fire; for that will be their doom, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Since therefore their Resurrection will be only in or∣der to their being fetched from Prison to Iudg∣ment, and sent from Iudgment to Execution; to be sure their bodies will be raised in full capacity to suffer the fearful execution of their doom; that is, with an exquisite sense to feel, and an in∣vincible strength to sustain the torment of eter∣nal fire. For since they must suffer for ever, they must be raised both passive and immortal, with a sense as quick as lightening to perceive their misery, and yet as durable as Anvil to undergo the stroaks of it, which to all eternity will be re∣peated upon them without any pause or inter∣mission. Thus shall they be raised with a most
vivacious and everlasting sense of pain, that so they may ever feel the pangs of death without ever dying; so St. Cyril Catech. illum. 4. p. 26. , i. e. wicked men shall be cloathed with eternal bodies that in them they may suffer the eternal punishment of their sins; and so they shall have strength to suffer as long as vengeance hath will to inflict: and there∣fore since it is the will of divine vengeance that they should suffer eternal fire, the divine power will furnish them with such bodies as shall be able to endure everlasting scorching in that fire, without being ever consumed by it, for at their Resurrection their wretched Ghosts shall be fetch∣ed out of those invisible Prisons wherein they are now reserved in chains against the Judgment of the great Day, to suffer in that body wherein they sinned, and that therein they may be capable of lingring out an eternity of torment, they shall be reunited to it in such a fatal and indissoluble bond as neither Death nor Hell shall ever be able to unloose. And this is all the account we have from Scripture concerning the change that shall be made by the Resurrection in the bodies of wicked men, viz. that from weak and corruptible bodies they shall be changed into vigorous and in∣corruptible ones, and be endued with a quick and everlasting sense of all that everlasting punishment which they are raised to endure. Thus having given an account at large of this second Regal Act which our blessed Saviour is yet to perform, viz. Raising the dead, I proceed to the
III. And last, viz. his judging the World. In treating of which great and fundamental Arti∣cle of our Faith, I shall endeavour First, To prove the truth of the thing that our blessed Saviour shall judge the World. Secondly, To give an account of the signs and forerunners of his coming to judge it. Thirdly, To shew the manner of his coming. Fourthly, To explain the whole process of his judgment. I. I shall endeavour to prove the truth of the thing, viz. that our Saviour shall judge the World, than which there is no one Proposition more frequently and plainly asserted in holy Scripture. Thus Acts 17.31. we are told, that God hath ap∣pointed a day in which he will judge the World in righteousness by the man whom he hath ordained, and that this man is Jesus Christ we are assured, Acts 10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the People, and to testifie that it is he which was or∣dained of God to be the Iudge of quick and dead; So also 2 Tim. 4.1. I charge thee before God and the Lord Iesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. And accordingly we are told, that we shall all stand before the Iudgment seat of Christ, Rom. 14.10. And all appear before the Iudgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body according to that he hath done whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. And to the same purpose our Saviour himself tells us, that the Fa∣ther judgeth no man, that is immediately, but hath given all judgment to his Son; and afterward he gives the reason of it, because he is the Son of
man, Iohn 5.22.27. that is, because he dutiful∣ly complied with his Fathers Will in chearfully condescending to cloath himself in Humane Na∣ture, and therein to offer up himself a willing Victim for the sins of the World; for so Rev. 5.9.12. Worthy is he alone to receive the Book, (of judgment) and to open the Seals thereof, because he was slain, and hath redeemed us to God by his blood, worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive the power and honour, the glory and bles∣sing appendent to his high Office of judging the World. From all which it abundantly ap∣pears that this great action of judging the World is to be performed by Christ. I proceed therefore to the Second general Head I proposed to treat of, which was to give an account of the signs and forerunners of his coming to judgment. For before he actually appears he will give the secure World a fearful warning of his coming by hanging out to its publick view a great many horrible signs and spectacles, for thus the Prophet Ioel, Ioel 1.30, 31. I will shew wonders in the Heavens, and in the Earth blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke, the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood before the great and terrible day of the Lord, which Prophesie of his is particularly ex∣emplified by our Saviour, Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars of Heaven shall fall, and the Powers of the Hea∣vens shall be shaken, and then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven, Matt. 24▪ 29, 30. and more particularly, Luke 21.11.25. Great
Earthquakes shall be in divers places, and Famines, and Pestilences, and fearful sights, and great signs shall there be from Heaven, and there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the Earth distress of Nations with great per∣plexity, the Sea and the Waves roaring, and then it follows, then shall they see the Son of man com∣ing. It is true, this Prophesie of our Saviour im∣mediately respects the destruction of Ierusalem, and was in part accomplished in it; several of these very signs being a little before the Calamity of that City actually exhibited to the publick view of the World, as both Iosephus and Tacitus as∣sure us; and several others of them were exhi∣bited immediately after the Tribulation of those days in that prodigious irruption of Vesuvius in Cam∣pania, the woful effects whereof were felt not only in Rome and Italy, but in a great part of Africa, in Syria, Constantinople, and in all the ad∣joyning Countries, Vid. Dion. Cass. lib. 66.68. but it is apparent that our Saviour here prophesies of the Judgment of Ierusalem, as it was a Type and Representation of the general Judgment; so that though his Prophesie respects Ierusalems doom immediately, yet through this it looks forward to the final Doom of the World, and therefore as in foretelling the former he prefigures the later, so in foretelling the foregoing signs of the for∣mer he prefigures the foregoing signs of the later. And since he here intended the signs of Ierusa∣lems dooms-day, only for Types and Figures of those signs which shall forerun the dooms-day of the World, and seeing that Types have always less in them than are in the things which they typifie
and prefigure, there is no doubt but those signs which shall forerun the last judgment will be much more eminent and illustrious, than those of Ierusalems judgment, which were intended only to Typifie and prefigure them, and accordingly St. Ierom tells us of an ancient Tradition of the Jewish Doctors (to which our Saviour in this Prediction seems plainly to refer) that for fifteen days toge∣ther before the general judgment there shall be transacted upon the Stage of Nature a continued Scene of fearful Signs and Wonders, the Sea shall swell to a prodigious height, and make a fearful noise with its tumbling Waves, the Heavens shall crack day and night with loud and roaring Thun∣ders, the Earth shall groan under hideous Con∣vulsions, and be shaken with quotidian Earth∣quakes, the Moon shall shed forth purple streams of discoloured light, the Sun shall be cloathed in a dismal darkness, and the Stars shall shrink in their light, and twinkle like expiring Candles in the Socket, the Air shall blaze with Portentous Comets, and the whole frame of nature like a fu∣neral Room shall be all hung round with mourn∣ing and with Ensigns of horrour, and when these fatal symptoms appear upon the face of the Uni∣verse, then shall the Inhabitants of the earth mourn, and the Sinners in Sion shall be horribly afraid being loudly forewarned by these astonish∣ing Portents of the near approach of their everla∣sting Doom. Having thus briefly shewn what shall be the Signs of our Saviours coming to Judgment, I proceed to the III. The Third general, which was to shew the manner and circumstances of his coming; and here
we will first consider the place from whence he is to come; Secondly, the State in which he is to come; Thirdly, the Carriage on which he is to come; Fourthly, the Equipage with which he is to come; Fifthly, the place to which he is to come. I. The place from which he is to come, which is no other than the Highest Heavens, where he now lives and reigns in his exalted and glorified Humanity; for him must the Heavens receive till the time of the Restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. in that bright Region of eternal day, that King∣dom of Angels and of spirits of just men made perfect, he is to reign in Person till the last and terrible day, and from thence he is to begin his Circuit when he comes to keep his general Assi∣zes upon earth, for he is to be revealed from Hea∣ven with his mighty Angels, 2 Thess. 1.7. and to descend from Heaven with a shout, 1 Thess. 4.16. so that in the close of those dreadful Alarms which he will give the World by the preceding signs of his coming he will arise from his imperi∣al Seat at his Fathers right hand, and descend in person from those high habitations of inaccessible light, and every eye shall see him as he comes shoot∣ing like a Star from his Orb, and the sight of him shall affect the whole World with unspeakable joy or consternation; the righteous when they see him shall lift up their heads and rejoyce, because they know he is their Friend and brings the day of their redemption with him, they shall congratulate his Arrival and welcome him from Heaven with Songs of Triumph and deliverance: but as for the wicked, they shall shreik and lament at the sight of him, as being conscious to themselves that by a
thousand provocations they have render'd him their implacable Enemy; the sense of which will cause them to exclaim in the bitter Agonies of their souls; O yonder comes he whose mercies we have spurned, whose Authority we have de∣spised, whose Laws we have trampled on, and all the methods of whose love we have utterly baffled and defeated; and now forlorn and mi∣serable that we are, how shall we abide his ap∣pearance, or whither shall we flee from his presence. O that some Rock would fall upon us, or that some Mountain would be so pitiful as to swallow us up and bury us from his sight for ever. But wo are we! within these few moments the Rocks and Mountains will be gone, the Heavens and Earth will melt away, and nothing will be left besides our selves for his fiery indignation to prey on. Thus shall the sight of the son of man descending from his Throne in the Heavens to judge the World, in∣spire his friends with unspeakable joy, and strike his enemies with terrour and confusion. II. We will consider the State in which he is to come, which shall be far different from that in which he came sixteen hundred years ago. Then he came in an humble and despicable con∣dition, clouded with poverty and grief, and oppressed with all the innocent infirmities of hu∣mane nature; but at the last day he shall come in his glorified state, cloathed in that Celestial Body which he now wears at the Right hand of God. For so, Acts 1.11. the Angel assures his Disciples, This same Iesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as you have seen him go into heaven, that is, he shall return to Judgment in that self-same glorified Body wherein you now see him ascend; and what a glorious one that is we may partly learn from that majestick description of it, Rev. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. In the midst of the seven Candle∣sticks was one like the Son of man, his head and his hair were white as wool as white as snow, his eyes were as a flame of fire, and his countenance was as the Sun shining in its strength. And partly from his transfiguration on the Mount, which was but a short essay and specimen of his Glorification; for it's said, that his face did shine as the Sun, and that his Raiment was white as the light, white with those beams of Glory which from his transfigured Body shone through all his Apparel, Mat. 17.2. When therefore he descends from Heaven to judg the World, it shall be with this glorified Body, this Body of pure and immaculate splendor, with its hair shining like threds of light, its eyes spark∣ling with beams of Majesty, and its face display∣ing a most beautiful lustre, and its whole substance shedding forth from every part a dazling glory round about it; and this I conceive is that which he himself calls his own glory, Luke 9.26. When he (i. e. the Son of man) shall come in his own glo∣ry, that is, the glory of that illustrious heavenly Body wherein he is now arrayed; besides which bright and luminous Robe, in which like a meridi∣an Sun he shall visibly shine over all the World; the aforecited Text tells us, that he shall also come in the glory of his Father, by which I con∣ceive is meant that which the Hebrews call the Shechinah, and the Scripture the glory of the Lord,
viz. a body of bright shining fire in which the Lord was especially present, and with which as the Psalmist expresseth it, he covered himself as with a Garment, Psalm 104.2. for in 2 Thess. 1.8. we are told, that he shall be revealed from heaven with flaming fire; and so he descended on the Mount in fire; Exod. 19.18. and that fire is called the Glory of the Lord, Exod. 24.17. That fire therefore in which our Saviour shall be revealed from Heaven, seems to be of the same nature with that fiery Shechinah or visible glory of the Lord in which he descended on Mount Sinai, though doubtless it will be far more glorious, as being designed to adorn a far more glorious solemnity. And this Glory being added to the natural bright∣ness and splendor of his glorified Body will cause him to outshine the Sun, and drown all the lights of heaven in the conquering brightness of his ap∣pearance. So that when he comes forth from his aetherial Palace, and appears upon the Ea∣stern heaven, that immense Sphere of visible glory which will then surround him, will in the twink∣ling of an eye spread and diffuse it self over all the Creation, and cause both the Heavens and the Earth to glitter like a flaming fire. III. Thirdly, We will consider the Carriage on which he is to come, which as the Scripture tells us shall be a Cloud; so Acts 1.11. the Angels tell his Disciples who stood gazing after him as he was ascending into Heaven, the same Iesus which is taken from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into Heaven. Now, if you would know how that was, the 9th Verse will inform you, where it's said, that he was ta∣ken
up, and a Cloud received him out of sight, and therefore as he ascended into Heaven on a Cloud, so in like manner he shall from thence descend upon a Cloud also; and accordingly our Saviour himself declares, that we shall see the Son of man coming on the Clouds of Heaven in power and great glory, Mat. 24.30. So also Mat. 26.64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of Power and coming in the Clouds of Heaven; and in this very manner do the Iews expect the coming of their Messias, as appears by that gloss of one of their ancient Masters on Dan. 7.10. si meru∣erint Iudaei veniet in nubibus Coeli, which Raimund. Pug. fid. thus explains, If ever the Jews deserve that the Messias should come, he shall come gloriously according to the Prophet Daniel, that is, in the Clouds of Heaven. And then he tells us farther, ideo moderni Iudaei dicunt Messiam non venisse quia non viderunt eum venire in nubibus coeli, therefore do the modern Jews say, that the Messias is not yet come because they never saw him coming in the clouds of Heaven; and it seems very probable that the great offence which the high Priest took at our Saviours saying, that they should hereafter see him coming in the clouds of Heaven, Mat. 26.64, 65. was this, that it was a tradition among them that the Messias should so come, and that therefore he look'd upon that saying of our Saviour as a blas∣phemous pretence to his being the Messias; as much as if he should have said, though I have done enough already to convince you that I am the Messias, yet you shall hereafter see that very sign of my being the Messias upon which you so much depend, and without which you will not
believe, viz. my coming in the clouds of Heaven; which therefore I am apt to think is the sign of the Son of man in Heaven, of which our Saviour speaks, Mat. 24.30. For so not only the Iews do Chara∣cter their Messias, but also the Heathen their Gods cloathed in a Cloud. Thus Homer. Iliad. lib. 5. represents God coming to Diomedes , with his shoulders wrap'd in a Cloud; and so also Virgil represents Iupiter coming to assist Aeneas, Aen. 7 — Radiis ardentem lucis & auro — ipse manu quatiens ostendit ab aethere nubem, i. e. shew∣ing him a Cloud from Heaven, flaming with rays of light and Gold. So that to appear in Clouds, it seems, was looked upon both by Iews and Gentiles as a divine sign and Character, and accordingly this sign was given by our Saviour to the Iews in that glorious representation of a Captain with his Legions issuing out of the Clouds a little before the destruction of Ierusalem, recorded at large both in Iosephus and Tacitus, and will hereafter be given to the whole World in a far more glori∣ous manner at the opening of the day of Iudg∣ment; for then, as the Psalmist expresses it, he will make the Clouds his Chariots and ride down from the Heavens on them in a triumphal proces∣sion, shining with unspeakable Glory and Maje∣sty: So that as when he ascended a bright and Radiant Cloud was prepared to receive and carry him up to the Seat of the blessed; so when he descends there will be a vast sheet of condensed aethr in the form of a radiant Cloud (and such it's probable was that on which he ascended) prepared to receive him, and to waft him down from above to the place appointed for the general Asizes,
and this very Cloud or bright aetherial substance, on which he shall come will perhaps be that Throne of Glory in Matth. 25.31. on which he shall sit whilest he is administring judgment to the World; for this substance being not only naturally lumi∣nous, but also accidentally illuminated from the Sun of Righteousness whom it bears; will to be sure be sufficiently Glorious to deserve the name of A Throne of Glory. IV. Fourthly, We will consider the Retinue and Equipage with which he shall come, which as the Scripture tells us will consist of innumera∣ble myriads of Saints and Angels; for immediate∣ly upon the notice that he is going down to so∣lemnize the general Judgment, all those blessed spirits of just men made perfect, whom he hath redeemed and glorified from the beginning of the World, shall forsake their mansions of glory to attend him in his progress; for so Enoch prophesi∣ed of old, behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment on the ungodly, Jude 14.15. and that by these ten Thousand, he means the whole body of the Church Trium∣phant, is evident by that passage of S. Paul, 1 Thess. 3.13. where he prays that they might be established in their Christian course till the coming of the Lord Iesus with all his Saints, and indeed, since they are all to re-assume their bodies and to be made partakers of the Glorious Resurrection, it's necessary that they should all come down along with him and return to this earth, where the old matter of those bodies lies, wherein they are to be reinvested; and to this illustrious retinue of glorified Saints shall be joyned the heavenly
hosts of the holy Angels; for so Christ himself tells us, that he shall come in his own glory, and in his Fa∣thers, and of his holy Angels, Luke 9.26. and that he shall come in his glory and all his holy Angels with him, Mat. 25.31. And S. Paul tells us, that he shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, 2 Thess. 1.2. And as the Angels shall come down a∣long with him, so in all probability they shall come in a glorious appearance, cloathed in bright aetherial bodies, in which to adorn the triumphs of that glorious day, they shall be conspicuous to all the Inhabitants of the Earth. Neither shall their coming with him be only for shew and pomp▪ but the Scripture plainly tells us that they shall minister to him in that great transaction. For at his issuing forth from the heaven of heavens, these mighty hosts of Angels shall march before him with the Archangel in the head of them, who with a mighty voice or sound like that of a Trum∣pet, shall send forth an awakening summons to all the Inhabitants of the grave to come forth and appear before the Judgment Seat; at which Tre∣mendous voice, which with an all-enlivening pow∣er shall be reverberated through all the vault of heaven, and penetrate the most secret reposito∣ries of the Earth, the dead shall rise and the li∣ving shall be changed and transfigured, and all shall be set before the dread Tribunal to under∣go their Trial and receive their doom: For so 1 Thess. 4.16. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first; and in 1 Cor. 15.52. the resur∣rection of the dead is made the consequence of
the sounding this Trumpet, for the Trumpet shall sound and the dead shall be raised incorruptible; And so also Mat. 24.31. our Saviour tells us, that at his coming on the clouds of Heaven, he will send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds; from whence it is evident that the Angels then minister to him to raising the dead, and assembling them to Judgment; and hence that which is cal∣led the voice of the Archangel in the above cited 1 Thess. 4.10. is elsewhere called the voice of the Son of God, John 5.25. because as it will be ani∣mated by his power, so it will be pronounced by his authority; and as they shall minister to him in raising the dead to be judged, so shall they also in executing his Sentence and Judgment; for so Mat. 13.41, 42. He tells us, the Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his King∣dom all things that offend, and them which do ini∣quity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. From whence it's evident that when he hath pronounced sen∣tence on the workers of iniquity, he will by the mi∣nistry of his Angels chase them into that everlast∣ing fire, whereunto he hath doomed and devoted them. Thus when he comes to judg the World all his holy Angels shall come with him, and that not only to contribute to the glory and splendor of his Circuit, but also to minister to him in his Judgment; so that his retinue shall consist of all the Inhabitants of heaven, who shall all come forth together with him and bear him company in this his Triumphant progress through the skies: by which we may easily imagine what an amazing spectacle
his coming down from heaven will be to the Inhabitants of the earth, when they shall see him descend from his Imperial Seat far above the star∣ry Skies with all the Train-bands of heaven about him, the Captain of the Angelical Host in the front of innumerable Angels marching before him, and with his mighty Trump ringing a peal of Thunder through the Universe, and with ten thousand thousands of the Spirits of just men made perfect, following after him with Crowns of glory on their heads, and Songs and Halelujahs in their moths; O blessed Jesu! how will this glorious and dreadful sight confound thy Enemies, and ravish thy Friends, make those that hate thee tremble and gnash their teeth, and those that love thee lift up their heads and shout for joy! V. And lastly, We will consider the place to which he is to come, concerning which all that is certain from Scripture is this, that when he comes down from Heven he will fix his Throne or Judgment Seat in the Air at such a convenient distance from the Earth as shall render him visi∣ble to all its Inhabitants. For so 1 Thess. 4.17. it is said of the righteous, that after their being rai∣sed or changed they shall be caught up in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, which is a plain argu∣ment that the Lord will sit in judgment on them in the Air, since thither they will be caught up to him after they are raised and judged. Thus in that very Air, which is now the seat of the Devils Em∣pire, shall Christ fix his Throne to manifest to all the World the consummation of his Victory over the Powers of darkness. There shall he sit in Maje∣sty and Glory where now the Devil and his Angels
reign, and in the publick view of the World shall even in their own dominion spoil those Hellish Principalities and Powers, and having chained them at his Chariot Wheels, make a shew of them openly, triumphing over them; there where they now do∣mineer and tyrannize over this wretched World shall he set his foot upon their necks, and from thence shall he tread them down into everlasting darkness and despair. Thus that he may expose him∣self to the more publick view, and the Devil to the more publick shame and confusion he will choose to keep his general Assizes in the Air. Be∣ing therefore arrived into the airy Regions, after a long and glorious progress from the highest heaven, there he shall sit down upon the Throne of his glory (as some think) over against Mount Olivet, the place from whence he ascended, whi∣ther all People, Nations and Languages shall be gathered before him to receive their everlasting Doom. And now let us imagine with our selves in what a glorious and tremendous Majesty he will appear to the World from his judgment seat, whence every Eye shall see him shine in his own, his Fathers, and his Angels glory, who in a bright Corona shall sit round about him like so many Stars about a Sun, and where as the Prophet Daniel de∣scribes him, Chap. 7. ver. 9, 10. he shall exhibit himself to publick view, cloathed in garments as white as snow, with the hair of his head like the pure wooll, sitting on a Throne like the fiery flame, and its Wheels as burning fire, with a fiery stream issuing out from before him, and a thousand thousands ministring unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand∣ing before him, whilst the Iudgment is set, and the
Books are opened. And thus I have given a brief account from Scripture of the manner and circum∣stances of his coming: from whence I proceed to the IV. And last general I proposed to treat of, viz. to explain the whole Process of this Iudgment. And that we may proceed herein the more di∣stinctly we will consider it with respect to those twofold objects; viz. the Righteous and the Wic∣ked, about which it is to be exercised, for it is plain from Scripture that they are not to be judg∣ed promiscuously one among another as they come, but the Sheep are to be separated from the Goats, the Good from the Bad, and to be tried and sen∣tenced apart from one another, Mat. 25.32, 33. And he, i. e. the Son of Man, shall separate them from one another as a Shepherd divideth his Sheep from the Goats, and he shall set the Sheep on his Right hand, and the Goats on the left; in which separati∣on the precedency will be given to the Sheep or Righteous, who are to be judged first; for so the Scripture assures us, that the dead in Christ are to rise first; and that after they have undergone their Iudgment, they are immediately to be was∣ted up into the Air, there to meet the Lord, and to sit as Assessors with him in that Judgment which he shall afterwards pass upon the wicked, vid. 1 Thes. 4.15, 16, 17. compared with 1 Cor. 6.2. In ex∣plaining therefore the Process of this Iudgment, we will treat of it in the same order wherein it will be transacted, beginning first with the Iudgment of the Righteous; in which according to the Scripture-account of it there are these five things implied, 1. Their Citation or Summons. 2. Their personal
Appearance before the Judgment Seat. 3. Their Trial. 4. Their Sentence. 5. Their Assumption into the clouds of heaven. I. This Judgment of the Righteous includes their Citation or Summons, which, as was observed be∣fore, is to be performed by the Voice or Trump of the Archangel, i. e. by an Audible shout or noise made by the Prince of Angels, and sounding throughout the Universe like the mighty blast of a Trumpet. For as it was anciently the manner of Nations to gather their Assemblies by the sound of a Trumpet; so by the same sound the Scripture tells us, God will assemble the world of men to judgment, and that this shall be a real Audible sound like that of a Trumpet, though proceeding from no other instrument than that of the Arch∣angels mouth, I see no reason to doubt; because with such a noise we read God did descend upon Mount Sinai, Exod. 19.16. and why may we not as well understand the one in a literal sense as the other, it being no more improper in the nature of the thing for God to proclaim by such a sound his coming to judge the World, than it was, his coming to give Laws to Israel. But then toge∣ther with this mighty Voice or Trump of the Arch∣angel there shall proceed from Christ a divine power, even his holy Spirit, by which he raised him∣self from the dead, by whose omnipotent Agen∣cy all those holy Reliques of the bodies of his Saints which are now scattered about the world shall be gathered up, reunited and reorganized into glorious bodies; for so the Apostle attributes the Resurrection of our bodies to the Holy Ghost, Rom. 8.11. For if the Spirit of him that raised up
Iesus from the dead dwell in us, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken our mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in us, and the old materials of their bodies being thus reunited and reformed by the powerful energy of the Holy Ghost accompanying the sound of the Archangels Trump, those Saintly Spirits which anciently inhabited them, and which are now come down from heaven with their Saviour shall every one re-enter its own proper body, and animate it with immortal vigour and activity, and whilst the dead Saints are thus arising, those who shall then be li∣ving, and have not tasted death, shall by the same Almighty Power be changed, transformed, and glorified in the twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. which being transacted they shall all be gathered together by the Ministry of the holy An∣gels from all parts of the Earth before the judg∣ment Seat of Christ, Mat. 13.27. For II. This Iudgment of the Righteous doth also include their personal Appearance before the Judg∣ment Seat. What this Iudgment Seat will be hath been briefly hinted before, viz. a vast body of luminous aether condensed into the form of a bright and radiant Cloud, and placed in the Re∣gion of the Air, at a convenient distance from the Earth, streaming with light from every part, and casting forth an unspeakable glory, for which cause it is called the Throne of his glory, and is de∣scribed by S▪ Iohn to be a great white or refulgent Throne, Rev. 20.11. out of which Lightnings and Thunders are said to proceed, Rev. 4.5. which im∣plies, that it will be a Cloud, it being from Clouds that Thunders and Lightnings do proceed. And
before this glorious Tribunal or bright Iudgment-Seat shall all the Assembly of the Righteous ap∣pear to undergo a merciful Trial, and receive a happy Doom. Here shall the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Pro∣phets, the noble Army of Martyrs, the holy Church throughout all the World, both Militant and Tri∣umphant, meet, and in one entire body present themselves before their blessed Redeemer; who looking down from his exalted Throne shall at one view see all the Congregation of his Saints before him, and with infinite complacency sur∣veigh the fruit of the travel of his Soul, and the mighty purchase of his precious bloud; for so the Apostle tells us that we must all stand before his Iudgment Seat. Rom. 14.10. III. This Iudgment of the Righteous doth al∣so include their Trial; for so the Apostle assures us, We must all appear (i. e. we Righteous as well as others) before the Iudgment-Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, 2 Cor. 5.10. which plainly implies, that even the Righteous shall undergo an impartial trial of their deeds; that so they may receive a reward propor∣tionable to them; and more expresly, Rom. 14.12. he tells us, that we must every one of us give an ac∣count of himself to God, and if every one, then to be sure the Righteous must as well as the wicked: not that there will be any doubt of the righteous∣ness of the Righteous in the breast of the Judge, to whose all-seeing Eye the darkest secrets of all hearts lie open; but yet for othe asons it is highly convenient they should undergo a trial as well as others: As first, for the more solemn and
publick vindication of their wronged innocence, that all that infamy and scandal with which their ma∣licious Enemies have bespattered them may be wiped off before men and Angels, and that be∣ing assoiled before all the World they may tri∣umph for ever in a bright and glorious reputation. And secondly, That all those brave and unaffect∣ed acts of secret Piety and Charity, to which none but God and themselves were conscious, may be brought into the open light, and to their everlast∣ing renown proclaimed throughout all the vast As∣sembly of Spirits: for now we shall see all those modest souls unmask'd, whose silent and retired gra∣ces do make so little shew and noise in the world, and all their humble pieties and bashful beauties which scarce any Eye ever saw, but Gods, shall be exposed to the publick view and general applause of Saints and Angels. Thirdly, They shall be tried also for the vindication of Gods impartial procedure in proportioning their reward to their vertue; that so the degrees of each mans profici∣ency in piety and vertue being exposed to the view of the world by an impartial trial, Angels and Men may be convinced that in distributing the different degrees of happiness the Almighty Judge is no way biassed by a fond partiality or re∣spect of persons, but that he proceeds upon immu∣table Principles of Iustice, and doth exactly adjust and ballance his rewards with the degrees and numbers of our deserts and improvements; that so even those that are set lowest in those blessed Forms and Classes of glorified Spirits may not envy those that are above them, or complain that they are ad∣vanced no higher; but every one may chearfully
acknowledge himself to be placed where he ought to be, as being fully convinced that he is only so many degrees inferiour to others in glory, as they are superiour to him in divine graces and perfecti∣ons. Fourthly and lastly, The Righteous shall un∣dergo this Trial for the more glorious manifestati∣on of the divine mercy and goodness. For which reason I am apt to think that even their sins of which they have dearly and heartily repented shall in this their trial be exposed and brought upon the Stage, that so in the free pardon of such an infinite number of them the whole Congregation of the blessed may behold and admire the infinite extent of the divine mercies, and be thereby the deeper affected with, and more vigorously excited to ce∣lebrate with Songs of praise the goodness of their merciful Iudge. For these reasons the Wise man tells us, Eccles. 12.14. that God shall bring every se∣cret thing to judgment whether it be good, or whether it be evil; which Proposition being universal, must extend to the Righteous as well as to the Wic∣ked. But yet though their sores shall be then laid open, it shall be done by a soft and gentle hand, by a serene Conscience, and a smiling Iudge, who with∣out any angry look, or severe reflection, or any other circumstance, but what shall contribute to the joys and triumphs of that day, shall read over all the Items of their guilt, and then cancel them for ever. For IV. This Iudgment of the Righteous doth also include their Sentence. Although to us whose ope∣rations are so slow and leisurely by reason of the unwieldiness of these fleshly Organs with which we act, such a particular trial as hath been before de¦scribed
of such an infinite number of men and women may seem to require an unreasonable length of time, yet if we consider that then both the Iudge, and those who are to be judged shall be array'd in spiritual bodies, in which they will be able to act with unspeakable nimbleness and dispatch, we shall find that a little time comparatively may ve∣ry well suffice for so great a transaction; for the Iudge being one that can attend to infinite causes at once without any distraction, and they who are to be judged, being by reason of their spiritu∣ality in a condition to attend to every ones trial, while they are undergoing their own, I see no reason we have to imagine that they shall be tried successively one after another, and if not, why may we not suppose that we shall all be tried together at the same time, and consequently that the trial of all may be transacted in as short a time as the trial of one. And that they shall all be tried together is very probable, since it is apparent from Scripture that they shall all be sentenced together, for thus Mat. 25.34. Then shall the King say to those on his right hand, i. e. to them all together, Come ye blessed, &c. Having first by an accurate and impartial Tri∣al manifested their integrity to all the world, he shall arise out of his flaming Throne, and with an audible voice, and smiling Majesty, pronounce their Sentence all together in these, or such like words, Come ye blessed Children of my Father inhe∣rit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world, to which welcome Sentence they will doubtless all immediately resound a joyful Choir of Halelujahs through Heaven and Earth, Allelu∣jah, Salvation, and Glory, and Power be to the Lord
our God, for true and righteous are his Iudgments' Salvation be unto our Lord that sitteth on the Throne, and to the Lamb; for wonderful are thy works, O Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, O thou King of Saints. And now all their business being finished here below, they shall from hence∣forth be no longer detained in this Vale of tears and misery, but with overjoyed hearts shall take their leave of it for ever. For V. And lastly, Another thing implyed in this their Iudgment is their Assumption into the Clouds of heaven. For their blessed Lord having thus publickly acquitted and pronounced them blessed, they shall immediately feel the happy effect of it▪ for now he will no longer suffer them to stand below at the Bar, but from thence will call them up to his Tribunal, there to give them a nearer ac∣cess to his beloved person and more intimate parti∣cipation of his glory. At which powerful call and invitation of his, they shall in an instant all take wing together like a mighty flock of pure and in∣nocent Doves, and fly aloft into the air, singing and warbling as they go to meet their Redeemer in the Clouds of Heaven. For so the Apostle in 1 Thes. 4.17. Then (that is, after their Resurrecti∣on and Judgment) we which are alive and remain, who never died, but only have been changed and glorified, shall be caught up together with them who shall be raised from the dead into the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so we shall be ever with the Lord. For to be sure that rapturous love which the sight and sentence of their Saviour hath by this time kindled in their pious breasts, will wing their souls with vehement desire to be with him, and then be∣ing
cloath'd with glorified bodies that are as vigo∣rous and active as their Souls; as nimble and expe∣dite as their thoughts and wishes, it will be in their power soon to accomplish their desire, and fly from hence up to the Throne of their Lord. And now this being the first general meeting of the blessed Jesus and his Church; the first Inter∣view that ever was between the heavenly Bride∣groom and his holy Bride, O the dear welcomes, the infinite mutual congratulations that will pass between them! How will they now melt in love and dissolve in mutual flames! now when like long absent Lovers they are safe arrived into each others Arms, never, never to be parted more. And now this joyful meeting being consumma∣ted, they begin to prepare for a most dreadful so∣lemnity, and that is the Iudgment of the Wicked. In order to which the Judge will reassume his Throne, and place his Saints all round about in shining Circles ten thousand thousand together, that so as his Assessors they may bear a part in the ensuing Judgment; for this the Apostle asserts as a notorious principle of our Christian faith; Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the World, 1 Cor. 6.2. that is, that they shall not only accuse and condemn the wicked World by the holy example of their lives, but also that they shall give their votes and suffra∣ges to that dreadful sentence which Christ shall pass upon them. And now the Iudge and his Assessors being set, proceed we to the II. Second Judgment, which is, that of the wicked, in which there are also five particulars in∣cluded: First, their Citation; Secondly, their
personal Appearance; Thirdly, their Trial; Fourthly, their Sentence; Fifthly, their Execution. I. Their Citation: For the first Judgment being finished, it's probable a new summons will be gi∣ven by the Voice or Trump of the Archangel to as∣semble the wicked World to their Judgment, up∣on hearing of which all those wicked souls that have left their bodies and been hitherto confined in some dark prison of the Creation shall be for∣ced to leave their dismal habitations, in which they would a thousand times rather chuse to continue for ever, if they might have their own option, than to undergo that fearful Iudgment whereunto they are cited; but being dragged into the open light again by those Devils who have been hither∣to their Jailors, they shall every one be forced to put on those old accursed bodies of theirs in which they contracted those crimson guilts which now they must expiate in eternal flames; and now the souls of the dead being shut up in their bodies a∣gain like prisoners in a sure Hold, and there se∣cured by an immortal tie from ever making ano∣ther escape, the bodies of the living shall by a miraculous change be render'd at once so tender and sensible, that the least touch of misery shall pain them, and yet so strong and durable, that the grea∣test loads of misery shall never be able to sink them; and thus being all of them put into an im∣mortal capacity of suffering, and thereby prepared to undergo the fearful doom which awaits them, they shall from all parts of the World be driven before the Judgment Seat of Christ. For. II. This Iudgment of the wicked implies also their personal Appearance at our Saviours Tribu∣nal:
for so S. Iohn in his prophetique Vision of the day of Judgment, saw the dead both small and great standing before God, Rev. 20.12. and in Mat. 25.31, 32. we are told, that when the Son of man sits down upon the Throne of his Glory all Nations shall be gathered before him, that is, the impure Goats as well as the innocent Sheep, as he afterwards ex∣plains himself. And now good Lord, what a Tragical spectacle will here be! An innumerable number of self-condemned wretches assemble to∣gether before the Tribunal of an Almighty and implacable Iudge, quaking and trembling under the dire expectations of a fearful and irrevocable doom, and with weeping eyes, pale looks and gast∣ly countenances aboding the miserable fate that attends them. For thus it is represented, Rev. 1.7. Behold he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him, they also which pierced him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him; and well they may, considering how they treated him, and what little reason they have upon that account to expect any favour at his hands; for to be sure the sight of him must give a dreadful Alarm to their consciences, and suggest to them the sad re∣membrance of the innumerable provocations they have given him. Look up O ye miserable crea∣tures, see yonder is that glorious person whose Au∣thority you have so insolently affronted, whose Name you have so impiously blasphemed, whose Mercies you have so obstinately rejected, behold with what a stern and terrible Majesty he sits upon yonder flaming Throne, from whence he is now just ready to exact of ye a dreadful account for all your past rebellions against him; but O unhap∣py
and furlorn! see how they droop, and hang their heads, as being both ashamed and afraid to look their terrible Iudge in the face, whose in∣censed eye sparkles upon them with such an in∣sufferable terror and indignation as they are no lon∣ger able to endure, but are forced in the bitter∣ness, anguish and despair that ever humane souls were seized with, to cry out to the Rocks and Moun∣tains to fall upon them, and to hide them from the face of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. III. Another particular implied in this judgment of the wicked is their Trial; for so 1 Cor. 4.5. we are told, that in this fearful day of reckoning God will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the very counsels of the heart; and this will be no hard matter to effect, considering that he who is to be the Iudge of these guilty Cri∣minals, hath been a constant witness to all their actions, that his All-seeing Eye hath traced them all along through all their secret mysteries and dark Intrigues of Iniquity, and hath kept an ex∣act record of them in the book of his remem∣brance; so that to convict them of their guilts he will need do no more but only produce his own registers, and expose what he hath there recorded to the view of the World; and there the wretches will see themselves transcribed, and all their abo∣minable actions exactly copied from their first O∣riginals; there they will find all their secret ma∣chinations; their dark cheats, their leud imagina∣tions and hypocritical intentions recorded in the most legible Characters, and perceiving them∣selves thus shamefully unstript and uncased before
the World, their very inwards dissected, and the smallest threds and fibres of their hearts laid open and exposed to the view of men and Angels, their own shame and the intolerable rack of their consciences will force them to confess their Charge, and proclaim themselves guilty before all that vast Congregation of Spirits. But, O the inexpressi∣ble horror and confusion these wretched Souls will then be seized with when they shall see them∣selves thus publickly unmasked and turned inside outwards, and be forced to stand forth like so many loathsom spectacles before God and his An∣gels without any excuse or retreat for their shame, without any vail to hide their infamy and blushes! when their filthy practices shall be no longer con∣fined to the talk of a Town or a Village, but be proclaimed in the hearing of all the rational World: O now it would be happy for them if as formerly, they could drown the retorts of their conscience in noise and laughter, and forget its cutting repartees which were always uneasie to bear, but impossible to Answer. But alas those jolly days are gone, and now in despite of them∣selves they must listen with horrour and confusion of face, to what those two great Judges, Iesus and their own Consciences unanimously give in charge against them. Thus he whose piercing Eye doth now penetrate their hearts and ransack every corner of their souls, will in that great day of discoveries bring forth all that secret filth that is there reposited, and expose it for an infamous spectacle to the publick view of men and Angels. IV. Another particular implied in this judge∣ment of wicked men is their Sentence. Their Trial
being now over, in which their guilt hath been sufficiently evinced and detected to their everlasting infamy and reproach, they will by this time have received the sentence of death within themselves, and stand condemned in the judgment of all the World; the Righteous Iudg, who is too great to be overawed, too just to be bribed, and too much provoked to be intreated, whose Ears are now for ever stopped, and whose Bowels are im∣penitrably hardened against all further Overtures of mercy, will with a stern look and terrible voice pronounce that dreadful doom upon them, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels, which though it be of a horrible import, will appear so just, considering the hor∣rible things which have been charged and proved against them, that it will be immediately second∣ed with the unanimous suffrage of all that bright Corona of glorified Saints that sit as Assessors round the Throne, who with one consent will all cry out together, Iust and righteous art thou O Iudge of the World in all thy ways: But, O the fearful shrieks and lamentations that will then be heard from those poor condemned Creatures! For if A Lord have mercy upon thee, A take him Iailor from an earthly Iudge be able to extort so many sighs and tears from a hardened Malefactor, what will A go ye cursed do from the mouth of the Righteous Iudge of the World, and when so many millions of men and women shall be all involved toge∣ther in the same doom, and all at once lamenting their dismal fate, Lord, what a horrible outcry will they make! Now in the bitter Agonies of their souls they will cry to heaven for mercy, mer∣cy,
but alas poor souls they cry too late; their Iudg was once as importunate with them to have mer∣cy upon themselves, but because when he called they refused, when he stretched forth his hands they regarded not, now when they call he will not answer, when they cry he will not hear, but will laugh at their calamity, as they did at his counsel, and mock when their fear and destruction is come upon them. V. And lastly, Another particular implied in this Iudgment of the wicked, is the execution of their Sentence. For immediately after their sen∣tence is past by which they stand doomed to ever∣lasting fire, an everlasting fire shall be kindled round about them, a fire which within a few moments shall spread it self over all this lower World, and convert the whole Almosphere about us into a furnace of inquenchable flames; For then all those fiery particles which are every where intermingled with these terrestial Bodies, and have hitherto been kept within their proper limits, shall be disintangled and set free from those more gross and sluggish ones that now bind and fix them, and swarm together like so many sparks into one huge globe of Fire, which from the lower-most centre of the Earth shall spire up and kin∣dle upon all that Airy Heaven above, and with one continued flame fill all the vast expansum; all that fiery matter which is now dispersed up and down within the entrails of the Earth, shall by degrees gather together into Rivers of Fire, which rolling to and fro within, to force their way into the open Air, will perhaps produce those pro∣digious Earthquakes, of which our Saviour speaks,
by which at length the Earth being cleft and torn, it shall every where vomit out Torrents of Fire from its flaming bowels; and at the same time the Sea shall boil and swell, and roar like water in a seething Pot, till 'tis all evaporated by the strugling flames from below, which having rarified its waters into vapours shall kindle those vapours into flames; and at the same time also the Heavens above shall groan and crack with incessant Thunder, accompanied with thick and fearful flashes of Lightning, which joyning with those vast streams of Fire that will be continually issuing out of the Earth and Sea, will make such a prodigious deluge of flames as will quickly overflow the whole World. For thus we are assured from Scripture, that the Element shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10. So also St. Iohn in his Vision of the day of Judg∣ment, Rev. 20.11. I saw a great white Throne and him that sate on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them: not that the matter of them shall be annihilated, but the form of them shall be destroyed by their being converted into an ever∣lasting Fire; and in this Fire shall those con∣demned wretches live and suffer to eternal Ages. Hence it is called the vengeance of eternal fire; and we are told that it will be in flaming fire, that the Lord Jesus will render vengeance to all that know not God and obey not his Gospel, 2 Thess. 1.8. And that this flaming fire shall be the conflagra∣tion of the World, that of St. Peter seems plainly to imply, 2 Pet. 3.7. But the heavens and the earth
which are now—are kept in store reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men; and being reserved unto fire against the day of perdition of ungodly men, we may justly con∣clude that the fire it is reserved to, will be the Perdition of ungodly men. Thus upon our Sa∣viours pronouncing those dreadful words, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, the persons concerned will immediately perceive the dire effects; for all on a sudden they will see the Clouds from above, and the Earth from beneath casting forth Torrents of fire upon them, which in an instant will set all the World in a Blaze about their ears; At the sight of which all this wretched World will be turned into a mournful Stage of Horrours, in which the miserable actors being seized with in∣expressible amazement to see themselves all on a sudden encompassed on every side with flames, will raise a hideous Roar and outcry, millions of burning men and women shrieking together, and their noise shall mingle with the Archangels Trumpet, with the Thunders of the dying and groaning Heaven, and the crack of the dissol∣ving World that is sinking into eternal ruins. In which miserable state of things whither can the poor Creatures fly, or where can they hope to find a Sanctuary? If they go up to the tops of the Mountains; there they are but more openly ex∣posed to the dreadful lightnings of Heaven; if they go down into the holes and caverns of the Rocks; there they will be swallowed up in the burning furnaces of the Earth; if they descend into the deep; there they will soon be overtaken with a storm of fire and brimstone; and where∣ever
they go the vengeance of God will still pur∣sue them with its everlasting burnings. And thus having no retreat left them, no avenue to escape out of this burning World, here they must re∣main for ever surrounded with smoak, and fire, and darkness, and wrap'd in fierce and merciless flames, which like a shirt of burning pitch will stick close to, and pierce through and through their passive bodies, and for ever prey upon, but never consume them. And now the Almighty Judg having seen his dread sentence executed, will arise from his Throne, and from thence return to the Seat of the blessed in a solemn and Glorious Triumph with all his ho∣ly myriads of Angels and Saints, who as they fol∣low him through the Air and aether, will with loud Hosanna's and triumphant acclamations cele∣brate the praises of their Redeemer. Thus shall the Ransomed of the Lord return with him, with Songs to the heavenly Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and everlasting praises in their mouths. For being arrived into those bliss∣ful Regions; there in those glorified Bodies which they put on at their Resurrection, they shall live for ever in unspeakable pleasures and delights, and be entertain'd not only with all that happi∣ness which they enjoyed in the state of their se∣paration when they were only blessed Spirits; but also with all the satisfactions and delights that their glorified Bodies can require and enjoy. So that now their blessedness shall be consummate, and all the capacities of their humane nature compounded of body and soul shall be fulfilled with bliss, till they overflow and can contain no
more. But wherein the happiness of their glori∣fied Bodies shall consist, I shall not presume to inquire, the Scripture being silent concerning it. And what the happiness of their souls shall be, hath been shewn at large before, Part 1. c. 3, 4. So that as to that state of eternal life, in which our Saviour shall place his faithful servants in the conclusion of this great Judgment, I need say no more of it in this place. SECT. XI. Concerning the conclusion and surrender of the Kingdom of Christ. WHen our Saviour hath finished that last and most glorious act of Royalty, viz. Iudging the World, and hath finally condemned to everlasting fire the irreclaimable enemies of God, and crowned all his faithful subjects with eternal Glory and Beatitude; the Apostle tells us, He shall deliver up the Kingdom to God even the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. For our better understand∣ing of which, we are to consider that the King∣dom of Christ is twofold: First, Essential, as he is God Essential, and doth subsist in the divine Essence; by the supereminent perfections of which he being exalted above all things, hath an essen∣tial Right of Dominion over all things; and this is Co-eternal with himself, and is as inseparable to him as his Being; this he can no more deliver up
than he can his Godhead, which without ceasing to be can never cease to be supreme over all things. But then in the second place, there is his Mediatorial Kingdom, which is that of which we have hitherto been treating, and this, as hath been shewn before, was by solemn compact and agreement confr'd upon him by the Father, upon condition that he should assume our Nature, and therein make expiation for our sins, in conside∣ration whereof the Father obliged himself to grant a Covenant of Grace to the sinful World, and to constitute him the Mediator of it; by which Mediatorial Office he is authorized to rule for God according to the tenour of that gracious Cove∣nant, as well as to intercede for us; and in ruling for God according to that Covenant, he is to crown and reward all such as return to, and per∣severe in their duty, with everlasting happiness, and to render eternal vengeance to all such as obstinately persist in their rebellion. So that when this is done (as it will be in the conclu∣sion of the day of Judgment) the whole business of his Mediatorial Kingdom is at an end; then the Covenant of which he is now Mediator will be completely executed, and consequently his Me∣diation will cease, as being of no farther use, and having no farther part to act. For now God and Man being made completely one, the Of∣fice of a Mediator ceases of its own accord; for a Mediator is not a Mediator of one, Gal. 3.20. and therefore the two parties being perfectly united, there is no farther use of a Mediator between them. Wherefore as our beatifical Vision will su∣percede the necessity of his prophetick Office, to
teach and instruct us; as our perfection and intire fruition will supercede the necessity of his Priestly Office to offer and intercede for us; so the se∣curity of our possession of both will supercede the necessity of his Kingly Office to protect and de∣fend us; and therefore when our Affairs are once reduced to this happy issue, his Kingly Of∣fice as well as all other parts of his Mediatorship will for ever cease. But since this great Mystery is no where expresly delivered in Scripture, but only in that forecited, 1 Cor. 15. I shall endea∣vour to give a brief account of the whole passage, which lies in vers. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Then cometh the end when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father, when he shall put down all Rule and all Authority, and all Power, for he must reign till he hath put all Enemies under his feet; the last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death; for he hath put all things under his feet: but when he saith all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which did put all things under him, and when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him which did put all things under him, that God may be all in all; the whole sense and meaning of which passage, I shall cast into these Propositions: First, That the Kingdom or Dominion here spo∣ken of, was committed to him by God the Fa∣ther. Secondly, That he is to possess this Kingdom and Dominion so long and no longer, as till all things are actually subdued to him. Thirdly, That during his possession of it, he is subject to the Father.
Fourthly, That after his delivering it up to the Father, he will be otherwise subject to him than he is now. Fifthly, That he being thus subjected to the Father, all Power and Dominion shall from thence∣forth be immediately exercised by the Deity. I. That the Kingdom or Dominion here spoken of, was committed to him by God the Father; and this is expresly affirmed, vers. 27. For he (i. e. the Father) hath put all things under his feet, which words are a quotation of Psal. 8. ver. 6. Thou madest him to have Dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all things under his feet; which words are to be understood literally of the first Adam, but mystically of the second; as is evi∣dent not only because 'tis here applied to Christ by S. Paul, but also by the Author to the He∣brews, Heb. 2.7, 8. where he expresly tells us, that it was God the Father that crowned Christ with Glory and Honour, and that did set him over the works of his hands, and put all things in sub∣jection under his feet; and accordingly our Saviour himself declares, that all Power in Heaven and Earth was given him, i. e. by the Father, and that it was the Father that committed all judgment to him; and the Apostle expresly tells us, that it was God that exalted him with his own right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, Acts 5.31. From all which it is evident that the Dominion which the Apostle here treats of, is not the Es∣sential Dominion of Christ, which as he is God Essential, is Co-eternal with him; but that Media∣torial Dominion which was committed to him by the voluntary disposal of his Father, and which
once he had not, and will hereafter cease to have. II. That he is to possess this Kingdom or Do∣minion so long as, and no longer than till all things are actually subdued unto him. So vers. 24. you see the time of his delivering up this King∣dom, is then, when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority and Power, i. e. till he shall have converted or destroyed all those Powers of the Earth that oppose themselves against him; for so vers. 25, 26. For he must reign till he hath put all Enemies under his feet, the last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death; which plainly implies, that when he hath conquered all Enemies, and destroyed Death, which is the last Enemy, by giving a glorious Resurrection to his faithful Sub∣jects, then, and not till then his Mediatorial Reign is to conclude: For so, Psal. 110.1. to which the Apostle here refers; the Psalmist brings in Ie∣hovah the Father, thus bespeaking Iehovah the Son, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I make thine Enemies thy footstool; now to sit at the Right Hand of God, when ever 'tis applied to our Saviour, doth in Scripture al∣ways denote his possessing and exercising this his Mediatorial Kingdom; so that the meaning of the Psalmist is this; the Father hath Commission∣ed his Son to continue the exercise of his Media∣torial Dominion, till such time as either by the dint of his Almighty Vengeance he hath tram∣pled all his Enemies under foot, or by the power of his Grace reduced them voluntarily to prostrate themselves before him: and indeed, the end for which this Kingdom of our Saviour was erected
was to subdue the Rebellious World to God, and either to captivate men into a free submission to hs Heavenly Will, which is its first intention; or if they will not yield, to make them the Triumph of his everlasting vengeance; which end at the day of Judgment will be fully accomplished; for then the fate of all the rational World will be fixed and determined; then the faithful Subjects will be crowned, and the incorrigible Rebels con∣demned and executed; and so, one way or t'o∣ther all things will be subdued unto him. So that from hence-forth the end and reason of this his Mediatorial Dominion will cease, and when the end of it ceaseth, he who never doth any thing in vain, will immediately deliver it up into those hands from whence he received it. For when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Au∣thority and Power, i. e. conquered and subdued all that resisted and opposed him, then cometh the end when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father. III. That during his possession of this Kingdom, he is subject to the Father. So Ver. 27. But when he saith all things are put under him, it is manifest that he (i. e. the Father) is excepted which did put all things under him. As if he should say; Do not mistake me, for when I say all things are put under him, my meaning is, all things except God the Father, for it was he that did put all things under him; and it's manifest that he who gave him this superiority over all things, must himself be superior to him; and indeed, considering Christ as Mediatorial King, he is no more than his Fathers Viceroy, and doth only act by deputation from him,
and rule and Govern for him; and hence the Father stiles him his King, Psal. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion. So that now he is subject to the Father in the capacity of a Vice-King to a supreme Sovereign, and what∣soever he doth in this capacity he doth in his Fathers Name and by his Authority; for he Medi∣ates as for men with God, in doing which he is our Advocate; so for God with men, in doing which he is our King. Gods part is to Govern us, and our part is to sue to him for favour and pro∣tection, and both these parts our Saviour acts as Mediator between God and us: He acts our part for us in being Advocate, and Gods part for him in being King. So that in that Rule and Go∣vernment which he now exercises over us, he is only the supreme Minister of his Fathers Power and Dominion, and as the Father reigns by his Ministry, so he reigns by the Fathers Authority. But tho now while his Mediatorial Kingdom doth continue, he is subject to the Father in the Admi∣stration of it, yet from this passage of S. Paul it is evident IV. That when he hath delivered it up to the Father, he will be otherwise subject to him than he is now; for so ver. 28. and when all things shall be subdued unto him, that is, actually, and as they will be at the day of Judgment, when the good are Crowned, and the wicked consigned to that fearful Execution, Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that did put all things under him, which necessarily implies that then he should enter into a different state of subjection to the Father, from that wherein he was before.
Why Then shall the Son himself be subject to him? Was he not subject to him before? Yes, doubt∣less he was, and therefore either this then must be impertinent, or then he shall be so subject to him as he was not before; before he was subject to him as he was his Mediatorial King or Viceroy, as he reigned under him and by his Authority, but then he is to be subject to him after a different manner. For the explication of which it is to be considered, that now the Son considered as Mediator, reigns under God in the right of what he did and suffered in his human Nature Hypo∣statically united to his God-head; for it was be∣cause he humbled himself and became obedient to the death, even the Death of the Cross that God highly exalted him, Phil. 2.8.9. Now 'twas as he was Man, that he became obedient to death, and 'twas in the right of that obedience that God exalted him to his Mediatorial Kingdom; so that now as Mediator he not only reigns in his human Nature, but in right of the passion of his human Nature; his Mediatorial Kingdom is the purchase of his Blood, by which he both obtained the new Co∣venant for us, and Regal Power to execute it up∣on us. When therefore he hath executed it to the full (as we are sure he will do at the day of Judgment) this Regal Power of his which he purchased with his Blood, will cease, as having fully accomplish'd that for which it was given and intended. And now he being to Reign no longer in right of the sufferings of his human Nature, his human Nature will be subject to the Father in a more different manner than it was before: Before it was subject to him as Authorized
in consideration of its passion to reign and go∣vern under him, but then having delivered up its Reign and Government, it will be subject to him in a more private capacity, as the Presidents of the Roman Empire were subject to Caesar while they governed under him, but when they rendered back their Character, they became his Subjects in a more private station. Not that the humanity of Christ shall be any way depressed, or degraded by his delivering up his Mediatorial Kingdom; but as an Embassador after he is discharged of the bur∣then of his Embassie doth still retain the honour and dignity of it, so the Human Nature of Christ after he hath surrendered up its Mediatorial Do∣minion, shall still remain as highly exalted in Honour, Dignity, and Beatitude as ever; and An∣gels and Saints shall for ever render to it the same religious respect and veneration as they did before he surrendered it; for it shall still remain Hypo∣statically united to his Godhead, and so God shall for ever reign in it, tho it shall not for ever reign with God: so that it being still the Temple of the Deity, and all the glorious atchievements it made during its Humiliation and Mediatorial Reign, reflecting still the same honour and praise and glory upon it, it will to eternity be as great and glorious throughout all the Heavenly World as ever it was in the full splendor of its Kingdom; so that in this respect what the an∣cient Fathers added to the Nicene Creed is most true, his Kingdom shall have no end, because, with∣out possessing it, he shall for ever enjoy the Glory and Honour and Beatitude of it.
5. And lastly, That the Son being thus sub∣jected to the Father, all Power and Dominion shall from thenceforth be immediately exercised by the Deity, that is to say, by God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; for so ver. 18. Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that did put all things under him, that God may be all in all. Where the variation of the Per∣son is very observable, for it is not said, that the Son shall be subject to him that did put all things under him (i. e. the Father) that he may be all in all, but that God may be all in all, that is, the Triune Godhead subsisting in three Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for had he meant the Father only, he ought according to the com∣mon rules of speech to have said he, or the Fa∣ther, of whom he had been before speaking, in∣stead of God, nor can it be reasonably suppo∣sed that after the resignation of the Mediato∣rial Kingdom the Father only shall act and reign, and the Son and Holy Ghost sit still for ever and do nothing, but the meaning is, that this Media∣torial Kingdom ceasing, in which the Son as Man as well as God now reigns, there shall from thenceforth be no other Kingdom or Dominion exercised in that Celestial State, but what is es∣sential to the Godhead, in which the Son and Ho∣ly Ghost subsisting together with the Father shall for ever reign together with him: for this I take to be the meaning of that phrase, that God may be all in all, that is, that he may rule and govern all things immediately by himself, that his immediate Will may reign alone in all, and be the proximate guide of all that blessed world, that there may be
no mediate or Mediatorial Governour between him and us to exact our obedience, and convey to us his favours and rewards, but that we may render all our duty immediately to him, and derive all our happiness immediately from him; so that as now Christ the Theantropos or God-man is all in all, Col. 3.11. because the Father doth all things, and governs all things by him, having given him all power in heaven and earth; so when this Oeco∣nomy ceases, God alone, or the Triune Godhead shall be all in all, because he shall do all things, and govern all things by himself immediately. Thus when the Son of Man is subjected to him that did put all things under him, that one divine Essence whence all things did proceed, and in which the Father, Son and Holy Ghost subsist, shall from thenceforth resume all Rule and Do∣minion to it self, and only the Son of God toge∣ther with the Father and the Holy Ghost shall reign. But yet in this purely divine Govern∣ment there is no doubt but those divine persons will still continue to act in subordination to each other, according to that natural subordination in which they are placed by their personal properties. For the Godhead being communicated from the Father to the Son, the Father in the order of nature must necessarily be Prior to the Son, and the same Godhead being communicated to the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, both Father and Son must also in order of nature be Prior to the Holy Ghost. So that between these Sacred Three there is an internal necessary subordi∣nation that can never be altered or inverted; and therefore there is no doubt but that as they will al∣ways
be subordinate, so they will always act sub∣ordinately. The Father as the first, the Begetter and the Fountain of Divinity will be always first and supreme in the divine Monarchy; the Son, as be∣gotten by him, will still reign in subordination to him, and the Holy Ghost, as proceeding from both, will continue to reign in subordination to both. Thus to everlasting Ages only the Trinity in U∣nity shall reign, and by its own immediate Will and Influence rule and bless all that Heavenly World over which it spreads its Almighty Wings, and so it shall be all in all. SECT. XII. Of the Reason and Wisdom of this Me∣thod of Gods Governing sinful Men by his own Eternal Son in our Natures. THough we are not able either by our natu∣ral Reason or Revelation to fathom the depth of the Divine Wisdom, or to trace out all the reasons of its Methods and Conduct, yet upon diligent inquiry we can plainly discern the Tracts of an admirable Wisdom in all the stated Methods of Providence; and though we cannot say that this or that is the main or only reason why God doth so or so, (for infinite wisdom may have infinitely greater and infinitely more reasons of its actions than our short-sighted Reason can at present discover) yet by comparing one action
of his with another, and diligently observing the drift and tendency of them all, how they concur to one common end, and subserve each other to promote and accomplish it, we cannot avoid discovering reason enough in them to convince and satisfie us that they all proceed from a most wise and intelligent Agent, and this more espe∣cially in the admirable Oeconomy of the Media∣tion, viz. the eternal Son of God's assuming our Nature, and therein becoming our Prophet, Priest, and King: for what easons there are why he should assume our nature therein to be our Pro∣phet and our Priest hath been shewn before. And now we shall proceed so far as our short In∣quiries will reach to shew what admirable reason there is why he should be our King also, to rule and govern us in the same assumed nature where∣in he is our Prophet and our Priest; of which according to the best ight that Revelation af∣fords us there are these five Reasons assign∣able. First, That he might govern us in a way more accommodated to this degenerate state of our Natures. Secondly, That he might the more effectu∣ally cure and prevent the spreading contagion of Idolatry. Thirdly, That he might the more powerfully incourage our obedience. Fourthly, That he might oblige us to himself with a stronger tie of Gratitude and Ingenuity. Fifthly, That he might give us the more ample assurance of our future Reward. I. God governs us by his own eternal Son in
our natures the better to accommodate his Govern∣ment to this our degenerate state, which renders us extremely unfit to be governed immediately by God. It is true, whilst man continued in his Primitive Innocence and Perfection, he was in a con∣dition fit to converse with God face to face, and to live under his immediate Dominion, for then his Sense being under the conduct of his Reason, and all his brutal affections intirely sub∣jected to the government and directions of his superior faculties, he was as much ruled and in∣fluenced by the objects of his Reason, as he is now by those of his Sense, and was as powerfully moved and affected by what he only knew and believed, as he is now by what he sees and feels; so that then God, that great invisible Spi∣rit, who is removed from all the perceptions of bodily sense, and is only perceivable by our Reason and Faith, did as powerfully impress mans hopes and fears, and all the other principles of action in him as he could have done had he appeared as amiable and dreadful to the mans sight and feeling as he then did to his faith and reason. In this state and condition therefore man was duly qualified to be governed immediately by God, to re∣ceive his impressions, and to be moved and acted by the over-ruling influence of his immense per∣fections. But when once he had degenerated from this pure and blessed State of his nature, and had thrown off the Government of his reason, and subjected himself to the tyrannick sway of his brutal appetites, he thereby unqualified himself to live under Gods immediate Dominion. For now he being governed by his sensual appetites,
and they by the sensual Objects that surround him, scarce any thing else can strike upon his hopes and fears, but what is carnal and sensual, or if any thing else doth, to be sure some carnal object immediately interposes and breaks the stroke, and renders it faint and ineffectual; so that now God who is solely the object of our faith and reason, can scarce be admitted to speak with our hopes and fears, by which we are made to be governed, or if he be, his soft still voice is immediately drowned in the perpetual clamour which these sensitive goods and evils raise about us. Where∣fore having thus unqualified our selves by our Apostacy from the primitive state of our nature to live under the immediate Wing and Govern∣ment of God, and he being resolved in tender commiseration to us, not to abandon us for ever, did in his infinite wisdom project a new Method of governing us more accommodated to this our de∣generate state, viz. by uniting himself to sensible matter, and therein addressing to our bodily senses in audible voices, visible appearances, and fi∣nally in our own form and nature, which of all other sensible things we are most apt to be affect∣ed with, to love, and honour, and reverence, and obey. For so immediately after his Fall God appeared to Adam, probably in a glorious human form, and spake to him in an audible voice, and afterwards he did the same to the Patriarchs, and to the whole Nation of the Jews from Mount Sinai, among whom he also dwelt in a visible glo∣ry; by which means he acquired to himself the same advantage of governing those sensual men that sensible objects had, which by striking on
their bodily sense did more powerfully insinuate themselves into their Wills and Affections. But all these sensible appearances of God were only as so many preludia to his assuming our nature into personal union with his Godhead, and therein ex∣hibiting himself familiarly to the bodily senses of mankind, which tho he now ceases to do, as be∣ing exalted far above our sight on the right hand of God the Father, there to reign till the con∣summation of all things, yet seeing we believe he is there visible in himself, cloathed in a most glorious human form, we can by imagination supply the want of our sight of him, and reach him by our inward sense, tho we cannot come at him by our outward; and whereas were he a mere Spirit, we could have no imagination of him, because ima∣ginations are nothing but the Images of sensible things, we can now by the strength of our Ima∣gination fetch him down from the Heavens when we please, and set him before our minds in all that venerable Majesty wherein he sits at the right hand of his Father. So that tho he be never pre∣sent to our outward sense, yet, which is almost equivalent, when ever we have occasion to con∣verse with him, we can make him present to our inward, viz. our fancy and imagination; into this spacious Gallery of the Pictures of sensible things our mind can walk when it pleases, and there be∣hold him in Effigie, tho it cannot see him face to face; and considering how much we are govern∣ed in this degenerate state of our nature by fancy and imagination, as well as by sight and feeling, it is doubtless a most advantageous circumstance of Gods Government of the World, that he governs
us by one whom we can fancy and imagine, when we cannot see or feel him. There are a great ma∣ny men that never saw the King, who yet are overawed by the imagination they have of his Ma∣jesty and greatness, whereas were not the King a man, but a pure invisible Spirit, they could form no imagination of him, the want of which would very much abate, if not utterly extinguish, their aw and reverence of his Person. Considering therefore how much we are go∣verned by our sense in this state of our Apostacy, it was doubtless a wonderful wise contrivance of God, who is a pure Spirit, to assume to himself some sensible matter, that therein by presenting himself to our outward or inward sense, he might strike the deeper aw on us, and thereby the more effectually rule and govern us. But of all sensible matter none could be so proper to this purpose as a human form, in which we are inured and ac∣customed to be governed, and of which, as was hinted before, we have of all sensible things the greatest love and veneration, during this our De∣generacy; therefore by which we are so unqua∣lified to be governed by God immediately, God the Father hath most wisely contrived to govern us by God-man, i. e. by his own eternal Son Hyposta∣tically united to our natures. But when once man∣kind is recovered out of this lapsed condition, when our sense is perfectly subdued to our reason, and all our faculties are reduced into their Pri∣mitive Order,, then we shall return under Gods immediate Dominion, for then God-man shall deliver up the Kingdom, and God shall be all in all.
II. God now governs us by his own eternal Son in our natures, to cure and prevent the spreading contagion of Idolatry. There is no one Vice to which our corrupt nature is more propense, and of which it hath been more univer∣sally tardy, than that of Idolatry; for as for other Vices they have their peculiar Provinces, and such a Vice is more predominant in such a Clime and Temperament of Air: In one Nation Pride reigns, in another Intemperance, in another Treachery, and in a fourth Malice and Revenge; as for Ido∣latry it's an universal Monarch, to whose Empire all the World hath been enslaved and subjected, and notwithstanding all the care which God hath taken to prevent it, it hath spread like the Plague, till it became the Epidemical Disease of human Nature. Now to be sure such an univer∣sal effect must necessarily be owing to some uni∣versal cause; and what other can that be than the universal degeneracy of human Nature from its primitive life of Reason into a life of Sense? For while Man was under the Government of his Reason, he was as much influenced by dry ar∣guments as he is now by his Sense, and the full reason he had to believe that there is an invisible divine Being presiding over all things, did as vi∣gorously excite him to adore and worship him as the sight of him could have done, had he appear∣ed to his bodily eyes in a Glory proportionable to the immense perfections of his Nature. But when once his sense had usurped the Throne of his reason, and enslaved him to its Empire, the case was quite altered, now Reason and Ar∣gument have very little influence on him unless it
be back'd with some impressions on his sense, and his predominant affections are those that are raised by the strokes of sensible objects upon the sensories of his Sight, and Taste, and Feeling, which the divine substance and perfections can never touch, they being purely spiritual; by which means that communication and intercourse which was between God and man, whilst man was governed by reason, is mightily disturbed and interrupted, tho it be not altogether stopt and intercepted; for still our reason (which was not extinguished by the degeneracy of our natures) suggests to us that there is a God, and inspires us with an awful sense of his divine perfections, which still maintains in us Religious Inclinations and Affections, whereby we are importuned and solicited to adore and worship; but we being under the Government of Sense, are thereby naturally inclined either to look upon God who is in himself a pure invisible Spirit under the notion of a sensible Being, and as such to wor∣ship him, (for so anciently some adored the Sun for God, others the universal material Nature, others such particular parts of it) and in this consists that gross Idolatry of worshiping false Gods, or at least to blend our conceptions of him with corporeal Phantasms; and then to ex∣press those Phantasms in outward visible Images, by them to excite and direct our Worship to him (for so in most Nations the supreme Numen was heretofore adored in Statues and Images of seve∣ral shapes and figures copied from the several Images by which they represented him to them∣selves in their own vain and roving imaginations)
and herein consists that more refined Idolatry of worshiping the true God in a false manner. Thus the general cause of all Idolatry is nothing but the general Apostacy of human nature from the life of reason to the life of sense, by which we are na∣turally inclined either to transform God into a gross and sensible nature, or at least to assist our selves in conceiving of, and adoring and wor∣shiping him by sensible and visible Objects. To prevent which God hath been graciously pleased to assume some material substance, and therein from time to time to exhibit to mens eyes a visible presence of himself, which in Scripture is fre∣quently called the Glory of the Lord, and by the ancient Jews the Shechinah or habitation of God, and consisted of a shining luminous matter, which exhibited a glorious lustre of flame or light set off with thick and solemn clouds; whence it is probable he is said to cover himself with light as with a garment, Psal. 104.2. and in this glorious appearance he conducted Israel through the Red Sea and Wilderness, came down upon Mount Sinai, and was seen by Moses and the Elders of Israel, and from thence removed into the Taber∣nacle, where he fixed his abode between the Cherubins, and from whence he frequently displayed himself before the whole Congregation in the beams of that visible Glory which he there assumed, as the Symbol of his special presence; and by thus doing he took a most wise and effectual course not only to raise and excite their devotion, but also to restrain and confine it within its proper bounds and limits; for while men are under the government of sense, there is nothing hath that
prevalence with them to excite their affections, and fix their thoughts as material Phantasms; so that God by exhibiting to them a visible presence of himself, and thereby impressing their imagina∣tions with a material Phantasm of his presence and Glory, did at once both spur their affections, and bridle their fancies from roving into wild si∣militudes of him, and thereby take an effectual course to prevent the worshiping him by those outward Images which they exemplified from the similitudes which they framed of him in their own fancies, and having this visible glory to enter∣tain their fancies, they had the less temptation from their sense to hunt after sensible similitudes and representations of him, that outward Shechi∣nah which they sometimes saw, being a sufficient help to raise up their groveling minds and carnal affections to the contemplation and worship of his invisible glory; and that that outward visible glory in which he appeared to them was intended for this purpose seems plainly implied in Deut. 4.12. where Moses tells them, that when God spake to them out of the midst of the fire they heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; and so again, ver. 15. from whence he infers, Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves left ye corrupt your selves, and make ye a graven Image, the similitude of any fi∣gure, the likeness of Male or Female, &c. ver. 16.17. where by their seeing no similitude is not meant that they saw nothing; for God himself had promised Moses that the third day he would come down in the sight of all the people on Mount Sinai, Exod. 19.11. and therefore in all probability they saw the fire or visible glory in which he
descended, for it is expresly said they saw it after∣wards, Exod. 24.17. but this fire shining without any determinate form or shape, they might very well be said to see no similitude, for by similitude it is evident he means a determinate shape, ver. 16. where he bids them beware of making the simili∣tude of any figure, so that the People saw God on∣ly in an unfigured flame, or visible glory that was cast into no determinate shape, (though within that it is probable, as was shewn before, God appear∣ed to Moses and the seventy Elders in a glorious humane shape.) And this it seems God deemed a sufficient help to inable them to fix their thoughts on, and determine their worship to himself; and therefore he strictly charges them to content themselves with this, and not let their fancies rove, as they were too prone to do, after formed similitudes and Images of him, lest those Images should create in their minds false and opprobri∣ous notions of him, and cause them to imagine the immense Godhead as the Heathen did, to be like unto Gold or Silver, or Stone graven by Art and mans device, Acts 17.29. Thus men being de∣generated into a life of sense, and thereby ren∣dered extremely propence to Idolatry, to worship God by Images, and thereupon to form blasphe∣mous notions of him, as if he were such a one in himself as those Images represented him, God was pleased to exhibit to them a sensible presence of himself, that thereby he might the more effectual∣ly excite their awe and reverence, and at the same time restrain their imaginations from debauching their minds with unbecoming similitudes of his infinite Being and Perfections.
And for the same reason that God under the Old Law appeared to the Iews in a visible glory, he afterwards appeared to this lower World, and doth still continue to appear to the upper, perso∣nally united to a humane body and soul; for so S. Iohn represents Christs assuming of humane na∣ture (who before he assumed it, was that God who appeared to the Iews from their Tabernacle in that Shechinah of visible Glory) to be only a re∣moving out of one Tabernacle into another, out of the Tabernacle of the Law into the Taberna∣cle of humane nature, John 1.14. The word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father full of Grace and truth, where instead of he dwelt among us, in the Greek it is , i. e. he Tabernacled, or dwelt as in the Tabernacle among us, he removed his abode out of the old Ta∣bernacle, and took a new Habitation in humane nature: for that this is the Apostles meaning is evident from what follows, and we beheld his Glory, which plainly refers to that Glorious Light or flaming substance, called the Glory of the Lord, in which of old he was wont to display himself before the Congregation of Israel from between the Che∣rubins; and in this very Glory S. Iohn says he be∣held him, viz. at his Baptism and Transfigura∣tion, at both which times he was seen by them shining in the very same Glory, wherein of old he was wont to shine out of the Old Tabernacle; and therefore it is added, that this Glory wherein S. Iohn beheld him was the Glory as of the only be∣gotten of the Father, i. e. it was the very same Glo∣ry with that wherein the only begotten was here∣tofore
wont to display himself from the Taberna∣cle of Moses; so that the meaning of the words seems at least to be this, He dwelt among us in our nature just as heretofore he did in the Mosaick Tabernacle, and in this Tabernacle of our Nature we Twice beheld him shining forth with the same Glory wherein he was wont to shine out of that Old Tabernacle from between the Cherubins. Since therefore Christ dwelt in our nature in the same manner, and therein appeared in the same visible Glory, that he formerly did in the Old Tabernacle, there is no doubt but he did it for the same ends and purposes; and therefore since one of the ends of his dwelling in that Tabernacle was to restrain men from running into Idolatry, there is no doubt but among others he intended this end also in as∣suming our natures, than which there can be no visible appearance in nature more proper to excite our sluggish and to determine our roving devotions upon him; for since in this life of sense which we now lead, we need a sensible presence of God to raise up our minds and affections to him, in what presence could he have appeared to us more proper for this end than that of our own nature? a presence which is not confused like that of the Old Tabernacle, which was only a mixture of shapeless lights and shadows; but distinct and de∣terminate and of our own form and shape, which of all others is most familiar to and most beloved and reverenced by us, and consequently of all others is most familiar to and most beloved and reverenced by us, and consequently of all others is most apt to encourage our prayers, and inflame our zeal, and raise our admiration. For in what
sensible appearance could God have more power∣fully affected our sense, than in that which we are most inclined to love, most prone to trust to, and most accustomed to reverence and obey; and than that in which alone we discern the Image of God, and the reflections of those divine Attributes of Wisdom and Goodness, and Truth and Justice, for which we reverence and adore him? There being therefore no visible substance in which God could more advantageously exhibit himself to us in order to the exciting our worship to him, and determining it upon him than that of a humane form, he thought meet to assume our natures into a personal union with his Divinity, and therein to rule and govern us. So that now the Humanity of our Saviour is the Tabernacle and Shechinah of God, wherein the fulness of the Godhead dwelleth bodily, and these two natures united in Person and Glory are the immediate object of our worship; wherefore as the ancient Iews fell upon their faces and worshipped when they beheld the Shechinah or glory of the Lord, their imagination being there∣by assisted and their affections excited, Levit. 9.24. So when we by our internal sense or imagination look up to the Glorified Humanity of our Saviour in Heaven, it is our duty to raise up our affecti∣ons to Heaven by that sensible Shechinah of God, and thereupon to fall down and worship. But as the Iews when they fell down before their She∣chinah, did not worship the visible light or glory separately from God, but as it was united to and assumed into conjunction with him, so neither ought we to worship our Shechinah, viz. the hu∣manity of our Saviour separately from his Divinity,
but in Union and Conjunction with it; and in short, as it was utterly unlawful for the Iews to worship God in any other Shechinah or sensible appearance either unshapen or shaped than in that Glorious one which he himself vouchsafed to them, that being sufficient to affect their sense, and thereby to raise up their minds and affections to him; so is it utterly unlawful for us Christians to worship God in any other Shechinah, Image, similitude or visible ap∣pearance, than that of the glorified humanity of our Saviour, that being sufficient to assist our imagina∣tions and elevate our hearts and devotions to him. For though we cannot behold his glorified Huma∣nity with our bodily Eyes now he is removed into Heaven, yet so neither did the Iews the Glory of the Lord (at least but very rarely) after the Ark whereupon it sat, was removed into the Holy of Holies, which was a figure of Heaven, yet as they being assured it was there, could easily view it in their imaginations, and thereby assist their devoti∣on; so we being assured from Scripture that Christs humanity is in Heaven, can look up thither in our imagination, and by beholding its glory there, lift up our heavy minds and affections to the eternal Divinity that inhabits it; so that if we Christians make any other Shechinah or Image to worship God in, besides his own humanity, which he himself made, and wherein he now dwells above in the Heavens, we are of all false worshippers the most inexcusable, because by assuming our humanity God hath vouchsafed to us such an Image and Shechinah of himself as is of all others the most proper and effectual to excite and determine our Devotions.
III. God hath chosen to Govern us by his own eternal Son in our natures, that he might thereby the more powerfully incourage us to obe∣dience, for now we have all the assurance in the World that the great design of his Government is to do us good, and to advance our happiness, and that under his blessed Empire we shall be sure to enjoy all the graces and favours that can be wisely indulged on his part, or modestly expected on ours. Had he Governed us immediately by him∣self, we could not have been so secure of our in∣terest in him, as we have reason to be of our in∣terest in his Son hypostatically united to our nature, because the divine Nature considered purely as such, is infinitly distant from ours and has no other relation to it than as it is the common cause of all things; and being so distant in nature from us, it would have been hard for us to imagine how he could be touched with the same tender and compassionate regard for us as he would be, if he were nearer allied to us, especially when we re∣flected upon our own demerit, and considered that by our sins we had set our selves at a wider distance from him than we were by our natures; this together with that anxiety which naturally a∣rises in guilty minds, could not but have rendered us very suspicious of Gods intentions towards us, had he governed us immediately by himself; but now that he governs us by his own Son cloathed in our own nature, at his hands we may with full confidence expect a most gracious and merciful treatment. For now we are assured we have a close and most intimate interest in him by reason of his kindred and Alliance to us in the same com∣mon
nature, which makes him every mans ano∣ther self under different accidents and circum∣stances; and his nature being perfectly happy and perfectly pure from all irregular passions and ap∣petites, cannot but be affected with a most tender regard to all the individuals of its own kind, be∣cause being compleatly happy himself he can have nothing farther to desire for himself, but that his kindred by nature, who are all his own substance dilated and multiplied, may be happy too; and being intirely good, he can have nothing of that sordid selfishness in him which doth too often con∣tract and narrow our benevolence, and cause us like Serpents to infold our selves within our selves, and to turn out our stings to all the World be∣sides: Upon both these accounts therefore as he is a perfectly happy and perfectly good man, he can∣not but bear a hearty and universal good will to mankind, and that he doth so, he hath given us too many dear experiments to make the least doubt of it; for while he was among us, he all along prefer'd our interest before his own, he made him∣self poor to inrich us, exposed himself to contempt to raise us to glory, took upon him our guilt to release us from punishment, and willingly under∣went a most miserable death that we might live happily for ever. In all which he gave us the most Glorious demonstrations how infinitely dear the humane nature, of which he participated, was to him in all those numberless individuals into which it hath been multiplied. The considerati∣on of which is exceedingly pregnant with encou∣ragement to obedience: For seeing God governs us by one who is as well our Brother by nature, as
our King by Office, seeing he carries our kind in his own person, and is flesh of our flesh and bone of our bone, we may certainly depend upon it, that he will be as kind and as gracious to us as his Government and our happiness, which is involved in it, will permit him; that so long as we are sin∣cere to him he will compassionate our weakness, and that when we have gone astray from him he will graciously receive us upon our humble submissions, that he will not load us beyond our strength, nor punish us beyond our demerit, but that he will readily assist us in all our needs and tenderly pity us in all our pitiable cases, and kindly accept of our honest endeavours and reward them beyond all our hopes and expectations; in short, that no∣thing shall be able to separate us from his favour, but only our own obstinacy and wilful Rebellion, and that though in this case he will be angry with us, yet he will wait to be gracious again in expe∣ctation of our Repentance, and not hastily aban∣don us to everlasting ruin till we have sinned our selves past all hope of recovery. For as to all these things the humane nature in him is our constant Advocate, which being our nature as well as his, makes our case its own, and is as much concerned for us as it could reasonably be for it self,, if it were in our circumstances; than which what higher encouragement to Loyalty and obedience can there be given to ingenuous minds, to consi∣der that he who reigns above in the Heavens and hath the disposal of my fate is my kinsman by na∣ture, who by assuming my substance hath assumed my interest, so that whatsoever he doth for me he doth it for himself, that is, for his own humane na∣ture
that is in me, and that therefore 'tis impossible but he must continue kind to me whilst I continue dutiful to him, seeing that without great provo∣cation he can never be unkind sure to his own na∣ture. For this reason therefore God governs us by his Son in our own nature, that so by this his near kindred to us he might the better assure our diffident mind of a most gracious and merciful treatment at his hands, and thereby excite us to a free and Chearful obedience to him. IV. God Governs us by his own eternal Son in our natures, that so he might the more powerfully excite our gratitude and ingenuity, and thereby ob∣lige us to render him a more free and generous obedience, which is the obedience he delights in, and that alone which answers the end of his Go∣vernment, for that which he aims at in govern∣ing us, is to subdue the Rebellion of our natures a∣gainst the eternal Laws of right reason, that there∣by he may render us more and more Rational, and consequently more and more prepared to parti∣cipate of the happiness of a rational nature, which is never to be effected by a forced and constrain'd obedience; for so long as our obedience is for∣ced, our Wills and Affections are unsubdued, and all our outward submissions are only the dis∣guise of a treacherous and rebellious nature; we would still fly out into acts of Rebellion, but we dare not; our inclinations are as stiff and obstinate as ever, and the Restraint which our fear lays upon them is so far from conquering them, that it only heightens and inrages them. Till there∣fore our obedience becomes generous and free, and doth proceed from a willing mind, from a mind
that is influenced by ingenuous motives, it will sig∣nifie little or nothing to the amendment of our na∣ture, which notwithstanding its beautiful rine and outside, will still remain corrupt and rotten at the core. Now to render us freely and willing∣ly obedient, what more effectual method could God have taken than this of governing us by his own Son in our nature? For in this our nature he was our Priest; and as I shewed before, it was in∣finitely reasonable he should be so; and by what more endearing motive can we be obliged to obey him than this that now he is in Heaven, he rules and governs us in that very nature which he sacri∣ficed for us, when he was upon earth; and that it is in that Individual humanity which as our Priest he offer'd up for us on the Cross, that he now reigns over us at the Right hand of God; so that he who is now our King was once our Sacrifice, and that not by constraint, but by his own free offer and consent? For to redeem the lives of our souls which by a thousand guilts were forfeited to the vengeance of God, he freely chose to assume our nature and therein to undergo our punishment, that so we might escape and be happy for ever; and being governed, as we are, by a King that died for us, that willingly died a woful shameful death to ransom our lives from death eternal, what Monsters of ingratitude must we be, if we still per∣sist in our Rebellions against him! When I consi∣der that he, who exacts my obedience, hath spent his own heart-blood for me, that he who requires me to sacrifice my lusts to him, did chearfully sa∣crifice his own life for me, how can I grudg to comply with his demands without blushing and
confusion! O ungrateful! had he been as backward to die for thee, as thou art to submit to him, thou hadst been a wretch, a miserable desperate wretch for ever. With what face then canst thou pretend to any thing that is modest or ingenuous, tender or ap∣prehensive in humane nature, that thinkest it much to render him those duties which he demands of thee, and which he demands for no other reason, but because they are necessary to thy happiness, when thou knowest he never thought it much to pour out his Soul for thee in the bitterest Agonies and Torments that ever humane nature endured? If therefore it be possible to work up our degene∣rate natures into a free and chearful obedience to God, one would think this consideration should do it, that he whom God hath constituted our King to demand our obedience, demands it in our own nature, which he assumed that he might die for us, and thereby release us from that dreadful obligation we were under to have died for ever. So that now while his Authority bespeaks our Awe and Reverence, his blood bespeaks our gratitude and ingenuity, and that in such Language, and with such powerful Rhetorick and perswasion as is im∣possible for us to resist, unless we are resolved to outvy the Devils themselves in ingratitude, who though they have been audacious enough to out∣face the Authority of their Maker, were never so much Devils yet as to turn a deaf Ear to the vocal blood and wounds of a Redeemer. V. And lastly, God governs us by his own eter∣nal Son in our own natures, that thereby he may give us the more ample assurance of our future Re∣ward. Had he continued to govern us by himself
immediately, we had wanted one of the most en∣couraging instances of his immense bounty in re∣warding obedience that ever was given to the World, and that is his advancement of our Savi∣our to that Mediatorial Royalty which he now ex∣ercises at the right hand of the Majesty on high; for had our Saviour been God only, he had been incapable of Reward, his happiness as such, being so immense as that it can admit of no addition; but being Man as well as God, he is thereby capa∣citated for all that vast reward which the possession of his Mediatorial Kingdom, together with an everlasting Heaven includes; and all this reward is the product of that perfect and profound obedience which he render'd to his Father whilst he was in this World. So that now in him by whom God hath promised to reward our obedience, we have an illustrious instance of Gods liberality in rewarding Obedience; by his happy fate we may be fully assured that we shall not serve God for nought, but that the reward of our obedience shall ten thou∣sand-fold exceed the labour and difficulty of it, for he is a man as well as we, though he be hypostati∣cally united to God, and this man for some few years faithful service upon Earth, for revealing Gods Will to men, and exhibiting a perfect exam∣ple of obedience to it, for exposing himself to some temporal Calamities; and finally for offering up himself a spotless Victim for the sins of the World, is now advanced to the utmost height of bliss and glory that it is possible for a Creature to arrive to; he is set far above all principality and power; he is served and Adored, as the only Potentate under God the Father throughout all the Heavenly
World; he is worship'd and Celebrated by Cherubin and Seraphin, by Archangels and Angels, he is extol'd in the Songs of the Patriarchs and Prophets, the Apostles and Evangelists, the Confessors and Martyrs; and his Name is resounded with ever∣lasting praises and thanksgivings throughout all the vast Choire of the spirits of just men made per∣fect; and in a word, he hath all Power given him both in Heaven and Earth, and to his all-com∣manding Will the whole Creation is subjected. In this ever blessed King therefore by whom God now rules us, we have for the assurance of our hope of a future reward, the most stupendous in∣stance of it that ever was given to the World. And indeed, since the great end of Christs Mediation was to reduce men to their duty by giving them a sure and certain hope of the remission of their sins at present, and of a glorious reward hereafter, it was highly condecent that it self should be an Example of its own design, and that the glorious part of it should be made the reward of the more painful and difficult, that so having in the Medi∣ation it self a signal instance of Gods immence liberality in rewarding obedience, we might there∣upon the more confidently expect that glorious re∣compence of Reward which God hath promised to those that obey him, and be thereby the more vigorously excited to our duty. And hence our Saviour proposes himself to us as an instance of the reward of obedience, To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even as I have overcome and am sat down with my Father on his Throne: As much as if he should have said, that upon your overcoming the difficulties of your duty,
you shall receive a most glorious reward, you need not at all doubt, having so illustrious an Example of it in my self, who having conquer'd the diffi∣cult parts of my Mediation, which was to teach you as a Prophet, and to expiate for you as a Priest, am now crowned with the reward of transacting the glorious part of it, i. e. sitting with my Father on his Throne, and there reigning with him in un∣speakable Glory and Beatitude, and accordingly the Apostle bids us Look unto Iesus the Author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set be∣fore him indured the Cross, despised the shame, and is sate down on the right hand of the Throne of the Ma∣jesty on high, Heb. 12.2. SECT XIII. That Iesus Christ is this Mediator, of whom we have been treating. HAving in the foregoing Sections explain'd at large the nature and Offices of the Mediator between God and men, all that now remains is to prove, that Jesus Christ, the Author of our Re∣ligion, is the Person whom God hath ordained and constituted this Mediator between him and us. And that he is so, he himself openly averr'd whilst he was upon Earth, and afterwards proclaimed it to the World by the Mouth of his Apostles; but this singly by it self is no argument at all of the
truth of the thing; because a deceiver might have aver'd the same thing, and since there were sun∣dry pretenders to this Office as well as he, it was necessary there should be some other evidence of his being invested with it, besides his pretend∣ing to it; otherwise it would have been impossible for us to distinguish him from those that falsly pre∣tended to it, and accordingly he himself tells us, Iohn 5.31. If I bear witness of my self my witness is not true, i. e. If I can produce no other testimony of my being the Mediator than my own bare word, you have no reason at all to believe me; and therefore he tells us that he had not only Iohn's Witness to it who was his forerunner, but also a much greater than Iohn's even the Witness of his Father, ver. 32, 33. 36, 37. Now there are Three ways by which the Father Testified for him; all which do abundantly evince his being the true Mediator. First, by sundry ancient predictions of him which were all exactly accomplished in him, for the Testimony of Iesus, saith S. Iohn, is the spirit of Prophesie, Rev. 19.10. Secondly, by sundry Voices from Heaven, by which the Father pro∣claimed him his well-beloved Son. Thirdly, by Mi∣racles, which by the power of God he frequently wrought in his own Person, while he was upon Earth, and in the persons of his followers after his ascension into Heaven. To treat of all which would require a Volume by it self: and therefore for the first of these ways I shall refer the English Reader to the Reverend Mr. Kidders Demonstra∣tion of the Messias, wherein the Testimony of Pro∣phesie is handled at large with very great strength and clearness of Judgment. And as for the second
way of Gods bearing Witness to Jesus, viz. by Voices from Heaven, I refer the Reader to our Learned D. Hammonds reasonableness of the Christi∣an Religion at the end of his Practical Catechism, it being my intent to insist only upon the Third and last way, of Gods attesting Jesus to be the Me∣diator, viz. by Miracles; for this way our Saviour himself most insists on and appeals to. So in the a∣forecited Ioh. 5.36. But I have a greater witness than that of John; for the works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do bear wit∣ness of me that the Father hath sent me. So also Iohn 10.25. The works which I do in my Fathers Name, they bear witness of me; And in Iohn 15.24. Our Saviour makes the inexcusable aggravation of the Iews infidelity to be this, that they would not be convinced by all those miraculous works which he had done among them; If I had not done among them the works which none other man did they had not had sin, but now have they both seen and hated me and my Father. In these and sundry other pla∣ces our Saviour appeals to those miraculous works which he did, as to a certain Testimony from God that he was the only true Messias or Mediator between God and men. And indeed, seeing the great aim and design of our Saviours Mediati∣on is to advance the Honour of God and the perfecti∣on of Souls; and seeing how admirably it is fra∣med and contrived to promote those blessed ends; Miracles are a most certain attestation of the truth of it. For though the Scripture tells us of false Miracles wrought by the power of evil Spirits, and History furnishes us with innumerable in∣stances of it; yet it is against all reason to imagin
that ever evil Spirits would exert their power to attest a Doctrine so infinitely repugnant to their own temper and interest. Had the design of our Saviours Mediation been to alienate mens minds from God and Goodness, we might have justly con∣cluded all his miraculous works to be nothing but Magical Tricks performed by confederacy with the Devil. For how could we have imagined either that God or any good Spirit would ever have employed his power to propagate a Doctrine so infinitely repugnant to his Will and nature, seeing it is equally incredible either that a bad Religion should be the Will of a good God, or that the God of truth should bear false witness to a lie; and therefore we always find that those false Miracles effected by evil Spirits, whereof the Scripture and History make mention were always wrought to deprave mens minds with vicious principles, and to seduce men from God to superstition and Ido∣latry, or to confirm them in it; but that an impious spirit should ever work Miracles to promote true Piety, to inspire mens minds with great and worthy thoughts of God and sutable affections towards him, that a malicious, proud, unjust and revengeful Spirit should by miraculous Signs endeavour to reduce the World to the practice of Charity, humi∣lity, justice, patience, meekness and equanimity is in∣finitely incredible; and therefore since the Do∣ctrine of our Saviours Mediation doth above all the Religions that ever were professed in the World, most powerfully oblige us to these and all other in∣stances of Piety and Vertue, we may depend upon it, that though the Devil had known it to be a Lye, he would never have been so great a fool as
to cheat the World into the belief of it; for though he loves to deceive, yet there is nothing in nature he more hates than to deceive men into Piety and Vertue, because hereby he deceives him∣self, and betrays his own interest in the World. The Miracles of our Saviour therefore being all designed to attest a most pure and heavenly Do∣ctrine, a Doctrine that is throughout exactly con∣formable to the Nature of God, and infinitely ab∣horrent to the Genius of Devils must necessarily be the effects of a Divine power; because to work Miracles for the attestation of such a Doctrine could be neither agreeable to any other nature nor serviceable to any other interest but Gods. Now of all the miraculous testimonies which God gave to our Saviour there is none to which he did so often appeal, and upon which he did so much stake the credit of his Doctrine, as that of his own Resurrection from the dead: for thus when he had performed that heroick act of Zeal, whip∣ping the Money Changers out of the Temple, and the Jews required some sign of him, by what au∣thority he did it, he bad them destroy this Temple, pointing to his own body, and in three days I will raise it up again, John 2.19. So also when the Pharisees desired him to give them some sign of his being the true Messias, he tells them, that no other sign should be given them but only the sign of the Prophet Jonas, for as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth, which necessarily implies, that after that he should rise again, Mark 8.12. and accordingly we find that after he was risen and ascended, the princi∣pal
business of his Apostles was to testifie his Resurrection to the World; for so Acts 1.22. S. Pe∣ter makes this to be the reason why it was ne∣cessary that one should be chosen into the A∣postolate, to supply the room of Iudas that he might be a witness with them of Christs Resurrection; and in Acts 4.33. we are told, that with great power the Apostles gave witness of the Resurrection of the Lord Iesus, and still when they were to prove any Article of the Christian Faith, this they urge as the great argument. Thus from the Resurrection of Christ S. Paul proves the general Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. so also Acts 17.31. he proves that God hath appointed a day wherein he will judge the World in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained, viz. Christ Jesus, by this very topick, whereof he hath given assurance unto all men in that he hath raised him from the dead; and 1 Pet. 1.3. that Apostle makes Christs Resurrection from the dead to be the great motive of credibility by which God had begotten them again into a lively hope of fu∣ture happiness; so also Acts 2.36. Therefore (saith the same Apostle, i. e. because God had raised him from the dead, ver. 24.) let all the house of Israel know that God hath made this same Iesus both Lord and Christ; and Rom. 1.4. he is said to be decla∣red the Son of God by the Resurrection from the dead; yea, so undoubted an argument is this of Christs being the true Messias or Mediator, that the Jews themselves were convinced that they must either allow him to be so, or else outface the truth of his Resurrection, which put them upon all possible ways of stifling the report of it, knowing that if once it obtained credit in the World, the last error
would be worse than the first, Mat. 27.64. from all which it is evident, that it was taken for granted, not only by Christ himself and his Apostles, but even by his most avowed Enemies, that supposing his Resurrection to be true, it would from thence undeniably follow that he was the Messias or Me∣diator. In the management of this Argument there∣fore I shall endeavour these two things: First, To prove the truth and reality of this mi∣raculous attestation which God gave to our Sa∣viour, viz. by raising him from the dead. Secondly, To shew what an excellent convin∣cing argument this is of the Truth of his Doctrine or Mediation. I. I shall endeavour to prove the truth and re∣ality of this miraculous attestation, which God gave to our Saviour, viz. by raising him from the dead; which being a matter of Fact, indepen∣dent from all necessary causes, is capable of no other proof to those who were not Eye-witnesses of it but only that of Credible Testimony. Thus that Iulius Cesar was killed in the Senate-house is a matter of Fact, the truth of which is acknow∣ledged by all the World, and that man would be accounted little better than mad that should make the least doubt of it; and yet we have no other way of proving this, but only by the concurrent Testimony of credible Historians, which being as great an evidence as the matter is ca∣pable of, is as much as any reasonable man can require to induce him to believe it. For al∣though Testimony be the only evidence by which matters of Fact can be proved, yet it is such an
evidence as hath force enough in it to induce any reasonable man to believe its proposals, and there are ten thousand things which we do as firmly assent to upon the evidence of Testimony as to any propositions upon the evidence of Mathema∣tical Demonstration. If therefore the Resurrection of our Saviour be but sufficiently attested, that is as good an Argument of the truth of it as the na∣ture of the thing will bear, and when it is made but as apparent that a thing is, as it could possi∣bly be if it really were, there is no farther proof of it can be reasonably expected, and if notwith∣standing this men will not believe, it is impossi∣ble that any reason should convince them: but in this Testimony of our Saviours Resurrection there is as much evidence and Credibility as there can be in any Testimony whatsoever. For to give a Te∣stimony the utmost force of Credibility six things are required. First, That they that give it should be certainly informed of the truth of what they do attest. Secondly, That there should be a concur∣rence of a sufficient number of Witnesses. Third∣ly, That there should be no visible reason to su∣spect their truth and integrity. Fourthly, That there should be no apparent Motive to induce them to give false Witness. Fifthly, That they give some great security for the truth of what they say. And Sixthly, That they also produce some certain sign or token of the reality of their Testimony. And when all these circumstances do concur in a Testi∣mony, they render it as highly credible as it is possi∣ble for a Testimony to be. Now in that Testimony which we have of our Saviours Resurrection there was, as I shall shew in the particulars, a full concur∣rence of them all. For
I. They who testified it were certainly informed whether it were true or no, for they declare that they were Eye and Ear Witnesses of it, Acts 3.15. and relate at large the familiar conversation they had with him after his Resurrection, Acts 10.41. and they tell the Story of it with so many circum∣stances that it is impossible they should be decei∣ved. For at his Resurrection they find the Stone rolled away from the mouth of his Sepulchre and no body therein, although it was guarded by Soldi∣ers, so that it was impossible for any body to steal him away; and that it was his own body wherein he arose and no aerial Phantasm evidently appears by what he did to convince S. Thomas who would not believe, unless he might put his hand into the hole of his side, and see the print of the Nails that pierced his hands, to which our Saviour readily condescended: and so far were the Apostles from being over-credulous, that when he appeared to them after his Resurrection, it is said that they suspected him to be a Spirit or walking Ghost, and to convince them of their mistake, he was fain to appeal to the judgment of their senses, handle me, and see me, saith he, for a Spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye see me have, Luk. 24.39. and after∣wards more fully to satisfie their yet scrupulous minds, he eat and drank in the midst of them, ver. 43. Now the more suspicious and incredulous they were at first, the greater evidence it is, that they were throughly informed of what they testi∣fied, that there was an undeniable evidence in the thing, else how could it have satisfied such scrupu∣lous and incredulous persons, and that they were far from being willing to be abused themselves, or from
having any design to abuse the world. And that their outward sense was not imposed upon by the strength of their Imagination is evident in that he conversed with them forty days together, which was too long a time for their senses to mistake an image of their fancies for a reality. For how is it conceivable that so many persons as pretended to see him after his Resurrection, should for forty days together imagine that they saw him, heard him, eat and drank with him, when in reality all this Scene of things was nothing but a dream or specter of their own fancies; that their fancies should create and represent a person to them frequently appearing to them preaching and in∣structing them, giving out Commissions, and admi∣nistring holy Ordinances to them; that their fan∣cies should draw them out to the Mount of Olives after a Specter, that was visible no where but up∣on the Stage of their own Imaginations, and there represent it carried up into Heaven on a Cloud? Surely, if they were in their Wits, it was impossi∣ble for them to believe such a train of things to be real, had they been only the images of their fancies; and yet that they were in their Wits is as apparent as the Sun, both from their unanimous consent in the relation of the Fact with all its cir∣cumstances, and from those wise and sober Wri∣tings which they left behind them, which abound with excellent Morals, solid and coherent Rea∣sonings, strong and powerful perswasions, without the least intermixture either of flat impertinence or ranting Enthusiasm: which is a plain demon∣stration that they were certainly informed concern∣ing the matter of Fact which they testified whe∣ther it were true or false.
II. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible is the concurrence of several Witnesses; of which we have a remarkable instance in this Testimony of our Saviours Resur∣rection. For if to those five hundred Brethren and upwards, who, as S. Paul tells us, saw our Savi∣our after he was risen, 1 Cor. 15.6. you add the Congregation of the Disciples he appeared to, when he baffled the Infidelity of S. Thomas, together with those great Assemblies that saw him in the Mount of Galilee, and upon Mount Olivet, from whence he ascended, it is not improbable but that there were some thousands of Persons that saw him after his Resurrection, among all whom we find the most exact agreement both in the matter and circumstances of what they did attest, which had it not been true, must have been morally impossible. For how could so vast a number of men have so punctually agreed in the same Story, had it been a lye? Especially, when they were so narrowly sifted, so craftily examined, and cross examined, as doubtless these men were (or at least would have been had there been any just ground to suspect them) by the Jewish Magistrates, who were all of them profest Enemies to our Saviour and his Doctrine. For had their Testimony been forged, it is not imaginable how they should fore∣see what Questions the Magistrates would propose to them, nor consequently how they should agree what Answers to return to their several Interro∣gatories; so that when they came to be examined they must of necessity have thwarted and contra∣dicted one another, at least in some circumstan∣ces of time or place, or the like, by which means
the whole forgery must have soon been unravel∣led, and the credit of it for ever dasht out of countenance. But that no such thing ever hap∣ned is evident by the credit which their Testimony found, even among those who had the best opportu∣nities of examining whether it were true or false; for the truth of Christs Doctrine depending upon the truth of this Story of his Resurrection, there can be no doubt but the Jewish Magistrates, whose in∣terest made them Enemies to Christ, would not have been wanting, had they thought it feasible, to try all ways to disprove the truth of it; and if they did not, no other reason can be given of it but only this, that the truth of the thing was so no∣torious, that it would have been Ridiculous for them to attempt the disproving it; but if they did, it had been a very easie matter for them, had it been a lye, to have detected it: for the number of the Witnesses being so great, and the Jews having every day opportunity of conversing with them, they might have easily trapt them in their relati∣ons, it being impossible that among a great num∣ber of conspiring Impostors there should be always an exact harmony and agreement. For suppose that such a Story as this were told in London that a certain man dwelling at Westminster, and pretend∣ing himself to be the Son of God, and the lawful Heir of the Crown of England, had preached up a new Religion, requiring all people under pain of damnation to embrace his Doctrine, and sub∣mit to his Government, and that as a sign of the truth of all this he had publickly declared that three days after his death he would rise again; whereupon the last Friday was seven night he was
put to death by the Magistrates, and notwith∣standing he was buried, and his Sepulchre dam∣med up with a huge Stone, and a guard of Sol∣diers set to watch it, left his Proselytes should steal him away, yet the Sunday following he arose, and hath since been seen by several hundreds, if not some thousands of the neighbourhood, many of whom had touched and handled him, eat, and drank, and conversed familiarly with him, a∣mong whom there was Peter such a one, Thomas such a one, and Iohn such a one, naming some twenty or thirty persons well known among the neighbours, who could give a more particular ac∣count of the matter, and tell the names of most of the persons that were eye-witnesses with them; why now it cannot be supposed but that as soon as ever this formal rumour began to spread (espe∣cially if it found credit among the multitude, and the pretended witnesses of it should be so bold as to go and assert it before the King and Council, as the Apostles did before the Rulers of the Jews) I say, it cannot be supposed but that care would be taken that the matter should be immediately sifted, and the several neighbouring Justices re∣quired to call these Witnesses to account, who by pumping and examining, promising and threatning them could not fail of extorting the truth from them in a very little while. For it is impossible but they must have found them falter∣ing in the relation of their Story, and counter-witnessing one another. Iohn would have told it with this Circumstance, and Peter with the con∣trary, and Thomas would have thwarted and con∣tradicted them both, so that when they came to
compare their several relations with one another, in all probability they would have found as great a confusion among them as there was in the language of the Bricklayers of Babel. And therefore though at first perhaps the Story might have seemed plausible, and a great many credulous people might have believed it, yet every day would have rendered it more suspicious, and the truth must at last have triumphed and prevailed; but yet though the Eye-witnesses of our Saviours Resurrection were thus sifted and examined over and over, their relation every one day got ground and credit even in Ierusalem it self, where the thing was transacted, and where every one might easily inform himself concerning the credit of the Relaters, and the circumstances of their relation; insomuch that forty days after it was so far from being dashed out of countenance, that at one Ser∣mon of S. Peters there were no less than three thousand persons converted to the belief of it, and so it still grew and increased, till at last in despite of all the wit and malice of its opposers, it was imbraced and acknowledged throughout all the World; which is an undeniable evidence of the exact agreement there was in the testimony of the several Witnesses of our Saviours Resurrection. III. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible is, when there is no vi∣sible reason to suspect the honesty and integrity of the Attestors; which circumstance did also concur to credit the Testimony of our Saviours Re∣surrection. For that the first testifiers of it were men of a clear and unsuspected honesty, will ap∣pear to any man that seriously considers either the
Doctrine which they taught, or the Genius of their followers, or the manner of their testimony, or the success it had among those who were best able to satisfie themselves whether they were honest or no. First, as for their Doctrine, there is nothing can be more contrary to lying, dissembling and Hypocritical reservation, it strictly requires plain∣ness and simplicity of speech, and that our words should be the Images and Interpreters of our minds, it brands and stigmatizes all deceit and falshood with a most infamous Character, and ir∣revocably consigns all wilful Lyars to the misera∣ble portion of the Father of Lies. If then they believed their own Doctrine, it is not to be imagi∣ned they would ever have defended it with frauds and impostures; and whether they believed it or no, it is hardly supposable, that they would have so loudly declaimed against dishonesty, had they been at least visibly dishonest themselves, since by condemning it in others they must have libelled themselves, and imblazoned to the World their own shame and infamy. And then secondly, As for the genius and temper of their disciples and fol∣lowers, it's plain that there never was any thing more open and sincere: for such was the ingenuous simplicity of the Primitive Christians, that they thought it a disparagement to be put to their Oaths, thinking it sufficient for every good man to give this assurance of his truth , I speak truly; and when they were most severely examined by their bloudy persecutors concern∣ing their faith, they never either denied or con∣cealed it, counting it a most impious thing to dis∣semble the truth, and though when they were
questioned they could easily have either denied or evaded it, yet they scorned to live upon such base terms, to be beholden to their hypocrisie for their lives; yea so conspicuous was their Honesty to all the World that the Heathen themselves were for∣ced to acknowledge it. For so Pliny in the account which he gave the Emperor Trajan of the Christi∣ans, tells him, That after the strictest enquiry he could make of them, even of those who had re∣nounced Christianity, he found this to be the greatest fault they were guilty of, that they used harmlesly to meet to worship Christ, and at those meetings to bind themselves by a Sacrament that they would not do any wickedness, that they would not steal, nor Rob, nor commit Adultery, ner falsi∣fy their words, nor with-hold any thing wherewith they had been intrusted, where ever it were re∣quired at their hands. Such was the temper of the immediate Disciples of the Eye-witnesses of our Sa∣viours Resurrection; and is it likely that the Scho∣lars would have proved so honest had they not been taught by the Example as well as by the Doctrine of their Masters: For to be sure had the Apostles been dishonest, their immediate Disciples must needs have known something of it, and being acquainted with it, they would doubtless have re∣solved either not to continue their disciples, any longer, or else to have imitated them in all their secret Cheats and Knaveries; and so from the Masters to the Disciples dishonesty would have been propagated from one generation to another; but since the contrary happened, it's plain that the first Propagators were men of very honest and sincere minds; which will yet further appear, if we con∣sider
thirdly the manner of their Testimony, which they delivered with the greatest plainness and sim∣plicity of speech, the greatest freedom and assurance of Spirit, and the greatest particularity, as to all its circumstances; they never went about to in∣volve their sense in ambiguous words, or to recom∣mend it to the World in a pompous stile, in pedan∣tick flourishes or flattering insinuations, which is the way of all Impostors; but as men that were well assured of the truth of what they said, they exposed it to the World in the most naked and simple expressions, and so left it to recommend it self; they did not whisper their Testimony in cor∣ners, as if they were either affraid or ashamed to produce it in the open light; but with the greatest confidence and assurance they published it in the midst of Ierusalem, yea and before the Sanhedrin it self; where, if it had been false, 'twas impossible but it should be detected; and whereas 'tis the way of Impostors to reserve themselves in generals, knowing that should they descend to particulars, 'twould be hard for them to avoid discovery or con∣tradiction; the Apostles did not only report a gene∣ral story of Christs Resurrection, but related it with all its most minute and particular circumstances, nor did they Change or alter any one of them upon dif∣ferent examinations before different Examiners; but still persisted with the greatest constancy to them∣selves and harmony with each other; so that if ever there might be any thing gathered of the temper of persons from the particular manner of their di∣scourses, we may certainly discern the greatest fide∣lity in the Apostles in the manner of their expressing themselves to the World. But then in the fourth and
last place, the credit which they found among those who were the best able to satisfie themselves whether they were honest or no, is a further evi∣dence of their fidelity; for had they been men of known honesty, it is not to be imagined that they could ever have obtained so much credit in a place where they were so intimately known, and among persons with whom they every day con∣versed with the greatest openness and freedom, espe∣cially considering how contrary their Testimony was to the genius and interest of those who gave credit to them, many of whose hands had been imbrewed in the blood of our Saviour, by which they were obliged in their own vindication, so far as in them lay, to disprove the story of his Re∣surrection; because if that proved true, it proved them guilty of the most monstrous impiety that ever was acted, viz. the murder of the Son of God. And is it likely that the Murderers of our Saviour would ever have believed the story of his Resurrection, which was so clear an evidence of his innocency and their own guilt, had they had any reason to suspect the veracity of those that at∣tested it, and yet in despite of themselves great numbers of them were forced to believe it, al∣though as soon as they did so, they were pricked at the heart with the sense of their horrid impiety, and forced to cry out in a bitter Agony of Con∣science, Men and Brethren what shall we do to be sa∣ved? and as for those of them who had no hand in his murder, to be sure they were greatly prejudi∣ced against the belief of his Resurrection, because upon that depended the truth of his Doctrine, which plainly contradicted a great part of that
Religion in which they had been educated, and of which they were infinitly zealous, and therefore to be sure they would never have given credit to it, had they not had undeniable evidence of the truth and integrity of those that testified it; especially when it was so easie for them to satisfie them∣selves about it. For 'tis not imaginable they would ever have entertained so ungrateful a sto∣ry, but upon the most strict enquiry into the cre∣dit of its relators; and if upon enquiry they had found the least flaw either in them or in their te∣stimony, if they could have convicted them of any dishonest practices for the time past, or catched them tripping or contradicting one another in what they testified at present, they would soon have made the World ring of it, and the Iews who were dispersed through all the neigh∣bouring Nations, would have divulged to all the World their fraudulent practices, and posted them up where ever they came for infamous Knaves and Lyars; which must have infallibly blasted the credit of their testimony, and caused it to have been hissed out of the World for a fulsom Imposture. Wherefore since no such thing ever happened, but contrariwise the credit of their re∣port of Christs Resurrection did, in despite of all the wit and malice of its opposers, every day spread and increase even in Ierusalem it self, where the thing was acted, and where the reporters of it lived, and that not only for a few days or months, but from year to year, even till Ierusalem it self was destroyed; since, I say, all this is so evi∣dent, what greater argument can we desire of the truth and integrity of those that attested it.
And supposing them to be honest, their testimo∣ny must be true, because it was not matter of opinion, in which it is possible for the wisest men to be mistaken, but matter of Fact, of which they had certain information from their own senses, and he who says that he saw such a thing, and it's evident that his senses were not imposed on, lies against his own conscience, if it be not true that he saw it. IV. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible, is, that there is no apparent motive to induce the Attestors of it to te∣stifie falsly. For whether they are honest or no, we cannot well suppose that in a matter of importance they will testifie falsly, without some great motive inducing them thereunto: but as for the witnesses of our Saviours Resurrection, had they not been certain of the truth of it, they could have no imaginable motive to induce them to attest it; for they could never hope to reap the least advantage from it either here or here∣after; not here, for their Lord had told them beforehand, that if they would be his Disciples, they must suffer persecution; and they themselves could not but foresee that by testifying his Re∣surrection, they must infallibly alarm all the World against them, because the Doctrine which they confirmed by it was extremely opposite both to the present Religion and Interest of the Iews, and to the common Theology of the Gen∣tiles; and that therefore by going about to esta∣blish it, they must in effect proclaim War against all the World, and consequently expose them∣selves to the utmost Rigor and Severity that the
wit and malice of men could invent or inflict: which must be a very sorry motive sure to induce men in their wits to undertake the propagation of a known Imposture. But perhaps it may be thought they did all this for the glory and reputa∣tion of being the founders of a new Sect. But from whence, I beseech you, could they promise themselves success? not from their Master Iesus, who, if their testimony was not true, they could not but know was still detained under the power of the grave; not from God, whom if they testi∣fied falsly, they were conscious they wickedly belyed in suborning his power and veracity to bear witness to a falshood; not from the force and charms of their own Eloquence or Sophistry, for that they pretended not to; not from their Riches, for their Staves and Scrips were all the Treasure they carried with them; nor from any Authority or Power they had or ever were like to have; for how could such poor illiterate persons as they, ever expect to arrive to an Authority great enough to contest with all the power and wisdom of the World which was armed against them; in a word, not from any proneness they found either in Iews or Gentiles to imbrace the Doctrine which they designed by this their Testi∣mony to confirm and assert, that being every where gainsaid and opposed by the interests and affections of both; and if their Testimony was not be∣lieved (as 'twas very unlikely it should, if it had not been true) what could they expect but to be branded to all posterity as a company of infa∣mous Cheats and Impostors: So that unless they had been assured that their testimony was true,
they had all the reason in the World to expect that it would prove the most fatal and unprofitable Lye that ever was invented or broached among mankind; since it was so far from promising them any worldly advantage, that it visibly ex∣posed them to all the miseries and calamities of hu∣man life. And then if they knew this Story of Christs Resurrection which they attested to be a Lye, they had a great deal less reason to expect any advantage from it in the World to come; for either they believed that Religion which they sought to confirm by attesting this sto∣ry, or they did not; if they did not, how could they hope to fare ever the better in the other World for endeavouring to propagate a false Re∣ligion in this; if they did, how would they hope to be made happy hereafter by telling a Lye for that Religion which excommunicates Lyars out of the Kingdom of Happiness? Since therefore if their testimony had been false, they could expect to reap no advantage from it in either World, doubtless they would never have been so mad as to assert and attest it, had they not known it to be true; for what man in his wits would ever tell a lye that hath no reason to expect any other fruit from it, but only to die for it here, and to be damned for it hereafter? V. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible is, that the testifiers of it do give some great security for the truth of what they say; and therefore it is required by human Laws that in all great matters of Fact the Wit∣nesses should give the security of their Oaths, or of some great pledge to be forfeited by them, in
case their Testimony prove false. But never did any men give greater security of their truth, than the Witnesses of our Saviours Resurrection; for they sealed their Testimony with their Blood, and rather chose to undergo the most witty and exquisite torments, than to recant any part or cir∣cumstance of what they had seen and testified concerning it. For of all the Apostles, who were the chief Witnesses of it, there was only one that esca∣ped a violent death, and he, as the Ecclesiastical Story tells us, had not been delivered from it but by a Miracle. And doubtless those other Disci∣ples, who saw and conversed with our Saviour after he was risen, and together with the Apostles bore witness of it to the World, did proportio∣nably run the same fate: And how is it imagi∣nable that so many men should all turn so mad together as to lay down their lives for a pledge of the truth of a Story which they knew to be all a mre cheat and imposture? Some men indeed have suffered Martyrdom for professing Propositions that were false, but then they thought them to be true; but no man in his wits ever died in the defence of an Assertion which he knew to be false. But as for the testifiers of our Saviours Resurre∣rection they did all of them witness upon certain information, and did assuredly know whether their Testimony were true or false; so that if Christ did not rise, as they reported, they died in the defence of a known Lye, which is such a piece of folly as doth exceed all instances of extravagance. Suppose that Aesop should have died a Martyr to his own Fables, or that the Author of the Se∣ven Champions should have laid down his life in
the defence of S. George's killing the Dragon, would not all the World have concluded them incurably distracted? But as for the Apostles, their excellent Writings are a sufficient demonstration, that they were men of very sound intellectuals, and therefore tho we should suppose them to be so wicked as to love lying for its own sake, we can∣not suppose them to be so mad as to love it better than their own lives, as they must necessarily do, if their Testimony of our Saviours Resurrection were false. But supposing that one or two of them should have proved so frantick, yet it is in∣credible that so many hundreds of men and wo∣men should all agree together at the same time in the same mad project, viz. to throw away their lives for no other purpose but only to cheat and abuse the World, and that no one of them should be induced, by all the hopes and fears that were set before them, to confess and discover the mad conspiracy. When they began to report the Story, they could not but foresee the conse∣quence of it, viz. that they must either recant it, and thereby proclaim themselves Impostors to the World, or else lay down their lives for it. So that had they known it to be false, it would have been a Prodigy of Impudence in them, and Folly together, not only without hope of benefit, but within prospect of a certain ruin, to have divul∣ged a known lye to the World, and under the se∣verest Persecutions to have persisted in it without the least regret of Conscience, or concernment for their own ease and safety. There never was the like instance among men, and I dare say there never will be so long as men love themselves,
and continue in their Wits; and to imagine that of the Witnesses of our Saviours Resurrection, of which there is no parallel example among mankind, is an Argument that we have much more inclination than reason to be Infidels. This therefore is plain, that the Witnesses of Christs Re∣surrection gave as great a pledge of the truth of their Testimony, as it was possible for mortal men to do, and if those men may not be believed who at∣test a thing upon certain knowledge, and seal it with their blood, there is no credit can be given to a∣ny human Testimony; because a mans life is the great∣est security that he can possibly give for his honesty. VI. Another Circumstance requisite to render a Testimony highly credible is, that the Witnesses do give some certain sign and token that what they testifie is true; and this the Eye-witnesses of our Sa∣viours Resurrection did. For in token that what they said was true they themselves wrought sundry Miracles in his name: for so we read of the Apo∣stles, that they went forth and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word with signs following, Mar. 16.20. and that with great power, i. e. miraculous works, the A∣postles gave witness of the Resurrection of the Lord Iesus, Acts 4.33. and also at Iconium the Lord gave Testimony to the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands, Acts 14.3. And the same was done by S. Stephen at Ierusa∣salem, Acts 6.8. and by S. Philip at Samaria, Acts 8.6, 7. and by S. Paul at Ephesus, Acts 19.11. And S. Paul assures us, That from Ierusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, the Gospel had been preached by him, with mighty signs and wonders, and
by the power of the Holy Ghost, Rom. 15.19. all which things being recorded in an Age wherein, if they had been false, they might easily have been disproved, it had been the wildest project in the world for the Apostles to have pretended to them had they not been notoriously true; for they must needs think that all the World being preju∣diced against them would be sure to keep a very strict and watchful eye on them, and that if upon the severest enquiry they were at any time taken tripping in this their pretence of working Mira∣cles, their fraud will soon ring through all the World, which must unavoidably prejudice their Cause a thousand times more than all the Mi∣racles they pretended to could advance it; and for men that had the eyes of all the World upon them falsly to pretend to work such innumerable Miracles as they did, and this not in corners, but in publick view, and to name the places where they wrought them, and where they knew there were thousands that could and would certainly detect and disprove them, would have been the most prodigious instance of impudence and folly together that ever was acted by men in their Wits. But so notoriously true was the matter of Fact, that their most inveterate Enemies amongst both Jews and Gentiles have not the confidence to deny it, although indeed they attributed it, even as the Jews did our Saviours Miracles, to the power of Magick; for so in their Talmud, Tra∣ctat. de Idol. c. 1. the Jews celebrate S. Iames the Apostle as eminent for the gift of Miracles, by whom the Nephew of Rab. Samuel being bit of a Serpent would not be cured because every Disci∣ple
of Jesus was wont to heal in his name. And Lib. Sabbat. Ierosol. they tell us of a Son of Rab. Iose, who having swallowed Poyson was cured by a Christian in the name of Jesus. And as for the Heathen Iulian himself, he confesses that S. Paul did very wonderful things, for he says, that he was the greatest and most expert Magician that ever was, vid. Cyril. Alex. lib. 3. and the same he pronounces of S. Peter also, id. lib. 9. So also Cel∣sus frequently charges the Christians with doing their mighty works by the power of some Demon, adding a fiction of his own, viz. that they had received from Christ certain Magical Books by which they were instructed to perform all their Miracles, vid. Origen. cont. Cels. p. 302. and se∣veral other places, which is a plain confession that such Miracles were commonly performed by Christians: But that they did not perform them by any confederacy with evil Spirits, as these bad men affirm, is evident because one of their great∣est and most common Miracles was dispossessing these evil Spirits of mens Bodies, and their own Temples and Oracles. For the truth of which they often provoke their Adversaries in their Writings and Apologies to come and make experiment of it. Thus S. Cyprian in his Epistle to Demetrian Proconsul of Africa, O that thou wouldst but hear and see when the Devils whom thou worshipest are adjured and tortured by us, and with the spiritual Rods and Torments of our Words are ejected out of the Bodies they possess, when howling and roaring in a human voice they confess the Iudgment to come: Do but come and see whether these things we say are not true. And a little after, If thou wilt come,
saith he, thou shalt see those whom thou worshipest for Gods stand bound and tremble as miserable Captives under our hands. Others of them appeal to the Consciences of the Heathens themselves, who had been Spectators of their miraculous Victo∣ries over these infernal Spirits. So Minutius Fae∣lix, All these things are very well known to a great many of your selves, that your Gods are forced by us to confess themselves Devils, when by the torment of our words, and by the fire of our Prayers they are chased out of human Bodies, even Saturn and Sera∣pis, and Jupiter, and the greatest of those Gods you worship, being overcome with sorrow are forced to acknowledge what they are, and tho it be to their shame, especially when you are present, yet they dare not lye, but being adjured by the true and only God they quake and tremble in the bodies they possess, and either leap out immediately, or vanish by degrees. Others of them offer to make the experiment even before the Tribunals of the Heathen, and to an∣swer for the success with their own lives. So Tertullian in his Apologetick. Let any man that is apparently acted by one of your Gods be brought before your own Tribunals, and if that supposed God, being commanded by any Christian to speak, doth not confess himself to be a Devil, as not daring to lye to a Chri∣stian, take that malepert Christian and pour out his blood immediately. Yea, how often, saith he a little after, only upon our touch of and breathing upon pos∣sessed persons are these Gods you adore forced to depart out of their Bodies with grief and reluctancy, you your selves being present, and blushing at it. And these things, as Origen tells us, cont. Cels. lib. 7. were ordinarily performed even by the meanest
Christians, which is a plain Argument that it was done merely by the power of Jesus, without any Conjuration or Magical Art. And can we imagine that the Devil, without any constraint from some superior power would ever have quit∣ted that Tyranny he had so long exercised over the bodies and consciences of men, who had thi∣therto adored and worshiped him, or that he would ever have confessed himself to be a Devil to those men who sought the ruin of his Kingdom, and made use of his Confessions to that purpose, had he not been forced to it by the Authority of the Father of Spirits? Is it likely, he would have exerted his power to the ruin of his own interest, and the amendment of those Souls he had insna∣red and captivated, as he must necessarily have done should he have impowered the Witnesses of our Saviours Resurrection to confirm their Testi∣mony by Miracles? And since they all along de∣clared they did them in the name and by the power of Iesus, to be sure if it had not been so, the God of truth would never have impowered them to impose such a cheat upon the World. These Miracles of theirs therefore were plain signs and tokens of the truth of what they did attest, viz. that Jesus was risen from the dead, and that not only as they were so many divine seals by which God himself did confirm their Testimony, whose goodness and veracity could never have permitted him to set the seal of his miraculous power to a lye: But besides this the Apostles Miracles were so many plain demonstrations that Jesus was risen and alive, since they did them all in his name, and by his power. For how is it possible, that Jesus
could have impowered them to do Miracles had he been still among the dead, and in a state of inacti∣vity? A dead man can do nothing himself, much less can he impower others to do Miracles. So that by those miraculous Works which the Apo∣stles did by the power of Christ they did in effect thus bespeak the World: Look here, O incredu∣lous World, if nothing else will persuade you that our Lord is risen and alive, behold the vital operations which he exerts in us his Disciples, tho of our selves we are as impotent as you, yet no sooner do we invoke our great Masters Name, and implore his Aid, but we are presently enabled to perform mighty things beyond the power of any mortal Agent; without any other Charm but his powerful Name, we raise the Dead, bind the Devils, restore the Blind, recover the Lame, and cure all manner of Diseases; and is not this as plain a token of his being alive, as if he were now standing before you in our room, and doing all these things in his own Person? If he were dead still he could not act in us, as you see him do; and therefore if nothing else will convince ye that he is alive again, behold these mighty powers which he exerts in us, and be at length persuaded by these sensible tokens of his activity, which we produce before your eyes, that he is risen from the dead. For it is worth observing, that this gift of Miracles was never so plentifully communicated to the Apostles as after Christs Ascension into Heaven, for before he a∣scended he commanded them to tarry at Ierusa∣lem till they had received the Gift of the Holy Ghost, or, which is the same thing, the Gift of
Miracles, Acts 1.4, 5. and this gift, as he him∣self tells them, vers. 8. was to enable them to bear Testimony to him unto all the World, for he being now ascended into Heaven they could no longer produce his person to convince unbelievers of the truth of his Resurrection, and therefore to supply this defect Christ gave them the gift of Mira∣cles, that that might be instead of his bodily pre∣sence a plain and sensible token of his being re∣stored to life again. And indeed this was as cer∣tain a sign of it as if he had continued upon Earth, and openly conversed among men in the view of the World; for the most crrtain sign of life is action, and by what hath been said it is apparent, that Christ did not more visibly act in his own Person when he was upon Earth, than he did in the persons of his Apostles after he ascended into Heaven. These miraculous Operations there∣fore which they performed by the Power of Je∣sus, were all of them so many plain and sensible Signs and Tokens of the truth of what they did attest, viz. that Jesus was risen from the dead. So that considering all these circumstances of the Apostles Testimony, I dare boldly affirm, that from the beginning of the World to this day there never was any matter of Fact more sufficiently and credibly testified than this of the Resurrection of our Saviour; and by raising him from the dead God hath bore witness to him before all the World, that he really is what he pretended to be, the true Messias and only Mediator between himself and us. Which brings me to the second Head I propo∣sed, to shew what an excellent convincing Argu∣ment
this is of the truth of our Saviours Doctrine and Mediation, and how effectually it justifies his pretence of being the true Messias and only Media∣tor. 'Tis true, all the Miracles which our Saviour wrought while he was upon Earth, were plain demonstrations of his being sent from God, and therefore to these, as I shewed before, he fre∣quently appeals in his excellent Disputations with the unbelieving Iews; and when Iohn Baptist sent to inquire of him whether he were the Mes∣sias or no, he returns no other Answer but this, Go and shew John those things which ye see and hear, that the blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor have the Gospel preached unto them, Matt. 11.4, 5. But his own Resurrection being the greatest Miracle that he ever performed, to this both himself and his Apostles did most commonly appeal; insomuch that S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.14. says, That if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and our faith vain; because this being the Grand Miracle on which Christ staked the credit of his whole Doctrine; if this had failed, there had been no reason to give any Credit to any thing that he taught. The Resurrection of Christ therefore is a certain evidence of the truth of his Doctrine; only as it was the greatest of his miraculous works, it proved his Doctrine no otherwise than his other Miracles did; but it was the highest proof of it, as it was the greatest of his Miracles. Wherefore to shew what an excellent proof of his Doctrine his Resurrection was, I shall endeavour to shew that Miracles in general, and particularly
this of Christs Resurrection are the best evidences of a Divine Revelation, that the nature of the thing will bear, and this I shall do by shewing First, that this is the most proper and convenient Evidence. Secondly, That it is the most certain and in∣fallible. Thirdly, that it is the plainest and most po∣pular. Fourthly, That it is the shortest and most com∣pendious. I. First, That this evidence of Miracles is the most proper and convenient to prove the truth of a∣ny pretence to Revelation. For as for the intrin∣sick Arguments drawn from the nature and quality of the Revelation, they may prove it indeed to be wise, and good and holy, but how they should prove it to be immediately revealed from God I cannot apprehend. For as for the Moral Wri∣tings of the Heathen Philosophers they were most of them very good, and wise and holy; but yet it doth not hence follow that the Authors of them were immediately inspired when they wrote them: notwithstanding their goodness they might be, and doubtless were the dictates of their own natu∣ral reason, and so may any other Doctrine how good soever it be; and tho the Authors of such Writings may pretend to be inspired, yet that is no argument that they are. For all that I know they may pretend to it to give credit to their Do∣ctrine, or they may think themselves inspired when they are not; so that they have no other way to convince me that what they pretend is true, but only by giving me some certain sign and token
that they are really inspired from above, and no sign can reasonably convince me of this, but such a one as I have reason to believe God alone did inable them to give me; for so long as I have just reason to suspect that the sign which they give me was produced either by their own power or by the power of some other Agent besides God, it is no sign at all to me of their being inspired by God. Miracles therefore being the only signs we can rea∣sonably believe are produced by the immediate power of God, 'tis they alone can indicate a mans being immediately inspired by God. For how can I be assured that what a man saith is immediate∣ly revealed to him by God, unless God himself give me some sign or token that he is so, and how can I know that this or that is a sign or token from God, unless it be something so extraordinary and miraculous, as, that all things considered, I may reasonably conclude 'twas God alone that pro∣duced it. I confess indeed, a Miracle singly is not sufficient to demonstrate any Doctrine to be of divine Revelation; for unless the Doctrine it self be good, at least unless it hath no apparent evil in it, there is no Miracle whatsoever can prove it to be divine. For there is no argument in the World can persuade a reasonable man to believe God against himself; but to believe a bad Doctrine to be the Will of God, because it is con∣firmed by Miracles, is to believe Gods Power a∣gainst his Goodness; and it is not more certain that God doth will what he confirms by Miracles, than that he doth not, cannot will iniquity; nay of the two, I should rather believe a good Doctrine to be from God, barely because it is good, than
that a bad Doctrine is so because it is confirmed by Miracles, it being more possible for a wicked Impostor to work a Miracle, than for a holy God to will sin. But yet the goodness of a Doctrine singly considered, and without the confirmation of Miracles, is no certain proof that 'tis of divine revelation. 'Tis true, those things in any Do∣ctrine which are morally good and founded upon eternal reasons, may be demonstrated true by moral arguments without any additional confir∣mation by Miracles; but if the Doctrine contain in it any Proposition that is matter of pure Reve∣lation, and cannot be known without it, it is hardly possible to prove such a Doctrine true with∣out producing some miraculous sign of its truth and divinity. As for instance, how can a man know that God hath appointed Jesus to be the Mediator between himself and us, which is matter of pure revelation wholly depending on the free will of God, unless God himself give us some miraculous sign by which we may know that it is his Will and Appointment? And therefore we find that there is no Revelation or pretence of Revela∣tion but what lays claim to this way of confirma∣tion. Thus the Mosaick Religion was confirmed by sundry great and stupendous Miracles, and even the false Religion of the Heathen pretended to this way of confirmation also; for generally they established their superstitious Rites by Magical Tricks and Incantations, they conjured their Demons into their consecrated Images, and made the liveless Stocks to move and speak, they pretended to effect extraordinary Cures by the in∣vocation of their Idols; they often raised the
Devils they adored by their Charms and In∣chantments, and made them appear in strange visible shapes to their superstitious Votaries, and by these and such like miraculous pretences they in∣troduced all their Idolatrous Ceremonies; which is a plain evidence that they thought Miracles to be the most proper and natural arguments of the truth of any Revelation; and since the thing is capable of no better way of demonstration, it is an unrea∣sonable thing not to be satisfied with this; for he who will not believe that a thing which may be is, without an impossible proof of its existence, is unreasonably resolved right or wrong not to believe it. So that this way of Christs proving his Doctrine by his Miracles, and particularly by his Resurrection, being the best and most proper; if we will not believe it upon this evidence, we are in∣curable Infidels whom no reason in the World can convince or persuade. II. This evidence of Miracles is the most certain and infallible Medium to prove the truth of any pretence to Revelation. For if God give a man power to do Miracles in token that what he says is true, he thereby sets his own Seal to the truth of it, and if we are satisfied that the Miracle was wrought by the Power of God, and yet will not believe the Doctrine it seals, we do in effect give the lye to God himself: for a real Miracle wrought to confirm a Doctrine gives as great a certainty of the truth of that Doctrine as we can have of the truth of God, which is the foundation of all the certainty in the World; because if once it be granted that God may work a Miracle to attest a lye, we can have no security of his truth; but for
all that we know every thing that he saith or doth may be an Imposture; and if so, for all we know he may have deceived our faculties too, and then there is nothing can be certain to us. The Miracles of Christ therefore, and especially this of his Resurrection, gives us as great a certainty of the truth of his Doctrine as we can have of any thing. For that he was raised by the power of God is evident, because he was really dead, his heart was pierced, and the vital bonds were broken, which rendered him utter∣ly incapable to raise himself; and supposing that there be some Agent in Nature besides God that was powerful enough to raise him, yet we are sure the Devil would not do it, because as was shewn before, he must thereby do a thing infinitely contrary to his own temper, and appa∣rently destructive to his Interest and Kingdom; nor would any holy Angel have done it without a special command and Commission from God, which is the same thing as if God himself had done it immediately. So that it's plain Christ's Resur∣rection must be effected either by the immediate Will, or by the immediate Power of God, and whether it was one way or t'other, 'twas a most certain evidence of the truth of his Doctrine, be∣cause it cannot be imagined that the God of truth would either way have raised him from the dead, had he been an Impostor, since in so doing he must have taken the most effectual course to im∣pose a Cheat upon mankind. For whilst he was alive he promised to rise again the third day, and gave this as the great Sign to the World whereby they should know that he came from God; upon
the hearing of which all unprejudiced minds (espe∣cially considering the nature of his Doctrine) had abundant reason to conclude thus with them∣selves, If this Man make good his word, we can no longer doubt but that he was sent from God; for to be sure he cannot rise unless God raise him, and it can never enter into our thoughts that the God of truth will raise him on purpose to delude and deceive us. When therefore he was actually risen, they could not without being guilty of the most unreasonable obstinacy, make any farther scruple of his truth and veracity. There was about six hundred years ago a cer∣tain Iew called El David, who gave out that he was Christ, and drew a great many Proselytes after him, upon which he was apprehended and brought before an Arabian Prince, who asked him what Miracle he could do, to convince him that he was not an Impostor, to which he answered, Sir, Cut off my Head, and in a little time you shall see me alive again; which he said to prevent some greater torments which he feared would be in∣flicted on him for deluding the People. Where∣upon the Prince replied, A greater sign than this thou canst not give, and therefore if after I have be∣headed thee thou recoverest to life again, both I and all my People and all the World sure will acknowledge thee to be a Messenger from God: and presently he commanded him to be beheaded, and there was an end of the Cheat; and so there would doubt∣less have been of the Christian Religion, if Jesus had not been raised from the dead, for he said just as this El David did, Kill me if you please, and when you have done so, you shall see I will live
again, and upon this I stake all the credit of my Doctrine. And therefore since it came to pass according to his word, we have all the Reason in the World to resolve with that Arabian Prince to believe and acknowledg him to be sent from God. For if there be a God that loves sincerity and truth, as we are sure there is, we are equally sure he will not conspire with an Impostor to cheat and delude the World; and yet this he must have done, had Jesus been a deceiver, when he fulfilled this mira∣culous sign of his Resurrection, upon which he suspended all the credit of his Doctrine. So that now we have the same certainty of the truth of our faith as we have of the truth of our knowledg; for the truth of our knowledg supposes that there is a God whose Goodness will not suffer us to be deceived in those things which we clearly ap∣prehend, and the truth of our faith supposes that there is a God whose Goodness will not suffer him to deceive us in such things as he hath given us suffi∣cient reason to believe; for he who gives me a sufficient reason to induce me to believe a false Pro∣position, is guilty of seducing me into a false be∣lief: and therefore since God in raising Christ from the dead hath given us a sufficient Argument to induce us to believe that he sent him, it neces∣sarily follows, either that he did send him, or that he is guilty of deceiving and abusing us. III. This evidence of Miracles is the plainest and most popular to confirm a Revelation. If the Principles of revealed Religion were to be pro∣ved by natural Reason and Philosophy, the Argu∣ments of it would be too thin and subtile for vul∣gar capacities, and men would never be fit to be
Catechized into their Religion till they had been trained up in the Schools, and there instructed in the intrigues of Logick and Discourse; for the ge∣nerality of men are capable of no other notices of things but what are immediately impressed upon them by the objects of sense, nor have they skill enough so exactly to compare simple terms as to connect them into true Propositions, and from these to deduce their true and natural Consequen∣ces. These are things that require far more lei∣sure and skill than Mens Education and Affairs will ordinarily afford them, so that had there not been some plainer and easier way found out to prove the truth of Christianity than this, it had been a Religion fit only for the Schools of Phi∣losophers; and the Vulgar who are not capable of close and strict discourse, and have neither time nor skill enough to trace the footsteps of truth through all the intricacies of reasoning and discourse, must have been damned to eternal infidelity; and this without doubt was one main reason why the Moral Philosophy of the Heathen had so little in∣fluence upon the People, because the Arguments by which its Principles were proved and demon∣strated were too fine and subtile for vulgar appre∣hensions, insomuch that there were but few in comparison that could comprehend the strength and force of them; and in all probability as little effect would Christianity have found in the World, had it not been proved and demonstrated by such evi∣dence as is adapted to all capacities. As for in∣stance, the immortality of the Soul is one great Principle of the Christian Religion; but now had we no other way of proving this Principle than by
Philosophical Arguments, how impossible would it have been to convince the Vulgar of the truth of it? For first, we must have proved that the Soul is immaterial, by shewing that its operations, such as Free-will and Reflection are incompetent with Matter; from hence we must have inferred that it is immortal by shewing that what is immaterial hath no quantitative extension, and consequently is incapable of division and corruption. Now, I beseech you, what Iargon, what unintelligible Gibberish would this appear to vulgar understand∣ings? What an insignificant noise would such fine Speculations make in the ears of an honest Plow∣man? But now the miraculous Resurrection of our Saviour is so plain and intelligible a proof of it, that every man may apprehend the force of it that hath the free use of his own faculties; for it is but arguing thus, and the thing is clearly pro∣ved; Christ told the World whilst he was alive that the Soul is immortal, and that there are everla∣sting habitations of weal or woe prepared for her in another World; and in token that what he said was true, he promised that the third day after his death he would rise again, which he could never have verified, had not God given him power to do it, and to be sure God would never have given him this power, had not his saying been true; where∣fore since God did impower him to rise again, it is plain that he thereby approved the truth of his saying, and justified his Doctrine to the World. This is such a plain and intelligible way of ar∣guing that the shallowest minds may easily appre∣hend the force of it; wherefore since God de∣signed Christianity to be a Religion as well for the
Vulgar as for the more refined and elevated under∣standings, it was highly reasonable that the way of proving its Principles should be plain and intelli∣gible to all capacities of men. IV. And lastly, This evidence of Miracles is the most short and compendious way of proving the truth of Revelation. One reason why the moral Philosophy of the Heathen had so little influence on the Vulgar was because their way of proving the Principles of it was so long and tedious; for they were fain to prove them by parcels, and when they had convinced their Auditors of the truth of one Proposition they proceeded to ano∣ther; and so they were fain to prove them all sin∣gly and apart by distinct and different arguments; which was so tedious a way that the vulgar had not leisure enough to attend to so great a variety of reasonings, nor yet capacity enough to retain them; but he that works a real Miracle, in token that such a Doctrine is true, proves it all at once, and needs not trouble himself to demonstrate one Proposition after another, for by giving a mira∣culous sign of the truth of such a Doctrine, God doth openly approve every Proposition contained in it, because it cannot be supposed that the God of truth would approve any Doctrine in the gross, if any part or Proposition of it had been false, since in so doing he must necessarily have abused our understandings, and wittingly betrayed us into a false belief, which to affirm of God is equally absurd and blasphemous. When therefore God raised our Saviour from the dead, he did by that one Act openly avow the truth of his whole Doctrine, and proclaim to all the World that every
Article in it is as true as truth it self. So that now we need not trouble our selves to hunt out for several Arguments to prove the several Articles of our Faith; for this one Argument serves instead of all, that God by sundry Miracles, and parti∣cularly by raising Jesus from the dead, hath given Testimony that the Doctrine which he taught is a true revelation of his Mind and Will to the World. And thus you see what a clear and excellent evi∣dence Christs Miracles, and especially his Resur∣rection is of the truth of his Doctrine: No wonder therefore that the Apostle doth so much prefer it above all other evidence, as we find he doth, 1 Cor. 2.4. For, saith he, my speech and my teach∣ing was not with the enticing words of mans wisdom, but in demonstration of spirit and of power; that is, I did not go about to convince ye with Rhetori∣cal Harangues or fine Philosophical Reasonings, but I clearly demonstrated the truth of what I preached by the Miracles which through the power of the Divine Spirit, I wrought amongst you. So that whether we consider the certainty of Christs Miracles, but especially of his Resurrection, or the powerful evidence which they give to his Doctrine, I doubt not but upon an impartial view of the whole it will appear that we have all the reason in the world firmly to assent to the truth of Christianity, and consequently to this Article which comprehends it all, that Iesus Christ is the Mediator between God and Man. FINIS.
NOTES. Page 35. Line 18. a FOr thus Tertullian, hunc (i. e. ) Zeno determi∣nat factitorem qui cuncta in dispositione formaverit eundemque & fatum vocari & Deum & animum Iovis, Apologet. 36 Pam. i. e. this Word, Zeno declares to be the Maker of the World, who formed all things in a due temper, and is called Fate, and God, and the Soul of Iupiter. And the Ancient Orpheus calls him the , and the , i. e. the divine Word and immortal King, Cem. Strom. l. 5. p. 60▪ So also Numenius the Pythagorean, as he is quoted by S. Cyril, cont. Iul. lib. 8. calls the Father the First, and the Word the Second God. So also Plotinus, Enn. 5. l. 5. c. 3. , (speaking of this divine  or ) , i. e. and this nature is God, a second God; and as for the Jews it is evident from the Se∣ptuagint, and Philo, and the Chaldee Paraphrase that by the Word they meant a divine Person, for Ezek. 1.24. the Se∣ptuagint hath changed shaddai, the undoubted name of the Omnipotent God, into  the Word, which to be sure they would not have done had they not thought this Word a divine Person; and then as for Philo the Jew, who lived in the Age when this Gospel was written, he expresly calls this Word  next to the , i. e. a second God next to the Father of all things, Quaest. & Solut. And elsewhere he tells us.  The Word is superiour to the whole World, and more anci∣ent and general than any thing that is made, Leg. Allegor. lib. 2. And again speaking of the Worlds being the Temple of God▪  saith he, , i. e. in which Temple the High Priest is the first-born divine Word of God, de Somn. And in his Book de Pro∣fug. he thus discourses of this Word,
i. e. this divie Word is superiour to all things, it hath no visible species by which it may be likened to any sensible thing, but is it self the Image of God, the most ancient of all intelli∣gibles, and next to the most High, between whom and him there is no medium. A great many other instances I could give out of this ancient Writer, but these are sufficient to prove what I intend, viz. that by the Word he meant a di∣vine Person. And then for the Chaldee Paraphrase, which is one of the most ancient Monuments we have of Jewish Learn∣ing, there is nothing more frequent in it than to signifie by this Phrase the Word a divine Person; for instead of Iehovah, or God, in the Hebrew Text they commonly insert the word of Iehovah, to which word they attribute personal actions, by which it is evident that they looked upon it as a divine Person; thus for instance they attribute speech to him, Gen. 3.22. where instead of God said, they render it, the word of God said, Exod. 20.1. instead of the Lord said, they render it, the Word of the Lord said. Again, they attribute hearing to him, Deut. 33.7. where instead of the Lord heard, they insert the word of the Lord heard. And Gen. 3.22. instead of the Lord said, be∣hold the man is become as one of us, the Ierusalem Targum runs thus, the word of the Lord said, behold Adam whom I created is the only begotten in the World, even as I am the only begotten in the highest heavens. And Exod. 19.3. instead of Moses went up unto God, in the Edit. Compluten. it is Moses went up into the presence of the Word of God. So also in Ex∣od. 17.7. instead of I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, it is, I will establish my Covenant between my word and thee. Again, Gen. 19.24. the Paraphrase is, And the word of Jehovah sent benign showers upon Sodom and Gomor∣rha to try them if they would yet repent of their evil works, which when they saw they concluded, doubtless our evil works are not yet revealed before the Lord, wherefore there was sent down upon them a shower of fire and brimstone from the word of Iehovah in Heaven. So also on Gen. 28.20, 21. Onkelos thus Paraphraseth, If the word of the Lord will be my helper, and lead me in the way which I go, the word of the Lord shall be my God; And on Gen. 5.24. the Ierusalem Targum expresly asserts, that Enoch was drawn up to hea∣ven by the word of the Lord. And also on Gen. 22.14. the same Paraphrase affirms thus, that Abraham worshiped
and called upon the name of the word of Iehovah, and said thou art Iehovah, &c. And on Deut. 18.19. thus both Onkelos and Ionathan Paraphrase, He that refuses to hear∣ken to my words, my Word shall take vengeance upon him. And to name no more, on those words of the Hebrew Text, Hos. 14.5. I will be as the dew of Israel, Ionathan thus de∣scants, I by my word will receive their prayers, and have mer∣cy on them. A great many other instances I could give, but these I think are sufficient to expose the great Immodesty of Crellius, who in a set Discourse will needs persuade the World that by the Word in the Chaldee Paraphrase is no where meant a Person, but meerly the speech or vocal Word of God: For how is it imaginable that by this Word they should mean no more than that, when they so commonly attribute to it per∣sonal actions, such as speaking, hearing, seeing, and desiring, drawing up men to Heaven, raining down fire and Brimstone from heaven, and taking vengeance upon men? With what tolerable propriety can these things be attributed to a vocal Word? How can a Covenant be made between men and the outward speech or declaration of God? What non-sense would it be to worship and invocate the name of Gods vocal Word, and to say of it, thou art Iehovah? With what tole∣rable sense can Gods declaration be called God or Gods only begotten in Heaven? Lastly, How can God be said to receive our Prayers, and to have mercy upon us by any such outward declaration? Since therefore it is evident that by this Word they meant a Person, and since to this Person they a∣scribe not only the Name, but the Worship of God, it is plain they believed him to be a divine Person, and that which is the sense of this ancient Paraphrase in this matter was without doubt the sense of the Jews in the Age wherein it was written. And accordingly Chalcidius ad Timaeum in that book where he professes to explain the Doctrines of the holy Sect. i. e. the Jews deliver this as their sense of this divine word, Et ra∣tio Dei Deus est humanis rebus consulens quae causa est homi∣nibus bene beateque vivendi, si non concessum sibi munus à summo Deo negligant, i. e. this Logos or Word of God is God taking care of human Affairs, and is the cause or princi∣ple by which men may live well and happily, if they do not neglect this gift which the supreme God hath granted to them. And to the same purpose Celsus, speaking the sense of the Jews, expresly tells us,
· i. e. we agree with you that the Word is the Son of God. Page 35. Line 20. b Nay, and that by this Word the Jews mean not only a real and divine Person, but even that very Messias himself, of whom S. Iohn here speaks, is evident, considering that they not only give him the very same Characters that the New Testament gives to our Saviour, such as the , the Character of God, Phil. de Agricul. lib. 2. and , the Image of God, Leg All. lib 2. suitable to Heb. 1.3. such as the Manna, the  and , the bread and food which God hath given to the Soul, agreeable to Iohn 6.33.35. such as the , the House of the Father, in which he dwells, ib. de Migrat. Abraham. sutable to Iohn 14.10. but be∣sides this I say, they also attribute to him the very same Offi∣ces that the New Testament attributes to our Saviour; for thus as the Scripture attributes unto Christ a Kingly Office under God the Father, so they make this  or divine Word, the , i. e. the Governour of all things, and the , the Viceroy of the great King, Ib. de som, & de Agricul. l. 2. where he also tells us, that God who is King and Pastor of the World hath appointed the Word his first be∣gotten Son , to undertake the care of his Sacred Flock as his own Viceroy and Substitute; and so also as the Scripture attributes to Christ the Office of an Intercessor be∣tween God and Man; so also the same Author tells us, which is highly worthy our observation,
, i. e. but this ex∣cellent gift the Father of all things hath bestowed upon the Prince of Angels, the most ancient Word, that standing in the middle he might judge between the Creature and the Creator; and he always supplicates the immortal God for Mortals, and is the Embassador from the supreme King to his subjects, and in this Gift he rejoyces as highly valuing himself upon it, saying, I stood in the middle between you and the Lord, as being neither unbegotten as God, nor yet begotten as you, but am a middle between the extreams, and a pledge for both; for the Creature with the Creator, that he shall not wholly Apostatize from him, so as to prefer disorder before order, and beauty; for the Creator with the Creature, to give him an assured hope that the most merciful God will never abandon his own Workmanship; for I declare peace to the Creature from him who makes Wars to cease, even God who is the King of peace. In which words the same Mediatorial Office, which the New Testament attributes to our Saviour is expresly attributed to this divine Logos. And in the above-cited Book de Agricult. he expresly teaches that this Logos or divine Word was that Angel whom God had promised to send before the Camp of Israel, of which Angel Moses Gerund. as he is quoted by Masius upon Io∣shua, Chap. 5. thus speaks, Iste Angelus si rem ipsam dicam, est Angelus redemptor, de quo scriptum est, Quoniam nomen meum in ipso est, ille inquam Angelus qui ad Iacob dice∣bat, Ego Deus Bethel, ille de quo dictum est, Et vocabat Mo∣sem Deus de rubo. Vocatur autem Angelus quia mundum gubernat, scriptum est enim, Eduxit nos Iehovah (id est Dominus Deus) ex Aegypto: & alibi, Misit Angelum suum & eduxit nos ex Aegypto. Praeterea scriptum est, Et Angelus faciei ejus salvos fecit ipsos: De quo dictum est▪ Facies mea praeibit & efficiam ut quiescat; denique ille Angelus est de quo vates, Et subito veniet ad Templum su∣um Dominus quem vos quaeritis & Angelus foederis quem cupitis. That Angel, to speak the truth, is the Angel Redeem∣er of whom it is written, Because my Name is in him, this, I say, is that Angel who said to Iacob, I am the God of Be∣thel; he is also that Angel of whom it is said, And God called to Moses out of the Bush, for he is called the Angel,
because he governs the World, wherefore it is written Ie∣hovah, i. e. the Lord God brought us out of Egypt; and elsewhere, he sent his Angel, and brought us out of Egypt; besides it is written, And the Angel of his face saved them. Of this Angel it is also said, My Presence shall go before the Camp of Israel, and shall cause it to rest. Lastly, This is the Angel of whom the Prophet speaks, The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, the Angel of the Co∣venant whom ye desire. By which last passage it is evident that by this Angel he meant the Messias, to whom all the an∣cient Jews refer that Prophesie; so that the divine Word, according to Philo, is the Angel that went before the Camp of Israel, and that Angel, according to Moses Gerundensis, is no other than the Messias: and that Philo himself by this Word understood the Messias is evident by his applying those words, Ezek. 6.12. (which the ancient Jews unanimously understood of the Messias) to him in lib. quod deter. poti∣orib. insid. soleat. But to put all out of doubt the Targums use the Word of the Lord and the Messias promiscuously; for so on those words, Gen. 49.18. I have waited for thy salvation O Lord, the Chaldee Paraphrase thus descants, Our Father Iacob said, I expect not the Salvation of Gide∣on the Son of Ioas, which is a temporal Salvation, nor the Salvation, of Sampson the Son of Manoah, which is a tran∣sitory Salvation, but I expect the Redemption of Messias the Son of David, who shall come and gather together the Sons of Israel, his Redemption my Soul expects; with which the Ierusalem Targum concurs almost word for word, only with this difference, that instead of those words, But I ex∣pect the Redemption of Messias the Son of David, it hath these words, But expect the Redemption which thou hast promised to give us by thy Word, that he should come to thy people Israel, which is a plain evidence that by the Messias and this Word they meant the same thing; so also on those words, Even I am he, and there is no God besides me, I kill and I make alive, I wound and I heal. Ionathans Tar∣gum runs thus, When the Word of the Lord shall be mani∣fested to redeem his People, he (i. e. the Word of the Lord) shall say to all the people, see now because I am he who was, and is to come, and there is no other God besides me, I kill in my revenge, and reviving do revive the People of the House of Israel, I will heal them in the last days; by which
last days is evidently meant the days of the Messias, who there∣fore must be the same with this Word of the Lord here spo∣ken of. Page 35. Line ult. c For as they affirm of their word that he is , i. e. always without time, and alone eter∣nal, vid. Porphyry quoted by S. Cyril, C. Iul. lib. 1. p. 32. that he is , the most ancient Word of God, Phil. de somn. and , the most ancient of all things that are, 16. Leg. Allegor. lib. 2. So S. Iohn affirms of his Word that he was in the beginning, that is, according to the pluinest and most obvious sense at least, that he actually existed in the very beginning of the World, and that consequently he was before all time, and the most ancient of all things. Again, as they affirm of their word, that it is not separated from the first Good or Father, , i. e. but of necessity is together with him▪ being separa∣tee from him only in personality, Plot. En. 5. l. 1. c. 6. So S. Iohn affirms of his Word, that it was with God from the beginning, ver. 2. that is, in an inseparable union and con∣junction, for otherwise all other things were as much with God as he. Again, as they affirm of their Word, that he is , the cause or artificer of the World, for so all the Platonick Schools frequently stile him, and so Pla∣to himself, , i. e. which World the Word, which of all things is the most divine, framed and set in order, Epinom. and Philo call him, , the Instrument by whom God made the World, Phil. lib. Chereb. So S. Iohn affirms of his word▪ that all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made, ver. 3. Again as they affirm of their word that he is, ▪ i. e. if I may coin a word, the Be-er, and that this Be-er, , i. e. is not a dead Be-er, that is neither life nor mind, but that mind and life and Be-er, are the same thing, Plotin. Enn. 5. lib. 1. c. 2. So S. Iohn affirms of his word, that in him was life, ver. 4. As they affirm, that the life or being of their Word was knowledge or understanding,
, i. e. neither is this Mind or Word in Potentia; neither is it self one thing, and its knowledge ano∣ther, but its knowledge is it self, or its own being, ibid. lib. 3. c. 5. So S. Iohn affirms of his Word that his life was the light of men, i. e. that it consisted of knowledge, which is the light of human minds, ver. 4. as they affirm that the , i. e. Intelligible light, proceeded , from the word Phil. de Opif. mund. and that , i. e. that all light is from this word or wisdom, Aristb. apud Euseb. praepar. p. 324. So S. Iohn tells us of his Word, that he was the true light which lighteth eve∣ry man that cometh into the world, ver. 9. In short, as they stile their word ▪ i. e. the Son of God, Plot. Enn. 5. l. 8 c 5 And again, , i. e. the Son or Child of God, the full beautiful mind, even the mind that is full of God, as al∣so , i. e. the most ancient Son of the Father of the Universe, Phil. lib. cui Tit. Deterius perfctiori semper infestum esse. And also  i. e. the first born Son of God, Ibid. lib. 1. de Agricut. So S. Iohn stiles his Word the only begotten Son of the Father, ver. 14.18. Thus from first to last, S. Iohn discourses of his Word, and in the same Phrase and Language gives the same account of him as the Jewish and Gentile Divines did of theirs, so that he must be supposed either to mean the same thing by him, viz. a divine eternal Person, or to design to make the World believe he meant so, for he who speaks or writes, must either equivocate and dissemble his meaning, or mean according to the vulgar ac∣ceptation of the words and phrases he speaks or writes; so that supposing S. Iohn doth here sincerely express his own meaning; no man that understands the common use and acceptation of his phrases can reasonably understand them any otherwise than of a divine Person, and whether this were not his meaning, at least in all appearance, I appeal to a very indifferent Judge, viz. Amelius, a Pagan Philosopher, who very well understood the Language and Doctrine of the Gentile Schools concerning the divine Legos or Word so of∣ten mentioned in their Writings, and who casting his eyes upon this discourse of S. Iohn, doth with all confidence pro∣nounce this to be the sense of them,
, i. e. this was that Word who, according to Hera∣clitus, existed from Eternity, and made all things, and whom, by Iupiter, the Barbarian places in the order and dignity of a Principal, declaring him to have been with God, and to be God, and that all things were made by him, and that in him all things that were had life and being. Vid. Eu∣seb. Praep. Evan. 540. Page 51. Line 3. d For thus Porphyry, as S. Cyril quotes him, , i. e. the divine essence extends it self to three persons, whereof the highest God is the Good; after him the second is the Maker of the World; and the third is the Soul of the World; for to this Soul the Divine Essence extends it self: And of these three divine persons Plotinus hath treated at large, whom he expresly calls, , three persons that are principles, viz. the Good or the One, the Mind and the Soul, assuring us that these Doctrines concern∣ing this divine Trinity, · i. e. that they were no▪ new, or of yeterday, but were anciently, though ob∣scurely taught; and that what is now discoursed concern∣ing them is only a farther explication of them, but we have faithful Witnesses that these Doctrines were taught of old, and particularly in the Writings of Plato himself, before whom also Parmenides delivered them. And indeed Plato very frequently mentions these three divine Persons; parti∣cularly, Phileb. p. 30. , i. e. but Wisdom and Mind can never be or act without Soul, wherefore in the
Nature of God there is a Kingly Soul, and a Kingly Mind. And indeed so ancient is this Doctrine of three divine Persons subsisting in the Godhead, that Proclus calls it, , the Tradition of the three Gods in Timae. Plat. p. 93. for so they sometimes call these three Persons three Gods, though as themselves elsewhere explain it, they are only three subsistences in the same divine indivisible Essence. And the same Proclus calls this Doctrine of the Trinity  which saith he, , i. e. the divinely inspired or deli∣vered Theology which teaches that this World was compleat∣ed by these three. By these and sundry other testimonies that might be produced it is evident that the ancient Di∣vines of the Gentiles acknowledged a Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, the last of which they called  or Soul, for so thee Chaldee Oracle, quoted by the above-named Proclus, i. e. after the Paternal mind, which in our Language is God the Son, I Psyche or Soul dwell: and this Psyche, or as our Scriptures phrase it Holy Ghost, they stile  the most divine Psyche ▪ i. e. whom we may truly say is God and not a De∣mon, Plotin. Enn. 3. l 5. c. 2. and the same Author tells us of this Psyche that it is , i. e. that it is the word of the Mind or Son as proceeding from him, and the energy or active power by which he operates, all which exactly accords with the Catholick Doctrine concern∣ing the Holy Ghost. Page 51. Line 3. e For so the above cited Philo, , i. e. when God accompanied with his two highest powers, viz. Empire and Goodness, the middle being one, he impressed thre hantasms on the sensitive or visive Soul, viz. of Abra∣ham. each  which exceed all measure, for these his Powers are all immense, but themselves measure all things. De Sacrif.
Abel & Cain. Now that by these Powers he means the second and third Person in the Triune Godhead is apparent, because he afterwards calls God and these his Powers. , the three measures, and tells us, , i. e. that the supreme God is Su∣perior to these Powers of his, and is to be seen without them, and appears in them, which plainly shews, that by these two Powers he means some things that were really distinct from that God whose Powers they were, and therefore since before he had told us that they were both immense, what else can he mean by them but those two divine Persons the Son and the Spirit of God? To the same purpose he discourses, lib. de Cherub. where after he had given some uncertain guesses at the mystical sense of those Cherubs that guarded Paradise, he thus concludes▪ , i. e. but I remember I have heard something more learned from my own Soul, which being often seised with a divine En∣thusiasm prophesies of things which it understands not, which so far as I can remember I will here deliver. By which solemn Preface he gives us notice that some very great mystery is to follow, and then he goes on▪ , i. e. My soul said to me with that only true God there are two supreme and first powers, viz. Goodness and Power, and that by the first all things were made, and by the second all things that are made are governed. Since therefore, as I have shewn before, he frequently asserts that all things were made by the Son of God, it is evident that by Goodness here he means the same Son; and if so, what else can he mean by Power but Psyche, or the Holy Ghost. And these three divine Persons he else∣where stiles, , i. e. the Be∣ing, the Ruling, and the Benefick power. l. 2. de Agric. Ne. Thus far this learned Jew, whose Writings, being originally in the Greek Language, have been delivered down to us without any considerable alterations, but it is not to be expected that those Writings of the ancient Jews, which are written and pre∣served in their own Language should be so express in this Ar∣ticle
of the Trinity as those of the Gentiles, because for several Ages they were solely in the possession of the Modern Jews, by whom this Article hath all along been obstinately rejected, and therefore may reasonably be supposed to be castrated by them in all those places where they more openly countenanced the Christian veriy against them; but yet after all there are sundry passages remaining in them which do very much favour this Ar∣ticle: thus Voisin in Prooem. Pug. fig. quotes this passage from the Book Reschit. Chocmah, c. 3. Tres sunt Dii ut explicatur in Zohar his verbis. Quis est sensus inquit R Iose horum ver∣borum, Deut. 4.7. Cui sunt Dii propinqui, dicendum erat cui est Deus propinquus. Sed est Deus superior: est Deus timoris Isaac, est Deus inferior & ita dicuntur esse Dii propinqui, i. e. there are three Gods as it is explained in the words of the Book Zohar, R. Iose said, what is the meaning of those words, Deut. 4.7. to whom the Gods are near, whereas it should have been said, to whom Gods are near; but there is the superiour God, there is the God of the Fear of Isaac, and there is the inferiour God, and so they are said to be Gods that are near. And Martin Raimund, Pug. fid. p. 396. quoes a passage out of Misdrasch Tillim, in which there is mention made trium proprietatum quibus creatus est mun∣dus, i. e. of three Proprieties or Persons by whom the World was made. And to the same purpose Rittangelius, in his Notes upon the Book Iezirah, quotes two passages out of Imre Binah, Tria sunt primaria & primordialia capita & coaeterna, idque testatur splendor eorum numerationesque in∣tellectuales in aeternam testantur Trinitatem Regis: There are three prime and primordial Heads and Coeternal, and this their own light testifies, and the intellectual numerations do eternally testifie the Trinity of the King, p. 3. & 36. So also Ainsworth on the first of Genesis quotes another passage from R. Simeon Ben Iocai in Zar to the same purpose, which is this, Come and see the Mystery of the word Elohim, there are three degrees, and every degree by its self alone, and yet not∣withstanding they all are one, and joyned together in one, and are not divided one from another. But to name no more, Grotius makes mention of some ancient Cblists, quoted in a Book called Additamenta ad Lexicon Hebraicum Schind∣leri, who distinguish God in Tria Lumina & quidem non∣ulli iisdem quibus Christiani nominibus Patris, Filii sive Verbi, & Spiritus Sancti, i. e. into three Lights, which some
of them call by the same names we Christians do, viz. Father, Son or Word, and Holy Ghost; and indeed, as their most ancient Writings do frequently make mention of the Word under the notion of a divine Person, as hath been shewed before; so they do also the Ruach Hakkodesh or Holy Spirit, to whom their most ancient Writers attribute all Prophesie or Revelation; for so, as I find them quoted by learned men in Pirche, R. Eliezer, c. 39. R. Phineas, inquit, requievit Spiritus Sanctus super Iosephum ab ipsius Iuventute usque ad diem obitus ejus. i. e. the holy Spirit rested upon Ioseph from his youth till the day of his death. And c. 33. R. Phi∣neas ait, postquam omnes illi interfecti fuerant viginti an∣nis in Babel requievit Spiritus Sanctus super Ezekielem, & eduxit eum in convalle Dora & ostendit ei multa ossa, &c. i. e. R. Phineas said, after they were all slain, the holy Spirit rested twenty years upon Ezekiel in Babylon, and led him forth into the Valley of Dora, and shewed him a great num∣ber of bones; and indeed it was a Proverbial speech of the Jewish Masters, as Maimonides tells us, More Nev. Part. 2. c. 45. Majestas divina habitat super eum & loquitur per Spi∣ritum Sanctum, i. e. the divine Majesty dwells upon such a one, and he speaks by the Holy Ghost; and that by this ho∣ly Spirit they anciently meant a real Person is evident, for so Ionathans Paraphrase on Gen. 1.2. Spiritu misericordiarum qui est ab ante Dominum, stante super faciem aquarum, i. e. the Spirit of mercies who is from before the Lord stand∣ing upon the face of the Waters; and Bereschit Rabba speak∣ing of the Spirit that moved upon the face of the Water, Gen. 1.2. expresly affirms, Hic est Spiritus Regis Messiae, this is the Spirit of Messias the King. So Ead. Hal. c. 12. Tempore Regis Messiae, quando constabilitum erit regnum ejus & omnis populus ad ipsum collectus, recensebuntur singuli ex ore Spiritus Sancti: In the time of Messias the King, when his Kingdom shall be established, every one shall be called o∣ver by the mouth of the Holy Ghost; in which places there are things and actions expresly attributed to the Holy Ghost which are proper only to a Person; and since by him they understood a Person, they must necessarily suppose him a divine Person, since by what follows it evidently ap∣pears that in their own Scriptures divine perfections were ascribed to him; and by what hath been said, that they believed three divine Persons in the Godhead, and according∣ly
Eusebius tells us, , i. e. all the Hebrew Divines do ac∣knowledge after the most High God, and after his first-born Wisdom a third holy Power, whom they call the Holy Ghost, affirming him to be God, by whom the Prophets were inspi∣red, Praep. Evang. p. 327. FINIS.
