S2541A 99832430 36903
THE SIXTH BOOK OF Practical Physick. Of Occult or Hidden Diseases; IN NINE PARTS Part I. Of Diseases from Occult Qualities in Ge∣neral. Part II. Of Occult, Malignant, and Venemous Diseases arising from the Internal Fault of the Humors. Part III. Of Occult Diseases from Water, Air, and Infections, and of infectious Diseases. Part IV. Of the Venereal Pox. Part V. Of Outward Poysons in General Part VI. Of Poysons from Minerals and Metals. Part VII. Of Poysons from Plants. Part VIII. Of Poysons that come from Living Crea∣tures. Part IX. Of Diseases by Witchcraft, Incantation, and Charmes. By Daniel Sennertus, N Culpeper, And Abdiah Cole, DOCTORS OF PHYSICK London, Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Book∣seller, at the Sign of the Printing-press in Corn∣hill, near the Royal Exchange. 1662.
Books Printed by Peter Cole and Edward Cole, Printers and Booksellers of Lon∣don at the Exchange. Several Physick Books of Nich. Culpeper, Physitian and Astrologer, and Abdiah Cole Doctor of Phy∣sick commonly called, The Physitian's Library, containing all the Wors in English of Riverius, Sennertus, Platerus, Rio aus, Bartholinus. Viz. 1. A GOLDEN Practice of Physick: after a new, easie and plain Method of know∣ing, foretelling preventing, and curing all Diseases inci∣dent to the body of Man. Ful of proper Observations and Remedies, both of Ancient and Modern Physitians. Be∣ing the fruit of one and thir∣ty years Travel, and fifty years Practice of Physick. By Dr. Plater, Dr. Cole, and Nich. Culpeper. 2. Bartholinus Anatomy, with very many larger Brass Figures, than any other Ana∣tomy in English. 3. Sennertus thirteen Books of Natural Philosophy: Oi the Nature of all things in the world. 4. Sennertus Practical Phy∣sick; the first Book in three Parts. 1. Of the Head. 2. Of the Hurt of the internal sen∣ses. 3. Of the external Senses, in five Sections. 5. Sennertus Practical Phy∣sick; the second Book, in four Parts. 1. Of the Iaws and Mouth. 2. Of the Breast. 3. Of the Lungs. 4. Of the Heart. 6. Sennertus Third Book of Practical Physick in four∣teen Parts, treating, 1. Of the Stomach and Gullet. 2. Of the Guts. 3. Of the Me∣sentery, Sweetbread and Omn∣tum. 4. Of the Spleen. 5. Of the Sides. 6. Of the Scurvey. 7 ad 8. Of the Liver. 9 Of the Ureters. 10. Of the Kid∣nies. 11. and 12. Of the Bladder. 13. and 14. Of the
Privities and Generation in men. 7. Sennertus fourth Book of Practical Physick in three Parts. Part . Of the Dis∣eases in the Privities of wo∣men. The first Section. Of Diseases of the Privie Par, and the Neck of the Womb. The second Section. Of the Diseases of the Womb. Part 2. Of the Symptoms in the Womb, and from the Womb. The second Section. Of the Symptoms in the Terms and other Fluxes of the Womb. The third Section. Of the Symptoms that befal al Vir∣gins and Women in their Wombs, after they are ripe of Age. The fourth Section. Of the Symptoms which are in Conception. The fifth Section. Of the Government of Women with Child, and preternatural Distempers in Women with Child. The sixth Section. Of Symptoms that happen in Childbearing The seventh Section. Of the Government of Women in Child-bed, and of the Dis∣eases that come after Travel The first Section. Of Dis∣eases of the Breasts. The se∣cond Section. Of the Sym∣ptoms of the Bests. To which is added a Tra∣ctate of the Cure of Infants. Part 1. Of the Diet and Government of Infants. The second Section. Of Diseases and Symptoms in Children. 8. Sennertus fifth Book of Practical Physick, Or the Art of Chyrurgery in six Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of Ulcers. 3. Of the Skin, Hair and Nails. 4. Of Wounds, with an excellent Treatise of the Weapon Salve. 5. Of Fractures. 6. Of Luxations. 9. Sennertus two Treatises. 1. Of the Pox. 2. Of the Gout. 10. Sennertus sixth and last Book of Practical Physick in nine Parts. 1. Of Diseases from occult Qualities in ge∣neral. 2. O occult, ma∣lignant, and venemous Dis∣eases arising from the inter¦nal sault of the humors. 3. Of occult Diseases from water, air, and infections, and of infectious diseases. 4. Of the Venereal Pox. 5. Of outward Poysons in general. 6. Of Poysons from Mine∣rals and Metals. 7. Of Poy∣sons from Plants. 8. Of Poy∣sons that come from Living Creatures. 9. Of Diseases by Witchcraft, Incantation, and Charmes.
11. Idea o Practical P¦sick in twelve Books. 12. Twenty four Books of the Practice of Payk, being the Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor La∣zarus Riverius Physitian and Counsellor to the late King▪ &c. 13. Veslingus Anatomy of the Body of Man 14. A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by th Colledg of Physitians of London, in Folio and in O∣ctavo. Whereunto is added, The Key of Galen's Method of Physick. 15. A Directory for Mid∣wives, or a guide for women 16. Galens Art of Physick. 17. A new Method both of studying and practising Phy∣sick. 1. A Teatise of the Ri∣kets. 19. Medicaments for the Poor: Or, Physick fo  Common People. 20. Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physick 21. One thousand New, Famous and Rare Cures, in Folio and Octavo. 22. A Treatise o Pulses and Urins. 23. A Treatise of Blood∣letting, and Cures perfor∣med thereby. 24. A Treatise of Sarifi∣cation, and Cues perfor∣med thereby. 25. Riolanus Anatomy. 26. The English Physi∣tian enlarged. The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a great Caracter in Latin. Divinity Books Printed by Peter Cole, &c. Mr. Burroughs WORKS, viz. on Matth. 11. 1 Christs Call to all those that are weary and heavy la∣den, to come to him for ret. 2 Christ the great Teacher of Souls that come to hi 3 Christ the Humble Tea∣cher
of those that come to him. 4 The only easie way to Heaven. 5 The Excellency of Ho∣ly Courage in Evil times. 6 Gospel Reconciliation. 7 The Rare Jewel o Christian Contentment. 8 Gospel-Worship. 9 Gospel-Conversation. 10 A Treatise of Earthly Mindedness, and of Heavenly Mindedness, and Walking with God. 11 An Exposition of the Prophesie of Hoseah. 12 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of Sin. 13 Of Precious Faith 14 Of Hope. 15 Of Walking by Faith, and not by Sight. 16 The Christians living to Christ upon 2 Cor. 5.15. 17 A Catechism. 18 Twenty one several Books of Mr. Willi , Col∣lected into two Volumes, Viz. 1 Scripture light, the most sure Light. 2. Christ in Travel 3 A lifting up to the cast down 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false Apostle tried and discovered. 7 The good and means of Establishment. 8 The great things Faith can do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The great Gospel My∣stery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from Christs Priest∣ly Office. 11 Satans power to tempt and Christs Love to, and Cae of his People under Temptation. 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition 13 Grace for Grace. 14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Naturall Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical Repentance 16 The Spiritual Life, and Ining of Christ in all Be∣leevers. 17 The Woman of Ca∣nh. 18 The Saints Hiding place, &c. 19 Christ coming, &c. 20 A Vindication of Gos∣pel Ordinaces. 21 Grace and Love be∣yond Gifts.
THE Contents OF THE SIXTH BOOK. Of occult or hidden Diseases THE FIRST PART. Of the Diseases from occult Qua∣lities in General. Page CHap. 1. Whether there are actions from the whole sub∣stance, or from occult Qua∣lities 1 Chap. 2. Of the Names and Nature of occult Diseases 2
and venemous Diseases that arise from Humors 17 Chap. 5 Of the Differences of Dis∣eases that come from the internal fault of the Humors 19 Chap. 6 Of the Signs of diseases that come from malignant vene∣mous Humors that are bred in our Bodies 20 Chap. 7 Of the Preservation from, and Cure of these Diseases ibid THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD PART. Of occult Diseases from Water, Air, and Infections, and of-In∣fectious Diseases. Chap. 1 Of occult and malig∣nant Diseases, and Venom that
arise from Waters 22 Chap. 2 Of malignant Diseases from the Air 23 Chap. 3 Of 24 Chap. 4 Of the Differences of in∣fectious Diseases 26 THE CONTENTS OF THE FIFTH PART. Of outward Poysons in General. Chap. 1 Of the Naure of Poy∣son 27 Chap. 2 Of the Differen∣ces of Poysons 2 Chap. 3 Of the Signs 32 Chap. 4 Of the Prognosticks 33 Chap. 5 Of Preservation from Poyson 34
THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVENTH PART. Of Poysons from Plants. Page CHap. 1 Of Opium 54 Chap. 2 Of Mushrooms. 56 Chap. 3. Of Napellas. 57 Chap. 4 Of Aconitum 58 Chap. 5. Of Toxicum and Phari∣cum ibid. Chap. 6 Of Hemlock 59 Chap. 7 Of the Colchian Ephe∣merum. ib. Chap. 8 Of Fleabane 60 Chap. 9 Of mad Nightshade and Dorycnium ibid. Chap. 10 Of the Mandrake. 61 Chap. 11. Of Smallage of Laugh∣ter, or the Sardonick Herb. 62
Chap. 12 Of Coriander ibid. Chap. 13 Of Ixia and Camaleon. 63 Chap. 14 Of Taxus the Ewtree. ibid. Chap. 15 Of Euphorbium. 64 Chap. 16 Of the Nut called M∣tella ibid. Chap. 17 Of Spurge 45 Chap. 18 Of Hellebore 66 THE CONTENTS OF THE EIGHTH PART. Of Poysons that come from Ani∣mls, or living reaures. Chap. 1 Of Poysons from A∣nimals in General 67 Chap. 2 Of Serpents in ge∣neral 69
Chap. 3 Of the Aspi or Adder. 71 Chap. 4 Of Cerastes 72 Chap. 5 Of Haemorrhous ibid. Chap. 6 Of Dipsas 73 Chap. 7 Of Amphisbena and Sci∣tale ibid. Chap. 8 Of a Basilisk 74 Chap. 9 Of the Viper ibid. Chap. 10 Of the Scorpion 76 Chap. 11 Of a Crocodile 77 Chap. 12. Of Stellio or a Lizard so called ibid. Chap. 13 Of the Salamander. 78 Chap. 14 Of the Spider. ibid. Chap. 15 Of Cantharides, or Spa∣nsh-flies 79 Chap. 16 Of Flies, Bees and Waspes 80 Chap. 17 Of the Poyson of a mad Dog 81 Chap. 18 Of the Brain and Blood of a Cat ibid. Chap. 19 Of Diseases and Symp∣toms which Poysons leave behind them. 82
THE Contents OF THE NINTH PART. Of Diseases by Witch∣craft, Incantation, and Charmes. Page Chap. 1 Of Fascination or Witchcraft, and whether a∣ny Diseases come thereby. 84 Chap. 2 What Inchantments, poy∣sonous Witchcraft, and Magick are 86 Chap. 3. Many affirm that Dis∣eases may be from Witchcraft and Charmes 88
Chap. 4. Uverus denies that Dis∣eases may come by Witchcraft. 90 Chap. 5 The Controversie is de∣cided, and it  shewed whence dis∣eases are made that are from Wit∣ches ibid. Chap. 6 Of the Signs of diseases from Witchcraft 96 Chap. 7 Of Preservation against Witchcraft 96 Chap. 8 Of the Care of diseases made by Witchcraft, and first of the Magical Cure 97 Chap. 9 Of the Natural Cure of Witchcraft 98 Chap. 10 Of the Divine Cure of Witchcraft 100 Also Two Eistles of that Excel∣lent and Famous man Baltha∣s Han Doctor of Physick, and chief Physitian to the E∣lectr of Saxoy.
THE SIXTH BOOK. Of occult or hidden Diseases. THE FIRST PART. Of the Diseases from oc∣cult Qualities in General. Chap. 1. Whether there are a∣ctions from the whol substance, or from occult Qualities. SOME confess that there are in na∣ture hidden faculties:. De nat. fac. c. 14. Lib. 1. d sumpt. fa∣cult. but how ma∣ny sorts, and from whence they come is not sufficiently explained. Galen calls them the Qualities of
the whole substance, and reproves the Teacher Plops, that bragged more ambitiously then lear∣nedly, that he knew the causes of all things. For they who endeavor to know that, bring foolish rediculous reasons, or deny things confirmed by experience. Libris de abed. rerum cau. exer. cit. 218.Fernelius in the last age learnedly defended oc∣cult qualities. And Iulius Caesar Scaligr saith it is great impudency to bring all things to mani∣fest qualities, And I suppose that there is no more foolish and detestable opinion in Physick, then to determine that the causes of all things which happen naturally, are to be fetcht from manifest causes and Elements. For who is so foolish or impudent, that will impute the action of the Loadstone drawing iron to qualities fetcht from the Elements? Some hate Cats, that if they be present (though they see them not) they fall into cold sweats, and faint, and cannot endure any Cupboard that contains them▪ Also purging Medicines that purge much in a small quantity, and the action of poysons testifie the same. And the meanest Physitians know of what narcotick quality a few grains of Opium are. From which, and six hundered more Argu∣ments, I conclude that these actions are far dif∣ferent from the actions of manifest qualities. Chap. 2. Of the Names and Nature of occult Diseases. THey are called occult Qualities, because their force is known only by their operati∣on
and effect; but we know them not by sense, because they affect the body privately.5. Simpl. c. 1. Com. in lib. Gal. de const. art. By Ga¦len they are said to act from the whole substance which Valeriola saies, is when there can be no reason given of the acting, but the substantial form, as the elementary qualities flow from their forms. Nor ae occult qualities to be contemned, therefore as the refuge of ignorance, but rather our weakness of understanding.Avien. de virib. cord. And as he that knows that fire warms from its heat, knows tru∣ly, and is not ignorant. So he that knows that a Loadstone draws iron, because it hath a vertue so to do, is truly knowing, and not ignorant. And in this our darkness, the form of fire and of the Loadstone, is alike unknown unto us, for the form is a Divine thing, and works, whole exqui∣site knowledg is hid from us; therefore it is the part of a fool to search after it.Scali. exer. cit. 307. sec. 29. For it is a part of humane Wisedom to be content to be ignorant of some things. And the true knowledg of all things is only in Eternal Wisdom. Chap. 3. Of the Original of occult Qualities. IT is hard and tried by few, to know the ori∣ginal of occult qualities: for they come not from the first qualities, which way soever mi∣xed or tempered, for they cannot produce such actions as are in Purges, Poysons and Antidotes, either being simple or mixed, so that occult qua∣lities should produce effects above the power and condition of the Elements. Nor are they from the peculiar mixture or unknown measure of the
temper of the Elements, for these miures do not change Nature, nor exalt the essence: for it is an undoubted truth, that nothing acteth be∣yond the strength of its kind. Therefore occult qualities flow from their forms, which must be sought for. Let us search into the differences of the substances in which these qualities are, and then it will appear that all have not the same original: for some are a∣live, others not, of those that live not, some have had life, as Rhubarb, Wormwood. Some have not, as Stones, Metals. 1. Therfore occult qualities that come frō living creatures, are in all the particular Individuums of every kind, only as long as they live; as force to stop a Ship, is the Remora, while alive, not dead. This quality is from the form of the fish living, and so it is in the Torpedo. 2. There are other occult qualities proper to some living, but not to all of that kind, as some hate cheese or wine, or Cats present, though not seen. These qualities depend not upon the form, but upon the peculiar disposition of the body. 3. Occult qualities are in things without life, & depend upon their specifical form, as the force of the Loadstone to draw in, or  it in the air, or to move towards the pole, or the vertues of Jewels, Metals and Minerals. 4. There are occult qualities in natural things that have lived, and do not, as in Plants and A∣nimals which are used in Physick, as in Rhubarb to purge choler, in the Elkes hoo against the E∣pilepsie &c. 5. There are occult qualities bred according to Nature in living things, both plants and beasts, as the venom of a Scorpion, Adder, Tarantula.
6. They are in living Creatures against Na∣ture, as the venome of a mad Dog, and of the Plague. These are the divers subjects of occult qualities. Chap. 4. Whether do occult Qualities belong to Health? NOt only the elementary qualities concern mans health, but the occult; for whatso∣ever conduceth to the natural disposition of the parts of mans body, belongs to the health of it. For health is as a natural power to exercise na∣tural actions, depending upon the constitution of the parts according to Nature; or a natural disposition of the parts of the body, that hath po∣wer to exercise natural actions. But to the con∣stitution of the parts of mans body, occult pro∣perties do belong, and many actions are done by them. Therefore occult qualities belong to the health of man. Chap. 5. Whether are there o∣ther Diseases then Distemper in the similar Parts. FErnelius only (as I know) said that similar parts had other diseases besides distemper,3. Path.  2. de abd. rerum c. c. 10. 1.2. de abd. rer. u.  for three reasons. 1. In a similar part, besides the distemper, are found things that make up its constitution, for there is matter and form which may be the subjects of a disease, as temper; for the whole substance is the perfection and integri∣ty, by which every thing subsists. Therefore
whatsoever destroys the matter and form, are diseases of the whole substance; some are mani∣fest, some are hid. The manifest demolish the substance of the parts by manifest qualities. The occult oppose the whole substance from occult causes. But Fernels reasons onely prove that there are diseases from occult qualities, and to be cured by the same. As for the first kind, the change and corruption of substance causeth not a disease, but the destruction of the part, but a corrupt thing neither suffers a disease nor health. If the corruption is not perfect, but beginning, it is a disease of distemper or alteration. If this destruction of substance come from an occult cause, it belongs to diseases of occult qua∣lities therefore it is not the corruption of the form. The second reason of Fernel, is from curing: Medicines are given, that work by occult quali∣ties, that is from the whole substance; therefore there are diseases answerable to them: for if there were no occult diseases, remedies had been invented in vain, which oppose the actions of them with their whole substance, as vonemous diseases, and the plague. To this I answer, a preternatural disposition from an occult quality, is more properly to be called diseases of occult qualities, then diseases of the whole substance or form: for it is not affected immediately, onely the noble qualities are affected, which the form useth for to act by. Fernels third Argument is from actions hurt: for saith he, all actions hurt, are either from the disease of the part acting, or from an external er∣ror, but there are actions which are neither re∣ferred
to diseases of distemper, nor to external error. It follows that there are others from whence these actions arise, as in malignant and pestilent feavers, in which there is often no di∣stemper to be observed, and yet strength is so de∣jected, that they often kill. Therefore every poy∣son of it self, as it is poyson, works by an occult force, and puts an evil disposition into the bo∣dy, that cannot be cured but by Antidotes But it must not be called a disease of the whole sub∣stance, but a disease of occult qualities. Chap. 6. What Diseases are in similar Parts, besides Di∣stemper? SOme Learned men having examined Fernels reasons mentioned for diseases of matter nd form, have seen some falsities in him, and therefore have rejected his truths also. I shall give my opinion. If any with Fernel wil cal them diseases of the whole substance or form, that have a hidden cause, because they destroy the substance and form of the part, it cannot be allowed, because they affect not the form immediately, as I shewed. But they shall say truly, if they shall say that they change those noble qualities, which the form u∣seth besides the first qualities, and bring in the contrary. That there are such occult qualities and evil dispositions appears by what is said, and they bring the same into our body, and so alter it, that after many years that malignant quality hath been observed to revive.
They say so of the English sweating disease, that many which scaped it, had a great palpita∣tion of the heart two or three years after, others all their lives. The same you may see in other venemous diseases, and the French pox. For ma∣ny have been seemingly cured, and after twenty or thirty years have relapsed, which shews a ma∣lignant disposition that remained. Galn knew this Saying. The least part of deadly poyson getting into the body, changeth it all in a mo∣ment, and alters it with a disease like it self. Chap. 7. Of the Causes and Differences of occult Diseases in General. OCcult diseases are preternatural dispositi∣ons, stampt upon the body of man from occult qualities, acting otherwaies then by the first qualities, and are cured by remedies that act occultly. These occult causes are divers, and produce divers diseases, as feavers with a cough, not deadly, but contagious; so there is an oc∣cult venom in the French pox, that kils not pre∣sently▪ but tormenteth men long. So the Le∣pers die not presently: and there are malignant feavers, with, or without the pgue. The causes of occult diseases, are sometimes without the body, from the air corrupted by va∣pors, and corrupts the humors, which causeth occult diseases; or when they stay with them that have an infection, as the Scurvey, Elephantiasis, and venom of a mad Dog, the Pox, and the like, by which, contagion is carried to others. Also poyson from Plants, Minerals, Animals taken in do the same.
Or conveighed by a bite or sting of a beast, as of a Scorpion, Tarantula, Basilisk. To these you may refer diseases by Witchcraft. There is another difference taken from the parts in which the occult qualities lie, by which a man is not presently killed, because poyson doth not suddenly go to the heart, but to some o∣ther part, as Spanish flies go to the bladder, O∣pium and evil malignant air to the brain, making an Epilepsie; the Sea-hare to the lungs, and the French pox to the liver. Some differences are from the manner and force of the action: for-deletery poysons have forms, which are the principles of acting, but the instruments are the hidden vertues that flow from these forms, which are unknown to us, except only by the effect. Also they act without the help of the first qualities, and cure distinguished from them. Chap. 8. Of the Signs of oc∣cult and venemous Diseases in General. IF he have been with them that have a conta∣gious disease, or hath taken poyson,The Signs. or been bitten or stung by a venemous beast. 2. If no Sympto can be referred to the quality. If they be gre, and not usual in other diseases. 3. If they e onely cured with Antidotes that work by an occult quality. You may know if the cause of an occult disease be bred in, or brought to the body by the die before, and by his conversing with such as had the like disease.
The Symptomes shew what part is chiefly af∣fected. If the heart he suddenly smitten, the vi∣tal faculty is dejected; the pulse is weak, the heart beats, the mind is troubled, there is faint∣ing. If the brain be affected, there is hurt of sense and motion presently, watching and raving. If the liver, the colour all over is changed there are spots and pustles all over, the urin is changed in colour and substance. The Pro∣gnostick.The stronger the malignant cause acteth, the shorter is the disease. Whatsoever gets quickly to the heart, is dangerous. Every occult disease is to be suspected, and also malignant and vene∣mous are worse then such as act by manifest qua∣lities. The greater the Symptoms, the more the dan∣ger. Chap. 9. Of the Cure of ma∣lignant, venemous, and occult Diseases in General. YOu must preserve or cure. Preservatives are excellent in contagions, of which hereafter. In diseases that come from humors gathered inwardly, you must evacuate presently. Poysons that come by chance, can scarce be prevented, except you do as Mithridates King of Ponius that used Mithridate often, of which Cardanus. If the malignant venom hath pressed the bo∣dy, take it presently away, or abate its force: if it be by a humor bred in the body, use Purges or Sweats▪ If poyson be drunk, and still in the sto∣mach, vomit it up with Oyl or Fat. If it be got∣ten
from the stomach to the guts, purge, or give Clysters: if it be in the liver, sweat: if it come by a little sting or touch, draw it out presently, that it pierce not in, of which before. Give Antidotes in all cases, or proper or com∣mon, if it be not known. In sharp poysons taken it, use fat Oyls, but in such diseases, look more to the occult then the manifest qualities. If there be other diseases also, as plethory, ca∣cochymy or obstruction, give not Antidotes be∣fore those causes be removed, and it must be done very quickly in great poysons. For those causes nourish the hidden venom, and oppose the strength of Antidotes. This was the opinion of Eustach Rudius,Eust. Rud. l. de morb. occult. &c. 12. which I suspect, for you must oppose what is worst and urgeth most; therfore give things at first against poyson. Against venemous diseases, we give Antidotes simple or compound, called Alexiteria. Simple are Angelica roots, Valerian, Swallow-wort, Contrayerva, Tormentil, Zedoary, Burnet, Scor∣zera, white Dittany, Masterwort, Snakeweed, Citron peels, Ashen bark, Carduus, Rue, Scor∣dium, Sorrel, Galangal, Pauls Bettony. Com∣pounds are Mithridate, Treacle, pouder of Sa∣xon, Diascordium. Mathiolus his Antidote. A∣mulets by Fernel and Palmar, and the like.
THE SECOND PART. Of Occult, Malignant, and venemous Diseases, arising from the internal fault of the Humors. Chap. 1. Of Malignity and Ve∣nom in general. THAT is malignant that hath worse symptoms, and is harder to be cured then ordinary. Malig∣nity is an adventitious quality to a disease that makes beyond its nature more difficult or dangerous. It is from manifest or occult qualities, as when an ulcer is in a part only distempered by a ma∣nifest quality, it may be cacoethick, or of an ill condition, but that is only from manifest quali∣ties. On the contrary, if a part be stung by a ve∣nemous
beast, or bitten, there wil be an ulcer al∣so, but such as is from an occult quality: here we shal speak only of malignity that flows from occult qualities. Hence it is cleer that malignity differs from poyson, for malignity comes after another dis∣ease, but poyson by is pernicious force brings a hidden disease without another disease, so the Plague poyson can kill without a feaver of it self, and so wil Hemlock, Napellus. Poyson therefore is that which of its own force by an occult way doth vehemently and im∣mediately afflict the body and endanger life, but the doubt is whether it be a quality or a sub∣stance, therefore distinguish it, somtimes it is ta∣ken for the thing poysoned, somtimes for the form of action and hurting our bodies privately. If it be taken for the thing poysoned, it is of a double nature: some are bodies and act by a bodily contract, and though they touch not all with their own body, yet they send forth Atoms and small bodies that infect, and move to & fro in the air in the time of contagion. Others act by intentional species, that is, spiritual qualities that kill, as the poyson of the Torpedo that bens the hand of the Fisher through the Spear. If poyson be taken for the venemosity it self, it is an occult and dangerous quality. The differences of malignant and venemous diseases are from the effects and causes, for we are ignorant of their forms, therefore we shall describe every poyson in its proper place by it proper signs: but here we shall propound the differences of occult diseases fetcht from their causes▪ they are bred in or without the body; from evil humors bred in the body are divers
sorts of malignant feavers, and pestilent feavers, and the plague. The causes without the body are divers both malignant and venemous. 1. The air drawn in, Inspiration sent out by transpiration. 2. Bad water drunk. 3. Contagion or Infection any way communicated to the body hurts secretly. 4. Poysons taken have power to cor∣rupt the body. 5. The stingings and bitings of venemous creatures, either piercing the body, or any other waies hurting, as by sight, hissing, venemous breath, or spiritual species. Also ve∣nemous oyntments with which darts or swords are infected: all these poysons are taken from Plants, Animals, or Minerals; of which in order. Chap. 2. Whether malignant venemous humours are bred in our bodies. MErcurialis denies it, Fernelius affirms it; and they both bring unsatisfying Argu∣ments. But Rudius decides the controversie in saying, they are properly poysons which are such of their own nature, and not such as by conception be∣come enemies to our bodies. And true poyson is only that which is bred without the body. 6. De lo. aff. c. 5.Galen seems to favour Fernel▪ against Mercu∣rialis, when he saies that poyson is bred in Dogs when they are mad, which is very infectious, and a pestilent venom breeds of dead carkasses, and if poyson breed in a Dog, why not in a man▪
nor is the external agent only requisite for gene∣ration, but the disposition of the matter is more then the outward acting Instrument. Chap. 3. How are malignant and venemous humors bred in mens Bodies? THerefore since poyson is bred in our bo∣dies the difficulty is, how it is bred. Note first that all the corruptions of our bo∣dies are not to be imputed to the matter alone, or to the efficient. Somtimes the efficient pro∣duceth it, when the venemous quality or dispo∣sition is so fixed that it infects the humors that flow to it: but usually venemous humors are bred in respect of the matter, and they after∣wards turn malignant. Note secondly that there are divers concocti∣ons in our body, in which new mixtures are made, nor is there a resolution as far as the first matter in every mutation or corruption, but when any thing corrupteth, only the form, and the determinate temper of that form, or the sub∣jects with its accidents perish, and others that are subordinate remain, some with their acci∣dents: hence it is that often some form is mani∣fest which lay hid before. And what Hippo∣crates spake of the powers of humors I find true in the nature of poyson.Lib. de vet. medici. In man (saith he) there is bitter, sweet, salt and sour, and six hundred more qualities, which according to their plenty and strength have other faculties, by mixture of the mu∣tual contemperation, nor are these seen, nor do they
molest, but any of thes are separated, and is alone, then it is evident, and molesteth a man, &c. thus must we dispute concerning poysons. A man feeds upon divers Creatures and Plants; the Plants are fed by dung of Animals and showers, or by floods, and we may find every-where things contrary to our bodies in the dung and excre∣ments of Animals, in the earth, rain and rivers, which are carried with the nourishment into the body, and there exercise their force. 6. Epid. com. 5. tex. 25.Hippocrates gives an Example of this, As when a Woman or a Goat eats wild Cowcumbers, the child or the Kid will be purged, because the milk is made purging. And though it be first made chyle, then blood, and thirdly milk, yet the purging quality is kept after so many changes, when the infant hath suckt. From whence it is easie to conclude, that ma∣ny things get into our bodies with the nourish∣ment, that have venemous and malignant quali∣ties. For how many men do feed upon Mush∣rooms, Melons, and the like, which breed bad juyce? How many malignant showers fall upon the Plants that feed the Cattel? How many beasts that are mans food, eat venemous Plants and Creatures? The Stork eats Hemlock, the Quail Hellebore, the Ducks Toads which nou∣rish them. Hens eat Scorpions and Serpents, and when man eats these meats, it is no wonder if that poyson which feed them (though after di∣vers concoctions it took divers forms) become hurtful unto man, and be a kind of poyson in him.
Chap. 4. Of the Causes of oc∣cult and venemous Diseases that arise from Humors. THese Causes are efficient or material. As to the efficients, in regard divers concocti∣ons are made, there must be divers excrements, according to the variety of the parts, one in the liver, another in the heart, another in the stones, womb, and the veins and arteries that contain blood and Spirits, when they are distempered, suffer the blood and Spirits to corrupt, and they are distempered by excess or occult malignity, by which the solid parts are often corrupted, as appears in soul ulcers, gangrens and sphacels. This evil disposition is somtimes from the pa∣rents to the children, and they produce evil hu∣mors, which cause the malignant Scab or Ele∣phantiasis. Somtimes it is from meat and drink, and venemous medicines that exceed in the first qualities, and secretly hurt the body. The Stars may do the same. For though they usually nourish the earth with benigne influen∣ces, yet by accident they may hurt this or that person by occult influences,Lib. 4. de febr. c. 4. 3. Apho. 1. except they keep a proportion, of which hereafter. Hippocrates shews how much the air condu∣ceth to the breeding of diseases, saying: That change of seasns doth chiefly breed diseases, and they are either breathed in, or sent into the bo∣dy by the pores, and the plague comes from the air. Also imagination and passions may be count∣ed efficient causes: for frights and anger have
caused great diseases. And I observed about six times, that when the plague was here where I live as Professor, that many fell into the plague by anger, which (though it be hard to be ex∣plained) is probable to me. For many bodies are of constitutions subject to the plague, either by the air or other cause, rather then to another disease; and if imagination, fear or anger come upon them, this disposition is easily brought into act, and the good humors may be corrupted by those passions, as Mercurialis shews. In lectioni∣bus de pe∣stil. c. 22. 1. de ven. c. 6.Cardan mentions hatred among these causes, it is a passion made of anger and sadness, and cor∣rupteth the humors. The other cause that corrupteth the humors is material, and makes them malignant or vene∣mous, and the plague is often bred from bad di∣et in time of famine,Gal. lib. de cib. lo. &. mal. suc. which Galen saw under Commodus the Emperor. Also Cowcumbers and Pompions produce humors as bad as poyson, if they lie long in the body. Also good meat not well digested in the sto∣mach, may cause bad chyle, and good blood is never made of bad chyle, but a humor or green choler, which is burnt and corrupted in the li∣ver, and mixed with the blood, and when it rests in the veins, it is scarce perceived, but when it is stirred by the motion of the body or mind, it is worse, and corrupts more, and is separated from the good humors, and brings great diseases, and sudden death. But meats that have in themselves a malignant venemous quality, as Mushrooms▪ Froggs do this much more.
Chap. 5. Of the differences of Diseases that come from the in∣ternal fault of the Humors. THere are two chief differences of Diseases from internal humors. The first are ma∣lignant, but kill not, onely cause greater Symp∣toms then the first qualities can produce, with these a man may live long. The second are such as presently kill, and are well called Venemous. Of the first sort are the humors that cause an Epilepsie, fear of water, dancing, madness, Scur∣vey, Colick, and malignant Dysenteries, Ele∣phantiasis, Gangrene, and simply malignant Fe∣ves. Of the second sort, are the humors that be∣get pestilent feavers, and the plague. As for the first sort, the Epilepsie and the other diseases are not the evident causes, or from ob∣struction of the ventricles of the brain, nor is fe of water, from the biting of a mad Dog. But this Epilepsie is from a humour or vapor that hurts the membranes of the brain, and the nerves espe∣cially. And fear of water may come from inter∣nal humors without the biting of any mad crea∣ture. Mercellus Donatus hath five Examples of this,Lib. de hist. med. mirabil. and the diseases mentioned are not from manifest qualities, but from malignant, occult and venemous causes. As for the second kind, the humors are so cor∣rupted, that they do not only turn malignant, but breed deadly diseases, that kil like poyson, as pe∣stilent Feavers and the Plague, Buboes and Car∣bunles, of which before.
Chap. 6. Of the Signs of dis∣eases that come from malignant venemous Humors that are bred in our Bodies. THe signs of these diseases are from the cau∣ses mentioned in the fourth Chapter, espe∣cially from the air, which if it keep not its natu∣ral constitution, the humors must needs be cor∣rupted, as experience confirms. Another sign is when famine hath been either by scarcity or siege, and men have had an ill di∣et, the inward humors are corrupt. The third is, when no manifest Cause went before, and the man had not to do with any man of the like disease, and there are the signs of ma∣lignity and venom,Gal. lib. 1. c diss. seb. . 4. it shews that it is from the in∣ternal fault of the humors. And by comparing the strength with the dis∣ease, you may know the event of the disease. Chap. 7. Of the Preservation from, and Cure of these Dis∣eases. WEE have shewed the Cure largely before, only if there be a malignant or Epidemical disease stirring, either from air or bad diet, or the like, let it be removed by conve∣nient Evacuations, lest the humors corrupt. And observe from what cause the fault is, that you ma apply sit remedies: as Pills de Tribus, Rhu∣barb,
and Syrup of Roses, and the like. These must be repeated at a distance, and good Anti∣dotes used. After purging, it is good to sweat, and take heed of anger, fear or passions, which stir up the hums that he stil and close, and make a plague without any society with them of the plague. See for the Cure Lib. 4. de feb. Cap. 6.
THE THIRD PART. Of occult Diseases from Water, Air, and Infecti∣ons, and of infectious Diseases. Chap. 1. Of occult and malig∣nant Diseases, and Venom that arise from Waters. MANY Diseases come from bad waters, as Dysentery and Dropsie and malignant Dis∣eases also, as the Scurvey. Marsh standing Pools easily corrupt, and the drinking thereof in Armies, causeth malignant pestilent Feavers, because they are infected by Froggs, Toads and Serpents, and other venemous Creatures. Also Waters are unwholsom, in which Flax or Hemp are steeped. And some Fountains have killed them that have drunk thereof, and there∣fore the Waters of the River Styx are so odious, among Poes. Pausanias and other Historians mention of many poysons that wil infect waters
You may cure these Waters by boyling thē or quenching steel, or stone, or iron in them when you are in Armies, or on a Journey, and cannot boyl them, at least you may strain them. And if any have drunk such Waters, let him presently take an Antidote. Chap. 2. Of malignant Dis∣eases from the Air. AIr as it is a pure Element, neither corrupts, nor is infectious;Paraeus lib 10. c. 13. but it may be corrup∣ted by other things. Paris is seldom free from the Plague, by rea∣son of inundations, for besides the stink of the mud, all the Jakes of the City are full of stink∣ing water, that go not into the Common-shore, but to the Gates of the City, and cause a stink, especially in hot weather. Also malignant vapors arise from Dens and Caves, saith Mercurialis,De ven. c. 13. he had seen many Caves near Rome, into which, if either man or beast go, they presently die. The air becomes pestilent, when the smal bo∣dies that use to be in the air (that of themselves are not venemous) do corrupt. These are all dangerous diseases, and none can be secure from them, for none can live without air. Therefore let such as by reason of their im∣ployments, or the like, cannot flie, never go a∣broad, but with good Antidotes in their mouths and anointed about their noses.
Chap. 3. Of Contagion. IN contagious diseases. 1. There is the dis∣ease which is called Contagious, because it infects another with the same disease. 2. There is the Medium by which the like disease is produced in another. 3. There is the action by which the like disease is produced in another. And lastly the disease which is produced in ano∣ther▪ A contagion is an infection, or a body sent from a sick body, that can produce the like disease in another. To clear this. 1. Consider the contagious body. 2. The infection by which it doth infect another. 3. The body that is infected. 1. The contagious body is not onely a man, but an Ox or Sow, or the like. And that is on∣ly contagious that can breed any thing in it self, which being sent to another of the same kind, produceth the like disease. 2. When that Contagion passeth to another body, with which it hath some likeness, the pas∣sage is by infection or seed, in which there is force to act by the quality that flows from the force. But we are ignorant of that quality and the form from whence it flows: therefore it is truly cal∣led an occult Quality. For this quality and form are in as smal a body as an Atome, and is so cal∣led; and as one saith, The infection of diseases is multiplied by little bodies, that like seeds, comprehend the whole essence of the disease. Now the quality by which the infection acts so powerfully, is not manifest; for no manifest quality hath such force; but it is occult, and not sensible, but known only by the effect. Nor can
you say that this infection is the effect of rotten∣ness, for that putrefaction be made many altera∣tion are required, and long time. But Conta∣gion taken in suddenly infecteth, and often kills, and begets the like contagious humor in the par∣ty; and works like contagious poyson before there is any putrefaction wrought, as appears in the Plague. This Miasma or Contagion is spred and sow∣ed about, by the pores of the skin. Somtimes it comes forth with the sweat, or sticks to the skin with a thicker excrement or filth. Somtimes it goes out of the body by the breath: somtimes by matter or quittor that comes out of the ulcers. Somtimes those Atomes flie about in the air, and therefore the seeds of the Plague are sowed far a∣bout. A Contagion or Miasma is sowed and spred abroad two waies, either by fewel alone, or by the air, and by its fewel. This fewel is not the subject of that form, but gives a place to the con∣tagi. Such are all things that are porous and thin, as wool, flax, cotten, feathers, hairy beasts skins, and walles may receive Contagion, as ex∣perience shews: and some solider things, as stones and Metals, but then they are soul, for when they ae clean from silth, they cannot receive it so ea∣sily. 3. The body that is infected, and receiveth the same disease thereby, is somwhat like it. For it is received into garments, wool, but the like disease is not produed in them, because they have no Analogy with the body infecting. Nor doth the same Contagion infect all alike, for the Plague which in Sows infects not men nor Ox∣n, and that which infects men, inects not ogs
nor Oxen. And all men, and are disposed to re∣ceive all Contagions, but the kindred are most sit to receive, by reason of the agreement of hu∣mors. Chap. 4. Of the Differences of infectious Diseases. IN cōtagious diseases there is an excremēt bred which like a vapor or little body, or by silth, infects another body with the same disease. Catarrhs are often contagious, and malignant pestilent Feavers, sore Eyes, Consumption, Dy∣senteris, Scurvey, Scabs, Itch, scald Heads, A∣rabian Leprosie, Dogs madness, the French pox, of which we spake before in a Treatise in Folio in English.
THE FIFTH PART. Of outward Poysons in General. Chap. 1. Of the Nature of Poyson. I Had thought to have conclu∣ded this Epitome with the French pox; but when I found many things remarkable con∣cerning poyson, I thought good to set them forth. There are many Authors of the same, but they follow not the Method of Sen∣nertus. First, what things are accounted poysons?Eusiach. Rud. lib. 1. de morb. occul. c. 40. Some think Bezoardick Medicines and Purges are to be reckoned among poysons. For the un∣derstanding of this: Observe first, that Galen used the word dead∣ly for that which may kil, or that which may do good somtimes, though it may kil by accident. Note secondly, that some Medicines alwaies
hurt, and never do good; these are poyson, and so must be called. But they which somtimes do hurt, are not to be accounted poysons, and they which somtimes do good, are not to be excluded from the number of poysons. For there is a dif∣ference of things hutful in general, as Saffron chears the heart. But if you take too much of it in meat, it hurts. As a Merchant who bought a great deal of Saffron, & cast a great deal into the porridg-pot against supper, and after he had sup∣ped, sel into such a laughter, that he almost died thereby. The same is to be thought of some pur∣ges and Bezoardicks, that have no occult quali∣ty against the body, which by the excess of good qualities, do hurt: these are not to be counted poysons. Therefore poyson is whatsoever is apt to hurt us much by an occult quality.Card. 1. de ven. c. 1. & 4. Or thus, it is that which corrupts the complexion, not only by a quality, but by a propriety; for it is necessary to the Nature of poyson alwaies to kill men,Avicen. doctr. 2. c. 15. but to hurt much only. They define not poyson rightly, that say it is that which can kill a man presently by an occult quality, or that can by a property corrupt the heart suddenly. Some are enemies to the brain, and cause madness: others are enemies to other parts. Lib. de ven. c. 3.But how comes poyson to the heart? It is ei∣ther drawn by the heart, or goes to it being car∣ried by its hurtful quality, or by both. It is pro∣bable that all poyson being active from the de∣structive form it hath against the heart, turns e∣very thing it toucheth in mans body into poy∣son, and multiplies it self, for spiritual things have great force to multiply by Species or A∣tomes,
as appears in Musk; but it chiefly hurts that part with which it hath the geatest Anti∣pathy. Have poysons power to nourish?Aerr. lib. de ther. c. 2. Some deny it, and bring reasons against experience. For the Aegyptians eat Vipers; and there are a people that are Serpent-eaters near the red Sea called Candaeans. And the Maid that fed upon Napel∣lus, that she might kill Kings that lay with her,Avic. l. 4. Fen. 6. r. and the like shew the truth of this. And he that takes these for fables, makes himself a fable. There are divers poysons, some have no nou∣rishment at all, but are wholly contrary to Na∣ture, as Arsenick. Some have nourishing parts that are taken with the poyson, these may nou∣rish, especially if they be accustomed by degrees to them. And Galen gives no other reasons, but that Nature may be made acquainted with poy∣son by degrees, and be nourished by them. Chap. 2. Of the Differences of Poysons. SOme are poysons in their own Nature. O∣thers are so by corruption, as rotten fish and stinking flesh. 3. There are poysons made by art, by boyling and sublimation, we shall speak only of those that are of their own Nature poy∣sons. Some are Minerals or Metals, as Arsenick. O∣thers are Plants, as Napellus. Others are from Animals, as Scorpions, Vipers. Secondly, they either act by the irst qualities, or by hidden qualities, or by both together, but this division i lse. For poysons are not to be
judged by their first qualities,Gal. de temp. c. 4. & alibi. but by their con∣trariety in the whole substance. Moreover they are all enemies to the heart or some determinate part, but as they are hot, cold, moist or dry, they hurt all, but not as poysons. For though ma∣nifest and occult qualities may be in the same subject, yet their effects must not be confound∣ed. For with their manifest qualities they heat, cool, dry, or moisten, but kill with the occult qualities, or hurt very much. The third difference, is from the effects, for their forms are hidden from us, and shew them selves by their operations Hence some are ene∣mies to the heart, and kill men presently. O∣thers are enemies to the brain, as furious Night∣shade,Gal. de purg. med. fac. c. 4. Dogs poyson. Others hurt the Liver, as the plant that purgeth blood. And some poy∣son hath Antipathy against all parts. The fourth difference; some poysons are deadly, others not. Nor is it true, that all poy∣sons either kill or make fit for death, for as it is in Chap. 1.Mercuria. lib. 1. de vene. c. 5. Many do but hurt greatly, and cause onely folly and doting, so that with them they may live long. Some kil sooner or later, by hurt∣ing greatly a member that is simply necessary to life, as the heart, liver, lungs or stomach, &c. Fiftly, some kill presently, others at distance, as a grain of Nubia, which being divided among ten men, kills them all in a quarter of an hour, such is Arsenick and the poyson of an Adder. A∣mong them that kill at a distance,Salig. & . is the poyson of a mad Dog that often lies hidden many yea.
Question. Whether are there such Poysons by Art or Nature, that can kill a man at a cer∣tain time? I think it cannot be, for though all natural things have their circuits, and that there are the beginnings and ends of actions, they are for the most part unknown, and cannot be determined in this darkness of mans mind. Moreover the a∣gent and patient concur in every action, and be∣cause the actions of active things are not out in a disposed patient, and the mans body, in respect of the circumstances, hath more or less power to resist, it cannot be that the same poyson should kill somtimes sooner, somtimes later. The sixth difference, is from the manner of poysons getting in: some are taken at the mouth with meat: some come from without, many waies. Some venemous beasts leave their poysons upon Plants; as it was reported of a young man that was talking with his Sweet-heart,Mizal. memo. cen. 1. é Ioa. Bocatio. and rub'd his gums with Sage, and fell down dead. The Gard¦ner found a great Toad under the Sage that in∣fected it. Some poysons hurt by touch, rubbing, or a∣nointing. The Turks have a poyson so strong, that by touching onely, it kills a man the same day.Card. l. de ven. c. 15. Scal. eer. 157. It is reported of the Son of the King of Cambaia, that was nourished with such poyson, that he was all over poyson, so that the flies that touched his skin▪ swelled and died. It is a quein how poysons should kill only by the vapo: it is either from the material qua∣ty, or the srital species that poyson, kils. For  poysons, like Atomes and little bodies, ex∣ercise
their force, whether it be in fume, vapor or dust, or in a Juyce or Oyntment, and the ve∣nemous quality is in that little body, as in a sub∣ject. For when such a quality depends upon its form, it cannot be moved but with the same. Chap. 3. Of the Signs. POyson is either taken unawares, or given by subtility and stealth by wicked men. And this is a common sign, it presently makes a great change in the body, by which it differs from those that are bred from humors in the body by putre∣faction. For in poyson bred in the body, the sym∣ptoms arise by degrees, not altogether, but by succession; but in poyson taken from without, many Symptomes appear together from Nature stirred up by the poyson with horrid and turbu∣lent vomiting, overturns all that she may send out her enemy. And we may suspect poyson, when a sound man bred up well without foul humors,Gal. 5. de lo. affec. . 1. shal sud∣denly have his actions and things voided, and retained, altered, and the qualities, presently the motion of the heart and pulse is disorderly, with∣out any other apparent cause. The strength fails, the pulse is either depraved or abolished, with beating of the heart, fainting and death. Some have Megrims, Convulsions, Trembling, Hickets, biting, stomach-pain, and guts griping-stoppage stoppage of urin, vomiting of choler, or the like, somtimes loosness of belly. Cold sweats, and chilness, swollen tongue, black and infamed lips, swollen belly, and body often, with spots. All these Symptomes are worse then such as come from poyson bred with in.
Poyson from biting or stinging of venemous beasts have other signs, there is presently pain in the part. It is inflamed, and rots, and mortifies, except you have present remedies. Poysons at a distance called Temporary, have their conjectures, though no certain signs, by the effects. There are often long diseases without reason: or folly, madness, or Epilepsie, running pains, and Consumption. But the poysons that affect the lungs, cause a dry cough and tongue, thirst, spitting of blood, and Consumption, and other poysons that hurt other parts, are known by the actions of those parts hurt. Whether may one killed by poyson be disco∣vered certainly? Galen thought they might be known to be poysoned, when he writes thus: A man of his own nature abounding with good hu∣mors, and well educated, and fed, when he dies sud∣denly (as they use to do that take deadly poyson) If his body be blew or blackish, or of divers colours,  stink, they say he is poysoned. From which words we may gather,Ioan. Bap∣tist. Sylvat. that Galen thought that men poysoned, might be discovered. But the best way to make it manifest, is to open the body, and have an expert and wise Physitian. Chap. 4. Of the Prognosticks. TO prognosticate artificially, consider the Nature of poysons, and differences. Some hurt more, others less; some sooner, some la∣ter. 1. They that set upon the heart kill present∣ly, or are overcome. They that assault the liver or lungs, last longer. They which hinder brea∣thin, quite kill presently.
The second difference is from the great, mean or small quantity of the poyson. 3. The more and the greater the Symptoms, the sooner and certainer is death, as sounding, chilness, cold sweat, turning of the eyes. If these come together, there is no hope, and the more they increase, the worse it is. If they decrease, there is some hope. 4. It is a sign of death, if after the poyson is taken, there is no vomiting, or purging, or voi∣ding any thing, though means have been used. There are other prognosticks which are manifest from what hath been said. Chap. 5. Of Preservation from Poyson. THey that will be preserved from poyson, let them keep close to Cardans Rules.Lib. 3. de ven. c. 1. The safest way is to use Antidotes, as Mithri∣dates did Mithridate, so that he could not be poy∣soned. There are divers Antidotes internal and external. Albertus Magnus speaks of the ex∣ternal, as the Diamond, Topas, Smaragd worn constantly upon the bare skin, no poyson can hurt that man.Anthelmus Boet. lib. 2. de gem. c. 175. Lib. dethe. ad. pis. c. 16. & ad pamph. Some precious stones keep men from infectious air. These are worn for Amulets: and if poyson be near, they sweat. Treacle and Mithridate are the best inward, and Galen saith that none can be poysoned that take as much as a Bean every day of Treacle and bids them use it in time of health. And experi∣ence shews that you may safely give preservatives against poyson to sound bodies, and by them they get an incredible propriety to resist poyson
Some of these Antidotes are without any ex∣cess of quality, as Bezoar stone, sealed Earth, Bole, Harts-orn, Smaragds, and the like. These are given safely to all bodies. Mithridate and Trea∣cle, though they be less hot, by reason of the fer∣mentation, yet take heed that by the too much use, you do hurt thereby. Chap. 6. Of the Cure of Poy∣son in General. SOme make differences between Bezoardicks and Antidotes, and say that Bezoardicks act not against poyson, but only strengthen the bo∣dy to expel it: and they help only by accident. Some say that Bezoardicks fight against poyson,Eustach. rad. de morb. oc. lib. 2. c. 7. and are wholly against them. Antidotes are hurtful in too great a quantity, and are in some sort against the heart, but both by use are good in venemous diseases; us all Cordials, Bezoar stone, Harts and Unicorns∣horn, &c. Some Antidotes are proper against some pecu∣liar poysons, and all strengthen the heart to resist poyson: as Tormenil roots, white Dittany, Borage, Bugloss, Sorrel, Scabious, Borage and Bugloss o∣wers, Violets, Roses, Waterlillies, Gilliowers, Ci∣tron and Basil seeds, Wood-alos, juyce of Citrons, Pomgranates, Oranges, Quinces, Saffron, Cinna∣mon, Cloves, Harts-horn, bone of a Stags heart, Ivory, Pearl, Musk, Amber, Coral, Hyacints, Smaragds, Saphirs, sealed Earth, Bole. Many of them resist poyson, and Compounds made of them. And though ht must be given against cold
and cold against hot poysons, yet you must not so much look at the manifest qualities as to that force which is in medicines, to oppose poyson in the whole substance. Therefore in hot poysons you may give Treacle and Mithridate: and if the poyson will give leave, first abate the Cacochy∣my. Lastly, let him that hath taken poyson, either at the mouth, or other waies, sleep but little; for he must constantly take medicines, and ob∣serve whether the Symptoms increase, or abate by the Bezoardicks, more of which hereafter. Chap. 7. Of the Cure of Poy∣son taken in at the mouth. WHen any one thinks he hath taken poyson, let him presently have a Vomit, before the poyson exercise its cruelty, and let it be repeat∣ed often, and made of things that may dull the sharpness of the poyson; as of fat Broaths, Oyl, Butter-milk boyled, Broom, Dill, Iesamine flowers, Radishes, and the like, to which you may add Be∣zoardicks, so that they stop not vomiting. Ther∣fore make choice of things that bind not, as Harts-horn, Bezoar stone. If the poyson get to the stomach and guts, give Clysters. As, Take Mallows, Pellitory, Althaea, each two handfuls; boyl them in water, strain them, to a pint and half, add Oyl six ounces, Electuary of Fleabane two drams, make a Clyster. And purge thus: Take Scorzonra roots two drams, Sorrel half a handful, Agarick two drams, Zedoary, Ci∣tron seeds, each a scruple; Cordial flowers a pugil: hoyl them, strain, and ad to four ounces, Manna two
ounces, strain it again, and add Syrup of Citron∣peels. While these are doing, anoint every third hour the heart, feet, hands and temples, and pla∣ces where you feel the arteries beat, with Oyl of Scorpions, of which Mathiolus, it is excellent. Let the reliques of the poyson be driven from the heart and bowels by sweats, and leave not sweating til the evil disposition be quite conque∣red. For diet, give Milk for meat and drink, and fat meats, Butter and Oyl, Borage, Bugloss, Figs with Cordials, Harts-horn, Coral, Pearl, Hyacinths, Smaragds, Zedoary, Saffron, Citron peels. Chap. 8. Of the Cure of Poy∣son from without. THat poyson may not creep in, draw it out presently by Medicines and Chirurgery. As, Take Galbanum, Sagapenum, Mirrh, Pelli∣tory, each half an ounce; Pigeons dung three ounces, Calamints a dram, dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and with Honey and Oyl make a Cataplasm. Or apply Chickens or Kids cut in two hot to the part where the poyson is. These laid on, work by a hidden quality, oyl of Scorpions, Spiders, and the Creatures that poysoned applied to the part.Gal. de  pis c. 0. Galen saith that he knew the biting of a Crocodile cured by the grease of a Crocodile, and the sting of a Scorpion, by the Scorpion applied to the part. These act by the like∣ness of substance. You must continue the use of things that draw out poyson, till pain, evil colour, and other
Symptoms cease, and there is laudable quittor in the part. And to keep the poyson from run∣ing inward or about, tie the vessels above: then cut off the part that is poysoned, if it may be done with safety. Give Antidotes at first to drive poyson from the heart, and kil it, and to take a∣way the venemous quality that is in the body. And  ulcer follow a bite or venemous sting, keep it long open, scarifie it, and burn it as shall be shewed. Poyson taken by scent, must be opposed by contrary scent, as Mirrh, Amber, Musk, Am∣bergreece, Civet, Rue, Asphaltum, Wood-aloes, Sanders, Cloves, Saffron, Storax, and the mouth being shut, you must take the scent of these at the nose. Of these we shall speak in the special or particular Cure of Poysons. Sennertus concludes this general Doctrine of poysons, with relation of diseases that come from fear and frights, because they are like poysons, and he reports out of Cardan,Lib. 3. de ven. c. 14. that when a man is frighted by Ghosts, or the like, the heat is drawn in, and the mind is troubled, and he be∣comes dumb; and if the fright be great, the out∣ward parts are cold, and contracted, and the hair falls off, and if the body be cacochymick, he is very sick, and if strength fails, he dies. This he confirms by many Histories which I have left out, only I shal relate one of which I was an eye witness. When I studied in Physick in Oxitan, Anno 1617. a woman that grew melancholick from anger, hung her self, the Crowner sitting upon her, sentenced her to be hung in gibets, a∣bout a mile from the City. Another woman that was her familiar acquaintance, seeing her ut of a window, neat the place, cryed out, and
fell into a great Diarrhaea suddenly, with a con∣stant dotage that could not be cured. From whence I conclude, that in these diseases from terror, the heart is not only affected, as Cardanus thought, but the brain also. Hence they usual∣ly give Epileptick Waters: this is good for chil∣dren. Take Tile-flower water, Piony, black Cher∣ry water, each an ounce and half; earl prepared, Coral and Hars-horn, each a scruple; Fecula of Piony half a scruple.
THE SIXTH PART. Of Poysons from Mine∣rals and Metals. Chap. 1. Of unsleaked Lime. VNSLEAKED Lime hath some venom in it, though it is a stone, and may be recko∣ned among poysons for its malignant quality; also it hath fire in it, that wil burn. Symptoms and Signs. This taken into the body, afflicteth grievously, for it corrodes and vexeth the stomach and guts, and causeth unquencha∣ble thirst, bitterness of mouth and tongue, ough∣ness, cough,Ama. Lu∣sit. c. 5. cur. 91. want of breath, Dysentery, stop∣page of urin, swounding and choaking. A child of eight years old supposed it to be Chalk, and eat much, and died the sixth day with these sym∣ptoms. The Cure.Provoke vomit with things that abate the sharpness of the Lime: give the warm Decoction of Violets, Mallows, Althaea, Lineseed, Rice, Oyl, fresh Butter, and Mucilages of Lineseed, Mallows, Althaea, Fleabane, and keep the belly open with
Cassia, or a Clyster with Barley water, and Mallows roots and all▪ Mucilage of Fleabane, Cassia lignea, Waterlillies, and the like. The Antidotes are, the gal of a Kid, from a scru∣ple to a dram, and the gall of an Hart or Deer a scruple drunk with warm Water, Earth of Lemnos two drams with Milk. Give fresh Butter and sat Broaths in which Mal∣lows is boyled. Chap. 2. Of Gipsum. THey who have drunk of this or eaten it with Wheat flour, have all died. The Signs and Symptoms. A great cough, driness of tongue and jawes, great pain about the stomach, hickets, stretching of the Hypochondria, binding of the belly, dul∣ness and dotage, fainting, and they die choa∣ked. Give warm Water with much Butter,The Cure. or Oyl of sweet Almonds, or Oyl of Lillies which will make them vomit it up. But because it sticks fast, give stronger Vomits, as Hellebore. If it be gotten to the guts, give emollient Clysters.Rhas. ad Almans. c. pr. Some give a dram of Scammony, with two drams of Fleabane in a Iulep. Then give Fats to make the passage slip∣pery; as the Decoction of Mallos, Althaea, Fae∣nugreek seed, fat Broaths, Goats milk, juyce of Mal∣lows, Decoction of Dates and Figs. These are specifick, Organ given in Vinegar and honied Wine, Liivium of Vine ashes or Fig∣tree ashes, with sweet Wine and Treacle, or Mithri∣date, from half a dram, to two drams in Sak.
Chap. 2. Of Vitriol. Diof. li. 5. c. 74.AMong Salts we reckon Vitriol, Chalcitis, Misy, Sory, Melanteria, it participates of the nature of Brass or Iron, and mineral Clay: this is not properly poyson, for good medicines are made of it, in which there are no signs of ve∣nom, and if it be given a dram with Honey it kils the flat worms,Dioscor. and with water it is the An∣tidote against Mushrooms. The Symptoms and Signs. It causeth loathing and vomiting, and cor∣rodes the stomach, except it be perfectly cast up it torments the guts, and causeth a Dysentery and great thirst. The Cure.Let it be presently vomited up with the De∣coction or Oyl of Dill, or Wormwood water, after vomiting, take much Butter or warm Milk with Sugar; if there be a gnawing in the guts, give Clysters of Barley water, Mallows and oyl of Roses. If you suspect malignity, give Earth of Lemnos or sealed Earth, with mucilage of Quince seeds a dram, with Barley water, or red Coral with Wine. Chap. 4. Of Aqua fortis. THis kils by corroding rather then by poy∣son, it is used by Gold-smiths to seperate and corrode metals. Symptoms and Signs. It pierceth so that it burns the tongue like fire, and corrodes the tunicles of the Stomach and Guts, a Maid died by it in great torment.
The mucilage of Quince seeds is good, for it le∣nifies and keeps the parts from corrosion by its sliminess. Or the eclegma of the mucilage of Al∣thaea and Quince seeds, Gum traganth made with Rose water, Honey of Roses and Violets: Or a Gargarism of Quince seed, Althaea, Cowcumber seed, Roses, Violets and Moulin, and of Self-heal, Lungwort, Sanicle boyled in water with Honey of Roses.Epist. 9. By this a Mariner was cured when he had dangerous symptoms from Aqua fortis. Chap. 5. Of Antimony. ANtimony is reckoned by many among poysons from its moving of such horri∣ble vomiting of water, and because it leaves such great weakness after it, but good medicines are made of it though it be not free from malignity, as appears by the vapors that fly from it when it is melted. The Signs and Symptoms. For when the Chymists melt it, if the vapor be taken in at the nose, it causeth Suffocation, Palsie, and Epilepsie, and other symptoms: If it be taken crude, it causeth Vomiting, Convul∣sion, Colicks, and fainting▪ To keep evil vapors from hurting such as use Antimony, let them eat Bread and Rue. Or,The Cure take Bezoat water with Bole. Or this, Take Walnuts a handful, beat them with Honey, add Treacle an ounce, Zedoary half an ounce, Clov, Nutmeg, each two drams; with Honey make an E∣lectuary, this is a preservative, and it may be used to anoint the nostrils. If it be given crude or ill prepared, it causeth
evil symptomes, then give Bailey water with syrup of Roses, to clense, and clensing Clysters: then strengthen the Guts and Stomach, with Wine wherein Cloves and Mastich is boyled: the Antidotes are Treacle and Bole Armeniack two scruples. Chap. 6. Of the Load-stone. Gar. ab hor. aro. lib. 1. cap. 56.SOme reckon the Loadstone among poysons, others say it makes people youthful, but that I believe not▪ because it is a mineral and hath the nature of a metal: and if it lie long in the body, you must do as hath been shewed in other cases; as if it stop in the Stomach, vo∣mit; if in the Guts, use lenitive Clysters, and then give Antidote, as the Smaragd to be drank in Wine thrice in nine daies, with Harts-horn and Co∣ral. Also Treacle is good. Chap. 7. Of the Diamond. THere is the same reason for the Diamond, as for the Loadstone of which we spake but there are more that think it not to be poy∣son, of this we spake Lib. 3. Part 2. Sect. 2. Ch. 7▪ Quest. 2. now I shal speak of the Symptoms and Cure of such as have taken Diamonds into their bodies. Signs and Symptomes. After taking Diamonds there is a vehement pain in the Stomach and Guts, and then follows fainting and death. Te Cure.It is by vomiting, as the other, then give
Goats blood, with fat Broath, and then from a scruple to two drams of natural Balsom, and if these prevail not, use the general Antidotes. Chap. 8. Of Lapis Lazuli. MAny say that Lapis Lazuli burneth and ul∣cerates, and putresies,Mosu. lib. de simpl. it is therefore not to be reckoned among things that are simply poyson, but among those Purgers that are not without malignity, because they are vehement. The Arabians say it purgeth melancholy, streng∣theneth, and cleereth, and therefore it is put in∣to Confection Alkermes, but then it must be wel prepared. Symptoms and Signs. This Stone not wel prepared, or taken in too great a quantity, causeth turning of the Stomach Vomiting, want of appetite, and pain of the bel∣ly, sadness and Sorrow. It is cured as other corroding poyson, by Vo∣mits and clensing emollient Clysters.The Cure. The cor∣roding quality is taken away by Asses milk warm drunk for seven daies together.Conciliat. Two drams of Am∣ber is the Bezoar or Antidote against this Stone. Chap. 9. Of Arsenick, Orpi∣ment, Sandarach, and Realgar or Ratsbane. Arsenick both natural and artificial, yellow and red is of the same faculty. Yellow Arsenik and Sandarach by sublimation make
white Arsenick or Ratsbane. Realgal and Ri∣sagallum are made of Orpiment and Sulphur with quick Lime and Salt. Signs and Symptoms. Foras. lib. 3. obs. 8.All the kinds of Arsenick bring grievous sym∣ptomes, which kill presently except they be op∣posed, as griping of belly and guts, vomiting, unquenchable thirst, driness of tongue, jaws and throat, and roughness, and then Dysentery and stoppage of urin, Cramp and Palsie, and Death, the white Arsenick is most dangerous. Histories confirm that Arsnick doth not only destroy by being taken in but hurts by being carried about.Amatus Lusit. cent. 2. cur. 34. Therefore they that have taken it are in great danger,The Pro∣gnostick. or they that handle it carelesly or apply it to cure the itch, or for other causes, for they either die, or run mad, or have a Cachexy. Provoke Vomit presently and often, with fat things,The Cure. and such as obtund or allay the sharp∣ness of the poyson as Butter, with warm water, or decoction of Turnep seeds, Arrage, with fresh But∣ter, oyl of Linseed or Roses, or other fat broath in great quantity. If the belly be griped, give Clysters of Mallows, Althaea, Violets, Vervain, Line seed, with Cassea and oyl of Violets, or of fat Broath, cream of Pisan, Asses milk, and mucilage of Fleabane seed. And after give Milk in great quantity and Butter and oyl of sweet Almonds, fat Broath, Rice boyled in Milk. The specifick Antidotes against Arsenick are a dram of pouder of Crystal with oyl of sweet Al∣monds, or three drams of oyl of Pine kernels Or▪Pet. Appon .G avne. Ma Take Pine nuts beaten four ounces, infuse them in a pint of water; strain and give it to be drank, Or give ten grains of oriental Beza.
Chap. 10. Of Brass, and its Verdigreece, and burnt Brass. IF meat be kept in a Brass-vessel (with Vinegar or Wine) and eaten, it disturbeth the sto∣mach, causeth vomiting, and driness of tongue, and corrosion, and fluxes. And Brass it self ta∣ken, causeth moreover difficult breathing, ulers of the guts, and suffocation. Burnt Brass, flour of Brass, scales of Brass,Diosco. lib. 5. c. 47. and Verdigreece, are all poysonous; for burnt Brass taken, turns the stomach, makes fluxes, and pain. And so doth flour of Brass, and also it strait∣neth the lungs, and suffocates. Verdigreece taken, is a deadly poyson, as Arsenick, it causeth pricking, grievous pain and corrosion in the throat, and stomach, and guts, and constant vomiting, and Dysentery, and stop∣page of urin, and straitneth the throat, and stops the wind, and suffocateth. It kills in one day,Bases in conti. c. 2. in the quantity of a dram. It must be cured by Vomit, with warm Water, and Oyl of Dill, or Butter; and by Clysters;The Cure. of Mal∣lows, Violets, Barley, Althaea, Faenugreek seeds, Fleabane, with Honey, Oyl of Roses and sweet Al∣monds. Then give Milk, fat Broath, fresh But∣ter, Faenugreek, Lineseed, Fleabane, Althaea and Mallow seeds. Some commend Sheeps suet, and advise that the bottom of the belly be anointed with hot Oyl of Roses, and of Mastich. For Antidotes, use a dram of Bole, or sealed Earth, with Wine, juyce of Mints, or Small age two drams. Or juyce of Acorus roots two or three drams with ▪ or two drams with Treacle.
Chap. 11. Of Aurichalcum, and Bell-metal. IT is most of Brass, and therefore is poyson, and communicates to meat and drink boyled in it, which eaten, brings the same Symptomes, and must have the same Cure. Bells are made of Brass and other Metals, and the rust of them doth the same. Horstius writes that a Noble woman that had taken the filings of Bells in red Wine,In commēt. ad sem. de occul. nat. miracul. by the advise of an old wo∣man that promised her health by it, vomited vio∣lently, and her belly rose up, and swelled her bo∣dy as if poysoned, and then she had headach, Megrim, and pricking, and fell into a Frenzie, and when she came to her self, her stomach was corroded, as if there were needles in it. The rust was purged out of her, which many saw. And if this happen, you must cure it as you cure Brass. Chap. 12. Of Iron, and its Rust and Scales. IRon is not poyson, except you take it in too great a quantity, or stay too long in the body, and then it hurts not as poyson, but causeth bel∣ly-ach, and driness of mouth, and inflammation of the body, and vomiting. The Cure.It is as that of Brass by Vomits and Clysters, that are lenitive and clensing, and by Manna, and Stomach-pills, and then Milk, Butter, and fat Broath. The Loadstone is instead of Bezoar a∣gainst it.
Chap. 13. Of Lead. IF Lead be swallowed whole, and voided, it doth no hurt; but if it be small, and stay in the body long, and melt,De lue. ven. c. 7. it causeth great Symp∣toms. Fernelius shews how it hurts. In Lead not burnt, when it gets to the guts,The Cure. and shews its malignity, it is sufficient to abate sharpness, and clense by Asses milk, and other Milk. Or the Decoction of Mallows, Althaea, Lin∣seed, Hydromel, Oyl of sweet Almonds. The An∣tidote against burnt Lead, is Quince seeds bruised after they are husked with Wine two drams, and two drams of Treacle every day with honied Water and Wine. Chap. 14. Of Ceruss. IT is made of Lead by corrosion, with the va∣por of Vinegar, and causeth the same Symp∣toms, which are these. If it be taken into the bo∣dy; the tongue, gums and teeth are white, there is hickets, and desire to vomit, driness of tongue and roughness of the mouth, a cough, pricking in the stomach and belly, stretching at the heart, difficult breathing, bleeding by stool, needing, the head is troubled, and strange things flie be∣fore the eyes. They are drowsie and dull, can∣not move hand or foot, the urin is black or bloo∣dy, the limbs are cold, and they die. Vomit presently with the Decoction of Arage∣seed and Rape seed, Mallows, Figs,The Cure. Water and Ho∣ney, Ol of Lillies, Orris, Iesamine, &c. And give Clysters of Coleworts, Pellitory, Car∣du, Centaury, Diaphaenicon, Oyl of Lillies.
Then allay the sharpness of the poyson, with hot Milk, Decoction of Figs, Mallow seeds, Althaea, Mucilages of Line and Faenugreek seed, Fleabane, Mallows, Oyl of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Iesamine. Then use Clensers and Diureticks with Anti∣dotes. A Lye of Vine ashes, and Ash leaves, Walnuts, Oyl of Angelica, Treacle, Mithridate. Chap. 15. Of red Lead. IT is made of common Lead, and is of the same force with it, and Ceruss and Litharge, and causeth the same Symptoms. Symptoms and Signs. It hurts the stomach and guts, causeth belch∣ing, loathing, vomiting, fluxes, and other Sym∣ptoms mentioned. The Cure.Give a Vomit presently, of Rape seed, Arage with Butter and Oyl. Then give the Clysters men∣tioned; or two drams of the Antidote of burnt Ivory in Wine, or Treacle, or Mithridate. Chap. 16. Of Litharge. A Gricola mentions five sorts of Litharge, but we have only white and red, and from their colour are called Litharge of gold and of silver. Symptoms and Signs. Dioscorides shews the signs from Litharge ta∣ken; as heaviness of the stomach and guts,Lib. 7. c. 27. with great pains. The guts are wounded, the urine stopt, the body puffed up, and like Lead. The joynts burn,AEtius & Avic. the guts are ulcerated, and there is a flux of blood, sometimes the gut comes out. The tongue is heavy, there is iliack passion, and
the tongue is faltering. They foam at the mouth, the breath is stopt, the tongue inflamed, the bo∣dy is blew, and the patient is choaked. Vomit presently to prevent corrosion,The Cure. and op∣pose malignity, with the Decoction of Dill Fgs, Dates, with Butter or Oyl: do it often.To Con∣quer all Infirmities Study my Sennertus, Platerus, Riverius, Bartholi∣nus and Riolanus, of the last Editions. Then give Clysters of Hydromel, Centaury, Dill, St. Iohns∣wort, Hiera picra, Oyl of Rue, Hens grease, &c. Resist malignity, and provoke urine with Mirrh, Wormwood, Hysop, Smallage seed. Or, Take Smallage seed, Mirrh, each equal parts, Worm∣wood half as much with Wine. Chap. 17. Of Quick-silver, crude or sublimated, or precipi∣tated. VVEE have spoken of the occult and manifest qualities of Quicksilver, we shall here shew how it is poyson. It may be ta∣ken in crude, sublimated, or precipitated: to the crude belongs a vapor that riseth from it. Symptoms and Signs. If Quicksilver taken in, stick in any cavity, or be mixed with any medicine that may keep it in the body, it causeth great evils, and death. So doth the fume of it taken in at the mouth: or if it be anointed outwardly, and pierce into the bo∣dy, it doth hurt. Precipitate is worse, but Sub∣limate worst of all. For Quicksilver not killed, by its corroding malignity causeth wind, and pain of the stomach and guts, heaviness of body and stomach. If it be kept long, there is stoppage of urin, and the whole body swells, and the colour is of a Lead
blew. It causeth Palsie in the member where it is, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Syncope and death. By its fume comes trembling, contraction of nerves, weakness of joynts, palsie, hurt of senses, especially of the sight and hearing,Ferd. Pon∣zetus 2. de ven. c. 21. Fern. de lue ven. c. 7. stinking breath and ulcers of the mouth, and the like, as the Quicksilver doth produce. Precipitate causeth the same, but worse, and Sublimate the worst of all, and by its touch like fire, it destroys whatsoever is near: with infla∣mation,Fondr. Bac in proleg. vin. valer. lib. 1. ob. burning of tongue, and swelling of the mouth, fainting, stoppage of urin, difficult breath, bloody-flux, and death. Some vomit first. I think it best to purge first, for if it rise upwards,The Cure. it is easily divided into smal parts, and so cannot be expelled by vomit: ther∣fore purge strongly. First, give a Clyster of Hie∣ra picra, Oyl of Hydromel, and Hens grease. Then purge,Concil. & Guayne. and give filings of Gold, or Leaf-gold; or Costus with Wine, juyce of Burnet, or three drams of Mirrh, with Honey; Wine after it. When the fume of Quicksilver is taken in at the nose or mouth, give Sage or Zedoary water. Sweat in a hot House, and rub the parts that are weak, with a bag of Sage, Groundpine, Bettony, Lavender, and Iuniper-berries boyled in Wine. If Sublimate or Precipitate be taken, they are cured as corroding poysons by Vomit, Clysters, and new Milk, with Fleabane seeds. The pouder of Cristal is the Antidote against Quicksilver, a dram with Oyl of sweet Almonds, or Oyl of Tartar, or two drams of Salt of Wormwood. Strengthen the heart with Diamargariton frigid, and de Gemmis. If urin be stopt (as it is often) use a Bath of hot Water for the Pecten, with a Spunge wet in the Decoction of Iuniper berries,
and Smallage seed. And anoint after with Oyl of Rue or Iuniper. Chap. 18. Of Cinnabar. I Speak of that Cinnabar which is made of Quicksilver and Sulphur sublimed, and is common. The Symptoms caused by it▪ are the same with those of Quicksilver. Fernel in his Book of the Pox, Chap. 7. and Schenkus in his 7. Book of Observations, speak of it from the re∣lation of Dr. Iohn Physitian amic. Cure it as Quicksilver,The Cure. for the same Symp∣toms require the same helps. Spodium is held the best Antidote against Cinna∣bar, made of burnt Ivory, and given, two drams.Pet. Appon. to. de ven. Others say Spodium of Cane roots two drams, is better. Also the other Antidotes mentioned in the former Chapter, are good.
THE SEVENTH PART. Of Poysons from Plants. Chap. 1. Of Opium. I SHALL speak of four things cōcerning Opium. 1. Whether Opium may truly be reckoned among poysons? 2. Whether it be hot or cold, whether it cause sleep, or do hurt by manifest or occult quali∣ties? 3. What are the signs and Symptoms of Opium taken in? 4. How they are to be cured that have taken too much Opium? And how Opium may be corrected, that it may be a profitable medicine. The learnedest Writers say it is poyson. The new juyce of the black Poppy being crude, and not corrected, must be counted a poyson. For
experience shews it, though many,Dios. lib. 6. Gal. 3. de tem. c. 4. Avic. l. 4. fen. 6. tr. 1 & omnes fere in eum comm. & alij plur. as Turks and Aegyptians eat Opium without hurt; for men by custom may be so familiar with poyson, that it may not hurt them. But hence it follows, not that Opium is not poyson, and works as poy∣sons by hidden qualities, though I shall shew, it may work also by manifest qualities. For the second: there are many Arguments that Opium is hot, which Scaliger Exercit. 175▪ affirms, calling it by the Name of Amphiam or Aphioure, and also Vesalius Mercurialis, and Ca∣pivaccius, and Erastus, and they confirm it by rea∣sons. 1. Its inflaming and burning quality. 2. Its strong scent. 3. The bitter tast. 4. Its burning the mouth and lips. 5. Its causing thirst. 6. Its heating the mind. 7. It provokes Venery. 8. It causeth itching. 9 It causeth sweat.Dr. Mi∣chael Dor. & Daniel Vuincke∣erus. All these are signs of great heat, as the Learned shew in their Tractates of Opium. Therefore in regard Opium is not cold, and doth not cause sleep or death from thence, nor from heat, because other hot things have not the same effect, we conclude that Opium doth it by an occult quality and propriety. First, they that work by manifest qualities, are not more contrary to one part of the body then another. But Opium is chiefly hurtful to the brain, nerves, and animal spirits; therefore it doth not work by a manifest, but hidden quality. Secondly, the effects of Opium are so wonder∣ful (as shall be shewed) that they canot be re∣ferred to manifest qualities. It kills a man in so small a quantity, as no pure Element can do the like, much less a mixed body▪ Lastly, if Opium hurt onely by its coldness, or by its quality▪ as Pepper and Saffron. The Physitians and Chy∣mists
need not study so much to correct, but on∣ly give it in a less quantity, as they do Ginger and Pepper. Thirdly, let the Symptoms be reckoned that follow; after Opium is taken, none can give Opium unknown to the receiver, by reason of its unpleasant scent, though it hath been taken instead of another medicine. After it is taken, there follows great sleep, and a Megrim, and Itching over the whole body, which is so great, that it raiseth a man from sleep: there is a strong scent over all the body like O∣pium; the lips swel, there is hickets, little brea∣thing, the eyes are dim, the nose is awry, & there are Convulsions somtimes. The Pro∣gnostick.If it be not prevented speedily, it kis sudden∣ly, as Histories mention. The Cure.After general Evacuation, as in other poysons by Vomits and sharp Clysters, give the proper Antidotes against Opium,Dios. lib. 6. c. proprio. as Assa ferida, Castor or Organ, and Castor boyled in Wine: of these Dioscorides. Chap. 2. Of Mushrooms. SOme Mushrooms are venemous by experi∣ence, for some have died by them, and even whole families. Seneca called them a Voluptu∣ous Poyson. They kill not onely when they are eaten, but when they are smelt. The Symptomes are when they are taken in too great a plenty, they cause strangling, or when they are not not well boyled or prepared; they also puff up the belly, cause hickets, ulcerate the guts, suppress the urin, and cause horror, cold
sweat, Syncope, and somtimes Epilepsies, pain, and madness, and death. Those Mushooms that of their own Nature are poyson,The Pro∣gnostick. are more dangerous then such as by plenty eaten, or by ill preparation do hurt. Vomit presently: Take Broom flowers,The Cure. Elder-flowers, each two pugils; bark of Danwort two drams, Radish, Dill, Arage seed, each a dram; A∣garick half a dram: boyl them in Hydromel, add to the straining, Oyl of Rue an ounce, make a Potion. Make Clysters of Organ, Hysop, Rue, Calamints, Scordium, Hiera, with Agarick, Honey of Roses, Oyl of Rue. These resist malignity, Calamus, Or∣gan, Hysop, Rue, Watercresses, Wormwood, Birth∣wort, Garlick. Treacle, Mithridate, Oxymel simple, and of Squils. But Honey is the proper Antidote against Mush∣rooms. Chap. 3. Of Napellus▪ IT is sudden poyson; for after it is taken, the lips and mouth swell, and are inflamed,Mathi. in. Dios. lib. 4 with the tongue also, so that it can scarce be thrust out. There are Convulsions, Faintings and Me∣grim; the eyes are twitched, the legs are weak, the pulse is faint, and death follows. Few escape after it, and if they do,The Pro∣gnostick. they fall into a Consumption. After Vomiting and Clysters,The Cure. give Boar∣stone, sealed Earth, with Butter and Aqua mes, or two drams of Smaragds, or Bo Armenc: this is excellent. Take the Flies of Napellus twenty, , Bole, each a dram; make a Pouder, give it with
Rue-water; Oyl of Scorpions of Mathiolus must anoint the head. Chap. 4. Of Aconitum. A Conitum, Cycoctonon and Lycoctonon so cal∣led, because it kills Dogs and Wolves, is like Pardalianches, which kills the Panther. To these the other kinds may be referred: the juyce of the Root is worst; and they are like Napellus. Symptoms and Signs. It is sweet upon the tongue, then it grows brackish, and stricks into the head, and causeth heaviness, Megrim, Convulsion of the temporal muscles, dotage, trembling, involuntary tears, red eyes, side-pain, heaviness of breast, difficult breathing, biting at the Pilorus, swelling as in a Dropsie and death. The Pro∣gnostick.Pliny saith it is the worst of poysons. Others think Napellus worse. They are worst in the Indies. The Cure.First vomit, if it be gone lower, purge or give Clysters, then give Antidotes, as Rue, Southorn∣wood, Centaury, Organ, Horehound, Groundpine, long Birthwort, Hares and Kids Runnet, with Wine and Vinegar, Eryngus, Castor, Treacle, Mithridate, Opobalsom a dram, and use Oyl of Scorpions outwardly. Chap. 5. Of Toxicum and Pharicum. VVRiters do not explain these; they are Plants, with the juyce of which they
poyson their Arrows. Some have used Napel∣lus and Aconitum for the same. Chap. 6. Of Hemlock. THey record that Socrates was killed with Hemlock: for it acts not only by cold, but by its whole substance and occult quality; therefore it causeth dim sight and madness, som∣times difficult breath, Hickets, Astonishment and death. It is more deadly in some countries then in o∣thers.The Pro∣gnostick. After vomiting or purging give proper Anti∣dotes, As, Rue, Dictany, young Laurel leaves, Carrot, Gentian, Pepper, Amomum, Cardamons, Nee seed, Wormwood, Castor, with Wine, Treacle or Mithridate two drams. Give Wine, warm the body, especially the heart, make him move and run. Chap. 7. Of the Colchian E∣phemerum. IT is called so from the Ephemerum that is not poyson: it is a plant in every part of it hurtfull to man, and grows much in Colchos. The Symptoms. If taken, it presently corrodes and ulcers the lips and stomach, and choaks as the Mushroom, if it go to the guts, it ulcerates and inflames them so that shavings of the guts are voided, like washings of flesh, and makes the whole body itch.
The Cure.After vomiting and purging, give Milk to drink. Dioscorides saies that alone wil cure. Chap. 8. Of Flebane. THere are divers sorts, and all enemies to the animal spirits, they cause madness like dcards, and they rail and think they are whipped, and they cry, and bray like Asses, or neigh like Horses, and have a giddiness and trembling of the whole body: they toss to and fro or fall in an Epilepsie, or faint, they breath not, and are seldom suffocated. The Pro∣gnostick.It yeilds easily to medicines while the party is strong, and the medicines proper. The Cure.Vomit with Hydromel and oyl of Re: Or give a Clyster, and then the Antidotes, as Pistachas, Castor, Rue, Wormwood, Bay leaves and berries, Netle seed, Garlick, Treacle, Mithide: Give with meat Radishes, Mustard seed, Garlick, Oni∣ns, Watercresses, fresh Butter, Pepper, Pistachaes, drink Wormwood-win and provoke Chap. 9. Of mad Nightshade and Dorycnium. Hiero-tra-gus hist. stir. l. 3. c. 24.TWo Boyes were killed with brries of Nightshade. And though there are ma∣ny sorts of it, they are all poyson, especially that called Bella donna, but mad Nightshade is worst. Symptoms and Signs. Dios. lib. 4. c. 69.A dram of the root of mad Nightshade, caus∣th strange imaginations not unpleasant, if you take as much more, it alienates the mind, and four times as muh kils.
Honey'd water drunk plentifully, or Milk,The Cure. and then Bole, sealed Erth, Rue, Treacle and Mithri∣date: and things good against Opium, and use Castor and Rue to the Nose. Dorycnium is not the same, for that is like milk, sweet upon the tongue, and when it is in the stomach, it causeth constant Hickets and faint∣ing, the guts are ulcerated, and they vomit blood. You must vomit here as in other poysons, but Honey water is best here, and Milk, sweet Wine warm, with Aniseed; and all Shell-fish are good raw or boyled. Chap. 10. Of the Mandrake. THe Mandrake and its Apples are also dan∣gerous, and though they hurt only by cold as some think, yet their bitter tast, and strong scent, itching and burning in the skin, and driness of the mouth, perswade the contrary: for all these are from venom: besides they cause sleep, Lethargies, and when they are awaked, they roar and and sleep again presently, they ar sad and dull, and somtimes mad, their eyes swel, they are red with swollen faces: there is urn∣ing the whole body, the mouth and tongue ae dry. As for the Prognostick, it kils slowly, but if  be not opposed, they die by Convulsions. et the Mandrakes be presently vomited or voidd by stool, then give Pnnyroyal, Worm∣wood, Ogn, Re, Srdium, Castor, it Vinega  a Dction, or in Pouder▪ o give Treacle, , with Salt three daies. ouse hi, ive  Ethis of Ca∣stor,
Rue, as in a Lethargie. Let the drink be sweet, or Wormwood wine. Chap. 11. Of Smallage of Laughter, or the Sardonick Herb. THese being taken, because they hurt the nerves, they make the mouth awry, for the muscles that move the lips, are contracted, so that they seem to laugh.The Signs. There is a heat in the guts, and stomach, and throat, and the whole body; they are mad, and some laugh constant∣ly. The Cure.After Vomiting and Purging, give Hydromel, Milk, Butter, and fat broaths plentifully. Emul∣sions of sweet Almonds, the great cold Seeds, Poppy seeds, with Barley and Lettice water, and Plantane water. The Antidote is juyce of Balm, with Vinegar, Bole and Whey. Anoint the neck with Oyl of Co∣stus, Castor, Foxes, St. Iohns-wort, Aragon Oynt∣ment, &c. Some make them drunk, that they may sleep it out. Chap. 12. Of Coriander. THe venom of Coriander is not to be sought in the first qualities, for it is hot, but you must consider its malignity: when green, and the ripe seed is not without fault, and must be prepared for Physick,Signa & sympto. for it causeth a mad do∣tage, so that they talk like drunkards obscoenly, with a shrill voice, they are sleepy, and giddy, and their body smells like green Coriander.
Vomit with warm Water, or Decoction of Dill,The Cur. Oyl of Orris, or Lillies, Wormwood wine,: give fat broaths, with Salt and Pepper. The Antidote is Root of Smallow-wort, with Win or Treacle. Give rear Eggs, with Ppper and Salt. Chap. 13. Of Ixia and Camae∣leon. The Symptoms and Signs. IXia smells and tasts like Basil, it inflames and exasperates,Aeti. & Dios. lib. 6. c. 27. causeth madness and want of breath, binds the belly, causeth pain, itching, and fainting. Give the decoction of Wormwood, Goats-organ,The Cure. in Wine or Vinegar or Hydromel, ftr a Vomit or a Clyster. Or give the Roo of Silphium, or Indian Spikenard, Castor, Treacle and Mithridate. Then strengthn the vital spirits, as in Chap. of swoun∣ding, l. 2. p. 4. c. 6. Chap. 14. Of Taxus the Ew∣tree. The Symptoms and Signs. THey that sleep under this Tree, or eat of its fruit die (though in England it is in∣nocent) yet they that are infected in other Countries, are all over, and fear choaking,Petr. pna in aver. p. 490. have a Dysentery, and often die suddenly. After Vomiting and fitting Purging,The Cre. give ormwood wine plentifully, or Geian, and Orris
roots, with Oxymel or Treacle. Against the Dy∣sentery give sealed Earth, Bole, Bezoar, Coral, Tormensil roots, Iuyce and Syrup of Pomegranates, and of Currans. Chap. 15. Of Euphorbium. THough Euphorbium be used physically, yet if it be given in a great quantity, or not corrected, it is poyson: and doth not only hurt by its burning, but by an occult quality. For it causeth sudden fainting that kills suddenly. The Symptoms and Signs. It being taken, burns the stomach, and cor∣rodes the guts, causeth hickets and vomiting, in∣flames the body, and causeth thirst, and over∣purging and Dysentery, cold sweats, fainting, and oftentimes sudden death. The Cure.Give a Vomit of warm Water, or the Decoction of Violets or Mallows, with Oyl of Violets, or Roses, or sweet Almonds, and a Clyster of Althaea-roots, Vio∣lets, Mallows, Endive, Lettice, Plantane, flowers of Chamomil, Moulin, cold Seeds, Mucilage of Flea∣bane. And then give now Milk and fat broaths. The proper Antidote is seeds of Citros in Win, & roots of Elicampane boyled, or sealed Earth, Sma∣ragds, Crystal calcind, Species liberantis, Treace. Chap. 16. Of the Nut called Metella. Lib. 3. de ven. c 5. Sympoa∣t.CArdan writes that it is of a mean, between Opium and Hemlock, and kills in a day, being taken in the quantity of a dam. It cau∣seth
deep sleep, from which the party that took it can scarce be roused; cold breath, swollen lips, pale body, blew nails, cold sweat, and death. Vomit with Walnut shells green boyled in Wine. Give a Clyster of Centaury, Rue▪ Scr∣dium,The  Castor and Hydromel: and then a Dcoction of Wormwood, Organ, wild Rue, Gentian, Elicam∣pane in Wine; or Castor, Pellitory Baberries, Cinnamon, Treacle, Diagalangal, Diagingiber. Raise him from sleep by strong Ligatures, Er∣rhins; and if he can walk, let him stir till he sweat. Let him drink new Milk, or new Wine. Chap. 17. Of Spurge. The Symptoms and Signs. IT is not simply poyson,Esulae sym∣ptomata & signa. for being rightly pre∣pared and given in a small dose, it is a purge, otherwise it causeth loathing and vomiting, and troubleth the heart, and destroys the temper of the liver, makes the belly-ake, and flux, which produceth Convulsions and Death. Provoke Vomit: after they begin to vomit,The Cure. that the whole venom may be evacuated, with warm Barley water, Oyl of Dill or Violets Then give a cooling Clyster of emollient Herbs, cold Seeds, Mucilage of Fleabane, Oyl of Roses and Violets, and the yolk of an Eg. Give Antidotes as against Euphorbium, and Gum Arabick, Traganth, fresh Butter, Cream of Ptisan, sweet Almonds, and the like.
Chap. 18. Of Hellebore. THe question is chiefly of white Hellebore. Some would have it not to be mustered a∣mong medicines. Others highly commend it, but this controversie may be ended thus. Poy∣sons are either simply so, and hurt all men al∣waies: or they are given by art and made Phy∣sick. Hellebore is of the last sort, and though many have perished by the use of Hellebore, yet it was by reason of the great quantity, or want of preparation. Symptoms and Signs. If it be taken in rat quantity without prepa∣ration; it purgeth violently upwards and down∣wards, and causeth great pains in the stomach and guts, hickets, suffocation, difficult breath∣ing, trouble of mind, sudden weakness, heart-beating, and they die by Convulsions or Suf∣focation. The Cure.Though Hellebore cause vomiting, it must not be suddenly stop, but furthered with a deco∣ction of Radishes, Dill and Arage seed in Hydromel often given. Give a Clyster of the decocion of small Cntaury, Rue, Plantane, Althaea, with Oyl of Dil, and yolks of Egs. For Antidotes, give pouder of a∣terlilly roots or flowers, or Parsnep seed two drams, with Wine, or Treacle and Mithridate. To prevent strangling, give half a dram of Galbanum. Against the bellyach, make a bag of Bran, Salt, Cummi, Pennyroyal,Lib. 3. pract. p. 2. & p. 1. & lib. 1. p. 2. . 28, Mints, Rue, Bayberries boyled in Wi or Milk. We have shewed elswhere how over∣purging Hikets and Convulsions are cured.
THE EIGHT PART. Of Poysons that come from Animals, or living Creatures. Chap. 1. Of Poysons from A∣nimals in General. ANIMALS do conveigh poy∣son to men divers waies. First, by biting, as the Viper, and all kinds of Serpents; the Mouse, the Spider, Scolopendra, and Dogs and all mad Cratures. By sting∣ing, as the Scorpion, Spider, Wasp, and the fish cal∣led Pastinaca marina. Othrs by spittle, as ptyas. Others by urin, as Dormice that make malig∣nant ulcers by pissing. Others communicate poyson by a Meium, as the Torpedo by the spear of the fisherman, benumes or stupisies his bd▪ So Mathiolus reports a Vine-dresser was
killed by a Serpent, others by touching the bo∣dy with poyson: but poyson is most dangerous when malicious people give it in meat or drink. Also the gall of Venemous beasts is deadly;Gal. 5. de symp. med. facul. for all venemous beasts, or beasts that live upon poyson have the poyson chiefly in the Gall. Animals are either of their own nature vene∣mous, as the Scorpion, Toad, or become such by their venemous food, of which sort was the King of Cambaia of whō we spake. Therefore you may well suspect creatures that feed upon poyson, as the Ducks that eat Water-toads, and the Quails that feed upon Hellebore: For in Athens they who sed high upon Quails, died of Convulsions, and others also. Hence we may conclude that venemous crea∣tures, if they live upon poyson are worse; so the stinging of Wasps is worse if they have lived upon Serpents: hence we may wl question whe∣ther it be lawfull to eat creatures that have been killed by poyson.Gal. lib. de therc. ad pis. Galen saies that the Daci and Dalmatians rub'd the points of their weapons with Elicampane, with which they killed Deer, and then they never hurt them that eat them; therefore distingish thus: If the poyson that the weapon is touched with, is only a poyson that kils a beast and not a man, the beast may be eaten. The Symptoms and Signs. You may know it from the Patients relation, or by a part stung or bitten, that swels presently, is inflamed, and hath great pain, with other symptoms that poyson. The Pro∣gnostick.I a bite or sting hurt the Artery, the wound is worse, because the poyson gets sooner to the hert, and there is a deadly Syncope: Aso
if a nerve be hurt the brain consents and there is the like danger; if a vein be only hurt there is less danger, for it threatneth only the corrupti∣on of humors. We spake of the cure:Par. 5. c. 7. but now I shal shew the proper Antidote against every venemous creature. Chap. 2. Of Serpents in ge∣neral. THe Serpents are such as have Egs, or bring forth quick Serpents, as the Vipers. We shal not dispute the temperamēt of a serpent because his poyson is not in the first qualities: But the Serpents communicate poyson to men divers waies, 1. By a horrid look that frights them, and by a deadly bite. 2. By Spittle. 3. By breath though they touch not, but by a Medium as a Spear. 4. By touch only without biting,Avic. l. 4. fu. 6. math. in praef. ad l. 6. dios. as Gesner writes Hist 1. 4. of the poyson of Ger∣man Darts. 5. Their blood poysons when they are cut or wounded. Moreover they creep in at the mouth when people lie sleeping. The Symptoms and Signs There is from the biting of a Serpent a tumor, pain and heat in the part, first good blood flows out, then matter or serum that stinks, the face is yellow and blew, after two or three daies the whole body is whiter, and the hair fals off, and commonly they die on the fouth day. Also many die that are poysoned by breath, when a part is infected by spittle or blood, there are red spots and the flesh is corroded. First let the part be bound hard above the bite,The Cu and the part bitten be saiied deep, and cp¦ped
to draw out the blood and poyson, then wash the wound with spirit of Wine, with Trea∣cle and Mithridate dissolved in it, or apply yong Pigeons split to the part, or Fis, or Garlick bruised▪: or Serpents grease,  or the head of the Serpent bruised; or the gall of the Serpent, which is best. Also in the mean time give Antidotes, and provoke sweat with Treacle and Mithridate. Some give Strawberry roots and leaves, and Pauls Bettony boyled in Wine, or a dram of Ca∣stor with Cardus-water Or, Take Gentian, long Birthwor, Bayberries, Myrrh, each two drams; bitter Costus, Rue, each a dram; Spike two scruples, Saffron a scruple, make a pouder, and with Honey an Electuary give a dram or two, keep the Patient from deep sleep, least the spirits being drawn in, the poysō go with them. If poyson be from breath do accordingly. If any part be infected by spittle or blood, sprinkle this pouder often upon it. Take herb Cancer gathered in June an ounce and half, Ashes of a Mole an ounce, two Snakes skins make a pouder, sprinkle it often upon the part. If a Serpent get in at the mouth, or be in the Guts or Stomach, you must tempt him out with the vapor of sweet milk, and he wil come up by the Gullet, if the Patient bend forward with his head down; when he is in the Guts, give a decoction of Ash roots, small Centaury, Cardu∣us, Wormwood and Scordim, and other bitter herbs, and Clyster of warm milk.
Chap. 3. Of the Aspi or Ad∣der. VVHether he be hot or cold. I shall not argue, for he hurts by an occult quality; the wound is no bigger then that made with a needle, yet it kills a man presently with little pain, and he kills not only by biting, but by spittle. Galn writes hus. The Adder cal∣led Ptyas lifts up his neck,Lib. de the∣riac. ad pis. c. 6. and with a pause as if he were rational, without any fear spits venom upon you. Symptoms and Signs. They who are bitten by an Adder, have hea∣viness of head, dim sight, dull senses, astonish∣ment, slowness, sleepiness, pale faces, chilness of body, cramp, convulsion, and die in three hours time except they have remedies. The symptoms that follow the spitting of a Viper are the same but more gentle. The Swallow-Adder kills presently, the Ear∣thy Adder kills in three hours,The Pro∣gnostick. and the Ptyas or spitting Adder kills slower or at longer distance. Draw the poyson out at the wound by liga∣tures and Scarifications,The Cure and apply green Cen∣taury bruised with Mirth: or Treacle beaten with Rue; or a clout dipt in Spurge milky juyce. Give Treacle also. Or, Take round Birthwort, Gentian, each a dram; Rue two pugils, Castor, Cassia Lignea, each two drams; Anise, Citron seeds peeled▪ eah a drm and half, make a Pouder, give a sruple or a dram with Wine or Vinegar. If the par be spit upon, wash it with spirit of Wine and Treacle. Let them
that are bitten by Adders, sleep little. Chap. 4. Of Cerastes. THs Serpent hath two horns like a Snail, the ound he makes is not painful but deadly, by the violent poyson though it continue nine daies. Symptoms and Signs There is a tumor like a nail and matter comes out at the wound, pale or black, there are blew pustles and somtimes the whole body is blew, the lips swel, the mind is troubled, the strength fails, the yard stands, and Death follows. The Cure.If it may be, the best way is to cut off the member hurt, otherwise cut off the flesh about the prt, scarifie and cup, and wash it with spi∣rit of Wine and Treacle. Or use a Cataplasm of Orobus meal, Squils, Figs, Garlick, Salt and Pitch, give things internal as before. Chap. 5. Of Haemorrhous. THe name signifies a flux of blood, and he gives a deadly wound, which is known by a violent flux to be from him, for the wound doth not only bleed, or the Haemor∣rhoids, Nose, Womb, but the Ears and corners of the Eyes, the Gums, the roots o the Nails, the mouth, by vomit and coughing and all the pres of the body, as Lucan shews, The Veins in all the members are full found, And all the body is but one great wound. Also the part bitten is black, and there is great
pain at the stomach, difficulty of breathing, the voice is stopt, the teeth fall out, and at length they faint and die. There is little hope,The Cure. therefore take off the member if it may be, or cup and scarifie: or burn the part:Aetius. or use a Pultis of Vine leaves boyled in Honey and Purslane with Bran. Apply me∣dicines to stanch blood, As, Tormentil, Shep∣heards-purse, Purslane, Plantane, Bole, sealed Earth, Bloodstone, with a little Treacle. Or use Garlick▪ Treacle, Raisons and Raspberries, or Bramble berries. Chap. 6. Of Dipsas. THey that are bitten by this have a great thirst, and all parts are inflamed, and though they drink much, they find it not quenched. Because the uretery passages are dried up, and the drink cannot pass, but lies in the cavity of the belly, so that it breaks to the Groyns, and the Patient dies thirsting. It is as that of other Serpents;The Cure. only give Di∣ureticks also, of the cold seeds, and opening roots, Restharrow, Chervil, Shepheards-purse, Peach kernels, Barley, and the like; and Cly∣sters to purge water, see Aetius Chap. 7. Of Amphisbena and Scytale. THese Serpents are so like that they are scarce to be distinguished▪ only Ampishena moves forward and backward, but tale
only forward, both hurt the same way, with a very little wound, which makes inflammation, pain and redness, and somtimes an Imposthume and other symptoms like those of a Viper. The Cure.See the cure of the biting of a Viper. Chap. 8. Of a Basilisk. GAlen in his Book of Treacle to Piso c. 8. de∣scribes him thus. He is a Srpent a little yellow, with tumors in his head, and kils those that see or hear him when he hisseth, and if any creature touch him when he is dead it dieth presently. Cardan saith thse are fables, because Galen 1. Simpt. med. f. c. 1. saith he never saw it, and knew none that did. But Dioscorides lib. 6. cap. ult. describes the biting of it, and saith the wound is a Gold-colour, and was cured by three drams of Castor drunk. Therefore let none deny that there is such a Serpent, though not so bad as reported, yet ve∣ry venemous, that if any touch him with a Spear he kils him. The Symptoms and Signs. After the biting of a Basilisk, there follows great inflammation of the whole body, and the part affected is yellow, the flesh melts away and falls off by piecemeals, & he dies in a short space. The Cure.Aetius thinks it in vain to prescribe medicines against such a sudden killing poyson. Chap. 9. Of the Viper. THough a Viper be a kind of Serpent, yet he differs from them all, because they lay Egs,
but the Viper brings forth young, the male Vi∣per differs from the female, for she hath four teeth with whih she squirts out poyson when she bites, but the male hath only two; & they are hollow, and lie at length in the Gums, and are only lifted up when they void the poyson by bi∣ting. Symptoms and Signs. After the wound is made, the first blood is pure, the next is mattery froathy like Verdu∣grease: the part bitten and the whole body swel suddenly, red, or green, or black, or purple, as the humors are: there is pain that runs about, great heat, with black pustles about the part: there is vomiting of choler, Hickets, Megrim, Astonishment, Feavers, stoppage of urin, Bleed∣ing, cold sweats, Trembling, Fainting, difficult breathing, and death. In some countries it is not very deadly,The Pr∣gnostick. but in ot Countries and in Summer, and when the Vi∣per is provoked and angry, it kils in seven hours. If any swound or bleed at the ears, or be struck as with hail, death is at hand Presently draw out the poyson at the part bit∣ten, as before with the same remedies:The Cur. the flesh of the Viper is the best remedy inwardly or out∣wardly taken, Treacle or troches of Vipers, or oyl of Vipers, Rue, Garlick, give Antidotes pre∣sently. Costus is the Bezoar against this poy∣son, a dram with Wormwood-wine. To all Antidotes, add Rue to make them stronger. Treacle and Mithridate are good, two drams with four ounces of strong wine Mathiolus lib. 6. see Dioscorides for his famous water against all poyson.
Chap. 10. Of the Scorpion. THere are many sorts, and all kill by a sting which squirts out poyson, they are more dangerous in some countries then in other. Symptoms and Signs. Gal. de lo. aff. c. 5.The Sting is small, but very deadly, for pain, inflammation and tumors follow in the part af∣fected and the whole body, pustles arise about the wound like warts, and all the body is as struck with hail, there is cold sweat, with pale∣ness and sweat, the hair stands an end, the face is drawn aside, they weep, filth comes from the eyes in the corners like glew, they foam at the mouth, and the body somtimes hath black spots all over. Women and Virgins chiefly are killed by Scor∣pions, and men when they are stung in the mor∣ning.The Pro∣gnostick. I have found by experience that if the same Scorpion be bruised and laid to the part,The Cure. or if it be anointed with oyl of Scorpions, it is speedily cured; which is done by similitude, for like wil to like, a Garden-Snail bruised with the shl and applied allaies pain presently. Or Earthworms, Calamints, Garlick, wild Rue, Scorpion-grass, bruised often, renewed after the part is washed with the decoction of wild Rue, Sulphur, Bay∣leaves, and the like, Of compounds the best ar Venice Treacle Diatessaron. Aetius commends this. Take Castor, Succi Cirenici, Pepper, each half an ounce; Costus, Spikenard, Saffron, juyce of Centaury, each two drams; with clarified Honey make an Electuary, take the quantity of a Walnut.
Let him eat Butter often, and drink old wine as much as he can, and eat no Smallage. Chap. 11. Of a Crocodile. HE hath a large mouth, and causeth great pain by tearing. First the blood that comes out is pure, then it is mattery and stink∣ing, and there is tumor and inflammation, with black pustles, vomiting, eaver, cold sweat, faint∣ing, and great symptoms, and Death. First, draw out the poyson,The Cure. then wash the wound with Pickle, or spirit of Wine with Trea∣cle or Mithridate, or Vinegar and Salt-peeter. Anoint with Crocodiles grease, or apply Niter, Deers Suet, or Goose grease, Putte and Honey, and use the Antidotes mentioned. Chap. 12. Of Stellio or a Li∣zard so called. IT is a Lizard with Star-like spots on his back, and the poyson of it is conveighed by biting or taken in, to the hurt of man or beast. Signs and Symptoms. If his flesh be eaten or the liquor drunk in which he hath been, the stomach and guts are afflicted, as the Bladder is by Spanish flies taken, with pain and burning, with vomiting, the tongue is inflamed, the sight is dim, the head akes, and there are spots in the face, and the flesh is blew about the hurt if there be a bite, with other symptoms.
The Cure.Giv Vomits and Clysters presently, if there be a bite, apply Onions and Garlick, and let them be eaten and wine drunk after, and use Antidotes as before. Chap. 13. Of the Salamander. IT is a deadly destroying poyson, for if he get into a Tree, e inects the fruit, and kills them that eat it; for the poyson infects herbs and waters, if he fall in, as well as when he bites. Symptoms and Signs. The part bitten loseth natural heat, and is black, stinks, and voids filth, and the hair falls off, the internal parts ae inflamed, the speech falters, and the senses fail, the body swels, and trembles, fainting and Death follows. The Cure.Scarifie presently, and draw out the poyson with Garlick, Onions, Rue, Salt and Honey, or ith a Hogs dung or Goa, with Vinegar hot. f you eat any thing the Salamander hath spit up∣on, vomit. Omit not Antidotes, as Mithridate, Treacle, Pine Rosin is good, or Galbanum with Honey. Or, Take Iuniper berries, Assa fda, black Pepper, each two drams; with Honey make an Electuary, give a dram or two with old Wine, which may be his drink, or new milk Chap. 14. Of the Spider. THere are divers sorts, some are worse poy∣son then others, one sort hurts if he be burnt, by the scent of him, and in Vascnia,
the Spider sends venom through the soles of their shoes. Symptoms and Signs. If the poyson be taken in, or you be stung, there is a numness in the part bitten, with chil∣ness, the belly swells, the face is pale, there is wind in the guts, cold sweats, a desire to piss, but in vain; they vomit or piss things like Spi∣ders. If a Spider be taken in, first vomit thus.The Cure. Take Spurge roots, Asarum, each two drams; Dill and Broom flowers, each a pugil: boyl them, to four oun∣ces straine, add a dram of Honey, make a Vomit. Then give Antidotes, provoke sweat, by a hot house, with two drams of Treacle, and Carduus, or Scordium water and Wine. Or give Bole and Vinegar:Fracast. lib. 2. d morb. cnt. c. 2. this cured a man that was stung in the neck, and was swollen, and could not speak. Or, Take Assa faetida two drams, Mirrh, Ga∣lick, Pepper, Castor, each half a dram; make a pou∣der for four doses with Wine before bathing, every day. If thre be  bite, wash it with Salt-water of∣ten, or with a Spunge dipt in warm Vinegar, or the milkie juyce of Fig leaves, and give Anti∣dotes. Chap. 15. Of Cantharides, or Spanish-flies. THis poyson is chiefly against the bladder; it corrodes all parts from the mouth to the bladder, and inflames, and causeth a feave, loa∣thing, dysentery, ainting, megrim and madness. But the chief burning and excoriation is in the
bladder, the yard stands, and there is a strangu∣ry: and then a gangrene and death. The Cure.Vomit, and give Clysters, vomit with Hogs∣head broath, or of a Lambs or Goats head, with Oyl of Violets often. Give Clysters of Barley, Mallows, Mercury, Pellitory, Faenugreek, Linseed, Rice, Oyl of Lillies, and Diaphoenicon. For the passage of urin, a Decoction of Althaea, Linseed and Mallows, with Oyl of Violets. Then give Goats mil▪ fat Broaths Rice with Milk, fresh Butter, fat Meat, Lettice, Purslane boyled with Bar∣ley. Emulsions of the four great cold Seeds, and Lettice water. Pennyroyal is the proper Anti∣dote. Or, Take Troches of sealed Earth, Alke∣kengi, each half a dram; give them with Breast∣milk. Use Baths of Mallows, Althaea, Violets, Let∣tice, Purslane, seeds of Faenugrek, Line, and Epi∣thems of Lettice, Purslane, Cowcumber, Melón, juy∣ce and Oyl of Violets laid to the parts pained. Chap. 16. Of Flies, Bees and Waspes. GReat flies are poyson, if hey set upon the carkasses of venemous beasts. Waspes that have fed upon Serpents, are most dange∣rous. Bees sting worse when they swarm, and fall upon any creature, they have killed a Horse. Symptoms and Signs. Great pain till the sting be drawn out with swelling, redness and pustles. Draw out the sting, with a Plaister of Ashes, Oyl and Leaven;The Cure. if they do not, then suck long, & wash with Salt-water. Then use a Pultis of Bar∣ley
meal, Mallows, and Plantane, and Vinegar, or Bole, and Vinegar, and Oyl: the Bees stampt and applied, draw out all venom. If there be heat, cure it as in malignant feavers. Chap. 17. Of the Poyson of a mad Dog. SEE Lib. 1. Pract. p. 2. c. 16. Chap. 18. Of the Brain and Blood of a Cat. SOme are frighted at a Cat in the Room, though they see her not, and have cold sweats and faint, if the Cat be not removed. Some say the brain and blood of a Cat are poyson,Ponzet. lib. 2. de ven. tr. 6. c. 3. Ma∣thio. in 6. Dios. In proemio lib. 1. Thenz. and a History confirms that a Girl that had an Epilepsie, was perswaded to take the blood of a Cat, which made her of the nature of a Cat in voice, mewing, and leaping, and creeping, as a Cat when she mouseth. Avenzoar saith that the breath of a Cat in∣fects the spirits, and causeth Marasmus. Symptoms and Signs. After the taking of the brain of a Cat, there is a megrim, astonishment and madness. If it be in the stomach, vomit it up;The Cure. if it be distributed, purge with a scruple of the Extract of Hellebore, then give half a scruple of Musk e∣very week, or give Diamoschu dulce. Or, Take Conserve of Rosemary flowers two ounces, Piony∣seeds, Caraway, Cubebs, each half a dram; Dia∣moschu dulce, a dram, with Syrup of Bettony, make
Chap. 19. Of Diseases and Symptoms which Poysons leave behind them. SOme poysons have greater antipathy to some parts: and therefore the evil disposition re∣mains somtimes in one part, somtimes in ano∣ther, as Cardan mentioneth.Cardan. lib. 3. de. ven. cap. ult. Somtimes there is after poyson an evil habit of the whole body, Leucophlegmacy, Jaundies, Consumption, Strangling and Quinzie; the teeth drop out, there is melancholy, sadness, watching, madness, bad concoction, the belly bound, pain in the guts and stomach, Dysentery, spleen swollen, difficult breath, resolution of members, or palsie, hard∣ness of joynts, feavers, fainting, weakness of eyes, or stareing, convulsion, pain of the whole body, burning of urin, and stoppage, megrim, loathing, forgetfulness, and the like. The Cure consists in two things. 1. By gi∣ving proper medicines to the evil disposition, if it be known. 2. By taking away the venemous quality, which cherisheth that evil disposition, or correcting it at the least. For the reliques of the poyson are to be taken away, before you use the ordinary Cure. So after the French pox there are Symptoms, as dropping of urin, and the like, which cannot be cured, except you regard the malignant disposition. If the kind of poyson be ot known, give ordinary Antidotes, with things that oppose the manifest disease.
THE NINTH PART. Of Diseases by Witch∣craft, Incantation, and Charmes. The PREFACE. AMatus Lusitanus shews that Physitians ought to know these Diseases,Cent. 6. cura. 87 because such come to them for Cure. I shall from Philosophers, Physiti∣ans, Lawyers, and Divines, take such things as concern us; and divide thi Tractate into four Chapters. 1. Whe∣ther there are Diseases from Witch∣craft? 2. How they come? 3. How they are known? 4. How they are cu∣red.
Chap. 1. Of Fascination or Witchcraft, and whether any Diseases come thereby. FIrst the word Fascination is to be ex∣plained, it comes from the Greek word , which signifies to envy, because the Vulgar people suppose that envious people hurt others by their looks chiefly. It is a sort of in∣chantment by which through looks or by com∣mendations, not only infants and men, but also Lambs, Hens, Horses, and other beasts, and al∣so flourishing corn and plants are praised, till they are killed,Arist. sect. 20. c. 34. probl. or grow weak and feeble. This Witchcraft is extended also to other things, some fear when they eat geedily, and others look sted∣fastly upon them, and give part of their meat to them that so look upon them, saying, Do not be∣witch me. Some extend this to things without life. Secondly, Fascination is not onely by sight, but by tongue and voice, of which the Latin Poet Virgil, Eclog. 7. When thou art prais'd, let Baccar crown thy Head For evil tongues have Prophets murthered. Lib. 7. c. 2.This Pliny observed, writing that in Africa there are families of Witches, by whose praise and commendations hopeful things perish, trees grow dry, and infants die. Hence I gather a threefold Fascination; the first is Poetical or Vulgar; the second is Philo∣sophical;
and the third Magical. The two first I deny, for the Poetical Witchcraft is fabulous, and delivered from hand to hand, rather supersti∣tiously then truly, according to which infants are said to be bewitched, and other things, only by the active look of the Witch, as when any one praised another, or looks malitiously upon him whom he hates: Mothers and Nurses hang A∣mulets about their childrens necks to prevent this. And the Poet Theotritus teacheth against this Fascination, That they should spit thrice in∣to their own bosomes that fear it. Spit thrice in thy breast, And Witches detest. I suppose this Fascination is not only fabulous but superstitious, and Divines have cursed the u∣sers and the allowers of it. And reason shews, that there is no force in this Fascination, for no∣thing is sent out of the eye that may carry it, be∣cause sight from the best Philosophers, is not by sending forth any thing from the eye, but by re∣ceiving of species into the eye; though another Poet hath writen thus. I know not what eye Made my Lambs for to die.Virg. in Eglgis. Certainly the horrid aspect of an ugly old woman may terrifie an infant, so that the humors being raised, they may complain as if displeased. So Tiberius the Emperor by a terrible look, as∣nisht a Soldier, and killed him with trembling, but this from the event, and therefore I con∣clude that this Witchcraft is plainly fabulous. 2. The Philosophical Witchcraft is not pro∣perly Fascination, but to speak properly a infe∣ction
or contagion, for one is hurt often times by anothers looks: so that Saying is true. If hou on sore look with sound eyes, Infection from the same shall rise. For the opinions of Avicen and Algaselis agree, that is, that no alteration can be made in another by sight, as it is meerly sight; but the alteration is made by a venemous quality that remains in te putrid humors, or in the distemper of him that beholds. This evil quality infects the air a∣bout it with its poyson, and one part of the air inects another, and so it comes to the eye to be infected; and this according to sound Philoso∣phy. But these being left, we shall come to the third kind of Fascination, which is our business. Chap. 2. What Inchantments, poysonous Witchcraft, and Ma∣gick are. INcantation and Veneficium signifie in general an action by which a man that hath made a League with the Devil, doth somthing above the course of Nature, by the help of the same Devil. These actions, and they that practise them, have divers names by the Latins, Incantationes, Vene∣ficia, Artes magicae; Inchantments, Poysoning, and Magick Arts, and they are called Incantatri∣ces Enchanters, Veneficae Poysoners, Maleficae evil Actors, Magi Magicians, Sagae, Lamiae, Striges, Witches of divers sorts. The first are called Inchanters and Enchant∣ments. These are either Verses, good or bad: the
good verses or spells, or charmes are such as are used for curing diseases, as when they speak cer∣tainwords in the time they gather herbs to make them more powerful. The evil Charmes and Charmers are such as hurts men and beasts. 2. They are called Veneficae, because they gather poysons or hurtful herbs to do mischief. 3. They are called Maleficae, because they have a desire to hurt, by the Instrument of the Devil, either man or beast. 4. They are called Magi or Magicians which belongs not to them, for in the Scripture the Magi were three wise Kings that worshipt Christ at his birth▪ And somtimes it is used to signi∣fie such as are led by evil Angels; for it cannot be denied, in regard the mind of man is not to be satisfied with knowledg, that the Chaldaeans and Aegyptians when they could not understand all things they desired, sought to the Devil for aid, hence the name of a Magician is infamous, although those men do labor to destroy Diabo∣like operations by the strength of nature. 5. They are called Sagae from knowing much, these profess to know and do much, and from a league with the Devil, can raise Storms, and hurt man and beasts and corn. And for this purpose they use charmes, images and chara∣cters. 6. They are called Lamiae from the Heathen∣gods which could hurt or do good by the divers shapes they took: therefore because Witches in our daies feast and sport with Ghosts, and have also copulation with them, they are called La∣miae. 7. They are called Striges from a bird so cal∣led, which Poets say would by night take chil∣dren
out of their cradles: And because the Witches were thought to do the same they have that name. And these are the chief names that are given to such as from a contract with the Devil and by his help can do things above the strength of nature, whether this contract be ex∣press or plain, or implicite. They are such as are so mad, that forswearing the omnipotent Lord of all things, make a covenant with the Devil, and deliver themselves wholly to his po∣wer: and though some enter not into an express covenant with the Devil; yet they use those things that implicitly shew the same, namely characters, words, or the like, which are received from others who have been in covenant with the Devil. Chap. 3. Many affirm that Diseases may be from Witch∣craft and Charmes. THe question then is, whether it be so or no? If any doubt it we have Eye-witnesses to prove it:Lib. 1. epist 38. And besides the reports of Iohn Langius of things done 1539. in the Bishop of Eistetens street, and the relations of Anthony Beni∣vensis in his Book of hidden causes of blood and diseases Chap. 8. who reports that a woman o six∣teen years old fell suddenly into a horrid skreek∣ing, & her belly so swelled, that she seem to have been eight months gone with child, and she was so taken with Convulsions, that her soals of her feet would touch her neck, and at length she vo∣mited wood, crooked nails, and Brass needles with wax and hair mixed in balls, and a piece of
bread so big that none could swallow it whole this she did often. Cornelius Gemma mentioned another,Lib. 2. de divi. nat. car. of which he was an eye-witness, beyond all admiration, so that there is no doubting of this question. Forestue reports that he saw a cloth, nails, bits of iron, hair, and bones vomited.Lib. 18. obser. 16. in scho. And Francis Heidelshem page 186. reports that a melancho∣lick man vomited iron, bullets, gun-powder, and other strange things. And what is more wonderful, some have lo their privities by witchcraft,Lib. 3. de mor. vexe. c. 5. of which Baptista Codronchius, who saies a young man envied a young woman, and desiring to leave her, lost his privities. And when another woman had taught him to use fair words and promisses, and if need required, threatnings and force to compel her to restore them. He took her counsel, and at even∣ing in a convenient place found out his Mistriss, & when neither by prayers, nor any fair promi∣ses he could not perswade her, he put a towel a∣bout her neck, and almost choaked her; nor did he lose till she promised him help. Then she put her hand between his thighs, and took away the enchantment. There are so many Histories to confirm this from credible Authors, that it would be tedious to relate all. And it is manifest every where that Witches have confessed before the Judges, that they have made some blind, others lame, others to have the Palsie, and others great pain, and to have caused many diseases. Hence it is manifest that diseases may come by Witchcraft.
Chap. 4. Vuierus denies that Diseases may come by Witch∣craft. FRom what hath been said, you may easily see the vain defense by Vuierus of Witches; he takes all these for fables, and cannot be brought to believe that there are Witches. And he sup∣poses that all things which Witches think they do, are meer dreams and Phantasmes: and he affirms that the fancy of Witches is onely delu∣ded by the Devil,Lib. de la∣miis c. 5. so that they confess they have done, which they neither could, nor nature could suffer to be done: and he saies many other things which will fall of themselves by what shall be written hereafter. Chap. 5. The Controversie is decided, and it is shewed whence Diseases are made that are from Witches. TO decide this Controversie in short, we must do it by some conclusions. The first is, It is the Witches purpose to hurt men by diseases, and many men have been so hurt. The Histories in Chap. 3. prove this conclusion: and Sprengerus hath many more in his hammer against Witches. And though Vuierus takes these for fables, yet History is not so rashly to be delu∣ded: that the Witches do act therein is manifest, because the instrumēts of Witchcraft being takē away, or the Witches burnt or dead, the patients
grow sound, and the charmes cease. The second Conclusion, Although Witches de∣termine to hurt men, yet neither do it, nor can they do it. The Witches are not the first causes of such operations, but the Devil: the Witches are his work-fellows, at whose request by Gods permis∣sion, he afflicts men with such diseases. There∣fore the Devil and the Witch must agree to cause Witchcraft formally. We deny not but the De∣vil may in dreams suggest what the Witches may think true when awake, as appears by many hi∣stories in Baptista porta and Vuierus, as that of a woman which anointed her self and slept, and a∣waking, affirmed that she had been at Sea, and flew over mountains. There are many the like of women, which stirr'd not out of their bed that night, yet affirmed that they did wonders in strange places. Moreover, it is pleasing to the Devil to have Witches obedient to him, and he perswades them that they may do good or hurt to whom they please: To this end he gives them instru∣ments, as pouders which may cause diseases or death, by putting them into meat or drink, or rubbing their bodies therewith; which if they cannot do, it will be sufficient to sprinkle them only upon their cloaths. To kill, it is a black pouder; to cause a disease, it is ash-coloured, sometimes red, to cure it is white, either to be sprinkled upon them, or to be given in meat or drink.Daemono∣sag. lib. 1. lib. 1. c. 2. Nicolaus Remigius proves this by divers Histories. The third Conclusion, The Devil by Gods permission bringeth diseases by natural Cause. For he well understands all the force of Sypathy, and what is good or bad for a mans eah. But
how are these diseases brought upon men? If the disease be in the humors, the Devil by the command of the Witch moveth the internal cau∣ses, especially melancholy, and so causeth melan∣choly diseases; therefore he rejoyceth at the disposition of Epilepticks, and gets into them: for first he gathers all the black choller together, and then moves it, and sends the smoak of it in∣to the cells of the internal senses, and if they be sharp as usually they are, it causeth the Falling-sickness, when he gathers a thick slimy matter into the inward substance of the nerves he cau∣seth a Palsie, deafness and blindness, by putting evil excrements into the Organs.: oftentimes ha∣tred and love and other passions. Hence the Poet. Thou makest the dearest brothers for to jarr. That he may hurt speedily, he taketh the spi∣ritual substance of the blood, and purgeth it, and separateth it from the gross. Or he makes a quin∣tessence of poysons, as Chymists do of Gold, and with that infects the vital spirits, which works so strongly that it cannot be overcome by natu∣ral means and causeth death certainly. It is wonderful what he doth by Witches to disturb wedlock, to hinder propagation of man∣kind, to which he is a deadly enemy, this is cal∣led, the tying of the point, this he doth by pro∣hibiting the breeding of seed, or hindering of erection of the yard, while it drieth and wil not be spent. He doth the same to women by ma∣king a preternatural disease in their privities, so that they cannot receive a man. To this are referred the Philtres or Love po∣tions which may cause Lechery, but cannot cause the love of any particular man, but instead of
love causeth madness, Lib. dis∣guis magi. 3. of which see Martin Del∣rio, and of which the Poet. In threefold colours knit three knots, and cry (O Amarillis) Venus knots I tie. The fourth conclusion. Somtimes the Devil without causes and natural means in mans body, hurts men only by his own power and sudden vio∣lence at the request of the Witch. For the Witch wil not do it her self for fear of discovery or the like, but commits the whole matter to the Devil, and what she commands he presently doth. This is plain from a story in Nicolas Remigius, that one cursed another that wronged him,Lib. dem∣nola. saga. c. 12. and he was taken up with a wind, and thrown down again, and made lame of one leg, so that he could not go; this he told the Shepheards that brought him home. He mentions two other Stories which clear the truth of this. The ifth conclusion. Somtimes the Devil de∣ludes men and perswades them to diseases they have not. This is proved Chap. 3. out of Baptista Co∣dronchius concerning the taking off of the privi∣ties; for it is not in the Devils power to restore members when taken off. The sixth Conclusion. Although diseases and o∣ther evils which Witches think they lay upon men come from the Devil as the imediate cause, and the Witch doth nothing; yet are they in fault, by rea∣son of their covenant with the Devil, that hurts men at their request, and by reason of their will to hurt, they are gulty of it. This is contrary to Uverius who defending Witches, as in Chap. 4. we shew∣ed, saith That what the Witches do is but a phansie and meer delusion, and whatsoever is
spoken of contracts with the Devil from the best Authors. It is a wonder I cannot conceive how a christian should so cast off all piety, that he should forget his Creator and Redeemer, and his Covenant with them in Baptism and go into the Devils waies, and profess himself an open e∣nemy to his Creator and Lord who can present∣ly destroy him in Hell fire, and joyn himself to the enemy of mankind the Devil: This hath been and is yet done, as appears by many Hi∣stories and confessions of Witches without tor∣ments. And how can these be meer Phantasms when the Witches have marks of their slavery which they willingly sufferred to be made by the Devil upon their bodies, visible to all mens eyes. And it is plain that the Devil made them, for if you prick them with needles they feel no pain, nor do they bleed the least drop, as Nicolas Remigi∣us affirms by Histories. Demono¦sag. lib. l. cap. 5.The sixth Conclusion. Though the power of the Devil be great, yet he can hurt none by the Witches power with him but by Gods permission. This is manifest from the history of Iob, whom the Devil never afflicted without Gods consent and permission. 2. The Gospel shews that he could not enter into the Swine or hurt them without Gods permission, nor doth a hair fall frō the head without Gods will and permission. Therefore the Devil promiseth to do what th Witch commands him, they cannot have their desire except God permit.Mag. de∣mon. lib. 2. c. 28. And Bodinus writes there are not two in a hundred that witchcraft can hurt. And it is known to be true from the voluntary confesion of Witches.
Chap. 6. Of the Signs of dis∣eases from Witchcraft. IT is very hard to know these diseases, and we must be very industrious to discover them. This is because the Devil doth so warily get into natural causes that it is not easily discerned, what comes from natural causes and what from the Devil. Fernelius gives an example of this in a young Knight which had a shaking and Con∣vulsion by fits; which by divers remedies given for some months could not be removed, but in the third month the Author of the disease was known, by voices and unusual words and sen∣tences, Greek and Latin, which was the Devil,2. de aba. re. caus. c. 16. and more plainly when he discovered the secrets of those that stood by, and of the Physitians, scoffing at them for their vain medicines, by which they had almost killed the party. The first sign then is of diseases from the De∣vil, when practised Physitians doubt of the signs, and cannot satisfie themselves, and all things are given in vain and to no purpose. Another sign is, because ordinary diseases come by degrees and have their times and sea∣sons, and come to their state, but these are in their vigor without any apparent causes. Thirdly they have extraordinary symptoms and convulsions, no cause aforegoing that ap∣pears: some say that if the Witch comes to see the Patient he is worse, and trembles or is other∣wise altered: but the certain sign is when a knife or a needle, or the like is o ied or purged forth, or come from ulcers tat breed not natu∣rally in the body.
Some have another sign which to me is super∣stitious, they wash the Patient with the decocti∣on of Vervain, and if nothing be sound in the decoction, or its colour not changed, they say there is no Witchcraft: but if many of his hairs be found in it, it is a sign of Witchcraft, this I say is superstitious though Vervain is common∣ly thought to discover Witchcraft. One think I suppose proves Witchcraft when married people formerly loving very well, hate one another without any evident cause. There are many Histories to confirm this. From whence we may gather this Prognostick. That all diseases from Witchcraft are long and uncurable but by the great mercy of God. Chap. 7. Of Preservation a∣gainst Witchcraft. I Can say nothing to this certainly, nor can heathenish medicines please me that are used against it, as that of Rhamnus whose branches in the windows or doors they say defend from Witchcraft:Dios. lib. 1. c. 104. Nor doth Lions foot take away the force o Love-potions: Nor a Horse-shoe nailed to a Threshold, nor a thousand other things which are used against Witchcraft, for how can these being natural drive away diseases which are caused by the Devil, who is without a body and hath no organs of sense, and therefore can neither be touched with natural bodies nor can be either pleased or disturbed thereby. Al∣though we wll not deny that God who is above all nature, can give power to natural things to work upon incorporeal.
Nor is it lawful for a Christian by any means to go to any Witch, and pray her or perswade her that she hurt not, or that she should take a∣way any mischief done; for so he should pray to the Devil who did the mischief, and not the Witch, as I shewed at large. It remains therefore that we only turn to Al∣mighty God heartily, and implore the good An∣gels his Ministers, to defend us from those evils which the Devil besets us with both sleepin and waking. Chap. 8. Of the Cure of Dis∣eases made by Witchcraft, and first of the Magical Cure. ALbeit Witches promise to cure such disea∣ses by Words, Characters, Inchantments and Adjurations: yet these and the like have no force, as we shewed, against Paracelsus and others which we shall not farther declare.Libro de cons. & dissen. And since it is certain, that the Devil chiefly causeth these e∣vils, it is wicked and unbeseeming a Christian, to desire any thing from him who is the impla∣cable enemy of mankind. Concerning this, there are two questions: first, Whether it is lawful upon suspicion of itchcraft, to ask or compel Witches to remove itchcraft and dis∣eases which they, or others have caused? O this there are divers opinions, and they desire to resolve it by divers distinctions, which well examined, I think thus: He that desireth by force to compel a Witch to cure a disease, be∣lieves in, and hopes for help from the Devil, which he should seek from the Lord, who severe∣ly
prohibited asking counsel of Magicians. The Soul (saith he) in Leviticus that goes after Witches or Soothsayers,Levit. 20. vers. 6. I will set my Face against, and cut him off from the midst of my People. Hence St. Chrysostome writes, That a Christian had better die then redeem his life by bondage to the Devil.Homi. 8. in epist. ad Coloss. For there are other remedies, and the Devil is not stronger then God: and though there be no hope of life, it is better to die, then to be cured by sin; for the Salvain of the Soul is better then the health of the body. And the Glory of God which by so doing is neglected, is to be preferred be∣fore all things. Another Question is, Whether it be lawful to searh into any means or instruments used by Witches to cause diseases, and to remove them when found, burn them or any waies destroy them? This Question little concerns Physick, of which see Martin Delrio, that decides the reasons on both sides very well, and confirms his own judgment by Histories: but we shall speak of things more profitable. Chap. 9. Of the Natural Cure of Witchcraft. THerefore it is not lawful to seek help from the Devil or Witches, because we have law∣ful meas sufficient, naely Natural and Divine: of Divine we shall speak in the Chap∣ter following; in this only of the Natural. And since in Part IX. Chap. 1. we shewed three sorts of Witchcraft, namely Poetical or Vulgar, Philosophical, and Magick. The Poe∣tical is no waies Witchcraft. The second which
is Philosophical, comes by natural causes, som∣times with the Devil concurring, who corrupts and alters the constitution o the body (God so permitting) that he may please the Witches that desire it of him▪ Diseases so caused, may be wel cured by natural remedies, but not simply; for in such diseases there are two causes namely Na∣tural and Diabolical, and if the Devil cease no to act or hurt, there can be no perfect cure. The Natural medicines are twofold, either such as evacuate foul humors, which the Devil useth to cause diseases, or Alterers and Antido∣tes which are against the dispositions brought in by the Devil. For Evacuation Vomits are goodpunc; for Experience shews that stubborn diseases, whose cause is in the stomach mesentery, and a∣bout the liver and spleen▪ which could not be e∣vacuated by ordinary purging, have been cured by Vomits. And so Ruland cured Diabolical diseases, and it is observed that some have been so cured that have vomited knives, hair, glass, and the like with putrid humors▪ But let the vo∣mit be proper, and Purges must not be neglect∣ed▪ Also use Alterers and Antidotes, external and internal; the internal are mentioned, as Herb True-love, round Birthwort and long, St. Iohns∣or , and many others. The outward are Oyntments, and Fumes, and Baths, as Oyntment of Viscus Colurus or Misle∣to, experienced in a Maid bewitched▪Henr. ab Hoer. in obs. med. raris obs. 8. thus made Take Dogs grease four ounces, Bears grease eight ounces, Capons grease twenty four ounces, Viscus Colurus Mislero green three branches, cut and bruise them till they are moist, Wood-leaves and berries,  is them all into a glass; set it in the Sun nine weeks,
and you shall have a green Balsom;o Con∣er all firmities udy my nnertus, laterus, overius, artholi∣us and iolanus, of the last ditions. with theis bdies bewithed, especially in the pained parts & the joynts are to be anointed, and the patient shall be cured, it is a certain Experiment. The Ancient and Modern Physitians used Fumes of Bayes, Rue, St. Iohn wort, Sage, Rose∣mary, Roses, Wood aloes, Asphalium. Sanders, Ci∣tron peels, Frankincense, Mastich, Storax Calamite, Labdanum, Musk, Sulphur which strengthen the heart and brain, and discuss malignnt and cold humors. Baths do both, by insensible Evacuation and altering, in which boyl Rue, St. Iohns-wort, Mug∣wort, Vervain, Palma Christi, and the like men∣tioned. But these are mixed without Superstition or Ceremony, pronouncing of words, and the like, and we must trust only to Natural means, and leave the rest to God. Chap. 10. Of the Divine Cure of Witchcraft. BEcause the Devil can hinder the force of na∣tural things, if God permit, we must have recourse to a Divine Cure, not only in diseases from Witchcraft, but also in all the calamities of this miserable life. And for this cause, for the prevention and cure of these diseases the Church which is the Spouse of Christ, hath constituted Exorist, which every one knows have power in this thing: therfore we must put our whole confidence in God, & call upon him by a firm & sincere Faith; yet we must take heed least under the shew of a Divine Cure, any thing be done
supestitiously, or against the Honor of God. It is good against the same to appoint a Peri∣grination to a Holy place, that we may obtain that by the Merits of the Saints, which we can∣not immediately by our selves obtain from God. This is approved by daily experiēce amōg Chri∣stians and true Catholicks: therefore to him be Praise, Honor, and Glory, and Thanksgiving for Ever.
Two EPISTLES of that Excellent and Famous Man Balthasar Han Doctor of Physick, and chief Elector of Saxony. The First Epistle. MOst Renowned, Excellent and most experienced Sir, my Godfather and much honoured Friend. I pre∣fent thee with a miserable but ad∣mirable Physical History (which I lastly told you in short) as I had it chiefly from mine own observation written with mine own hand. A certain honest godly woman twenty two years old, of a laudable temper, somwhat incli∣ning to melancholy, in the year 1634. the 8th of November being Saturday, was troubled at evening with an unusual stopping and heaviness at the breast, she went to bed at her accustomed hour with desire to sleep, and though she obtain∣ed her desire presently, yet was grievously trou∣bled, by which means after twelve of the clock, she was heard often to groan sadly, but they sup∣posed
she dreamed, and called her; but she a∣waked not til she had often groned: being a∣waked she often lifted up her eyes, but kept them not long open, but presently composed her self for sleep again, and spake not above three words. In the morning being Sunday, and the the 9th of November, she arose at six of the clock thinking upon the Church, and how she might according to her promise bring a yong maid to be married to a Minister of the Church. But on a sudden she beheld two blew spots in both hands, which crept up from the wrists to the bending of the Arm, not in one continued line, and above both the bendings of the arms, there were divers letters, among which were these two N B. joyned together, and many crosses of this form ✝ she being undaunted continued her holy resolution, and by Gods assistance she went to Church at 8. in the morning, and was very merry at the wedding-dinner, til four in the afternoon, and perceived no disturbance that day nor that night, but munday morning following being Novem. 10. she observed the number of crosses increased about her neck, breast and belly to the bottom of it. And all that day she felt great straitness and troubles, one fit followed another, and she had so great a desire to sleep, which was the forerunner of a fit, and more works and crosses that she could not be kept awake, at which time (to the terror and admiration of the beholders) the characters mentioned most like crosses were in most parts of her body, so that in seven daies time she was all over before and behind, from head to foot, marked as if sh had been whipt with rods or thorns; at first her face was not marked, but afterwards it was with
the same, but smaller, and more superficially in the scarf-skin, at night she went to bed and slept an hour after which she was troubled, & groaned, and folded her hands close. The standers by ob∣serving that awaked her, and parted her hands, and they sound a Needle stuck in the palm of her hand, and they drew it out; they bent it & put it in the fire unknown to her▪ and keep it stil. The 11th of November being Tuesday she was better but not without some fits, but gentle: this night she dreamt that she should find a needle under her bed, which she should put into the fire pre∣sently and so be cured. The 12th of November being Wednesday at noon she remembred her dream, and commanded her Maid to search di∣ligently for a needle under the bed, the Maid re∣turning brought a long Taylors needle, she cast it into the fire, often, this done she went to bed at her usual hour, and espied a Ghost like a wo∣man going into a Study, and hiding her self in a corner, at which she was much frighted, and trembled, and began to be sleepy as formerly, which by reason of her pain she resisted, And lo an illfavoured old woman very terrible with her wrinkled face stood by her bed side, having a thick cudgel with which she smote her violently upon the legs, and being very angry she repeat∣ed these words, Give me my Needle, Give me my Needle. At which she cried out aloud, and the old woman vanished, and from that night, till Saturday after, which was the 15th of November he did not suffer any thing, but then about night walking about she pulled out another Needle from the soal of her foot with great pain, lamen∣tation, and loss of blood, and shewed it to the standers by, she slept wel that night, and the fol∣lowing
day being Sunday the 16th of Novem∣ber, she put on her bst cloaths and went to Church chearfully, from which day she was not troubled, only she was somtimes found under the Table at night taken out of her bed, to which she went every night at her usual hour, after prayer and signing her self with the sign of the Cross, without any hurt, and at certain times the third, fourth, sixth and tēth day, she had new marks of crosses with other marks as of hearts and Astronomical characters of the Planets and cōfigurations, as ♂. ✶ ☍ and of Planets ♄. ♃. ♂ ☉ ♀. ☿. ☽. and some of chymical medicines, as {nitre}. {salt}. ☉. (for she was not ignorant of Astronomy and Chimistry with which she refreshed her self by reading and calculating beyond ordinary wo∣men) were as it were cut in the skin, she con∣tinued indfferent well in this state to the twen∣ty seventh of Ianuary 1635. and her fis were very little, and in a manner quite gone, at which time she went to see her neighbour to pas her time with her in reading or sewing, or discourse: in the midst of their discourse she had on her right hand the shape of a Rose, and on her left, of Three-leaved grass, with the year of our Lord 16, gently painted and so artificially that A∣plles the best of Painters could not mend it. Under these figures without pain were painted to the admiration of the Beholders a wounded heart, the picture of a fool, and the German word Narr. and nescio with divers crosses. The 27th of February just at noon her trouble returned with more greater fits: And from that day to this, by Gods Grace she never had any, whom I desire by prayer to defend her from these delusi∣ons of Sathan, and to give her health, and be with
us all to whom be Praise, Honor, and Glory for Evermore. This is that miserable History which I promised you, read it with your divine inge∣nuity, and consider it; and leave your opiion of such passions to posterity. For you Books of Practical Physick, written from long and infalli∣ble Experience, with great pains and ingenuity, which all Learned men admire, may well con∣tain it. In the mean while farewel, and be cer∣tain that I am most ready to serve you. Dated from the Electors Camp, the 5. of November. 1635.
THE SECOND EPISTLE. IN my last Letter, Renowned Sir, my most Experienced Godfather, and very good Friend, I sent you a lamentable History of a Physical case: now I send you the opinion of the Famous and Excellent Physitian Dr. Ioachimus Colbius concerning it. But by your leave I shall a little digress, and a little mention what was done, and what medicines were given without many flourishing words. That this trick or delusion was from Satan, there is no doubt in me. Some suppose that she gave him this op∣portunity by givin a smock to an old woman which was manifest to be the Witch. For this is a Maxime, not only among the Devils Slaves the Witches▪ but also among Common people; that if a Witch get any silk or linnen that hath been worn next the skin of any▪ then she can hurt any part of them that wore it, by pricking, striking, tying, twisting more or less when, and where she pleaseth. The crosses of which I spake, were not alwaies of the same form, but some lon∣ger, some shorter, somtimes very long; some were deeper, and caused pain and itching; some came to matter▪ and left marks behind them above a month, in some did not. But why crosses, roses and three leaved grass so artificially painted, and Characters which she knew, and things she de∣lighted in? The cause of these, was the Devils hatred to mankind for she signed herself with the sign of the cross, morning and evening against Satans force, and loved Needle-work, and A∣stronomy,
and Chymistry, which by her friend leave she learned of a famous Doctor that live in the house; the Devil therefore labored to tak off her faith, and the force of her prayers, an mock them with the sign of the cross, and mak her melancholy by scoffing at her recreations and so to destroy body and soul together. Thi may be probably and Religiously supposed t be true, in regard we cannot pierce more into the inward causes. The medicines applied we few and gentle, which purged the belly of me∣lancholy, and did alter the humor, with some temperate Cordials, and things experimentally good for the womb, she had sent her from Hala an Amulet of herbs, and seeds rightly gathered at certain times, which had much. Camphire in it; but she refused it, least she should purchase the displeasure of Almighty God, by vainly la∣bouring against the hatred of the Devil, wh is a Spirit, and cannot be touched by corporeal medicines. She used nothing to drive the De∣vil, but prayer and Divine worship, and Sa∣craments very cheerfully and couragiously. Let this be sufficient to be spokē of this matter in the time of war, & while the guns roar and thunder, where the Muses in vain seek for their friend si∣lence. Accept of it kindly, and suspend not your judgment, but give your opinion concerning these things▪ and declare them speedily to the Learned. Farewel worthy Sir, and continue to be my Friend, who am much your Servant. Given from the Electoral Army, November the 30th 1635. FINIS.
