S3656 8240233 41144
THE Master of the Temple A bad a LAWYER, AS THE Dean of Pauls Is a DIVINE. IN A Letter from a Gentleman of the Tem∣ple, to his (quondam) Tutor in Ox∣ford. About the Law-Part of Dr. Sherlock's modest Examination of the Oxford Decree. LONDON: Printed, and Sold by E. Whitlock, near Stationers-Hall, 1696.
A Letter from a Lawyer in the Tem∣ple, to his (quondam) Tutor in Ox∣ford. SIR, THough it be some time since I left the Ʋniversity, yet my Obligations to it continue fresh upon me. I have still (and ever shall have) the same Concern for its Honour and Interest, that I had when I was actually a Member there. In Truth, the So∣cinians, the Tritheists, and Latitudinarians both in Opinion and Practice, increase so fast in this Town, that they frequently provoke
a Wish for my Return thither. For, notwith∣standing the Calumny and Reproach which Hereticks and Dissenters have cast upon that Seminary of Learning and Vertue, in Con∣tempt of the Publick Opinion of the greatest part of the Christian World; yet I must declare, that I observ'd Probity, Good manners, and Religion, more Visible and Exemplary in that Place, than they can be pretended to be amongst Us here. SIR, I cannot but with great Concern Ac∣knowledge, that Your Pulpits are more earn∣est in Recommending Practical Piety than Ours, notwithstanding the Youth of those who generally fill 'em. Our Master enter∣tains us of late with such Arguments and Concessions about Christianity, that Infidels seem rather encourag'd than convinc'd by his Reasonings. One while he confesses the Souls of Brutes to be Immaterial, and anon
he supposes some hidden unreveal'd Decree of the Deity for their Annihilation at Death; and yet again argues from the Immateriali∣ty of an Human Soul, that the same is ne∣cessarily Immortal, and must endure to Eter∣nity. These, and such like Discourses from the Pulpit, fill the Coffee-houses about Us, upon Sunday Evenings, with many Wild Dis∣putes concerning a future state: And in truth, the Deans Sermons, together with three of his Old Friend's, viz. One, concern∣ing the Temporary Duration of Hell-Torments; and to prove, that God is not oblig'd to ful∣fill his Threatnings, but that, on the con∣trary, it may be for his Honour to be better than his Word: A Second, concerning the Concealment of a Man's Christianity under a Mahometan or Pagan Government, rather than disturb it: And a Third, concerning the Perfection of True Wisdom (if a Man can hit it) in the Practice of an appearing freedom and openness, with a Resolute Reservedness, as
little appearing as is possible: These, I say, have given such Subjects of Discourse to the Youth of this Place, that 'tis scarce Imagi∣nable how much the Number of the Pre∣tended Wits and Atheists is of late encrea∣sed. But Sir, the informing you in these Par∣ticulars was not the Design of this Letter; tho I could not forbear Complaining of the Decay of Religion, to You, whose Prayers may assist to stop it, and to beg of God the Forgiveness and Reformation of those, who occasion or promote it. What I intend by this Paper, is, to shew my Duty and Filial Regards to my Mother University, by mak∣ing a short Observation, or two, upon the 7th Page of our Dean's Satyr, on the Proceed∣ings about Mr. Bingham's Sermon. I shall not presume to venture upon any Argument about the Opinion Censur'd. My
Reverence for your Knowledge in these Matters, and the Application of my Studies another way, do expresly forbid it. That which I here offer to your Consi∣deration must be agreed proper to the Pro∣fession I am now engag'd in, viz. An Essay, to prove, that the Vice-Chancelour, Bp. of Ox∣ford, and Heads of Houses there, have not in∣curr'd any Premunire, or other danger, to themselves, or the University, in their late procedure about the Sermon above-menti∣on'd: And (to tell you my Opinion freely in this matter) if the Dean's Divinity be no better than his Law, I think him deeply engag'd to the Legislative Power, which took away the Writ de Haeretico Comburendo. He is pleas'd to insinuate, That you ought to have advis'd with men of Skill, how far your Irregular and Unstatutable Proceeding might affect you. I take the thing to be so very plain, that you needed no Consultation with Lawyers
before-hand, nor afterward neither. But, since the menaces pronounc'd have proceed∣ed from a Person, whose Station and Con∣verse suppose him advis'd by men of Skill, Some, on your behalf, have consider'd the matter; and I find the Templars to smile at the Deans Presumption, in pretending to im∣pose on the World (especially on his Neigh∣bours, the men of the Law) a Proviso, in an Act of Parliament, which stands repeal'd by a subsequent Act; and upon which Repeal the greatest miscarriages of the Last Reign are Founded. For, in truth, the Suspension of the B. of London, and the Business of Magdalen-Colledge were no miscarriages, but upon that supposal, viz. That the Act in the First of Elizabeth, erecting an High-Com∣mission-Court, was a New Law; and that therefore being repeal'd, any the like Com∣mission was Illegal. Thus, I am sure, the Opinions and Complaints ran, before, and at the Arrival of his Present Majesty.
It is not easie to imagine from whence he could have receiv'd this Notion, unless it were from Bp. Cartwright's Book, who for his own Justification, maintain'd that Law to be but Affirmative of the Old Common Law of England. And yet even that Suppositi∣on, were it true, would not answer the Deans Purpose, as will appear by and by. I believe, You Sir, who are a good man, will be apt to think, that it Savors strongly of Prevarication to Print part of a Clause, and omit the most material words in it, which are plac'd in the midst of the Para∣graph, and could not well be overlook'd, but by one that was resolv'd to overlook 'em, be∣cause it was for his purpose to do so. Yet this little Piece of Art the Dean has stoop'd to, as you shall see presently: which is the more re∣markable, because he has Printed the Words of the Act in a different Character; which, amongst ingenuous Persons, I think, sup∣poses a Literal Recital.
This way of Dealing I confess, as odd as it is, is not wholly without a Precedent, (whether it will warrant or justify our Ma∣ster I shall leave you to determine,) but he has the Honour of following the example of a Reverend Prelate, who upon a certain oc∣casion thought fit to launch out of his Pro∣fession, and argue a Law-Point: to prove his Argument he quoted a Charter, but was pleas'd to repeat only half the words of the sentence, and then stop't short, omitting these, Salva Persona nostra, Regina nostra, & Liberis nostris, donec emendatum fuerit; & quandocun∣que Emendatum esset, intendent nobis sicut prius: Matthew Paris can give you the whole in King John's Reign; but the mischief is, the latter words, if inserted, wou'd have spoil'd the force of that inference for which the Quotation was us'd, and we are not to ex∣pect from either of 'em that they shou'd every day answer their own Arguments. This Practise is too often observable in the
Discourses of Those, who, to shew their Read∣ing, endeavour to fetch Arguments from Pro∣fessions, in which they were never Educated, or not sufficiently Studied. Sir, I must beg you, not to con∣strue this Reflection as general: For it must be acknowledg'd, that Your Gown doth afford many instances to the contrary; and particularly, the Universal Learning, and apparent Sincerity of the great Bishop of Worcester, is a notorious ex∣ception to these Remarks. He must be own'd to have read more of our Law-Books than, perhaps, any man that is not a Lawyer; and to have employ'd what he has read Knowingly and Fairly. But as 'tis plain our Dean has no pretence to the First Part of this Character, so whether he has any to the Latter, or not, you are to judg upon what follows.
The Case is thus. A Sermon is Preach'd at Oxford, in which there is a Passage complain'd of, as giving occasion of Offence. The Vice-chancellor Convenes several Heads of Houses, amongst which were more than six Doctors of Divini∣ty. They Judg, Declare and Determine these Propositions (that there are Three Infi∣nite Distinct Minds and Substances in the Tri∣nity; and that the Three Persons in the Trinity are Three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits, and Three Individual Substances) to be False, Impious, and Heretical, dissonant, and contrary to the Doctrine of the Catholick Church; and especially to the Doctrine of the Church of England publickly receiv'd. Wherefore they do Command and publickly Enjoyn all and singular, the Persons commit∣ted to their Care, not to publish for the future any such Tenet in their Sermons, or otherwise.
The Question now, upon this Case, is, Whether the Vice-Chancellor and Heads of Houses have been guilty of any Crime, ac∣cording to the Laws of this Realm, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, or by the Statutes of the University? I say, that the Negative is plain. For, first, this is not a Judicial Proceeding, in order to punish the Person who had publickly maintain'd these Propositions, but a Decla∣ration rather of their Opinion by way of Caution, to the Members of the University under their Care: The Wherefore, in he Close, doth plainly shew their honest and justifiable intent and design. And no man can have the Forehead to assert, that Twen∣ty Men may not deny the Notion in Debate to be true, with as much Freedom, by our Law, as Two or Three may affirm it. Nay, if it was their Judgment and Opinion, as undoubtedly it was, the Morals even of a Lawyer will assure the Dean, that it was
their Duty to declare so, in order to prevent the Growth of the suppos'd Error, or Here∣sy among those committed to their Charge. The Judgment of Universities hath been Frequently and Legally declar'd upon Less Occasions, even upon the Printing of Pam∣phlets, tho out of their Precincts, and by Persons not under their Care. Their Pow∣er hath, with Allowance, been extended to forbid the Reading of Erroneous Treatises; and how comes it to be a Crime in them then to Censure, what is publickly Preach'd be∣fore them, by One of their Own Members? But suposing it to be a Judicial Proceeding; yet their Statutes are their Warrant for it. The plain words of which are, Haeretici, Schismatici, & quicun{que} alii minus recte de Fide Catholica & Doctrina vel Disciplina Ecclesiae Anglicanae sentientes, us{que} tam Conciones quam Libri quibus malesanae opiniones propagantur cohi∣beantur. And this is intrusted Judicio Vice∣cancellarii, assidentibus Ipsi Praefectis in Ordina∣rio suo Conventu. Thus runs the Statute, de
Authoritate & Officio Vice-Cancellarii. There is another Statute as to Sermons, and that runs thus, Siquis pro Concione aliqua, intra Ʋni∣versitatem ejusve Praecinctum habita quicquam doctrinae vel disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae publi∣ce receptae dissonum aut contrarium protuerit, sive protulisse ab ipso Vice-Cancellario suspectus, vel alio aliquo rationabilem suspicionis Causam afferentede∣latus fuerit; the Vicechancellor may thereupon proceed, adhibito Consilio Sex aliorum Stae. Theologiae Doctorum (quorum Ʋnus sit Stae. Theologiae Pro∣fessor Regius, si concioni interfuerit.) There is not a step they have taken in this Affair, which is not according to the Power grant∣ed to 'em in these words. And I wonder therefore what the Dean means by reproach∣ing their Proceedings as Irregular and Ʋnsta∣tutable. There seems to be a Fate upon him in mis-understanding and mis-representing every thing that carries the Name of a Law; for he deals just as skilfully, and fairly with these Local Statutes, as he does afterwards with those of the Realm.
If then these Statutes of theirs are valid, they are an Ample Warrant for what they have done: And Valid they are, unless they are contrary to the express known Laws of the Realm, which I shall prove 'em not to be immediately. In the mean Time, sup∣posing there were an Error in their Proceed∣ings, it is but the Error of a Judge at most, which is never Criminal by any Law in the World (unless Corruption attend the Sen∣rence) where the Person and the subject Matter are within his Jurisdiction. Now, in both Respects, That is the Case here. 'Twas a Member of the University that main∣tain'd the Proposition censur'd, 'twas in a Sermon preached before the University. The subject matter of the Words relates not to the Temporal Government, but mere∣ly to an Opinion in Religion, to an Article of Faith: And it must be agreed, that Ser∣mons before them, and the Doctrines deli∣ver'd in those Sermons, are under their Cognisance. Now supposing the Censure
to be a Mistake, no Man of sense but the Dean, will pretend that this mistake is a Crime: It only gives Cause of Appeal to some Superior Judge, in Case the Constitu∣tion allows one; as Ours, both in Civil and Ecclesiastical matter, doth in most Parti∣culars. There are but few Cases of any kind or Nature whatsoever, where the Law hath impowr'd a Final Determination in the first Instance: Even in Colledges and Universi∣ties there are Visitors, and in most Cases, Appeals from the first Order or Sentence. Mankind doth so generally agree this to be reasonable, in consideration of our obnoxi∣ousness to Error, that Appeals are deem'd Remedies approv'd by the Law of Nature; and in this, Divines, Canonists, Civili∣ans, and Common-Lawyers do all agree: And, if so, with what Colour can the Dean insinuate, that this Proceeding hath brought either the Persons concern'd, of the University, into any danger, supping if
contrary to the Laws of the Realm. The next thing to be consider'd, is, whe∣ther any Law of the Realm doth controul or over-rule this matter? The Dean says, that such Declarations are not fit to be intrusted with any Body of Men less than a National Synod. I shall not dispute about Convenience; tho, with submission to better Judgments, Our Consti∣tution can hardly admit of any Alteration, but for the worse. But the question is how the Law stands? The Objection is from the 1st of Eliz. Cap. 1. Upon which the Dean says. We find the power to order, determine, or adjudge any matter or Cause to be Heresy, restrain'd one∣ly to such as heretofore have been determin'd, or∣der'd or adjudg'd to be Heresy by the Authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first Four General Councils, or by any other General Coun∣cel,
wherein the same was declar'd Heresy by the Ex∣press and plain Words of the said Canonical Scriptures; or such as hereafter shall be order'd, judg'd, or determin'd to be Heresy, by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm, with the as∣sent of the Clergy in their Convocation. This is his Quotation: Then he goes on thus, And if the King could not grant a greater Authority than this to his High Commissi∣oner for Ecclesiastical Affairs, it is not like∣ly that any other Body of Men have it. And my Lord Coke says, That this is a direction to others, especially to Bishops, in their ad∣judging Heresy, 3 Instit. pag. 40. And how they have obsery'd this Law in their Decree, they had best consider. To which I answer; That, were this Law in force, and did it concern them, yet for the Reasons above mention'd, 'tis no more than an Erroneous Judgment, as we have seen many on the 25 E. 3. and revers'd with abhorrence; and yet the Judges not deem'd offenders, because they were not so Wise as
their Superiors, who were of another Opi∣nion. But his Emphafis lies on the last words, They had best consider how they have ob∣serv'd that Law. You, Sir, know best, whether the Position be declar'd Heresy by any of those Councils: But, I'm sure, I know, that there is no such Law in force; and, if there were, yet it concerns not this matter. First, It no ways concerns this Procedure, but only a Legal Process upon a Person for Heresy, in order to his being condmn'd, and deliver'd over to the Secular Power, to be burn't. In the next place, it concerns only the High-Commissioners, and none else; it was not intended to oblige even the Bishop of a Di∣ocese in his Ordinary Proceeding. 'Tis true, Coke says, That it may serve for a good Direction to Others, more especially to a Diocesan, being sole Judge in so weighty a Cause; but he doth not say it obliges him, nor can He, or any body else pretend it does: much less doth Coke say, that it extends to a
Vice-Chancellor's Government of the Univer∣sity, with the Assistance of the Heads of Hous∣es, or Doctors of Divinity: Neither Dio∣cesans nor Universities are mention'd or in∣tended, as appears by the whole Contexture of the Act. But suppose the Act were Directory, nay, Compulsive upon a Diocesan (which 'tis not) doth it follow that the Direction extends to Universities also? The meaning of a Law is, to be extended no further than the Words of it, and not strain'd, to take in Parallel-Cases and Remote Consequences. Then, consider the Reason of the thing; May not the Univer∣sity be allow'd to censure a Member for He∣retical Words, tho they should not be such as contain'd Heresy condemnable by the Ordi∣nary? May they not caution against a Doct∣rine as Heretical, for which the Ordinary cannot Sentence in order to Death? The Punishment of Heresy at the Time, when this Statute was in force, was Fire: Suppose the Bishop oblig'd by this Law now, yet he
could not punish such Heresy as was within it, but upon a contumacious Adherence of the Offending Party to his Opinion. Do's it follow from thence, that the Ʋniversity may not Censure other Words, which do not strictly come within the Statute, as Impious and Heretical? Nor reprimand one of her own Members for using 'em? But this is a Debate upon Suppositions on∣ly, and those utterly false. For Coke him∣self tells us, in the First words of the very Sentence quoted by the Dean, that the Act extended only to the High-Commissioners, which were appointed by the King in pur∣suance of it. So that if the Dean had Print∣ed the whole sentence, as it lies in my Lord Coke, he would not have been capable of raising so much as the shadow of an Argu∣ment from it. How this agrees with the Common Rules of sincerity; the Dean, who understands how to reconcile every thing to every thing, may please to tell us; for I dare say, no body else can.
However, take it again as he would have it; and let us see what follows. Because this is a Direction to Bishops in their Dio∣ceses (whereas Coke only says, It may serve for a good Direction to 'em, in so weighty a Cause; and so, That's not very fairly quot∣ed neither) because this is a Direction to the Ordinary; therefore, What! Therefore, you had best consider, how You have observ'd that Law, which does not concern You! O the Power of No-Logic and No-Law, met together! As he clips Coke's Opinion, so he maims the very Paragraph of the Act of Parlia∣ment, upon which he founds his imply'd Menace. For, as it lies in the Act, it is a Restraint of the Power, which the High-Commissioners were to have, by Vertue of the King's Letters Patents, and of that Act. The words are, by Vertue of this Act, and these he omits. Now this Proviso implies, that, if the Proviso had not been added, the General Purview had given them a
greater Latitude and Power; for otherwise the Proviso had been useless. The General Purview, giving a Power to exercise Ecclesi∣astical Jurisdiction, it must be suppos'd, that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction might declare and punish other Heresys, than what are mention'd in the Proviso; and the Proviso's being restrain'd only to those Commission∣ers, shews, that the Law-Makers thought other Heresys might be declar'd and pun∣ish'd, than what are there mention'd: Tho they would not permit These Commissioners to declare any other. But further, If there be a Repeal of the Clause which enacts the High-Commission-Court, (as there is by the 17 Car. 1. Cap. 11.) the Proviso, in restraint of these Commissi∣oners, is, and must be Repeal'd too. This Na∣tural Reason and Common sense might have taught the Dean, without his resorting to the Temple Library, or consulting his Men of Skill about the matter. For either that power of Erecting an High-Commissi∣on-Court
was in affirmance of the Com∣mon-Law, or introductive of a New Law. If the former, as was Argu'd in the last Reign; yet, even then, this proviso being restrain'd to such Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by Letters Patents by Vertue of that Act; the same can never extend to o∣ther Ordinary Acts, or Exercise of Juris∣diction, without a special Commission, be∣cause the words have so restrain'd it. And if the Power of that Court were New, and Created by that Act, as all the Dean's Lawyers do, and must contend; then the Court being gone, the Proviso in restraint of it is vanish't too. So that at last here is no 1 Eliz. cap. 1. left for the Ʋniversity to consider; and the Dean has dealt with Them, as the World often has with Him; has thrown away his Advice upon 'em to no purpose. It is News to Me, Sir, and will be so to the World, I believe, what you tell me, with regard to the Reprimand, suppos'd to have
been given lately to the Ʋniversity. It has been talk'd very confidently of here in Town, as a thing past Dispute, and the Dean, I assure you, has taken Heart upon't, and (according to his way) defi'd all the World more than once from the Pulpit in the strength of it. And  send me word, That it does not at all  the Meet∣ing of the Heads of Houses, or of the Ʋniversity, that any such Reprimand, so much talk't of here, has been sent: And this, you say, I may de∣pend upon, as certain. You surprize me, Sir, and I believe what I am going to say, will as much surprise You. You tell me, that it is taken for granted at Oxford, that the Judges of England have giv∣en their Opinions in Prejudice of the Ʋniver∣sicy, and their Proceedings. You may be aftured, that this Report, as loud and as largely spread as it is, is scanda∣lous and groundless. You may be assur'd of it, I say, both from the known Law of the Realm, and from the known Honour and Pro∣bity
also of the Persons filling those Places. For by our Law, the Judges are not to give any O∣pinion out of Court, upon any Matter, that may possibly come before 'em in Judgment; and if they do, 'tis an Irregularity in their Behavi∣our; an Indecency, seldom committed, but never own'd. For such Opinions, being Ex∣trajudicial, are not upon their Oaths; and are neither obligatory to themselves, nor valu'd by others. 'Tis a Reproach upon the King to sup∣pose their Opinion ask'd in this case. Many of 'em, I am sure, when requested by Ministers, upon greater occasions than this, have refus'd to give it, as in Justice and Honour it became 'em; and would therefore, if they should have been ask't upon this, have certainly de∣ny'd it. Shipmony, and Non-obstante's, and Quo∣warranto's had some such Preliminary Interro∣gatories about Opinions; but Experience tells us, that the Nation would not bear it: Besides, These Gentlemen now on the Bench are not quite so Dependent on the Crown, as the Bene∣placito Men were. 'Tis true, they are bound to advise the King, when requir'd: But that cannot be concerning an Act already done by the Subject, whether
Lawful or Criminal? For in these Cases the King hath his Serjeant, his Attorny, Sollicitor, and other Counsel, Learned in the Law, to ad∣vise w. You may depend upon't therefore, that no∣thing of that Nature can have been done or attempted, as peremptory as the Dean's Crea∣tures have been upon  ccasion. So that, upon the whole, think you need not sneak to any Socinian, Tritheist, or Latitudina∣rian whatever, upon the account of the evil Con∣sequences that may attend your Conduct in this matter. Fools and Cowards may blame you for having gone so far; but with Wife and Honest Men, your only Fault will be, if you go no farther. Sir, I might enlarge upon the Powers and Priviledges of the Ʋniversity, in respect of de∣claring Doctrines to be Erroneous; and I could find Materials enough from good Histories, Re∣ports, and Journals, and those approv'd by Lawyers, for that purpose: But at present, I think it enough to have answer'd the Dean, till he shall be pleas'd to give further occasion by Writing about Law Points again. I am, Sir, Your most humble Servant. Feb. 3. 1695.
