S4612 16976054 105588
Some short but necessary Animadversions on the Paper delivered to Dr. Haw∣kins, together with a Copy of the Paper it self entituled, The Confession of Ed∣ward Fitz-Harris, Esq written with his own Hand, and delivered, &c. Reprinted from the Copy published by the Doctor, and these Animadversions added to prevent the deluding of Protestants by it. ALL that have heard of the Execution of Fitz-Harris, and of the Paper he left with Dr. Haw∣kins, are undoubtedly curiously inquisitive after the sight of it; it is therefore thus printed in a Half Sheet, for the convenience of dispersing them throughout the Kingdom. But I durst not make this Publication, without taking notice of the Incredibility of some passages in it, for I do not know the Attestors. But admitting Fitz-Harris did leave this Paper, and the Attestations be true, it doth not therefore follow the Narrative it self is true, I leave any man to judge whether the second Paragraph looks like the drawing up of such a Layman as Fitz-Harris, or not rather like the work of a Churchman. Those that know our present Sheriffs, know them to be Men of more Prudence and Honesty, than he would suggest them to be; and as for our Recorder, he is known to be too good a Christian to swear at that rate, and too wise a man to tell such a Fellow that The Libel was a Court Trick; nor can he be thought so ridiculous as to tell him, Do you say a thing, and we have those that will swear it. But the truth is, the whole Contrivance is so foolish, that no wise man will believe it. Notwithstanding his so solemn declaring and protesting his Paper to be true, yet the whole Kingdom can give him the Lie in one passage, viz. where he tells us, that the Sheriffs brought Instructions, which they said came from the Lords and Commons, who met that day in order to address the King in his behalf; when all men know the Parliament was not sitting during his Imprisonment in Newgate, (where onely the Sheriffs came to him) nor did they meet till several days after he was sent to the Tower. Now when he is so easily con∣tradicted herein, who will believe the rest? It was reported it would come out by order of Council, but that proving false, we may well suspect the Story it self, there being so many Shams now abroad. The Confession of Edward Fitz-Harys Esq Written with his own Hand, and delivered to . Hawkins Minister of the Tower, the First of July, 1681. being the day of his Exe∣cution, together with his last Speech. I Edward Fitz Harys, having been indicted of High Treason, for endeavouring to dethrone the King was thereupon found Guilty, and Sentence of Death passed upon me. I the aforesaid Edward Fitz-harys do voluntarily and freely, without any hopes to save my life, but as a dying Man, and to discharge my Conscience towards God, and for the better satisfaction of the World, make this Declaration following, in the presence of God, and unto Doctor Francis Hawkins, Chaplain of the Tower of London. I do profess and declare my Religion in the general to be that which hath been truly and anciently delivered in the first Four General Councils; and in particular, my belief is that true Faith of a Christian, briefly contained in those three Creeds commonly called The Apostles Creed, St. Athanasius's and The Ni∣cene Creeds: And I die a Member, and in the Communion of Christs Holy Catholick Church, hoping for Mercy through the alone Merits of the Passion of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. I do also confess and declare, as to the Crimes which I die for, I was no further concerned in the Libel, than as employed to give the King notice of what Libels, or other Accusations there were against him; and to this intent, and no other, I en∣deavoured to get this Libel which at length I did from Mr. E∣verard, all written under his own hand and carried it to Mrs. Wall, by whose means I conveyed all Matters of this or the like nature o the King. I told her I had a Business of great consequence to acquaint the King with: but she answered me. That my Lord Sunderland being out, there would be no money had for Secret Service, and advised me to go to the Ld. Clarendon or Hyde: but before I could do this, I was taken. As for that part of the Libel which I left with Everard, as a Pledge to assure him I would not betray him, I received it of the Lord Howard: And the Money I received from the King, was for bringing a libel called The King unvail'd, and the Lady Portsmouths Articles. I call God to Witness, I never had a Farthing charity from the King. I do further confess and declare, That the Lord Howard told me of a Design to seize upon the Kings Person, and to carry him into the City, and there their Desires. Heyns and my self were privy to this design, and had several Meetings with the Lord Howard; and as an Encou∣ragement, the Lord Howard assured us of breaking the Settle∣ment of Ireland, taking off the Additional Revenue of the Bish∣ops, Forty nine Men, and Grantees, whose Estates were to be shar'd amongst the Party. I do confess and declare. That while I was in Newgate, the Sheriffs Bethel and Cornish, came to me, with a Token from the Lord Howard, which I knew to be true, and brought Heads with them from Everard, wherein he accused me of being a Court Emissary, or Yorkist, put on by the King to put the Li∣bel into Protestant Houses to trepan them. But I declare upon my death I had no such intent, nor do I know any such thing: The Sheriffs likewise told me I was to be tryed within three or four days, that the People would Prosecute me, and the Par∣liament would impeach me, and that nothing would save my life but discovering the Popish Plot: and then the Sheriffs a∣foresaid gave me great encouragement from the Lord Howard, that if I would declare I believed so much of the Plot as amounted to the introducing the R. C. or if I could find out any that could Criminate the Queen, R. H. or make so much as a plausible Story to confirm the Plot, that the Parliament would restore me to my fathers Estate, with the Profits thereof since his Majesties Restauration. I finding my self in the condition I was, in Newgate Fettered, Monyless and Friendless, my Wife ready to Lye-in, without any subsistence, my Children in a mi∣serable condition, and must needs be in a worse my death, and I could see no other Refuge for life but complying with them, so, not with ambitious intent, but to save my life I did comply: The Sheriffs brought instructions which they said came from the Lords and Commons, who met that day in order to Address to the King in my behalf, if I should confirm the Instru∣ctions; and they made use of the Lord Shaftsbury's Name, and others, what Advantage I might have thereby. At the first I made a formal Story concerning the Plot, which was not pre∣judicial
to any body, but most relating to general heads known publickly; upon which Mr. Cornish told me, these were things cried about the Streets two years ago: I replied, I could say no more: Mr. Sheriff said, he was sorry for me with all his heart, but thought I could say more if I would and pressed me hard to speak to several Heads, unto which unless I spoke, he said, there was no hopes of life: the Heads I was to speak to is what the examination taken by Sir Robert Clayton and Sir George Treby contains, and a great deal more that I did not say then, relating to the Queen, R. H. Earl of Danby, declaring French Pensioners, Lords, Hallifax, Hide, Clarendon, Fevershm, Sey∣mer, and others; the Burning the Fleet, Forts and Govern∣ments in Popish hands, Meal-Tub Plot, Prentices Plot, The Contrivance of the libel on the Lady Portsmouth, being a French Design to destroy Protestants. These and many other Heads were brought me by the Sheriffs. I do farther confess and declare, That Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir George Treby coming to me to examine me, Sir Robert Clay∣ton asked me what I could say concerning Godfrey's Murder? I answered, Something. He replied, it may be I was in a confu∣sion; recollect your self. And what I said concerning Father Patrick, was forced out of me: and what I said concerning him is not true. Sir George Treby was with me three hours, or thereabouts, and pressed to say concerning Godfrey's Death: And said. Unless I could speak to that Murder, I could say no∣thing: Whereupon, I said something I had from others. He ask∣ed me, if I could say no more? I replyed, Is not this enough to save my Life? Am I not Rogue enough? The Recorder hereupon swore Gods wounds. What were you ever but a Rogue? Then the Recorder entred upon the Heads of the Examination: which being done, He told me, All this would not save my life, unless I would speak to the Libel, which was a Court-Trick: And it was not for nothing that I had been so often seen at the Lady Portsmouths. The L. Shaftsbury said, You know more of these matters than any man. Sir George would have me speak to the Consult: that the Duke was at it, the Lords, Belasis, Arundel, and Powis were at it: You have seen them go to it at St. Jame's without doubt they were there: Do you but say it, we have those that will swear it. I do further declare and confess, That what I said against the Queen and the Duke, I was put upon in the matter of Sir Ed∣mundbury Godfrey's Murder: And do further declare, That what I swore against the Earl of Danby: the threatning words that were uttered I did (to the best of my remembrance) hear, but whom they concern'd I could not well know, by what my Lord himself said. And what de Puis told me concerning my Lord of Danby, I believe was spoken out of ill will: And what I said against him, was to stave off my Trial till a Parliament: and they were the more desirous to accuse the Lord Danby of Godfrey's Murder because the Crime of Murder is not inserted in his Pardon. I am sorry for what I said against the Queen, his Royal Highness, and the Earl of Danby: I desire God to forgive me the wrong I did them, and do heartily beg their pardon. I do further declare and protest, That this Confession and Declaration of mine I own sincerely as a dying man, and not to save my life; and I call God and all his Angels to witness the truth of it; and I renounce Mercy at the hands of God Al∣mighty if this be not true. And I do further declare and protest as a dying man, unto James Walmesly, Edward Pattel, and Mary Walmesly, That I have made this Confession and Declaration unto Dr. Hawkins, freely and of my own voluntary accord, without any manner of pro∣mise made, or hopes given me by him from the King, of saving my life by this Confession; I having given him to understand before hand, they were matters of consequence, and such as chiefly concern'd the good of the King and Kingdom. I give the Doctor my hearty thanks for all his Prayers, Coun∣sels, and Charitable Offices he hath done me, and I pray God to bless him for ever for it. I forgive all the world, and desire all the world to forgive me; and the Lord have mercy on my Soul. Edward Fitz-Harys. This Protestation was made by Mr. Fitz-Harys, July 1. between the hours of 7 and 8 in the morning, in the presence and hearing of us whose Names are here-un∣der written. James Walmesly. Edward Pattel. Mary Walmesly. I Do hereby declare, That Mr. Fitz-Harys, before he began to write any part of this Narrative, was more than once, assured by me, that there was no hope of his Life that I knew of, whatever he should say; nor of his Salvation, if he should say any thing that he knew to be false: of which he being through∣ly sensible, and perfectly convinced, proceeded to write the Narrative aforesaid. And I continuing to admonish him upon every point that was material, not to say any thing but what was exactly true, he took occasion, at several periods of his Narrative, to kneel down, and solemnly to Protest the Truth of every word therein contained. And this I do again declare upon the Faith of a Christian, and the word of a Minister of the Gospel. Francis Hawkins. Mr. Fitz-Harris's Speech at his Execution at Tyburn, July 1. 1681. GOod People, This Infamous kind of Death is much more irksome to me, than Death it self: Such a Judgment as this my Sins against God may justly bring upon me, and I do most humbly submit unto it. But as to the Crimes which I now die for, I take God to wit∣ness, I was no further concerned in the Libel, than to discover to the King what Practices of that kind were a∣gainst him, being employed for that end, though those that employed me refused to do me Justice at my Tryal. And I call God to Witness, I never had a Farthing of Money of the King in my Life, but on the Account of the like Service. And as to the Witnesses that have sworn against me, I do here solemnly declare, now at my Death, That I have not seen the French Ambassador since the beginning of the breaking out of the Plot, neither have I had any Acquaintance with him. And as to his Confessor, I never spoke with him in my life; neither have I had any dealing, either directly or indirectly in my life with them, though Sir William Waller and the rest swore most falsly to the contrary. And how like it is that the French Ambassador would give Three Thou∣sand Crowns for writing that Libel, I leave the World to judge. What I might further declare, I have left with Dr. Hawkins. I forgive all the World, and do hope that God will forgive me. I beg the Prayers of all good People for a happy Passage into the other World. Edw. Fitz-Harys. London, Printed for Richard Janeway, 1681.
