S5845 13770137 101739
A Strange and wonderfull DISCOVERY Of a horrid and cruel MURTHER Committed fourteen years since, upon the Person of Robert Eliot of London, at Great Driffield in the East-Riding of the County of York. Discovered in September last by the frequent Apparitions of a Spirit in several shapes and habits unto Isabel Binnington, the Wife of William Binnington, the now Inhabitants in the house where this most execrable murther was committed. Together with the Discourse that passed between the Spirit and the said Isabel Binnington after its first appearing. Taken upon Oath at the Examination of the said Isabel, before Sir Thomas Rennington Knight, and Thomas Crompton, Esq two of His Majesties Justices of Peace for that Riding, Septemb. 2. 1662. Printed in the year 1662.
The Examination of Isabel Binnington of Great Driffield, aged 28 years, or there∣abouts, taken by Sir Thomas Renning∣ton Knight, and Tho. Crompton Esq two of His Majesties Justices of the Peace for the East-Riding, the second day of September Anno Dom. 1662. Com. Ebor. THe Examinant sworn and examin∣ed, saith, That she and her Hus∣band William Bennington came to the house where she now dwels (being the house of one Mr. Belt of Hull) about the beginning of June last, And saith, that in that house on the 23. of August last, as she was sitting by her fire-side, having also a Candle lighted by her, betwixt the hours of 8 and 9 at night there appeared unto her a Spirit having long flaxen hair in green cloaths, and bare-footed, and without a hat; she conceived that it was some wan∣dering person that might have come for Lodging, and thereupon asked it, saying, what art thou? and what
wouldest thou have? Thereupon it removed some∣what nearer unto her: then she begun to be sore affrighted, and said, In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy-Ghost, If thou wouldest have any thing, speak, Then it said, Fourteen years have I wan∣dered in this place, suffering wrong three times, and seven years I have to wander, twenty one years is my time, then it went (as she supposed) into the par∣lour, and came again about a quarter of an hour after and said, be thou not affraid of me, I will never hurt thee, and thou shalt never want, then it vanisht glide∣ing away without any motion of steps. It had appear∣ed to her three times before, First resembling a man, and secondly resembling a boy about twelve years old. On Sunday August the 24. (which was the fifth time that it appeared) it said nothing, nor she to it, it was about eight or nine of the clock at night on Wed∣nesday following, being the 27. at the usual time it ap∣peared to her again in white, like a winding sheet, then she said, In the name of the Father, &c. If thou would∣est have any thing, speak: then it began, My life was taken from me betwixt eight and nine of the clock at night in this place, she asked what place, it answered, in the Chamber, & I received my Grave betwixt twelve and one: and so it went away. On Friday following it appeared to her again about the usual time, and she (being before advised by the next Justice of Peace, to ask it the names of those that murthered it, and its own name, and some other questions) said to it, In the name of the Father, &c. I pray thee tel me thy name, It said my name is Robert Elliot, Then she said, I desire thee to tel me who took thy life: It replied, I was
knock'd in the head fourteen years since in my bed by three women, Mary Burton, Alice Colson the elder, and Anne Harrison. Then she asked it, what were its Sisters names? It said, Kate and Jane. Then she asked it where it was born? It replied within three miles of London at  she is not certain of the Towns name, but she is sure it ends in Ham, on Saturday the 30. in the morning when the Sun was about an hour high, It appeared to her again in white, and then desired that there might be made a bright fire of Coles in the place where she pulled up the stakes and found the bones, then she desired it to tel its Fathers name? To which it replied my Father's name was Jacob Elliot and my Mother's Rebecca, and my Father was a Hackney-Coachman in London. On Sunday the 31. about five of the clock in the afternoon it appeared to her again in white, and said, Blessed be the time that ever this fire was made, and blessed be they that gave con∣sent to the making of it, for the Stake is now as warm at the root in my heart, as my heart was when the Stake was striken through it. On Mon∣day the first of September about ten of the clock in the forenoon it appeared to her again, in the same likeness, and spoke to her to this effect. That he was an Apprentice to a Raft-man, and that he came into the Countrey about his Masters business, and that he came to this house for lodging, and that Mary Burton was very unwilling to lodge him, and that he demanded of her three and twenty pounds, which he had lent her three
years before; and that they had some cross words about it, and that he was killed that very night in his bed, by the said three Women, and that the said Mary Burton took out of his pocket three and twenty shillings in monies, which she gave to her Maid, and two Gold Rings which were his Grandmothers, and one Silver Rings which was his Mothers, and some Writings which concerned his business, which shortly after she carried with her to  (it ends in ham) near London, and by vertue of them she demanded certain things of his Sister which belonged to him, viz. a Rug, worth about four and twenty shillings, and a silver Tankerd, worth about five nobles, which they gave her, and she sold them in Lon∣don: his eldest sister Kate delivered them, It said no more at that time; She observed that it spake altogether the Southern speech. This Examinant also saith, That at one time she desi∣red it that it would speak to others, and it said that until seven years were expired it could not speak with any other, but it would be seen by divers in its own likeness. The Examinant be∣ing further questioned concerning the digging in the place where the murthered Person is supposed to have been buryed, saith, That sweeping in the room, she perceived some loose mold in the floor, and thereupon said to some of her neighbours with her, that there might possibly be some money hid there, but made no further search at that time, but at another time finding a hole in the place she begun to
digg in it with her knife, which casually fell out of her hand into the hole, thereupon she took a piece of a broken dish wherewith she cast up the earth, and made a hole til she came at a Stake of wood, which she pulled up by the half (for it was so rotten that it broke) and burnt it, and digged further til she came at a great stone under which she found certain bones (viz.) A scalp or head; some of the teeth, and other bones, which she supposeth might be of a man. Before the digging in this place she never saw the Spirit, she never knew any of the persons which the Spirit named, nor ever heard of them before. This upon oath. FINIS.
