S664 11354554 47565
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN, In the beginning of the Reign of CHARLS the 5t, Emperor of Germanie, and King of that Nation. Written originally in the Spanish-tongue, by Prudencio de Sandoval, Doctor of Divinitie, and Abbat of the Monasterie of St Isidro el Real, in Valladolid, of the Order of St Bennet, Hisiographr  HILI the Third; never yet Translated, now put into English by Captain J. W. DEUS: PROVIDEBIT IVSTVS VIVET FIDE R·Y LONDON, Printed by William Du Gard▪ and are to bee sold by Iohn Holden in the New Exchange, 1652.
PROGENIES DIVVM QVINTVS SIC CAROLVS ILLE IMPERII CAESAR LVMINA ET ORA TVLIT. AETAT SVAE XXXI. ANN. M.D. XXXI. Impenum oceano: famam qui lerminat astris. ombart Sculpt
To the Honorable, Colonel HERBERT MORLEY ESQUIRE; One of the Members of the High and Hono∣rable Court of PARLAMENT, and of the Council of State; chief Lievtenant of the Countie of Sussex. TO THOMAS CHALONER ESQUIRE; A Member of the High Court of PARLAMENT, nd of the Council of State, &c. And To IAMES CHALONER ESQUIRE; A Member likewise of the said Court of Par∣lament, the Supreme Autoritie of the Three Nations. Noble Gentlemen! I Have long repined that my gratitude should bee limited within the narrow walls of my brest, when your favors that gave it beeing, have daily shewn themselvs in such fresh and frequent testimonies; but it hath now got a little more elbow∣room, and gladly take's occasion to tell the world as
well as you, of my happiness in such a Triumvirate of Patrons; yet in this I may rather seem to have studied a secure convenience, then an ingenuous ac∣knowledgment, since this Historie cannot shroud it self within a safer shelter, then what your accepta∣tion and clear judgment is able to allow it; but you want no Candor, and therefore I no Confidence that you will gently conserv the intentions and endea∣vors of Your humble servant JAMES VVADSVVORTH.
Vpon this Choice and Remarkable piece of Historie. AMong those various delights and advantages which accrew to a Reader of Historie, one is, That no modern accident can seem strange unto him, much less astonish him: Hee scarce can wonder at any thing, in regard hee may remem∣ber to have read of the same, or much like the same, that happened in former times; therefore hee doth not stand staring like a childe at every sudden spectacle, like that simple American, who, the first time hee saw a Spaniard on hors∣back, thought the Man and the Beast to bee but one Creature, and that the hors did chew the Rings of his Bit. Now indeed, not to bee an Historian, that is, Not to know what Forrein Nations, and our Fore-fathers did, Hoc est semper esse puerum, as Cicero saith, this is still to bee a childe, who gazeth at any thing; whence may bee inferred, There is no knowledg that ripen's the judgment, and put's one out of his nonage sooner then Historie. If I had not formerly read the Baron's Wars in England, I had more admired that of the Liguers in France. Hee who read the near upon fourscore years Wars in Low Germanie, never wondred at those thirtie two years late Wars in High Germanie. I had more wondred that Richard of Bourdeaux was knockd down with a halbard, had not I read formerly that Edward of Carnar∣van died of a hot Iron that was thrust up his fundament; It was strange that Murat the great Ottoman Emperor should bee lately strangled in his own Court; yet considering that Osman his predecessor had been knock'd down by an ordinarie slave not many years before, it was not strange at all. The blazing Star in
Virgo, 33 years since, did not seem strange to him who had read of that which appeared in Cassiopéa, and other constellations som years before, and how portentous they proved to poor Mortals. Hence may bee inferred, that among all other kindes of contemplations, Historie may bee called the great Looking Glass, through which wee may see with Ancestrall optiques, not onely the various Actions of men, and odd Accidents of time, but also discern the Constitutions, the Humors, and Genius of Nations. This faithful piece of Storie will displaie the very intrinse∣cals of the Castillian, (who entitle's himself to bee the prime Spaniard) and make that opinion a meer paradox, whereby hee is cried up to bee so constant to his principles, so loial to his Prince, and so conformable to Government: for it will discover as much levitie and tumultuarie passions in him as in other peo∣ple; Which may bee the reason why these Annals were sup∣pressed, and called in, in Spain, yet procur'd by a Gentleman of qualitie and of exquisite knowledg, and now made English, with much exactness and fidelitie; Therefore most worthie of the perusal, beeing a pure maiden-storie, never blown upon hitherto; for to my knowledg shee never travell'd over the Pyrenean Hills, or cross'd the Seas in any language till now. Iames Howell.
TO THE READER. COurteous Reader! if likeness breeds liking, and if in Histories, as in Humane bodies, may bee admitted any Sympathetical ope∣rations, I cannot but promiss my self, that this Narration will not bee unwelcom to your curious eies, in regard it doth punctually relate the no less strange, then rue transactions, betwixt Charles the fift in his Minoritie and his Subjects in Spain, which had so much similitude to divers late passages in this our Nation, that had not those in Castilla had the privilege of many years before us, wee might have been said to have been their pattern, although the suc∣cesses are different. The Autor was a man of no mean eminencie, neither for knowledge or extraction, and who (though somwhat violent in his tearms against the Commonaltie by reason of his dependance on the Court of Spain) wrote so plainly, and with such impartiali∣tie, that all his books were suppressed by especial com∣mand from the King, whose Historiographer hee was, which rendereth the truth of the Historie less questionable: Herein, as in our troubles, you shall finde the Clergie-men on both sides no less busie in distracting peoples mindes, then in fomenting and aggravating their unhappie dissentions: Herein you shall see besides the
policies, and subtile correspondencies betwixt the several Cities of that Countrie, the Statutes and Decrees enacted by the Commissioners or Substitutes of the Commonalties assembled in Parlament, after their King's departure into Germanie, whither they were sent to bee ratified by him, his answer, and their proceedings afterwards. The names of places, as well as men, are left in Spa∣nish, becaus they cannot bee so well rendered in any other language, as in their own, and som terms likewise, whereof though our tongue admitteth not of a simple, and direct version, you shall finde them paraphrastically expounded in the margents, therefore I hope you will not impute this as a fault to the Translator, and in case your more penetrating judgment should discover any other defects, my humble supplication is, that you will not bee a Captious, but a Cautious Reader, and careful of the reputation of him, whose chief aim, in this labor, was to procure you both profit and pleasure, as beeing Your affectionate Servant J. W.
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE FIRST BOOK. SECT. I. IN the year of our LORD 1500, which was (according to the Hebrew account) five thousand four hundred sixtie and one years after the Creation of the World: from the Universal Deluge, three thousand eight hundred and five: from the Coming of Tu∣bal to inhabit, and people the (then desolate) Countrie of Spain, three thousand six hundred sixtie and three: from the Conquest of Cesar, one thousand five hundred thirtie and eight: from the Entrie of the Goths into Spain, one thousand eightie and six: and lastly, from the Dominion of the Moors
in that Countrie, seven hundred eightie and six years, Alex∣ander the sixth then beeing Pope of Rome. The Christian King Don Fernando and Donnia Isabel having reigned twentie seven years, converted the Mezquitas, or Moorish temples, into Chistian Churches, and purged the whole Kingdom of Paganism and Jewish Cerimonies, beeing also the year of Iubilee at Rome: for their comfort, and to drie up the tears which sorrow∣ful Spain ceased not to shed, for the decea of teir Prince, Don Iuan, or Ion, (onely Son to the Catholk King, and Donnia Isabel, his Queen) and he Infanta Donnia Isabel, their eldest Daughter, (who was married to Don Iuan, or Iohn the Second, King of Portugal) in the Citie of Gant, upon the Apostle t Matthias his daie, beeing mundaie 25 Febuarie, was born Charls the fift,The birth of the Emperor Charls the Fift. Emperor and King of Spain, begotten by Don Philip, or Philip, surnamed El Hermoso, or the fair, Arch-Duke of Austria (on to the Emperor Maximilian the First, and Donnia Maia, sole daughter and heir to Charls Duke of Bur∣gundie, who had for her porion, besides the said Dutchie of Burgundie, the Dukedom of Brabant, Flanders, Limbourg, Haynaut▪ Hlland, Artois, Zealand, and Cueldres, with other places thereunto belonging) and Donnia Iuana, second daugh∣ter to the fore-naed Don Fernando and Isabel. The Prince Don Miguel de la paz, son to Don Iuan of Portugal, and Don Fernandos eldest Daughter, Isabel (who by the right of his mo∣ther was to inherite the Crown of Castilla) was yet living, when Charls the Fift came first into the World; the news of whose birth, with the particulars of the place and time, beeing carried into Spain, his grandmother Donnia Isabel (I know not by what prophetick spirit) presently said, Cecidit sors super Mattiam, meaning, that the succession of those Kingdoms should fall upon Charls (who was born upon that Saint's daie) as it did, and hee became the most potent Prince of the Christian World. For Don Miguel de la paz, dying in Julie following, in the same year 1500 the inheritance of the Crowns of Spain descended to Donnia Iuana, mother to the fortunate Prince Don Charls,His title bee∣ing a Child. or Charls, then bearing the ti∣tle of Duke of Luxembourg.
SECT. II. IN the year 1501, the Catholick Queen,Anno 1501. Donia Isabel, of Ca∣stilia beeing fallen into a langushing diseas, and past hopes of ecoverie, shee desired to see Don Philip, and Donnia Iuana (er daughter) before her deceas. Whereupon they took their waie through France, where they were received, and feasted in a Princely manner, by King Lewis the Twelfth, who treated with them concerning the marriage of his Daughter Claudia, to their son Charls. One of the Articles was, That in case the said marriage should not bee consummated trough anie default of the said King of France, the Emperor should invest and settle the Dukedom of Milan upon their son Don Carls Duke of Luxembourg: And it so happened after∣wards, that the said match was broken off by te aid King Lewis, which is a great Plea for the Crown of Spain against the Kings of France, in the pretention of Milan. Beeing ar∣rived at Toledo,Philip the  wrn Pice of Spin. where the Catholick King and Queen exspe∣cted them on Sundaie, 22 Maie (in the Cathedral Church▪ they were sorn Princes of Castilia and Leon:) Don Fernando▪ and Donnia Isabel assisting at the Ceremonie, with the Cardinal Don Diego Hurtao de Mendosa, Don Fray Francisco de Xmenez Archbshop of Toledo; Don Bernardino de Valaso Lord hgh Constable of Castilia and Leon, the Duke del Infantad, Duke of Alva, Duke of Bejar, Duke of Alburquerque, and a mulitude of other noblemen: after which solemnitie the King went to Sa∣ragosa, and the Queen with her Daughter, and Don Philip went to Torisos, Fuenslida, Cas Rubios, and thece to Madrid; from whence,The brth of he Ifante Frdinand. after om time, Donnia Iuana went to Alcala de Henaes, where shee was brought to bed of the Infante Don Ferdinando, or Ferdinand hee was baptized with exceeding great solemnitie, by the Arch Bishop of Toldo; the Duke of Naxara and the
Earl of Villena were his Godfathers, and Madame de Luin his Godmother. Which Ceremonie beeing past, and Donnia Iuana throughly recovered, shee and her husband (whose presence was most earnestly desired in Flanders) repaired both thither, by the waie of France; And beeing at the Ci∣tie of Lyons, hee concluded the Peace betwixt his father Max∣imilian the Emperor, Don Fernando King of Spain, and Lewis the French King, who again moved him about marrying the Duke of Luxembourg with his daughter Clavia, who was to inherit the Dukedom of Britanie, yet hee was the first oc∣casion of breaking that agreement. SECT. III. Anno 1505.IN the year 1505, a Parlament beeing call'd at the Citie of Toro, in presence of the King Don Fernando, with all the Grandees of the Kingdom,The death of Isabel Queen of Spain. and the Commissioners or Burgesses (Donnia Isabel the Queen beeing deceased at Medina del Campo) the Princess Donnia Iuana, then beeing in Flanders, was de∣claed Queen of Castilia and Leon, and her son Don Carles heir and successor after her to those Kingdoms, which pacified divers turbulent pirits, and stopt the current of manie trou∣bles and mischiefs, that was like to overflow that Countrie. This news was brought to Donnia Iuana, then newly brought to bed of the Infanta Donnia Maria, who was after∣ward married to the unfortunate King of Bohemia, Lewis son to Uladislaus; after whose death shee was Governess of Flanders for manie years, and proved nothing inferior to her Brother in courage, and other princely endowments, onely shee was a woman: Don Philip remaining still in Flanders with his Queen, there grew such differences betwixt him and Don Fernando,Ferdinand's design to get the Kingdom of Castilia to himself. that finding an advantage in their absence, Don Fernando sent Don Rodrigo Manrique his Embassador to the King of Portugal, desiring him to give in marriage La Ex∣celente,
otherwise called La Vltraneja, thinking by virtue of her right, and his powerful assistance, to oppose Don Philip, and make himself King of Castillia (which argued no less weakness then Ambition in the Catholick King.) But the King of Portugal was so discreet, as not to satisfie his desires, ad although hee had given his consent La Veltraneja would never have condescended thereunto, for besides that shee was well stricken in years, shee was altogether given to her devo∣tion, and valued not the vanitie of anie earthly Crowns. Having received this repuls, hee agreed with Lewis King of France, that hee should make the match betwixt him and Madam Germana, daughter to Gaston de Foix, and to the said French King's sister, which was concluded upon this condition; That King Lewis, in stead of her Dowrie, should grant and pass over to Don Fernando the right which hee pretended to the kingdom of Naples, and that if the Queen should die be∣fore him without issue, hee should succeed and inherit the same title; but if shee should survive Don Fernando, that Lewis should repossess the said claim: These Articles beeing con∣firmed, they made a Peace betwixt France and Spain, for a hundred and one years, (but it scarce continued so manie weeks) and Don Iuan de Silva Earl of Cifuentes, with the Vice-Chancellor of Aragon went into France, to attend and con∣duct her Majestie into Castillia. SECT▪ IV. THe Castillians in mean time, beeing very desirous to have their Natural Sovereign amongst them, impor∣tuned by frequent messages and invitations, Donnia Iuana and her husband to return, and bring their Children with them into Spain. Whereupon Don Philip having provided a Fleet for the purpose, they departed Flanders, leaving the Prince Don Carles under the care and tuition of the Emperor
Maximiliano and Donnia Margarita, widdow to the Duke of Savoye; and at last (though tossed with much storm and tempests by the waie) they landed safe at the Groyne in Gali∣cia. Don Fernando hearing of their arrival went to meet them, be∣twixt La Puebla de Sanabria and Asturianos. This interview oc∣casioned no small discontent betwixt these Princes; for Kings will admit of no competitors, or Companions (no not of their own chldren) in matters of Government and Command. Whereupon Don Fernando (forsaken by all, but onely the Duke of Alva and the Earl of Altamira with som few others) took his waie to Villafafila, and Tordesillas, and King Philip with his Queen to Venauente, attended by all the Nobles and flower of Castillia, besides strangers, to the number of above two thou∣sand hors. One caus of their discord was about the title and inscription of Commissions, Patents and other dispatches Roial, which at last was determined, and agreed, that all things should pass in the names of Don Fernando, Don Philip, and Donnia Iuana: But this style was soon altered by the un∣exspected dath of Don Philip, which hapned at Burges: hee had but seven daies of sickness (which was thought to bee a surfeit) and past from this life to the eternal on fridaie the fifth of September,The death f Philp the Fair Duke of Bur∣gudie▪ an A-Duke of Austi. anno 0, beeing aged but twentie eight years, and having enjoied the Kingdom of Castillia a year and ten moneths, lacking one daie; hee commanded that his heart should bee carried to Bruxels, his bodie to Gra∣nada, and his bowels to remain there. His death was much lamented by the Emperor his Father; for, besides that hee was his onely son, hee was one of the handsomest men of his time, therefore hee was called Philip the Fair; and the no∣bleness of his minde was answerable to the feature of his bodie. Donnia Iuana his Queen was so sensible of his loss, that with the extremitie of sorrow, and her incessant weep∣ing,An old wo∣man's Prophe∣cie of him. shee became in a manner distracted. An old woman in Galicia seeing him at his landing, and beeing told who hee was, said, That hee should bee a longer time, and travel more leagues in Castillia, beeing dead then living; which
proved so; for the Queen carried his bodie with her, from place to place,What Chil∣dren. Hee left. and would not suffer it to bee buried for ma∣nie years after. Hee left two sons, Don Carles, and Don Fer∣nando, both Emperors; and three daughters, all mightie Queens: Donnia Leonor first reigned in Portugal, and after∣wards was married to the King of France: Donnia Catalina was wife to Don Iohn the Third, King of Portugal, Aunt, and Mother-in-law to Philip the Second of Spain: And Donnia Maria had for her husband Lewis King of Bohemia and Hun∣garia. SECT. V. IN mean time Don Fernando, beeing married to the Queen Germana, and distasted in Castillia, retired himself into Ara∣gon; from thence beeing upon his ournie to Naples, the Ca∣stillins gave him notice of Don Philip's death, and of the ne∣cesitie that there was of his Roial presence; but hee refused to return, beeing incensed against som of them for their ingra∣titude to him. By the death of Don Philip, and the absence of King Fernando, divers tumults and seditions arose in the kingdom, the people refusing to obeie the Magistrates and Of∣ficers of Justice; and the Nobles wanted not factions and partialities amongst them to trouble and disquiet the Coun∣trie, and almost everie Citie throughout the Kingdom was infected with the same contagion: Som crying up Charls, or Don Carles; others Fernando; no small number stood for Maximiliano, but verie few made anie mention of Donnia Iuana, who, whether out of a sens of her own disabilitie, or overcom with melancholie for her husbands deceas, had re∣tired her self at Tordesillas, refusing to govern or trouble her head with State-affairs. Whereupon, with the consent of most part of the Peers and Nobles of the Realm, the Cardi∣nal Ximenez Don Bernardino de Velasso Lord high Constable, and
Don Pedro Manrique Duke of Naxara took upon them the administration of Government for the present; they made Don Alonso Suarez Bishop of Iaen, President of their Council, assisted by Doctor Tello, el Licenciado Polanco, and other learn∣ed Lawyers. They called a Parlament, wherein they or∣dered to send to Don Fernando, desiring him in the name of the Queen and the whole Kingdom to return, and under∣take the Government for his Daughter and Grandchilde. Which hee, beeing more readie to accept then they to offer, did not refuse, but returned answer, that having setled the business which had called him to Naples, hee would satisfie their desires: And after som time, leaving Don Iuan de Ara∣gon Earl of Ribagorsa, his Vice-Roy, hee embarqued himself for Spain with his Queen Germana, Don Gonsalo Fernandez de Cordova, commonly called the gran Capitan, and a great train of Spanish Gentlemen that attended him in his voiage. Beeing arrived at Valentia, the Queen Donnia Iuana went to meet him, whom hee received with signs of much affecti∣on and fatherlie tenderness, which shee answered with all the honor and due obedience that could bee exspected from an observant Daughter; for although the excess of sorrow had weakned her intellectual faculties, yet shee never lost her respect to her Father, but paied him with all humilitie and filial dutie; neither was shee ever heard to utter anie mis becoming words, which is common to people tainted with her infirmitie. The eighth of October the King and Queens came to Arcos, where Donnia Iuana desiring to staie, Don Fernando went with his Court to Burges, leaving her a good number of Noblemen and Ladies, besides guards, suitable to the dignitie of her person. Som years after, Don Fernando left the troubles of this transitorie life to enjoie the quietness and bliss of the eternal,The manner of King Fer∣dinand's death. in the sixtie fourth year of his age, having reigned and governed as King, fourtie two years compleat. Som saie it was the Dropsie that brought him to his end; others report, that his young Queen, to quicken his Spirit, and thaw the ice that contracted the
blood in his aged veins, gave him a certein provocative po∣tion; which, instead of raising a part, cast the whole bodie into the grave. After his death, arose manie differences amongst the Grandees concerning the Government. Adriano (Dean of Lovain, and Tutor to Don Carles) produced a Commissi∣on, which the young Prince had given him to succeed Don Fernando in the Government, until his coming into Spain; this was opposed by Cardinal Ximenez,Dispute about the Govern∣ment of the Kingdom. who alleged, that by virtue of his Catholick Majestie's last Will and Testament, hee was to bee Governor of the Kingdom, until the Prince should com himself, or give som special order to the contrarie▪ that Adriano's Commission was dated long before Don Fer∣dinando's deceas, therefore not valeable; besides, that hee was a foreigner, which was sufficient reason to bar his preten∣sions. But at last they agreed to govern both together, until they received further order from Don Carles. This joint-Government continued a great while, during which time, several Grandees of the Kingdom were much discontented, and murmured, that a Frier, and a stranger (in a manner of the same stamp) should bee raised to such a height above them, as to rule and command the whole Kingdom, and them: they alleged that Don Fernando had no power to sub∣stitute, or appoint anie one to administer the Government of that kingdom, in regard that since the Catholick Queen's death, hee was not King, but onely Governor thereof himself: and that considering Donnia Iuana would not undergo the trouble of the Crown, according to the Laws of that and, they agreed that the Duke del Infantado▪ the Lord High-Coun∣stable, and the Earl of Venavente should examine the Cardinal, by what autoritie and power hee took upon him to bee Governor of those kingdoms: Whereunto hee boldly made them answer, By the Power of his Catholick Majestie: And they replying, that the Catholick King had no autoritie o to do,Resolute car∣iage and an∣swer of Car∣dinal Ximene to the Nobles o Spain. hee led them to a brest-work, which hee had made about the hous where hee then lodged, and shewed them a great rank of Artillerie, commanding his servants to discharge them
all; which don, hee told them, this is the power by which I do, and will govern Spain, until the Prince our Lord com to take charge of it himself: they were not very well satis∣fied with this answer, neither did that manner of discours bode anie good to the Kingdom. Notwithstanding the op∣positions and murmurations of the Grandees and others in Castillia, the Cardinal continued at the helm in despight of all, until his Majestie's coming into Spain,Charls the Fi's coming into Spain. which was anno 1517. At which time, the Cardinal finding himself indisposed, was retired into a Monasterie of his own Order at Aquilera; whi∣ther his Majestie (beeing received at Valladolid) sent him a letter, thanking him for his former services, and requiring him to repair with those of the Council to Mojados, where hee might consult with him concerning the present settling of his affairs; after which hee should bee eased of the weigh∣tie burthen of that troublesom emploiment, and have liber∣tie to solace and retire himself. This Letter was said to bee penned by the Bishop Mota, who (envious of the Car∣dinal's power, and studying nothing more then which waie to eclips his greatness) perswaded his Majestie to write to him in those terms; which his Eminence having perused, it struck him into a high distemper; and the violent passion of his minde, joined with the infirmitie of his bodie, in∣creased his fever, in such manner, that hee rendred his soul into the Creator's hands within eight daies after, and was buried at Alcala de Henares,Crdinal Xi∣mes buried at Alcala, anno 1517. in the College of St Illefonso, where∣of hee was Founder. After whose death, the Arch-Bishoprick of Toledo was given to Guillermo de Croüy, Bishop of Cambray, and nephew to Monsieur de Xeures, his Majesties chief favorite, which bred no small discontent amongst the Castillians, seeing the principal Jewel of their kingdom bestowed upon a foreigner.Som were of opinion that hee was poi∣soned. Yet the general report was, that the Marquis of Villena, with other Grandees of Castillia, desired and earnestly importuned his Majestie so to do; and that of himself hee had no such Intention, neither did Monsieur de Xeures ever mention it: And, it is not to bee thought, that those Noble∣men
tooke pleasure in seeing anie stranger advanced above them in their own Countrie; But they were induced here∣unto, out of hopes to ingratiate themselvs thereby to the Fle∣mings, and chiefly to Xeures, who had the King's ear above anie at that time. Such is the force and power of over-sway∣ing Ambition, which so bastardiseth, and adulterate's the hearts even of Noble-men, that they will descend, or stoop to anie thing,Charls the Fift's age when hee was received into Spain. to currie favor with a Prince's Minion. Don Carles at that time, could not reckon above seventeen years and a half at most, from his Nativitie, which was a verie tender age, to undergo so weightie a charge, as was that of ruling so ma∣nie, and so considerable Countries; especially, those of Spain, where, according to their Laws and Customs, it never had been seen, that a Youth so young, and one that had been born and bred in foreign parts should sit in their King's Throne. Hee understood no Spanish, neither was hee acquainted with the inclinations, and dispositions of the people: therefore (al∣though hee was verie ingenuous,His Dispositi∣on. and of as excellent and sweet a nature, as could bee desired in a truly Christian Prince) hee could do no less then suffer himself to bee advised, and guided by som of more mature years and experience. And having been bred and tutored from his infancie,Who Xeures was. by Guillermo de Croüy Lord of Xeures (who was Duke of Sora, in the king∣dom of Naples, and afterwards Duke of Arschot in Brabant, a man of ripe age, solid Judgment, and eminent parts an∣swerable to his birth, beeing descended of the illustrious stock of the Kings of Hungarie, and recommended to bee his Governor, by his Grandfather Maximilian the Emperor) hee committed himself with the management of all State-affairs, wholly to his wisdom; and Xeures in matters concerning Spain, (beeing a stranger to that Countrie) was led by Ma∣estro Mota, a Native of Burgos, Bishop of Badajos, and som other Castillians, who were more ambitious then virtuous.
SECT. VI. AFter the reception of the Prince Don Carles in Valladolid, (which was most splendid and magnificent) all the Procuradores del Reyno, or the Commissioners of the Kingdom, were summoned to assemble in Parlament; wherein the Ca∣stillians were highly distasted, becaus the Lord Chancellor (a Fleming) assisted as President for his Highness, and that other strangers were admitted to sit in Parlament; Som of the Com∣missioners took the oath of Allegeance to his Highness,Differeces about the ac∣knowledging of Chals, King of Spain. as King; others refused to acknowledg him to bee their King, as long as his Mother Donnia Iuana was living, (who was right heir to the Crown) and that hee first should swear to maintein and observ the fundamental Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; especially, that no Offices, or places of Be∣nefit or Trust, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal, should bee conferred upon anie, that were not Natives of that Countrie; But at last, all beeing agreed, both the Grandees and Commis∣sioners of the kingdom took the Oath; the Cerimonie was in this manner:The form of swearing Al∣legeance to him. On Sundaie the 7th of Februarie, 1518, the Prince accompanied by all the Embassadors, and Nobles of his Do∣minions, having heard Mass in St Paul's Church at Valladolid, was seated in a chair before the Altar, and Adriano, Cardinal of Tortosa, holding the Evangelists in his hands, Don Garzia de Padilla read with a loud voice the contents of the Oath; which don, the Infante Don Fernando swore first upon the book, then went to kiss the King's hand; but the King refusing to give his hand, embraced him, and laid his cheek to his brother's; After that the Infante took his Sister Donnia Leoner by the hand, and led her to swear, and afterwards to kiss his Ma∣jestie's hand, but the King arose, and kissed her cheek, then they passed on the King's right hand, and Don Fernando stood close to his chair bare headed. Immediately came the Infante
of Granada, with the Arch-Bishop of Santiago, the Bishop of Granado and other Prelates to take the Oath; after them fol∣lowed the Grandees, and Nobles there present, to whom the Infante Don Fernando held the Book: Don Garzia read the Oath to the Nobles, and likewise to the Commissioners of the seve∣ral Cities; who having sworn, went all to kiss his Majestie's hand. After all which, the King swore upon the same holy Evangelists,The Oath  took. to keep and fulfil all, and everie thing, and Arti∣cle, which hee had promissed, and agreed of with the Com∣missioners. Moreover was added, if at anie time it should pleas God to restore the Queen Donnia Iuana, his mother, to her perfect health and abilitie, to rule her Kingdom, that hee should desist from the Government, and that onely shee should reign; That in all Writings, Letters, Commissions or pub∣lick Acts whatsoëver, during the said Donnia Iuana's life, her name should bee set in the first place, and then his: And that hee should bee styled onely Prince of Spain. This don, Te Deum laudamus was sung with great solemnitie, and varietie of musical Instruments. The Commissioners of the Kingdom, beeing all assembled in Valladolid, made a very discreet speech to the King, in an∣swer to that which the Bishop of Badajos, and Don Garzia de Padilla had propounded in his Majestie's name, intimating, that amongst themselvs, they should seriously consider, and weigh those things which were important to the good preservation and increasing of those kingdoms. The Commissio∣ners desired with very valid and good reasons, That his Majestie would put in execution the holie and Catholick Pro∣positions, which hee had expressed in favor of his kingdom, and the Subjects thereof. And that they might enjoie the fruit of his so virtuous and holie desires, they came to put him in minde, how, by a decree and express order from Heaven hee was chosen, and called to bee King, whose of∣fice was to govern well, and to govern well was to administer Iustice, giving to everie one that which is his; and they desired that his chief ends and in∣tention
might tend thereunto; for although Kings do possess divers other qualities and things recommendable, as their linage, dignities, power, honor, riches, delights, estimation, &c. none of all these make a King according to right, but onely the ad∣ministring of Iustice; And for this onely, and in the name thereof the holie Ghost hath said, That kings do reign; That Iu∣stice and the ruling therewith, do require, that when the Subjects sleep, their kings should watch. And that it was his part so to do, for in effect hee was as an hireling to his Subjects: for that caus did they give him part of their fruits and estates, and serv him with their persons, if (need requiring) it bee his pleasure to call them: That by a certain tacit contract the King is obliged to do Iustice to his people; which is a thing of such excellencie and Dignitie, that God hath made it one of his own attributes, calling himself the Iust Iudg; that God, beeing so great a friend, and lover of Iustice, would likewise bee a friend to him that should bee careful in preserving and administring thereof. That the charge of him that is to judg, beeing of such high importance, hee whom God hath called to manage a Scepter, hath need of som assistant; there∣fore it is necessarie that the King should have som inferior Ministers, that may bear a part of that weightie burthen and incessant cares, which accompanie the Roial dignitie, the supream Power still remaining in his own hands. That a good King ought to choos and seek out such men for his Ministers, as Moses did, when hee received a command from God to elect seventie and two men out of his people, who might assist him in the Government, and eas him of a part of the care and troubles, wherewith hee was surchard: those men were to bee wise, of mature years, fearing God, enemies to Covetousness and all other passions, which may blinde and pervert the understanding. That although they doubted not to finde all these perfections in his highness, yet they humbly desired him to ratifie the ensuing Articles. 1. That the Queen Donnia Iuana, his mother, might have a Court, and attendants suitable to the Dignitie of her person,
as beeing the Queen and Ladie proprietarie of those King∣doms: whereunto hee answered That hee thanked them, and assured them that hee had nothing in greater recommen∣dation, then what concerned that particular, as they should finde by effects. 2. That hee would bee pleased to marrie with what con∣venient speed might bee, it beeing very requisite for the good of the kingdom, that hee should leav a prosperous issue to rule manie years over them: the King replyed, That hee would consider thereupon, and do that which shall bee most conducing to his honor, the benefit of his Kingdoms, and the succession thereof. 3. That the Infante Don Fernando might not go out of the kingdom, until hee were married, and had children: the king made answer, That hee was not more careful of anie thing in the world, then of the advancement of his bro∣ther, the Infante, and that hee would order nothing to bee don concerning his person, but what should bee for his ad∣vantage, and the good of those kingdoms. 4. That hee would bee pleased to speak Spanish; for by practising hee would the sooner learn, and better under∣stand his Subjects, and bee understood by them. Hee an∣swered, That hee was well contented, and would strive so to do, and the rather, becaus they desired it in the name of the Kingdoms: so, afterwards hee did speak Spanish with them and others. 5. That hee would not alienate anie thing from the Roial Crown, and if anie should desire Iustice of him for their grie∣vances, that hee would give order to have it don them. Hee answered, That hee would do therein according to his Oath, and would redress all those that came to complain. 6. That whatsoêver the Catholick King and Don Philip, his father, had given away by waie of Dowrie or Legacie, hee would command to bee fulfilled, for the repose and dis∣charging of their consciences: Hee answered That hee would; provided, that it might bee don without prejudice to the Roial Patrimonie.
Sixtie seven more Articles they propounded, which, becaus they are more at large specified hereafter, I shall forbear to trouble the Reader with them in this place; His Majestie gave so gracious an answer to them all, (thanking the Comis∣sioners in a very courteous manner) that they remained ve∣ry well apayed and satisfied. The Subsidie which they granted him in this first Parla∣ment (according to Fray Antonio de Guevara's relation) was one hundred and fiftie millions of Marauediz;34 Mauediz make 6d. A Duket make's 5 6d. Ad Pero-Mexia saith, it was six hundred thousand Dukets, t bee rais∣ed the three first years. The Parlament beeing ended, there was celebrated a Iust, or Turnamnt Royal in the chief mar∣ket place of Valladolid, five and twentie against five and twentie; Som Spaniards, and som Flemish Noblemen, who strove to out-view each other, aswell in the ricnes of their habits and livries, as in feats of arms; Seven of them were killed, and som hurt; therefore it was commonly said, That for a Combat in earnest the loss was not great, but, for a jest it was too much. After this solemnitie, which on∣tinued certain daies, the King having visited his moher, Donnia Iuana, and the Queen Germana, leaving all things in good order in Castillia, departed ith his Court for Aragon, taking his sister, Donnia Leonor, and the Queen Germana with him. Hee made the town of Aranda in his waie, whither his brother,The Infante's disonet∣ment. the Infante Don Fernando, was returned with small contentment, becaus they made such haste to pack him out of Spain. There the King remained som few daies, du∣ring which time, the Infante was dispatched for Flandrs, as was before determined; for the Kig (ot beeing yet arrived in Castillia, som men of note about the Inante's person, put thoughts into his head of succeeding his grandfather in the Crown; and it was greatly to bee feaed that the Casillians wuld have declared for him, to the prejudice of Don Carles, hee beeing of their Countrie, and his brother a Fleming: be∣sides, his name, Fernando was enough to gain him the affecti∣on and hearts of all Spain, for his Grandfaters sake, whose
memorie was held in great honor and adoration amongst them; But God disposed it otherwise for the good and quiet of those Kingdoms. Don Fernando beeing fitted with atten∣dants, and all necessaries for his voiage, the King continued his progress into Aragon,Charls the Fift received at Sa∣ragosa. 1518. hee was received in Saragosa with very great solemnitie and joie, the 15 of Maie 1518. The Castillians expressed much discontent at the departure of the Infante Don Fernando,The Castillians and Aragoneses distasted. and began to murmur every where, they beeing of opinion, that hee ought not to bee sent out of the Kingdom, until his brother were married and had children. They were likewise distasted, and the Aragoneses also, at the present Government; for they could not endure that stran∣gers should bear so great swaie in their Countrie, that all businesses must pass through the hands of Xeures, and his friends, who had the name of beeing over-greedie, and co∣vetous; the same brand was laied upon the rest of the Fle∣mings that attended his Majestie. But that was no wonder, for all Prince's Favorites (bee they never so just and well de∣serving) are generally envied, and abhorred by most peo∣ple. They said moreover, that the King was wilful, untra∣ctable, disdainful, and gave small testimonies of affection to the Spanish Nation, with divers other such like discon∣tented speeches, which are mentioned more at large hereaf∣ter. But to saie the truth, the King was no waie to bee blamed; for hee was so young, that of necessitie hee must suffer himself to bee directed by those, who had bred him up from his infancie. Time made the Spaniards plainly see, when hee came to riper years, that hee loved, respected, and esteemed them above all other Nations, which ap∣peared by his placing them in offices of the greatest Honor and Trust, not onely in Spain, but in Italie, Flanders, and Ger∣manie.
SECT. VII. THe King having been som daies at Saragosa, the Parla∣ment began, which continued so long, that hee was forc'd to remain there eight moneths; there the grand Chan∣cellor dyed, not much lamented by the Spaniards, who abhor∣red the verie memorie of him, and hee cared more for his gold then for their favor or displeasure. This Monsieur de Laxao left a very bad name behinde him; in his place, by his Majestie's command,Gatinara made Lord Chan∣cellor of Spain. succeeded Mercurino de Gatinara, a man of singular wisdom and learning, a friend to Iustice and Equitie, and a great Iurisconsult. The Grandees of the Kingdom of Aragon beeing assembled in the Arch-Bishop's Pa∣lace, who was unckle to the King, they desired him to let them understand his pleasure, for they were very willing and desirous to serv him, as they had don his Predeces∣sors, but conditionally, that they might enjoie the antient Customs and Privileges of the Kingdom; the King answer∣ed, they should; But considering the indisposition of the Queen, his mother, hee willed and required them to ac∣knowlegd him their King, as those of Castillia had don. Whereunto the Iurados, or Iurates, in the name of the king∣dom,Demands of the Aragoneses before they would ac∣knowledg Charls their King. replied, they would, though it was against the Laws, his mother beeing yet living; So that his Highness would bee pleased to swear the Infante Don Fernando Prince of Spain, the same daie, as they should swear him King; not that the Infante should remain Prince, and heir to the Crown, but one∣ly until such time as hee should bee married and God should bless him with som hopeful issue to succeed him, whereun∣to, if his Highness would not consent, they would swear him Executor, and Administrator of the Queen, his mother's estate: and if hee would not condescend to this, they told him in plain terms, that they had no leav nor power to do
otherwise, and although they had, they would not put it in execution; for that would much prejudice, and damnifie their exemptions. The King was much displeased at their peremptoriness, and answered them not one syllable: the Grandees of Castillia beeing present, grew out of patience at the Aragoneses sawciness, and the Earl of Venavente told the King openly, that, if his Majestie would take his Counsel, hee should make them com under the yoke, that hee would venter his life and fortune, to serv him in that design; that his Majestie's onely waie was,Quarrel be-the Castillians and Aragoneses, about the re∣ceiving Charls as King. to rais a powerful Armie, and subdue that Kingdom by force of Arms, and so hee might impose upon them what Laws hee pleased, not such as they desired and fancied. At which words, the Earl of Aranda answered the Earl of Venavente, in such harsh and bitter tearms, that all the Palace, and the Grandees of the Court were com almost to daggers drawing: So that the King had much to do to pacifie them, commanding everie one of them to repair to their own houses, and not to stir abroad upon pain of death; But his Commands were not fully obeied that time; for night beeing com, divers of both parties met in the streets, and manie of them were sore wounded, and questionless, the dispute had been more bloudie, if the Arch∣Bishop had not left his supper, and com out with other Noblemen to part them. The next daie, the King made the Earls of Venavente and Aranda friends, which don, the Ara∣goneses were brought to reason, and beeing willing to con∣form themselvs with the Castillians, they took the same Oath, and acknowleged the King to bee their King and Lord, joint∣ly with Donnia Iuana the Queen, his mother, as had been don in Castillia. SECT. VIII. IN the beginning of the year 1519,Anno 1519▪ the Parlament of Ara∣gon beeing ended, the King went to visite his Dominions
of Barcelona, and would have don the like in the Kingdom of Valencia,The Empeor Maximilian's deah in Ger∣manie. if his occasions had permitted. Beeing at Bar∣celona, news was brought him that Maximilian the mperor, his Grandfather, died at Belsis the 12th of Januarie 1519, whereat hee was not a little troubled; all the Court was forthwith put into mourning, and his Obsequies celebrated with very great solemnitie, according to the honor and greatness of his person,His conditi∣ons. who was one of the most virtuous, and wel-deserving Emperors that ever had command in Ger∣manie: hee was of a most noble and generous disposition, pious and valiant. The ten first years of his age, hee could make no use at all of his tongue, insomuch that the Empe∣ror Frederick, his father, thought hee would bee dumb, or a fool; But coming to mature years, hee gave great evidences of very rich endowments of his soul. Hee died of a Flux, in the sixtie third year of his age, having governed the Em∣pire twentie five years, after his Father's deceas. Francis, the First of France,The King of Fance' ambi∣tion to the Imperial Crow. stood in competition with Don Carles, for the succession to the Imperial Crown, and left no waie un∣attempted to corrupt the Elctors, and make them of his partie. But the major part, after manie, long, and seri∣ous debates, thinking it more fit to continue that Dignitie to the Hous of Austria (who were Natives of that Countrie) then to transfer it upon a strange Prince, made the election in favor of Don Carles,Seven El∣cos o the Empire. King of Spain, to the great content∣ment of all Princes, and people of Germamie. The Electors of the sacred Empire, at that time were, Alberto Archbishop of Ma∣guncia, or Mntz, Hertnao Archbishop of Colonia, Ricardo Arch∣bishop of Trues,Cals the Ft elected Empe∣ror. Frederico Duke of Saxonia, Lewis King of Bohemia, and Hungaria, Ioachim Marquis of Brandeburg, Lewis Count Palatine of the Rhyne. The Election beeing past in Franckfort, and published all over Germanie, the Electors sent Frederick Duke of Baviers into Spain, to his Majestie; in mean time, they ordered all matters concerning the Empire, and made Casimire of Brandeburg Captain General of the Im∣perial forces, until the new Emperor should com to receiv his
Crown. Whilst these things passed in Germanie, the King ce∣lebrated in Barcelona, the feast of the Order of the golden Fleece; there the Lord high Counstable of Castillia, Don Innigo de Velasco, Don Iadrique de Toledo Duke of Alva, Don Alvaro de Zunniga Duke of Vejar, Don Fadrique Enriquez Lord Admiral of Ca∣stilla, Don Estavan Alvarez Cesorio Marquis of Astorga, received the Order:Hughti h∣militie of the Eal Vnvn∣, in  to bee mde Knight of the glden Flece. But the Earl of Venavente refused it, saying, that hee was a right Castillian, and cared not for anie badges of foreign honor, those of his own Countie beeing as good, and in his opinion far better The Duke of Cordona in the Kingdom of Aagon, and the Prince of Bisgnano, a Neapoli∣tne, stood not upon those nice tearms, but accepted the Or∣der as a particular favor from his Majestie. About the same time, the Queen Germana (finding more contentment in the Companie of a Husband, then in the solitarie condition of a widow,) was married with great solemnitie, to the Mar∣quis of Brandeburg, brother to the Elector, who (though of a very illustrious extraction) was so incomparably inferior to the Majestie and greatness of her former husband Don Fernando, that her judgment was much censured for her chois, and the Courtiers thought so slightly of her, that di∣vers would not give her the style of Highness, until his Ma∣jestie commanded it (who assisted personally at the solem∣nitie, thinking thereby to endeer th Elector of Brandenburg, the more to vote in his behalf.) At the beginning of Julie, in the same year, arrived at Barcelona, Frederick Duke of Bavi∣ers, brother to Lewis Duke of Baviers, Elector and Count Pala∣tine, with the dispatches from the Electors; and having deli∣vered his embassage, the Chancellor Mercurino de Gatinara an∣swered, that his Majestie did receiv very willingly the le∣ction of the Empire, which the seven Princes Electors had con∣ferred upon him, that hee would take that weightie and honorable care upon himself, out of the great affection which hee bore his native Countrie, and that hee would en∣deavor with all convenient speed, to settle his affairs in Spain, and make a voiage into Germanie: Thus the Empire
beeing setled upon Don Carles of Spain, and the King of France deprived of all his hopes (notwithstanding the vast summs of monie and presents, wherewith hee thought to purchase the Elector's Votes) his envie and choler grew be∣yond the bounds of moderation, and hee resolved forthwith to act what mischief hee could, and interess the power of all other Princes, his Allies, against the Emperor Elect. SECT. IX. WHilest the King, or Emperor Elect was at Barcelona, hee demanded the Catalanes to receiv,The Catalanes make difficul∣te of acknow∣ledging Charls King. and acknowledg him their King, which they refused for a while, neither would they consent, that hee should call anie Parlamemt in their Countrie; but at last, they were perswaded to reason, and swore Alleageance to him, as Castillia and Aragon had don. The Emperor upon notice of his Election, and solicitation of the Princes of Germanie for his going hither, had not the lei∣sure to visit the Kingdom of Valencia, as hee intended; there∣fore hee desired, that those of that Kingdom would swear, and acknowledg him King,Those of Va∣lencia. reuse to a∣knowledg him. without obliging him to bee personally present, in regard it was imposslble for him to perform that journie, at that time, by reason of his new and unexspected occasions, which called him another waie. But they would not hearken to anie such motion, and scorn∣fully made answer,Their proud answer. that they were as good as Aragoneses, or Catalanes, and since, hee had spent two years time in those Countries, why could not hee staie two moneths at Valen∣cia? The Emperor beeing readie, to depart from Barcelona, sent Cardinal Adriano to Valencia, to pacifie that Kingdom, and gave Commission to the Infante Don Enrique, and the Arch∣Bishop of Saragosa (both his Unckles) to call a Parlament in his name, ordering that the monie which should bee grant∣ed him therein, by waie of Subsedie, should bee all distri∣buted
amongst the aggrieved, and needie of the Kingdom. Don Alonsa de Cordona Admiral of Aragon, and the Duke of Gandia, with several other persons of account, gave their Votes to acknowledg, and swear his Majestie their King▪ But the rest told the Cardinal Adriano, and wrote besides to the Emperor, that they would lose their wives, Children, and Estates, rather then the Liberties and Privileges of their Countrie; whereat the Cardinal much displeased, returned to Court, leaving the Citie of Valencia in great distraction; the out-rages and disorders whereof, shall bee hereafter more at large related. SECT. X. IT was agreed, and his Majestie toke Oath in the Parla∣ment, at Valladolid, That no Offices should bee given to strangers, nor the kingdom surcharged with new Impositions, but should continue in the same manner, as was ordered by the Catholick King, at a Parlament, which hee called in Burgos; Yet there was nothing less observed, or wors kept then these Articles; for the treasure of the kingdom was pub∣lickly exhausted, and Offices were daily given to the Flemings, who sold them to those that would give most monie, and likewise divers spiritual livings were so bestowed; which the Castillians seeing, and taking notice, how small account was made of the Grandees, and Nobles, Natives of that Coun∣trie, they began to bee distasted, and muttered out manie things in a discontented manner, which ought not to bee re∣hearsed. These murmurings began from the time of his Ma∣jestie's departure, from Valladolid to Aragon, which was in March 1518. And beeing in Barcelona, som troubles arose about Segovia, and Avila, by reason of certain persons, that had farmed the Customs, and Roial Revenues, which enhaunced the charges of the Countrie; whereat those Cities much ag∣grieved,
the contrarie having been promised by the Emperor Elect in Parlament; They acquainted the Citie of Toledo with their grievances, and desired, that all the Cities of the kingdom should make a joint-complaint thereof to his Majestie, and appoint their Commissioners to importune him for a redress, desiring him to stand to the Ordinances of Parlament, made in Valladolid, and to grant what hee then refused; moreover, that hee would visit the whole Kingdom before his depar∣ture into Germanie. Whereunto the Lord Chancellor, in his Ma∣jestie's name, made answer, That hee would very speedily send an Express, to give the Citie of Toledo thanks for their expressions of fidelitie to him, and satisfie them more fully▪ But the Empire beeing without Head, hee could not defer his going thither to receiv the Crown, and settle the Go∣vernment; which don, hee would make all convenient haste back again, into that Kingdom of Castillia, whose good hee tendered in a very particular manner. The Commissioners bee∣ing answered, the Chapter of Toledo (as beeing the Chief of the Kingdom) presented their grievances to his Majestie, concerning the Tenth, which the Pope had granted to him, through all the Churches of the Kingdom, complaining that it was a new, heavie, and intolerable tax, and not one∣ly grievous to the Ecclesiasticks, but prejudicial to all his kingdoms; That in former times, when the said Kingdoms were over-run by Moors and Infidels, although there were manie, and bloudie wars, which continued until the blessed reigns of the Catholick, King Don Fernando, and Donnia Isabel, of glorious memorie, his Grndfather and Grandmother, who conquered the Kingdom of Granada, and extirpated the Moorish race, which wars were very necessarie, and of extraor∣dinarie expence; yet there were no Tenths raised, nor demand∣ed; It beeing an unheard of thing, and a request as unjust as insupportable, much less reason had his Majestie to require anie such thing of the Clergie, his case beeing far different, and his wars nothing so important. That hee should rather en∣courage the Clergie, to praie for his good success, then dimi∣nish
anie thing from their subsistence; Praiers beeing of more avail, then anie Martial Discipline, as appears by the holie Scriptures; wherein it is read, that the victorie is more certainly obteined by the praiers of devout Priests, then by the force of Horsmen and Arms. But if his Majestie's tempo∣ral Revenue was not sufficient to maintein a just war, in such case, hee might demand assistance of the Church-men, as far forth as the present necessitie did require; wherein they would willingly supplie his Majestie, making Levies amongst themselvs, and rather abate their own subsistence, then suf∣fer him to bee disfurnished, which they should not bee able to do, if his Majestie in the verie beginning would exact a Tenth from them. Divers other reasons they alleged in their Petition to his Majestie, whereunto there was no time to give answer. SECT. XI. MEan time the Emperor Maxmilian beeing dead, and Charls the Fift beeing long before hee went thither, to to take possession, the People of Austria having lost all fear, and respect of autoritie, fell into the greatest disorder and mutinie that had been,Troubles in Germanie. within compass of the memorie of man, turning out, and discarding all antient Officers of Justice, and constituting others of their own combination: the like they did with Ecclesiastical benefices. The Loial Par∣tie (which was the fewer in number) durst not open their mouths, fearing the furie of the seditious vulgar; who had possessed themselvs of all the Arch-Duke's Revenues, and were grown to such a height of arrogancie, that they sent to the Emperor, beeing at Barcelona, to ratifie and confirm what they had don for the publick Weal and good Govern∣ment (as they termed it) of that Countrie, and to allow the new Officers of Iustice, whom they had constituted. But the
Emperor returned them such an answer, as made them under∣stand that hee knew himself to bee Arch-Duke of Austria, and not they. These distractions and perturbations continued in that Countrie almost two years; after which his Majestie re∣turning into Germanie, pacified all those dissentions and fa∣ctious spirits, setled the Government, and received the Im∣perial Crown, as shall bee expressed hereafter. Finis Libri Primi.
THE SECOND BOOK. SECT. I. IN this and the following Books, I am to re∣late the the Insurrections or rising of the People (commonly called Communidades, or Communalties) which continued in Spain, from the year 1519 to 1522. A Subject, truly, very sad and unpleasant, and which I would willingly pass under silence, becaus som Illustrious Families, Noble Cities, and principal Towns of the King∣dom were interessed therein, which never had been disobedi∣ent to their Kings, but alwaies esteemed for their loialtie. Neither do I conceiv that they thought anie waie to disserv his Majestie, but rather to releas him out of that oppression (as I may term it) in which his Favorites held him. And, it is manifest, in that they so earnestly importuned and petitioned, that their King would not go out of the Kingdom, that they desired, and delighted to see, and enjoie his Roial presence; which was no sign, that they intended to do him anie disser∣vice: It will appear more evidently in the Progress of this Historie, and by the letters which passed between them,
whereof som I have set down in the same manner, as they were written in the originals, becaus the particularitie of the Historie doth require it, in a matter of such weight and dan∣ger. And since the Loialtie of Spain come's in question, who have alwaies had their Princes in so high a reverence, that they honored and respected their verie Statues and pictures, as if they had been their Sovereign's, whom they represented: I will, before I go anie further▪ declare the ground and reasons, upon which the Castillians founded their com∣plaints and grievances, as I have gathered them from those who were eie-witnesses, and have penn'd all the several pas∣sages, with much discretion, respect, fear of God, and with a minde free from partialitie. SECT. II. THe familiaritie of Monsieur de Xeures with the King was so great, that hee rather seemed to bee the King, and the King his Son, then to bee Xeures his Vassal and Crea∣ture, as hee was. There was no access, nor speaking with the King, but when Xeures pleased: if anie thing succceded well, Xeures assumed the glorie to himself, giving out that hee had don it; if ill, hee alwaies laid the fault upon the King, saying, The King would have it so. And, indeed, this was the first occasion that begat the innocent Prince the ill will of his People. I have seen a memorial of these Passages, which a Gentleman (one of the King's Domestick servants) wrote, and averreth to have been an eie-witness of them. Hee report's, that while the King was yet in his minoritie, and unacquainted with State-affairs, Xeures would suffer no bodie to speak with him, unless hee were first informed of the business, that so hee might put into the King's mouth, what hee would have him to answer; and if anie refused to impart their business to him, they were so far from having
audience, that hee would not suffer them to enter into his Majestie's presence; Thus did hee deal with those that were sent from Toledo, and divers other Cities. Indeed, at that time all the Castillians were very much discountenanced, and not treated as their's and their Predecessor's services had deserved. The Flemings perceived the mindes of the Spaniards disposed for all mischief; much ambition, and little friendship bee∣ing amongst them: for som devoted themsels particularly to King Ferdinand the Catholick, others to King Philip the Fair. These were kindes of Factions, wherewith were pos∣sessed for som daies the mindes of manie People. Mercurino Gatinara Lord high Chancellor was second in the Emperor's favor, and as the Autoritie and familiaritie with Princes admit of no Competitor, Xeures and this Chancellor could not endure each other: they both presumed so much, that each of them would command alone, and ambitioned a Power above the other; these made themselvs the Heads of those two Factions, and added more poison to their ma∣lice and discontents. Xeures favored those of Ferdinando: and the Chancellor sided with those of Don Philip's Partie. And all was ill (as the Proverb saie's) for the poor Pitcher; for the distressed Countrie of Spain had all the sufferings. Xeures was so corrupt and covetous, that he sold all the King's Favors, Offices, Bishopricks, Honors, and whatsoëver hee conceived would yield him money. The Chancellor did the like with all Iustice-ships and other Offices; so that secluded Iustice was enforc'd to give up her Seat, and Sword to the Tyrannie of over-ruling Avarice; onely monie then bore the swaie; no Right, no Equitie was able to counterpoiz the weight of Gold; all things and places (as in the times of Ca∣tiline at Rome) were then put to sale: The Flemings were much encouraged with this fine gold, and Ingots of pure Silver, that came from the Indies; and the simple Spaniards so blinde, in giving it for their pretensions, that it became as common, as a Proverb, for a Fleming to call a Spaniard, My Indian. And, indeed, it was not improper, for the Indians never gave so
much gold to the Spaniards, as the Spaniards did to the Fle∣mings: this in time grew to such a pass, that it was pub∣lickly sung along the streets, Double Pistol, it's well for thee, That from Xeures thou art free. It is reported that a certain Pretendent, or Petitioner who had presented Xeures with a very handsom Mule, and hee beeing asked by another Gentleman, where hee had gotten that curious beast, answered, That hee knew not who had gi∣ven it him; beeing within hearing, and very much ag∣grieved to see himself so soon forgotten, and the business hee had communicated to Xeures so neglected, give's forth∣with order to have his Mule cried, declaring all his marks, and describing the furniture hee had bestowed on him; which the same Gentleman hearing of, went presently, and told Xeures, that according to the marks, it must needs bee that this Mule had been stolen; Thus the poor Petitioner re∣covered what hee had given him, and lost not all, as most men do in such occurrences: for there is no memorie so weak, as that of a covetous man in Power, who digest's gold with more facililitie, then Estriches do Iron. SECT▪ III. THere was no monie to bee got in the whole Kingdom, but pieces of nine Marauediz, which is three half∣pence English, for all better coins Xeures had transported▪ What shall I saie? Besides that which was ship't for Flanders from Barcelona, beeing 750 Millions; from the Groyne, 950 Millions; and from other parts, 800 Millions; so that it exceeded the number of twentie five hundred millions; which was enough to make him equal to the most power∣ful and richest King. But consider in what condition did poor Castillia remain after such a dreining. Besides all this,
the Flemings held the paniards in so mean esteem, that they insulted over them as if they had been their slaves, or rather beasts; they would break open their houses at their plea∣sures, abuse their wives in their own presence, carrie away their goods, and no Justice to bee had against them. It hap∣ned that a Castillian having killed a Fleming at Valladolid, took Sanctuare in St Marie Magdalen's Church; Som Flemings violently breaking in upon him, and stabbing him in divers places, there made him a sad sacrifice to their revengeful fu∣rie; which don, they went cleer away unchastiled, unque∣stioned; That which bred the People's greatest dislike of their King, was, that they could not bee admitted into his Presence, treat with him, nor o much as know him: For Xues would suffer no bodie to speak with him; if at anie time hee did give audience, Xeures would still bee at his el∣bow, and in regard hee did not throughly understand the Spanish Tongue, hee seemed as if hee had not been spoken to. This gave the rise of the People's general ill opinion of him: They presently spake him a man of a weak apprehension, and of an ill disposition, they call'd him Dutchman, and an Enemie to Spaniards; They said, hee wanted Judgment as well as years, neither was hee of a Talent fit to govern: by these prejudicial Censures of their Prince, which were for som time generally noised abroad amongst the People, like∣ning him to his Mother: Som that never had seen him, said, It could not bee otherwise; and that, for that respect onely, Xeures would suffer no bodie els to confer with him, lest hee should too much discover his own imperfections. Others that had been admitted to speak with him, much vin∣dicated his honor in that particular, protesting, That they found him verie discreet, and of no mean capacitie; That hee was no way guiltie of those pretended weaknesses, but his Favorites infinitely to bee condemn'd; neither was it to bee wondered at, if hee suffered himself to bee governed by them, in regard hee was but a youth, and unacquainted with the Customs of that Countrie, and the dispositions of
the People. Those that have near relations about the Persons of Kings, ought to bee verie careful and circumspect, how to avoid the occasions of Murmurings and Envie, consi∣dering, that Kings are like that Sun which diffuseth his light to all. SECT. IIII. THe whole Countrie of Castillia was imbrued with these factious discourses, before they ever thought of the departure of their King and Emperor, as will appear by the Letters, which were interchangeably sent from Citie to Ci∣tie. But when they heard of his resolution to bee gon, and that his calling of a Parlament would enreas their Contri∣butions and Taxes, they out-stript the bounds of patience. The principal Causses of their Commotions were these three ensuing: First, to see the King go out of that Kingdom, bee∣ing alwaies accustomed to keep their Courts in Spain; for when King Alonso the Wise deserted it, out of an ambitious covetousness of possessing th' Imperial Scepter, hee not onely lost that Kingdom, but was incumbred with insurrections, not of the Common people, but of Kings and Princes, tht levied arms against him. Their second grievance was, To see all Offices, and places of Honor, Trust, or Profit, con∣ferred upon strangers. The third was an universal crying out, That the Treasure of Spain was all transported into fo∣reign Nations. And wee may add for a fourth Reason, That in that verie occurrence, som evil Star dispersed the maligni∣tie of it's influence over all Castillia, Sardinia, Sicilia and Austria, which at one instant were all infected with the same poison, as if they had all conspired and agreed together. This they made the ground of their insurrections; becaus their King left them to live in a strange Countrie; becaus their wealth was exhausted, and their Countrie impoverished, to inrich foreigners; and becaus the high Treasurer-ship was given to
Xeures, and the Arch-Bishoprick of Toledo to William de Croy, his Nephew, and all presentations to spiritual preferments, and other Offices to strangers; But that which they chiefly resented was the King's going to the Empire, and had they really wished him ill in his own person, they would not have been so sensible of his departure. I cannot let pass with silence the audacitie of a certain gentleman of those parts, named, The Martial Don Pedro, who refused to swear Alleageance to Charls, as King, alledging, that in regard hee was not born in Spain, nor descended from the blood of the Castillian Kings, by the Father's side, hee was not obliged to acknowledg him, The Martial Don Pedro re∣fuseth the Oath of Al∣gance.but, like a true Castillian, to keep strictly that Oath, and Loialtie to his Countrie, and the precedent Kings. Upon which words hee was appre∣hended, his goods confiscate, and his person committed close prisoner in the Castle of Atienza. The Emperor after this coming to Valladolid, sent for him, and promised him, that if hee would yet take the Oath, hee should not onely bee enlarged, but bee restored to the quiet possession of his whole estate, as formerly, which favor beeing refused, hee was thence carried to the Castle of Simancas, where hee ended his life through his own indiscreet obstinacie. Som men through a desperate fool-hardiness think it a piece of cou∣rage and gallantrie to precipitate themselvs into the most eminent dangers. SECT. V. THe Citie of Toledo (extremely discontented at these Pas∣sages, especially, at the Emperor's going away without beeing known or seen) wrote to the other Cities of Castillia this ensuing Letter.
A Letter from Toledo to the Cities of CASTILLIA. Worshipful, Noble, and most Virtuous Sirs! IN regard somtimes wee have written to you in particular, you may wonder why wee now write to you all in general: But considering the imminent necessitie that there is in this case, and the danger that may ensue by deferring anie longer; wee shall rather bee condemn'd as beeing too slack for not doing it before, then thought importunate for doing it now. You know, and may remember, how vehemently King Charls our Soeverign Lord's arrival in Spain was desired of all, and how sudden is his departure from us; his absence now is no less torment to Us, then his Presence at that time afforded us de∣light and comfort; the long continuance of his Roial Person in the Kingdom of Aragon, and the small time hee hath vouchsafed to re∣side in this our kingdom of Castillia, hath been a great occasion that the affairs of this kingdom are yet in so unsettled a condition: And if his Majestie doth go away, as hee hath determined, the longer wee delaie, the wors our case will bee. Therefore (Sirs!) our opinion is, if you think good, since the damage is universal, That 'twere con∣venient, that wee should all meet and consult upon a remedie; the bu∣siness is of no small moment, besides, in manie other particular things (Sirs!) wee finde an extreme necessitie of your advise, and after your advise wee shall have as much need of your favor, and helping hands. Wee finde three principal things that require our convening, that wee may advise upon som good cours for the expedition of them; It will bee needful that wee dispatch som messengers to his Majestie, humbly beseeching him, First not to depart Spain; Secondly, that hee would by no means permit our Treasure to bee transported hence; Thirdly, that no strangers may bear office in this kingdom. Sirs, wee beg thus much favor of you, that having read our Letter, you forth∣with send us your answer; for it is necessarie, that those who are to car∣rie our Messages should go together, and make their Propositions all at once; for our demands beeing in the names of the whole kingdom, wee
shall obtain a more significant and speedie Answer. God keep his Ma∣jestie, and preserv his Noble Person. From Toledo this 7th November, 1519. The contents of this short Letter were much approved of by the Readers; but in that Occurrence of time they were of dangerous consequence, for the ill managing of the affairs of Castillia was generally much resented, and this Letter bred no mean varietie of thoughts in the alreadie wounded hearts of the suffering People; it did this mischief, that all men suspecting wors evils, unanimously said, Since Toledo lift's up the hand, som great disaster must befal this Kingdom. They all returned their answers, although the Citie of Burgos dis∣approved their general meeting; Granada answered, that they should do better to exspect another opportunitie, and carrie a more specious form. Salamanca and Murcia were not backwards in their promises and fair offers, but they did not agree in that particular, touching the general Assem∣blie, yet all wrote that they would send their Burgesses, as Agents, who in the Parlament should bee conformable to the Toledians. Sevil answered neither yea, nor no. These an∣swers puff'd up the Spirits of the Toledians, and Hernando de Avalos (brother to Don Iohn de Ribera, who was chosen for Procurador,Iohn de Padilla was after∣wards their General, a mn of noble extraction, and a high Spirit. that is, Burgess and Commissioner) associating himself with Iohn de Padilla, were the chief sticklers for that Caus, and although the Emperor wrote to them, no reason would satisfie, but they answered, that they under∣stood in so doing, to do him service. SECT▪ VI. SOon after was publisht through the whole kingdom, the Emperor's determination to go into Germanie, to receiv
the Imperial Crown; Everie one lamented his departure, out of a presaging fear, that those so long contracted fogs of murmuring Discontent, condensing more and more through the privation of his resplendent presence, might at last break forth into som furious storm of intestine Commoti∣ons, to the ruine of their whole Countrie; Which Consi∣deration meeting with the complaints, and general grie∣vances of the whole Kingdom, they began at length to mut∣ter out their resentments in these following words. That the King shewed verie small affection to that Countrie; and despising it as too mean for him, would betake himself wholly to Germanie. That Xeures had robbed Spain of all her Treasure; That the King beeing at Burgos (Capital Citie of Castillia) did not staie one week there. That Xeures would not have the Parlament to bee in Valladolid, although all the Gran∣dees, and divers others of the Kingdom had petitioned for it. That Don Pedro Giron had given the King som unbe∣seeming Language, which hee thought good to put up, be∣caus hee was not man enough to punish his temerarious au∣dacitie. That Xeures had called a Parlament, but for no other end, then to charge the Kingdom with a new Cessment of four hundred thousand Duckets. From these and such other seeds of discontents sown amongst the Common People, grew suddenly a multitude of turbulent Imaginations in their factious hearts; and the seditious Clergie, casting the oil of their, pretended, Religious Doctrine into the fire of the People's ill-grounded zeal, made the flame blaze the higher, pricking them daily forwards with their sacrilegious Exhor∣tations in the Pulpits, in these or like words▪ Why do you, that are a Free born Nation, suffer such exorbitancies? Why do you suffer strangers to reap the fruits of your labors, in your own Coun∣trie? You have not yet fully paid the Cessment, that was granted to the King in the last Parlament; and yet hee will impose more Taxes on you, till hee hath swept this kingdom clean, and quite beggar'd us, to inrich his Germane Nation; and there's Xeures, who was but a private Gentleman in Flanders, hath made himself one of the richest men in the world, by the spoils of us Castillians.
SECT. VII. THe Emperor beeing at Valladolid, and the People's mindes much distracted with these several grievances, hee sent for the Corregidores, Regidores, and all other Publick Magi∣strates to his Palace. Upon their appearance hee told them that beeing then to go into Germanie, to receiv the Imperial Crown, hee was in great distress for want of monies to de∣fraie his charges, to which hee desired, they would not onely give their consents, but bee assistant in the raising of three hundred Millions of Marauediz, which might bee easi∣ly don in Castillia, by waie of Subsidie and Pole-monie, everie Town paying according to their qualitie and Cessments; Presuming, that if those of Valladolid subscribed, the other places of the Kingdom, would not bee backwards to an∣swer his exspectation; And in case they did satisfie his de∣sires therein▪ hee promised to grant them all the Favors their Burgesses or Commissioners should demand of him in Parlament. There was present at this Conference, the Arch∣Bishop of Santjago, the Bishop Mota, the Earl of Venavente, the Marquis of Astorga, and Xeures who was never from the Emperor's elbow. Those of Valladolid desired som time to give in their answer, but (they said) They could see no pos∣sibilitie of effecting what the Emperor demanded of them. Thence began tumultuous meetings in the streets, Conventicles, and outragious murmurings, insomuch that they were even readie to rise in arms against the Flemings. At last Valladolid returned the Emperor this answer, That they humbly desired his Majestie would bee pleased to staie, and make his resi∣dence in their Countrie, and that upon those terms hee should not onely command the three hundred Millions hee desired, but they would furnish him with much more, and if need required, they would not stick to part with their
lands and goods, but fell their Children also to do him ser∣vice. But, in their opinions, that hee should go away and deprive the kingdom of his Roial Person, besides, that vast summe monie which hee desired to carrie into forreign Countries, seemed verie unreasonable, and they would sell nothing to further anie such designe, neither did they be∣liev that God required they should paie him anie such obe∣dience. Upon this answer of Valladolid, there were several meetings and Consultations, but they prevailed nothing. But the Emperor's Favorites, (against whom Castillia was chiefly incensed) Viz. Xeures, Don Garzia de Padilla, and Mota, Bishop of Badajos, went again to the Magistrates, desiring them that they would consider well upon his Majestie's demands, since the performance thereof was so important to his pre∣sent service, and so easie for them to accomplish: that the necessitie of his going to receiv the Imperial Crown was ex∣tremely urgent, and redounded not a little to the reputation and honor of that Kingdom. That they should look upon what Castillia had furnished to King Alonso the Wise, when hee went into Germanie upon a pretended claim of the Empire, and how much more reason they had to do the like now, (which they might well do, the Kingdom beeing in a far better condition.) That the King undertook not that voi∣age, as Don Alonso did, upon a doubtful matter, his business was already most certainly concluded and agreed upon. This was closely followed, for during the three daies time which the Emperor staied in Valladolid, The Gentrie, Magistrates, and Burgesses of the Town, with Bishop Mota (whom the Em∣peror had sent, to entreat them to condescend to his desires) did nothing els all daie and night, but go from the Court to the Town-hous, and back again; the Bishop of Osma, Don Alonso Enriques and som of the Magistrates were of opinion, that they should do well to satisfie his Majestie's desires. Others stood strongly to the contrarie, and turned their Op∣ponents out from their consultation, with manie reviling words, calling them disloial, disobedient, and other injuri∣ous
names: this beeing known amongst the Common Peo∣ple, inflamed amain their furie;Diats in those o Va∣ladolid. Their boundless Rage suddenly broke into an Ocean of inconsiderate and bitter expressions. The third daie that his Majestie was there, It beeing divulged to and fro in the Citie, that the Magistrates had consented to and subscribed the Emperor's demands, The People cried out, That ought not to bee suffred. The Emperor beeing informed of all these passages, was very much perplext, and gave order presently to prepare for his departure. It is rported that hee said, hee desired no more then that consentment, and those subscriptions which som of the Magistrates had given in, As for the rest, who had refused, hee should take his time to bee even with them. So hee departed upon a sudden, though the Towns-men thought hee would not have gon, in regard Valladolid and divers other Cities of Castillia, had sent to beseech him with much humilitie and earnestness, that hee would bee pleased to forbear a while, and not leav them so soon, fearing the disasters which afterwards befel them. The Emperor gave them a gracious answer, thanking them for their good wishes, but (hee said) it was expedient for him to depart without anie further delaie, for the good and advancement of that Kingdom, and hee promissed them, that assoon as hee had received the Imperial Crown, hee would com back again, at the farthest within three years. This did not satisfie the Gentrie of the Kingdom, nor the Cities, nor the Commons of Valladolid, who grew excessively out of Temper. SECT. VIII. BEfore wee pass anie farther, it will not bee improper to set down what was don at Toledo in this Interim. Wee have seen the Letter which they wrote the last year 1519, to the other Cities of the Kingdom, They wrote another to
Valladolid, bearing date the 8th of June of this year 1520. de∣claring (to the same effect as in the former) the great necessi∣tie, into which the absence of their King would plunge the Countrie, and the great inconveniences that were likely to proceed from that occasion. That it was expedient, that all the Cities of the Kingdom should make an Assemblie, and consult what were best to bee don in a case of such high con∣sequence;Toldo write's to Valladlid. That they would consider of the manner and place of meeting; That they would conform themselvs to Valladolid, and that Valladolid should communicate the mat∣ter to the bordering Towns and Cities. That Toledo would presently put it in execution, for they were and ever would bee at his Majestie's service, for the good of the king∣doms and their Republicks. The fifteenth of June, Valladolid re∣turned this answer, That they would very willingly con∣descend to such an Assemblie, if they thought they might justly and lawfully do it, and that they remained well as∣sured of the zeal and good affection which Toledo expres∣sed to the King's service,Valldolid's answer to To∣ledo. and the publick good; But such kinde of meetings (they alleged) were prohibited by the Laws of the Kingdom, without his Majestie's permission, and admit they were not forbidden, at that time however they were unlawful in regard his Majestie was absent, and by reason of the scandal which might arise from thence, especially there beeing a Governor for his Majestie in the King∣dom, and a Person of such note and value, besides the Lord President, and those of the Council, with whom they and the other Cities of the kingdom might communicate their necessities and grievances. And Valladolid conclude's thus: So Wee beseech your Worships that you would pleas to let these Assemblies ceas, becaus out of the desire wee have to do you service, It would griev us very much, that that Citie should give anie occasion of scandal. Becaus all that should proceed from thence, would bee imputed and laid to the charge of those, that were assistant at anie such Iunta. And if you think that there is anie necessitie to provide for, or
that you desire to remedie anie thing touching this King∣dom or that Citie, send your messengers or Commissioners to the Governor, and those of the Council, and wee will procure them a free arrival hither, protect them while they staie here, and obtein them a safe conduct back again, to which wee doubt not but the Governor will easily condescend, and wee will also join with them in all that is just and lawful. And becaus wee believ, according to your great Prudence and Virtue, you will receiv our Intention with the same zeal and affection, as wee declare it, wee enlarge our selvs no further in this particular. So God keep you, &c. SECT. IX. THese private Treaties increased daily the publick re∣sentments, and the more in respect of the King's de∣mands, and his so unexspected determination to leav that Countrie. The principal of those that declared themselvs in Toledo, with demonstrations of the greatest zeal to the Com∣mon good,Iohn de Padil∣la, Don Pedro Lasso, and Her∣nndo de Ava∣los, principal Actors for the Commons in Toledo. were Iohn de Padilla, Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega, Son to Don Garzilasso de la Vega Chancellor of the Or∣der in the kingdom of Leon, and Hernando de Avalos, all gen∣tlemen of noble extraction, and allied to the chief Nobles of Spain. These gentlemen who were chief Commissioners in the Iuntas and Assemblies, which were held in the Citie, exclaimd exceedingly against the ill government, That the King was carried away by strangers, not considering the miserable condition in which hee left that Kingdom; then they repeated all the Contents of the Letters, which Toledo had sent to th' other Cities, adding divers other things that had been produced upon new occasions, which they amplified and aggravated, with more bitterness then need required: And, That Toledo, which for her greatness, had been the Metropo∣litan Citie of Spain in time of the Goths, was more then ordi∣narily obliged to seek out a remedie, and set a Period to so great evils. They urged moreover that it was most expedi∣dient,
that forthwith Letters should bee dispatched to all the Cities of the Kingdom (that had Vote in Parlament) to incite them to assemble in som place convenient for their treating upon the forementioned remedies. That there should im∣mediately bee sent a Petition to the King; beseeching him not to depart the Kingdom, but that hee would bee pleased to give som Order for the remedying, and better managing of Affairs. That, in case his Majestie would not, the King∣dom intended to indeavor it, and would more narrowly see into that which concerned the Common good. These and divers such like things were that daie there propounded. And in egard they carried a specious apparence of the Pub∣lick Good, which was so generally desired, throughout the whole Kingdom, the Major part of the Assemblie was of opinion, That it was most fiting and convenient so to do. But som dissented (though they were the fewer in number) fearing that if the affairs were carried on in that manner (al∣though under colour of the Common good) they would produce very sad consequents, neither were they satisfied of the lawfulness of the Citie's assembling such Iunta's, without the King's licence and autoritie Antonio Alvares de Toledo, an anci∣ent gentleman of that Citie, Lord of Cedillo, and som others, which leaned to his faction, were of this opininion, either out of desire to do the King service, or becaus they could not agree with the rest, (for such kinde of sidings have pro∣duced a world of mischief in all places) or that like prudent men and free from passion, they fore-saw with clearer eies, the danger that would ensue th'assembling of the Cities without the King's Autoritie; They gave their Votes against writing to the Cities, declared against all publick, or parti∣cular meetings in that kinde, and said openly, that in case there were a necessitie of rectifying anie thing, they should in an honest and humble manner petition the Emperor to take it into his consideration. Whereto those of the contrarie Judgment made several replies. After long debate and con∣tention about this matter, at last those few, which were of
the most safe and wholesom opinion,Corregidor is as our Majors are in Eng∣land. protested and re∣quired according to that which they had voted, that the Corregidor and Citie would take an especial care what they did,Dissentions in he Aemblie at Toledo. as for their parts they absolutely disapproved of Iohn de Padilla's and the other Gentlemen's Propositions. The Go∣vernor Don Lewis Porto Carrero, Earl of Palma, beeing present adhered to this Opinion, but was backwards in expressing himself, in regard he had married the sister of Don Pedro Lasso, who was of the contrarie Partie: neither did hee answer one syllable to the other's Protest or Requests. Yet the busi∣ness was so imbroiled, that no resolution could bee given that daie. This difference and contention amongst the chief men of the Citie beeing noised abroad, the people began to mutinie, and divide themselvs into Parties and Factions.Here the Au∣tor mislook his carms, speaking like a flattering Frir. But the Major part inclined to the worst Opinion, beeing allured and drawn on with the fair pretence of the Commn good: Those few, who prudently perceived the contrarie, gave the Emperor forthwith notice of all these passages in the Citie, and Antonio Alvarez de Toledo in par∣ticular, who had great intimacie with the Bishop of Pa∣lencia Mota. This Advice came to the Emperor's hands, just upon his departure from Aragon to Valladolid. But soon after at another meeting in Toledo, the Major part voted that they should write to the other Cities of the King∣dom, as formerly had been propounded, and that they should send to the Emperor two Regidores,Rgidores and Iuados are in he nature of our Alder∣men and Common-Council men. and two Iurados, or Iurates of the Citie, humbly to demand of him as shall bee set down hereafter. Yet they were contradicted, and the con∣trarie required by the same men that had opposed them before, but to no purpose. Whereupon the dispute grew so hot amongst them, That Iohn de Padilla, who stood for the Com∣mons, and Antonio Alvarez de Toledo, who opposed and con∣demned his opinion as wicked and dangerous, drew their daggers at each other in the Assemblie. Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega, Don Alonso Suares, and two Iurates were appoint∣ed to go from the Citie to the Emperor, who having
put themselvs in equipage forthwith departed. Letters were presently dispatcht and sent to the other Cities, although the same distemper and factions were already brewing in divers of them before they were delivered.Parlament call'd in Ga∣licia. At that same time was brought to Toledo from the Emperor, a Summons to as∣sist in the Parlament, which hee had call'd in Galicia. And according to the custom of Toledo, (which is for the Regidores and Iurates, that are present, to draw lots, and one of each to go (upon whomsoëver the lot fall's) It was Don Iohn de Silva's chance (who afterwards was Mar∣quess of Monte-Mayor) to go as Regidor of Toledo, and Alonso de Aguirre, as Iurate. To whom (becaus they held the opi∣nion of the contrarie Partie) The Citie would not give a full and general Power, according to the Emperor's Com∣mands, but an especial and limited one, to see and hear what the Emperor desired, and with an injunction to give them advice thereof, to the end that from time to time the Citie might order them what to do, and that in no case they should grant anie Subsidies, or anie thing els. Which Power Don Iohn de Silva would not accept, nor go to the Parlament upon those tearms, exspecting they should give him the full and usual Power, and that the Emperor should send his Command to that effect. There was such trouble and opposition in this business, that hee could never obtain that Power, neither did they go to the Parlament. SECT. X. THe Emperor returned an answer to Antonio Alvarez de Toledo, and the others, who had given him notice of the several Passages, thanking them for their fidelitie, and acknowledging the good service they had don him therein, charging them moreover to persevere, but with rhe greatest wariness and discretion that might bee. To the Corregidor
Don Lewis de Palma hee wrote likewise, reprehending him of his lukewarmeness and small resolution, and gave him order what to do thenceforwards: but hee did not punctually obeie his Majestie's Orders, nor observ the manner which was most convenient, for hee was a man of too milde a disposition, which suit's very ill with those who are to govern, especially in cases of that nature. Whereupon som few daies after hee gave up his Command, and the Em∣peror sent Don Antonio de Cordova the (Earl of Cabra's brother) to take his place, but hee came too late to applie anie remedie to those disorders. Thus the affairs of Toledo wax't wors and wors, and the audaciousness of the People was grown to such a height, that they made new Assemblies everie daie in favor of that, which they called Communaltie, by consent and order of Iohn de Padilla,Te Autor ought rather to have said Promoters of he People's good. and Hernando de Avalos, who were the chief Incendiaries and favorers of these distur∣bances. Toledo excepting against the fore-mentioned Com∣missioners, agreed to constitute others with an especial pow∣er to present certain articles to the Emperor (which they had by waie of Instruction from the Citie) touching the gene∣ral good of the Kingdom. Don Pedro Lasso, and Don Alon∣so Suares were appointed to go as Regidores of the Citie, and Michael de Hita and Alonso Ortiz, as Iurates. The Contents of their Commission were these. That they should beseech the Emperor not to depart the Kingdom, representing unto him the Inconveniences, which might arise by his absence, in regard the Kingdom of Castillia could not live without their King, beeing not accustomed to bee under anie parti∣cular man's Government. That hee should not give anie Office or Charge in that Kingdom to anie stranger, and that hee should take those away again which hee had so bestow∣ed. That hee should not take anie monie out of the King∣dom for anie person in the World, becaus they had already contributed so much, that the Kingdom was reduced to great povertie. That in the Parlament, which hee had now as∣sembled, hee should not demand anie Subsidies, especially,
if hee continued in the resolution of departing the King∣dom. That the Parlament should bee adjourned, and held in Castillia and not at Santjago, nor in the Kingdom of Ga∣licia. That the Offices and Governments should not bee ven∣dible. That som good order should bee taken in the Inqui∣sition, which might tend to the service and glorie of God, and that no bodie should bee molested. That the grievances and wrongs of private Persons of the Kingdom, should bee righted and repaired. These were the principal heads of the demands, Toledo then sent to his Majestie, but the Com∣motions increasing gave them the boldness to add new matter to their Petition, as you shall see hereafter. SECT. XI. I Have declared already the combustions that were in Valla∣dolid, and the Emperor's determination to depart thence, purposing to take his waie by Tordesillas to visit the Queen, his mother. Which beeing known, and noised through the Citie (moreover that hee would carrie his mother out of the Kingdom with him) the Citizens, and Common Peo∣ple were so much troubled at it, that they vented divers as bitter exclamations as a furious passion could dictate to their disturbed mindes. But the chief Burgesses, Deputies and other Officers met in Consultation at the Monasterie of St Paul, to take order for investing their Commissioners with a ge∣neral Power, to grant what the Emperor should demand in Parlament, to petition his Majestie om things in their favor, and to kiss his hand before his departure. While they were thus assembled on Mondaie morning, Don Pedro Lasso with his Companions, arriveing the same daie at Valladolid, and beeing alighted went to visit them. But Alonso Ortiz, his fellow Commissioner (who resided in Court) said, in regard the Emperor was gon to Church to praie for his good journie to
Tordesillas, that hee thought it convenient for them to go first to the Palace, for perchance his Majestie beeing informed of their arrival, would vouchsafe to staie a little, and give them Audience. In this interim som Inhabitants of Vallado∣lid beeing told of the Toledo-Commissioner's coming, went to salute them, desiring that they would indevor to procure som Remedie against those miseries and grievances under which the Kingdom then so much groaned. Hereupon, it was agreed amongst them that the Towns-men should pre∣sently put themselvs in a readiness, to oppose and hinder the Emperor from going out of the Kingdom, or depart that Ci∣tie (in which attempt Don Pedro Lasso offered to venture his fortune with them, if they would stand to him,) and that they should seiz upon Xeures, and som Flemings of the chief of his Majestie's Council, and Bed-chamber, binding first those Towns-men with a solemn oath, not to desert him in that enterprize. Beeing pricked with this over-dilligent itch of putting in execution the orders and Commands which their Citie had imposed upon them, before they went to kiss the Emperor's hands (which had been the right waie) beeing ac∣companied with a gang of Common People, and som Deputies of the Wards (who by this time were come in to them) they went directly to the Monasterie of St Paul to salute, and communicate their design with the chief of the Citie there assembled; To whom they made a speech, signifying the Causses of their comming, and what they intended to de∣sire of his Majestie in behalf of their Citie, justifying their de∣mands, and coloring them with the most specious pretences that could bee: And indeed, (as at first their meaning was) their affection and zeal to their Prince were such, that their thoughts (I believ) differed nothing from their expressi∣ons, until things were brought unto such a pass, that there was no hopes of remedie, and that those that had the power, or the wisdom, made a breach through their mise∣ries; as did Don Pedro Lasso and divers other gentlemen. And at the last they desired, that (as they had written, and offered
to the Citie of Toledo) they would send their Commissioners with them, to make a Joint-demand of the same things, which Salamanca and other Cities desired:Vlladolid's answer to the Commissio∣ners of Toledo. for a Petition bee∣ing countenanced by so manie Cities, would bee much more available. Their speech beeing thus ended, by the general consent of the Assemblie, Don Hernando Enriquez (bro∣ther to the Lord Admiral) returned them this answer; That as yet they were not fully determined what to do, and for that caus they were there assembled, That they would resolv upon that, which should tend most to the King's service, and the good of the Kingdom; That they might do what they saw good. The Commissioners of Toledo perceiving Valladolid otherwaies inclined, then they exspected, went forthwith to the Palace, leaving them in consultation. SECT. XII. THey came to the Emperor's Chamber of presence, just as hee was risen from dinner. With his Majestie were the Marquis of Villena, the Earl of Venavente, the Earl of Miran∣da, the Duke of Alburquerque the Earl of Haro, the Earl of Castro, the Earl of Palma, the Marquis of Brandenbourg, the Archbishop of Santjago, the Bishop of Palencia, Monsieur de Xeures, and Don Pedro Giron, the Earl of Urenia's eldest son. It hapned as those Commissioners came in, Don Pedro Giron was talking with the King so loud, that everie one might hear him: Hee said, that his Majestie might remember, that bee∣ing at Barcelona, the first of March anno 1519, hee did him the honor to give him a writing under his hand, wherein hee promissed, that at his arrival in Castilla, hee would com∣mand the Judges to examine, and determine according to Law, the right which hee pretended and claimed to the Estate of Medina Sidonia, as the portion and inheritance of the Ladie Mencia de Gusman, his wife, Daughter to the Duke Don
Iohn deceased, and that his Majestie beeing since at Burgos, hee had again refresh't his memorie by waie of Petition, that hee had don the like there in Valladolid, and yet his Ma∣jestie was upon his departure, without giving anie order for the performance of that which hee had promised under his hand; and hereupon hee fell into a vain of very pre∣sumptuous language, such as savored of too much sauci∣ness and audacitie. Amongst other things hee said, That since his Majestie did not do him Justice,Bold speech of Don Pedro Gi∣ron to the Em∣peror. hee intended to right himself with his own hand, and that for so great an injurie (and without reason, so publick, and so known, as his Majestie had made it to all the world, by suffering him to bee so abused against Equitie or Justice, and contrary to that which his Majestie did owe to his own Royal word, hee having so punctually performed all the duties that could bee required of his Loialtie) hee had now no more to saie or do, but onely to let his Majestie understand, That for fault of the remedie which hee did not give him, and for the great injurie which hee now did him, hee could and would make use of all those provisions, which the Laws of the Kingdom of Spain did ordain in favor, and for the redres∣sing of oppressed and injured Gentlemen, and to this effect it was sufficient to ask his Majestie's permission, as hee had alreadie begged it before as honorable persons, as those that were then present, but could not obtain it: Speaking these words, hee fell upon his knees, and kissed his Maje∣stie's hand. The Emperor somwhat moved at Don Pedro's, more then bold, speeches, made this grave replie, Don Pe∣dro you are a discreet man, I do not think that you would do anie thing, that shall oblige mee to punish you, for if you should, my Justice must answer your offence. Don Pedro replied, Sir, in doing what I saie, I do nothing but what I ought, and what is just, if I do it not my self, your Majestie will not see mee righted. Those from whom I descended, never imbraced the thought of doing anie thing that ought not to be don, neither do I intend it.
That which I said, Sir, I would do, was to seek som re∣medie for my grievances, according to the Laws instituted in this Kingdom; and if your meaning is, Sir, to have me punished for doing what I ought, you will see (if you do so) what you ought to do to your self. The Emperor pre∣sently answered, I think to do you Justice, Don Pedro, as I told you, and I have performed my promise to you. You are my King Sir, said Don Pedro, and I will not answer you: That which you promised mee is herein written un∣der your own hand, and may soon bee seen, and what you concluded in your Council yesterdaie, this daie is known sufficiently: that said, hee produced his paper for evidence. Upon these words the Marquis of Villena bid Don Pedro forbear, and void the Chamber, so Don Pedro went out, and the Earl of Venavente, and the Lord High Constable with him (who came in after this discours began) all the other Gentlemen presently followed them, and ga∣thering themselvs in a knot together in the King's Anti-cham∣ber, they descanted upon these passages, and Don Pedro Giron continued still his fuming, with expessions of much discontent, and sens of injurie, becaus the King had not made good to him what hee had promised him with so much assurance. SECT. XIII. DOn Pedro Giron was no sooner gon out of the Pre∣sence, but Don Pedro Lasso, & Don Alonso Suarez ad∣vanced to speak to his Majestie, beseeching hee would bee pleased to give them audience, for they had divers things to impart to his Majestie, which did much conduce to his Ser∣vice. The Emperor answered them, that hee was upon go∣ing, as they saw, and that hee had not then the time to hear them: They replied, but chiefly Don Pedro Lasso: That it
was of so much concernment to his Majestie to hear them, that hee would not repent the deferring of his departure for a little while, especially the weather beeing (as it was) very rainie. For they would inform his Majestie of manie things, wherein were interessed in an extraordinarie manner, both His service and the good of the Kingdom. The Emperor knowing alreadie the substance of what they came to ask, and nothing pleased with their manner of petitioning, an∣swered, That there was no man in the world more care∣ful, and desirous of that which might bee most expedient for the good of his Kingdoms, then himself; That they should meet him at the next town to Tordesillas, in the waie to Santjago, and there hee would hear them: So they de∣parted his Presence. The Emperor (beeing very angrie at the importunitie, and sauciness of the Toledians, and Don Pedro Giron) sent presently to call som of his Privie Council, to ad∣vise touching the apprehending of Don Pedro Giron; The Lord High Constable beeing advertised of the Emperor's pleasure, came presently to the Palace, and with the rest of the Nobles there beeing, hee sent to desire Xeures, that hee would join with them, in taking som cours for the composing of the matter. While things were thus in agitation, a rumor be∣gan to spread amongst the People, that their Magistrates had granted what the Emperor did desire, that hee was going away, and that hee would carrie his Mother out of the King∣dom with him; and as the People are apt to believ all they hear, this report much troubled them, and beeing drunk with passion, they ran madding through the streets; and here and there making stands (after that Countrie fashion) they as∣sembled divers circuler consultations, saying, that it would bee fitting to petition the King not to depart; Beeing all up in this confusion without understanding each other's meaning, a certain Rope-maker, by Nation a Portuguez, inhabitant of that Citie, seeing that the King was readie to depart, and that no bodie would petition him to staie, hee got into the steeple of St Michael (which is a very ancient Parish in that
Citie, where hung a great bell, commonly called the Coun∣sel-Bell, which used to bee rung onely in times of war, uproars,Tumults in Vlladolid. or upon anie Alarum) this bell hee begin's to ring, with as much speed as hee could, which assoon as the People heard, without knowing or examining wherefore, all (except those that were assembled in the Monasterie of St Paul) presently took up arms, to the number of about five or six thousand Common People. 'Tis said their determi∣nation was to kill Xeures and all the Flemings, and to hinder the Emperor's departure. Don Alonso Enriquez Bishop of Os∣ma, gave Xeures notice hereof, yet hee would not believ him, thinking that hee told him so, onely to ingratiate him∣self with him; But soon after, hearing a great hurlieburlie, and the clashing of weapons, and asking what the matter was, Don Pedro Porto Carero told him, Sir, it is now no time for you to sit in Council, but indeavor to secure your Person; for the Common crie of the People is, Let Charls the King live, but let his ill Counsellors perish; neither ought you to think it strange, if in their rage they murther you, since they consider you, as one that carrie's their King from them. The People seeing themselvs so numerous, manie of them (as it appeared) would have stop't the Emperor's Journie. And this disorder fell out just as the Emperor was in Consultation, about the apprehending of Don Pedro Giron, but Xeures and the Flemings, beeing too well assured of the People's tumultuous furie, hastened the Emperor (all they could) out of Valladolid, so hee departed from his Palace in the cruellest rain, and thickest skie, that had been seen in the memorie of man. Which it seeme's was a presage and ill Omen of the miseries and dis∣asters, which were afterwards poured upon Castillia and his other Kingdoms.The People stop the Em∣peror at the gates of the Citie. The Emperor coming to the gate of the Citie, found there som of the rabble (they could not all bee so soon there, becaus of the extraordinarie foul weather). who having seiz'd upon the gates, began to shut them, and to barricado up the waie: but the Emperor's Guards made them suddenly quit their Poste, and hee continued on his
journie leaving Valladolid full of disorder. Som were trou∣bled for what they had don, others perplexed that they had seen and suffered such insolencies to bee committed. And in regard there was no ground for this tumult, it was pre∣sently appeased, and the people were ashamed, and sorrie for the irreverence and disrespect they had shewn the Emperor. The Officers of Justice of Valladolid began to make diligent inquirie, who had rung the Bell, or who gave order for the ringing of it. But the Portuguez could not bee found, so others paied for him. Som had their feet cut off; Som were whipped: Som banished and their goods confiscate, Som others had their houses pluck't down. There was whip't amongst others a Goldsmith (a man of good account, a Citizen of the Town) becaus it was proved that hee had received som Letters from the said Portuguez: som other Goldsmiths, and som officers of the Town beeing also ta∣ken, were very much afraid that they should bee brought to the like publick shame and punishment. But the Emperor beeing informed of the good intention of that Citie to∣wards him, and that what they had don was not out of malice, or anie premeditated design to do him anie inju∣rie, hee sent an Order for releasment of the prisoners, and commanded that there should bee no more said of it. The Dean having apprehended, and clap't in prison three Priests of St Michael's Church, the Judges of the Court in the Em∣peror's name required him to deliver them the said Priests, in regard they were accused to have given their consents to the ringing of the Bell. They were accordingly delivered and carried upon three great Mules, with Irons upon their legs through the chief streets of the Citie, until they came to Fuen-Saldania's Fort, (which then stood for the King, and was kept by the sons of Don Iohn de Vivero Viscount of Altamira, becaus hee had unworthily made away his wife) and there they re∣mained manie daies until the Emperor was satisfied of the truth.
SECT. XIV. THe Emperor came to Tordesillas soundly wet and durtie, and no bodie with him but Xeures, the rest could not keep pace with him, and having refreshed himself there one daie, hee continued on his journie to Villalpando, where hee had appointed the Commissioners of Toledo to attend him. They beeing com thither before, met with the Commissioners of Salamanca, who were Don Pedro Maldonado, (who was afterwards beheaded) and Antonio Fernandez, Regidores of that Citie; with them were their Messingers also, (viz. Iohn Alvarez Maldonado, and Antonio Enriquez) who were chifly sent to underfeel, what instructions those of Toledo had in all particulars, and had order to conform themselvs in all points to the Messengers of that Citie. At Villalpando a Town belong∣ing to the Lord High Constable, did these Commissioners and others exspect his Majestie's coming. Upon Sundaie after they had been at Church, they went to the Palace, to the end the Emperor should give them audience; while they were at∣tending his Majestie's pleasure in the Hall, came to them Don Garzia de Padilla, and Mōta Bishop of Palencia, who wished them in the Emperor's name (but they thought it was from Xeures) to tell them the message they had from their Citie. Don Pedro Lasso, and Don Alonso answered. That their Citie had commanded them to speak to his Ma∣jestie, and though they importuned them never so much, they would not declare unto them their business. Thereupon the Bishop and Don Garzia returned into the King's Chamber, but after a little time came out again, and told these Commis∣sioners, that if they would not give them an account, wherefore they were com, before they kissed his Majestie's hand, they should not have audience. The Commissioners seeing there was no remedie, conented to impart the sub∣stance
of their Message to them, which done, it was agreed that at two a clock in the afternoon, (if they returned to the Palace) they should have audience. They suspected that this diligence and earnestness of the Bishop's, and Don Garzia' to know their business was, becaus the Emperor at that time beeing very young, and not much versed in State-affairs, Xeures (who was verie discreet and politick) had put them on to urge it before they were admitted, to the end hee might prepare the Emperor to give them an answer. The Commissioners returned at the hour, and delivered their mes∣sage to the King, but would not consent that anie others should bee present, onely the Bishop and Don Garzia, the sub∣stance of their discours was as  have said. They insisted chiefly that his Majestie ought not to go out of the Kingdom, and conluded with this Article, saying, however, if hee did resolv upon his departure, that hee would command such order to bee left for the Government, that the Cities of the Kingdom might have their share therein; And like∣wise that hee would bee pleased to demand no Subsidies at all, and other things reasonable enough; as wee shll see hereafter. Which indeed were so just, that a Dore-keeper nam'd Duranges wep't to hear them, considering the great reason the Castillians had to complain; But it availed them little at that time; for they were then discountenanced, and not treated according as their's and their Ancestor's good ser∣vice had deserved. The Emperor told them onely, that hee had heard them, and would give order for their answer. The same hee said to those of Salamanca, (who spake to him afterwards) and in effect desired the same things as the Toledians had, telling him moreover, that they had order from their Citie to conform themselvs in everie thing with the Commissioners of Toledo. To whom the Emperor sent word by the Bishop Mota and Don Garzia de Padilla, That in regard his Council was at Venavente (whither hee was to go within two daies) they should not fail to meet him there, to receiv their answer, which they did accordingly. The
Emperor beeing arrived at Venavente, Don Pedro Lasso and his Companion, presented themselvs for their answer. Whereupon the Emperor commanded his Council of Iu∣stice and of State to assemble, who having considered the circumstances and manner of those Commissioners, joint∣ly gave their opinion, that they deserved rather to bee pu∣nished, then to receiv anie good answer or satisfaction to their demands;The Emperor displeased with the Tole∣dians. wherefore the Emperor sent for them into his chamber, and with a severely frowning Countenance (as Don Pedro Lasso afterwards declared) told them, that hee was not pleased with what they did, and that if hee did not consider from what Parents they were descended, hee would have them punished according to their deserts, for medling with what they had undertaken, and that they should go to the President of his Council, who would tell them fur∣ther what they were to do. They began to excuse themselvs, but the Emperor not willing to hear them, retired himself. Then Don Garzia de Padilla taking them aside, gave them a no∣table schooling, and reproved them sharply for what they had done, telling them that their boldness in insisting so much to the hinderance of a journie, which so deeply concerned not onely the honor and reputation of the Emperor, but al∣so the securitie and preservation of his Estate, was beyond the thought of pardon. And that the things which they had done, had been the occasion of disaffecting and disqui∣eting the mindes of other Commissioners, and of the whole Kingdom, by reason of the precedence and Autoritie, which Toledo had amongst all the Cities of Castilla, which they should do well to consider, and seriously to reflect upon. After this they went to the President of his Maje∣stie's Council (who was the Arch-Bishop of Granada) as the Emperor had commanded them. The President told them, that what hee had to give them for answer, was that his Majestie was going to hold a Parlament in the Citie of Santjago, where all the Commissioners of the Kingdom were to assemble, That Toledo should send theirs thither, with a memorial of the
things they desired, which beeing perused and examined, The Emperor would give such Orders as should bee most expedient for his service, and the general good of his King∣doms and Subjects, moreover hee willed them to desist from medling anie further in those matters, but to return and deal with their Citie, to send their Commissioners, as the other Cities of the Kingdom did, and not to affect such innova∣tions, as they had begun. Whereunto they made answer, that indeed they were not imploied by the Kingdom, but they desired however that those things might bee granted for the good of the Kingdom, And refusing to follow his advice, but rather thinking it a point of honor to persist in what they had begun, they followed the Emperor to San∣tjago. SECT. XV. THe Emperor passing through Leon, Astorga, and Villa Franca del Vierso was in everie place petitioned, that hee would bee pleased to keep the Parlament in Castilla, but they availed nothing. And these Commissioners of Toledo, beeing arrived at Santjago, sollicited very hard the Commissioners of the other Cities, that were likewise com thither, indeavoring to draw them to their opinion, pressing them to stand up∣on the same tearms Toledo did, as their Cities had offered. Those from Salamanca did the like, shewing themselvs much of the Toledo faction. The Emperor would by no per∣suasions bee brought to hold the Parlament in Castilla, but neer the Sea-side, becaus Xeures would have it so; and the Fleming desired it the rather, out of fear, that the People would murther him, for hee knew how ill hee was be∣loved amongst them, and hee perceived that if there were anie tumult or uproar, they would begin with him. Be∣sides, seeing himself verie rich, hee desired exceedingly to
bee out of Spain, and that if there should fall out anie muti∣nie, or disorder in Parlament, beeing near the Sea-side, hee could with more facilitie secure his person and goods. As for the Emperor's own particular, it concerned him no more to call a Parlament at Santjago, then at Valladolid or Burgos, or anie other Citie of Castilla. At last beeing arrived at Santjago at the end of March, with manie Grandees and Nobles of Spain, the Parlament be∣gan on Mundaie the first of April following, anno 1520, whereof was President Don Hernando de Vega Commendador Mayor de Castilla (Father to Don Iohn de Vega, who was Vice-King of Sicilia) a person of great note; Don Garcia de Padilla and Zapata were his Assistants. The Emperor sitting the first daie himself in Parlament, commanded that the Propositi∣ons should be made in his own hearing, which declared the just and great occasions, that pressed him to undertake the Journie hee was then upon, the extraordinarie ex∣spences it did require, and the vast charges hee had been at in coming into that Kingdom, besides the great Armies hee had raised, and maintained against the Infidels, and the charges of sending the Infante Don Fernando, his brother, out of that Countrie, desiring them that they would assist him with the accustomed Subsidies, and that in his absence they would keep the Peace and fidelitie, as from such loial and good Subjects might bee exspected. Although som Com∣missioners would have opposed the granting him anie such Subsidie,The Commis∣sioners of Sa∣lamanca refuse the Oath in open Parla∣ment. they did not however discover their intention that daie, onely the forenamed of Salamanca, who openly refused the solemnitie of the ordinarie Oath, unless his Maiestie would first grant them the things which they desired. Which beeing condemned for a great unmannerliness and disre∣spect, they were forbidden to come anie more into the hous. Then Don Pedro Lasso said, that hee had brought a memo∣rial and instructions from the Citie of Toledo, what hee was to do and grant in Parlament, and that his Majestie might see them, that hee could not go beyond his Commission,
but would perform and execute it in that manner, as should be most agreeable to his Majestie; otherwise hee would ra∣ther choose to bee cut in pieces, or have his head cut off, then to give his consent to a thing so prejudicial to his Citie, and the whole Kingdom.Dissentings in the Parla∣ment. This answer was back't by the Commissioners of Sevilla, Cordova, Salamanca, Toro, Zamora, and Sancho Zimbron, Commissioner of Avila, from which they could not bee drawn. Whereupon the Parlament was ad∣journed for three or four daies, there beeing amongst them such jealousies and fears as usually proceed from discontent∣ed mindes. SECT. XVI. THe Kingdom of Galicia was much distasted at this Par∣lament, becaus they had no Commissioner allowed, and that Zamora spake for them, notwithstanding Galicia was one of the greatest and most ancient Kingdoms of Spain, and the source of the greatest Nobilitie. The Arch-Bishop of of Santjago, Don Alonso de Fonseca (who was afterwards Arch-Bishop of Toledo) the Earl of Venavente, and the Earl of Villalva Don Hernando de Andrada, went all together to St Francisco, where the Parlament was kept,The Galician distasted. and having obtained entrance, they thus spake to the high Chancellor (who was President) and the Commissioners there present: It is not unknown that Ga∣licia is a distinct Kingdom from Castilla, that in former times they had their Votes in the Parlaments held in Castilla, and that (from a certain time only) they were subject to the Votes of the Citie of Zamora (which was of the Kingdom of Castilla and Leon) which was a great grievance and prejudice to them; therefore they did desire out of favor, of the Commissioners there present, and (if need were) they would require them, that they would admit of the Commissioners, which that Kingdom of Galicia should nominate, who should bee ready to obey whatsoever his Majestie should command them.
And in so doing they would oblige them very much: but in case they were refused, they protested, that they would not stand to anie thing, that the Commissioners of Zamora should denie or grant; and of that they desired witness. Hence grew som hurlie-burlie and tumult in the Parlament. For one Garci Ruyz de la Mota (Bishop Mota's brother) who was Commissioner for Burgos, took upon him to answer, and thwarted the Earl of Villalva, with language that was much displeasing. This was forthwith noised in the Court; whereupon the Emperor sent presently the Bishop Mota to quali∣fie the matter. Hee was hardly at the gate of the Cloister, where the Parlament was held, when hee met the Arch-Bi∣shop and the Earl coming forth. The Bishop perceiving the Earl of Villalva much incensed, to pacifie his choller, accost∣ed him with very smooth and civil Language, expressing much sorrow, that his brother had so much forgotten him∣self. Amongst other words that passed between the Bishop and the Earl, Villalva chanced to let slip these, You have a prettie fellow to your brother, my Lord Bishop, and withall hee swore, that (if they supported him) hee would join with Don Pedro Lasso. And in regard Don Pedro Lasso was so fixed to the interest of the Kingdom (which was not very pleasing to Xeures, and others that sate at the helm) These words of the Earl's were presently carried to the Palace; whereupon an Alcalde de Casa y Corte (that is, an officer in the nature of our Judges of oyer and terminer) commanded the arl to quit the Court within one houre, and not to return to it without his Majestie's per∣mission. At the houre's end hee went from Santjago to the Groyne, where his hous and estate laie. But soon after the Emperor going from Santjago to the Groyne, readmitted him into his presence and favor.
SECT▪ XVII. IN this Occurrence som Grandees of the Kingdom, which followed the Court, accused Xeures highly to Emperor, and bid him beware that the Fleming did not counsel him for his own ends. Hereupon there passed som angrie expressions betwixt Xeures, the Earl of Venavente and the Arch-Bishop of Santjago, and they began to breed factions in the Court. This Arch-Bishop and som others began to make private meetings,Emulations in the Court. and consult how they might provide themselvs with arms and men secretly. The Emperor perceived it, and if hee had not remedied it in time, hee had found it trouble∣som enough. The Earl of Venavente and others left the Court discontented; The Emperor knew the sidings and dissentions that had been in Toledo, and how they had refused to give a full power to their Commissioners (Don Iohn de Silva and Aguirre) which considered, the Emperor and his Council were of opi∣nion, that it would not be amiss to send to som of the chief Officers that opposed it, to come to Court, and send others, his Majestie's servants, to supplie their places, for taking som out and supplying their places with others, they might do whatsoever his Majestie commanded. To that effect were presently dispatched Orders, whereby Hernando de Avalos Iohn de Padilla, Iohn Carrillo, Gonzalo Gaytan, Don Pedro de Ayala and Pedro de Herrera (all Regidores and Officers of the Citie) were commanded under great penalties, everie man of them to make his personal appearance at the Court with∣in such a time: And Lope de Guzman, Rodrigo Ninio, and Mar∣tin de Ayala, were commanded under the same penaltie, to go to supplie their places at Toledo, to the end that these bee∣ing gon thither, and the others com away, the Citie might revoke the powers, which they had given to Don Pedro Lasso and Don Alonso, and give others to Don Iohn de Silva,
and Alonso de Aguirre. These Orders beeing signified to the above-named, they all excused themselvs, onely Herrera, who in obedience to his Majestie's Commands went to the Court. These weeds of dissention increased daie by daie in Toledo, and the other Cities of Castilla, and in the Court it self manie bitter words were buzzed up and down, coun∣tenancing and approving these proceedings, and the demands of Don Pedro Lasso and others, as tending to the general good of the Kingdom. SECT. XVIII. THe Messingers and Commissioners of Toledo and Salaman∣ca, with other associates, made this Request to the Rest; that in regard the Commissioners, which Toledo was to send particularly for that Parlament, were not yet com, and those which were there from Salamanca were not admitted, there should bee nothing granted, or determined until those of the one and of the other Citie were present. If otherwise, they protested, That it should not bee anie Prejudice to their Cities. This beeing ingrossed verie fair, they carriyd it to St Fran∣cisco where the Parlament sate, taking a Notarie with them called Antonio Rodriguez (who was afterwards Clerk of the Iunta) And they demanded Audience. But, notwithstand∣ing manie voted for them, those of Toledo were refused, and forbidden to enter, in respect they were not Commissioners ap∣pointed for that Parlament. Thereupon they made their Acts and Protests at the dore, saying, that the King's Commis∣sioners could not assemble in Parlament without the Com∣missioners of Toledo,The Toledians protest against the Parlament at Santjago. that their non-appearance proceeded from their own particular negligence, not anie fault of their Ci∣tie's, in regard they had their Powers delivered them, that they beeing members of the said Citie did require them not
to assemble in Parlament, until those Commissioners of Toledo were arrived, and against the contrarie they protested. And whatsoever should be enacted in anie such Parlament with∣out them, they declared to bee void and of none effect, and should bee no waies prejudicial to the Citie of Toledo, nor the whole Kingdom. Manie persons of note were wit∣nesses to this Protest, and it occasioned much scandal in the Court. Don Pedro Lasso and his companion slighted his Majestie's commands, which were signified to them by the Secretarie Covos. Which beeing told the Emperor, hee gave immediate command to banish them that verie daie (beeing Palm Sundaie); and accordingly in the evening his Secreta∣rie Francisco de los Covos, and Iohn Ramirez Secretarie to the Council of Iustice, went to the lodging of those Toledo-Commis∣sioners, and in the Emperor's name signified to each of them severally his Mjestie's pleasure, commanding Don Alonso de Suarez the next daie (beeing mundaie) to leav the Court, and that within two moneths hee should go serv nd reside, where that Companie of men laie whereof hee was Cap∣tain, where hee should remain until further order from his Majestie, under pain of forfeiting his goods, and the said Captain's place. Don Pedro Lasso was likewise commanded to absent from Court, the same Mundaie, and within for∣tie daies, to go and reside in the Government of the Fort of Gibraltar (which was his own inheritance) and not to de∣part thence, without the Emperor's leav, under penaltie of forfeiting that Command, and all the rest of his estate what∣soever. The Iurates were also commanded to leav the Court immediately. And there was order given in their lodgings, that they should not entertein them anie longer. They demanded Copies hereof, but were refused, so they went to Iohn Ramirez chamber, and by much importunitie they ob∣teined one, but not signed. The Toledians beeing extreamly troubled that they were banished the Court with so much rigor, two hours within night, Don Pedro, and Don Alonso with the Iurate Ortiz went to the Palace. Ortiz
went in to Xeures, and acquainted him tha such gentlemen were come to speak with him. Xeres bad him speak to his servants to set up lights in his chamber, and that they should stay there for him. Xeures beeing come, they spent above two hours together, and the result of their conference was: That it seemed they took it verie ill to bee thus forbidden the Court; therefore it was agreed that in testimonie of their obedience, they should go onely four or five leagues from Santjago, and should leav som bodie in their steads, to put him in minde to sollicite the Emperor to revoke their banishment. The next daie, beeing Tuesdaie, in the morning they went away, laving Alonso de Ortiz onely to sollicite Xeures, and to put him in minde of what was agreed betwixt them, and to tell him that Don Pedro Lasso and Don Alonso Suarez were gon to Padron (four leagues from Santjago) in obedience to his Majestie's Commands. Alonso de Ortiz returned to the Palace, and meeting Covos, hee desired him to help him to the speech of Xeures. Xeures beeing com forth, Ortiz be∣seeched him to perform what hee had promised to those gentlemen. Xeures told him, that hee had moved it alrea∣die to the Emperor, but could not prevail: And that (for ought hee saw) there was no remedie, but that they must obeie the extremitie of his Commands. Ortiz replied, that they should have a care what they did therein, and that it would not redound to the Emperor's service, not so much becaus those Commissioners were of the chief gentrie of the King∣dom, as that they were deputed and sent by the Citie of Toledo, who must take upon their accompt what trouble or injurie soever they suffered, in regard they had done no∣thing beyond, or contrarie to that which their Citie had encharged them, for the good of the Kingdom. Xeures answere, that they had not shewn the respect which they owe to their King, and for that they deserved the punish∣men which hee had inflicted upon them, and much more. Ortiz replied, That since hee had the greatest privacie and
freedom with his Majestie, hee was the more obliged to see to this matter, and to consider with attention, that the whole Kingdom knew that Toledo had sent those gentlemen to treat of that which concerned them all, and that seeing them thus banished the Court, they would not think it was for anie disrespect to his Majestie, (for if any such thing were they de∣served double punishment) but that they were turned out of the Court, that they might not solicite the Kingdom's good, and thereupon they would bee all scandalized, and such mischiefs would insue, as they would not bee able to remedy when they listed. Whereto Xeures very formally thus replied, what lightness is this of Toledo, what lightness I say? is the King no King? why doth no body think of putting Kings in and out at their pleasure? Alonso Ortiz answered again, that hee wondred, hee should speak so much against Toledo, it beeing of such consequence, that it was reputed the best and most considerable Citie of the Kingdom, and had the greatest priveleges and immunities, which the natives did enjoie, for the notable services they had don to the deceased Kings. Therefore it could not bee thought, that Toledo treated or in∣tended anie thing, but what might suit with his Majestie's service; Moreover, if hee pleased to look upon what gentlemen had gon into Flanders, to serv his Majestie against King Fernando's will (venturing there, not onely their own lives and fortunes, but their friend's and Kindred's also) hee would finde that the most of them were of Toledo. And that those of that Citie, were the cheif means of paying the subsidies to King Phillip. And since that Citie produced such gallant men, hee ought not to beleiv that It's intention ever was other, then to do his Majestie service. The Secretary Francisco de los Covos heard all this discours. These and divers other means the Toledian Commissioners used by favor of som great one's about the Emperor, to obtain a revocation of their banishment, but nothing would do, for Xeures and other Castilians of the privie Council, opposed it. Don Alonso Suarez prudently considering that their business was foyled, and in
danger of beeing utterly lost, performed what hee was com∣manded, and never after put himself into those troubles, nei∣ther did hee meddle during all the commotions of Castilla, whereby hee lost nothing. Don Pedro Lasso did the like (though late) not understanding sooner that hee disserved the King. Thus ended the Embassage of Toledo, which was so boldly and couragiously performed by these gentlemen. Before the Emperor departed from Santjago hee installed Knight of the Order the Earl of Santisteuan, the Marquess of Villena's son. The ceremony was celebrated with great solmnity at the great Altar in Santjago's Church. SECT▪ XIX. ON Tuesday in the Holie week before Easter, a Post came from Toledo with an express to recall their Com∣missioners; This Post was dispatch't before there was any notice of their beeing banished from Court. Hee brought letters to his Majestie, som from the Assemblie of the Citie, others from the Chapter of their Cathedral Church, and from the Monasteries and Fryeries, humbly begging therein a fa∣vorable treatment of their Commissioners, not as yet knowing what had passed. Moreover they mentioned how Don An∣tonio de Cordoua (the Earl of Cabra's brother) their Governor, then beeing at Toledo, had produced certain orders from his Majestie to Iohn de Padilla, Hernando de Avalos, and Gonsalo Gaytan, whereby they were commanded to make their perso∣nal appearance at Court, within a certain time, under penaltie for default. The reason that Toledo gave, why these gentle∣men did not obey, was, that they were emploied about som affairs concerning the publick good, and that their absence would bee prejudicial to the whole Citie. And therefore they beseeched that his Majestie would suspend his command for the present. The gentlemen that stayed at Padron, sent
this dispatch, with the instructions they had from Toledo, to A∣lonso Ortiz, who remained at Court. Hee presently went to the Monasterie of San Salvador, half a league from the Citie (where the Emperor had retired himself for the Holie week) and desi∣red to enter to deliver the letters to his Majestie, but hee found no admittance. Meeting Secretarie Covos, hee acquainted him with his business, and told him that hee had letters to deliver to the Emperor from Toledo, Covos told Xeures this, who forthwith sent for Ortiz, and bad him give him the letters. But Ortiz desired to bee excused, for hee had order to deliver them into the Emperors own hands, and to none els. Xeures told him, that the Emperor having received the Sacrament that morning, was yet at his devotion, and hee could not speak with him. Then they fell to discours again about those gentlemen's banishment, and grew so hot at it, that Xeures went away distasted, and Ortiz remained with small satisfacti∣on. A little after Covos came, and told Ortiz that Xeures cal∣led him. Ortiz went, and Xeures told him, that resolvedly hee could say nothing as touching their banishment, so with∣out any more words hee went into another room. Ortiz stayed behinde with Don Garcia de Padilla, who blaming ex∣ceedingly the proceedings of Toledo, said, if his counsel might bee taken, the Emperor should go thither (it would bee but ten daies work) and inflict som exemplary punishment upon them, that were occasion of those troubles, whereby the rest might bee deterred and quieted. I wish to God hee would, said Ortiz, for then his Majestie would see the great damages they suffered, and give order for som redress. So they parted, and Ortiz went that night to speak with the Lord Chancellor, for hee saw there was no possibilitie of delivering his letters to the Emperor, nor of speaking with him. The Chancellor and Ortiz spent a great part of the night, without concluding anie thing to the purpose. The Emperor remained at Santjago, untill the thursday in Easter week, and then departed for the Groyn, where hee made his entrance on Saturday following. Thither repaired also
the Parlament-men and Commissioners to conclude all their businesses. There were produced the testimonies, supplications and Acts, which the Regidores and Council of Toledo had made concerning the commanding them to appear at the Court, and the Power which the Citie sent to Alonso Ortiz, charging him to do all the diligences therein expedient, which hee did, and presented himself to the Secretary Ramirez. And more∣over were delivered the second Orders for their appearance, with greater penalties, which had bin sent to Toledo and noti∣fied to the gentlemen there. SECT. XX. BY this time Toledo had notice of their Commissioner's banish∣ment, and of the ill success of their affairs in Court, which, added to the distaste those Orders had bred in them, so exasperated their mindes that their passions grew beyond the bounds of moderation. Som were seazed with fear, others with vaporing speeches carried it very high, and set themselvs to excite the People against the Iudges, and those that shewed themselvs desirous to advance their Prince's ser∣vice, possessing them that this was for the publick good, and that it was their interests and profit, that then was in agitation, especially Hernando de Avalos, Iohn de Padilla, and som others of their faction.Rather the chief instru∣ment of the Common good. It is true, at the beginning of these disorders, Iohn de Padilla was the onely Bouttefeu, Hernando de Avalos and other gentlemen were his Abettors and Promoters, who added fewel to the fire, beeing persons of mature age and experience and had acquired the repute of wise men a∣mongst the Common people.The Autor undervalue's Iohn de Padilla out of passion, for contrary to his discrip∣tion hee was a man of Singu∣lar wit, lear∣ning and ma∣ture judgment and his Wife was a Ladie Nobly descended and the most Mas∣culine, He∣roick Spirit that ever Spain bred. Iohn de Padilla's fault was, that hee was young, not above thirtie years of age, and not verie readie witted either, but good natured, and easie to bee perswaded to any thing, they would put him upon: and hee wanted no instigation from these gentlemen and his wife
Donia Maria Pacheco, who was one of the Kingdome's fire∣brands. They possessed the vulgar with a thousand follies, and lies intermingled with som trueths. That the Emperor, deserted the Kingdome, that hee left Strangers to govern, that his favorites and Officers had robb'd the Kingdom, leaving the Countrie lean, poor and dismantled of all it's fruits and wealth: These things they caused to bee publish∣ed in the Pulpits, And to the end they might the better com∣municate their passion, and give everie one a dose of this in∣fectious drug, they advised to assemble the people. In that Citie there is a great Congregation or fraternitie called the frater∣nitie of Charitie, which used every year to make a Solemn Pro∣cession; upon this occasion there was one ordained to go from St Iusta's Church to the Cathedral. Som (especially Don Her∣nando de Silva, Antonio Alvarez de Toledo, and others of their o∣pinion) knowing to what end this Solemnitie was orday∣ned, highlie opposed it, saying that, it was prejudicial to the King, and that it was onely a plot and cunning trick of those that were disaffected, and Don Hernando required the chief of the Congregation not to make anie such tumultuous meetings (under color of devotion) to disturb the People to the King's prejudice and dishonor of justice, for if they did, hee with his friends and servants would hinder it. They valued not these words but rejoiced that Don Hernando de Silva did ap∣pear in the business, for that would open them the way (as they desired) to augment the distemper of the People, and enkindle their indignation. And it fell out so, for the People resenting and condemning highly Don Hernando's request, looked on him as an enimie of the Countrie, and as one that did not onely contradict and hinder the good of the common people; But also the most sacred practices of devo∣tion. To bee short, they did go in Procession and in the Let∣anie they praied that God would enlighten the understanding and direct the Heart of the Emperor well and piously to rule and govern those Kingdoms. Don Hernando did not exe∣cute his Intention, beeing advertised to the contrarie by the
Governor, to avoid further scandal. In the Procession there were som things done, more then needed, in scorn and de∣rision of those that did not follow that opinion, and much murmuring against them. Wherewith the People gener∣ally thence forwards were so infected, and divers grew so audacious, that justice had no force nor respect among them. The disorder and confusion became excessive, and there was nothing in the Citie done, for the most part, or conclu∣ded in Council or without, but what was dictated or appro∣ved by Hernando de Avalos, and Iohn de Padilla. So Don Hernando de Sylva resolved to leav Toledo and go to the Emperor. SECT. XXI. THe Emperor knew all this, when Alonso Ortiz petitio∣ned concerning the Orders for the Officers of Toledo to appear in Court, and Commanded to bee delivered the Se∣cond Orders, that I mentioned, which were notified. Iuan de Padilla delt with two gentle-men (his kinsmen) one called Pedro de Acunia (who married one of his sisters) the other Diego de Merlo (who married a Cousin-german of his) both powerful men in Toledo: telling them, they knew that the Emperor had sent for him and other gentlemen of the Citie, to make their perso∣nal appearance at Court. And that upon the first and second Orders they had excused themselvs, but the third Command beeing com,This Plot the Fryer writ up∣on report. they could not bauk it. They had a thought, (becaus they would not have their not o∣beying seem to bee their faults, but rather that they could not go) That those gentlemen with their Allies, Abbettors, friends and servants, assembling together should make a kinde of mutinie in the Citie, and apprehending them should detain them and by no means consent to their departure, whereof having certificate, they might send it to the Court for their
defence, and by that invention bee freed from the Penalties mentioned in the Orders. Those two gentlemen Pedro de Acunia and Diego de Merlo (who had bin bred at Court) pru∣dently considering what Iohn de Padilla and the rest of his Consorts demanded, told them, that Proposition sounded not well in their ears, and they desired to bee excused for not ingaging in so rash and unadvised an enterprise. Iohn de Pa∣dilla and the rest, perceiving there was no hopes of bringing these men to their byas, went and agreed with the Fryars of St Augustin and those of St Iuan de los Reyes, That the general Procession beeing com from the Cathedral Church to the Au∣gustines, and the People all assembled, those Fryars should lay hands upon them (whom his Majestie had commanded to appear in Court) (which they alleadged they might safely do, in regard men of their Coat had nothing to loos, and were exempt besides from any punishment the King could iuflict upon them.) This beeing agreed upon, it hapned that going in the Procession Hernando de Avalos and Don Fran∣cisco de Herrera, a Canon of Toledo and Chaplain Major of the King's Chappel (who was afterwards Arch-Bishop of Granada ten daies onely) fell to words; which occasioned so great a nois and hurly-burly amongst the People, that to pacifie them the former agreement was forgotten, So their design took no effect. Padilla and his Consorts, seeing they could not accomp∣lish their desires, That the Emperor departed not the Kingdom as yet, and that the prefixed time of their appearance at Court was exspired,Neither were these men such base fellows as hee make's them but per∣sons of quali∣ty. fearing least the Governor of Toledo should exe∣cute the Penalties specified in the Orders, or apprehend them and send them to Court▪ They resolved to accost certain mean fel∣lows of Scandalous and mutinous dispositions that led a shif∣ting and discontented life about the Citie, The chief whereof were one called Xara, and a Petifogging Solliciter) to whom they promised large rewards, giving them order, with the rest of their gang, to seiz upon them. These Fellows knowing that Hernando de Avalos Iohn de Padilla, and the rest, were great sticklers for the good of the Kingdom, and that particularly for
the benefit of that Citie they had exposed themselvs to so great danger, They thought themselvs obliged to countenance and assist them, and not to suffer them to go out of Toledo, and were glad of the Emploiment; For besides that of their own disposition they were seditious, and naurally affected novelties, the hope of recompence, and seeing what esteem and value those Gentlemen set upon them, animated them with a desperate vain courage to doe, as followeth. SECT. XXII. HErnando de Avalos and Iohn de Padilla, seeing their de∣sign goe forward to their own contentments, agreed to make a shew as if they intended to perform the Emper∣ror's Commands, in appearing at Court. So beeing fitted for the journey they took Witnesses of their departure, the six∣teenth of April: Iohn de Padilla was no sooner out of his hous, but a rabble of forty or fiftie men (who had the watch-word) met him in the street, and in a violent tumultuous manner laying hands on him, som cryed out, let us keep Iohn de Padil∣la here, let him not go to the Court: Others, let us never consent that hee or any of the other gentlemen should go out of Toledo; for that would bee the ruine of the Common-People, and it were an exceeding crueltie and ingratitude to let them go to the Court to suffer there.Tumults in Toledo. Hereupon the People so flocked from all parts of the Citie, that in very short time they exceeded the number of six thousand men; most of them beeing armed, cryed out with loud voices, kill kill Xeures and the Flemings that have robb'd Spain, and let Hernando de Avalos, and Iohn de Padilla (the Fathers and Defenders of this Republick) live, let them live: With this tu∣multuous nois and hubbub they hurried away Iohn de Padil∣la prisoner, notwithstanding hee protested and required them (with a cunningly framed dissimulation) that they would let him go to fulfil the commands hee had received
from his Majestie. Having put him into a Chappel in a Part of the Cathedral Church, called the Bishop Don Pedro Te∣noma's Cloister, they made him swear as hee was a gentlman, that hee would remain a Prisoner in that Chappel, and not offer to stir out of it without leav or order from them. then they fetched Hernando de Avalos, Gonsalo Gaytan, Don Pedro de Ayala and the rest, and committing them all prisoners in the same Chappel, they set guards upon them. These gentlemen made protest upon protest against that detaining of them, whereby they were disenabled to undertake their jour∣nie to Curt, and perform what the Emperor's Orders imported, but they were very glad within themselvs of that invention so handsomly to prevent their going. SECT. XXIII. THis done, the same Mutineers went to the Governor Don Antonio de Cordoua, and required him to recall and make void the Notification of the Emperor's Orders, which hee had made to those gentlemen, and chiefly that hee would command them, under pain of death, not to obey that summons. The Governor began to shew his courage, and commanded a Proclamation to bee read in every street, that they should all retire to their dwellings and lay down their Armes. But they slighted his autoritie and in stead of obeying, they began to cry out, som let us kill him, others let us turn him and all his Officers out, and choos others for the Communalty. Seeing himself in this danger, and possessed with a panick fear, to pleas the People, Hee did what they required, And sent immediately to the Gentlemen Prisoners an absolute Command not to go out of the Citie, but remain there, for so doing would bee more conducing to his Majestie's service. Hereof they took certificates, which they sent to Alonso Ortiz, that hee might present them to his Majestie in their defence,
which hee did accordingly, and spake to som of the Council about it, believing the matter had been really so, and urging for instance that his Majestie did not see what was most expe∣dient for the Kingdome's good, as they desired. Som are of opi∣nion that if the Governor of Toledo had Punished that sedi∣tious tumult in stead of condescending to their desires (which hee might then have don) hee had prevented a world of miserie and mischief, that was occasioned by the succeeding war. For the beginners of that hubbub were not many, and of meanest of the people. And at that time there were divers gentlemen in Toledo, who would have assisted him in the suppressing of them, especially Don Iohn de Sylva with divers of his kindred and opinion, although som of them were drawn the other way. The Governor's timiditie and want of resolu∣tion so much emboldned the People, that they seized on him and others that would have prosecuted against the first and chief instruments of this commotion. Which had been other∣wise carried if the Governor had had so much Spirit and cou∣rage as hee ought, but that was so little, that hee retired him∣self into his hous, where hee continued som few dayes without anie power or respect, after which hee left the Citie for fear least the People should murther him. SECT. XXIV. HErnando de Avalos and Iohn de Padilla perceiving that to avoid one mischief they had fallen into a greater, be∣thought themselvs that (in respect the Emperor was then ready to go out of the Kingdom, to excuse and free themselvs from the punishment which the Governor (though hee deferred it) was to inflict upon them) It would bee most expedient for their purpose to incite the whole people to rise up in Arms, and having possessed themselvs of the justice, the Fort, and the bridges, to defend themselvs against whomsoever. To this
effect they solicited som Fryers and Priests to declare with ag∣gravation in their Pulpits the damages and miseries the Kingdom then suffered, That no Offices nor Benefices of va∣lue were bestowed upon the Natives, but the Flemings en∣joied all▪ That no places of Trust or Honor were confer∣red upon them, for either their's or their Predecessor's merits or services, but must bee purchased with great sums of monie. Thus began the Priests to move the People's hearts, Com∣mending and applauding much what they had don, and ur∣ging that the Kingdom was tyranised over: That the Casti∣lians were debased and vilified. That they should bee loaded with new taxes, That every head of Cattle should pay such a rate, and every hous so much. And that in this respect whosoever would ingage himself in the defence of the King∣dom, with the liberties and freedoms thereof, should purchase an eternall memorie. Hereupon the fire grew so violent that those who discreetly would not ingage in these combustions, for fear of beeing murthered, were enforced either to flie from the Citie, or confine themselvs to their own houses. And the most considerable, amongst whom were som Regidores and Iurates of the Citie, took refuge in the Fort with Don Iohn de Rivera, or Sylva, who kept it at his own charge, and was re∣tired thither, with som of his Kindred, Children, and ser∣vants. Thence hee sent to his Tenants in several places to bring him in provisions, for the sodain and unexspected ne∣cessitie of his flying thither did not permit to furnish himself with what was needful. And those of the Communalty (as they already styled themselvs) which was the rest of the Citie, following them who took upon them to bee the most wise, set themselvs to fortifie and repair the wals and places of im∣portance, fearing the damage they might receive from abroad (for within they feared nothing) and possessed themselvs of the gates and Bridges which were under Don Iohn's com∣mand.
SECT. XXV. THings beeing in this condition the Earl of Palma, Don Luis Puerto Carrero fearing the mischiefs this Com∣motion might produce, sent an express to inform the Emper∣or of the several passages in the Citie, that he might so∣dainly provide som remedy. In this interim, Don Pedro Lasso, Don Alonso Suarez, Miguel de Hita and Alonso Ortiz were com again all to Santago, and although som gentlemen, their friends had counselled them to bee gon in order to his Majestie's commands, and not to stay any longer about the Court, be∣caus the Emperor (beeing already incensed at the Audacious∣ness of the Toledians) might perchance command them to bee punished, as believing them to bee the occasioners thereof. Yet they still continued at Santago without fearing much what could befal them. The Constable of Castilla and Garci Lasso de la Vega, Don Pedro Lasso's brother, Seeing this, earn∣estly desired the King's Soliciter (who was resident at Toledo) that hee would with all expedition go to Santago, and per∣swade them to depart thence, becaus Don Pedro Lasso had but five dayes remaining of the forty which were limited him to retire to Gibraltar. The Soliciter presently took Post for Santjago, and communicated to them what the Constable and Garci Lasso had injoined him, besides hee told them his own o∣pinion and how rotten the hearts of the People were in Toledo▪ Hee prevailed with Don Pedro Lasso, that he should depart the next day (which hee did). Passing through Zamora hee declared there what commands had bin layd upon him, which troubled and incensed the People, as you shall see here∣after.
SECT. XXVI. THe Common People of Toledo beeing thus distempered, they determined to possess themselvs of the Fort as well as of the Gates and bridges of the Citie. To this effect a nois was spread amongst them that Don Iohn de Sylva was a Traytor to the good of the Communalty, and that it was fit to take the Fort from him and turn him out of Toledo. The Multitude gathered together to assault it, and in regard during the Reigns of the Catholick Kings there had bin so much peace and so little use of armes, all Forts and places of strength were very ill repaired, and unprovided aswel of arms as victu∣als. Don Iohn perceiving the People's fury and malice (as you have heard) fortified himself the best hee could, taking into the Fort with him divers gentlemen and others to the number of about four hundred, all resolved to defend themselvs against the People, if assailed by them. The multitude perceiving this, determined first to take the Gates and Bridges of the Citie; so they went forthwith to the Gate of Visagra, and to the Port of Cambron which they gained without resistance. One of the Iurates called Miguel de Hita (who the was joint-Commissioner with Don Pedro Lasso and Don Alonso Suarez) was commander of the Bridg of Alcantara, in whose absence his Lievtenant could not so wel defend the tower of the bridg but that in short time they were masters of it. Thence they went to St Martin's Bridg, whereof was Commander Clement de Aguayo a man of great courage, and hee had provided himself with som friends and servants to help him, they assaulted him desperately, and hee with no less resolution defended himself, until by meer strength they forced an entrance into the first Tower of the Bridg on that side towards the Citie,Their grounds were good and had suceeded better if they had not bin betrayed by som of the Nobility. for such infinites of Common People and gentry flocked thither (many thinking that rising to bee upon better grounds and
with a better intention then afterwards it appeared) and the boyes flowed in such multitudes thither, that with brick∣bats and stones from an eminent place neer tey made them quit the top of the Tower. The assault beeing thus hot from several parts, at last they made breaches and entred with such fury, that taking the Commander they wounded him sorely in two places and threatned to hang him, if hee would not send to command the other tower of the bridg towards the fields to bee surrendred to them; but hee couragiously putting his life to the venture would send no such Order. Hee beeing secured they fell desperately upon the other tower, but they within seeing the success of the former and their Commander taken, had not the courage to stand out, but delivered it immediately to the Citie, Thus they got all the bridges and Gates into their own hands. Thence they mar∣ched in very great numbers (All armed) to the Fort, resol∣ving to take it by assault if it were not sodainly surrendred to them. Som religious men grieving much at the mischiefs and death of divers persons which must needs ensue so violent an assayling, became mediators betwixt Don Iohn de Sylva (who defended the Fort) and the better sort of those that came against it: This treaty continued a good while; at length Don Iohn seeing divers of his neer kinsmen against him, his friends and Allies, and considering that hee wanted provisions to make anie long resistance, to avoid the damages his standing out might have occasioned, suffered himself to bee per∣swaded to deliver up the Fort, upon condition that one of his own servants should remain as Commander having first taken the Oath of fealty. Thus on Saturday 21 of April Don Iohn and his Children with the other gentlemen and friends that were retired thither, came out of the Fort, and went to a village of his four leagues thence, from which place hee wrote again to the Emperor informing him how the People had taken the Fort from him, and possessed themselvs of all the Gates and Bridges of the Citie, which news incen∣sed his Majestie very much, yet hee did not resolve to send any
Souldiery thither, becaus every one told him that beeing a business of no foundation, it must needs fall again of it self. All this passed before the Governor went out of the Citie, or gave up his Staff. So all the Common People, con∣ducted by their Chiefs, went next unto his hous and made him swear that hee should hold his staff, or acknowledg his autoritie and Office as from the Communalty of Toledo. Hee beeing affrighted with this tumult, condescended to what they would have him do; the People soon after broke out, and did what they listed, seeing him so helpless and so void of reso∣lution. The Citie thus wanting both Governor and Don Iohn de Sylva, Those of the Communaltie became freemen and Lords of all, They constituted Deputies, and began to settle a form of government at their own pleasures, Saying they did it in the name of the King, Queen and Communaltie. In this manner began the great troubles and commotions of Toledo. SECT▪ XXVII. DOn Pedro Lasso arrived at a village of his, called Cueua, in his way to Gibraltar, whither hee intended to go like a good and Loial Subject in obedience to his Majestie's Command, although the fortie dayes (hee was limited) were expired. But Toledo having notice of his beeing there, They sent to desire him to return to the Citie. Hee would have excused himself, Saying that hee was to repair to Gibraltar in Order to that which the Emperor had commanded. whereupon they or∣dered a party of Hors to seiz upon him and bring him thi∣ther, Hee not beeing able to withstand them, went (though seemingly) against his will, and got privately into his own hous, but could not keep himself long concealed, for the People gathering presently together went to his hous, and forcing him to com forth, carried him to the Church. Hee rode on horsback and the People went on foot by him
with great acclamations of joie applauding and extolling the Valor and resolution hee had shewen in their behalfs (for indeed at that time Hee was beloved and highly esteemed not onely of that People, but of the whole Kingdom)▪ This favor and honor which everie one did him made him not reflect so soon upon his Error. For Don Pedro was a very sweet dispositioned gentleman without malice, and, be∣sides his good natur, a great friend to justice and the weal of his country, and therefore hee ingaged so far in those first broils. Whosoever knew what hee was, will acknowledg all this, for the noble bloud that ran in his veins would not suffer him to degenerate from his Ancestor's generositie, who were of the Grandees of Spain, Hee beeing son to Don Garci Lasso de la Vega, Comendador mayor de Leon, (one of the most renowned gentlemen that were in the times of the Catholick Kings);Extraction of Don Pedro Lss. Sa∣cha de Guzman Ladie of Batres, descended from that most illu∣strious familie of the Guzmans of Leon, was his mother. Hee was nephew to Don Gomez Xuarez de Figueroa Father to the first Earl of Feria, and to the Lady Eluina Lasso de la Vega, sister to the Marquis of Santillana, which two houses Vega and Mendosa, were of the most Illustrious families of all Spain. This was his extraction, and it is to bee expected that his thoughts and desires to serv his Prince should bee correspondent, as the Emperor and his son King Philip had good experience of afterwards. Who in times very troublesom (when they had need of men of resolution and loialty) sent Garci Lasso, Don Pedro Lasso's son, their Embassador to Paul the fourth about businesses of very high consequence and great difficulty. I finde my self obliged to this digression for the honor of so noble a person, It beeing no less then my dutie not to suffer such eminent virtues to bee buried in Obli∣vion, although it doth somwhat hinder the Story.
SECT. XXVIII. IT was generally voted by the Communalty of Toledo (which already gave themselvs the attribute of Holie) for further security of their place and persons, That it was ex∣pedient to turn the Governor and all his Officers out of the Citie, notwithstanding hee had taken an Oath to Officiate for them. For the better effecting whereof they raised a mu∣tinie pretending to kill him, and to take away the staves from Him, his Lievtenant and other Officers, who presently deli∣vered them for fear of their lives. The Governor, the Lord chief Justice and the High Sheriff, fled to Don Pedro Lasso's hous for refuge, where hee secured them, and Hernando de A∣valos with som other gentlemen: The tumult of the Com∣mon People beeing appeased, they were conducted out of the Citie on foot, then they took hors and rode to Alcala de Henares. Whence the Governor sent one of his Officers, named Don Pedro del Castillo, to inform the Emperor of these passages in Tole∣do. The Citie set guards at all their gates and Avenues, that no body should go out to give notice of their proceedings, nor anie one com in without beeing examined who hee was, whence hee came and what letters hee brought. All this was done by the general command and consent of all the gentlemen that assisted in this insurrection of the Common People, and all the Fryers and Priests, excepting som few who absented and withdrew themselvs, though with danger of their lives. The Order they kept to conform themselvs in these disorders, was, That every time they were to treat of anie business, the inhabitants of every perticular parish were to assemble, and two publick Notaries with them, before whom every man, how mean soever, was to sit down and declare his opinion.
SECT. XXIX. THe 8th of Maie in the same year was published at the Groyn this rising of Toledo, som were glad of it, others sorry, every one according as hee stood affected. Som ad∣vised the Emperor to take post and go to Toledo, and inflict som exemplarie punishment upon the principal delinquents, which might bee a means to keep the whole Kingdom in subjection. The Emperor beeing young and full of Spirit approved of that counsel, but Monsieur de Xeures disswaded him, fearing greater disorders if hee went thither, and know∣ing the strength and scituation of that Citie, besides conside∣ring the heat of the people's fury, and that the mischief would bee greater, if they had the impudence to affront him in Person, as it was probable they would, fearing to bee pu∣nished for what they had don already; That their fury beeing most violent in the beginning (which time alone could miti∣gate and appeas) their first impetuosity would soon bee over, as most commonly it is observed in such commotions, which kindled with a little fire and without any grounds, are allayed again with as little water. Besides all these allegations Xeu∣res had a longing desire to bee in his own Country, verifying in that this saying, That wheresoever the Treasure is, there is the heart also. Moreover the Emperor had a particular necessitie, for a thousand reasons which neerly concerned the reputaton of his person, not to defer his departure, but rather to hasten it all hee could, beeing exceedingly urged by the Princes Electors, and that hee might not give his enemies anie time to hinder the Election of the Empire, the King of England beeing then like∣wise in expectation of som interest therein. And besides it was of no small consequence for him to bee gon, before the King of France was joined with the King of England, who were reported to meet the first of Iune at Calis. These considerations
setled the Emperor's determination of going into Germanie, his Council supposing that the business of Toledo would go no further, no body imagining what afterwards did ensue. SECT. XXX. THings beeing in the condition I have declared, The Commissioners of Toledo never came to the Parlament, which was concluded by them that were there, who gran∣ted his Majestie the subsidie hee desired, which was two hun∣dred Millions of Marauediz to bee payd in three years, where∣unto som would not consent, and those that did had trouble and displeasure enough from their Cities for it. Salamanca, Toro, Madrid, Murcia, Cordoua, and Toledo opposed, whose Commisioners had no hand in the granting it, neither came they into the Parlament-hous; One of the Commissioners of Leon refu∣sed it, the other consented. Of those that did allow it, som were induced thereto by their own particular interests, few out of zeal or affection to his Majestie's service. The Emperor beeing ready to depart, onely staying for a winde, and his desire granted for matter of subsidie (although som of his Council were of opinion that hee should not receiv it, as Don Alonso Telles, Lord of La Puebla de Montalvan, Bishop Mota and Francisco de Vargas) His Majestie sent for those Grandees of the Kingdom that were then there, who were Don Diego Lopez de Pacheco Marquis of Villena, Don Inigo de Velasco Constable of Castilla, the Earl of Venavente, the Duke of Alburquerque, the Duke of Medina Celi, the Marquis of Astorga, the Earl of Lemos, the Earl of Monterrey, and the Commissioners of the Kingdom then present, to whom hee sayd hee was then ready to depart, beeing neerly concerned in the election of the Empire, and that, God willing, hee would sodainly return, In mean time hee left governor of those Kingdomes the Cardinal Adriano Bishop of Tortosa one of his Council, who was a person eminent for his lear∣ning
and good conscience, and hee required and com∣manded them to assist and favor him that his Kingdomes might bee well governed. The major part of these gentle∣men disliked this motion for som reasons, whereof one was that the Cardinal was a stranger, but som approving it, the Emperor took no notice of the opposers, neither did hee admit of any replies. SECT. XXXI. THe Emperor being at the Groyn divers requests were made to him in the Kingdoms name, as followeth, That his Majestie would bee pleased to return speedily into those King∣domes and govern them in his own person, as his prede∣cessors had done. For nothing that they could ask him would bee so satisfactore and acceptable to those Kingdoms as his safe and speedy return, in regard Spain was not accusto∣med to bee without their King, neither could they bee gover∣ned by any other with the peace and quiet which is necessary and expedient. That assoon as hee should com back hee would bee pleased to marry for the universal good of the Kingdoms, that they might have the seed of his Roial Per∣son to succeed him, in regard his age did require it. That the Queen's Court might bee put into such order as was suita∣ble to the dignitie of Her Roial Person and the honor of those Kingdoms. That Shee might have Officers of trust about her, who should bee well treated and incouraged with good rewards. That at his return hee would bee pleased to bring with him no Flemings, French, or other strangers, to have any Office of importance in those Kingdoms, but that hee would advance and employ the natives of that Country who would serv him with much loyaltie and affection. That those King∣doms
beeing at Peace and under his Majestie's subjection, hee would not bring anie souldiers of Forreign Countries for defence thereof, or to bee guards of his own person. Al∣leadging that in that Countrie the People beeing very warlike and of courage enough to conquer other Nations, what might they think could bee the reason, but his distrust of them, if hee should take strangers for his guard. That Hee would govern and settle his hous in such order as the Catholick Kings his fore∣fathers, and other Kings his Predecessors had done. That no wa∣ges or pensions should bee given to the Wives or Chil∣dren of anie Courtiers that were not in service, unless in acknowledgment and recompence of services done by the Father deceased, hee would gratifie the surviving Chil∣dren. That in regard there were many superfluous Offi∣ces added in the Queen's houshould, which were not of former times, they should bee all taken away again, and no Salaries allowed for them. That no Grandee should have anie office in the King's or Queen's houshould as in relation to the Exchequer or Treasurie. That whilest his Majestie was absent the Salaries of his Domes∣ticks should bee payed out of his own Revenue. That the Governors they were to have during his absence might bee Natives of either of those Kingdomes of Castilla or Leon. That such Governors might have power to confer anie Offices or dignities of the Kingdom, except, Bishopricks, Lievtenantships, and Commanderies of Or∣ders. That neither the King nor anie Noblemen should give billets for lodging, and in case they did that the Peo∣ple should not bee obliged to reciev them unless they listed. But when his Majestie goeth his progress, That there should bee lodgings and furniture provided for his familie and Court gratis, so that hee make no longer stay then fifteen dayes in a place, if more, afterwards hee should pay; And that his guard and Souldiery bee lodged and quartered according to the usual manner. That there should bee one hundred lodgings and no more provi∣ded
for his Majestie's familie at the Charge of the Place where hee shall stay. That there should bee no lodging allowed for those of the Council, Judges, nor anie such like Officers. That the King should not give general or particular billets for the lodging of anie. That the taxes and impositions should bee reduced to a certain number, and the Pole-monie set at a just and moderate rate, whereby the People might perceiv the grace and favor his Majestie did them. That the subsidies granted by the Commissioners at the Groyn, should not bee received nor demanded, neither should there bee anie ew taxes or extraordinary tribute imposed upon the King∣dome without som evident necessitie, and that it were thought requisite for the good of the Kingdom and his Majes∣tie's service. That the King should not end any instructions to the Cities, or form of granting Powers, nor nominate a∣ny particular men for Officers: but that the Cities and towns should have the freedom and libertie to bestow and confer their Powers upon such men as they should finde zealous for the good of their Republicks. That the Commissioners in Parlament should have the libertie to meet when and where they pleased, and to discours and confer freely with one another. That such Commissioners during their emploiment, should not re∣ceiv of the King anie Office, favor or gift whatsoever, for themselvs, their Wives, Children or kindred, under pain of death and confiscation of goods, and that those goods should bee em∣ployed for the publick reparations of the Citie or Town whereof they were Commissioners, to the end that they should bee the more careful to do onely that which was most expedi∣ent for the glory of God, the service of his Majestie and good of the Kingdom. That everie Commissioner or Burgess should have a competent allowance from the place whose persons they re∣presented. That the Parlament beeing ended, the several Com∣missioners should return within forty dayes to give account of what they had done under pain of losing their wages and emploiment. That no gold or Silver, coyned or to bee coy∣ned, should bee transported out of the Kingdom under pain of
death; In regard the contrary having been done the King∣domes were impoverished and destroied. That there should bee monie coyned differing as well in value as stamp from that of the neighboring Countries, and that it should bee of a base alloy two Carats under the rate of the finest gold. That in Weight and value it should bee answerable to the Crowns of Gold which are coyned in France: Becaus that would bee a means that it should not bee transported. Manie other ar∣tickles were given in touching gold and silver, the particular favors and rewards of the King, and other matters of justice: But that which they insisted most upon was, that the Councils should bee strictly looked to. That the Chancery and other Courts in the Kingdom should bee visited or reviewed from six to six years, and that all suits should bee dispatched in order, and determined whithin a certain time without any delay. That there should bee no appealing from Court to Court, but that each case should bee decided at it's own Tribunal. That no Counsellor or other whosoever should enjoie two offices, but should apply himself to one onely. These and manie other things the Nobles and Commissioners of the Kingdom desired, but they fell into the hands of Stran∣gers, the King beeing young and full of thoughts of his Voi∣age and possession of his Empire; So they remained. And in regard these and other such like propositions were slighted and layd aside (though presented with much zeal and affecti∣on) the whole Kingdom burst out, and slipping in one, they fell into the Precipice of manie inconveniences, (as it is com∣monly seen). They desired one thing, verie Holie, in the Chapter concerning Ecclesiastical dignities and pensions, That they should not bee conferred upon strangers, and that the acts of Naturalization which had been made should bee revoked. That in the Ecclesiastical Courts there should bee no more du∣ties payed, then in the secular, and that they should observ the same Statute. (Which I would it were well seen unto in these times.) There were likewise som complaints and Petitions given in against Pedrarias de Avila, a gentleman of good
note and quality (brother to the Earl of Punio en Rostro) and who had done great services; yet hee was accused by som of his enemies and charged for having put manie to death unjustly at the discoverie of the Indies, and committed divers Robberies and Tyrannies. There were seaven consultations hereupon, and Pedrarias was quitted by them all; and the Emperor himself (taking particular notice of the services which hee had done at Oran in Africa, and the taking of Buxia, besides other places in the Indies) freed him notwithstanding these fals and passionate accusations, and confirmed him in the government and charge which formerly had been con∣ferred upon him, and gave him som rewards besides. But all this was not sufficient to stop the mouths of his enemies, who gave occasion to strangers not onely of speaking ill, but also of writing against this gentleman, who was valiant in his own person, and of antient extraction in this King∣dom; And others (not knowing to the contrary) have followed them in the prejudicial censure of this nation and the Nobilitie thereof. SECT▪ XXXII. TO the grief of those gentlemen who took ill Cardinal Adriano's beeing Governor, by a general consent of the Council, and Don Antonio de Rojas Arch-Bishop of Granada, then President,Cardinal A∣driano made Governor du∣ring his M∣jestie's absence. Hee was confirmed Governor of Castilla and Navarra jointly with those of his Council, who were Don Alonso Tellez Lord of la-Puebla de Montalvan, Hernando de Vega Chancellor of the order in Castilla,His Council. Don Iohn de Fonseca Bishop of Burgos, Don Antonio de Rojas Arch-Bishop of Granada and President of his Majestie's Council of Justice, and Francisco de Vargas Treasurer general; these were to reside at Valladolid. An∣tonio de Fonseca Lord of Coca was appointed Captain Gene∣ral of the kingdom, and Don Iohn, Brother to the Bishop of
Burgos, his Treasurer. Don Iohn de la Nuza was Governor of Aragon, Don Diego de Mendoza, brother to the Marquis of Zenete, Vice-Roy of Valencia. All being thus ordered for the Government of the kingdom, and the winde coming faire, upon Saturday the 19.th of May at Sun-set, The Emperor commanded to bee Proclaimed, That all the mariners and his retinue should goe on board that night, for the next day in the morning hee would set saile.The Emperor imbark's for Flanders. Sunday the 20.th of May before day hee did his devotion and received the Sa∣crament, after which hee tooke ship, Don Alonso de Fonseca Arch-Bishop of Santjago, Don Iuan de Fonseca Bishop of Burgos, Don Inigo de Velasco Constable of Castilla and Leon, Don Diego Lopez Pacheco Marquis of Villena, Don Alonso Pimentel Earl of Benavente, Don Iohn Osorio Marquis of Astorga, and divers other persons of quality waited on him to the Sea-side: Those that imbarked with him were Don Fadrique de Toledo Duke of Alva, the Marquis of Villa Franca and his son, Don Hernando de Andrade Earl of Andrade, Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, who did great services to the Emperor, and Monsieur de Xeures with the rest of the Flemings. So with a most harmonious noise of Minstrels and Trumpets they weighed ancker, and set saile with great acclamations of joy, leaving sad Spaine over-charged with sorrow and misfortunes. They shaped their course directly for England, and the sixth day the whole Fleet arrived at the Downs.Hee arrive's in England The same day (being whitsun∣day) The Emperor landed with all his nobility and servants, where hee was received by the Cardinal of England,Cardinal Wolcey receive's him at his landing. favorite to King Henry the Eight, and by whom hee was much governed. The same night the King of England came by post thither, the expressions of affection and the great con∣tentment which the King of England seemed to take in his Majestie's company, were beyond relation; The next day the two King's went to visite St Tho:His reception by the King and Queen at Canterburie. of Canterburie's tomb, where Queen Katherine, wife to King Henry and Aunt to the Emperor, attended them in a sumptuously adorned Palace, wherein they spent the three dayes of whitsuntide with
great Jollity and feasting. The holy-daies being past, and the Princes having treated sufficiently of what concerned them, and confirmed a Peace with great testimonies of affection on both sides, the Emperor took leave of his Aunt and the King, and went to Deal a harbour in the same Island. And so imbarked again and sailed to Flushing. His arrivall was incredibly welcom to the Inhabitants of all those Provinces, the same expressions of joy were all Ger∣many over (assoon as they knew of his landing) where hee was infinitely desired. Hee went from Holland into Flanders without anie stay, but in all places where hee did pass, hee was most Splendidly entertained, especially at Gant, where Margarita his Aunt, and the Infante Don Fer∣nando his brother (who was Arch-Duke of Austria) exspected his coming. Thence hee went towards Calis to visit again the King and Queen of England, who mean time the Emperor was at Sea, met the King of France there, who endeavoured all hee could to possess the King of England? with a disaffection of the Emperor, whose power and great∣nesse hee envied and repined at. Having made this second visit the Emperor returned to Gant, where hee put himself in fit equipage to receiv the Crown at Aquisgran. Where we will leave him for the present and return to relate the the miseries and troubles of Spain. SECT. XXXIII. THe Emperor's departure was diversly resented in Spain, Those that were honestly minded and of sober and quiet dispositions approved of it, esteeming it just and requisite, but feared much what after did ensue. But the factious and Seditious Party were otherwise affected, They rejoiced at it, and hugged themselvs in the fancie and vain hope of increasing their estates and reputation with
these dissensions and alterations, delighting (as the Proverb saith) to fish in troubled water. The Emperor being gone from the Groyn, all the Nobilitie and Gentrie which stayed behinde returned to their owne houses, and the Commissio∣ners or Burgesses of Parlament, repayred to their respective Cities and towns with feare enough of their Republicks. The Cardinal and those of his Council tooke their way towards Valladolid, and before they arrived there, newes was brought them of the Commotions of the Cities of Castilla. The Emperor was very ill advised in not leav∣ing the government of those Kingdoms to some Noble∣man of that Countrie; as was desired of him in Parlament, whom as a Grandee of note and power they might feare, and love, honor and respect him as their Countryman. Or if they had done as (when necessitie constrained them) they did afterwards, all had been well; The fault being laid upon Xeures, hee sayed, That it was not so ordered, that his Majestie thought there were no Noblemen in Castilla worthy of that honor, but because of the factions and partialities amongst them, the conferring it upon one should not dis∣gust the others. SECT. XXXIIII. THe Cardinal and his Council being arrived at Vena∣vente, an express from Don Iohn de Acunia Governor of Segovia came to them purposely to inform them of a notoriously haynous accident befallen in that Citie, which was thus, One of the Commissioners or Burgesses that was sent thence to the Parlament at Santjago named Iohn or An∣tony de Tordesillas, Regidor and native of that Citie, gave his consent to the granting the Subsidies his Majestie demanded. Hee brought for the Citie the Pole-money to bee payed by
way of excise and a gratuity of one hundred thousand Maravediz for reparation of the walls, and for himself hee had procured a very good governement and received an office which the Mint or coyning house had given for lost. It is a custome in Segovia every Tuesday in whitsonweek that the Collectors meet to treat concerning the Revenue of Corpus Christi Church. It hapned that being all together one of them inconsiderately sayed, Gentlemen! you know that Don Iohn de Acunia is Governor of this Citie, and that hee never set foot in it, and yet not satisfied to under value us, hee main∣tein's here certain Officers to robb us, rather then to administer Iustice.Tumults in Segovia. And I vow to God, if the former stole away our Cloaks, these strip us to the very Skins. Moreover know that the Governor hath put in here a Deputy, more fool then valiant: Hee is not satisfied with the injuries hee doth us by day, but hee leads a dog to catch men in the night. And my opinion is, That if any one hath done what hee ought not to doe, Hee should apprehend him in his house like a Christian, and not hunt him with doggs in the Mountains like a Moore; For a man of any credit is more troubled at his being apprehended in the open street then at his Imprison∣ment. A certain old man, called Melon, chanced to bee present at these words, who had for many years executed the office of a Sergeant or Catch-pole (as they call them); and therefore was hated and abhorred by all the people. This poore man having heard the other out, and every body else holding their peaces, stood up and spake these words in favor of the Justice. Indeed (Gentlemen!) that which this man hath sayed seemeth to me not well, and mee thinks it is wors that men of such honor and credit (as here are) should give eare to such a man: for hee that will speak in publick of the Ministers of Iustice ought to have some respect and moderation in his tongue; and in an officer of the King's, hee ought not to look onely at his person, but to consider what his staff represent's, As touching the dog hee speak's of, that my Master carrie's with him, I sweare by this cross, that, being a yong man, hee takes him with him more for his pleasure in the day time, then to catch men in
the night; and if it had been so you doe not, (I hope) take me to be so base, but that I should haue made it known to the people, for I am more beholding to my friends and neighbors then I am to Strangers. If the Officers doe any thing against Law and Iustice, (which hitherto they have not done) like Christians and Gentlemen wee are obli∣ged to advise and reprove them in secret, and not defame them publick∣ly; and if this which I say now unto you, soundeth not well in your ears, perchance that which will result hereof will please you wors; for ill words inconsiderately spoken somtimes are dearly repented. This speech was so ill taken by them all, that with shouting and great violence they seized on him, cast a rope about his neck, and with huge nois and exclamations they dragged him out of the Citie, but they bruised him with so many stripes that hee was dead before hee came to the gallowes, yet they hung up his body upon it. As they returned from hanging this unfortunate Melon, they met by the way a com∣panion of his, called Roque Portalejo: To whom one of them said, as they came along, Portalejo! thy Companion Melon re∣member's him to thee, there hee hang's upon the gallows, and hee saies hee hopes thou wilt beare him Company there to morrow, and t'were no great matter if wee made thee accept of his invitation, for since thou wast his companion in the fault, it is but reason thou shouldst beare a share of the punishment. Portalejo replyed, God preserve the King my Lord and his Iustice, for one day you may repent you for what you haue done and Segovia for permitting it. for the blood of the Innocent, although men doe forget it, is alwaies crying out for vengeance before God. Hereupon, and because they saw him with a pen and paper, one of them began to say, that hee tooke the names of those that had killed Melon, upon which words they all cryed out kill him, kill him, So with the same fury in a disorderly rout, as they had done to Melon, they layd hands on him, and dragged him to the gallows where they hang'd him by the feet, so the poore man dyed. They spent all that day in execution of those two; The next day being wednesday The Citie sat in counsell; the Regidor Torde∣sillas went thither to give account of what hee had don in
Parlament although hee was advised to the contrary. The place of meeting was at St Michael's Church. The People beeing told, that Tordesillas had granted the subsidie and that hee was at the Council, a great number of Carders ran in a tumultuous manner thither, and climing over the dores and breaking in at the windowes, they violently layed hands upon him and dragged him out of the Church. Antonio de Tordesillas intreating them to forbeare, sayed, Gentlemen! heare me, I come to give you an account. See here the Articles which I bring, bee pacified, and let us goe to some place where you may bee informed of the truth. But this satisfied not, the multitude of Teazers was so outragious, some cryed, let us carry him to Santa Olalla; and poor Tordesillas said, whither you please Gentlemen. Others cryed, Kill im, kill him, Others sayed, Tordesillas give us those articles. Hee answered, Since you will haue it so, there, take them; then hee drew a paper out of his pocket, wherein was conteined all that hee had done in the Parlament, Which they tore in peeces without ever reading it. And with one voice they cryed out, to prison with him, there wee shall see his treason. then they set him upon a Mule, beeing clad with a long cassock or gaberdine of crimson velvet. Hee had not gone far but some of them crying, Art thou catched? layed hands again upon him, and having knocked him off the Mule, they hurried him into the Prison, others cryed out, A rope, a rope, let im not stay in prison, let us have him strait to the gallowes. And pre∣sently with lowd exclamations they cryed out all together, Let him die, let him die. And a rope beeing brought they put it about his neck, and plucked him down to the ground, then dragged him along the streets, punching him and giving him great blowes upon the head with the pum∣mels of their swords, and although hee cryed out to them with grievous sighs and pitiful groans, saying, Gentlemen! heare me, why doe you kill mee? it availed nothing. Hee desired to confess, and they would not suffer him. The Dean and Canon with their Sacerdotal habits came forth to them, carry∣ing the holy Sacrament. And (which was most grievous of
all) Tordesilla's own brother, a Franciscan Fryer, a very grave man in his habit ready to say mass, and the holy Sacrament in his hands, with all the rest of the Fryers of St Francis order came out, and kneeling all before this crew, they begged of them with tears to spare his life for Christ Iesus sake.Antnio de Tordesillas Rgidor and Commissioner of Sgovia hanged by the People. But in regard all that Rabble was of the common and baser sort of People, they made no reckoning of them, nor bore any respect or reverence to the Church. Then the Fryers de∣sired, if there was no remedy but that hee must die, that they would give him leav to make his confession, which they refused. And when they had brought him to the gallows, half choaked already with the rope, they tyed his feet and hung him with his head downwards, betwixt the two others they had hanged the day before. Thus this poor Gentleman ended his life, and doubtless his companion Iohn Vazquez had tasted of the same cup, had hee not absented himself, but hee escaped being advertised by this disaster. SECT. XXXV. THis done the Common People of Segovia elected their Deputies of the Commonalty, turned out all te King's officers of Iustice and authorised others to officiate for them, then seized upon all the gates of the Citie. About that time was come to Segovia Don Hernando de Bovadilla Earl of Chinchon, who had great power in the Citie, having the command of the Forts, Gates and Mint-hous; which place was given his ancestors and him by the King for former services. The Com∣mon People possessing themselvs of the Gates, and a hous Don Hernando had within the Citie, Hee presently made all his servants and the officers of the Gates retire into the Forts, that, there might bee men enough to defend them, in case they should be assaulted, and leaving them to his brother Don Diego' charge and care, hee went to a Fortress of his own in the
Countrie and took out all the peeces of Artillerie hee had there, which hee brought with more servants and other People, to reliev his brother, who was by that time besieged and streightned in those Forts by the Commons; which siege lasted all the time of the troubles, and the warre was cruell on both sides, Don Diego defending himself with great dex∣terity and valor; The generositie and loyaltie of these Gentle∣men was so great, that to defend the Forts committed to their charge by the King, they disarmed their own, choosing rather to leave their own Townes and Holds openly exposed to bee destroied by the fury of the Common People, then neglect or forsake that which conduced to the King's service. SECT. XXXVI. THis message which the Post brought from Segovia to the Governors, declaring the crueltie done in that Citie, possessed them with much trouble and care. These risings touched the Cardinal to the heart, and hereupon hee entred into consultation with those Gentlemen whom his Majestie had appointed to assist him. After this the Gentlemen and Regidores of Segovia sent another Messinger to make their ex∣cuse to the Governor, alledging, That they had nothing to doe in the Death of Tordesillas, nor the other two men, neither were they able to hinder it in regard of the Mutinie of a great multitude of teazers of Wooll, who made that scan∣dalous uproar and outrage, men of strange places, vagabonds, and who were already dispersed and fled from the Citie. That if it could bee proved that anie man of account or worth in the Citie was amongst them, or but anie waie favoured, assisted, or so much as consented to their barbarous proceeding, they would willingly submit themselvs to anie Punishment that could bee inflicted on them. The President of the Council Don Antonio de Rojas Arch-Bishop of Granada
grew so cholerick and furious, that through excess of passion hee gave the Messengers (whom the Gentlemen Regidores and Citizens had sent to make their excuses) such reproachful language and high threatnings, that it spoiled all. For return∣ing to their Citie much distasted with this answer, They were all scandalizd at it, and those that before were very quiet and peaceable began to incline to the Mutiniers. The Cardinal beeing arrived at Valladolid the 5th of Iune 1520, the day before Corpus Christi eve, (the Arch-Bishop beeing gon thither two daies before) Hee assembled all the Council and asked their opinions, which were very different concerning this matter. And becaus they are of so much importance to the Historie, I will set down som of the most remarkable which were then taken in writing. The first that spake was Don Antonio de Rojas President of the Council, who de∣clared himself in these words. The opinion of Don Antonio de Rojas concerning Segovia. MY LORDS! wee, who are dedicated to the Divine Sacra∣ments, have not the libertie to speak over boldly i matters which concern humane rigors and chastisements, becaus our profession is to shed tears for those which transgress against the God of Heaven, and not spill the blood of those who offend earthlie Kings. You see, My Lords! if the dignitie of Arch-Bishop invite's me to Clemencie, the office of President (which is conferred upon mee) constrain's me to Iustice. This I say, My Lords, that you my not bee scandalized if I declare my self in this my vote. I denie not that our Lord God giveth a beginning to all things with his Providence, but yet manie of them hee persu's and concludeth with his rigor and Iustice. And this hee doth, that the Good may bee incouraged to serv him, and the wicked refrain from displeasing him, According to this saying of the Prophet, Misericordiam & Judicium cantabo tibi Domine. To com to the Purpose which now is in agitation, This action of Segovia, for my particular I hold it so hainous and scandalous, that I cannot think of any Punishment great enough for it. For where the offence is
without weight, the Penaltie ought to bee beyond measure. Those of the Citie of Segovia have offended God in so barbarously putting to Death a man, who better deserved to live then They. Which wicked action is of no less consequence, then that it should wreak God's Iudg∣ments upon them, for the blood of his Innocencie is no other then the Crier, or Proclaimer of Vengeance. Again, in my sense, they are guiltie of Crimen laese Majestatis, and it is very palpable; for they did not murther Tordesillas for any offence hee had done them, but for the service hee did the King in the Parlament. And since for the King hee lost his life, the King is obliged to see him revenged: and in respect his Majestie is gone out of Castilla, to receiv the Imperial Crown in Germanie, It will bee sufficient, if hee return in prosperitie, that hee reward his wife and Children with some gratuity; And wee are to pro∣ceed according to Iustice, considering that the offence is as hainous, as if it had been done to his own person. For if I have served his Majestie, beeing here present, in giving him good Counsel, I shall serv him more now, My Lords, in punishing misdeeds in his absence. Moreover, Since the King our Sovereign took shipping at the Groyn, This is the first act of disobedience in Spain. Wherefore I judge their crime the greater. For an offence committed in absence, alwaies argueth the more malice, and where the malice is so great, the Punishment ought to bee corre∣spondent. Item, it is alleadged by those of Segovia, that the Citie in general is not guiltie of this fact, but only som particular men, Carders, did hang Tordesillas upon the Gallows. I would fain know of them, what was the reason, why they did not punish those fellows, since they were but few; for there is no such testimonie of Innocence, as to exe∣cute Iustice upon offenders. In my opinion the Citie of Segovia cannot plead Non-Guiltie in this case, for Five Thousand Citizens (if they had listed) might easily have withstood the furious insolence of Fiftie Teazers, and those Strangers too. But some secretly with their counsels, others publickly using violence, committed this insolent outrage. For if it bee a crime in Wicked men to murther the good, It is no less crime in good men not to resist the Wicked. You have seen, My Lords, the peremptoriness of those of Toledo, The King our Lord beeing at his Parlament in Sant∣jago and the Groyn: which was so great and scandalous, that for my part I know not which was more to bee condemned their malic in so doing, or
Xeures his negligence in not remedying it. Wherefore I say, that if that which was done, hee being here, hath pas't unpunished, and this, which hath bin committed in his absence, be not remedyed, from henceforwards I give all Castilla for lost and ruined. For this is a General maxime, if Iustice once lose her force, presently start's up insulting Tyrannie. Item since his Majestie's departure out of this Kingdom, This is the first scandal wherein it is requisite that the Council make appeare their Counsel and wisdom. And there is nothing that can give a greater evidence thereof, then in governing the People in such sort, that wee may gain the affections of the good, and bee no less feared by the evil. If the death of this Regidor bee thus smothered, and the inso∣lence of Toledo dissembled, the Carders of Segovia will thinke, and the Cap-makers of Toledo will Proclaime, that wee doe not let these things pass with our good wills, but that wee dare not punish them. And by this means Iustice will bee defamed in that shee cover's Feare, and which is worst of all, will lose the credite of being feared. In summ of all that I have spoken, I say, that my determinate will and opinion is, that an Alcalde de Corte, (who is in nture of a Iudge of Oyer and Terminer, here in England) should goe to Segovia, and what hee ought to doe in this (although I know it) my Sacred Orders doe not give me leav to express. I onely say thus much, that the Iudge ought to do wors to them by Iustice, then they did to Tordesillas without Iustice. Let all that I have said in this consultation bee under your most Reverend Lordship's correction: and if these Lords bee of any other opinion, I shall bee content to conform my self to them, for in matters of weight and moment, a man is not to defend his own opinion, but to follow that which is most expedient for the publick good. SECT▪ XXXVII. THe second that was remarkeable in this Consultation, was Don Alonso Tellez Giron, who in those times was esteemed a man of a good Conscience, a vertuous life, of a generous ofspring, and chiefly in the opinion (which hee
delivered) very circumspect, for hee would never give any counsel, unless hee had considered the matter throughly before hand. Don Antonio de Rojas having ended his speech, Don Alonso Tellez began, Saying. The discreet Opinion of Don Alonso Tellez Giron. IT chanceth often-times amongst the most expert Cap∣tains, that being upon the point of giving battle, they dif∣fer in the manner and order of their Combate, and if such men take oath of their dissenting opinions, I say that kind of discord proceedeth not from any particular difference betwixt them, but that each one of them thinkes, that what hee sayes is the best and most secure way to gain the Victorie that day. This I say, most Reverend Lord Cardinal, in order to my Lord Arch-Bishop and President his Speech, which was very good and beseeming a Prelate that is desirous of the publick good. But if hee and I doe differ in the meanes which is to bee used for the remedying of so great a scandal, wee shall not, I am confident, in our intentions be dissenting. I swear by the faith of a Christian and a Gentleman, and by this Holy habit of Santjago which I wear, that my soul desi∣reth nothing at this present more, then that wee may hit upon the right way of rectifying and providing for Segovia. For my mind giv's me, that if wee miss our aim in this first enter∣prise, we shall not bee powerful enough hereafter to execute Justice. Hee that is to give his sens in such occurrences, ought not only to see to the remedying of mischiefs, but to bee cir∣cumspect and warie lest the fulfilling of his Vote should bee the occasion of a greater Inconvenience. For it may bee already (which God forbid) thinking to tile Segovia, wee have untiled it, and so bewetted all Spain. Vndoubtedly those of Segovia offended God in destroying his creature, and the King in murthering him for his cause. They scandalized the Repub∣lick by hanging him in that manner. And accordingly (if it were of no further consequence) nothing could bee more just,
then that the more cruel and barbarous they have shewd themselvs in that murther, the less pitie wee should shew in chastising them. I would say in this case, that wee are able to punish Segovia, or we are not able, and so likewise Toledo of their rebellion: and to speak the truth, to my best sens to chastise Segovia, or correct Toledo is yet too soon. For being, as we are, but newly come to the government, we should grant som privileges and libertie to the People at first, to win their obedience; and afterwards chastise them, that we may bee feared. Put case wee are not powerful enough (as I believ we are not) to quell that high couraged stubborn People, (if my Iudgment fail me not) I hold for most certain, that if Segovia lose their respect to us, the like we shall find through all the Cities of Spain. Moreover you know, my Lords, that it hath been averred to us, that there was never a Gentleman nor Citizen at the murther of Tordesillas, and that those Teazers which had committed the fact, were fled already. The Judge whom wee shall send thither, to seem that hee doth som∣thing, must rob the Poor, chastise the Innocent, disquiet the Rich, defame the Noble, and chiefly scandalize the bordering People, so that the untimely punishing of one man's death, may bee an occasion of destroying all. Item you know, My Lords, that the King, our Lord, had the ill will of all his Subjects for the ill Government of his Tutors, and certainly those of this Kingdom desire to express their discontents. Me think's, we should rather provide for and hinder the manifestation of the ill intentions of Castilla, then to stand so much upon the rigorous chastising of the Carders of Segovia, for it is the part of wise men to dissemble and defer the punishment of faults already past, and forthwith apply a remedie to a present evil. Item, Segovia cryeth out and desire's, that if Fifty or a Hundred weavers committed that outrage, the whole Citie should not lose its Innocence. And in my Judgment we should bee very injurious and unjust, if we should declare a whole Citie Traytors, when but few are guiltie, and I know the King hath manie faithful servants in
Segovia: therefore wee should commit a great offence there∣in. Besides, it is as much the Propertie of Clement Princes to pardon many wicked men, for the respect of som few good, as it is the Practise of cruel Tyrants to condemn many good, for a few evil. Item, it is sufficiently known that Toledo is in Rebellion, and beeing (as it is) so powerful a Citie, wee cannot exercise Justice upon it. Now, if wee doe chastise Segovia, wee cannot do it so much dammage, as wee shall do favor to Toledo thereby. For all those whom wee take now for enemies, wee make friends to Toledo. And by this means there will bee manie favorers of their Tyranie, and but few to assist our Justice. Item, it is to be considered that the Citie of Segovia and the Town of Medina del Campo, by reason of the Cloaths of the one, and the fairs of the other, Those two People used alwaies to bee like Brothers. My end in saying this is, becaus the best Artillerie the King hath in Castilla is at Medina, and if the business were come to that, They would sooner give it Segovia for their defence, then to us to punish them. And by this means Segovia will get the Ar∣tillerie, and wee shall lose Medina. Item, Segovia hath not taken the Fort as yet, nor disobeyed the Justice, nor shut the Gates, nor taken up Armes; And if a Judge go thither to chastise them, perchance wee shall (the Guiltie beeing fled away for fear of punishment) give occasion of fear to those that are Innocent, and they put themselvs into a defensive posture thereupon. And this will bee the way to make those whom wee have as yet for subjects, declare themselvs our enemies, My Lords, I will not extend my self any further in my dis∣cours, but only that for the reasons which I have alleged, and for others which I could produce, I doe not deny but Segovia ought to bee chastised: But my vote is, that for the present, it should bee dissembled. For prolonging a punish∣ment never did harm: and an over-hastie execution of Justice never did good. The Cardinal tak's and followe's the President's advice, which was to chastise Segovia.
All those that were present approved of Don Alonso Tellez his opinion, yet the Cardinal agreed to do according to the vote of Don Antonio de Rojas, President. For hee was a man so violently hastie and opiniative, that no body could perswade him to any thing, neither would hee bee contradicted. There were certain Fryers, who did much harm in these commotions, som out of Zeal, others beeing of turbulent Spirits and too busie, and medling with Secular affairs, which suite not with a Religious life. SECT. XXXVIII. IN one and the same day rose the Cities of Zamora & Segovia.Commotions in the Citie of Zamora. In Zamora began the furie of the People against their Commissioners, who had exceedingly incensed them, becaus when that Citie had notice that Toledo, gave limited Powers to their Commissioners, They would do the same. But their Commissioners told them, they might not do so, and having received their Orders, they made oath of fealty to the People, that they would not act any thing, without first giving them notice; of which oath afterwards the Commissioners desired the Emperor to quit them, and they granted the Subsidie. Where∣upon the People were so inraged, that they desired to have them burnt. They having som inklings hereof, fled to a Monasterie a little day's Journy from Zamora (called Marta). The People in mean time went to their houses, and not find∣ing them, They resolved to pluck down their houses, but did not, out of respect to the Earl of Alva, to whom all that Citie (as they had reason) did bear particular honor and re∣spect. His Authoritie prevailed much, and hindred the Com∣mon People from doing a Thousand other mischiefs, but this it could not; which was, The People not finding the Com∣missioners, made Statues, that resembled them, which they dragg'd about the streets with many reproachful exclama∣tions
against them, proclaiming them Traitors and Enemies to their Countrie. After that they caused their pictures to bee set up in the Consistorie, with a writing at the foot of each, to signifie who they were, and what they had done against that Citie, and against the Faith they had sworn to them. At length, hearing that they were retired into that Monasterie, they sent to the Friers to turn them out, if not, they would go and set fire to the hous. And although they desired libertie to com with saftie of their persons to the Citie, and give them account of what they had done in Parlament, the People would not grant it, but used means to kill them. In that Citie there were two great factions, one for Don Diego Enriques Earl of Alva, the other for the Bishop Don Antonio de Acunia, of whom I shall speak hereafter. SECT. XXXIX. THe Governor Cardinal Adriano desirous to go to Valladolid, and to the end hee might make his entrance with the Autoritie that was requisite for his person and dignitie, re∣quired the Lord high Constable, who was at Villalpando, to ac∣companie him, which hee did; and so they entered into Valla∣dolid on Corpus Christi eve, whence the Constable returned presently. And if the President of the Council had not gon thither before, and the Cardinal soon after well attended, doubtless that Citie had done no less then Segovia and Zamora. For their Commissioners beeing returned (who were Francisco dela Serna, and Gabriell de Santistevan) The People knowing that they had granted the Subsidie, and hearing how the other Cities had welcomed their Commissioners, they went in bands and clusters up and down the streets murmuring and grum∣bling amongst themselvs. Wherefore the Commissioners and the Council of the Citie agreed not to divulge the Articles, until the Cardinal and the Council were arrived. And out of
this feare they dispatched a Post to the Arch-Bishop President of the Council, desiring him to com speedily thither, and this was the reason that hee went before and stayed not for the Cardinal. This was the occasion that Valladolid refrained for som time from doing what afterwards it did. At last it broke out like the rest of the Cities. SECT▪ XL. THis fire most furiously and strangely spread it self through the other Cities, as if they had agreed together and corresponded by watch-Towers and Beakons (as they are wont to do in the frontiers and upon Sea-coasts) so manie places burst out into these Commotions at one instant. I have read in a Letter from Leon Picardo, a servant to the Lord Constable and his Painter,Earthquake in Burgos. that feeding his hawk at night in Burgos, there was so grievous an earthquake that the dishes fell off the shelvs, the tiles off the houses, nay and som buildings were turned topsie-turvie, and his hawk dyed with the fright, as also som women with child. Presently after which at the same beginning of Iune, the People of Burgos rose with great disorder, many of them armed and crying out very confusedly. The Common People through the parishes and quarters assembled at the Chappell of Santa Katherina del Claustro nuevo in the great Church (as they used to do for the election of officers and other things.The Common people of the Ctie rise up in Arms. There they discoursed concerning the risings & Commotions wch were much noi∣sed in Castilla, there was nothing resolved amongst them but great clamors & divers opinions, & going out with that hurly-burly and disorder as is usuall at such meetings. At last a great multitude of them being assembled at a middle row of houses close by the Gate of Sarmental, they agreed to rise also, which they did, & stood upon the same terms as the other Cities had done; they nominated two chiefs, Anton Cucbillero and Bernal
de la Rixa, who with this rout went to seek Don Diego de Oso∣rio Lord of Abarca, a gentleman of great qualitie, inhabitant of the Citie of Burgos, but met him not until the Evening; having found him, they brought him by violence into the market-place with much nois and tumult, saying, Tht hee must bee their Chief, and must govern them: they put a white staff of Justice into his hand, and upon his left arm a Target. Don Diego bid them be quiet, and tell him where∣fore they brought him out of his hous, and put him in that equipage. They answered, That as a gentleman hee should protect them and free them from that slaverie wherein they lived. They would not hear him speak, but threatned him, if hee would not do as they required him: they continued pressing of him thus till night, and staied for his resolution till next daie. Don Diego at that time was Governor of Cordo∣va, and came thither onely to see the Ladie Isabel de Rojas his wife and his children, so hee presently got out of their hands, and that same night took his waie towards Cordova, leaving his hous to the charge & care of Don Pedro de Cartagena Lord of Olmillos (who had married the Ladie Marie de Rojas his daugh∣ter) to the Dean of Burgos Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco, and Fran∣cisco Sarmiento, who was his kinsman. These Gentlemen re∣paired forthwith to Don Diego Osorio's hous, where they found his wife and daughter very disconsolate for his absence, and fearing the People's threatnings,Their design upon Don Die∣go de Osorio's hous. who hearing Don Diego was gone, assembled together and came with intent to break open the hous, plunder it and pluck it to the ground. But these gentlemen, beeing advertised of their design, stood all in the gate with their swords and daggers drawn, threatning to cut in pieces whosoëver durst attempt to break in, and vow∣ing that they were resolved to lose their lives upon that ac∣count. This resolution of their's daunted the Assailers, so that none offered to stir, but went all quietly away. Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco went along with them, for Bernal de la Rixa the Cutler, their Captain, bore him much respect, becaus hee had received a son of his nam'd Valoradico, to be a singing-boie
in his Church. Don Pedro Xuarez's getting the good will of this Cutler was of such importance, that by his means hee knew all the secret dealings and intentions of the Communal∣ty, and was admitted somtimes into their Assemblies. They went by Squadrons up and down the Citie, committing ma∣nie outrages and insolncies, like men distracted and without judgment. An humor took them to burn down the Carthu∣sian's wood, and as they were going with this resolution, Don Pedro Xuarez met them by the waie, and told them, that it would bee very well done of them, indeed, to set that wood on fire, but the world would bee so rosted with the heat, that it were better to keep the wood till winter, and not to burn it in the field to no purpose; so hee turned them back again from St Paul's Bridg. They were so audacious as to assault the Lord Constable's hous, hee beeing Chief of that Citie, and ha∣ving heard that the Dutchess Donia Maria de Tobar Marquess of Berlanga, a Ladie of great worth, had threatned them, they came one daie in great number thither, and having enviro∣ned the hous, they shot off a piece of Ordnance, which beat down a corner of the Tower, so they entred into the hous, & the Dutchess was forc'd to hide her self in som secret by-place. They went also to Garci Ruiz de la Mota his hous, (who had been Commissioner in that last Parlament, brother to Maestro Mota Bishop of Badajos and Palencia) with intent to kill him, but not finding him (for hee was fled) they burned and pluck't down his hous, where were consumed great num∣ber of Writings, as Deeds and Charters, and manie other papers concerning the King and Kingdom, which hee had in keeping. That which they burned in Mota's hous, was va∣lued above three Millions, when they carried it to the place where they made the Bonfire, into which they cast all the moveables they could finde in the hous; as pure linnen, rich tapistrie-hangings, cloaths, houshold-stuff, and manie chests or trunks full, all which they burned, without making be∣nefit of anie thing (which was a wonder, considering the condition of such mean people). In the like furie they went
and pulled down the hous of one of the King's Harbingers, named Garci Iofre, who, though hee was a Frenchman born, had been a long time in the King of Spain's service and the Emperor's. Hee was married, and had his dwelling in that Citie: they were incensed against him for no other reason, but becaus the Emperor had given him the command of the Hous and Castle of Lara, which Burgos pretended was theirs, and they demanded it of him, but becaus hee told them that hee had received that Castle of the Emperor, and that hee could not deliver it to anie but his Majestie, they went to kill him▪ neither stopped their furie there; for poor Iofre being unfortunately there that daie, (beeing returned from France, whither hee went by the Emperors command with the French Embassador) and seeing how they plucked his Houses down, hee went to Lara, saying, That hee hoped in God to bee revenged, and to build up his Houses much better with those Rascal's monie, then they were when they pulled them down, and that hee should make morter of their bones, and temper the chalk with their blood. This being known in the Citie by the report of a Collier (to whom Iofre spoke it by the waie) they sent som men on hors-back privately after him, who overtook him in a little village called Vivar del Cid, three leagues from Burgos, where drawing him out of the Church, they appre∣hended him, & had cut him in pieces there, but for som Gen∣tlemen, who qualified them for the present; yet they would not let him go out of their hands, but brought him to Bur∣gos back again and clapt him into prison, where with blows and thrusts they soon dispatched him, and beeing dead, they tied his feet together, and dragged him first to his own door, striking and pinking his bodie with their swords all the waie: then they drew him through all the streets, and at last hanged him with his head downwards. Don Inigo Fernandez de Ve∣lasco Lord High Constable, who was at Villalpando, being infor∣med hereof by a Letter from the Cardinal (wherein hee desi∣red him for the love of God to go speedily & set som remedie and order in that Citie) went presently to Burgos, and out of af∣fection
in regard those of his familie for manie successions had been born in that Citie, he took upon him the staff and office of Governor, which the Inhabitants most willingly em∣braced; there hee continued som time, whose presence was the onely remedie and means to hinder the enraged people of that Citie from committing a thousand other Insolencies. What happened afterwards you shall hear hereafter. SECT. XLI. A Certain Judg nam'd Hernan Gomez de Herrera, whose wife and familie was in Madrid,Upoars in Madrid. took that occasion to go from Valladolid thither; but being arriv'd, the People began to mutinie, saying, That hee was com thither to take examinations against Toledo; at wch nois manie People assembled presently together and went in a tumultuous manner to apprehend him in his hous; but hee having notice thereof, used means forthwith to bee secretly conveied out of the Citie; so hee escaped with fear enough; for if the Common-people had light upon him, they would have given him hard measure. Thence the disorder∣ly Multitude went to Francisco de Varas his hous, (one of the Council) and took away all the Arms they could finde; as Fowling-pieces Arquebusses, Cros-bows, Arrows, Pikes, four hundred Corslets, and manie Halberds, which they put into a strong place for their own defence when occasion should require: they set Guards all the Citie over, watching and going their rounds through all the streets and walls, to the great hinderance of Commerce and destruction of the Citie.In Siguenca, Guadalaxara, Salamanca, Mucia. In the same manner rose Siguenca, Guadalaxara, Sala∣manca, Murcia, and manie other places of importance, where were divers things committed, not unlike those which I have already declared, which would bee an endless business for mee to describe particularly. The seventh of Iune, in this pre∣sent year 1520, the Citie of Leon was verie quiet, and stood
much for the King's service: for it seemed that Valladolid had written to them to know whether they had received anie Let∣ter from Toledo concerning their business or not: Whereto Leon made Answer, That as yet they had received no∣thing in particular from Toledo touching that matter, and that the Citie of Leon was fully determined, not to do, or consent to anie thing, for the whole world, that might bee anie dis∣service to his Cesarean Majestie, or contrarie to the fidelitie they owed him, especially the most Reverend Cardinal re∣maining Governor, with the Lord President and the rest of the Council, to whom that Citie was so much obliged. t had been well for that Citie if they had continued in that minde. SECT. XLII. THe 24 of Iune, 1520, the Emperor beeing at Bruxels re∣ceived information of all the passages in Toledo and o∣ther places, and of the Letter which Toledo sent to Valladolid, and their Answer: Whereupon hee wrote to Valladolid, gi∣ving them a full relation of his Voiage by Sea, how hee was entertained by his Uncle and Aunt in England, and that they had confirmed a most sure League of Peace and Amitie toge∣ther; That thence hee intended about the middle of September to bee at Aquisgran, to receiv his Imperial Crown, with manie other circumstances; and at last, That he resolved, God willing, to return into that Kingdom much sooner then hee had pro∣mised at the Parlament, mean time hee incharged them Peace, quietness, and obedience to the Commands of the Cardinal, his Governor, President and Council, &c. and if there should arise anie mutinies or Commotion in anie other Towns, that they, out of their antient and well approved fidelitie, would in∣deavor to pacifie and suppress them, for they knew the love and affection which hee bore that Citie, which might suffi∣ciently
appear by the favors hee had granted them in former Parlaments, according to the Copie which hee sent with that Letter. There was also a General Letter to all the Cities and Towns of that Kingdom, who had Votes in Parlament; but passion had gained such a transscendence over the hearts of the major part, that they would not believ those Letters to bee from the Emperor, but said openly that they were coun∣terfeited, neither did they anie waie abate their resentment of his so sudden departure out of that Kingdom, leaving them (by the counsel of his Favorites) involved in so great a fire, and with so much povertie and pain. SECT. XLIII. AFter this came news to the Cardinal how the Citie of Guadalaxara was revolted in the same manner, and ta∣king up Arms like the other Cities of the Kingdom. They chose for their Captain the Earl of Saldania, eldest son to Don Diego de Vega y Mendoça Duke del Infantado, and making use of his horses,The people of Guadlaxara rise up aginst their Commis∣sioner. they pursued Diego de Guzman, and Luis de Guzman, their Commissioners in the late Parlament, who, for fear of their lives, were fled from the Citie; but not being able to overtake them, they went to their houses, which they razed, and having plowed up the ground, they sowed it with Salt, saying, That in regard they were Traitor's houses, they must bee salted, lest they should infect the rest with their infideli∣tie. Thence they went to the Duke, beseeching him to favor and assist them; if not, they would have him to know, that no Grandee must staie within that Citie, which hee and his son were enforced to grant to satisfie them: but the Duke seeing the Citie in so great disorder, and the Kingdoms all over inflamed with such Combustions, sent an Express to the Cardinal, desiring him (since God and the King had consti∣tuted him in that Office) to use all possible diligence and care
to stop the current of those exorbitances, and that without passion or affection hee would grant a general pardon; for if hee suffered the sore to fester, hee would not bee able to cure it when hee pleased. That hee would take off the Subsi∣die. That all Tallages and Impositions should bee reduced to the same estate as they were twentie five years past. That Offi∣ces and benefices should be taken from strangers, and confer∣red upon the Natives of the Countrie: And that all this should suddenly bee performed. The Cardinal was well contented with his Letter, but durst not do otherwise then was ordered by the Council, until hee received further Commission from the Emperor. SECT. XLIV. THe Order from the Council was, that Ronquillo (a fa∣mous Judg in those times) should presently march to Segovia with all the men hee could make, and punish the Delinquents. They sent with him a thousand Hors-men (most of which were of the Guards) under the Command of Don Luis de la Cueua, and Ruy Diaz de Rojas, who had Or∣ders in case the Judg was not received into the Citie, to batter and beat it down. But when his coming was known in Se∣govia, those that were quiet and peaceable before, jealousies and fears distracting their ill-tempered mindes, rose and asso∣ciated themselvs with the others, and in particular, one prin∣cipal Gentleman of the Citie, called Don Hernando, who had written to the Cardinal, that hee kept the Citie, the Fort and the great Church for the King, and that hee had driven the Com∣monaltie into the Suburbs, and moreover, that there was great partialitie and difference amongst them; upon whose advice and intimation the Judg was sent directly thither: but when they heard in what manner hee came, Don Fernando & the Common-people agreed so together, that the Gates were
shut against him, and the towns-men all up in Arms. Ronquil∣lo perceiving their strength and resistance to bee great, retired himself to the Town of Arevalo, and the Cardinal sent to him to return to Valladolid, until the Council should take further order therein. But the Judg did otherwise, and from thence went to Santa Maria de Nieva, five Leagues from Segovia, where hee made his Requests and Protests to those of the Ci∣tie, & began by Criers to publish Acts and Writs against them, requiring them to submit to Justice, or to appear and give a reason why they would not. Whereunto those of Segovia ('mongst whom at first there was no person of credit or re∣spect, but onely a furious and indiscreet Rabble) not onely not obeied nor answered, but after som daies spent in parying and treating; without fear or wit they sallied out, to the num∣ber of four thousand men, almost all on foot, on purpose to meet Ronquillo and fight with him, and in this manner they marched towards the place where hee was quartered. Hee, with his Captains, came presently to incounter them, and it is affirmed, that hee might easily have routed them (for al∣though they were more in number, they were but ordinarie people, and as disorderly as unskilful. But he was unwil∣ling thereunto, out of respect that manie men's lives might have been lost in the Conflict, or perchance being doubtful of the Success. So there were onely som light skermishes, where∣in Ronquillo took som of their baggage, and divers of them pri∣soners; whereof som he hang'd, others he punished otherwise. So that the Segovians retreated with no sal loss, and thence∣forwards hee advanced his Siege, and cut of their Commerce and Provisions, so that nothing could pass into or out of the Citie; yet hee used no extremitie towards them, becaus hee had still hopes of som accommodation. Hereupon Segovia mustered up their forces, which amounted to twelv thou∣sand men, besides women and children who with an un∣speakable courage took up Arms to defend the Citie against Ronquillo. They made strong Pallisadoes, deep Ditches, and chained all their streets. The Citie of Avila assisted them, as
if it had been their own Interest, and both these Cities made a Joint-supplication to the Cardinal, that hee would not pro∣ceed against them with so much rigor; but receiving no sa∣tisfactorie answer, they said, Since it must bee so, wee will remedie our selvs. At length Segovia, finding themselvs streightned by the Siege, wrote to the Citie of Toledo, decla∣ring the occasion of their Revolt, excusing themselvs of the death of Tordesillas, and imputing it to the indiscreet furie of som Carders and Teazers, exclaiming against the rigor of the Cardinal and Council for sending Ronquillo, not as an equitable Judg to do them Justice, but as a cruel Tyrant to wage War against them; and at last conjuring and imploring their suc∣cor and assistance to rais the Siege, alleging that the punish∣ment the Cardinal and Council intended to inflict upon Se∣govia, was but the Precursor of the destruction of Toledo, in re∣gard they were in the same Predicament, and declared by the Council for disobedient, as well as those of Segovia, were condemned for Traitors: In the Close of all, they desired that Citie to give credit to the Relation of Rodrigo de Cieca, and Albara de Guadarrama (the bearers of their Letter) who had Instructions and Orders to impart matters of higher conse∣quence unto them, wch they durst not commit to paper. Other Letters, to the same effect, they sent to the other Cities of Castil∣la, who all returned them great promisses and encourage∣ment, and in effect they sent to the Cardinal and Council, desiring a pardon for Segovia, all but Toledo, who beeing less scrupulous, in stead of fair words, sent them men of Arms to succor the Citie, as shall appear hereafter. SECT. XLV. TOledo, upon receit of this Letter, sent, to reliev Segovia, four hundred Musketiers, as manie Halberdiers, and three hundred Hors, well Armed, which were joifully recei∣ved,
and gave them courage to sallie out again upon Ronquil∣lo. But first they sent to him, requiring that hee would let them alone, depart from Santa Maria de Nieva (where hee laie) and that hee would meddle no more with the affairs of Segovia, otherwise they would make him go away with a Vengeance. But Ronquillo thought to do what hee came for, that was, to enter into Segovia, and punish severely the Delin∣quents; to which effect hee assembled the whole Countrie thereabouts, yet could not accomplish his Design; for all the Cities and Towns that then were up, were wedded so unani∣mously to that same Interest, that there was much to bee fea∣red. Ronquillo went from place to place, one night hee laie in one Town, the next night in another, setting out Spies, somtimes catching those that came out of Segovia, and seek∣ing all means possible to get into it. In the Market-place of Santa Maria de la Nieva hee made publick Acts, Proclamations and Out-laws against the Segovians; but they scorned and laughed at them, and 'tis reported that the Common People set up a great high Gallows, which they swept and watered everie daie, saying, That was to hang Ronquillo upon, making shew of as much courage and resolution, as if they had had the whole world on their side; this was when they saw how forward and ready Toledo was to back them, and had furnished them with both men and monie. SECT. XLVI. THe Cardinal seeing the ill success of this business, sent about three hundred and fiftie Lanciers, and som Foot Souldiers, of those which were Garrisoned in Navarra, to Ron∣quillo; with whom hee scoured the Confines of Segovia. One daie hee went to Zamarramala, where hee caused to bee set up certain papers against the Segovians, proclaiming them Traitors and Rebels, and summoning them to appear before
him within a certain time; thence hee returned to Nieva, where hee commanded a high Scaffold to bee built, whereon hee caused to bee set other Acts and Writings to the same effect, then gave order to bee proclaimed in all the adjacent Towns and Villages, that no bodie should dare to carrie anie provi∣sions whatsoëver to Segovia under pain of death. Segovia see∣ing Ronquillo use them so hardly, keeping all provisions from them; three thousand five hundred of them, very well pro∣vided with Corslets, Lances, Halberds and Swords made a∣nother sallie, one of the principal Citizens, named Peralta, was their Commander in Chief; so with great nois and lit∣tle order (as Common-people use to do) they marched di∣rectly towards Santa Maria de Nieva, but at two Leagues di∣stance from Segovia they met Ronquillo with his men (who were better disciplined then they) & made som shots at them, whereupon they soberly retreated towards their quarters. The Segovians seeing that, and thinking that they ran away, pursued with great eagerness and in such disorder, that the others turning upon them, killed som of them, and took Don Diego Peralta their Captain Prisoner, and they took an Offi∣cer, and som of Ronquillo's men. At last the Combat grew so hot, that Ronquillo quitted his quarters, and left the Segovians (beeing far more in number) masters of the place, who pre∣sently set fire to the Scaffold, and burned all the Acts and pro∣clamations hee had set up against them. Upon this came a new supplie of three thousand men to them, which gave them fresh courage, and seeing themselvs so strong, they fol∣lowed Ronquillo, and made two great shots at him, which killed him two Hors-men, and they took the Paie-master of his Forces, with two millions of Maravediz (whereof thirtie four make six-pence sterl.) which hee carried to paie his men: this Prize, with other prisoners, they sent to Segovia. Ronquillo still retreated in good order, and som of his Hors perceiving a Partie of about fortie men of the Segovians scattered in a smal Village near Nieva, charged them, and having took som they brought them to Ronquillo, whereof he presently hanged two,
the rest he carried to Coca, where he went to lodg. And the Se∣govians having rescued their Captain, returned joifully to their Citie. SECT. XLVII. THe distempers of Madrid (for as I have said, that Citie rose also) were no less then those of the other Com∣monalties of Castillia. Francisco de Vargas a man of honor and approved fidelitie, mainteined the Fort against the People, notwithstanding all the diligences they could make to turn him out, and possess themselvs of it. They required him of∣tentimes with manie threats, that if he would not deliver it up to them, they would hang as manie as they could light upon, of those that were within. Francisco de Vargas perceiving the streight hee was in for want of men, got secretly out one night and went to Alcala (six smal Leagues from thence) for som assistance. Hee procured about fortie men, whom (that they might get into the Fort without beeing discovered) hee ordered to enter by two and two on hors-back. This could not bee carried so close, but the Citie had som intelligence thereof. Whereupon the People beeing all Alarmed, in great hast and furie, som on Hors-back som on foot, ran out to in∣tercept him, taking som Gentlemen to bee their Captains. Beeing in the field they ranked themselvs in better order, and when the Captain of the Fort was readie to enter with his men, they fell upon him, who beeing but a smal number, were forced to seek their safetie by flight; Francisco de Vargas beeing advantagiously mounted, with som others that were able to follow him, returned to Alcala. The people after that, grew more careful, and kept Spies out and Guards in all the Avenues of the Citie, then they fell upon the Fort with great furie, encompassing it round, but they durst not ap∣proach too near, for those that were within defended them∣selvs very stoutly, welcoming them with manie musket-bul∣lets
lets, Cros-bow shot and stones. The Fort beeing in this streight, Diego de Vera with his men approched, & faced Madrid. Hee had force enough to have relieved the Fort with men and provisions, and ill treated the Commoners of Madrid. But hee was wearied with a tedious march, and discontented that hee had not received of a long time paie, neither for him∣self, nor his Souldiers; besides, at the same time Letters were brought him from the Citie of Avila (where hee was bo and had his estate and familie) wishing him to let those of Madrid alone, and no waie to molest them, for if hee did, they would pluck down his hous, and set fire on all his goods. Out of this fear Diego de Vera, dissembling his design, would not enter into Madrid, nor do anie thing to help the one partie, or prejudice the other. Madrid finding themselvs but weak in men, and not very well provided with Arms, sent to Toledo for succor, who forthwith furnished them with five hundred men and thirtie Lances, under the Com∣mand of Goncalo Gaytan. Having received this supplie, they resolved to undermine the Fort in four places, wch they within perceiving, shot still more and more fiercely, and killed som of their workmen, which made them leav mining by daie, & labor onely in the night, with Blindes and Engines, made like Carts, which they might go safely under, and for their better securitie, at the front of all, they placed the Children and nea∣rest of kin to those that were within the Fort, to make them refrain from shooting, for fear of killing them; yet for all this, Francisco de Vargas his wife (who was within) was so ready to assist, and so wittily cunning to endeer and encou∣rage her men to fight, (lest her husband should bear anie blame) that they still held out, and defended themselvs cou∣ragiously. The Towns-men sent to require them to surrender the Fort, if not, they threatned that none should go either in or out, but should bee either killed or taken; whereunto shee made Answer, that they troubled themselvs in vain, and shee would have them know, That although her husband was absent, neither shee, nor anie of the rest with her, were of
such low and unworthie spirits, as, out of fear of their threat∣nings, to do an act so prejudicial to his Majestie's service, That they were all resolved rather to die in their own defence, then commit so High a Treason; for where shee was, her Hus∣band's honor should not suffer in the least. The People hear∣ing this, broke into a furious rage, crying out with loud voi∣ces, Let them die though wee all perish. o all beeing armed, they environed the Fort on all sides, and planted their Artille∣rie in order against it. Those within stood stoutly in their de∣fence, discharging all the great Guns they had, which were manie and good, and put in a readiness their Muskets and other Arms, but they wanted men to plie their smal shot, The Artillerie began to plaie on both sides. The Fort battered down all the neighboring houses, and the Gunners shewed much skill both within and without, yet did not so much mischief on either side, as they might have done. At last came som Religious men to mediate a peaceable agreement. And as it was half concluded, a Gentleman stept in and crossed all, saying with a loud voice, O you traitors, rogues, Iews of Ma∣drid! What have yee done? What Agreement is this you will make, so prejudicial to the King and your Citie? you do it but out of cowardise. This and manie things more hee said, insomuch that the peo∣ple mutinied, and grew rather more distempered then before; som favored him, others were enraged to kill him, so there grew a great tumult, and a bloodie confusion, dealing blows and thrusts of Swords and Lances on all sides. But my Gen∣tleman was taken at last by the Common people, whereof som would have killed him presently, others more discreet, thought fitter to keep him prisoner, until they knew what mo∣ved him to cast that seed of dissention amongst them, to hin∣der the Agreement which was then concluding. The next daie, the people returned to assault the Fort, and their Gunner killed the Gunner of the Fort, and left them none to manage the Artillerie. Then they cut off their water, and their pro∣vision of Victuals growing short, at last they were enforced to surrender the Fort to the Commander of those of the Com∣monaltie.
The People entred the Fort, with great acclama∣tions of joy and triumph. In it they found eight hundred compleat Suits of Armour, a thousand lances, a hundred, hal∣berts, four fauconets, three pieces of Cannon of one hun∣dred pound bullet a peece (according to the list) three hundred bullets of iron cast, foure pieces of ordnance, which they took from Mercado de Fruslera, twentie thousand pikes, two thou∣sand two hundred firelocks, two thousand head-pieces, gant∣lets and Cros-bows, two whole Cannons, seventeen hundred weight of powder, eight field-pieces, and five housand Corslets. All which Arms and Ammunition had been laid there by the Catholick Kings, besides much more which was carried away to the battle of delos Gelves. SECT. XLVIII. MAdrid beeing thus revolted, and in design of possessing themselvs of the aforesaid Roial Fort and Magazine, they sent for succor to Don Iohn Arias, Lord of Torrejon de Velasco, one of the chief Gentlemen of the Kingdom of Toledo, & of an Antient and Noble amilie. But hee beeing very disreet, & ex∣ceedingly valiant, answered them, That hee would have no∣thing to do with anie suh broils, and that hee desired to live peaceably at home without ingaging on either side: yet upon better consideration, like a faithful servant to his King, having gathered one hundred and fiftie Hors, with as manie Foot, and a competent quantitie of Artillerie, hee went to reliev the ort; vvhich beeing known at Toledo and Alcala, by messen∣gers from Madrid, they sent multitudes of People, who join∣ing all in one bodie, fell upon his Town of Torrejon de Vela∣sco, vvhilest hee vvas upon his march tovvards Madrid: They sacked and burned it quite dovvn, and hurt divers of the In∣habitants, som they killed. This nevvs beeing brought to Arias, hee returned much troubled and incensed to Torrejon,
swearing that hee would bee revenged, and if hee could not get satisfaction from Madrid, hee would not leave one Town there-abouts undestroyed. Som of his followers advised him to join with Diego de Vera who was come from Gelves, with whose help and the good provision of Artillerie which hee had, hee might besiege Madrid, hereupon Don Iohn Arias de∣manded Don Diego's assistance, but hee exused himself saying, that hee was tyred with his march, neither would hee fight against any of the King's Towns. Iohn Arias did all the mis∣chief hee could in the Towns adjacent to Madrid, and the people were so fearful of his Souldiers, that they durst not leave their cattle abroad. It fell out one night, that the Village of Mostoles (which was near Torrejon) having notice that Ion Arias would fall upon them, they barricadoed their streets, and put themselvs in a posture of defence, but hee en∣tred at another part, where the inhabitants suspected not, and sacked the Town, and at their going away again, all loaden with plunder, the Townsmen all at once fell upon them and took all from them again, but killed not a man. SECT. XLIX. DOn Iohn Arias de Avila, afterwards seeing the inconstan∣cie and fickleness of the Common People, who neither kept oath nor promise, desiring to serve his King, and pacifie the tumults of Toledo, went with som few servants to the Town of Illescas, where the chief promoters of those com∣bustions were with divers men in Arms, and coming thither to treat of composing the matter in a peaceable waie, hee expressed himself in such efficacious terms, and gave them such undeniable reasons, and friendly exhortations, represent∣ing unto them the dangers whereunto they exposed their lives and fortunes, by withdrawing themselvs from their obedience to their King, that somtimes hee prevailed so far with, them as
to harken to an accommodation (but they continued not long in that mind) for the business depending of so many several People, that which was concluded one day, vvas quite broke off the next; and at last they fell into such a popular madness, that throvving aside all respect, they vvould lay violent hands upon Don Iohn Arias, peremptorily bidding him deliver up to them the places of strength, vvhich hee had under his command, and seeing hee would not do that, they demanded the Artillerie vvhich vvas in them; and becaus hee denyed that also, vvith great nois and tumult they gathered together in the hous vvhere the Assemblie vvas kept, and made an order that Iohn Arias should presently deliver the Artillerie, and in case of default, hee should suffer death as an enemie of the common good. This vvas intimated to him by a Notary Publick. But Iohn Arias vvith solid and good reasons ans∣vveared, that hee could not do it. The People of Illescas here∣upon vvent againe into the council, and ordred, that Iohn Arias should, vvithout replie, deliver the Artillerie, or bee killed; vvhereunto hee made ansvvere soberly and undauntedly, That the life hee yet injoyed vvas onely his ovvn, but the honor and good name descended from his Ancestours, and should con∣tinue as an inheritance intailed upon his Successors, That it vvas in their povvers to take avvay his life, but not his honor, for that hee could neither give nor lose, That if they did take his life, it would cost them many lives, That they had best take heed what they did, and that they could not take away the loyaltie which hee owed to his King though hee should lose a Thousand lives, and that this should bee his resolution in de∣spight of their cruiltie. The Common People, seeing the resolute courage and constancie of Iohn Arias de Avila, suspen∣ded for the present the mischief they intended against him, so hee tooke horse and rode with a stayed serious countenance through the Town, attended onely with those few servants hee brought with him, and thence returned to Torrejon, where∣of the People of Illescas presently repented themselvs, and con∣demned one another of unadvisedness, in that they had not
killed, or at least, kept him prisoner▪ But John Arias mainteined stoutly three Forts well provided of men and armes in the King's service against them, which were of great importance for the suppressing and hindering the outrages of Toledo, and those neighbouring places, to the great hazard of his life and fortunes. And as soon as hee heard that the Lord Constable was Vice-Roy of Castilla, hee sent him the seal of his hous and armes, offering himself wholie to accomplish the obligation hee had to his Majestie's service, for which the Lord-Con∣stable returned him thanks promissing to acquaint the Emp∣eror with his loyaltie, and moreover recommended to his care the charge of those parts, which John Arias performed with great diligence, skermishing often-times with the Com∣moners. For this, and other services, and in consideration of his illustrious extraction, the Emperor gave him the tie of Earl of Punio en Rostro, and vvrote him very favorable and gratious Lettres, expressing the great esteem and account hee made of his services to his Majestie. In a hundred small Villages the People rose against the Earl of Chinchon, but hee suppressd them quickly, and punished them severely. Alcala was infected with the like disturbances and revolts, vvith di∣vers other places of the Kingdom, imitating their chief Tovvn vvhich vvas the ring-leader of all those distempers. SECT. L. CArdinal Adriano (who was a Saint-like man) sought all means possible to remedie these disorders, with a sweet∣ness and Clemencie answerable to his Charitie, and hearing of a Gentleman that followed the Court, who was a native and Iurate of Toledo, a discreet man, hee sent for him, and bee∣ing come, hee asked him what cours (in his opinion) was fittest to bee taken for the pacifying of that Citie, saying, That if hee could devise anie waie to do it, hee should bee exceed∣ing
glad to embrace it, and hee would procure his Majestie's approbation thereof. The Gentleman thanked him in the Citie's behalf, as beeing a member of it, and said, Hee did not certainly know their intention, but according to his judg∣ment, the onely waie to cure those mischiefs, was to applie the same medicine which they desired, viz. That his Majestie would bee pleased to grant to Toledo what their Commissio∣ners had petitioned him in Parlament; That his Eminence would command Ronquillo, the Judg, to rais his Siege before Segovia, and return with his men, in regard the Citie was much scandalized at his coming in such an hostile manner, they having sent two Prelates with their submission, and begging pardon of his Eminence; that hee knew how all the chief Cities of the Kingdom, beeing guiltie of the like Commoti∣ons, every one would exspect the like punishment, and out of that fear, they would rather join all their Forces to succor Segovia, then bee liable to anie such rigorous sentence; that he should be very careful in that point, for if the people once lost their respect, hee would not bee able to correct them: That for the present (although there were tumults and Com∣motions everie where) yet there was no publick War decla∣red, onely dissentions amongst the people. But if they joined and assisted one another, it would occasion great miserie and ruine to the Kingdom, as it afterwards fell out. These and som other instances the Gentleman pressed to the Cardinal, who finding much reason and weight in them, bad him come a∣gain to him the next daie in the Evening, in the mean time hee would call a Council concerning those particulars. The Gentleman punctually observing the time appointed, the Car∣dinal told him, that hee had consulted about that business, but they were not all of his opinion, so that there could bee no∣thing done but what was formerly commanded. The Iurate beseeched him to bee very warie and well advised; for som of his Council, hee told him, were men o're-swaied with pas∣sion, and more wedded to their private interests, then his Majestie's service, and that to his knowledg both Toledo and
Madrid were raising men to send to reliev Segovia, and if they went thither, hee might easily see what mischief would en∣sue. The Cardinal thereupon said, hee would call a Council again about it. SECT▪ LI. TOledo and Madrid (as beeing nearest) fearing that if Sego∣via were subdued,Toledo and Madrid Succor Sego∣via. they should bee in danger, chose Cap∣tains,Iohn de Padillae made Capain of the Toledi∣ans. and raised men to send to succor it. Toledo pitched upon Iohn de Padilla, to whom they gave Commission to rais a thousand Foot, and a hundred Light-horsmen (whereof Her∣nando de Ayala was Captain) with som pieces of Artillerie. Madrid sent out four hundred Foot, and fiftie Hors. The To∣ledians beeing joined with those of Madrid,Iohn Bravo Captain of the Segovian forces they marched to∣gether to a place called Espinar, where John Bravo Captain of the Segovians, came forth with his men to receiv them; They made all together two thousand Foot, and one hundred and fiftie Horse; after some Conference, they agreed all three to go to Santa Maria de Nieva, where Ronquillo was quartered, and do as much mischief as they could, whil'st those of Salaman∣ca and other places might join,Ronquillo refu∣seth to ingage in battle. and come to the succor of Se∣govia. But Ronquillo and his Captains, persevering in their de∣sign (although they went out into the field, seeming to in∣counter the Enemie) would not ingage in Battle, but mar∣ched soberly and in good order, another waie; the Cardinal hearing of the setting forth and joining of these Captains, de∣termined to increas the strength of his own forces, and make a formal Camp, able to suppress and subdue the Contrarie Partie. To this effect hee sent to Antonio de Fonseca Captain Ge∣neral of the Kingdom, that vvith the King's standing forces, and with all the rest hee could make of Foot and Hors, hee should go help Ronquillo, and of that Artillerie which was at Medina del Campo, hee should take what hee thought fitting.
Moreover hee sent to command Rnquillo,Antonio de Fon∣seca comman∣ded by the Cardinal to as∣sist Ronquillo. that by no means hee should give those Captains battle, but should first join with Antonio de Fonseca, for the better effecting thereof. Antonio de Fonseca's March could not bee kept so private, but Valladolid (where the Order was made) perceived it. Whereupon (al∣though they were cried up for their Loialtie) they began to mutinie much more then before they had done, (which was no slight matter neither) for they made private meetings eve∣ry daie. Yet notwithstanding the Commotions of Valladolid, Antonio de Fonseca cunningly got out of the Citie, and marched with all the Hors and Foot hee could rais to Arevalo, where Ronquillo and the Captains that were with him, met him with theirs,Segovia write's to those of Me∣dina del Campo not to deliver their Artille∣rie to Fonseca. and concluded of their journie to Medina. Segovia ha∣ving notice of their march, and knowing their intention, which was to bring Artillerie thence for their hurt and dam∣mage, immediately dispatched an Express to Medina, with a Letter to this effect. That by no means they should conde∣scend to deliver the Artillerie to Fonseca, notwithstanding the persuasions of the Bishop of Burgos his brother, who had been long there solliciting and pressing them to it, alleging how unjust a thing it were, since Segovia sent their Clothes to inrich the Fairs of Medina, that Medina should send Cannons to batter and beat down the walls of Segovia; urging more∣over, that if they did so, it would bee the utter ruine of Segovia, and Medina would suffer likewise in their Fall. And in the Close, they desired Medina to hear and give full credit to their Messenger, who should impart som things to them which they thought not fit to write. SECT. LII. Antonio de Fon∣seca advanceth with his forces to Medina to demand the Artillerie.UPon receit of this Letter, those of Medina resolved not to deliver the Artillerie. Antonio de Fonseca with the best part of those men that were at Arevalo, marched thence on
Tuesdae morning the 21. of Angust towards Medina, with in∣tention to take the Artillerie away by force, in case they refused to deliver it, as already they had upon Ronquillo's demand. They beeing advertised by the Letter from Segovia, and other parts, of these preparations against them, put on a resolution to stand out and not deliver the Artillerie. Antonio de Fonseca having friends within the Town (besides the Corregidor him∣self, Gutiere Quijada, beeing well inclined to the deliverie there∣of) began first to treat fairely with them, shewing them the Orders and Power hee had to that effect. But the Towns-men replied,They refuse to deliver the Artilerie. that they kept the Artillerie for and in the name of the King, and that they saw no reason they had to deliver it, but rather to keep it in defence of their Town and people. Yet to do his Majestie service, they were willing to deliver some of it, if need required, upon condition that they them∣selvs might go with it, and bring it back againe, from this contention they grew to higher language, thence to blows, and planting their ordnance at everie street's end, great mul∣titudes of people presently flocked thither, all in armes. An∣tonio de Fonseca seeing this,Fonseca storn. the Town. Is repulsed. commanded his men to storm the Town; the Towns-men killed some of his men with can∣non shott, and some of theirs were likewise killed, defending the entrance of the Town. Antonio de Fonseca thought to catch them with a wile (not intending any such mischief as fell out) which was thus;The unfortun∣ate burning of Medina del Campo by Fon∣seca's men hee privately commanded certain fire∣bals of pitch to bee made and flung into St Francis street, thinking that the people would presently run all thither to quench the fire, and quit the gates, by which meanes hee might enter and seize upon the Artillerie; but it succeeded not according to his exspectation; for the fire began to rage ex∣ceedingly, in so much that St Francis street, and the linnen dra∣perie was quite through of a flame, yet the inhabitants shewed so much courage that (although their houses, goods and chil∣dren were burning before their eyes) they would not depart from the Artillerie, fighting with Antonio de Fonseca and his men, until they had driven them quite from the Town. Fon∣seca
was very angrie, and ashamed that hee could not effect his intention, and no less grieved for the great harm and damage the fire had done, which hee intended not. The Monasterie of St Francis was burnt to the ground with all the rich orna∣ments and librarie; besides great store of Monie, Cloath, Silks Clothes of Gold and Silver, and other rich commodities, which divers Genua, and Segovia Merchants had layed up there, all consumed to ashes. And nine hundred houses more, in whch not so much as one bed was preserved. It was a lamentable thing to see how the poor people, women and children, went crying, and groaning up and down the streets, having no hous left to go into, nor any thing to cover thei nakedness, calling upon God for justice against Fonseca. In this sad condition remained Medina, more inflamed with the fire of wrath in their hearts, then their houses were with the bals of pitch. The Corregidor durst not stay, becaus hee had been with Fonseca. Whereupon the people began to call an Assemblie of the Commonaltie, and took the same form of government as the other Cities did. They wrote forthwith to Iohn de Padilla, and the other Captains, declaring their miseries, and imploring their assistance, to revenge their losses upon those that had sided with Fonseca against them; and their chiefest spleen was against the Town of Arevalo, becaus Fon∣seca had carried his men thence. Arevalo feared as much from those of Segovia, and in it self there were partialities and si∣dings thereupon, som taking the Commoners part, others the Contrarie. Medina wrote likewise to the other Cities, impart∣ing to them their calamities: Segovia answered their Letters, expressing manie thanks for their defending so couragiously the Artillerie, and exceeding sorrow for the great losses they had susteined,
SECT. LIII. ADriano the Cardinal of Tortosa (beeing a holie man) was grieved to the soul at the disaster of Medina, and in excuse of himself hee wrote a Letter to them, expressing his sorrow in good and Saint-like tearms. Whereunto they re∣turned an answer, giving his Eminence thanks for his resent∣ment of their miseries, and making a large relation of the cru∣elties of Fonseca and his Souldiers, besides the great losses they had susteined by fire, which they esteemed to bee of so high value, that they doubted the King's whole Revenue, for som years, would not bee enough to make them reparation. And at last they desired his Eminence would bee pleased to con∣demned and declare for Traitors and disturbers of the King∣dom Antonio de Fonseca, Gutiere Quijada, and that bloodie rob∣ber (as they called him) Iohn de Avila, and disband their men, with Command that everie one should repair to their own home, and not burn the houses of his Majestie's faithful Sub∣jects, for under colour of serving the King, they did him great disservice therein. Finis Libri Secundi.
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE THIRD BOOK. SECT. I. ANger supported on the shouldiers of Autori∣tie is like lightning from heaven. Antonio de Fonseca, Captain General of the Kingdom, was inraged beyond the measure of discretion a∣gainst Medina. Hee burned like a flash of lightning, their houses and their goods, but hee incensed their hearts and wills much more (like men in despair) to commit a thousand absurdities. And to revenge the furie of his passion, all the people of the Town took Arms, dispersed Letters of their grievances through the whole
Kingdom, desiring vengeance, and hee that could do most mis∣chief was held the bravest fellow. Amongst these broils and mischiefs, there was one particularly noted for his courage and boldness, a Cloth-worker by trade, his name was Bobadilla, a mean fellow, dull, but cruel of disposition; hee was follow∣ed, as their Captain, by divers that were undone, and therefore grown furiously passionate. First hee fell upon Gil Nieto (who had been his Master) cutting and slashing till hee had killed him; then hee killed a Book-seller, called Tellez; next, a Regidor of the Town, called Lope de Vera. And so hee and his Associats served all those whom they knew, or did but imagine, had anie hand in Fonseca's coming to demand the Artillerie, or had consented to the de∣livering of it. They pluckt down the houses which Don Ro∣drigo Mexia had there, and committed divers other crulties and outrages. This active audaciousness of Bobadilla got him very much credit and esteem amongst the people, and hee Lorded it, and took so much upon him, that from that time forwards nothing was done but what he would; so hee commanded and governed as Head of the people.Bobadilla Cap∣tain of the peo∣ple in Mdina. Hee pre∣sently took a great hous, set Porters at his Gates, and gave him∣self the style of Lord. Such Heads, as this Cloth-worker was, had the Commonalties in other places; as Villoria, a skin∣ner in Salamanca, and Antonio Casado in Segovia, and others such like, who beeing bold, and without honor or shame, were followed and esteemed by the common and meaner sort; And indeed divers Gentlemen were to blame herein, who did ve∣ry much harm, som by kindling and fomenting the fire secretly, others publickly, not with design to do the King anie disservice, but by reason of parties and factions amongst them∣selvs, som siding with the Commonaltie, purposely to de∣stroie others, so that it was more their particular factions and seditions, then their disobedience to his Majestie, that occasi∣oned all these disorders.Medina com∣plain's to Val∣ladolid of their misfrtune. Medina, soon after this disaster, sent Let∣ters to Valladolid, conteining a most pitiful relation of their unfortunate and deplorable condition, with high exclamati∣ons
against the crueltie of Antonio de Fonseca and Ron∣quillo. SECT. II. THe Emperor wrote to Valladolid, giving them thanks that they had preserved Peace and quietness in that Citie, and for the good entertainment they had given, in his absence, to the Cardinal,Valladolid's an∣swer to the Emperor's Letter. his Governor, and those of his Council. Where∣unto they returned an Answer the 8th Iulie, 1520, with manie acknowledgments of his favor, praising God that hee had given them such a Prince and Emperor, who they hoped should conquer the Holie Land, and bee a great Defendor of the Church, as the Emperors and Kings, his forefathers, had been. And moreover they beseeched, with all humilitie, his Sacred Majestie, forasmuch as that Citie had not onely shew∣ed their Loialtie, in serving, with their Arms, the Kings his Ancestors (as Don Alonso the Eleventh, Don John the Second, and others) but also in advising and counselling them what was most expedient for their Roial services. And since it was ap∣parent, that the granting of the Subsidie in the Parlament at the Groyn, had been the onely occasion of so manie great Commotions and troubles in the Kingdom, that his Majestie would bee pleased (of his innate liberalitie and goodness) graciously to remit and pardon all those that had opposed the levying thereof, and that it should bee no more demanded, which favor would be so acceptable to the whole Kingdom, that at his return (which they hoped would bee peedily) they would do him such extraordinarie service, that Hee should thank them for preferring Him that Petition, and know more clearly their desires to serv Him. But the burning of Medina del Campo, caused so great scandal in Castilla, that it revived and made the fire blase more fiercely out amongst the common people, and infected their Spirits
so, that manie other Towns, whither the sore had not yet run, rose up in the like disorder. The next daie after Medina was burnt (as you have heard) they sent Letters with a par∣ticuler of the passages, to Valladolid. With no less furie, then Fonseca's firebals consumed the houses of Medina, were inflam∣ed the hearts of those of Valladolid at the receipt of those dolo∣rous tydings. And without respect to the Cardinal, Governor,Tumuls in Vllaolid for the burning o Mdna. the Arch-Bishop, President, Council or other officers of justice, and forgetting the graces and favors the Emperor had done them by his Letters; they rang out the bell of San Miguel, whereupon all the people presently took arms, and ran from all parts of the Citie to the great market-place, and all that the Earl of Venavente, and Don Alonso Enriquez Bishop of Osma could do, or saie (who came out to pacifie the people) was to no purpose. And beeing thus gathered to∣gether, about five or six thousand men, they went to Pedro de Portillo's hous, about twy-light (for at that time hee was chief Burgess of the Cittie) willing him to go along with them to the President of the Council, that hee might provide for certain things, which were necessarie for the Citie. But Pedro de Portillo displeased them so with his answear, calling them mutiniers and theevs, that went about to robb and plunder, that in furious madness they broke open his dores and windowes, and hee had much adoe to get cleer of them by hiding himself; seeing they could not find him, they took a rich cupboard of plate, that was set against supper, they searched his hous all over, plundred his shop and warehous, and took away manie rich cloaths and silks (for hee was a merchant) they made a great fire before his dore, in which they burned manie pieces of rich cloath of gold and silver, silks, wollen cloaths, tapistries, rich mantles, ermines and other things of great value (for hee was a very rich man) they left not so much as a hen, but they flung it in the fire or stole it away. And at the carrying away of their plunder, they fell out and fought with one another. This man's loss was esteemed above three millions of Maravediz. Not satisfied
with all this, they began to pluck the hous down, and som boies that followed their fathers, set fire to a Garret, where was great store of drie wood and bavins, which burned furi∣ously, but fearing to burn the neighboring houses, they sud∣denly quenced the fire again, which if they had not don, would have endangered a great part of the Citie. This done, beeing inraged with that popular furie which the Divel had sowd in Spain, with loud out-cries they ran to the hous of Antonio de Fonseca, who set fire on Medina, and in revenge there∣of, they burnt and pluckt it to the ground, not leaving a bit of timber, nor a tile that belonged to it, unconsumed. Thence they went to Alonso Ninno de Castro's hous (who was chief Judg of the Citie) and finding not him, they plundered it, and plucked down the ntrie. The like they did to divers of the principal men of the Citie, which a certain Autor, a Na∣tive of Valladolid, and an eie-witness of all these passages, saith, was a just judgment upon the Regidores, and the rest, for their ambitions and disordinate desires of advancing their particu∣lar ends, without regard of the publick good, suffering their Countrie to bee drained of all its treasure by strangers, to the sum of nine millions of gold, out of Castilla onely, which was never converted to his Majestie's use, but was shared a∣mongst the Flemings▪ This was the general complaint of that Kingdom, which people of those times said, ought to bee registred in charactes of blood▪ After this, they made themselvs strong, keeping constant watch, and going the Rounds with Minstrels and Drums, no less then fifteen hun∣dred together at the first▪ but this was so chargeable, that they reformed their Rounds to twentie men at a time. Som nights they found gunpowder mingled with pitch scattered in the streets, which they said, Antonio de Fonseca had commanded to bee done, for anger that his hous was burnt. After that they kept Rounds and strong Guards at the Gates, and they were so affraid of fire and pitch, that they watered all their houses with vineger, thinking there was som design to burn Vallado∣ as well as Meina. They called an assemblie in the Mona∣sterie
of the Trinitie, where they chose new Burgesses and Deputies. Then they sent for the Gentlemen and Citizens of the Town, whom they made to swear and take the ingage∣ment of the Commonaltie, which for feare of death they durst not refuse to do. They made the Infante of Granada their Captain General, which office hee was inforced to accept, or die. And they all swore to obey him, and to do nothing contrarie to his command; which charge hee began to exercise with much discretion. But becaus they knew that Don Alonso Enriquez Bishop of Osma, and brother to the Lord Admiral, did not like well of their proceedings, they turned him out of the Citie, and divers other Gentlemen likewise, becaus they could not trust them. Which done, they presen∣lie sent messengers to Medina del Campo, offering them succor. And to that effect they listed two thousand Souldiers, and chose likewise six Commissioners, to send to the Iunta, or Assemblie, held in Avila, to which already the gave they Attri∣bute of Holie. SECT. III. THe Cardinal and those of the Council seeing all these passages, were so far from providing or ordering any thing in this case, that they durst not, neither did it seem pos∣sible for them to meet, and confer of what was to bee done. But as in a storm at Sea, when there is neither sayles, marrin∣ers nor pilots (all hope lost) the ship is left to drive at the tempest's pleasure: so the Cardinal and the Arch-Bishop of of Granada, and those of the Council (having no means to resist) thought best to let alone that people, who were hurried away with so violent a storm of inconsiderate furie. The Cardinal made them a thousand congies, and excused him∣self saying, that hee never commanded Medina to bee burned, nor had any hand in the other mischiefs: quite contrarie it
grieved him to the very soul, to hear what Fonseca had done. And beeing desired by the Citie,The Crdinall disclaime's Fonsec's burn∣ing of Medin and Com∣mand's him to disband his men. and thinking it to bee con∣venient himself, hee commanded to bee proclaimed publick∣ly, that all those that were with Antonio de Fonseca should leav him and return to their houses, and hee sent his express order to the same effect to Antonio de Fonseca, commanding him to disband his men, reserving onely what was necessarie for the guard of his own person, in regard it was not possible to maintein an Army in those parts, having no means, nor place where to raise monie for their subsistance. Fonseca was in∣forced to obey, conforming himself to the time so taking a partie of hors with him, hee went out of the Kingdom; for all in that Countrie were his deadlie enemies, and hee had no mind to bee surprised by them in Arevalo, or either of his Towns of Coca or Alaejos, but leaving them well fortified, and his son Don Fernando in Coca, hee passed into Portugal, and thence by Sea into Flanders with the Judge Ronquillo. SECT. IV. ABout this time Caceres in Estremadura, and the Citie of Iaen in Andaluzia (where as yet the diseas had not broke out) began to cry up the Commonaltie.Commotions in Caceres and Iaen quieted by the discre∣tion of Don Rodrigo Mexia. So that Don Rodrigo Mexia Lord of Santa Eufemia, who had a great partie, beeing born in that Citie, labored and used all means possi∣ble to hinder the people from the outrages and mischiefs, which were done in other Cities, and not beeing able to bridle and restrain their furie otherwise, hee took upon himself the charge of the Justice and Commonaltie. Manie other Gentle∣men made use of the like prudent dissimulation, not beeing able to do otherwise. Badajoz also, beeing in the like dis∣temper, was quieted by his good industrie, they of Badajoz took a fort from him that kept it for the Earl of Feria. There is no reason why the Andaluzians should bee held any better
then the Castillians, for in all places the dissentions were much alike, and their demeanors, as if the common people had agreed and contracted together som yeares before. SECT. V. Factions in ueda and Bza.UBeda and Baeza were divided into two parties between the Venavides and the Caravajales both noble and ancient families in Castilla, Don Luis de la Cueva, cozen german to the Duke of Alburquerque, was Captain of the Venavides. Cara∣vajal Lord of Todar (which is a Village two leagues from Ubeda) commanded the other partie. In these factions there was so much animositie, that one daie Don Luis de Ubeda, coming in a litter (for hee was an old man) was set upon by Caravajal Lord of Todar, attended by an hundred hors, who gave him so manie thrusts with his lance, that hee killed him in his litter. This done, hee was carried back to Ubeda, where the manner of his death beeing related to his son Don Alonso, and their kindred, to revenge his father's death, they went to the Village of Todar, where they killed and cut the throats of all they could lay hands upon, and afterwards set fire to the Village in manie places, that some that hid themselvs in their houses, were fain to leap out at the windows to avoid the fire. The destruction and crueltie was so great, that they reckoned of killed and burned, about two thousand persons, men, women, or children, and onely the ruines of some houses in the village remained. But indeed though these Gentlemen were Loyall like Noble persons, yet it was so, that in this there was more of passion and particular grudge and hatred then anie matter of Commonaltie. For neither the Venavides, nor those of la Cueva, ever were Commoners, or pre∣tended to disserv the King. But in these places, with the occasion of the Kingdom's beeing in a hurly-burly, they made use of the Common Interest to revenge their private
passions. And it is apparent, that if these Gentlemen did fol∣low the Commonaltie, as wishing it well, yet they were none of their Captains. SECT. VI. CUenca,Cuenca riset for the Com∣monaltiee. in imitation of other Cities, rose also and com∣mitted the like disorders; In this Citie was Captain of the Commonaltie, one Calaborra, and with him a Bridle-ma∣ker, whom the whole Citie obeied as their Lords. And there beeing a person of principal note and power in the Kingdom, (Luis Carrillo de Albhornoz, Lord of Torralva and Berreta) they so much slghted him, that hee was inforced to dissemble and sumon all his reason and prudence to persuade his heart to brook it. Their audaciousness grew to that pass, that hee ri∣ding upon his mule through the street, a Rascal of the Com∣mon sort struck him over the buttock, saying, in a scoffing manner, Go thy waie Luis Carrillo; hee was glad to let this pass, the times not permitting him to do otherwise. Luis Carrillo was married to Donia Inez Varrientos de Manrique, a Ladie of a Mascu∣line courage, who desiring to revenge the injuries and affronts done to her husband, and to stop and take off the opprobri∣ous taunts of the people, she invited the Captains of the Com∣monaltie to Supper, and having well loaden their heads with wine, shee caused them to bee carried to sleep in several cham∣bers, and beeing dead with sleep and the vapors of the wine, shee commanded her servants to cut their throats, and hang their bodies out at the windows next the street. SECT. VII. AVila was the seat where all the Cities made their Assem∣blie▪ Here they did such disorders, as the loyal Citie of
Avila ought not to have permitted. The Common people were the onely Actors thereof, for the Gentrie still persevered in the fidelitie of their Ancestors. And becaus Antonio Ponce (like a loial Gentleman) would not swear to follow the Commonaltie, they began to pluck down his hous, but did not, beeing hindred by som other Gentlemen. The rest, as in other Cities, did swear and took the Engagement of the Commonaltie, som willingly, som becaus they did not right∣ly understand themselvs, and others out of fear. They would have pluckt down the hous of Diego Hernando de Quiniones, becaus hee had granted the Subsidie, beeing their Commissi∣oner in the last Parlament, but som good men intervening, hindered the executing of their Purpose. They had possessed themselvs of the Fort, if Don Gonzalo Chachon Lord of Cassar∣ruvios, (seeing the Commotions in most parts of the King∣dom, and that Toledo had taken the Fort from Don Iohn de Sil∣va, and Segovia would have done the like to the Earl of Chin∣chon) had not prudently and with dissimulation provided it (hee beeing Governor thereof) with Munition, Arms and men, taking them in by night, and hiding them by daie. The Fort beeing thus Ammunitioned, when the Common-people ple flocked thither to take it, they found greater resistance then they exspected. And the Citie perceiving they might bee much damnified by the Fort, and those of the Fort likewise by the Citie; they treated of an Agreement and Cessation of Arms, whereby they might live quietly, and not to do anie act of Hostilitie to each other. Don Gonzalo Chachon having in∣formed the Cardinal, Governor, of this Treatie, by his consent it was concluded, and Articles on both sides were drawn in form, signed and delivered in presence of the publick Nota∣ries of the Citie. So those of the Fort lived quietly, leaving the Towns-men to the confusion of their Commonaltie. The nobleness of the Gentrie (in imitation of their Ancestors, desirous to serv the King) beeing as a firm Bulwark and se∣cure Guard against their indiscreet furie. This made Avila gain the renown of Loial.
SECT. VIII. NOt onely the fore-named Cities were infected with this spirit of Sedition, but divers other small Towns and Villages were tainted with the same Contagion, where the diseas raged with such unnatural furie, that there was neither Law nor respect betwixt Fathers and the Children, som being of one opinion, the others contrarie. In a certain Village called Medin,The Autor b∣ing a Frier▪ shewe himself more a Flat∣trer then the Priest a Fool, for the one praied simply▪ the other writ colloguingly, taking all ad∣vantage, t ad∣vance his In∣terest i Court▪ near the Palomera de Avila, lived a Byscainer Priest, half a fool, who was so affectionated to Iohn de Padilla, that everie Holie daie in the Church hee used to saie, I recommend unto your praiers, Brethren, The most holie Commonaltie, desi∣ring God to preserv and support it, that it may never fall. I recommend unto you likewise, his Majestie the King, Don John de Padilla, that God may prosper him; as also her Highness the Queen, our Ladie Donia Maria Pacheco, that God may powr down his blessings upon her; for verily these are the true Kings, the rest are all but Tyrants. These praiers continued for three weeks together, after which Iohn de Padilla, with his Souldiers, passing that waie, som of them were quartered in this Priest's hous, who drank him up a little barrel of wine, killed his Hens, and took away a young wench that he kept, with them. The Sundaie following, bee∣ing in the Church, hee said to his parishioners, You know, Bre∣thren, how John de Padilla passing here, his souldiers quartered in my hous, truly Beloved, they have not left mee one Hen, they have eaten up all my Bacon, they have drunk mee a whole Barrel of Wine, and have taken my Katherine away with them, therefore I charge you hence∣forwards not to praie God for him, but for our Sovereign Lord Don Carlos, and the Queen Donia Juana, for They are our true Kings. I do relate som of these fopperies, that you may see how foo∣lish and blinde men were at that time, and indeed no better could then bee exspected; for certainly som malign star had predominance for two years over those parts, which made men fall into such unheard of extravagancies.
SECT. IX. THe Citie of Soria was ingaged in no less mischief then the other Cities, by the rising of the Common People. If I should undertake to particularize the riotous disorders of evrie several place, my work would never be at an end. In short, none of those that treated of Commonalties, made anie bones of kil∣ling their neighbors, plucking down their houses, and com∣mitting a thousand exorbtances (like rash unadvised men, without sens or judgment) as to discompose the form of Go∣vernment, displace the Officers of Justice, taking their staves from them, and naming other Judges, without considering or reflecting upon the end that followeth such like disorders, nor how to bee preserved in them.Toro and Ciu∣dad Roderigo declare for the Commonaltie The Citie of Toro and Ciudad Rodrigo took likewise the Engagement of the Commo∣naltie. They turned out the Officers of Justice established by the King, and put others in their places; And those Gentlemen that had most power, drove their Antagonists out of the Ci∣tie. Which factious bandyings one against another, in revenge of particuler grudges and quarrels, were the chiefest occasion of kindling the people's furie, and it might justly bee said, that they were private seditions and tumults, not Rebellion against their King, for there was no such word amongst the Gentrie, nor the Common people. SECT. X. LEon had done wisely if they had continued in the same good resolution, wherewith they answered Valladolid concerning the Treatie of an Assemblie, which Toledo desired. But (as I have often said) the factions and parcialities that
were in everie Citie, did more harm then anie thing els in these Commotions. The Guzmanes were so highly distasted at their beeing put out of Don Fernando, the Infante, his service, that a little thing would have made them raise a Commotion in that Citie, where they were very powerfull, beeing of an Ancient and Noble extraction. They had some difference and spleen against the Earl of Luna, who was sent Com∣missioner from that Citie to the Parlament, that was held at the Groyne,Factions in he Citie of Leon. who having consented to the Subsidie, was not well received at his return; and it is reported that Ramiro Nunnz de Guzman spoke thus to him; They saie, you have granted the Subsidie, and gon beyond your Commission, if that bee true, you deserve to bee severely punished. The Earl hereupon answered Ramiro Nunnez, I have done what I ought and what I was Commanded to do, neither have I exceeded my Commission one title. So from one thing to another at last they fell into a great passion, and Ramiro Nunnez said to the Earl, I will make you know with this my Sword against yours, how you are a Traytor, and have Committed Treason against this Citie. Thereupon they both drew, and this unfortunate controversie, divided the Citie into two factions. For these two families beeing the chief and most Ancient of the Citie, had each of them manie friends, kindred and abbettours; but in regard the Earl was out of favour with the people, and Ramiro Nunnez much beloved and followed by a great multitude, they fell upon the Earl and his partie with such furie, that they killed thirteen of his men, there were manie on both sides wounded. The Earl was behold∣ing to the swiftness of his hors, or else hee had born his dead followers companie. This news was brought to Valladolid, and the Cardinall highly resented it, but knew not how to remedie it, seeing the fire so generally kindled throughout the kingdom, that of the eighteen Towns of Castilla which had Votes in Parlament, fifteen were risen for the Commonaltie, and had chosen Commissioners, or Burgesses, to goe to the Iunta, or, Assemblie, then held in Avila. The Cardinall de∣rived the fault of all this mischief upon Monsieur de Xeures, for
giving the Emperor so ill counsel, as to demand that Subsidie, and the worst of all was, that hee never received it. The Cardinal was out of heart, and perplext with continual fears, not thinking himself secure in Valladolid, by reason of these troubles and heart-burnings of the people, which no fault of the King's but the covetousness of his insatiable Counsellers, had occasioned. I have alreadie told you, that one Subsidie they desired was three hundred millions, and another time six hundred millions, in all nine hundred millions of Maravediz; therefore let no man marvel at the great difference of these sums, for in effect no bodie could rightly understand what they would have had; yet they saie, the Emperor desired no more then the ordinarie Subsidie that his Predecessors, the Catholick Kings had, (which was two hundred millions everie year) and that the over-plus they stole from him and the Kingdom, contrarie to his will or knowledg. SECT. XI. THe affairs of Spain were so imbroiled, and men so in∣considerately raving, that it seemed as it were a scourge from Heaven, which threatned no less destruction to that Countrie then that, during the reign of Don Rodrigo. They trust∣ed in Southsaier's Prognostical judgments of the succeeding mischiefs. Som Divels invented, I know not what Prophecies, which they father'd upon Saint Isidorus Arch-Bishop of Se∣vilia, others upon Frier Iohn de Roccacelsa, and one Merlin, be∣sides others, which they said, were of Saint Iohn Damascenus, and other Doctors; that of Saint Isidorus was his complaints or lamentations over Spain. I have read all those ill presges of calamitie and destruction to Spain, which so much affright∣ed and dismaied the people, and I find them onely idle things, which deserv not the setting down here, unless it were to
make us wonder at the facilitie and weakness of men in those times, to give credit to anie such like fopperies. The ignorant people were particularly besotted with one which pourpor∣ted,A rophse. That there should reign over Spain a Prince called Charles, who should destroie the Kingdom, and make the Cities desolate, but hee should bee overcom and driven out of the Kingdom by an Infante of Portingal, and that the said Infante should reign over all Spain, and mee think's wee see the contrarie. Such follies doth blinde passion, work in thoughts of ignorant and indiscreet people. SECT. XII. TOledo wrote to the other Cities the last year 1519, invi∣ting them to assemble, and consult of what was most meet and expedient for them to supplicate the Emperor before his departure out of the Kingdom. And in regard that As∣semblie went not forwards, and that now things were in such disorder, that the breaking out was universal through the whole Kingdom, yet they did not well understand, nor trust one another; so for the begetting a better intelligence a∣mongst them, and to the end they might the more firmly esta∣blish the Commonaltie,Toledo invite's all the other Cities to send their Commis∣sioners t the Assemblie at Avila. which thy called Holie, Toledo sent other Letters to all the Cities of Castillia, pressing them with manie powerful arguments, to send, without delaie, their Commissioners to the Holie Assemblie at Avila, and not to return them anie such excuse, as formerly, becaus such kinde of Congregations and Assemblies were condemned by strangers; for in that Holie Assemblie nothing was to bee debated, but what concerned the Service of GOD. And that they might stu∣die or invent Remedies against the Seven sins of Spain, treating first, Of their fidelitie to the King, their Lord. Secondly, the Peace of the Kingdom. Thirdly, the Remedie or settling of the Roial Patrimonie▪ Fourthly, the grievances of the Natives. Fifthly, the Injustice done by Strangers. Sixtly, the Tyrannies wth som
of their own Countrie-men had invented. Seventhly, the intole∣rable Impositions & taxes which that Kingdom suffered. Ur∣ging moreover, that they should not value what censure pas∣sed upon them amongst their enemies for so doing, in regard wicked persons are alwaies ready to blast with opprobrious tongues, all good and religious actions, which presupposed, although things should fall out contrarie to their exspectations or desires, and that they should bee in danger of their persons, thei houses should be plucktdown, their goods taken away, and at last should lose their lives: In such case they were to esteem disgrace a favor, danger securitie, povertie riches, ba∣nishment a glorie, loss profit, persecution a crown, death life; for nothing is so glorious for a man, as to spend his life in the defence of the Republick. After all these, and divers other persuasive arguments, they desired each Citie to give ful cre∣dence to their Messenger, who had instructions to treat fur∣ther with them. SECT. XIII. THe fifth of Iulie 1520, the Lord Deputie of Murcia made a complaint to the Cardinal and Council, how the Citie, beeing risen, had killed their Governor, a Judg, and one of the Sheriffs, besides several other persons, and that the people were all in Arms, and so disorderly, that becaus hee went about to pacifie and allaie their furie gently, and in a peaceable manner representing to them the foulness and enor∣mitie of what they had don, they drove him out of the Citie, and placed Guards and Rounds, which committed very great disorders. Hereupon it was ordered by the Council, that Le∣guizama,Leguizama the Judg, by order from the Council, go∣eth to punish the disorders in Murcia. a Judg of Oyer and Terminer, should go thither with large powers, taking Officers along with him, and that the neighboring towns should furnish him with men sufficient to bring them to reason. Leguizama the Judg, beeing arrived
at Murcia, entred peaceably into the Citie. Hee intimated his orders to the Chief Justice, Gentlemen, Council and Assem∣blie of the Citie, requiring their favor and assistance. Which at first they did obey: and the Judg began to make his privie search and examination, whereby hee found som guiltie, which hee gave order to apprehend. This pleased not the People, who began to think of turning him out of the Citie. Hee sentenced a Shoomaker to bee whipp'd, who beeing brought through the streets,The people re∣scue the offen∣dor, and mui∣nie against Le∣guizma. the Beadles still whipping him, the people mutinied, and manie beeing armed, they rescued the prisoner with great nois and hubbub; which done, they went into a hous to consult what they were to do. The Judg perceiving that presently betook him to his heels, and fled into the Marquess of Velez his hous, who then was in the Citie. The Marquess hearing that the Judg was gone to his hous, hee would not staie with him, but presently took hors and rode out of the Town as fast as hee could to Mula, a Citie ten leagues from Murcia. The Judg made all haste possible after the Marquess, and overtook him in the field a good waie from Murcia, where hee shewed him his Orders, charging him in the King's name, under pain of Death and Confisca∣tion of all his Estate, to go back again with him into the Ci∣tie, and to aid and assist him to do Justice. The Marquess an∣swered him very angerly, (for hee had desired him before to bee very careful how hee proceeded, to consider the times, and not to be too rigorous, but he would not follow his counsel) saying,The Marquess of Velez's an∣swer to Legui∣zama. Iudg! Go, make these Requests to such men as your self is, not to mee, for in respect I am very much a servant to his Majestie, I give you this answer and no other. But to obey, and shew the reverence I bear to the Roial Crown (in whose name you require mee to return with you) let your Notarie publick com after mee, and I will give him an answer to what you demand of mee; With that hee turned the reins of his Hors and rode on towards Mula. The Judg went back to Murcia and set up his Hors in the same lodging hee was at before. By this time the Commonaltie was monstrousty di∣stempered, and a multitude not onely of the Towns-people,
but also of the neighboring Farms and Cottages, ran thither with clamorous outcries, and a full resolution to burn him, and all that were in the hous, and they had executed their pur∣pose but for Diego de Vera, who happily was then at Murcia with his souldiers: and hearing they had such an intention, hee rode presently to the Judge's lodging, which hee found encompassed with a number of people, crying out, Let him die, let him die. Yet at the instance and earnest request of Cap∣tain Diego de Vera they forbore, who desired them not to com∣mit anie such violence, but leave it to him, and hee would take such order, that the Judg should go out of the Citie, and meddle no more in that business. Hee obteined at length, with much trouble and importunitie, a promise from them to do whatsoëver hee commanded, upon condition, that the Processes made against anie of the Inhabitants of that Citie should be delivered to them, and that the Judg should depart the Citie within one hour▪ Diego de Vera having promised their desires should bee performed, went into the Judge's lodg∣ing, who presently delivered him the said Processes, which hee gave to the people, making them promise him, that they would not in anie kinde molest the Judg nor anie of his ser∣vants, but would let him go quietly and safely away, so hee departed without making anie longer staie in those parts,Leguizam for∣ced to leav the Citie. which was no small matter to obtein of such Mutiniers: the autoritie and grey-hairs of Diego de Vera, besides the repute hee had of beeing a gallant Souldier, was very useful at that time. Having pacified the people, and persuaded them to re∣turn to their own homes, he conducted the Judg, with his ser∣vants,Hee flie's to Mula. out of the Citie, and a league beyond, where they parted, and the Judg went in a great chafe & fume to Mula. There hee demanded men to return with him to Murcia,The people rise there also, and rais the Countrie a∣gainst him. which coming to the people's ear, they rose also against him, and having sounded an Alarm with much furie, they presently gaue no∣tice thereof to Lorca, and so from Village to Village to Murcia, and in very short time they were together in Arms about eight thousand men with those of Murcia, who marched a Judg∣catching
directly to Mula. But hee was too wise to wait for their coming, and flying night and daie hee never staied until hee got to Valladolid. Where hee remained but two daies, and on Sundaie night he went to Aldea Mayor, three leagues thence, for hee durst not staie in Valladolid, knowing they did not greatly love him for som things past, and there was but a kinde of counterfeited eace in that Citie, hee was affraid they would kill him. SECT. XIV. THe Citie of Sevilla, or Sevil, that all this while stood (as it were) looking on the rest, had likewise its disturber, who indeavoured to plunge it as deep as the other Cities, in these unhappie Commotions.Don Iohn de Figuero decla∣rth for the Commonalti in the Citie of Sevill. The beginning was thus. Don Iohn de Figueroa (brother to Don Rodrigo Ponze de Leon, Duke of Arcos) the Duke beeing at his Town of Marchena, set him∣self to rais the people of the Citie in favor of the Common∣altie, with intent to bee Captain and Governor himself. To vvhich effect, having already moulded and vvorked them to his mind, and beeing agreed vvith those that vvere his com∣plotters and confederates in this design, on Sundaie 17 of Sep∣tember, 1520, after dinner time, hee and som Gentlemen (kins∣men and followers of the Duke his brother) went to the Duke's hous in Sevilla, where they assembled and gathered together above seven hundred men with Arms, which done, hee and the rest of the Gentlemen beeing on hors-back, and the people on foot, they took four pieces of Ordnance out of the Duke's hous with them, and so marched into the streets, crying out, God bless the King and Commonaltie. Thus they went as far as St Francis place, and no bodie els stirred nor offred to join with them, but onely looked on as they passed. By the waie Don Iohn caused the staves to bee taken away from the King's Officers of Justice, and gave them to others in be∣half
half of the Commonaltie. In this time the Duke of Medina Sidonia, Don Alonzo Perez de Guzman, beeing very young, was yet under the Guardianship & Tuterage of Donia Leonor de Suniga his mother. Who being a Ladie of an high Spirit and courage, and seeing so dangerous a fire kindled in Sevilla, assembled all their domesticks, with all the friends and welwishers to her Son's Partie (that shee could so suddenly get together) and sent them under the Conduct of Don Valencia de Venavides a valiant Gentleman (who had married the Duke's sister) against Don Iohn de Figueroa. But beeing approached near each other, and ready to fight, som Gentlemen of note, mediating betwixt them, composed their quarrel, insomuch that the Duke of Me∣dina's men returned home again, and Don Iohn advanced to the gate of the Fort Roial, which finding shut, hee battered it down with his Ordnance, and beeing entred with all his men, hee took the Commander of it Don Iorge de Portugal Earl of Gelves; which done, becaus it was grown late, hee quarter'd there all night, thinking that all the people of Sevilla would pre∣sently flock to him, applauding this exploit, and back him in his enterprise, but they were so far from countenancing his design, that the greatest part of those that followed him that daie, for∣sook him in the night, and returned to their own houses. The next daie, very early in the morning, the Officers of Justice, and the Veynte y Quatros (by whom that Citie is governed) bee∣ing assembled,The Vynte y Qutros te Four and twentie chief¦men chosen by the Citie for the managing of affairs. they ordered, that immediately the King's Stan∣dard should bee brought forth, and that by command of the Citie, the people should all go in Arms and assault the Fort, which beeing re-taken, should forthwith bee delivered unto the Charge of him who before commanded it for the King. Don Fernando de Zuniga Earl of Venalcazar and divers other Gentlemen fitted themselvs to assist the people in this enter∣prise. But before they were in a posture to put this design in execution, Don Valencia de Venavides, by order and command express from the Dutchesses, Donia Leonor de Zuniga, and Donia Anna de Aragon, and the Duke of Medina (who was sick in bed) having rallied and re-assembled the men that followed
him the daie before with great courage and resolution march∣ed to the Fort, of which, after three hours hot dispute hee be∣came Master,Don Iohn taken prisoner, and the Citie qui∣eted. took Don Iohn de Figueroa prisoner, (who was wounded in two places) and re-delivered the Fort to Don Ior∣ge de Portugal. So in less then 24 hours this cloud was quite blown over, which threatned so furious a tempest. SECT. XV. THe Citie of Segovia sent to Salamanca, desiring Hors for their defens against Ronquillo. The Common people and so Gentlemen gave their Votes to send them succor, but the greatest part of the Gentrie opposed it, saying, it was a great dissrvice to the King, and contrarie to Justice. Manie distast∣full words passed amongst them, but at last the Commons prevailed,Salaman up in Arm. and turned all those Gentlemen out of Salamanca. One stately hous, that belonged to the Archbishop of Santjago's Steward, they burned down to the ground. Neither did those Gentlemen hold themselvs secure, until they were got into Val∣ladolid, where they gave a full account of all these passages. This was the beginning of the rising publickly in Salamanca. After which they kept their Rounds and Guards in the Citie, and sent Hors to the relief of Segovia, but before they departed, Salamanca, with other Cities, sent two men to the Cardinal and Council, beseeching them to forbear from chastising Se∣govia, for if they did not, the Citie of Salamanca could not re∣frain from sending them succor. Their chief Captain in this uproar was Don Pedro Maldonado,Don Pedro Mal∣dondo Cap∣tain in Sala∣manc▪ Nephew to the Doctor Talavera, who drove the rest of the Gentlemen, that were not of his faction, out of the Citie, and made the Corregidor go a∣way also, leaving the administration of Justice more out of fear then otherwise; which done, the Citie ordered the Justice, and did what you shall see hereafter.
SECT. XVI. THe Cardinal, Governor, seeing these troubles and disor∣ders increas daily without anie hope of remedie, not∣withstanding all the endeavors and gentle means hee, and those of the Council, had used to procure it: The President and the rest agreed to give his Majestie an exact account of all the Commotions and particular exigencies of the Kingdom of Castillia, and in what danger they themselvs were by rea∣son of the people's furie, desiring his Majestie to take som spee∣die order for the rectifying of so great disorders. SECT. XVII. THe Emperor had already received som intelligence of these troubles in Spain, by means of Flemish Merchants, and other particular letters; But when those from the Cardi∣nal and Council came to his hands at Lovain, Hee was seized with unexpressible sadness. The necessitie of his going to bee crowned in Germanie was very urgent, and his returning into Spain seemed yet of more importance. The Letter's sad Contents brd divers discontents, and no less different opini∣ons (as the custom is) amongst the Courtiers of the nearest relation about the Emperor. The Flemings condemned the Spaniards for raising these tumults ond commotions in their King's absence: The Spaniards retorted the blame upon the Flemings, saying, That their ill Government had been the oc∣casion of the ruine and loss of Spain, and that they had robbed it; and indeed to saie the truth, They were both in fault; for the Flemings were as short of discretion and prudence to Go∣vern, as they abounded with a too insatiable Covetousness.
And the Spaniards, although they had som reason to com∣plain, could not bee excused for rising up in Arms. Mon∣sieur de Xeures grew much discontented and ashamed upon the report of this breaking out of Spain, partly becaus hee knew what opinion went of him in the Court, but chiefly becaus hee thought (as justly hee might) the Emperor would derive the fault upon him: who, whil'st hee was in Spain, commanded with so absolute a power, that it was commonly said, The Emperor Don Carlos is King by right, and Monsieur de Xeures in effect. The Emperor beeing thus disquieted, called a Council, and desiring to have their advices, hee propounded, That they would consider what means was to bee vsed, that Hee might go into Germanie, and receiv that Crown which Hee so much desired, and provide som reme∣die to settle the disturbances of Spain, which was of no less importance to him, for his Coronation could bee no longer suspended, and the remedying of Spain ought not to bee dif∣ferred. Hee had of his Council in this occurrence, Germanes, Flemings, Italians, Aragoneses and Castillans; and their opinions were as different as their Nations. For the Germanes urged, that it was repuisite his Majestie should continue his journie into Germanie. The Italians said, it was necessarie that hee should make a progress into Italie. The Flemings were very importu∣nate for him to staie in their Countrie. The Aragoneses pleaded, that Valencia was also risen up in Arms. And the Castillans used all means possible to persuade him to reurn into Castill. The case beeing so general and nearly concerning so manie Kingdoms, the Emperor did wisely to take the advice of ma∣nie. But at last the resolution of the business was given by few▪ as great Princes use to do in like occurrences. The result of this Consultation was, That the Emperor should continue his journie into Germanie, and having received the Imperial Crown, there to remain until hee had fully settled the affairs of that Countrie, not being everie daie to return thither. It was likewise resolved, That his Majestie should send amiable and gracious Letters to all the Cities and Towns of Castilla, requi∣ring
som of them to return unto themselvs and his service, and expressing his thankfulness to others for their good in∣tentions towards him; That hee should desire and encharge the Nobles and Gentrie to favor and assist those of his Roial Council; promising to all upon the faith of his Roial word, that with all possible expedition hee would return into Castil∣la, (for the thought of the Emperor's never returning into Spain, bred in the Common people the boldness to commit such outrages and exorbitances). Moreover it was determi∣ned, That the Emperor should write unto the President and Council, condoling their troubles and persecution, comman∣ding them withall, that in one place or other, six of them should alwaies bee about the Cardinal and hold Council: To the end they might serv as a Refuge for the good people to appeal unto, and bee a terror to the evil: for if the Council omitted the doing of Justice, the Roial Autoritie must needs fall. And also, That the Emperor should appoint two other Governors to bee joined in Commission with the Cardinal, and those to bee men of noble extractions, well experienced, and advanced in years, of generous dispositions, powerful in estates, but chiefly Natives of that Kingdom. This advice see∣med very sound and pertinent to the Emperor, whereupon hee gave order it should bee put in execution accordingly, and those whom they Voted to bee joined in Commission with the Cardinal were, Don Fadrique Enriquez Lord High Admi∣ral of Castilla, and Don Inigo de Velasco Lord High Constable, who were both antient Gentlemen of great generositie and gallantrie. Which Election gave no small satisfaction to the Castillan partie, for they had shewen themselvs in their com∣mands not onely wise but valiant, and were alwaies fortunate in their undertakings. These Noblemen governed with such valour and prudence, that the Emperor in his Letters to the Lord High Constable, give's him thanks for his services, ac∣knowledging that by his means hee was King of Castilla. And indeed the Emperor said but what was true. Besides all this, his Majestie sent an especial Command, That the subsidie
which was granted him at the Groyn, should not bee exacted from those Cities which continued in their obedience to him, nor from those which were willing to submit and bee redu∣ced, for it was his will and pleasure graciously to forgive it them. This grace hee did likewise to the whole Kingdom, That the Roial Revenue should bee allowed for the Taxes, as during the Reigns of other Catholick Kings, his Ancestors. Hee resolved also to abrogate the sale, farming and enhaunce∣ment of all Taxes and Impositions, (which indeed were ve∣ry great): and besides hee sent to offer and certifie, That no Office in that Kingdom should bee conferred upon anie whomsoëver, unless hee were a Native; which if hee had granted when hee was desired, these Commotions had never happened. Of all this were ingrossed his Majestie's Patents and Commissions of sufficient power. Yet notwithstanding these three things were the principal grievances and most im∣portant reasons that Toledo and the other Cities alleged for ex∣cuse of their tumultuous risings: The granting all these de∣mands was not available enough to quiet their Commotions and reduce them to obedience;Here the Au∣tor flatter's▪ for the Contrivers and Ring-leaders, who had seduced the people into those mischievous practices, finding profit in fishing in that troubled water, hindered all they could that these graces of his Majestie might not com unto the people's knowledg, and when they were known, they gave out that they were vain promises, and onely fained or framed by the Council, becaus they were not able to do any thing els untill they had divided the people, and then that they would fall upon them. SECT. XVIII. ABout this time Letters were brought to Toledo from all the Cities, concerning their Iunta or Assemblie, and they all agreed it should bee as Toledo desired. Don Pedro Lasso (whom Toledo honored so much, since his return from the
Groyn, where hee shewed such obstinacie in his resolution, that they received him with great Solemnitie, giving him the stile of the Deliverer of that Countrie). Was appointed for the chief Commissioner of that Citie; with him they sent Don Pedro de Ayala, and two Iurates, besides other Deputies of the Common-People. Who resolved to take their Iournie the same daie Iohn de Padilla went to the succor of Segovia. The Citie of Avila was pitched upon for this Assemblie,The Junta be∣gan in Avilae. Iuli 29. 1610. Where they sayed not ng before they went to Tdsillas. more particularly becaus it was situate in the middle of old Cast∣illa, and the Kingdom of Toledo. The Cities which made this Assemblie were, Toledo, Madrid, Guadalaxara, Soria, Murci, Cuenca, Segovia, Avila, Salamanca, Toro, Zamora, Leon, Valla∣dolid, Burgos, Cuidad Rodrigo. The Commissioners of all these Places beeing assembled, they chose their Secretaries and other Officers correspondent. The Assemblie was held in the Chap∣ter of the Cathedral Church, Don Pedro Lasso Commissione from Toledo, and the Dean of Avila (who was a native of Segovia) were chosen Presidents. Upon a table in the Chapter laie a Cross and the Evangelists, whereon they made oath, everie one to live and die in the King's Service, and in favor of the Com∣monaltie. And those that refused to do this in Avila, were not onely ill treated in words, but had their houses pulled down. But this fortune onely befell one Gentleman, named, Don An∣tonio Ponze Knight of the order of Sant jago, and son to the Prince, Don Iohn, his nurs. The rest fearing the Peoples furie, condescended and collogued with them, to save their lives, which were in no small danger. In the middle of the Com∣missioners of this Assemblie, was placed a little form, where∣on did sit a certain Cloath-worker, named Pinilles, with a wand in his hand,A wiser man then the Au∣thor or els probablie bee never had rais∣d himself from nothing to so great prefement. and no Gentleman Commissioner or Ecclesiastick durst offer to speak one word untill this Cloath-worker had given him the sign, by pointing to him with his wand. So that those who took upon them to remedie the Kingdom, were commanded by a mean inferior fellow, a Cloath-worker. Such was the violence and blindness of the Common People's passion. The first thing they Ordered,
was, to take awaie the staff from the Corregidor of Avila, next they sent Letters to the Alcalde Ronquillo charging him not to set foot in the land of Segovia, and condemning him to great penalties if hee did the contrarie. SECT. XIX. HAving alreadie related the manner of the Commotions of the Cities and principall Towns of the Kingdom, with their general Assemblie at Avila,Hre the A∣thor would disgrace and undervalue if hee could the bravest wit that ever Spain bred, the hoor of his Countrie whose inen∣tions were oely for the Common-wealth's good, and had hee not been be∣trayed by some Nle-men of his Partie, he ad made it  most glios Com∣mon-Wealh in the World. Hee is much lamented by manie persons of qualitie in Spain yet  this die. I will now tell you the successes of those unadvised and indiscreetly raised Tumults. And in regard one of the most notorious Actors in these tragi∣call disorders, was Don Antonio de Acunna, Bishop of Zamora, who is famous to this very daie, for the strangeness of his dis∣position, and manner of the death hee suffred, which was not suitable to the dignitie of a Prelate, (but very answerable to his Actions, since it was done with very great justification of the Emperor, and by the Autoritie of Pope Clement the 7th, as appear's upon Record in the Arches of Simancas, which I have seen) you shall briefly hear who this Bishop was, and what his conditions. During the time of Don Iohn the second his raign in Castilla, lived in that Kingdom Don Luis Osorio de Acunia, a Gentleman of eminent note and account, father to Don Diego Osorio and this Don Antonio de Acunia, to whom his father dying left the Arch-Deakonship of Valpuesta, be∣sides other meanes, In these times hee beeing in service to their Catholick Majestie's was sent by them Embassador into France, after which the Bishoprick of Zamora was conferred upon him. The King was not very well pleased with him, becaus hee was of a turbulent Spirit, a lover of broils, impatient, adventurously bold, and one that did take more upon him, then his profession and degree required. Hee was naturally inclined to Arms, his ambition was to make himself Lord and Master of Zamora, where the Earl of Alva de Lista
then lived, son in law to the Duke of Alva, a stout gallant Gentleman and a great lover of honor. The Bishop and the Earl meeting about certain affairs betwixt them they grew to such odds, that very good Mediators were not able to pacifie them. Zamora beeing in Rebellion, and paying no obedience but to the Junta or Assemblie, the Bishop on one side and the Earl on the other, used all means possible to draw the people to thir factions. The Earl was better beloved, and bore the greater sway in the Citie, so that the Bishop was forced to leav it: It made him half madd to lose his hous, and so desperate seeing his Enemie prevail so far against him, That hee presently went to Tordesillas (where the Commissioners of the Iunta were then assembled) with whom hee joyned in confederacie, desiring them to assist him and furnish him with forces to beat the Earl of Alva out of Zamora. They all received him with great respect and contentment, thinking it an honor to their caus, to have so eminent a Prelate amongst them, they gave him men and Artillerie, wherewith hee marched back towards Zamora. The arl beeing informed of the manner of his enemie's advance, thought not fit to stay for him, but quitting the Fort, went and associated himself with the Cavaliers of the Loyal Partie, as you shall hear. Thence forwards the Bishop stuck close to the Iunta, and the Farl as eagerly followed the King's counsel, each of them so much favoring their Partie, that there were not anie two more remarkable then they. The Bishop was threescore years of age, but as vigorous and lively as if hee had been but five and and twentie. I was acquainted with one that knew him and received orders from him, who told me that hee was excellent at handling his arms. That hee had more then foure hundred Priests under his command all well armed and valiant men, and that hee still charged at the head of them himself, Saying, Here my Priests. The rest hereafter.
SECT. XX. I Have told you in what manner Segovia was fortified, the resolution of the Inhabitants, the relief which they receiv∣ed from manie places, notwithstanding Ronquillo's endeavors to hinder it; how Toledo incouraged them with promises both of men and monie, Madrid, Guadalaxara, and Salamanca did the like, making their case their own. Medina del Campo secured them their trading, offering to bear what loss soëver they should sustein either of persons or goods. At last the Citie of Avila seeing what Ronquillo did against Segovia; and the adjacent Towns, that hee entred into the Villages be∣longing to Avila, taking, killing and executing Justice in a severe manner, and that by order of the Cardinal and the Council, hee had taken from Segovia all the Places and Towns under its jurisdiction, commanding them not to obey or bee anie waie subject to that Citie, neither to furnish them with provisions anie more then if they were their enemies, under pain of death and confiscation of goods, giving them power and Autoritie to keep Justice amongst themselvs, as beeing a distinct jurisdiction, and other priviledges to the distruction of that Citie: They assembled in Council, and agreed to send a Petition in the name and with the subscriptions of the Officers of Justice, the Regidores, Gentrie, Religious Per∣sons, and of all the Commonaltie, humbly beseeching the Cardinal that hee would bee pleased to set a remedie to those disorders, and not proceed with so much rigor against Segovia, for that Citie would bee reduced sooner by fair means then by such severitie. That hee would command Ronquillo to rais his Siege, and that hee should not molest, nor use such crueltie against Segovia. The Cardinal and those of the Council did not weigh much this Petition of Avila, which so incensed that Citie, that thereupon they sent them word
peremptorily, that since they would not rectifie those disor∣ders, they were resolved to seek their own remedie. Mean time Ronquillo was at Santa Maria de Nieva making what preparati∣ons hee could against Segovia, making incursions into their ter∣ritories, and laying Ambuscado's for those that came out of the Citie. It happened that two young men coming out of Segovia, fell into the hands of Ronquillo's Guards, who asking them whence they were, and whither they went? They an∣swered, That they were of Salamanca, that they came from Se∣govia, and were returning to their own homes. At first the Guards were in the minde to let them go, becaus they seemed to bee but poor fellows, yet afterwards they laid hands on them and brought them before Ronquillo; who asking them who they were, whither they went, and whence they came? They said, they were Carders, who seeing Segovia streightned, and trading dead, they were upon their return to their ovvn houses. Hee examined them severally concerning the man∣ner of Tordesillas his death, and they agreed not in their relati∣on. Ronquillo thereupon began to press them further, deman∣ding more and more & more questions, till at last one of them confessed he fetched the rope vvherevvith they dragged Torde∣sillas along the streets, and the other that hee plucked him by the hair. Upon this confession hee condemned them both to death, one to bee dravvn and quartered, the other, vvho said, hee pluck't him by the hair, had first his hand cut off, and then vvas hanged. It seemed a dirct Judgment of heaven to put those men into the hands of the Justice, and that they should confess vvithout torture. SECT. XXI. AFter this Ronquillo met vvith one Francisco Peralta, a suffici∣ent man, and vvell beloved in Segovia, but not thinking fit to execute Justice upon him presently, sent him prisoner up∣on
on an Ass, to a Castle belonging to the Bishop of Palencia. But meeting by the waie a man, that was very zalous for the caus of the Commonaltie, and satisfying his curiositie by telling him the occasion of his imprisonment, through his means hee was rescued by the Common People of Duenias,Alguazil is an officer of just∣ice in Spain. and taken away from the Alguazil, that had charge of him, (who had so much a doe to escape with his life) and Peralta after courteous entertainment in the Town, had a hors given him, vvheevvith hee went to Burgos, which then was declared for the Commonaltie. Iohn de Padilla, you have heard, marched out of Toledo at the head of two thousand men well armed, and having passed the Port de la Tablada, hee came within sight of Segovia, where in a Plain, not far distant, hee pitch't his camp: the next daie hee sent a Trumpetter to Ronquillo with a peremptorie message to bid him get him gon, if not, that hee would forth with put in execution what the Citie of Toledo had Commanded him. Hereupon Ronquillo retreated to Antonio de Fonseca at Arevalo, and so they fled both together▪ not beeing able to withstand Iohn de Padilla's Forces. SECT. XXII. THe Cardinal, President, and those of the Council la∣bored, all they could, to persuade the Queen Mother to signe certain orders (which they would send throughout the Kingdom) against the disturbers of it; becaus the greatest Autoritie, which those of the Junta pretended to have, was to saie, that whatsoever they did, was for the Queen's service (whose that Kingdom was) and other things to that purpose. The President therefore and some of the Council, went to Tordesillas, and spake publickly with the Queen, who was very merrie with them, but complained, saying, that for fifteen years past shee could never know the truth of anie thing, then turning towards the Marquis of Denia, shee said, this
Marquis told mee the first lye. At which words hee fell upon his knees, and with tears in his eyes, hee said, it is true Madam, I did tell you a lye, but it was to moderate the violence of your passions, and now I give you to understand that the King, your father, is dead, and I did bury him. Shee ans∣wered, Bishop, believ mee, All that I see or hear, mee thinks is but a dreame. The President answered, Madam! in your hands, under God, lyeth the remedie of this Kingdom, and your Highness will do a greater miracle in Signing what wee demand, then ever did San Francisco. Shee bid them go to bed, and come againe next daie. The daie following, beeing Sunday, they returned in the morning, much time was spent in controversie, whether they should kneel or sit before her, but the President telling her, that those of the Council ought not to bee treated in that manner, shee commanded they should sit, but chairs beeing brought in, shee cryed out, no chaires, but bring a form, that was the custom in my mo∣ther's daies, onely give the Bishop a chair. Six hours they were with her in private, and the result of all was, that they should return to Valladolid, and consult with the rest of the Council, what orders they should issue out, which done, shee would sign them. They came to Valladolid, and in the interim Iohn de Padilla arrived at Tordesillas (as you shall finde hereafter) those of the Council were presently afraid to bee taken, and some report, that hee sent a Captain in persuite of those that came from Tordesillas. SECT▪ XXIII. THe same daie that Valladolid rose up publickly in Arms (wch was Wednesday the 29th of August) Iohn de Padilla, having beaten Ronquillo from Segovia, Iohn Bravo, and Iohn Zapata, with the men which they brought from Toledo, Sego∣via, and Madrid, arrived at Medina del Campo. Which the
Towns-men taking as a great favour, went out to receiv them with their flags and mourning colours, besides manie teares, which moved these Captains to great compassion, especially when they saw the Town reduced to ashes; they comforted the People the best they could, and Iohn de Padilla took thereupon occasion to tell them, Gentlemen, If you had reflected well upon the Letter, which I sent you giving you notice that Foseca was raising forces, with intent to fetch the Artillerie thence, peradventure you had not been suffrers in so high a nature. Those of Medina wondred that they never had heard of anie such Letter, and after divers circumstances, it was found out that the Regidor Gil Nieto had received and concealed it from the people: whereupon they grew to an ex∣cessive passion, and whilest this was yet in agitation, Gil Nieto unfortunatly came amongst them. Some of whom discours∣ing of the Town-affairs, said to him. If there were no Traytors in Medina, the miseries wee suffer never had befallen us. Who are those Traytors? replyed Gil Nieto. At which words started up Bobadilla, the Cloth worker, and with a great Oath answered, you are one of the Traytors, then drawing his sword hee violently flew upon him, and with one blow separated his head from his shoulders, wch done, and having found in his bosome Iohn de Padilla's Letter, they flung him out at the windows of the Regimiento,Regiminto, or Casa del Regimi∣ento, is he hous where the in∣hibtants n e∣veri Citie d ssemble a∣bout things concerning their Poliical Government▪ upon the Souldiers pikes wch stood below. Hee was afterwards taken up and interred by his friends and kindrid. Iohn de Padilla remained five daies in Medina, and the Tovvn having given him tvvo great peeces of Ordnance, hee departed thence vvith his men for Tordesillas. Hee pretended that hee went thither to kiss the Queen's hands, and give her an account of what passed in Castilla. Others said, that hee went audaciously to seiz on her, and take her into his power. Beeing arrived, hee drew up his Armie in Batalia, charged his Ordnance, and remained in that Order, until hee had given notice of his coming to her Highness and the Town. The Queen presently gave order they should go forth to receiv him, which the Town did in the best manner
and with the greatest companie they could, and as they were even ready to meet, hee commanded his two Guns to bee shot off with great showting and nois of Trumpets. The Salve being past, they took Iohn de Padilla in the midst of them, and so entred the Town with the greatest applaus that might bee imagined, after hee had rested himself a while, hee went to the Pallace, where the Queen received him very gracious∣ly, gave him Audience, and asked him who hee was. To which hee answered,Iohn de Padil∣la's speech to the Queen at Tordesellas. That his name vvas Iuan de Padilla, son to Pedro Lopez de Padilla, vvho had been Captain General in Castilla, and served the renovvned Queen Donia Isabella her mo∣ther, and that also hee came to tender his service to her Majestie, with the people of Toledo; That hee did give her to under∣stand, that since the deceas of the Catholick King, her father, there had been, and were in that Kingdom great disor∣ders, mischiefs and dissentions for want of a Governor. Al∣though the Mightie and Illustrious Don Carlos, her son, had governed Spain, yet by reason of his sudden departure, the Kingdom was risen in such Commotions and Disordrous manner, that all Spain was ready to bee destroied, and that now hee was com with a certain Armie of Toledians to serv her Highness, whom hee desired to see, and know what Com∣mands shee had to laie upon him, for hee was ready to spend his life in her service. The Queen was much astonished to hear such things, and said, shee never knew any thing of it be∣fore: For shee had been sixteen years shut up within a cham∣ber, under the Guard of the Marquess of Denia, and wondred to hear anie such stories, but if shee had known of her Fa∣ther's death, shee would have gon abroad and set som reme∣die to those mischiefs. So forgetful and void of Judgment was the Queen. Then shee said to Iohn de Padilla, Go you now, I command you, take the charge, and execute the office of Captain General in the Kingdom, and give you order for all things as need shall require, until I provide otherwise. This said, shee retired into her chamber; and Iohn de Padilla return∣ed to his Quarters, well attended and very jocund for the fa∣vour
the Queen had done him, in giving him that Commissi∣on. Manie times after this, Iohn de Padilla had conference with the Queen, and she seemed to give Audience to him and others of the Iunta, very willingly. They told her once, that the King her son, had done great damage to the Kingdom, whereunto shee answered, That her son was not greatly in fault, for hee was but a youth, but the Kingdom rather ought to bee con∣demned for suffering it. Then shee commanded, that the As∣semblie of the Kingdom should bee kept there, that shee would autorize it. Hereupon an Order was forthwith issued out, That Proclamation should bee made in Medina and other places, for all the Commissioners that had assisted in Parlament at the Groyn to make their appearance and render an account at Toresillas under pain of death. SECT. XXIV. THe Iunta was yet held at Avila, whither was sent an Or∣der from the Queen, commanding them to remove to Tordesillas, wch they presently obeied, for it was their only waie so to do; The Queen understanding nothing what belonged to businesses. The Antagonists of the Junta gave out, That those Dispatches which were produced and publshed in the Queen's name were fals, and the testimonies likewise made by counterfeiting hands. The Junta took a resolution to turn the Marquess of Denia out of the Queen's service, for the ill opinion hee (beeing a loial subject) conceived of the Com∣moners, alleging, that shee was not well pleased with him. And becaus they would bee informed how the Marquess did serv the Queen, they sent to Maestro Fray Pablo a Dominican Frier, a grand Commoner, Commissioner of Leon, and to the Commendador Almaraz, Commissioner of Salamanca, and El Ba∣chiller de Guadalaxara:Here the Au∣tor jeer's his own Coat. And from these men's relation (which was never the holier for the Frier's having any part in it) re∣sulted
a determination to turn the Marquess and his Ladie from the Queen. Whereupon they were not onely cast out of their hous, but driven out of Tordesillas, with such strictness and precipitation, that they had not one hour's time to take a∣way their goods and housholdstuff, and although they made their Requests to the contrarie, they were no whit the more regarded. In their places were presently put Donia Catalina de Figueroa, wife to Quintanilla, and som other women of the Town. And the Marquess, with his Ladie, was enforced to re∣pair to a small Village, and suffer with patience this tribulation for their Prince's service.The Iunta or General As∣semblie sttled at Tordesillas. The Iunta beeing set at Tordesillas, they began to treat of the peaceable government and quiet of the Kingdom. Soon after, Salamanca, Avila, Madrid, besides other places, sent manie Companies of Foot and Hors, paid at the charge of the said Cities, with their respective Captains, who had Orders to bee at the King and Queen, his Mother's ser∣vice, and in favor of the Junta. There was already so great a confluence of Gentlemen and Captais, that Tordesillas was not able to contein them, although the Common Souldiers were quartered in the adjacent Villages. The Citie of Vallad∣lid sent a thousand chois men well Armed, under the Com∣mand of Don Diego de Quiniones, a valiant and well-born Gen∣tleman. The Commissioners, Gentlemen, Captains with ma∣ny grave and learned Friers, beeing assembled in the Junta, there was a motion made, that they should send to Valladolid, to seiz upon the President and the rest of the King's Council, and to have them brought to Tordesillas, or at least, to take such or∣der, that the Citie of Valladolid should not back them or con∣ceal them, but should give waie that the Junta might appre∣hend and bring them away. To this (the report is) there wanted no Votes, neither were the Friers backwards in giving theirs, alleging, that the securing of those men was very ne∣cessary for the good of the Kingdom. To this effect was dis∣patched a Dominican Frier (who was a man of honor and great leaning) with Letters of Credence to the Commonaltie of Valladolid, and to the Infante of Granada, their chief Cap∣tain
The Frier having delived his Letter and Message to the Infant, hee thus answered, Father, as far as it concern's mee (as beeing Captain of Valladolid) I do obeie the Orders here sent from the Junta, but it is convenient the whole Commo∣naltie should bee assembled, that you may deliver your Mes∣sage to them all together, and receiv their answer. Hereupon the Deputies of the Wards, Jurates, Common Council-men and other Officers, were all ordered to warn the Inhabitants of their respetive quarters and parishes, to make their appear∣ance the next morning by nine of the clock at the Church of Santa Maria la Mayor, which was done accordingly. The In∣fante of Granada, Don Pedro Giron and other Gentlemen, beeing there assembled, with the rest of the Commonaltie, at the hour and place appointed, the Frier went up into the Pulpit, and with smooth fair language, hee told them the substance of his Message, saying, That he came thither from the Lords of the Junta at Tordesillas (who were the greater part of the Kingdom, and were there assembled for the remedying of the distractions and mischiefs which abounded in that King∣dom, as appeared by the Power & Letters of Credence) which hee had already shewed to that very noble Commonaltie of Valladolid, and the Infante their Captain. Yet becaus it was thought fit that a business of such weight (as that wherewith hee was intrusted to impart to them) should rather bee mani∣fested to them all in that place, then communicated to any members in particular, and in regard they were then all assem∣bled, hee again notified those Letters unto them, giving them to understand that the Lords of the Junta, moved with a ve∣ry holie zeal, and desire of procuring the Kindom's good and his Majestie's service, had found it convenient (to the end the Intent of the Junta might the better take effect) that there should bee no Council Roial at all, but that the President and the rest should bee sent prisoners to Tordesillas, and to shew that their Intentions were holie, and tending onely to the ser∣vice of God, and the King, in the name of the Lords Com∣missioners of the Junta, hee did assure the lives of the Council,
but not their goods and estates. For they must know, that whosoëver of that Council had offended, his estate was liable to confiscation, according to the qualitie of his delict, and that the monie which should accrue, should repair in part the dam∣mages which they had occasioned. Hereupon the Frier ex∣tended himself into manie Rhetorical expressions, to cog the peopl into a Consent, urging, that if they did otherwise, it might bee the occasion of bringing the whole Kingdom to destruction: for if there was both a Junta and Council, the Jun∣ta governing contrarie to the sens of the Council,The Inta send' to Val∣ladold to ds∣sol the Kg' Counc. and the Coun∣cil abrogating what should bee enacted by the Junta, what could bee exspected but confusion and utter ruine? Hereunto hee desired their speedie answer, becaus hee was to return to Tordesillas. They forthwith replied, That it was a business of no small moment, and required great consultation, yet if hee would stay till night, hee should have their answer. They divided themselvs into several Assemblies to consult hereupon, and they were generally of opinion, that it was a difficult and strange attempt for them to dissolv a Council of so great Auto∣ritie, beeing constituted by their King, especially that Citie having received, in particular, so manie Immunities and other favors from them, and they eeing so good friends, that the Council had,Valldolid's Answer. in a manner, entrusted them with their per∣sons, it were an act of high inhumanitie and baseness to laie violent hands upon them. On the other side they thought, that they were bound in conscience not to leav undone the Commands of the Junta, in regard their Commissioners were there, they had acknowledged their power, and had sworn to obey whatsoëver should there bee ordered or enacted. In the end, they agreed to give the Frier this answer, That if the Junta did desire to apprehend those of the Council, they should send their own Captains and souldiers to do it, for Valladolid would have no hand in either helping or hindering them in that design, neither would they favor the one side, or oppose the other. The Frier, and those Captains, and other Of∣ficers which came with him from Tordesillas, beeing satisfied
with this Answer, The Frier reckoned up those of the Coun∣cil whom the Iunta demanded, which done, it was agreed, that everie Deputie of a Ward should take four or five of the said names in writing, and go with a Notarie publick to their respectiv houses, or lodgings, requiring them to meet the next daie in the cardinals hous, where hee should tell them what further they were to do. Which beeing done accord∣ingly, those of the Council that could not escape as divers did) failed not to com to the Cardinal's Pallace, where the Fier, with his Captains about him,A name Junta, sum∣mo's hose of the King' Counil to ap∣pa beore them at Torde∣sillas. notified and commanded them in the name of the Iunta, to go with them to Tordesillas, and to execute no more the offie of Counsellors, that beeing there they should know further what they were to do, and that there was no fear of their lives, but their goods and estates he could not promise to secure. Whereunto they made answer,Their answer. That they held their Offices and Charge from his Mjestie's own hands, whom they had served and did serv, and that although they were taken, they would not go with them, unless they were carried away by force. This was the best answer the Frier could get at that time, so hee returned to Tordesillas, but was not long before hee came back again to Valladolid, with other Letters and Orders as shall bee seen here∣after. SECT. XXV. IN this coniuncture arrived an express from Flanders,The Emperor sen's Com∣missions to the Lord high Constable and Lord Admiral of Castilla ma∣king them Joint-Gover∣nors of Spai with the Car∣dinal. vvit dispatches from the Emperor, Letters for the Cities of the Kingdom, and his Majestie's Commissions and Orders to Don Inigo de Velasco Lord high Constable of Castilla and Leon, and Don Fadrique Enriquez Lord Admiral of Castilla, autoi∣sing and Commanding them, joyntly vvith the Cardinal Adri∣ano, to undertake the charge and care of governing and ma∣naging the affaires of that Kingdom untill his returne. In
his Letters, the Emperor declared his exceeding sorrovv and discontent for the troubles and insurrections in that Kingdom, notvvithstanding the great affection hee alvvaies expressed to∣vvards them. That his good vvill vvas so ill requited, and his favors no better accepted. That they had failed in that fidelitie vvherevvith (like good and Loyall Subjects) they had alvvaies served the Kings, his Predecessors. Yet hee could not bee persuaded but some particular persons, for their private nterests, had been the occasion of all those disorders. And That in regard one of the principal things, at which the Kingdom was aggreived, had been his conferring of the government upon a stranger (although the prudence and up∣rightness of the most reverend Cardinal of Tortosa could not in all reason but give them satisfaction) to stop the current of those disorders, which increased daily in that Kingdom, and to provide for the good government thereof, and the Peace of his Subjects; with great deliberation and advice (during his absence, which should not bee long) hee had ordered and appointed to rule joyntly with the Cardinal, as Vice-Kings and Governors of that Kingdom, the Lord Admiral and Lord high Constable of Castilla, beeing both persons indued with wisdom, and other parts requisite for so high a charge, and that they should take upon them all the care, trouble, &c. And that he had given them particular charge if the Kingdom was anie waie aggriev'd, to send for the Commissioners or Burgesses of the Cities, that they might demand redress before the Governors; And withall hee Commanded the Cities to bee obedient unto them. The Emperor wrote also to the Lord high Constable, endeering him by the acknowledgment of his former services, to undertake and execute with like fidelitie, resolution and cheerfulness, the joynt charge, with the Cardinal and the Lord Admirall, of pacifying the present tumults and insurrections, reducing his Subjects to their for∣mer obedience, and the governing and managing the affairs of that Kingdom until his return. Dated in Bruxels the 9th of September 1520.
SECT. XXVI. IF these Noble-men had been made governors before the Emperor's departure out of Spain, questionless the Com∣motions had never come to that height. But they were now too far gon beyond their recoverie, for although some were very well pleased with this Election, others were not. The Lord high Constable (as wee shall see) was not very well beloved in Burgos. The Cardinal with the President and Council were not onely not beloved, but extreamely hated and abhorred in manie Cities. Onely in Valladolid the Cardinal was much respected and honored, neither would they con∣sent to his departure out of the Citie, although hee often de∣sired it, but they offered themselvs all to bee at his service, es∣teeming him (as it were) a Saint; and they kept guards at the Gates of the Citie, lest the Cardinal, or anie of the Council, or Judges should goe away. Yet for all their guards El Li∣cenciado Zapata made his escape in a Benedictan Munk's habit,Som of the Council escape out of Vallad∣lid in disguise▪ having shaved his crown and his beard, and divers others of the Council likewise, who durst not attend the determinati∣on of the Junta: perhaps their own ill consciences did accuse them, and filled their hearts with the apprehension of danger, which onely make the sinners flie, though no bodie doth pur∣sue them. And indeed in offices and charges of that nature, some men are monstruously insufferable. SECT. XXVII. FEw daies after the Dominican Frier was returned to the Junta, and had given an account of his indeavors at Val∣ladolid, concerning the suspending of the Council Roial, and
the apprehending of the Counsellors. They sent another Fri∣er, Alonso de Medina, Professor of Divinitie, of the Order of St Francis, with second Orders from the Junta to Valladolid. Where beeing arrived, hee caused the Commonaltie and Officers of the Citie to assemble at the Monastrie of St Francis, which beeing done accordingly, the Frier went up into the Pulpit, and shewed the Letters of Credence which hee brought from the Iunta, in whose name hee told them, they were againe re∣quired to send those of the Council-Royall Prisoners to Torde∣sillas, and that those of the Council of Warre, who were fled and absented themselvs, should thenceforwards bee payed no Salarie, nor enjoy any of their Revenues; But that they should all bee punished according to their severall deserts; And that her Highness, the Queen's pleasure and absolute Command was, it should bee o, in regard it was found expedient for the good of the Kingdom. Otherwise the offenders and wicked Counsellors, the Perpetrators of so manie evils in the Kingdom, should escape unpunished, and the poor oppressed People remain without Justice. Many other reasons hee aleadged, which were not unpleasing to the People, who were filled with a desire of seeing the punishment (hee mention∣ed) inflicted. And having ended his discours, hee produced and read aloud to them a copie signed by three publick Notaries, of what passed between the Queen and the Com∣missioners of all the Cities and Towns in the Kingdom, that had Votes in Parlament. Who beeing altogether in her pres∣ence, gave her to understand by the mouth of the Doctor Zuniga of Salamanca, the grievances of the Kingdom having been pilled and polled by strangers since her ather's death, and out of the sens of their opression,The Iunta's re∣quest to the Queen. they desired that her Highness would bee pleased to take upon her the Command and government of the Kingdom, making high protestations, that they would obey and serve her till death as their Queen and naturall Soveraign, and that shee should Command as absolutely as the most powerfull Queen in the World. Where∣unto shee answered to this effect, That shee loved that Coun∣trie
and her Subjects with so much tenderness, that it grieved her exceedingly to hear of any of their sufferings, But shee had been so long mued up there, and alwaies such bad People about her, who fed her with falsities and lies, insomuch that shee knew not of her Father's death, nor of their opression, And that when shee was informed of those strangers coming into Castilla, it troubled her very much, yet shee thought it might bee for her Children's good, though, it seemed, it proved otherwise. But shee wondred much at them that they did not revenge themselvs, if any thing was don contrarie to Ju∣stice. And forasmuch (said shee) as you intend to remedie the ill-government of the affairs of the Kingdom, it doth re∣joyce me, and if you do it not let it lye upon your own Consciences, besides I Command you so to do, and as far as lyeth in my power, I shall bee readie to do any thing for the good of the Kingdom, here or wheresoëver I am. You need not come all to mee hereafter, it will bee more conveni∣ent, that you appoint four of the discreetest, and most know∣ing amongst you, who shall at any time have access to mee, and inform mee what cours is meetest to bee taken, I will heare them and do all that possiblie I can. Then Don Pedro Lasso desired, that her Highness would bee pleased to nominate the four Members, whom shee would have to confer with her concerning the government of the Kingdom, shee an∣swered that her will was, that the Iunta should send whom they thought good, and shee would heare them whensoëver they came. SECT. XXVIII. THis writing signed by three Notaries in the presence of the Infanta Donia Catalina, all the Commissioners of the Kingdom, divers eminent Priests and Friers, and manie other persons of qualitie, satisfied exceedingly the Common people,
who cried it up for a kinde of miracle, that the Queen, after so many years of retirement, in so strict a manner, that no bo∣die could scarce have a sight of her, and so long discontiuance from anie knowledg of State-affairs, should now com forth, and shew her self in a time of so great necessitie, with so much knowledg and clear judgment in things concerning the government of the Kingdom: They praised God for shew∣ing his mercie in so high a measure unto Spain: Yet som there were, who did not stick to saie, that all those circumstances were fals, and forged by those of the Iunta. That the Queen had no judgment to meddle with anie such affairs, neither was shee in a condition to bee treated with. (This was commonly noised not onely in Valladolid, but divers other places also: Pe∣ro Mexia treating of this business, seemeth in his book to fa∣vor this opinion, I write what I had from one that was an eie witness of all these passages, and who neither was a Com∣moner nor friend of that faction.) After all this the Frier told them, that there were Souldiers without the Citie, who, if they would give leav, should com in and carrie away those of the Council prisoners. They all agreed, that two hundred should com in the next daie, who would bee sufficient to ap∣prehend them, and carrie them away to Tordesillas. Where∣upon the day following Iohn de Padilla, Captain General of the Iunta's forces, entred Valladolid with three hundred Lances of Avila and Salamanca, and eight hundred Pikemen and muske∣tiers, where hee had noble entertainment, and his Souldiers had good quarters given them, with a large portion of all ne∣cssaries. Iohn de Padilla forthwith seized upon all those of the Council that could bee found in Valladolid,John de Padilla apprehendeth some of the Concil and caith them prisones o Tordesillas. who were Doctor Veltran, Doctor Tello, Doctor Cornejo, and El Licenciado Herrera, all Alcaldes, whom hee confined to their houses that daie, under great penalties, having taken good securitie for them besides, and set Guards upon every one; hee took away likewise the staves from the Alguaziles and other Officers, whom hee com∣manded and ordered, under great penalties, to make their per∣sonal appearance at Tordesillas. The next daie hee carried them
away prisoners, with the respect and honor that every one deserved. Hee took with him the books of the Treasurie, and the Broad Seal wherewith the Council sealed all their Acts and Orders; for the better autorising of the matter, the Junta desi∣red the Queen to confirm by her sign whatsoëver should bee agreed on by them, as persons of her Council. Which shee refusing to do, the Commissioners there present, sent to their respective Cities, to give them power to see to the go∣vernment of the Kingdom (for fault of a Governor) and to constitute a Council. Som did end their powers to this effect, others disliked that proposition, holding it a thing needless, and of a dangerous consequence. Divers Gentle∣men of Toledo were much distasted hereat, and sorrie that Iohn de Padilla had been so forward, for which they sent him and their Commissioners a notable check, refusing to give them any power concerning the Govenment of the Kingdom. SECT. XXIX. THe Iunta, for the better autorising and securing their per∣sons and proceedings, used all means possible to seduce all the Cities of the Kingdom, and engage them in their quar∣rel. From Palencia they had intelligence, that a small matter would make them rise. Whereupon they presently dispatched thither an Augustine Frier, giving him Orders first to sound the Bishop, and afterward to address himself to the Citie, telling them how they stood obliged to favor and assist the Junta, in regard the chief end of their assembling, and their onely stu∣die, since they were established, was for the general good of the Kingdom. The Frier went (but it had been better for him to have staied in his Cell) and with much libertie and lavish∣ness of words hee began to treat of his message, and having assembled the people, to preach sedition publickly in the Pul∣pit. This continued som daies, until the Cardinal, who then
was at Rioseco, with the Council, sent to apprehend him, which was the easier done becaus there were divers loial and well-affected persons in the Citie, who were scandalized at the ill example of this Frier. Hee was carried prisoner to Me∣dina, where after few daies, the fact beeing proved against him, hee was strangled. Hee had his desert, and may all Friers or Priests meet with the like punishment,How unchari∣table the Au∣tor is to his brethren Fri∣ers? that imbark themselvs so far in secular affairs, not observing that retirement and mode∣stie which their qualitie and profession doth require, which is to renounce the world with all its troubles and vanities. Yet the eed which this factious Frier sowed in Palencia, took not so little root in the people's hearts, but that soon after almost the whole Commonaltie of the Citie, infected with his per∣nitious doctrine, rose in so tumultuous a manner, that the Cr∣regidor was forced to flie away, they took away the stavs from the King's Officers, and gave them to som of the Com∣monaltie. They turned out of the Citie the Provisores dl Obis∣po or Officers of the Bishop's Cout, they turned out the Regi∣dores, whom the Bishop had constituted, and the Commo∣naltie put others in their places. At the ringing of a bell the people all assembled, and most of them beeing Armed, they ran furiously to Villamuriel, (which was a Fort and the Bi∣shop's hous) and pulled down a part of one of the Towers thereof. The 15th Sept. 150, they cut down the greatest part of a Wood called Santillana, which belonged to the Bishop; divers other strange disorders and mischiefs they did in and a∣bout the Citie, as if they had been in an Enemie's Countrie: things indeed befitting the blinde and furious rage of the com∣mon people. SECT▪ XXX. THe Cardinal, governor of the Kingdom, seeing the dis∣turbed estate of things, and that in Valladolid hee was not
obeyed, as the dignitie of his person and place required, but rather in danger daiely to bee affronted, took a resolution to re∣tire himself to a Gentleman's hous out of the Citie, where hee might bee secure. This was no sooner known in Val∣ladolid, but some of the Citie-Officers came to peake with him, desiring to know wherefore hee would go away from them. The Holy man with much meekness, answered, that hee would willingly retire himself with the Lord Admiral at Medina de Rioseco. But those of Valladolid, holding it their best waie to keep him there, would not let him go. They present∣ly set guards at the Gates of the Citie, that none of the Com∣mon people should go out, for they began already to feare, lest they should go joyn with the Lord high Constable, who was levying forces to resist and suppress those Tumults, which were grown so excessive in the Kingdom, to whom were repaired those of Council, that escaped from Valladolid, to the end that Castilla,The Cardinal indeavouring to go out of Valladolid is stopped by the people. might not remain without Justice. The next morning early the Cardinal, beeing fully resolved to bee gon, departed from his hous with an hundred and fiftie men on horsback and on foot, besides divers of the principal persons of the Citie, who guarded him on both sides. But coming to the bridg they would not let him pass, there hee stayed a good while, still commanding his people to bee quiet and offer no violence, for they would have broke down the Gates and forced their way through. This beeing known in the Citie, there was presently a great hubbub, and a cry∣ing out, The Governor's goeing away, The Governor's goeing away. Hereupon one Alonso de Vera, a Deputie of a ward, without any Command or Order from the Captain Generall of the Commonaltie, ran in great hast to ring the Council Bell, which beeing heard the Citie presently took the Alarme, and in a trice there was such a hurly-burly and confusion of people in the strees, that it was wonderful, they all locked up their houses and shops and posted with their Arms towards the bridg, (as if the Citie had been stormed by an enemie) where in a moment's time (in a manner) was assembled a very
numerous Armie of compleat men, with new shining arms, but without order and without Captain. The Cardinal see∣ing this tumult, turned back againe towards the Citie, and beeing half way ouer the bridg some of his servants said to him, My Lord! your Eminence should do well to stand still there, un∣till you see what is the meaning of this boldness of the People. So hee did remain a while, having a strong guard before him. But the people came swarming to that place like emmets. Whilest the Cardinal was at this stand, came Don Pedro Giron, to whom all the people bore as much respect, as if hee had been their Lord. Hee was mounted upon a stately Ginnet, his body was covered with Armor as bright as silver, his head with a richly guilded helmet, his hors proudly praunsing along the streets, made waie through the disorderly throng, untill hee came where the Governor stood, to whom after salutation,Don Pedro Gi∣ron's speech to the Cardinal, persuading him to return to his Palace▪ hee thus spake. My Lord! I am sorry that your Eminence would offer to go away thus without the consent of the Citie and Kingdom, if my Counsel might prevail, you should return to your lodging, for if you stay longer here, it will not bee in the power of man to remedie or hinder the mischief, which your departure may produce. The Cardinal's men not throughly understanding Don Pedro's speech, began to draw their swords; which some of the people, that had crowded neer, seeing, cryed out, Arm, Arm Commoners, help, help. Hereupon grew such a noise and so great a tumult, that had not the President of the Chancerie, Don Pedro Giron, and other Gentlemen been there to appease the furie of the people, they scarse had left one man alive of all those that were with the Cardinal. But all beeing pacified, hee returned with his guards to his lodging, accompanied with other Prelates and divers Gentlemen of qualitie, and after all, followed his traine of bagage in the same order as they marched outwards. The Common People went be∣fore him all armed, with sound of drums and trumpets con∣ducting him to his lodging, with all due honor and reverence. By this time it was full twelve of the clock, so that they spent six hours at least in this contention. The Infante of Granada,
Captain of Valladolid, was so much displeased that St Michael's Bell had been rung, and that the people had all taken Arms in that manner without his order or knowledg, that hee threatned to leave his charge. Thereupon strict order was given, that no man thenceforwards should dare, under a great penaltie, to ring the Bell or to rise in Arms, without their Captains order. Vera who rung the Bell, to avoid the punish∣ment which was intended, and his offence deserved, fled to Tordesillas. After this, Valladolid ordered that every five and twentie men should have a particular Captain, that should command them upon occasion, having first received orders from the Captain General. The newes beeing carried to Tor∣desillas, how those of Valladolid had opposed and detained the Cardinal, besides the good order they kept for the guard and defens of their Citie, The Iunta sent an express with Letters to give the People thanks in their names, extolling their valor to the skies, which puffed up the people's hearts with a kinde of vanitie, and incouraged them to commit greater exorbitan∣cies another time. SECT. XXXI. THe Cardinal seeing it was not possible for him to go publickly out of Valladolid, and considering how much it behoved him to depart thence, where hee had no more then an honorable prison, resolved to steal away privately: which hee did one night all alone, beeing disguised, and hee had been gone ten daies before it was known in the Citie, or his own Guard of Hors missed him. His Foot Guards went away the daie before by two and two. After which time hee sent to entreat the Citie, to suffer his goods to bee brought unto him, assuring them that his going away should bee no waie pre∣judicial to them, that hee was in a manner enforced so to ab∣sent himself from them, both for respect of his Majestie's ser∣vice,
and that hee had not left him wherewithal to defraie his charges in the Citie, but wheresoëver hee was, they might bee confident hee would do all that might be for their and the whole Kingdom's good. Valladolid, with much complement and civil expressions, sent him all his Linnens and other hous∣hold-stuff to the Town of Rioseco, whither hee was gone in exspectation of the Lord Admiral. About this time there were great differences betwixt those of the Commonaltie, and their Captain the Infante of Granada. They would have killed him, manie of them coming violently against him with their Arms, and giving him very reproachful and abusive language. As hee advanced into the market place with above six hun∣dred Lances to apprehend Alonso de Vera, (they saie) it was a Bridle-maker and som such like audacious fellows, that were the occasion of stirring the people to this insolent attempt. The Iunta beeing much displeased  ereat ordered that the Infan∣te of Granada should leav the Office of Captain, becaus it was too great a charge to allow him everie month 30000 Maradiz, alleging moreover, that none but a native of the Citie, ought to execute that Command. But the Infante giving notice of his discontent, by command of the Iunta this matter was put to Votes, and hee having the major part on his side, it was ordered, that hee should bee confirmed in his Office, but withal, that hee should pardon Alonso de Vera, with the rest that had offended him, and strict command was given, that the people should make no more meetings, nor demand any thing from thenceforward with Arms in their hands, but by waie of Justice and Reason. That presently under pain of one hundred lashes, all those Vagabands and fellows that had no professions, should avoid the Citie. This was pro∣claimed in Valladolid on St Luke's daie.
SECT. XXXII. WHil'st the Commonaltie of Valladolid was in con∣sultation, whether the Infante should continue in his Charge or not, arrived a Commissioner from the Junta, desiring that Citie in their names to agree, and bee all as one, and not to give waie to their particular pas∣sions, which might breed division among them, to the great weakning and disenabling of that Citie, for they were now to consider that they had manie enemies, who had already begun one of the highest and greatest attempts in the world. That if their hearts were not united & stirred up therewith, they, with their wives and children, should bee reduced to most wretched slaverie. That with couragious mindes and upright desires, they ought to prosecute this matter, and bee as∣sistant to those Gentlemen who were already engaged therein, and boüy them up out of that gulf of miserie whereinto they were plunged. For the Lords of the Iunta considering that Val∣ladolid was the most noble & principal Citie of all Spain, and that it had been the principal autor of their good (as in former times) exposing and hazarding their lives and fortunes to ma∣ny eminent dangers. They thought it great reaon to give them an account of what they had done in the Iunta. To whih effect they had sent to let them know, how that neither night nor daie they ceased laboring in the advancement of the ser∣vice of God and the King and the publick good of the Nati∣on, neither eating nor drinking in quiet, but still watching with much care and studie, how God and the King might have their due respect and honor, and the Kingdom bee pre∣served in libertie. Renouncing all private affairs, leaving hou∣ses, goods, wives and children at random, to attend and applie themselvs with more fervencie to procure the people's good without Interest. That before the Iunta sate at Tordesillas, they
all took a solemn oath, that no man should procure for him∣self, wife, children, friends or kindred, anie Lands, Offices or benefits whatsoëver, to the end that they might loilly, and without Interests, serv the publick. That every one of the Iunta was a Gentleman, and as free, as the King himself from all the tributes & taxes that were imposed upon the meaner subjects, & that neither for respect of what they might hope to gain, or to free themselvs of that which others did paie, they had expo∣sed themselvs to so great hazard, beeing no more then fiftie, that did help or any waie advance this business, which so near∣ly concerned all. That without them the Iunta could do lit∣tle, the case being weightie and dangerous. That they trusted in God within eight daies, the Iunta would have taken such a cours, that Castilla should enjoie as much peace, quietness, and plentie as formerly; for they wanted nothing but the Articles of the several Cities of the Kingdom, to extract the best out of them; which should bee printed and and sent through the whole Kingdom, that every one might see the good which proceeded from the Iunta. The Articles which were purg∣ed in the Iunta, whereby they thought (as they saie here) to remedie and restore Castilla to its former condition, shal bee punctually set down in the following Book. In Valladolid they much rejoiced at this discours, and were highly taken with the promises made them by the Iunta, which filled them with a thousand good hopes, but within seven months they found them all fruitless. They offered willingly their e∣states and goods, and to expose their lives in the defens of the Holie Iunta as they called it. SECT. XXXIII. THe Cardinal and those of the Council, prudently desired first to proceed with mildness, and endeavor by fair per∣suasions to quench, or (at least) mitigate the furie of that un∣natural
ire;Note that this mesage Was sent at the firt assembling of the Iunta in Avila. to that effect they sent to entreat the Iunta to as∣semble rather in Valladolid, where the Council then was, that there things should bee remedied to their liking and content. Those of the Iunta, having intelligence of this message, sent one to meet him that brought it, before hee could reach to Avi∣la, with command to charge him in their names, under pain of death not to com into the Citie. The Council, seeing that they could prevail nothing by fair means, sent to command and require the Junta not to assemble at all, in regard it was a thing forbidden by the King and the Laws of the Kingdom, without their Sovereign's leav. That if they had anie thing to desire, they should repair to the Council at Valladolid, and they would join with them in Petition to the Emperor for the ob∣teining and fulfilling their demands. This also they refused to hear; and sent the like message back to the Council by the Commendador Hinestrosa, to whom they denied both audience and entrance into the Citie. From that time forwards the Jun∣ta called them of Council Tyrants, and those of the Council termed them Traitors. Which beeing known in Valladolid, a rumor was noised about, that the Lords of the Council had given order to apprehend those of the Junta, for which caus El Licenciado Francisco de Vargas, Treasurer General, and El Li∣cenciado Zapata, made their escapes in the night from the Coun∣cil: For they having born a great swaie, one in the Treasurie, the other in matters of Justice, were both grown odious in the eies of the Common-wealth. SECT. XXXIV. THe several Parties reviled, and fell into malicious expres∣sions one against the other, not considering, that that was one of the poorest and vilest revenges upon earth, and wch suit's with none but rascal-like & unworthie dispositions. Those that were enemies to the Commonaltie, reported, that no Gen∣tlemen
or persons of qualitie would have taken that side, but for private respects and ambition. That Don Antonio de Acunia Bishop of Zamora (whose storie wee are not yet com to) would make himself Arch-bishop of Toledo. That Don Pedro Giron was on fire for the Estate of Medina Sidonia. The Earl of Salvatierra ambitioned certain territories of great value, called Merindades. Hernando de Avalos for revenge of som injuries don im. Iohn de Padilla to bee Master of Santjago. Don Pedro Lasso to bee Lord of Toledo. Quintanilla to have the Command of Medina del Campo. Hernando de Ulloa to drive his brother out of Toro. Don Pedro Pimentel to advance himself with Salamanca. The Abbat of Compludo to be made Bishop of Zamora. El Licen∣ciado Bernardino to bee Judg in Valladolid. Ramiro Nuniez that hee might possess himself of Leon, and Carlos de Arellano bee Lord of Soria. Thus their tongues went nimbler then their hands (except when they were asleep) breeding and brew∣ing a world of mischiefs. And divers Gentlemen found themselvs so far ingaged already in this disorder, that they could not with honor withdraw themselvs, neither could they tell whom to trust. SECT. XXXV. BEfore I proceed any further with the Historie, of what was done by the Commonalties in Castilla, I wil here describe the particulars of the insurrection of the Citie and Kingdom of Valencia, in regard it was the blindest and most pernicious of all Spain, and although some have written very dolefull and lamentable memorials thereof, they do not men∣tion half what there befell. Several prodigious signs pre∣saged this miserable dissention in Valencia. In the yeare 1517. The river which runneth by the Citie of Valencia, so shallow that somtimes there is scarse any water, on a sodain swelled, and overflowed the bankes in such manner, that it put those
of Valencia to the greatest shift and streight,Prodigious signs in V∣lencia. that ever they had been reduced to in former ages. Manie daies and nights, was seen running along the streets a furious great Lyon, which made so hideous a roaring that the people ran trembling away from it, and if any had the courage to stay, and see what it would do, they could see nothing. Other strange sights were likewise reported to have been observed there in the yeares 1517, and 1518. You have heard how the Emperor, before his departure from the Groyn, appointed for Vice-Roy of Valencia Don Diego de Mendosa, son to the Cardinal Don Pedro Gonsalez de Mendosa, and brother to Don Rodrigo Marquis of Cenete. Who executing his command and charge in Valencia,The Confed∣rates of Vale¦cia. whenas the people, already linked in a Confederaoie, began to stand in a competition with the Nobles, to molest and prosecute the Gentrie, abusing their servants and vassals with great audacitie and disrespect: It hapned that two Morisco's vvho belonged to Don Ramon de Cardona, Lord of Castalla, passing along the street of Nuestra Seniora de Gracia, which was in that part of the Citie, where most of the meaner sort of people lived; Some Trades-men, that were working at their dores, flouted and laughed at them as they used to do, but the Morisco's answering them they presently rose in Arms, and cut one of them so grievously that hee died; And beeing about to kill the other also, who defended himself, a man by chance pass∣ing by (whose name was Diego Pisador, by trade a salt-maker) took compassion of the poor fellow, and did what hee could to defend him. Whereat those Towns-men were so incensed that leaving the other they ran after this Diego Pisador, follow∣ing him quite through the Citie to his own hous (whither hee fled to save his life) and fell a storming it in a furious manner about mid daie, the officers of Justice not daring to gain-saie them. The Priests of St Nicholas Church (which was close by that hous) came forth all with the Holie Sacra∣ment, at the nois of this Combustion, to pacifie the furie of the People, which their presence and intreaties did somwhat mitigate. But Diego Pisador, not holding himself secure in
his hous, thought it a safer waie to take sanctuary in the Church; so beeing come down, the Priest that carried the Sacrament, took him next unto him, and o advanced towards the Church; which the people seeing, they violently ran a∣gain upon him, and killed him with their daggers. Upon this, came amongst them one Avendanio a Cloath-worker, who was the Autor and chief of this confedracie (it vvas thought) to hinder and keep them from doing mischief, but seeing that man so barbarosly killed, hee vvent presently into a hous, vvhere hee burst and died miserably (som saie) for anger and grief, to see such excessive disorder. These and manie other such like outrages vvere done by the People of Valencia, before the mperor departed, whereof his Majestie was advertised by the Nobles and Gentlemen of that Citie; and hee referred it to Xeures, but hee beeing more sollicitous for the transporting of his treasure, then the remedying of the troubles in Spain, neglected it. All that was ordered herein, was to remit the quelling and reducing that People to reason, to the care of the Infante Dou Enrique, Duke of Segobe, but the People beeing launched into the depth of mischief, slighted his Autoritie; which manifestly declared the rebellion and pernicious intentions of that Confederacie. Soon after, a man condemned for haynous crimes beeing led along to exe∣cution, the People came out with Arms, and rescued him from the officers of Justice, abusing and ill treating them in a horrid manner. No Noblemen or Gentlemen could pass through the streets, but those of the Confederacie would deride and flout them with base reviling language. Inso∣much that a Hat-maker's wife, dressing a Hat at the door, with her children about her, as some Gentlemen were go∣ing by, shee bid the children look at those men that passed there, and the boyes asking her why shee bid them look at them, shee answered, Becaus when you are grown up to bee men, you may say, that you have seen Gen∣tlemen. This the woman said, becaus the Common People were then in the minde to destroie all the
Gentrie of the whole Kingdom root and branch. Aven∣danio the Cloth-worker beeing dead, the Confederates chose another Captain, one of the same trade as the former, his name was Sorolla, a pestilent audacious villain, who a∣mongst other wicked facts, went to the Citie Hall, when they were consulting about the Election of Iurates, and with a confident impudence told those of the Regimiento, in the name of his Confederacie, that if they did not admit them to bee of the Regimiento, those stones should flow with blood. And his threats were accomplished; for they made their Election ac∣cording to the rights and custom of the Citie. Whereat the people were so enraged, that they committed those outrages which shall bee set down hereafter. In this distemper and ex∣travagant hare-brainedness, Don Diego de Mendosa found the mindes of the people in Valencia, when hee came to bee their Governor. Sorolla, Vicente Periz, one Iohn Caro, and other lead∣ing men of the Confederacie, understanding that the Vice-Roy had been fully informed of their demeanors, and of the state of things, but yet dissembled the knowledg thereof out of fear, considering what power and credite their Confederacie had with the people: they complotted that Sorolla should hide himself in his own hous, and that the rest should go up and down the Citie and acquaint all his friends and allies that the Vice-Roy had sent for Sorolla, and that (as they were inform∣ed) hee either had already hanged him, or was then about it, and that for manie respects, they ought not to let such a man suffer, who was the defendor and mainteiner of the publick good. This report beeing thus cunningly spread through the whole Citie, so incensed the people's mindes, that in an in∣stant all was up in Arms, Drums beating, and Colours flying, and in this manner they marched to the Vice-Roy's hous, cry∣ing out, Let the Vice-Roy die, if hee deliver us not Sorolla. The Vice-Roy, and som Gentlemen that were in the hous at that time with him, besides his servants, defended the windows and doors, where the assault was hottest all daie long, and night beeing com (as God would have it) a good woman one
of Sorolla's neighbors, who having seen him in his hous, and hearing that the people were storming the Vice-Roy's alace for hanging Sorolla, shee went to the Bishop of Segorbe, who lived close by, and told him that shee had seen Sorolla safe and sound in his own hous but a little before. Hereupon the Bi∣shop went presently to Sorolla's hous, which hee caused to bee broken open, and finding where hee had hidden himself, hee chid him throughly for his mischievous villanie, but hee ex∣cusing himself, said, hee durst not go out of his doors. The Bishop immediately gave order to saddle his mules, and riding upon one himself, and Sorolla on the other, with manie Halbards attending him, hee carried him quite through the Citie to the Vice-Roy's hous, to the end the people might see-Sorolla was neither dead nor a prisoner in the Vice-Roy's hous. The Confederates seeing him alive, with much joie they raised their siege, which had con∣tinued all daie and almost all night. After this they rescued a man likewise, condemned to death for hainous crimes, whom, in regard hee had manie friends and kindred in the Cite, the Vice-Roy had commanded to bee hanged as∣soon as he had confessed, lest his friends should petition for him before hee was dead. The thirteen Sindicos and Sorolla gave out,Sindico's were officers whch they had mde amongst themselvs. that this man was condemned, and to bee executed wrongfully, which the people hearing, went preently (all armed) to the prison and released him. Ten beeing posses∣sed that the Vice Roy was about raising men to subdue them, they environed his hous, and put him to his shifts, that hee was forced to send his Ladie out of the Citie, and hee not da∣ring to staie long after her, with much ado escaped, riding be∣hinde another Gentleman upon a mule. Hee having left the Citie in this manner, all the Nobles and Gentrie followed him with their wives and Children, retiring every one to their own houses. The Vice-Roy beeing of kin to the Earl of Co∣zentayna, carried the Vice-Queen to his hous. The other Gen∣tlemen having left their wives and children in secure places, with what arms, horses, and men they could get togeter, re∣paired
som to the Vice-Roy, others to the Infante Don Enrique, and to the Duke of Segorbe Don Alonso, agreeing all unanimous∣ly to adhere to the Emperor's service against the Rebels. All these Gentlemen's houses within the Citie, the people plucked down or burned, and plundered their goods; a thousand more abominable mischiefs they did, which I am ashamed to relate (so cruel and unruly is that Beast, the Common Peo∣ple when it hath broke the bridle.) They armed all the slaves, and received manie Moriscos for souldiers. From Cozentayna the Vice-Roy went to Xativa; the Inhabitants of that Citie de∣sired him to give them leav to muster upon St Bartholomew's daie, which hee denying, they marched out of the Citie in de∣spight and contempt of him, and mustered before his face. The Vice-Roy hereupon, fearing a second trick of Valencia, re∣tired into the Fort, which those of Xativa perceiving, they pro∣claimed, that no bodie, under pain of death, should furnish him with victuals, or anie provision whatsoëver. Hereupon hee went from thence to Denia, becaus if hee was pursued by land, hee might escape thence by sea. Those of Valencia, hear∣ing that the Vice-Roy was fled to Denia, after that Xativa had rebelled against him, resolved to seiz upon all the King's Reve∣nues and Customs: which to effect, they went to the Custom houses and broke the Records, took away the Books, and spoke words which were wors then their deeds. Those of Valencia, seeing themselvs masters of the Citie, the Vice-Roy and all the Gentrie beeing gone, they ordered the Government thereof. They appointed thirteen persons to govern and defend it, whom they call'd the Thirteen of the Confederacie. These Thir∣teen chose for the General of their Armie Iohn Caro, (who was a Sugar-baker) and held intelligence with the whole Kingdom: Insomuch that assoon as the news was heard of the Rebelli∣on of Valencia and Xativa, and that the Vice-Roy was fled, pre∣sently the Citie of Oribuela & the Marquisat of Helche did the like, and at length there was no Citie or Town but rebelled also, in imitation of Valencia, treating the Gentrie and nobler Citizens with the like dis-respect and tyrannie. And the Gentrie, with
their servants, arms, goods, and all they could get, joined toge∣ther in their King's service. So that (which is a thing wor∣thie of note and esteem) there was not one Gentleman, nor person of any birth or qualitie through that whole Kingdom that sided with that vile Commonaltie, but valiantly and unani∣mously ventured their lives and fortunes in their Prince's ser∣vice, although hee was out of the Kingdom; they suffered patiently their houses to bee pulled down, their goods to bee burned, their towns destroied, and all to shew their fidelitie to their King. The Citie of Oribuela chose for their Captain one Palomares, who made himself so absolute Lord of those people (beeing but a poor Serving-man) that often∣times hee drew out five thousand men into the field to fight, though hee paied dearly for it afterwards. The Confederates, having lost their respect to the Vice-Roy, a∣greed to lose likewise the fear of God. They made a Conspi∣racie amongst them, the result whereof was to rob and take away all the riches of the Monasteries and Churches. Which beeing discovered, the loial Partie desired Don Rodrigo de Men∣dosa Marquess of Cenete, to take upon him the Autoritie of the Justice for the King, which hee did, and like a good resolute Gentleman, hee hung up three or four of the chief Conspirators, and so the robberie which they intended was prevented, and the Citie quieted for certain daies. But soon after the Confe∣derates marched into the field towards Denia, to drive the Vice-Roy out of the Kingdom. Ten thousand men in Arms Va∣lencia furnished to that effect. The Clergie with their Hoods upon their heads, and Crosses in their hands, stood all at the gate of San Vicente, and as the Confederates passed by them, the Priests and Friers said to them, Sirs! Misericordia, Misericordia; and they answered, swearing, Cuerpo de Dios, Iusticia, Iusticia. And indeed God's Justice did abundantly fall upon their heads; for the greatest part of those that answered so, were ei∣ther killed in battle, or executed by Justice afterwards. Iohn Caro and Sorolla were Captains of this Armie. The Confede∣rates having the sole power and command of Valencia, Iohn
Caro was sent with a sufficient force to besiege the Castle of Corbera, six leagues from Valencia, which while hee was batter∣ing with some peeces of Artillerie, Don Geronimo Vique (who at that time was at a Monasterie of Friers of the order of San Geronimo, half a league from the Castle) desired to speak with him, who, overcom with his persuasions and powerful rea∣sons, raised his siege. Which the Thirteen of the Confederacie hearing, took te Office of Captain General from Iohn Caro, and conferred it upon Sorolla. By this time the Vice-Roy, with some forces, which hee had raised, was came to Gandia, to succor the Castle of Corbera; And Sorolla with his Armie went seeking the Vice-Roy: as hee passed hee ruined and spoyled all the places, that belonged to Don Geronimo Vique, becaus hee had persuaded Iohn Caro to leave the Castle. At last coming to Gandia, hee met with the Vice-Roy's Armie and gave them battle, wherein manie were killed on both sides, but at length the Confederates won the daie, and the Vice-Roy, with the Earl of Oliva, and divers other Lords and Gentlemen that re∣mained alive, were inforced to retreat to Denia, whither Sorol∣la with his men still pusued them. And beeing arrived at a town called Vergel (one league short of Denia) Mossen Bal∣tazar Vives, Lord of that place, refreshed them, and afterwards conveied them safe to Denia, where hee imbarked for Penisco∣la, whence they wnt to the town of Morella, where they rais∣ed more men. Sorolla returned to Valencia, where hee entered with his Armie very joiful and content with his conquest. By this time the Duke of Segorbe Don Alonso de Aragon was com in∣to the field with above four thousand Foot, and divers gentle∣men with their servants and others on hors-back, to the num∣ber of one hundred and sixtie, whereof was Captain Don Jayme Ferrer, son to Don Luis Ferrer, who was Lord Steward to the Queen Donia Iuana, at Tordesillas. And beeing quarte∣red at Almenara, a league and half from Monviedro with intent to besiege it, which was the strongest and most considerable Fort the Confederates had, but four leagues from Valencia; no∣tice was given him that the enemie appeared with no less then
eight thousand Foot and some Hors, fleshed with their Victo∣rie over the Vice-Roy, and recruited with many fresh men from Valencia. Whereupon the Duke sent Don Iayme with the Hors to discover, and according to his advice, hee would fol∣low as speedily as might bee with the Foot. This was car∣ried with so much discretion and valor, that the Duke gave them an absolute rout, leaving above five thousand men dead upon the place, for which it is called to this daie, The field of slaughter. This Victorie restored the Kingdom, which if it had otherwise succeeded, the Common People had become absolute Masters without any contradiction. Things beeing in this condition, the Vice-Roy returned with a fresh supplie, and incamped his Armie about Alcira and Xativa; The People were som∣what amazed, and startled at the rout the Duke had given them. Yet those of Alcira and Xativa marched out very strong to meet with the Vice-Roy, and finding him a league from the Citie, they gave him battle, the conflict was so hot, and so well maintained on both sides, that it was hard to saie which had the advantage, the combate continued all daie, and at night both Armies beeing very wearie, and great store of men hurt, they were both glad to retreat, seeking re∣freshment and medicaments to dress their wounded men. About this time the Cities of Oribuela and Alicante, with all the Towns and Places under their jurisdiction, associated themselvs with the People of Valencia. But all the Gentrie and persons of qualitie followed their Governor Don Pedro Masa, who was inforced to quit those two Cities, and the Castle of Oribuela, whereof hee was Governor. But Don Iayme de Puyg, a valorous Gentleman (who was Lievtenant of the Castle under the Governor) with fifteen or sixteen men defended himself gallantly against the furie of the Com∣mon people, when in their violentest heat they killed, burned and sacked the Gentlemen's houses. The Marquis de los Ve∣lez, Don Pedro Faxardo, Adelantado Mayor (that is Lord Deputie or Lord Lievtenant) of the Kingdom of Murcia, having
notice of the rising of Oribuela, levied what force hee could, and marched to reliev the distressed Gentrie, having order from the Emperor, to assist the Governor of Oribuela upon all occasions. Don Pedro Maca with his hors, beeing joyned with the Marquis de los Velez, the Common People of Oribuela, and the jurisdiction thereof, (who were above eight thou∣sand) marched in pursuit of them to the top of a moun∣tain, called Rajolar, with intent to give them battle, their in∣tilligence assuring them that they were far the greater number. The Governor advised with the Marquis about relieving the Castle of Oribuela, which was in great necessitie, every one of his Troopers carrying in, a sack of provision behinde him, whilest the Marquess amused the enemie with skirmishes, for hee doubted not to bee back with him time enough to dis∣comfit them. This was don accordingly, and beeing drawn up in Batalia, the Marquis secured the waie to the Castle, that the Governor might go thither with his Hors, and having put in his provisions, return to the battle, which was dexte∣rously and successively effected, with the slaughter of above four thousand of the Rebells: So the Marquis cleared all the Countrie about Oribula. But seeing how infected the whole Kingdom was, and what multitudes of people were com in to the Commoners, encouraged by their Victorie (for it is the nature of the Common people to follow the strongest partie) he advanced higher into the Countrie with his Armie, which daily increased, insomuch that before hee could reach Valencia, hee had above eleven thousand men and thirteen pieces of Ordnance, wherewith hee encamped at a place called Paterna, within sight of Valencia, and sent the Citie a Summons, which beeing surrendred upon Articles, and the Vice-Roy re∣possessed of his Command, the Marquis returned with his Armie to Murcia. After his departure, the Articles beeing not well performed, the Confederates retired themselvs to Xativa, where they chose for their Captain one Vicente Perez a fellow whose trade was to gather Acorns. They assaulted and entred the Fort, it beeing ill provided. Besides the aforemen∣tioned,
there were divers strange presages in Valencia of these prodigious disorders; amongst others, upon a Tuesdae the 27 of Maie in the evening, a Thunder-bolt fell upon a Church called El Asseu de Valencia,Other Prodi∣ious signs in Vlencia. which threw down one of the Pin∣nacles, and burst the Clock in pieces. Upon a Fridaie morning in the same month, fell a sudden storm of hail, with most ter∣rible Thunder-claps, after which, in a ground betwixt the Countie of Oliva and Dutchie of Gandia, were found three stones (which fell from the skie) in colour and make like flints. Fray Antonio de Guevara Chronicler to his Imperial Ma∣jestie, and Bishop of Mondoniedo, reporteth, that hee saw one of them hung in a chain in Santa Maria Church, a league from Oliva, which weighed no less then five and twentie pounds. The passage which I am now about to relate is so remarkable, that men cannot but admire the blindness which possessed the miserable people that affected these novelties and Insurrections. There was nothing more certainly known in Spain, then that the Prince Don Iohn (onely issue male of his father and mother, the Catholick Kings, and immediate Heir to these Kingdoms) died at Salamanca, to the exceeding grief and resentment of his parents and all Spain, and in those daies there was no further scruple or question thereof. But since in the time of these unhappie Commotions, the Confederates of Valencia were so besotted, that a strange mean fellow of no ac∣compt (who came in a fugitive manner out of Africa, and associated himself with them) that they received him, and beleiving, or seeming to believ him, to bee the Prince Don Iohn, they swore allegeance to him, as King, and hee Com∣manded and ruled over them for two years, until hee met with the end hee deserved, as shall bee seen hereafter. In the year of our Lord 1512, a certain Merchant of Biscaya, named Iuan de Vilvao, or Iohn of Bilbo, went to trade at the Citie of Oran. In the ship which carried him and his commodities, hee light upon a passenger, who addressing himself to him, told him that hee could write and read in several languages, and that if hee pleased to give him any competent subsistence,
hee would bee glad to serv him as his factor, and teach his children; the Merchant entertained him, and took him on board with him at Cartagena, thinking himself the happiest man living, that hee had so luckily met with a man of such abilities to instruct his children and follow his business be∣sides. This fellow was of a low stature, thin-faced, of a sal∣low complexion, hee had a terrible look, his eies beeing of a black and green color, little hair, and thin upon his head, his beard wors furnished; hee was a man of verie few words, in his Conversation somwhat too strict and austere, seeming∣ly intemperate in his diet, a great eater, but drank little, hee spoke Spanish, Arabick, and Hebrew. It never was known di∣rectly who his father was, onely hee confessed, while hee was under the lash, that hee was a Jew's son, and that hee was Circumcised, but never Baptized, for his father carried him into Barberie, in the same year the Jews were driven out of Castilla. Hee remained in this Merchant's hous until the year 1516, which vvas four years: and to ingratiate himself the more vvith his Master, hee told him, thenceforvvards hee vvould call himself by his name Iuan de Vilvao. But the Merchant having occasion to absent himself often from his hous, leaving his wife, children, and goods, all in charge with this servant, one time at his return from Castilla, hee was told by his neighbors that Iuan de Vilvao, his man, was a slepperie companion, and that in his absence hee was too familiar with his wife; others said, hee had abused his daughter. Hereupon without any further examination, hee turned him presently out of his hous, not declaring anie occa∣sion, or reason hee had for so doing, becaus hee could not have his servant punished otherwise, without bringing his own honor in question. At that time there was a young man Corre∣gidor of Oran, who not knowing wherefore the Merchant had discarded his servant Iuan de Vilvao, entertained him to bee his Steward. The Corregidor having a handsom young wench, which hee kept privately in his hous, Iuan de
Vilvao used all means possible to gain her acquaintance and affection, and withall to persuade her to learn witchcraft; for amongst other good qualities, this wicked fellow was a great Practitioner in Negromancie. The young maid beeing little pleased with his sollicitations, resolved at last to acquaint the Corregidor, how hee importuned her, and that hee would per∣suade her to learn witchcraft, but chiefly that hee had made her promise to give him poison, that so they two might with more freedom enjoie each other's affection. The Corregidor was much startled and amazed hereat, for hee thought his hous and Paramour as secure with Iuan de Vilvao, as if hee had committed her to the custodie of an Eunuch, and therefore hee did not absolutely credit her accusation of him; but after∣wards observing with a more strict eie the carriage and de∣meanure of his teward, hee was confirmed and satisfied of the truth, especially when hee found the spells and poison wch he was to use. Hee committed him to the publick Gaol, whence upon a market daie hee was fetch't out, set upon an Ass, with his sorceries about his neck, and whipped through all the principal streets of the Citie. The people were all asto∣nished that hee should bee so close a villain, for every bodie had a very good opinion of him; After this, beeing banish∣ed Oran, hee returned into Spain, and dis-embarked upon the Coast of Valencia, just in the time of these disastrous troubles. Hee, by his juggling inventions, begat himself a great esteem and credit first amongst the Confederates of Algecira. After∣wards hee came to Xativa, under the name of Don Henrique Manrique de Ribera, and beeing a subtil Impostor, and the Con∣federates simple, and besotted with passion, hee wrought so much upon their blinde credulitie, that they made him their General, and by little and little hee so in∣veagled them that they held him for their God, and their King. Vicente Periz (who was Captain General of the Confederate Rebels of Valencia) made great submissions to him, saying, that God had sent him to give them libertie, and that hee
would procure them much monie and arms. Those of Xati∣va adored him as their Redeemer, and called him El Encubierto, or the man disguised,El Encubiert. saying, God had sent him for the redress∣ing of the oppressed People. Hee made them believ that hee was the Prince Don Iohn, Son to the Catholick King and Queen deceased, and that for certain ecret causes and Revelati∣ons of God's Judgments,The notable imposture of Iuan de Vilvao. it was convenient for him not to bee publickly known in the world for long time past, but now since the Kingdom's were in so distressed a condition, and in so great necessitie of their naturall King, to own and defend them, and settle them in the same peaceable Govern∣ment, as they injoyed during his Father's Reign, hee desired to reveal himself unto them, and that it was God's will also. This those wretched Confederates beleiving, followed and honored him, as if hee had been their God. Thus having gained the affection and esteem of these Rebels, hee conferred with divers of the Citie of Valencia, of la Huerta, and other places thereabouts, inticing them to put in execution what that Tyrant, Vicente Periz, had alreadie moved. Hee dealt likewise with some places of Aragon, and Catalunia (which were alreadie tottering and half, at least, inclining to Com∣motion, ingaging them, that at the same instant (if pos∣sible) as hee should make his Attempts upon Valencia, they should all rise in arms, and secure those parts for him. With∣in Valencia hee had his intelligencers, and instruments, whom hee imployed to murder the Marquis of Cenete, then Govern∣or of the Citie; These were so faithful to him in this treacherous design, that hee wanted not assistants to convey him over the walls into the Citie, whereby hee might the better contrive his plot, seeing the disposition of the place, and (having a more free communication with the inhabi∣tants) allure and draw to his byas more complices, to strengthen his partie, and execute his wicked intention. This was so cunningly carried, that if God had not otherwise disposed it, the whole Kingdom at that time ran a notable hazard of beeing absolutely destroied. The Citie of Valencia
(as I have told you) beeing in so miserable a condition, the Religious men, with other good and loial people, went to petition the Marquis of Cenete (who then was in the Camp) to take upon him the Government of that distressed Ci∣tie. Which hee did (like a noble man as hee was). The people expressed so much contentment and comfort in his presence, that in all the Monasteries and Churches, they sung with great solemnitie, the Te Deum laudamus, and all the blls rung out in testimonie of an universal joie. The Marquis was a man of such courage and resolution, that when, throughout the whole Citie of Valencia, no bodie durst so much as name God, King or Iustice, hee took divers of the re∣bellious disturbers and hanged them. So that they began to bee affraid, and sculked in corners. Soon after having notice of a band of these Confederates, which were fled from Valen∣cia, hee marched out against them, and meeting them about Monviedro, hee brought away their Colors, having routed and put them all to flight. Amongst divers great hazards which the Marquis ran of losing his life, by the insolence or treacherie of these Confederates, one I shall give in particular; A mon∣strous disorderly multitude of these wretches beeing gathe∣red together in Valencia, fell like a furious storm upon the Mar∣quis his hous, with huge clamorous out-cries and lashing of weapons, not understanding each other's minde, nor know∣ing what they would have. The Marquis hearing the nois, went down to quiet the tumult, beeing well provided and at∣tended, but his Ladie seeing him engaged amongst a throng of such vile respectless people, and fearing lest hee should bee murthered by them, took such a fright, that her weak Consti∣tution beeing not able to resist the violence of that sudden ap∣prehension, shee presently expired. Vicente Periz Captain of the Rebells, with a numerous Armie intrenched himself and planted his Cannon within sight of Valencia, where hee re∣mained som time: In his Camp hee had a bell, at the sound whereof a numberless gang of thievs, such as his Armie was composed of, ran out of the Citie to him: And had not the
Marquis been very circumspect, without question they had suprised the Citie; but finding little probabilitie of effecting their design upon Valencia, they marched towards Monviedro, thinking to make the Vice-Roy rais his siege thence, but within two daies after Monviedro was surrendered to him (which was of no small importance) for thereby hee had an open and free passage to receiv succour out of Castilla. The Marquis hearing that the Confederates were marched to∣wards Monviedro with their Cannon, and having intelligence of their intentions, followed them (but with no consider∣able force) and meeting some of his own foot companies, which having been much galled by their Cannon and small shot, were retreating towards Valencia quite disheartned, hee strove to incourage them as well as hee could, representing to them the service of God and their King; but prevailing not with them, howëver he advanced and set upon the enemie, crying aloud, Let the King live, and the Traytors die, and with∣out fear of their muskets or Cannon, which played fiercely upon him, hee charged into the middest of them, God (whose caus hee fought) preserving him, and striking their baser hearts with fear, insomuch that hee had them all at his mercie. Yet his nobleness and generositie was such (though they deserved it not) that hee commanded his men (who were very busie in killing) to forbear further execution, cry∣ing out, Let them not die, let them not die: having thus quite routed these Mutiniers, hee returned to Valencia with the spoil, and all their Artillerie, where hee was received with joy and tears. The Vice-Roy afterwards, beeing before Xativa, with intent to reduce it to the Emperor's subjection, the Re∣bels dealt so cunningly with some of his Souldiers (who sowed the same dissention in his Camp, as was within the Town) that by certain signs they understood each others in∣tentions, and they agreed at one and the same time to fall upon the Loyall Partie, and murther them; and having taken their Artillerie, to storm Valencia, sack it, and kill all that were for the Emperor in it. This conspiracie was discovered,
but there was no remedie to hinder it, neither in the Vice-Roy's Camp, nor in Valencia; for the Confederates were very numerous and the Loyall Psons but a small Partie; The Marquis, at the intreatie of the honest people of Valencia, went to the Vice-Roy's Camp before Xativa, where hee found more disorder then was reported, and the infection less cura∣ble then hee imagined. The sign that these Conspirators had agreed upon, was, that in the night at a certain hour those of the Camp should cry out, Paie, Paie, Mutinie, Mutinie, and those within the Citie should answer, Paie, Paie, Mutinie, Mutinie. The Vice-Roy and the Gentlemen with him in the Camp, desired the Marquis to venter himself, and indeavor by going into the Citie, and reasoning with the people, to de∣fer the execution of this horrid treason: Although it seemed an act of great timeritie (as indeed it was) for him to ex∣pose himelf to the furie of a eople so mutinous, and bent upon mischief, yet the Marquis valorously did as hee was re∣quired: And it was miraculous, how his presence and fair deportment pacified the inhabitants minds, and brought them to submit to reason. The Adversaries beeing mad at the good success the Marquis had wrought within Xativa, con∣spired how Vicente Periz, their Captain might secretly convey himself into the Citie, and gathering as manie of the people, as hee could, together, apprehend the Marquis. This was effected, and Vicente Periz with a multitude of well armed men went to assault the Marquis, who beeing but slenderly provided, and weakly attended, and seeing a squadron of these thievs advance towards him, dissembled, and made as if hee knew them not, asking them thus, Are you our friends? do you com to serv the King? To which they answered neither yea, nor no, but seemed to bee daunted at the very sight of the Marquis. Hereupon with much seeming affection hee spake aloud, Nay then my boies, Viva el Rey; viva el Rey; which said, hee fell upon them, and took away their Arms. Presently upon this the rest of the e∣nemies discovered themselvs, and began to fight, discharging
their Cross-bows and Musket-shots as thick as hail against the Marquis and his men, which the Marquis seeing, hee cried with a loud voice, O you Traitors! now force is requisite; and flinging down his staff, hee took a pike, and saying, God preserv the King, and let the Traitors die; hee fell in amongst them, fighting so desperately, that before his men could com to se∣cond him, hee had made them turn their backs, but at last be∣ing over-powered and wounded in the left arm, hee was ta∣ken prisoner, and carried by the people into the Castle, where at that time the Duke of Calabria was also prisoner, who re∣ceived the Marquis with much honor. The Marquis was af∣terwards put into a Dungeon under St George's tower, where they kept him close prisoner som time, thinking thereby to make the Vice-Roy, his brother, condescend to what they listed: But at last hee was released, and perceiving the Coun∣trie to bee infected beyond hope of remedie, hee retired to his own hous. Those of Valencia found a great miss of him, and seeing most of the people of the Citie becom of the Confede∣racie, Vicente Periz having possessed himself of la Huerta, and other places thereabouts, the Iurates, and Chapter of the Church called el Asseu, sent to beseech him, that hee would bee pleased to condole the miserie of that Citie, and bee tender of the King's service. The Marquis was at Ayora, a town of his, & up∣on receipt of this message, hee took his waie towards Valencia. Thursdaie 27 Februarie, 1522, the Tyrant Vicente Perez, trust∣ing to the multitude of his partie within the Citie, took the boldness to enter into Valencia, with intention to plunder it, and kill all that should resist him, and having intrenched and fortified himself within the walls to that effect, it struck great terrour into the loial partie. But the Marquis, well Armed, came to a large place, called la Placa del Asseu, and caused to bee rung that bell, which they used to ring in Uproars, to the end all those of the loial partie might repair thither to him; where hee staied until noon, having used all fair means possible to pacifie without blood-shed the advers partie; but seeing no∣thing could avail, hee took a view of his men, and what
Arms they had; and finding his no competent force to en∣counter Vicente Periz, who had made himself very strong; hee betook himself to his invention and policie, which suc∣ceeded so advantagiously, that Vicente Periz came short of his design, all his men beeing dis-banded, and returned to their own dwellings. This was a happie daie for Valencia, for if Periz his plot had taken, hee had been absolute master of the whole Citie; and ever after, that daie was called the Thurs∣daie of Vicente Periz: Yet staying within the Citie hee rallied again, and what with those of Valencia, what with the fresh supplies which were sent him from Xativa, and Algezira, by the disguised Prince Don Iuan, or Iuan de Vilvao, who went thither to that purpose: Hee was so strongly recruited, that hee gave the Marquis Battle in the streets of Valencia, and had won the daie undoubtedly, if the Marquis had not shewed as much policie as resolution. In the Combate the Marquis pur∣suing Vicente Periz (who was glad to take his heels) was knocked down by a great pot full of earth, which a woman flung from the top of a hous upon his head, which though it killed him not out-right, did stun and bruis him very sore: Hee was presently taken up again by his servants, but his par∣tie supposing him to bee dead, lost courage, and withal the advantage they had gained of the eneme: which hee perceiv∣ing, assoon as hee was com again to himself, ran amongst them, saying, If the Marquis bee dead, the King is alive. These words put new vigor into the hearts of his despairing men, who following the Marquis, gave a fresh charge to the Con∣federates, so hot, that they were glad to hous themselvs, which proved no Sanctuarie, for there they were killed and taken, not beeing able to make resistance. Vicente Periz had his head presently struck off. This Victorie quieted the Citie of Valen∣cia, vvhich vvas so infected vvith the poison of Rebellion, that in the very Cloisters and Monasteries, there was as much division and passion as elswhere; insomuch that one part praied God to favor the Confederates, the other to give the Cavaliers the Victorie. The disguised Prince exspected a
quite contrarie success, hoping by the death of the Marquis, and the routing of his partie, to reign victoriously in Valencia; but God,Iuan de Vilvao, or the disgui∣sed Prince exe∣cuted by the Maquis of C∣nete in Vln∣cia. who had otherwise decreed the Event, made him likewise fall into the hands of the Marquis the 19th of Maie, 1522, who commanded him to bee hanged, drawn and quar∣tered, and his head to bee set upon the point of Lance. And thus that villanous head was crowned, who of an infamous Jew, and abominable Sorcerer, would have made himself King of Spain. After this grew several other Commotions in that Kingdom, but nothing near so dangerous; which I shall omit now to particularize, in regard I am called away by those of Castilla. SECT. XXXVI. THe Earl of Salvatierra, and other Mountaniers, infected the people of the Mountains of Burgos, as far as Alava and Vitoria, with other places of la Rioxa; and Burgos was very near revolting also. All which was opposed by the Lord High Constable, not becaus the Emperor commanded him so to do (for hee received no orders from his Majestie to that effect till afterwards) but moved with the magnanimitie of his own generous spirit, and the sens of Loialtie, which was Hereditarie to that noble familie. I do not finde that any of the Grandees of Castilla were very forward to break the ice in this undertaking, though afterwards, like honest men, they all set their helping hands. The Lord High Constable at first prudently feared the Event, and was loth to engage himself in so perillous an enterprise, hazarding no less then his life and whole estate, in endeavouring to oppose so manie, especially without arms, monie, or order from the Emperor. For the enemies were very manie and powerful, no less then thirteen of the most considerable Cities of Castilla, with divers other Towns and Villages, beeing declared for the Commonaltie;
besides that many Gentlemen of qualitie & great estates (much animated against the Emperor and his Ministers) had involved themselvs in the same Interest. It vvas an attempt of so much consideration and danger, that the other Grandees thought it the best vvay (seeing they vvere not able to do otherwise) to sit still and look on, and manie of them advised the Lord High Constable to do the like. But his Ladie Donia Maria de Tovar, onely daughter and heir to Don Luis de Tovar, Marquis of Ber∣langa, beeing one of the discreetest and most magnanimous Ladies in all Spain of her time, was not of the opinion of those that gave her husband that Counsel; but she never ceased, representing to him the advancement of his Majestie's service, and that for the good of the Kingdom, hee ought to resist and suppress the exorbitances of the insulting Commoners, al∣though hee put himself to the hazard of losing both life and fortune, in regard hee bare the Office of Lord High Constable, Captain General, and the second person of the Kingdom next his Majestie. The Dutchess beeing at her own hous at Haro, wrote to the Lord High Constable, her husband, this ensuing Letter, which is worthie to bee Chronicled. The Dutchesse's letter to the Lord high Constable. YOur Letter I received by Pedro de Velasco. And my opinion is, since his Majestie from the place where hee is doth what hee can, to give you his power and Revenue here, That you determine to preserv it. For if hee lose his right, no wonder if you, and all those, that have done what they were obliged to do, bee dispossest of your's; But if you maintain his interest, you and his other Servants will bee all secured. That which (in my judgment) your Lordship and the Lord Admiral are now to do, is to raise men and monie with all possible expe∣dition and trie your fortunes. I write to Pedro de Melgosa to use all means and shifts, that may bee, to procure you monie. The greater the danger, more glorious is the attempt. Trust in our Lord God, for since herein you doe both him and the King service, bee con∣fident
hee will bee favourable, and give a blessing to your indeavors. So, becaus I intend to write more at large to you by the Treasurer, I rest, praying God to preserv your Lordship's most Illustrious person, with more tenderness then I wish to my self. From Haro this 19th of June, 1520. Finis Libri Tertii.
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE FOURTH BOOK. SECT. I. THere is no Republick, or Change of Go∣vernment whatsoëver so barbarous, as to bee ignorant how important and necessa∣rie a Cement Concord is to make it long subsist. Wherefore those of the Iunta drea∣ding (and not without caus) the dange wherein they stood, desired the Citie of Valladolid to agree and bee all of one heart: for the high con∣sequence of the matter wherein they were ingaged, did require it, promising them that within fevv daies they should see the
Ordinances, which with incessant labor and watching, the Holie Iunta had agreed to publish and dispers through the whole Kingdom, whereby they hoped to make that Repub∣lick flourish, as one of the most happie and best governed in the whole world. The people were big with glorious hopes of injoying a second golden Age; and those of the Iunta were so well pleased with the thanks and applaus of the People, that their Ordinances beeing finished; they resolved to send them to the Emperor, by two Gentlemen and a Frier, not doubting but therefore his Majestie would confer som hono∣rable dignities upon them. But what these were, I will not mention, onely I may say, that hee was so incensed at their message, that they held it a great mercie they escaped with their lives. They wrote moreover a kinde of requisitorie let∣ter for the Cities and Towns where their Embassadors were to pass, and therein they inclosed their Letters to the Empe∣ror, with the Articles and Ordinances, which in the name of the Kingdom, they desired his Majestie to confirm; and though already I have declared the substance thereof, I will set them down in the same form they sent them; that the cu∣rious and patient may read and see the pretensions of the Commonalties, and what the Kingdom demanded. Let eve∣ry one judg what reason they had, for my own part, I will neither excuse nor condemn them, but onely relate faithfully the truth, which is as much as can bee required of mee, con∣sidering my office. In their Letters to the Emperor, they give his Majstie an account of all the troubles and insurrections of the Kingdom, which they told him, proceeded from the evil Counsel which his Majestie entertained about his Roial Per∣son, who, for their disordinate Covetousness, private passions and interests, besides other sinister ends (they said) might more properly bee styled the Deceivers, Cheaters, and Enemies of his Majestie's Kingdoms, and the publick good thereof, then Counsellors, such as they ought to bee. For they were the oc∣casion that the Kingdom of Castilla, which abounded in riches, and all other things that could bee required of the most opu∣lent
and flourishing Kingdoms of the World, was now bee∣com the poorest and most miserable of all the neighboring Kingdoms: Which did not onely concern the publick, but was also particularly prejudicial to his Majestie's Roial Patri∣monie, and which was insufferable, That the desolation of his Majestie's Kingdoms, and the exhausting of his treasure, to his own exceeding inconvenience, and the ruine of his sub∣jects, was to no other purpose, then to enrich his evil Coun∣sellors, and divers other persons strangers, who bare no af∣fection to his Majestie, nor had any zeal to advance his service, or the publick good, but to build their own fortunes. Next they complained that the Commissioners of several Cities (who desired his Majestie in the name of the Kingdom, at Santjago and the Groyn, not to demand any Subsidies) were by his Counsel sentenced rather worthie of punishment then au∣dience, and order given, that they should not bee admitted to sit in Parlament, but bee confined and banished, som of them to the remotest parts of the Kingdom. That since his Maje∣stie's departure out of the Kingdom, the Cardinal, with the President, and rest of the Council, had given Commissions to Antonio de Fonseca, and the Alcalde Ronquillo, to sack and make de∣solate the Citie of Segovia, notwithstanding they sent to excuse and submit themselvs to the Council, and that becaus of their so rigorous proceeding, they sent to Toledo, and other Cities, for assistance, who before they raised any forces to succour them, desired the Cardinal and Council by waie of Petition to deal more favorably with those of Segovia, but receiving no satis∣factorie answer, they sent an Armie into the field. They ag∣gravated the crueltie of Antonio de Fonseca in burning Medina, whereby the Town was endammaged above two millions of Ducates, and which occasioned the rising of divers other places. They declared how the Queen had commanded the Iunta to remove from Avila to Tordesillas. That they had un∣dertaken the care of the Queen's person, and put the Marquis of Denia and his Ladie from her, holding them destructive to the advancement of the publick good. They alleged reasons
for dissolving the Council, which his Majestie had settled be∣fore his departure. And why they paied their Armie out of his Majesties Revenues. At last they desired his Majestie would bee pleased to grant and confirm all those Articles, which their Embassadors should present him from the King∣dom, the intent and scope of them beeing meerly for his good, and the peaceable Government, by regulating and repairing the miseries and great dammages that had been occasioned through the evil Counsel of those, which thitherto had abused and mis-led his Majeste; urging moreover, that for the be∣nefit of the Publick, and the improving of his Roial Patrimo∣nie, it was necessarie and expedient, that until such time as his Majestie should appoint other persons of better temper, and uprighter intentions to reside in his High Council then the former were, his Majestie should give power to those Cities and Towns, which had Vote in Parlament, to provide and see to the Administration of Justice, and other things wherein those of his Council ought to have been more circumspect and moderate. And also, that hee would revoke the Com∣missions and Autoritie which hee had sent to the, then ruling, Governors, becaus they were men whom the Kingdom could not endure. Besides this letter to the Emperor, they sent another to those of the Citie where hee then was, desiring them to join with them in supplication to his Majestie, and procure his consent and approbation of all the Kingdom's de∣sires, in regard they tended to his Majestie's service, the pub∣lick good of the Kingdom, the increasing of his Roial Patri∣monie, and were exceedingly conducing to a peaceable and quiet government. Dated from Tordesillas the 20th of Octo∣ber, 1520. Under the the Letter was written, I, Lope de Pal∣lares, Secretarie of the Parlament and Iunta of the Kingdom, caused this to bee written by their Command.
SECT▪ II. ARTICLES Of The KINGDOM. DON CARLOS and DONIA IUANA, &c. To our Infantes, well-beloved Children, Brothers and Dukes, Greeting. Know yee, that for the remedying and re∣pairing the great dammages and exorbitancies, which have been and are in our Kingdoms of Castilla and Leon, by reason of the former evil Counsel and Government of our said King∣doms, The Commissioners or Procuradores of those Cities and Towns that have Vote in Parlament, are assembled as becom∣eth our Loial Subjects and Servants, with zeal to our servic and the publick good of our Kingdoms, fulfilling that which the Laws of our Kingdoms oblige them to do; And by spe∣cial Command from us, the Queen, are com to Tordesillas, to take care and provide for the reparation and remedie of the said dammages and exorbitancies; To which effect they have made and ordeined certain Articles, which are conducing and expedient for our service, the good Government of the King∣dom, and the increasing of the Revenue and Partrimonie Roi∣al. The Tenor whereof is as followeth: MOST HIGH AND MIGHTIE CATHO∣LICK PRINCES, QUEEN AND KING OUR SOVEREIGNS, That which the Cities, Towns, Villages, Commonalties, and Natives of your Kingdom of Castilla and Leon, do desires your Majesties will bee pleased to grant for a perpe∣tual Law, is here ensuing: That which concern's his MAIESTIES ROIAL PERSON. FIrst, These Kingdoms humblie supplicate your Majestie will bee pleased speedily to return into these Kingdoms, and beeing com, to remain ruling and governing them. For
staying here your Majestie may give Laws and Command over the whole World, as your Predecessors have done: And nothing of all that which they desire of your Majestie will bee so pleasing to these Kingdoms (although you should grant them much more, for they hope your Majestie will condescend to all these things) then your speedie coming to them. For it is not the custom of Castilla, to bee without their King, neither can they be governed by others in peace and quiet, which is very necessarie for your Royal service. Item, These Kingdoms humbly beseech your Majestie at your return, to bee pleased to marrie, it beeing necessarie for the universal good of these Kingdoms, that there should bee some issue to succeed your Royal Person, as they desire, your Majestie's age now requiring it. And that you would bee pleased to take a wife according to the Vote and good lking of these your Kingdoms, for so shee shall bee of some Countrie in amitie with them, as is most convenient for your service and the contentment of your Royal Person. That which concern's the Royal Familie. THat our Ladie and Sovereign the Queen's Royal hous bee put in such order and estate, as is becoming her Royal Person, and the honor of these Kingdoms. That the Officers about her bee persons of qualitie. That her hous bee sufficiently provided of all thing befitting her dignitie, for so her Highnss will bee well pleased with these Kingdoms, and they obliged. Item, That his Majestie would bee pleased at his return into these Kingdoms, to bring neither Flemings, French, nor other strangers whatsoëver, to bear any Office in his Royal Familie. But that hee would confer all such Offices upon Natives of these Kingdoms, there beeing multitudes of able and sufficient persons, who will serv his Majestie with much affection and loyaltie, and that his heirs and successors for ever should continue the like order. Item, That neither his Majestie, nor his successors, bring in,
or entertain any forreign souldiers for the guard of their Per∣sons or defens of their Kingdoms, in regard there are war-like and courageous men enough amongst the Natives, not onely to defend their own Countrie, but to conquer others, as they had done heretofore. Item, That his Majestie beeing in these Kingdoms, and having none but Natives about him, would bee pleased to order his Familie in all respects as Don Fernando, his grandfather, and Donia Isabel his Queen, and the rest of the Catholick King's, his Progenitors of glorious memorie, had done before him. For in so doing hee would save a number of unneces∣sarie expences which were made in his table and houshold; and this would palpably appear, for his Majestie will find that in the dishes for his own table, and those that are made for the fvorites and great persons of his familie, is daiely spent one hundred and fiftie thousand Maravediz, and that the table-expences of Don Fernando the King and Donia Isabel (who were excellent and powerfull Princes) besides the Prince Don Iohn (whom God receiv in his glorie) and the Infantes, with a multitude of attendants, amounted to no more then twelv or fifteen thousand Maravediz, per diem. And hence proceed's his Majestie's wants, and the impoverishing of the People and Commonalties, by ubsidies and other taxes im∣posed upon them. Item, In regard it hath been, and is a very excessive charge, to allow wages to such as are not domestick's, That hence-fowards there bee no Salaries given to any Courtier's wives, or children, or any other persons whatsoëver, no in immediate service, or shortly to bee entertained and admitted. But if any man should die in his Majestie's service, in satisfaction or equivalence thereof, hee might allow a pension or stipend to the wife or children of the deceased, although they bee not of age to serv. Item, In regard after the most llustrious Queen, our Ladie Donia Isabel his Majestie's Grandmother, was taken with the sickness, whereof shee died, divers superfluous offices were
crept into the Royal Familie, which never were before, That whosoëver injoyed any such office or offices, might forth∣with bee discarded, and bee allowed no Salarie: And all such superfluous expences bee imployed for necessarie uses, more conducing to his Majestie's service. Item, That in his Majestie's houshold no Grandee might have any office concerning the Revenue or Royal Patrimonie, and if any enjoy any such office at present, that it maie bee taken from them. For this is very inconvenient, and maie greatly impaire the said Patrimonie and Royal Revenue. Item, That during his Majestie's absence from these King∣doms his houshold officers, and other persons, who have re∣lation or attendance upon his Majestie, bee payed out of the Royal Revenue. Concerning GOVERNORS. THat, In regard in his Majestie's absence it is requisite to have one or more Governors in the Kingdom, such Governor or Governors might bee Natives of the Kingdoms of Castilla and Leon, appointed and chosen with consent of the Kingdoms, and that with their beeing Natives may concur the other qualities, which by the Law established by the King Don Alonso, called, Ley de La Partida, is required. That the said Law may bee observed and fulfilled to perpetuitie; As also the Order of Election and Provision, with the Conditions which dispose in what case a Governor or Governors are to bee chosen, as in respect of minoritie, absence, or whatsoëver other occasion. Item, that the Provisions, Orders or Commissions which his Majestie had given in those Kingdoms, contrarie to the above specified form, might be declared void, and that hee would command those and every of those Governors, whom hee had autorized, to forbear the execution of that office. Item, that the Governor or Governors, beeing constituted in the abovesaid manner and form, may bee invested with power to confer dignities, offices, administration of Justice,
and to redress grievances: And this not onely in the King∣doms of Castilla, but also in the Isles and firm land alreadie discovered, or to bee discovered, and that they provide them within ten daies. That they may present Dignities and places Vacant, and do as much therein, as the King himself in person, but not give any gft or gratuitie out of the Royal Patrimonie, nor any ting thereunto belonging. Concerning BILLETS. THe lodging by Billets (which is practised no where neither amongst Infidels nor Christians, but in this Kingdom) beeing a thing most exorbitant, and whence have proceeded and do proceed inconveniences and dam∣mages so excessive, that a small volume cannot contain them, and his Majestie's subjects suffer thereby not a little, aswell in their honors and lives, as in their estates, That for ever henceforth they may bee freed from so abominable and pre∣judicial a servitude. And that in these Kingdoms no such Billets bee given in any kinde, neither by the King's themselvs, nor any Lords, Noblemen or Prelates whatsoëver, and in case any should bee given, That the People may not bee obliged to accept of them, unless with their own conents, they paying for their lodgings, as shall bee agreed upon with the owners or inhabitants of the houses, whither such Billets shall bee brought or directed. But in his Majestie's progresses, That lodging and linnen should bee allowed Gratìs for those of his houshold and Court, so that hee exceed not the term of six daies in one place, which expired, they should paie for their lodging according to the ordinarie rate and custom. Likewise, That the Souldiers of the Guard should have free quarter after the usuall manner. Item, That their Majestie's the King's, Princes, and Infantes, his predecessors, had given and allotted convenient lodgings for their Royal Persons and Familie, and to the number of seventie, but no more, for the officers which were of necessi∣tie to bee neer the Palace were appointed in the same Citie,
or Town where the Court was, and in such houses as the Council, Iustice and Regidores of the said place should finde con∣venient and suitable to the conditions and qualitie of the persons to bee lodged, and the said seventie lodgings to bee paid according as the said Council, Iustice and Regidores should rate or tax them. And that for paiment hereof, all the Cities, Towns, Villages, or Burrougsh should contribute with∣out exmption, according to the cessment made by the said Council, Iustice and Regidores, without troubling or asking leav of his Majestie, insomuch that under colour thereof, there should bee no more cessed or gathered, then what the rent of the said lodgings would amount to, under penaltie of the Law. Item, That these lodgings which are allowed for his Ma∣jestie's familie, are not intended for those of the Council, for the Alcaldes of his hous and Court, nor the Alguaziles, or other Judges or Officers whatsoëver, nor the High Treasurers, or any such like, for these are to paie for their lodgings, by the order and form before mentioned. Item, That his Majestie, or the Kings or Princes his Succes∣sors, might not give anie Billets in general or particular, or other Command whatsoëver, that the Inhabitants of such Cities, Towns, or Villages should furnish lodgings, contrarie to their own wills and consents: And that in case any such Billet ge∣neral, or particular, by waie of intreatie or command, should bee given, it might bee received with respect, but not fulfil∣led, neither the Owners or Inhabitants of the said houses bee obliged to accommodate the bearers thereof. Cocerning Customs, Taxes, the Revenues Roial, Pole-monie, and Fee farms. THat the Customs and Thirds which belong to the Crown, may bee reduced to the same number and quantitie as they were instituted by the Catholick King Don Fernando and Donia Isabel, Anno 1494. That at the same rates and value all the Cities, Towns, Villages, with their several Lordships and Leases of Abbie-lands, may remain taxed for
ever, and no higher: for they may not bee raised nor abated at anie time, since such was the pleasure of the most Illustrious Queen Donia Isabel, our Ladie and Sovereign, as appear's by her last Will and Testament. And it is better for the augment of the Roial Revenue, as well as the good of the kingdom; for there was more gold and silver brought to his Majestie's Exchequer by the simple Penie-rents, then by these racking enhance∣ments, considering the breaches and failings which have been, and are amongst those that farm the Subsidies, neither is that burthensom to the kingdom. Item, That the people may take in the said perpetual Tax, the said Customs and Thirds, and be obliged to rent the Situa∣dos that there was upon the said Customs and Thirds, resto∣ring to their Majesties the over-plus, having paid the Situados and rights at the accustomed places and summons▪ By this means their Majestie's servants and retainers would bee duly paied,Librancas, are assignments of monie. and all those bribes and selling of Librancas would bee saved, neither would there be any need of so many Officers; & their Majesties might spare great sums of monie, much wa∣ges, and a multitude of discharges, or bills of receipt, which were given to Officers more then needed. Item, That the Queen and King, our Sovereigns, and their Successors in these kingdoms, bee contented for ever to have and rais their Customs, by and according to the fore-mentio∣ned imposition, and no otherwise, in regard so they are cer∣tain, and not variable, neither will there bee anie thing dimi∣nished of the Revenue, there still accruing to the Crown o∣ther profitable rights, as Fines, Confiscations of goods, the Salt-pit-rents,Pertos seco, are Customs paid at the go¦ing▪ in or cut of everie seve∣ral Kingdom in Spain by Land. the Mountain-Tributes, Subsidies, Customer∣ships, and Puertos secos, besides currant monie, taxes, and ordi∣narie paiments of the kingdom, with the rents of Maestrazgos. And that which com's from the Indies, Isles and Firm-land a∣mount's to so great a sum,Maestrazgos, are the places of the Masters of the orders of Knighthood in Spain. that thereby his Majestie may suf∣ficiently maintein his state, without pressing the Kingdom in Parlament, and out of Parlament, to grant any other extraor∣dinarie Subsidies, whereby the people is much aggrieved, and
teir Roial Consciences can bee no less burthened with the oppression and great dammages of these kingdoms. Item, That all the Inhabitants of the Cities, Towns, Villa∣ges, Burroughs and Lordships, may enjoie the said perpetual taxes in general, that none amongst them may rent or farm any particular part thereof at a higher rate then the said taxes, nor hat anie more sesments bee made amongst the Inhabi∣tants of the said places, then what shall bee necessarie for the recovering and gathering of the said taxes. Item, that everie Citie or Town that is chief of the Countie, do caus a Chest to bee set in som secure place, wherein they may put or gather the Roial Revenue, and that they see to and provide, that which shall bee necessarie for the estate of the Kingdom; And chiefly to have a care that the Queen, our Soveeign adie's familie, bee maintained and furnished with all things suitable to the Dignitie of her Royal Person, and the honor of the Kingdoms, next, to paie the Searchers, Counsels and Chanceries, with other ordinarie offices of the Kingdom, and beeing payed, that it remain stated in the offices of the Puertos Secos, mountain-Tributes, and Custo∣merships, and (in case any bee wanting) in the hous of the Contratacion of Sevilla; And the remainder of the Revenue and Royal Patrimonie to bee kept in the treasure, and deliver∣ed to his Majestie, when it shall pleas God that hee return in∣to this Kingdom, or to supplie his necessities, and those of the Kingdom, if any real and urgent occasion doth require it. Item, That the residue, or any thing that is unpaied of the Revenue, after ten years, may not bee farmed or recovered. For by recovering debts of so long standing, may arise great extorsions and grievances on the Natives of the Kingdom, or their sureties, children and heirs, who after so many years can not, perchance, produce the discharges and acquittances that had been given.
Concerning Commissioners or Burgesses of Parlament, Subsidies. THat the Subsidie granted to his Majestie by some Com∣missioners at the Parlament in the Citie of the Groyn, bee neither demanded nor received, nor any other imposed here∣after; Nor that any other impositions, or tributes, extra∣ordinarie bee layed upon the Kingdom by their Majesties, or any of their Successors. Item, That when any Burgesses or Commissioners are to bee sent to Parlament, the Custom of each Citie is to bee ob∣served in the state of the Regimiento; moreover, one is to bee sent from the Chapter or Clergie, another from the state of the Gentrie, a third from the State of the Commonaltie, and every State to elect and nominate their Commissioner severally in a distinct assembly; Which Commissioners are to bee payed by their own Citie or Town, except the Commissioner of the Clergie, who is to bee maintained by the Chapter. Item, When any Parlament is called, and the Cities and Towns, which have Vote, bee summoned to send their Commissioners, That their Majesties, or any their Successors, in these Kingdoms, send not to the said Commissioners any Power, Instruction, or Command, in what manner and form their Powers are to bee granted, nor appoint or nominate any particular persons to bee Commissioners: But that such Citie or Towns may have free libertie to grant Powers according to their own sence, and to such persons, as they shall think most convenient for the good of their Republick. Item, Wheresoëver the Parlament bee assembled, That the Commissioners may have the freedom to meet, confer and discours with one another, as often as they shall think good, and that no President bee ordered to com amongst them▪ for that would hinder them from attending to those things, which particularly concern the Cities, and the good of the Republick, which they represent. Item, that during the time of the Commissioners beeing at Parlament, nor before or after their return to their houes, as
having been, or beeing Commissioners in the said Parlament, they may not receiv directly or indirectly, under what colour or pretence soêver, any present or gratuitie from their Maje∣sties, or their Successors, in these kingdoms, of what value or qualitie soëver, neither for themselvs, their wives, children or kindred, under pain of death, and confiscation of goods: which goods may bee emploied for the publick reparations of the Citie or Town, whereof any such Delinquent was Commissioner. For they beeing free from Covetousness, and without hopes of receiving anie bribes in that nature, will bee more attentive and zealous for the service of God, the King, and the publick, and more careful to perform what was en∣charged them by their Towns and Cities. Item, that the Commissioners may onely have the bare sti∣pend, which shall bee allowed them by their Cities or Towns, and that the said stipend or Salarie bee competent, according to the condition and qualitie of the person, and the place from whence hee is emploied as Commissioner; And that this Sa∣larie bee paied out of the proper Inhabitants Revenue of each Town, or Citie, that doth send the said Commissioner, ac∣cording as they shall bee taxed by the Council, Iustice, and Regi∣dores of the said place. Item, that the said Commissioners may choos and enter∣tain one or more Lawyers beeing at Parlament, as they see oc∣casion, to whom the Cities or Towns are to paie a competent Salarie, but may change them as often as they pleas. And that the said Lawyer may not demand or receiv any gratuitie from their Majesties, or other person, in their names (as is above in∣structed and ordered for the Commissioners) neither may any Lawyer at all bee entertained by the Commissioners, but with the good liking and consent of the Kingdom. Item, that their Majesties would revoke and declare to bee void all gratuities of what qualitie sover, which were given to the Commissioners of the last Parlament, held in the King∣dom of Galicia, and that neither they, nor their wives, chil∣dren, heirs or Successors, may injoie any part or parcel thereof,
under penaltie of losing their goods, for the publick reparati∣ons of the Citie, or Town, whereof they were Commissi∣oners. Item, that thenceforwards to perpetuitie, the Cities and Towns, that have Vote in Parlament, may meet and assemble every three years by their Commissioners, who are to bee chosen out of the three States (as is aforesaid). And that it may bee done in the absence, and without licence from their Ma∣jesties, or the succeeding Kings; to the end, that beeing so as∣sembled, they may procure and see, that the Contents of these Articles bee punctually observed; and that they may discours of, and provide other things which may bee expedient for the service of the Roial Crown, and the publick good of the King∣doms. Item, that the said Parlament beeing ended, the said Com∣missioners may bee obliged within fourtie daies, to return to their Cities, or Towns, and give an account of what they had done in the said Parlament, under pain of losing their Salarie, and beeing deprived of their Office, which their Majesties might dispose as vacant. Concerning Coin. THat no monie bee transported out of these Kingdoms, either Gold or ilver, coined or to bee coined: Since it is forbidden by the Laws of the Kingdom, under pain of death, confiscation of goods, and other Penalties. For the contrarie having been done, especially since his Majestie's com∣ing into these Kingdoms, the Countrie is impoverished and destroyed. Item, That forthwith monie bee coined in these Kingdoms, of a different rate and value, then that of the neighboring Countries, and that it bee of a base alloy two Caratts under the rate of the finest Gold, which may countervail in weight and value the Crowns of Gold that are made in France; By which means it will not bee carried out of the Kingdom. Alwaies provided, that whosoëver should bee indebted any
quantitie of Maravediz, before the time of publication of the new coined monie, might bee obliged to make paiment in the coin, which was then currant, or to make up the value thereof in monie of the later stamp. Silver Coined. THat a mark of Silver out of the Mint may bee of the just value of two thousand two hundred and fiftie Ma∣ravediz, and no more. Copper Monie. THat new copper monie may bee coined, and in regard too much Silver mixed with it is but lost, into everie Mark should bee cast onely the quantitie of one of the new Ryals. Item, That the monie of Silver mixt and Copper, which is made in other Countries, is much less worth then it passeth for in this Kingdom, and the profit and gain thereof re∣maineth in forreign Nations, who carrie away our Gold for their base monie. That six months beeing expired after the coining of the said new monie, publick proclamation might bee made to prohibit the taking or receiving any of the said foreign mixt Slver and Copper monie. Item, That the old monie which is now currant, in no wise may bee made away, given, or sold out of the Mint-hous, directly or indirectly, at any higher rate then now it goe's, under penaltie that whosoëver shall bee defective herein, may lose his monie and third part of his estate, to the end that it may bee all coined, to make new monie. Item, In regard before the new monie bee all coined, and especially in the beginning, those who make a trade of trans∣porting monie out of the Kingdom, may indeavor, and bee apt to convey much away, That new searchers may bee placed in all Ports, by Sea and Land, and such as may applie their whole care and diligence to the well executing of this particular, and nothing els, provided, they bee persons of
trust. And that whosoêver shall bee found guiltie of this fact, may bee punished and condemned to death (if con∣vinced) without any further process, That there may bee no reclaiming or remission of this penaltie and punishment, but if those who are incharged therewith, bee slack or neg∣ligent in the execution of their office, that they may suffer the same punishment. And to the end this may bee the better effected, that whosover shall declare, or discover it, may have the one half or moitie of the monie so seized. Transportation of Corn, Leather, Sheep, and Woolls. THat no Corn, or the Leather of Sevilla, may bee trans∣ported out of the Kingdom. That the Mercedes, or gra∣tuities and taxes (which were given and imposed in some parts of these Kingdoms) of levying certain duties, for giving licence to transport Corn out of the said Kingdoms, and Leather from the Citie of Sevilla, may bee revoked, and decla∣red to bee void. For besides, that the said taxes bee unlawful, they are very hurtful and prejudicial to these Kingdoms, and the Citie of Sevilla. And that their Majesties may never hereafter give the said licence for monie, or for any imposition. Item, That henceforwards no sheep or hogs alive or dead, or any other cattle may bee transported out of the Kingdoms. For this hath been the caus that flesh, leather and tallow are raised to above double the price of what they were wont to yield, and if the said cattle bee not carried a way, these commodities will return to the same rate they were at for∣merly, which will bee a great benefit to the Kingdoms. And if any bee found a delinquent herein, That the one half of his goods and estate may bee confiscate to their Majesties, one fourth part given to the accuser, and the other fourth part imployed for reparations and publick uses of the Citie, or Town, whereof hee was Inhabitant. Item, That the Merchants, Clothiers, and other trades of the Kingdoms, may take to work and spend therein one
half of all woolls, bought by Natives, or Strangers, to send out of the Kingdoms, paying the same price, as they had done, for them; if they had given readie monie: And if they had taken them upon trust, giving securitie to paie at a certain daie, that the Merchants, and others, might have them upon the same conditions, giving the like securitie. And that the Officers of Justice may take the said Woolls from the Shep∣herds, or buiers, and deliver them to such persons (as is be∣fore-mentioned) not suffering any fraud or contention to a∣rise hereupon, but the truth beeing known, speedily to deliver them to the said Merchants, and others, to be wrought in these Kingdoms, paying in ready mony, or giving the said securitie; And in case any Officer neglect his dutie herein, that hee may lose one whole years Salarie, and be obliged to make good the dammage and interest of the Partie. Concerning the Council, Courts, and Iustices. THat his Majestie would bee pleased to dismiss those of the Council, whom hitherto hee hath kept, in regard they have advised him to the great prejudice of his Majestie's Roi∣al Crown, and the excessive dammage of the Kingdoms. That they never bee admitted to bee of his Privie Council, the Queen's Council, or Council of Justice. That their Majesties would select som of the Natives of those Kingdoms to bee of their Roial Councils, who were known to bee loial and zea∣lous for their service, and which would set aside their particu∣lar interests for the people's good. Item, that the President, Council, Judges, Alcaldes, and Of∣ficers of the Courts and Chanceries may bee visited every four years, according to the usual manner. That those who are found faultie, may bee punished, as the Laws of the King∣dom have ordered, according to the hainousness of their crime: and those who are found otherwise, may bee acknowledged to bee good men, and rewarded by his Majestie. Item, that the said Offices, aswel of the Council, as of his Majestie's familie, Chanceries, and other Courts, bee not given
by favor, or procured by the Petitions, or importunate sollici∣tations, of any Grandees, or other persons, near about his Ma∣jestie, but that they may bee bestowed upon able and deserv∣ing men: and that the provision may bee to Offices, not to the Persons, that enjoie them. And if any shall have, or pro∣cure them, contrarie to the tenour hereof, the kingdom may not acknowledg such as Officers, but that they may bee dis∣abled to keep or execute any the aforesaid, or other publick Offices. Item, that the said Offices of the Council Roial, Alcaldes de Corte, Chanceries, or other Courts, may not bee provided or possessed by such as com but newly from their Studies, but by persons ndued with qualities, and parts necessarie and fit for his Majesties service, having been experienced and practi∣sed in the exercise of the Office of Counsellors at Law and Judges, for the contrarie having been don hitherto, hath been the occasion of great inconveiences and dammages to these Kingdoms. Item, that the Judges of the Council Roial, Chanceries, and other Courts, which Voted in the first sentences, may not Vote nor sentence anie processes upon review: but pass the View and Votes of such Suits by order to the Judges of ano∣ther Court, as is usual in Suits, which by reason of discod, are remitted from one Court to another, for of the sentences pro∣nounced by those of the Council, and Judges of the said Courts, beeing reviewed by them, have proceeded and do proceed great inconveniencies. For they shew themselvs very passionate and desirous to confirm their sentences, defending them as if they were Advocates for the partie in whose favor they formerly had given sentence.Writs of er∣ror. And that all Suits may bee determined by two Courts, without any inconvenience, that that those Writs may bee useless, which, they that are in Suit, procure in like cases to make their Suits pass through all Courts. Item, That his Majestie provide and appoint a Superintendent to bee constant and resident in every one of the Courts and
Chanceries, as was accustomed in the time of the Catholick Queen Donia Isabel our Ladie, and that they bee persons of Autoritie and good intention, who may provide that the ordi∣nances bee observed, and see that the suites bee conformable thereunto; That Clients applying themselvs to them, may finde redress and help for their grievances, and that his Majestie may bee informed by them of the State of his Courts, and of the justice administred in them. Item, That the said offices of the Council, Chancerie and Alcaldias, bee not perpetual, in regard it is so expedient for his Majestie's service, and the good of the Kingdoms. That the Judges and Alcaldes, may not hold themselvs Lords of those offices, nor think it to bee an injurie to them to bee dis∣placed, and others appointed to officiate. Concerning the Council and Courts. THat the offices of the privie Council, in what concerns the Kingdoms of Castilla and Leon, and judges, his Ma∣jestie's Alcaldes de la casa e Corte, Chanceries, and all other offices of justice, may not bee given to any strangers, but to the in∣habitants and natives of the said Kingdoms; And that for this respect no act or letters pattents of naturalization may bee given, and if any should bee given, that they may bee respe∣ctively received, but not fulfilled. That the number of the judges of the Council of justice may bee twelve, neither more nor less, and those to bee of such qualities and parts as the Laws of the Kingdom do require. Item, That Suits bee determined in the Council and Chan∣cerie in their order, and as they stand registred, and by the Courts where they are depending without joyning of any others to them. That concerning this particular, his Majestie may give no writs in derogation of ordinances. Also that those which were to bee pleaded, and determined in Chan∣cerie, bee not kept still nor removed by wrts to the Council. And that those judges that can take recognisance of Suits, and causes, may not bee put by from hearing and determining the
said Suits by writ or order from his Majestie. And in case the judges bee suspected, the Parties may have the remedie of appeal. Or if his Majestie have given any such writs, that hee revoke and annul them. That henceforwards it may re∣main as a perpetual and inviolable Law, that the Judges of the Council and Chancerie, present or to com, may not obey the said writs, under pain of beeing deprived of their offices, and paying one hundred thousand Maravediz each, for his Majestie's exchequer. And that the same may bee observed in the writs which shall bee given by his Secretarie, the Suites depending. Item, That those of the Council, Judges of Courts and Chancerie, and Alcaldes de Corte, may not possess or hold more then one office. And in case they should have two, or more, that they may bee taken from them, and that they may receiv Salarie for no more then one office. Item, that matters of Justice which may bee prejudicial to the parties henceforwards, may bee determined and dispatch∣ed by those of the Council, and not by the privie Chamber, for by this means, things will bee carried according to Justice, and without grievances. Item, that the Secretaries appointed for the Chamber, may not have Vote in the Council of Justice, concerning those matters which depend on private Writs or Mandamus from their Majesties; to the end they may not defend in the Coun∣cil any Writs which they had so signed, whereby the parties might bee aggrieved. Item, that the said Secretaries appointed for the Chamber, may not receiv any thing besides the Salarie, which his Majestie is pleased to allow them, it beeing competent. For by experience it hath been seen they have demanded and ad∣judged divers unjust things concerning the taxes and impositi∣ons of the Kingdom. And they keep intelligencers through the whole Kingdom, to give them notice of what is vacant, and how they may charge new taxes and impositions. And this Office beeing in their own hands, they may ask what
they list, and it is granted them. But in case the said Secreta∣ries, or any of them, should demand any thing for themselvs, their children or friends, that for so doing, they may lose their Offices, and not onely bee disabled to execute the said Offices, but all others whatsoëver. Item, that the diffinitive sentences pronounced by the Alcal∣des de casa e Corte, and Chanceries, in case of death, or mutilation of members, may have the libertie of appeal to those of the Council and Judges of the Courts Roial. And that te said Alcaldes may bee obliged to grant the said appeals and suppli∣cations according to Law. Item, that the said Alcaldes de casa e Corte, and Chancerie, or their Notaries, may not exact or receiv either more or less du∣ties or fees then the ordinarie Alcaldes of the Corregidores of Ci∣ties and Towns in this Kingdom, where there is Counsel and Chancerie. Item, that the Alcaldes and other Officers of the Court called the Hermandad (which is properly for High-way-men) may have a constant place of Residence, when they leav their Office, which those that succeed them may enjoie; and that these may have power to question and execute their sentence against the said Judges and Officers, their Predecessors. Item, that the Corregidores, Alcaldes, Officers of Cities, Towns, Villages, Burroughs, and other places of Justice in these King∣doms, may not bee continued in the said Offices above the space of one year after their donomination, although the Ci∣ties, Towns, and Commonalties should desire it; for the said Offices having been continued for longer time, hath oc∣casioned many inconveniencies and defects of Justice to such Cities and Towns. Item, that henceforwards no Corregidores may bee provided or appointed for any Cities or Towns of these Kingdoms, but when the said Cities or Towns shall require it, in regard it is so ordained by the Laws of the Land. And that the said Cities and Towns may place and provide their ordinarie. Al∣caldes, beeing men of abilities, that so the Salaries of Corregi∣dores,
their Lievtenants and other Officers may bee saved. That the Cities and Towns may appoint and allow moderate and reasonable Salaries to the said ordinarie Alcaldes out of the pub∣lick stock. And that the said stipendarie Judges may bee tied to serv onely that Town or Citie which giveth them the Sa∣larie. Item, that in cases wherein a Judg Inquisitor is required, those that are appointed for Judges Inquisitors may go with the limited Salarie at the charge of the King's Exchequer, and not at the charge of the Delinquents, for to recover their Sa∣laries, they make Innocent men Delinquents; and after that the said Salaries and charges bee recovered of those who were condemned and declared guiltie by those of the Council, or o∣ther Judges, the said Examinations may bee reviewed by waie of Appeal, Commission, or otherwise. Item, that henceforwards no Corregidor, or other Judg of what qualitie soëver, may bee allowed to receiv his Salarie, or any part thereof, or by waie of Ayuda de costa (which is to help bear his charge) out of anie fines or forfeitures adjudg∣ed by them, but may return them to the Exchequer, to the end hee may not bee thought to have pronounced an unjust sen∣tence, out of covetousness thereof. And that whosoëver shall receiv anie monie in that kinde, may bee condemned to paie four times as much into his Majestie's Exchequer, and bee made incapable of any Office ever after. Concerning Encomiendas, or promotions to Dignities, and Council of the Orders. THat those of the Council of the Orders, as Presidents, Judges, and other Officers bee visited in the same man∣ner as is ordered for the Council Roial. Item, that the Treasurers and Officers of the Orders, and Maestrazgos, or Masterships, make their Visitations from three to three years, that it may appear how they behave themselvs in their Offices, and those that shall bee found guiltie may suf∣fer punishment.
Item, that the Encomiendas of the Militarie Orders of Santjago, Calatrava, Alcantara, may not bee given or conferred upon any Strangers, although they bee naturalized. But that herein may bee observed the same rule as in Ecclesiastical Offices, Digni∣ties, and Benefices, whereby they may bee provided according as is constituted and ordeined in the Statutes of the Order. Concerning Bulls, Cruzadas, and Compositiones. THat no Bulls, Cruzadas, or Compositions, of what qua∣litie soëver bee suffered to bee preached in these Kingdoms, unless upon som real and urgent occasion, debated and approved in Parlament. That the monie which shall bee raied tereby, may bee deposited in the Collegial or Cathedral Church of the Bishoprick, and not to bee taken out thence, spent or emploied otherwise, then in the same urgent occasion, for which the Bull was granted. Item, That in case there bee such necessitie of preaching the Bulls, Cruzadas, and Compositiones, as above said, this man∣ner and order may bee observed. That there bee care had to choos honest men, of good consciences, and learned, that they may know and understand what they preach. That they exceed not in their preaching the cases and things contained in the Bulls. That they preach in none but the Collegial, or Ca∣thedral Churches. That in places where there are no Col∣legial or Cathedral Churches, the Bulls may bee sent to the Curates or their Vicars, to the end they may divulge and publish them to their Parishioners; That they advise and dmonish the people, but impose no Penaltie, if they take them not, and that they might receiv them if they would. That there may bee no such exorbitance, as was usual hereto∣fore, injoyning the people to com, and detaining them per∣force in their Sermons, not suffering them to follow their cal∣lings and occupations, unless they took their Bulls, and other such ill demeanors. Item, That whatsoëver was to bee recovered and gathered by virtue of the Bulls thus received, may not bee recovered by
waie of excommunication or interdict, but by demanding it before the secular Justice of the Citie, Town, or Village, where the Bull had been received. That the Alcaldes of the Villages may have power herein, for the contrarie, having been done, hath much indangered the Souls of laboring-men, Priests, and other persons, and the people suffer very many and great oppressions in this manner of recovering it. Item, That henceforwards for ever the Commissaries of the Cruzadas and Compositiones may not levie or recover any thing of that which some Cities, Towns, Villages, and Cor∣porations have expended in their own houses in feasting, Bull-baitings, or acts of Charitie, although they do it from an ancient custom, by vow, or what other waie soëver they can pretend. Item, That the monies levyed by the Cruzadas and Com∣positiones, which were granted for the war against the Moores; costs and charges of the Armies which had been or are to bee raised against the enemies of our Catholick faith, and to releiv the Kingdoms and Cities of Africa, may bee expnded and imployed to the same end, for which they were granted, and that they may not bee granted hereafter upon any other pre∣tence whatsoëver, nor the said monie, or any part thereof, may bee given or bestowed as a Merced or gratuitie upon any bodie, becaus, besides the publick dammage, men's Souls are indangered by the not imploying it to the use, for which it was granted; Which if it were applyed to the proper and right intent, the Royal Revenues would remain free for the service and augmentation of the Royal estate. Item, That the Mercedes and Librancas of any monie of those said Bulls, Cruzadas and Compositiones, which have been given to any particular persons, as well natives as strangers, may bee revoked and made void. Concerning the Indies, Isles, and Continent. THat henceforwards for ever, no Mercedes may bee made of Indians, whereby the Gold, or any other Commodi∣ties
may bee taken thence, to anie person or persons, of what qualitie soëver. That these which hitherto have been, may bee revoked; for by that means their Majestie's Roial Patrimonie hath been, and will bee, much damnified, in stead of beeing advantaged, by reason of the great quantitie of Gold exhausted thence: Besides that, they are used more like Infidels and slaves, then Christians, as they are. Item, that the hous of Contratacion at Sevilla, for the Isles and Continent of the Indies, may remain for ever in the said Citie, and not bee removed to anie other Citie or place within this Kingdom or without. In regard the said Citie of Sevilla is so famous and fit a place for it, and it would bee a great hinder∣ance to these Kingdoms, and a disservice to their Majesties, if it should bee altered. Concerning Mercedes. THat their Majesties, or the succeeding Kings, may not make anie Merced of goods confiscated, or to bee confiscated, or of anie part or parcel thereof, to anie Judg, or Judges, who have given, or are to give Sen∣tence in the said Causes. That the said Judges, or anie of them, may not receiv anie such Mercedes, either in paiment or lieu of their Salaries, or for Ayuda de Costa, or in anie other kinde whatsoëver, directly or indirectly, either for themselvs, or their wives, children, friends or kindred; for by this means they, beeing free from all covetousness and interests, may, with more equitie and Justice, proceed and give their Sentence. That whosoëver shall do the contrarie, may bee obliged to restore four times as much into his Majesties Exchequer, and that they may for ever remain incapable of enjoying the same, or anie other publick Offices. Item, that their Majesties or their Successors, may not give or make anie Mercedes or Librancas of goods and monie, which hath not been brought into their Exchequer, or in their own hands; for by this means they will know what they give, and how they endammage themselvs; which not knowing,
they easily grant the said Librancas and Mercedes, as their Ma∣jesties had given away in that nature great quantities of pearls and monie, which (if preserved) had been sufficient to have mainteined their Roial Houshold, without making such shifts as they were driven to, by taking up monie at In∣terest, or demanding Subsidies of the Subjects and Natives of their Kingdoms. Item, that their Majesties, or their Successors, may not give or grant anie Merced of goods, demanded in their Majesties names, or of the Roial Crown of these Kingdoms, concerning which there is anie Suit depending, unless sentence bee first pronounced against the possessors thereof, and that they bee ab∣solutely condemned. That whatsoëver hath been done to the contrarie heretofore, may bee revoked. Otherwise it would hinder the free Administration of Justice according to right and equitie. And that whosoëver should receiv or pro∣cure anie such Mercedes, may for ever bee held incapable and unworthie of receiving for themselvs, or others, anie Merced from their Majesties, or their Successors, in these Kingdoms. Item, that their Majesties may pleas to revoke all Mercedes whatsoever, which had been made or granted since the death of the Catholick Queen Donia Isabel, as well by the Kings Don Fernando, and Don Felipe, as by Don Carlos our present Sove∣reign. And whatsoever Confirmations have been made of anie Towns, Villages, Vassals, Jurisdictions, Salt-pits, Mines of Gold and Silver, Copper, Lead, Tin, or Allum. In regard besides, that they are contrarie to the Laws of the Land, the most illustrious and Catholick Queen Donia Isabel, our Ladie, did absolutely prohibit and forbid them, when, by her last Will and Testament, shee left the government and rule of these Kingdoms to the charge and care of the Catholick King Don Fernando; And that all this may bee applied to the proper use and benefit of the Roial Crown of these Kingdoms, and that those persons who have obteined anie such Mercedes, may make no further use of them hereafter. Item, forasmuch as since the deceas of the Queen Donia Isabel
have been made divers Mercedes, and manie Patents and Pri∣vileges of Gentilitie given for monie to several persons, with∣out anie just caus or consideration of services done to their Majesties, that might deserv the said favour; whereby the Towns, Commonalties, and those which paie the taxes, have been much damnified and injured. That their Majesties may revoke all such Patents, Mercedes, and Privileges whatsoever, and those to whom they were given, may not anie waies en∣joie them. And that henceforward no such Mercedes, Patents, or Privileges may evr bee granted, or bee in force, to benefit those to whom they were given. And that this may never bee derogated or abrogated with anie claus general or particular, or by anie ordinarie or absolute Power. Item, forasmuch as contrarie to equitie, and the tenour and fom of the Laws of these Kingdoms, have been granted and made, divers Mercedes of the Reversion of Offices, Bene∣fices, Dignities, and other things, in the hands of men yet li∣ving: That their Majesties may revoke all of them, without exception, that hitherto have been made or granted, either by their Majesties, or their Predecessors. That nothing in this nature bee ever granted hereafter, and if anie should bee gran∣ted, that they may not bee fulfilled, nor take effect, notwith∣stding any derogatorie clauses with penalties and confirma∣tions whatsoever; but to the end they may bee resisted and bee of no value, that they may bear no penalies at all; And that whosoever shall procure anie such Merced, may bee made in∣capable of anie place in Court, or anie other publick Office. Item, that his Majestie discard and put away the Officers of his Roial Familie and Kingdom, as Treasurers, and their sub∣stitutes, and all others whosoëver have behaved themselvs a∣miss in their offices, to his Majesties great disservice, & the uni∣versal dammage of these Kingdoms; who having (as when they first entred into their Offices) little or nothing of their own patrimonies, and their profits much exceeding their expences, have raised themselvs vaste Estates, to the prejudice aswel of the publick good of the Kingdoms, and the Natives thereof, as
the impairing and diminishing of the Roial Patrimonie. Item, That the offices of his Majestie's Royal familie and the Kingdom, those of the Royal Courts, and the Alcaldes & Fiscales, or Attournies thereof, Corregimientos, Assistencias, Alguazilagos, Regi∣mientos, Veyntiquatrias, Escrivanias of the Audiencias, and Coun∣cil, and whatsoever other offices of the Cities, Towns, and Places of the Kingdoms, which are at their Majesties, and their successors, disposal, now and from this time forwards, may never bee fold or given for monie, or bestowed, as Mercedes, upon any, who beeing unfit to execute the said offices, may make sale of them, in regard the sale of them is very dete∣stable, and forbidden by the Common Laws and rights of the Kingdoms, for the great dammages and prejudices which have accrewed thereby to the good of the Publick. And that the said offies may bee freely given and bestowed upon persons of sufficient parts and abilities to perform and exe∣cute them. Item, Tat if the said offices or any of them, bee provided otherwise, or bestowed contrarie to the tenour and form mentioned in the precedent Article, That they may bee held as vacant, and whosoever is so placed in them, may bee dis∣carded. And their Majeste's and successors provide and bestow them as above said. Item, That the officers which are to serv in the Court, or in any the Cities, or Towns, of these Kingdoms, aswell of the Iuzgados as of the Veintequarto Escrivanias, and other such like offices, may not possess more then one office. And if they bee such as may bee supplied by Substitutes, or iev∣tenants, that these may bee paied by the principal officers. And that their Majesties or successors grant no stipend or Sa∣larie to the said Substitutes, nor the Principals consent there∣unto, under pain of losing their offices, and others to bee put into their places. Item, as touching the Confirmations of the priviledges of the Right or Custom called, Maravediz de Iuro; That no confirmation of the said Priviledges may bee required, and
that their Majesties give Command to the officers, who have raised great summs thereby, to restore the said monie to the persons of whom they received it, and that speedily and freely without any trouble or suit. Item, that those of the Offices Roial, as well High Treasu∣rers, as those of the Cruzadas, Compositions, or the Islands and Continent of the Indie, may bee obliged to certifie and declare unto their Majesties, and their Successors, whatsoever debts re∣main conceled and forgotten, and all other things in the said Offices, appertaining to the Roial Patrimonie, but that they give no intelligence thereof to anie particular or private per∣sons, lest they should beg them, under pain of paying twice as much into the Exchequer or Roial Patrimonie, and of beeing deprived of the said Offices, and made incapable not onely of them, but all others. Item, that those who have had, or have anie Office Roial, or charge of the Registers of the Roial Revenues, may not have the said Remainders of the farming thereof, and in case anie have made use of them, that hee or they bee obliged to paie the double of what hee hath received thereof, into their Ma∣jesties xchequer, and lose their Offices, with the Salaries and benefits thereunto belonging. Item, that all those who have bought anie Offices since the deceas of the Catholick King Don Fernando, which could not bee sold according to te Laws of the Land, and the Contents of the preceding Articles, may not execute the said Offices, un∣der pain of death and loss of good, and their Majesties may provide and dispose them to other able and sufficient persons. Concerning Residencia's. THat all those Officers who had charge of his Majesties Estate, in the time of the Catholick King Don Fernando, his Grandfather, may bee brought to an account for what they did in their Offices and Charges, concerning his Majesties Estate ad the Roial patrimonie, which passed through their hands, and that they produce these accounts before such per∣sons
as shall bee nominated and appointed by his Majestie, and the Kingdom. That his Majestie appoint and nomi∣nate these said persons within thirtie daies after these Articles and Laws bee granted by their Majesties, and in case his Ma∣jestie doth not nominate anie within the said term of thirtie daies, that then those Accounts may bee produced before such persons as the Kingdoms shall appoint, who may receiv them for their Majesties Exchequer, and condemn and laie penal∣ties upon those whom they finde guiltie, according to equitie and the Laws of the Kingdoms. Item, that the like Account bee also given by the Treasu∣rers, and other Officers, whosoever have been encharged here∣tofore with the Cruzadas, Bulls, and Compositions, or with the Gold and Pearls brought from the slands and Continent of the Indies; and the same order to bee observed therein, as is above-specified. Item, that those of the Council, and the Officers of his Ma∣jesties Familie and Court, who have been, or are to bee dismis∣sed, may make their Residencia, or render their accounts before the Persons mentioned in the preceding Arcicles. Item, that the said Officers bee thus called to account, be∣caus they have given advise and notice of manie things which have been begged and given as Mercedes, to the great Prejudice of the Roial Patrimonie; which advices and informations they gave, either to enjoie a share thereof themselvs, or to pur∣chase them wholly, or to procure others to buie or farm them, by which means, for very small matters, they have gained vaste sums of monie. Therefore in regard this hath been a great dammage and prejudice to the Roial Patrimonie, their Maje∣sties may ratifie and allow the above mentioned persons to take the said Accounts and Residencia's. And whatsoever shall bee thus discovered by them, that it may all accrew to their Majesties Exchequer; for if they had rightly and truly per∣formed their Offices, they ought to have given their Majesties those Informations, and not to private persons.
Concerning Prelates and other Particulars. THat the Bishopricks, Archbishopricks, Dignities, Cano∣nicates, & other Ecclesiastical preferments whatsoever, or the pensions thereof, may not bee conferred upon anie tran∣gers, but upon the Natives and Inhabitants of these Kingdoms. That if anie were disposed of contrarie to the tenour hereof, his Majestie may bee pleased by Apostolical Autoritie, to order that they may bee resigned and conferred upon Natives of these Kingdoms, satisfaction beeing given to those that are dispos∣sessed of them, to their full value in other rents in their own Countries. Item, in regard his Majestie had given away the Archbisho∣prick of Toledo, before hee was received and sworn King in the Parlament at Valladolid. That his Majestie may make a new presentation of the said Archbishoprick, and confer it upon a Native and Inhabitant of the Kingdom of Castilla, who may deserv it, beeing a person of learning and conscience answe∣rable, a Divine or Civil Lawyer; for the bestowing it on the Nephew of Monsieur de Xeures, contrarie to the Laws of the Kingdom, hath been, and is, very prejudicial to the King∣dom, and the said Dignitie, hee beeing under age, and absent, (and although hee were a Native of the Kingdom, it was not fit nor just to give it him). That the Revenue of the said Di∣gnitie was transported out of the kingdom, wherewith if hee were a Native, and resident in the said dignitie, hee might en∣tertain manie Nobles and Gentlemen in his hous, as hath been the custom formerly. And if his Maestie would bee pleased to graifie the said Nephew of Monsieur de Xeures with som other lands in his own Countrie. It might very well bee done. Item, that all Letters of Naturalization whatsoever, that have formerly been given, may bee revoked, and never anie gran∣ted hereafter. And if anie should bee granted, although with derogatorie clauses, and by an absolute power, that they may bee respectively received, but not fulfilled. That there may bee
no penaltie for the non-performance of anie such supplication, and whosoever should bee strict therein, may bee apprehen∣ded and severely punished by the Justices of the kingdom where hee was taken. Item, that the Judges, Notaries, and other Officers of the Ecclesiastical Courts, may not have or demand more fees then those of the Secular Courts, according to the tatutes of the kingdoms. And if, in anie case, the Apostolical Autoritie bee requisite, their Majesties may bee pleased to send to their Embssador to procure it from his Holiness, and send it. Item, that the Archbishops, Bshops, and Prelates of the kingdoms, may reside in their own Diocess the greatest part of te year, whereo, if they fail, that they may lose proportio∣nably a pat of their fruits, to bee emploied for the building or repairing of their Churches; for, by reason of their beeing ab∣sent, the Divine Service is not performed as it ought to bee. That his Maestie send for a Bull to this effct from his Holi∣ness, within the space of one year. And if his Majestie did not send for it within the said term, that the kingdom might have power to demand it, and take, by his Autoritie, out of the fruits of the said dignities, as much as would diffraie the charges of the Journie, and sollicitation to procure it. Item, forasmuch as his Holiness at his Majesties rquest had sent a Licence to the Archbishop of Granada, purposing that whosoever should have his said power (although secu∣lar persons) might judg and give sentence in som cases against Priests, in criminal matters. That his Majestie would bee pleased to caus the said Licence to bee enrolled within six months, and send a Copie thereof into these kingdom, to ex∣cuse and avoid the scandals which arise thereby. Concerning Regidores. THat henceforwards, their Majesties, or their Successors, never give or grant anie Licence to the Regidores, Veynti∣quatros, Iurados, and other Officers of the Council of Cities, Towns or Villages of these kingdoms, to live with, or have
anie dependance upon Noble-men. That all Licences to this effect whatsoever, granted in former times, may bee revoked; That the Laws of the Kingdoms may bee herein observed and executed. That whosoever shall procure, or make use of anie such Licence, may bee deprived of his office. And that their Majesties dispose thereof, as beeing vacant, but that hee or his children may never re-injoy it. Item, That the Regidores of the Cities and Towns of these Kingdoms, who are Lawyers, may not execute the office of Advocates, nor plead in the said Cities or Towns, but for them and their Commonalties. Alienation of Goods or Lands from the Royal Crown. THat his Majestie command effectually to restore the Towns, Villages, Forts, Jurisdictions, Revenues, and all other Rights whatsoever, to the Cities and Towns of his Royal Crown, which they had formerly in their possession, and which the most illustrious Queen Donia sabel, our Ladie, commanded in her will to bee restored. And to the end this may bee effected, and the wills of the Catholick King Don Fernando and his Queen Donia Isabel, may bee fulfilled, That executors may bee appointed with sufficient power to per∣form the same within six months without further delaie. Item, to the end this may remedied henceforwards, That their Majesties or Successors, for no reason or caus, neither in paiment or satisfaction of services, or anie other waies what∣soever, may alienate anie thing from the Royal Crown or Patrimonie, and in case anie alienation bee made, that it may bee restored. Concerning Forts and Alcaydias, or Governments. THat the Forts and Alcaydias of the strong holds of these Kingdoms, may not bee given to anie forreiners, but in∣trusted to the Natives and Inhabitants of these Kingdoms, al∣though they may produce letters of naturalization, And that the same order bee observed herein, as in the Dignities and
Ecclesiastical preferments. Item, That his Majestie take away all command or govern∣ments whatsoever of Castles and Forts, possessed by strangers, or transferred by them for monie to anie natives of these Kingdoms. Item, that Antonio de Fonseca may bee dispossessed of the offices and command hee hath in these Kingdoms, in regard of the great mischiefs and scandals which they suffer by his occasion. Item, that the Forts and Alcaydias may not bee given to anie Noble-men or persons of high birth and qualitie. And that the Alcaydes or Commanders thereof may take the oath of fealtie to his Majestie, and give securitie to the Cities and Towns where they are, that, by or from the said Forts, they shall receiv no dammage or prejudice. Item, that his Majestie give order forthwith, and every two years from this time forwards, to visite and repair, as occasi∣on doth require, the Forts and places of strength upon the fron∣tiers of these Kingdoms. Concerning Cloath. THat the Cloath that is imported from other Countries may bee of the same size and goodness, as those which are wrought in these Kingdoms, according as it is ordered by the Statutes and Act of Parlament. That the said Act may bee executed aswell upon forreign Clothes, as those which are made in these Kingdoms. That what deferring of the time of the Act, or Licences soëver have been granted to sell and disperse them in these Kingdoms, may bee revoked and de∣clared void. That hereafter no such Licences bee granted, but in case there bee, that they may not bee fulfilled. And that, without stopping or arresting them, the Justices may proceed according to the Act, under pain of losing their offices, and paying one hundred thousand Maravediz towards the repa∣rations and charitable uses of the Citie, Town, or Village, where their Residence is.
Contribution. IN regard it is ordeined by the Laws of the Land, that cer∣tain Towns and Villages (which now are under the pos∣session of som Noblemen) should proportionably (as the rest of their neighboring Cities and Towns) bear a share in the Tributes and Contributions, and Taxes for Hedges, Bridges, Fountains, Watchmen, Suits in Law, Defences, and enlargement of Territories; yet by the favor of Noblemen and persons of great qualitie, (to whom they belong) they do not observ or fulfil his Majesties Commands herein. That henceforwards they may bee obliged to perform them, and in case of default to lose their Offices, and all the Salarie there∣of; and that the Lords of the said places may not oppose or do any thing to the contrarie under pain of losing the Lord∣ship and proprietie of the said places, or Towns, which after∣wards shall bee as Crown-Lands never to bee alienated from the Royal Patrimonie. GENERALS. FOrasmuch as his Majestie, in the Parlaments which hee called at Valladolid and the Groyn, did grant som things, which, for the profit and publick good of the Kingdoms, ought to bee effected: That his Majestie command all provi∣sions and power necessarie for the performance thereof, to bee given to the Cities, Towns, and other places of the King∣doms. Item, that his Majestie give order to proceed rigorously against Antonio de Fonseca, Alcalde Ronquillo, Gutiere Quixada, El Licenciado Iuanes, and the rest, that had any hand in the bur∣ing and destroying of the Town of Medina del Campo▪ And that his Majestie approve and allow of what the Kingdom shall do concerning the confiscation of their, or any of th estates and goods. Item, that their Majesties approve the Assemblie which the Cities and Towns of the Kingdoms have made, and do make
to the end they may repair and remedie the exorbitancies and grievances of the Publick; to make and ordain these Articles, and all which they have done in order to the suspending of those of the Council, and Officers of their Majesties Familie and Court, placing and displacing Officers of Justice, taking and demolishing of Forts, pulling down of houses, killing of men, tumults and uproars, and judging and sentencing other matters of the Kingdoms; their endeavors in taking away all that might stop or hinder their proceedings herein, and any other excess whatsoever, as in the order and form of the pre∣misses is conteined▪ The assembling the people, raising of Arms, and the punishment which certain Cities and Commonalties have inflicted upon the persons, houses, and goods of om men, whom they esteemed enemies to the pub∣lick good of the Kingdoms. And that their Majesties ac∣knowledg to bee well emploied, all and every the sums of monie which they have taken out of the Roial Revenue, and other things, and disbursed in paiment of the said men, and Armies, or otherwaies in prosecution of the above-said premis∣ses: And whatsoever taxes they had imposed and recovered to that effect, or expended in any kinde. That their Majesties would command all to bee remitted and absolutely pardoned, as also not onely their Assemblies and Councils of the Cities and Towns of the Kingdoms, but likewise that every particu∣lar person or persons that had been active therein, might bee free from anie trouble or question therefore in anie Courts, civil or criminal. That their Majesties would revoke and de∣clare void, all and everie information or informations, com∣mands, sentences, and provisions which those of the Council, or the Alcalde Ronquillo, or any other Judg whatsoever, had made or given against any of the Cities or Towns of the Kingdoms, or against any particular persons, and that for this caus they, nor any of them, might bee deprived of their privi∣leges or offices, but might remain free and indemnified. In regard they were moved thereunto out of their respects to their Majesties service, and the publick good of the Kingdoms,
and for the encreasing & preserving of the revenues and Patri∣monie Roial, in order to the obligations and duties wch they owed to their natural Sovereigns, according as the Laws of the Kingdoms have ordeined. And that his Majestie would grant, autorize, and confirm the said Articles as a perpetual and inviolable Law for ever, and that he would promise & swear, by God and his holie Evangelists, never to revoke, or consent to the revoking or altering of them, or do, or suffer to bee done, any thing contrarie to their true intent and meaning in Parla∣ment, or out of Parlament: And that hee would not demand of the Pope or other Prelate whatsoever any dispensation or ab∣solution for the said oath and promise. SECT▪ III. THese Articles were sent to Flanders by those of the Iunta, to bee delivered to the Emperor. Antonio Vazquez de A∣vila carried one Copie of them, and Maestro Fray Pablo (a man of an exemplarie life and holie intentions,Who was an exempted pe¦son and reser¦ved by the Emperor to bee punished. onely blinded with a zeal for his Countrie, seeing the Kingdom ruined) another. They went several waies, but neither of them durst appear be∣fore the Emperor, and som saie, they never came into Flanders. Antonio Vazquez de Avila arrived at length at Worms in Germanie, which the Emperor hearing, commanded him to bee appre∣hended and imprisoned in a Fort; but after som time, beeing better informed, hee gave order to releas him. Fray Pablo, and Sancho Zimbron, who went together, hearing, before they came to the Emperor, how Antonio Vazquez had been welcomed, went no further then Bruxels. These Articles were applau∣ded and held for holie things amongst the Commonaltie; they said, The Emperor must bee verie cruel if hee did not con∣firm them. That those of the Iunta deserved an immortal Crown, and a never-dying fame for their pains and care in making such excellent and holie Ordinances, whereby their
Kingdoms should bee made the happiest, and most opulent in the world. SECT. IV. THe Lord Admiral, beeing desirous to compose these dif∣ferences and disorders of the Kingdoms, before they broke out anie further, resolved to go and convers with those of the Iunta at Tordesillas, and beeing at Torrelobaton, hee sent to them, desiring, that they would give him the libertie and safe conduct to go to them. Those of the Iunta answered, That they knew very well, that his Lordship came to speak with them concerning the Commonalties of the Kingdoms, but they desired him not to put himself to the trouble of coming thither, until he had dismissed those Gentlemen, with their sou∣diers, out of Medina, and his own lands, & those of the Council likewise, in regard they disserved his Majestie, and hindred the good of the Kingdom, which don, they should be very glad to serv him, and shew him all the respects due to his person. The Admiral replied, that hee was well contented to discharge all those souldiers, and send away all those of the Council, except the Cardinal and the Lord High Constable of Castilla, who were the Governors and principal men of the Kingdoms: Those of the Iunta would not bee satisfied, unless they were all sent away. Whereupon they sent two Heralds with a Nota∣rie publick, to require him with great protestations, that hee should not permit the mischiefs and dammages which might bee occasioned by the Iunta, and the Armies of the Advers Partie. They sent others also with trumpets, to require the Lord High Constable, and the Earl of Alva, not to levie anie Souldiers, becaus that would bee prejudicial to the Roial Crown, and hurtful to the Kingdoms. The Lord High Constable received those that brought him this message very courteously, and commanded a dinner to bee prepared for
them; After which, hee sent them to the Earl of Alva, with twelv of his own men on hors-back. The Earl apprehended the chief man of them, commanding him to bee clapt in pri∣son, and afterwards, they saie, hee caused him to bee stran∣gled, and gave no other Answer to the Iunta: whereat they were very much displeas'd; others said, The Earl did like a wor∣thie Gentleman, for no Law or Word is to be observ'd or kept with Traitors. The unfortunate man, whom the Earl thus put to death, had been, not long before, preferred by those of the Commonaltie, to the Office of Chamberlain to the Queen Donia Iuana. In revenge of which crueltie (as they termed it) those of the Iunta commanded the Lord Constable, and the Earl of Alva, to bee proclaimed, in manie Cities and places of Castilla, Traitors, and capital enemies of the Kingdom; alledging, That they raised forces against the Roial Crown, and to the prejudice of the Kingdom. That they had made a new Broad-Seal, contrarie to the Laws of the Kingdom, wherewith they did seal Orders against his Maje∣sties Subjects, and contrarie to all right and Justice. That they did favor and uphold those of the evil Counsel; and that they had apprehended her Majesties Chamberlain, all which was in dis-respect or contempt of her Majestie, and to the pre∣judice of the publick good. And therefore those of the Iunta, in order to the service of God, and the Kingdom, did finde themselvs obliged to declare them Capital Enemies, and ac∣cordingly, that their Estates and Land should bee seized and forfeited to the Roial Crown. SECT. V. THose of the Iunta beeing possessed of Tordesillas, and having the Queen, with her familie, and the whole Kingdom in their own hands, manie people believed that shee was recovered, and that shee was well-pleased with
the proceedings of those of the Iunta. The increasing of this opinion, and their credit with the people, raised their thoughts to things of higher consequence, and the novelties which everie daie did produce, were already swoln to so great a number, and spred into so manie parts that it is impossible to relate them so cleerly, fully, and dis∣tinctly as I would. The pretence of the Iunta was so plau∣sible, bearing the sugared name (which they gave it) of Libertie, and exemption from unjust taxes and evil govern∣ment, that divers other places, were likewise in Arms for them; And it was a miracle that anie place stood out: For they favored and countenanced them that followed their fa∣ction, and those of the contrarie Partie were perpetually un∣der the lash of their persecution.Commotions  Palencia. In Palencia the people mu∣tinied, and would have killed the brother to their Bishop Mota, with divers Canons, and other Priests of the Citie, be∣caus they had given possession of the Bishoprick to the said Mota,Alcala de Henares. whom they extreamly hated. In Alcala de Henares they turned the Governor, and the Vicar-General to the Arch∣Bishop, out of the Citie, becaus they hated the Arch-Bishop for beeing a kinsman to Xeures, and a stranger. Medina pre∣pared to make open War against Coca and Alaejos, in revenge of the mischiefs and losses which they had susteined by Antonio de Fonseca. It would bee an endless task to undertake to give a particular relation of their outrages, what persecutions, rob∣beries, and murthers, were committed in each place. Those of Segovia did not lie still either, but were perpetually making new attempts against the Earl of Chinchon, and the Town of Espinar, which they assaulted and sacked, as if they had been Infidels, carrying away their wives and daughters, some of whose husbands following after the Segovians, said, That if their wives went with them beyond a certain limit, they should keep them for ever.
SECT. VI. I Mentioned in the rising of Burgos, the prudence and courage which the Lord high Counstable, to detain and suppress the furie of that disorderly people, had shewed, in taking upon himself the Autoritie and care of administring Justice, to the great contentment and rejoicing of the Citizens. But the inconstant Vulgar, upon no occasion, lost the respect which was due to so honorable a person, never considering how advantageous it would have been for them to have suff∣red themselvs to bee governed by him in such troublesom times. That which they pretended to bee the caus of their respectless audacitie was, That when Medina del Campo did be∣siege Alaejos, Segovia, Salamanca, Avila, and other Cities, having assisted them with men to destroie that Town, out of the ex∣ceeding hatred which they bore Antonio de Fonseca: Burgos would do the like out of revenge of the Merchandise which they lost in Medina, by Antonio de Fonseca's burning it: But the Lord High Constable satisfied them otherwise; And becaus his son offered himself to bee their Captain, which the people imagined hee did onely out of subtiltie and cun∣ning to amuse them or for som other by-respect, they began to bee jealous of him; this suspicion ingendred a mortal hatred, insomuch that their furie grew beyond the bounds of moderation and obedience. The Lord high Counstable had privately conveyed into his hous four hundred Lances: Which beeing known in the Citie, the Regidores and Gentle∣men assembled, and sent two of their companie to summon him. Hee excused himself, saying, hee was very ill, and could not go to them: But they told him, that they could not bee satisfied with that answer, hee must rise, and go with them. At last hee went, and was civilly received; beeing com amongst them, two of the Assemblie in the names of all the
rest, rose up and thus bespake him; Wee are very sorrie and grieved that the honor and affection wherewith this Citie hath alwaies served your Lordship and your Ancestors (bee∣ing Persons of so great qualitie, natives, and in a maner, Lords of all this Citie, which is the chief of Castilla) should bee so ill requited, as that you should keep secretly in your hous four hundred Lances, to destroie the people: wee require you forthwith to dismiss them, and reserv onely twentie servants about you, if not, the Citie will take their remedie. This was not very pleasing to the Lord Constable, but it behoved him to satisfie their desires. Yet notwithstanding hee condescen∣ded to their wills,Burgos riseth up in Arms a∣gainst the Lord High Constable. the suspicions ceased not, neither were the people pacified. Upon our Ladie's daie of September their furie broke out, and all the Commonaltie rose up in Arms against him, in such a raging manner that they had killed him, if hee had not retired to his hous, where almost two whole daies they kept him besieged, and Don Diego Sarmiento the Earl of Salinas with the Dutchess and the Countess their wives. After this, seeing himself the object of the people's malice, and every hour in danger to lose his life; hee con∣ditioned with the people to let him go freely with all his familie out of the Citie; Which beeing granted, hee went to a Town of his called Briviesca. This example of the Peo∣ple of Burgos, made other places commit the like audacities against their Lords; as Haro against the Earl of Haro, Son to the Lord high Constable; Duenias against the Earl of Buendia; and also Naxara against the Duke; although that Citie doth allege and prove that they rose not for the Com∣monaltie, but for the King, whose subjects and tenants (they saie) they are. The Lord high Constable beeing at Bri∣viesca, very full of care and sorrow to see the Kingdom in so great distempers, and so little probabilitie of any remedie; about the middle of September arrived Lope Hurtado de Mendoça with dispatches and orders from the Emperor, im∣porting that hee should bee Governor of Castilla and Navarra joyntly with the Cardinal and the Admiral of Castilla; Which
having read, hee presently accepted the Government of the Kingdoms: But becaus the Commission was for them all three, hee could not so suddenly execute the Command. For the Cardinal was as yet at Valladolid, and the Admiral in Cata∣lunia, in the Countie of Cabra, whither the dispatches were sent to him, who was of opinion to defer the acceptance of that Charge, until his return into Castilla, and to use som means in the interim to agree and accommodate the differences of the Commonalties, as you have already heard. Which difficul∣tie beeing related to the Emperor, beeing on the waie to Aquis∣gran, where hee was Crowned; hee sent other Letters dated the 17 October following, with special command to the Lord High Constable, that having assembled som of the Coun∣cil, hee should, alone with them, execute the charge of Gover∣nor of the Kingdoms, & provide for the remedying of the pre∣sent disorders, until such time as the Cardinal, and the Admiral could com to join with him; which hee did, as shall appear hereafter. SECT. VII. THe Lord High Constable seeing the remedie of the Kingdoms to lie upon his account (although hee was much offended with those of Burgos) without seeking any reparation of honor, prudently endeavored by fair means and treatments full of courtesie, to appeas that people, and reduce them into the Roial waie of doing their Prince service; for it was of no small importance for him, at the beginning of his Government, to gain that Citie, and settle himself in it, bee∣ing the chief of Castilla, and a place of such greatness and esteem. Hee kept intelligence with som principal Gentlemen of Burgos, by whose industrie the Citie was so well disposed and ordered, that within a short time after, hee became ma∣ster of it; This was the first symptom of the Countrie's
health, and an Antidote against the desperate poison which had so infected the whole Kingdom. The Lord High Con∣stable, together with the Citie, committed to the Charge of Don Diego Lopez de Castro, the government of the Castle of Lara, with the territories thereof, hee having first taken the Oath of Fealtie, as hee was a Gentleman, according to the order and manner of Castilla, to keep it for the Emperor. From this time forwards Burgos began to have an ill conceit of the Iunta, disliking more and more their proceedings, especially their ill treating of the Cardinal and those of the Council, and sent to their Commissioners to com away from Tordesillas. After which they wrote to Valladolid, in testimonie of their Loialtie, encouraging and persuading those of that Citie to do the like, in order to their due obedience to his Majestie, and the pacifi∣cation of the Kingdoms. SECT. VIII. THose of Valladolid, beeing ill satisfied with the letters which they received from Burgos, returned them no an∣swer, esteeming them people of small resolution or constan∣cie, and not fit to bee trusted. Those of Burgos sent letters like∣wise to those of the Junta, telling them manie things by way of exhortation and advice, amongst the rest, That they should leav the Queen in her free libertie, to do what shee pleased, and to let things remain in the same condition the Emperor had left them, with other circumstances, which were contradicto∣ie to what formerly they seemed to desire. Whereby it appea∣red, that they declined the Interest of the Junta, and favored the Lord High Constable's Partie. Som other places of the Kingdom also began to bee more moderate, by the Letters and promises which they received from the Cardinal, and other Gentlemen of note.
SECT. IX. IN the Citie of Valladolid the people were still divided by several factions, some transported with a blind zeal, presed for obedience to those of the Iunta, thinking whatsoever they ordained was good and holie; others desired with no less earnestness that the Lord high Constable, with those of the Council, might bee re-admitted into the Citie, deeming whatsoever was enacted without them, to bee wicked and unjust: And hereupon they spoiled and murthered one ano∣ther, like people without sense or reason. Whereupon they wrote to the Lord Admiral (who was their Countrie-man and neer neighbor) giving him account of the troubles of the Kingdom, and especially of the mischiefs which they feared would befall that Citie in particular. Whereunto hee sent an answer with an extraordinarie sens of sorrow, to see the danger whereunto the whole Kingdom was brought, counselling and admonishing them to have a care left they lost themselvs: Moreover, in regard that Citie had been noted particularly for their Loyaltie to their King, and for the re∣lation hee had to it by his birth, it grieved him to the soul to see it in such extream distraction, which hee feared would not bee so easily remedied; with several other expressions of affection and tenderness for their welfare. But Valladolid did not set much by his admonitions at that time: But after∣wards (though late) they were better advised, and they found in the Admiral the mercie which they did expect, as shall bee set down hereafter.
SECT. X. THe Letters from Burgos, with the sedulous and prudent endeavors of the Lord high Constable, made those of Valladolid to bethink themselvs a little, and with a kinde of re∣mors for what was past, to begin to understand reason, al∣though the greatest part (but not the best) stickled hard to keep the Citie in obedience to the Iunta, to the end they might compass their own ill designes. After this the Lord high Constable sent to notifie his Commission to bee Vice-Roy and Governor, together with the Cardinal and Lord Admiral, to all the Cities of the Kingdom, where it might conveniently bee done, which beeing proclaimed, in most places was obeyed. Whereupon hee sent to all his kindred and friends, ordering them to rais what forces they could possibly, and dispatched messengers to all the Grandees, and Gentlemen of note in the Kingdom, encouraging and enjoyning them to assemble, and bee assistant to him. And hering that the President, with others of the Council, were fled from Valladolid in the manner before mentioned, hee sent for them to com to him, which the President, and some of them, did. After∣wards the Letter coming to his hands, wherein the Emperor Commanded (until the Lord Admiral could joyn with them) That hee and the Cardinal should govern; Hee pre∣sently began to put his Majestie's orders in execution, using means to rais monie for the levying and paying of Souldiers: For without the force of Arms it seemed impossible to do any good; and therefore hee sent to borrow fiftie thousand Duckets of the King of Portugal, which hee lent him freely. With which monie, and what hee had of his own, or could procure any other waie, hee raised some Infantrie. Which done hee wrote to the Duke of Naxara Don Antonio Manrique Vice-Roy of Navarra for more men, who sent him five
hundred foot Souldiers and some Artillerie, which hee also desired very earnestly. Hee sent likewise for those of the Guards, who came from that expedition, which was called De les Gelues; Some of which were readie to put themselvs in the King's service, others took up Arms for the Junta, by the persuasion and means of Don Pedro Giron (who was up∣on tearms of beeing their Captain General) and of the Bishop Don Antonio de Acunia, a great stickler for the Com∣monaltie. Also hee carried the business with those of Burgos in such manner, that they all should bee ingaged in the Emperor's service, promising them very fair conditions, and delivering into their hands Don Iuan de Tovar Marquis of Berlanga, his second Son, and Don Bernardino de Velasco, his yongest Son, as hostages, until such time as his Majestie should allow and confirm his agreement vvith them. SECT. XI. WHilest the Lord High Constable was making all these diligences, the Cardinal stole secretly out of Valladolid (as you heard already, upon the 20 of October 1520, with one single Page, and thence hee went to Rioseco; whence hee gave notice to the Lord High Constable, and other Grandees of the Kingdom, desiring them to send him men, and to repair thither in his favor; which they did. The first that came to him, were, the Marquis of Astorga, who brought with him the 26 October, eight hundred Cross-bow-men, two hundred mus∣ketiers, four hundred men Armed with Targets and head-pieces, two hundred Lances, and one hundred Light-hors∣men. The Earl of Venaivente came, the next daie following, into Medina, with two thousand five hundred Foot, and two hundred and fiftie Lances. The Earl of Lemos brought fifteen hundred men. The Earl of Valencia a thousand. All which Noblemen, with some of the Council, staied in Rioseco with
the Cardinal, exspecting more forces. Don Hernando de Vega, Lord of Grajal, brought three hundred and fiftie men; and the Admiral, Lord of that Town, wrote, hee would speedily bee there also. The Lord High Constable was very glad to hear of the Cardinal's escape. And according to his Agreement with those of Burgos, hee entred into the Citie the first daie of November, and notwithstanding some opposition, hee posses∣sed himself of it. Whence communicating by Letters with the Cardinal, and other Nobles at Rioseco, they concluded, since there was no other remedie, that they should carrie on their business by force of Arms; That the Rande-vous should bee there at Rioseco, that beeing the most convenient place, becaus nearest to Tordesillas, where the Iunta was likewise making their Armie. Hee resolved (it beeing generally so agreed up∣on) to staie at Burgos, with such force as hee thought conve∣nient, to oppose and suppress the Merindades, which were risen, (of whom the Earl of Salvatierra, with small discretion, had made himself Captain) and sent his son Don Pedro de Velasco, Earl of Haro, as Captain General of the Souldiers and Artillerie that were sent him out of Navarra, and those Hors & Foot that were at Medina de Rioseco. The Earl of Haro departed from Burgos about the middle of November, and went to Melgar, eight leagues from thence; Where hee staied to gather more Forces: Don Pedro Veloz de Guevaro, Earl of Oniate, Don Garcia Manrique, Earl of Osorno, the Martial of Fromesta, Don Alonso de Peralta, and other Gentlemen, met him there, everie one bring∣ing as many men as they could rais, thence they continued their march to Rioseco, whither every daie came Gentlemen with other Forces. Of all which, the Lord High Constable gave a particular relation to the Emperor. SECT. XII. FRom the very daie that those of the Iunta were informed of the naming of the two Governors, they thought it was
time for them to provide more forces then what they yet had raised. To which effect they presently dispatched Letters to all the Cities of their League, advertising them of the great pre∣parations the Governors were making, and that they must fur∣nish both men and monie. They wrote also to Don Manuel, King of Portugal, thinking to gain him to their Partie; but what Answer hee returned I could never learn. SECT. XIII. THose of the Iunta, seeing so great a confluence of Soul∣diers com daily to Rioseco, they dispatch'd messengers pre∣sently to their several Cities, desiring they would speedily send thither what forces they could make. Salamanca, with the terri∣tories terof, furnished two hundred Lances, and six thousand Foot, wch, with those from Toledo, Madrid, and Segovia, made a reasonable good Armie. Thus both sides prepared what for∣ces they could to destroie one another. Those of Valladolid, see∣ing themselvs in the middle of these two Parties, and both ve∣ry near them, beeing not determined which side to take, re∣solved to send to them both. Their Messengers, Don Pedro Vaçan Lord of Van̄eça, Doctor Francisco de Espinosa, Pulgar and Diego de Zamora, Batchellors at Law, in the name of their Citie said to those of the Iunta, That if they did continue in doing that which was just and good for the Commonalties, as they had begun, the Citie of Valladolid, with all their Armie and power, would assist them, but if otherwise, they would de∣cline their Interest, and resist them. Thence they went to Ri∣oseco, and said as much to the Cardinal, and those of the Coun∣cil; adding moreover, that they should not intermeddle, or hinder anie thing which the Iunta had done in favor of the Commonaltie of the Kingdom, upon which condition they would obey them in all things, and (if they pleased) receiv them into their Citie with honor and respect: And they did
require them in the names and behalf of the Infante, Gentle∣men and Commonaltie of Valladolid, That they would not rais any Souldiers, nor make any scandals or offence to the Countrie, by gathering together Armies, otherwise, that they did protest against them. A brave resolution of those of Val∣ladolid to stand out against them both. SECT. XIV. NOtwithstanding the different factions which divided Valladolid, they were all generally well affected to the Lord Admiral, and desired hee should com amongst them, hoping his presence would conduce much to the remedying of those mischiefs, hee beeing a very noble Gentleman, and no waie addicted to passion, or partialitie. The Lord Admiral, having intelligence of all that passed in Valladolid, wrote them a Letter, saying, That although hee did not desire to bee pe∣stered with those troubles and confusions, yet his coming thi∣ther should not bee deferred much longer. That his intention was to do good to them all generally, being very much grieved for what had passed amongst them. That he could not choos but admire at the tumultuous risings of the Kingdom. That if they had but written twice or thrice to his Majestie, he would have remedied all those disorders, by granting what they desir'd. That their keeping Guards, and going their Rounds about the Citie, tended to nothing but the consuming of their Estates, destroy∣ing of their Trade, the undoing of the Husbandmen and Com∣mon People, for which hee was very sorrie. That the whole world took notice heretofore of the nobleness and loialtie of these Kingdoms: And now their inconstancie, divisions, and factious insurrections, afforded matter of discours to all other Nations. That they should take notice that the great Turk was com with a mightie Armie against Rodes, ravaging and spoiling Christendom both by Sea and Land, and that by rea∣son of these dissentions, animosities, and confusion amongst
the people, it were no hard matter for him to gain footing in these Kingdoms. Therefore hee affectionately desired them all to bee pacified, and to believ, that his Majestie was very much troubled and aggrieved at these sad occurrences: And that at his return hee would procure the good of the King∣doms. This Letter beeing read in the publick Assemblie of Valladolid, did sufficiently startle som of them, but they hoped for a emedie from heaven. After this the Lord Admiral bee∣ing at Zerbera, wrote another Letter to them in a manner to the same effect. Which beeing heard and seen by those of Valladolid, tey were astonished at the words and counsel whch hee gave them therein, not knowing how to answer his reasons, nor to what they should attribute his counsels. Som that were of opinion that the Iunta was wicked and un∣lawful, would have it bee dissolved; others extolling it to the skie, urged, that every bodie ought to conform themselvs thereunto. The Nobles and Gentrie at Rioseco were very de∣sirous to re-unite and pacifie Valladolid, it beeing so conside∣rable a place, thinking besides, that if they were but Masters thereof, they should with more facilitie compass their design upon the other Cities: To this effect they used all the po∣licie and subtil inventions possible, sending messengers, and holding private intelligence with those of the Citie, who were well affected and desired the King's service. The Citie was in this season more strictly watched then before, they making secret Rounds, and placing strong Guards at all the Gates; for the contrarie parti (which was the most powerful) was jea∣lous, and afraid of som double dealing. SECT. XV. AT the same time that Valladolid received the Lord Admi∣ral's Letters, others were brought to them from Burgos, which were likewise read in the publick Assemblie of the
Citie. The Reader may imagine what various humors, what speeches, what factions, what passions were engendred, by the Contents of those Letters; finally, what confusion they might breed in so noble and spatious a Citie, (the seat of the Kings of Spain) and what judgments and censures might there-hence take their rise, and fill the malicious heads of the Common people; not knowing well which hand they had best to use, they resolved to plaie with both, and sent again to the Cardinal, Governor, and those of the Junta also, their Embassadors Don Pedro Vaçan, and the others before men∣tioned, with certain Articles which they thought were con∣venient for the pacification of the Kingdoms, The Cardi∣nal with those of the Council, gave them a fair reception, and a satisfactorie answer: Those of the Junta did no less, desiring to make them of their pack, and moreover, they wrote a Letter to those of the Commonaltie in Valladolid, with some expressions of zeal and affection mingled with re∣prehensions for their luke-warmness and indifferencie. SECT. XVI. ON Sundaie the eleventh of October, one Alnso de Vera got up into the Pulpit of the Cathedral Church of Valladolid, and read to the people two Letters, one from those of the Iunta, wherein they desired, that Valladolid would assist and stand to them, as they had promissed, and fulfil what they had commanded them. The other was from Don Pedro Giron, in which hee offered them his service, desiring that as hee had alwaies shewed a particular affection to that Citie, and been tender of their welfare, they would receiv him, in regard hee was Captain General of the Junta's forces, and de∣sired nothing but the good of the Kingdom, and his Majestie's service, neither would hee act any thing but with the good liking and consent of Valladolid. The people were ex∣ceedingly
taken with these Letters, and said, they would do whatsoever therein was required, and that Don Pedro should bee welcom into the Citie; And the next daie hee made his entrie, all the people of Valladolid going forth to receiv him with great applause. This War beeing betwixt kindred, friends, and Countrie men, there was as much diligence used to gain places, and good wills, by Letters, as by force of Arms. The Earl of Venavente, and the Lord Admiral of Castilla were in a manner Natives and Citizens of Valladolid, their families from many generations, having had their principal mansions there, and the Citie bare them great respect, as they had reason. These Noble-men shewing their affection to Valladolid, as their Native soil, and seeing it so far plunged in these distra∣ctions, either out of hope to reduce it by fair means, or meerly out of their love and desire of its good and preservation, they both endeavored by Letters to make them sensible of their errors. The Lord Admiral chiefly desired, that they would let him com into their Citie, promising, that hee would bee as vigilant and careful of their general good, as of any particular persons▪ That hee would imploy in their defens his own life, and fortune: If that could not bee granted, that they would send any three, whom they thought fittest, to meet and confer with him, two or three leagues thence, where they pleased. But Valladolid would accept of none of these con∣ditions, alledging that such enter-views would bee ill taken, and that people would bee apt thereupon to saie, Burgos ha∣ving Articled and agreed with the Lord high Constable, that Valladolid would do the lik. So they returned the Lord Ad∣miral no other Answer, then that for the present they could not condescend to any of those things which his Lordship desired. To the Earl of Venavente's Letter they briefly thus re∣plied, That since his Lordship was so Noble, as to offer them his own person, and men, they desired that hee would keep his promise, in letting them have the said men to send to Tor∣desillas, in the Iunta's service, and upon that condition, they should carrie the Colours and Arms of Valladolid. These
Letters were dispatched in the name of the Citie by the Prior of the great Church, who was a grand Commoner. These answers beeing sent to the two Noble-men, the Citie gave order for the raising of more men to send to the Iunta, becaus there were many wanting of the thousand which they had sent. Moreover, Command was given for the gathering of one hundred Duckets out of every Ward, which amounted to one thousand four hundred Duckets. Which was forth∣with done, and the thousand men compleated. After this they caused a Proclamation to bee made throughout the Citie, commanding all and everie of the Commonaltie to appear un∣der pain of beeing accused for Malignants, or Ill-affected to the Iunta. Who beeing all assembled, they made them swear by the Holie Evangelists, and upon the Cross in forma, that under pain of beeing infamous perjurers and faith-breakers, they should bee readie to serv, favor, and assist in whatsoever those of the Iunta should do, in order to the ser∣vice of God,The Engage∣ment of those of Valladolid. the King, Queen, and Commonaltie of the Citie of Valladolid; and that they should not do, or saie, directly or indirectly, any thing to the contrarie, or suffer anie thing to bee said or done by their children, servants, or housholds. And if they should know or hear any thing said or done to the con∣trarie, that they should forthwith inform the Assemblie of the Citie of Valladolid thereof, to the end the offenders might re∣ceiv condigne punishment; The Oath beeing thus pro∣nounced, they all cried with one voice, This wee swear. SECT. XVII. I Have already declared, how the Citie of Segovia was divi∣ded by several factions, insomuch that they seemed to bee in Civil War amongst themselvs. The Earl of Chinchon defen∣ded the Forts. Within the Citie there were several houses of strength, wherein som of the Roial partie fortified themselvs,
others did the like in the Cathedral Church. The Fort bee∣ing but slenderly mann'd, the Earl of Chinchon went to Burgos, to desire succour from the Lord High Constable, who sent ten Musketiers, valiant and resolute men, with order to get into the Fort, s they could. They arrived at Pedraça on Fri∣daie morning, 23 of November, where they took abou one hundred weight of powder, and kept themselvs private until the Evening; Night beeing com, they marched with a guide (who led them by-waies) to Parral, where hee left them, and the Moon beeing down, they went into the Fort, with∣out any one's taking notice of them; which was the better effected, becaus that very daie those of Segovia had assaulted the Church, and were wearie, having found strong resistance. The next daie, it beeing noised in the Citie, that the Fort had received succour in the night, they were much scandalized, and troubled at it,The Infant of Granada, ha∣ving been put out of his Of∣fice, with four∣teen other Of∣ficers of the Citie, by the people of Val∣ladolid, who ac∣cused them of keeping corre∣spondencie with the Ene∣mie. thinking it more considerable then it was, and feared that they were sold by som within the Citie. Things beeing in the condition before-mentioned, disposed for an absolute breach, the Cities of the League prepared arms and men with all expedition; and those of the Iunta sent cer∣tain instructions (which their Captains and Souldiers were to observ) to Valladolid, where Don Pedro Giron (whom they all looked upon as Captain General) remained to make and order the Armie, as shall bee more at large declared in the fol∣lowing Book. Finis Libri Quarti.
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE FIFTH BOOK. SECT. I. THe Passions of the people in Castilla grew to such mortal animosities, that pens and tongues beeing wearied, they fell to pre∣paring arms and munition of war: as when an Impostume fester's, no cure can bee exspected, but by the applying of hot burning Iron. Those Gentlemen who were the chief sticklers for the Commonalties, beeing lanch'd forth into the deepest of the sea of passion, knowing how ill a name they had acquired (which exceedingly offended their
presumption,) were already grown so desperate, that they cared not to lose their Countries, Estates, Wives, Children, or their own Lives, desiring to hazard all in the Lotterie of Arms, and make or destroie their fortunes in one Battle; wherein, if their designs had been crowned with success, doubtless, they would have changed their styles, and beeing victorious, remained with the glorious attribute of Redeem∣ers and Defenders of their Countrie: for humane judgments determine by the Event, not by the middle or beginning of any Enterprise. Though it hath been the ordinarie defect of other Commonalties to have but slender forces, this was so powerful,Their Capans were good e∣nouh, if hey had not hd som eache¦rous great ones amongst them. that had there been the least good Conduct mongst them, and som experienced Captains, Don Carlos hardly ever would have recovered the Crown of Spain. The Common people were to blame, and the Gentrie not to bee excused, for opposing and rising against their Sovereign's Ministers; yet wee must of necessitie confess, that they were valiant. That there were divers exorbitancies, outrages, and insolencies com∣mitted, What wonder is it amongst the respectless and liber∣tine People? and that the Gentlemen depended more upon them, then they upon the Nobles, who assisted them. If wee see an Armie well disciplined, the Souldiers subject and obe∣dient to their Captains, shall wee saie absolutely all those in that Armie are Traitors? for my part I would not; neither is it any such great marvel that children rise up against their own fathers;Here the Au∣tor conleth in a manner the justnes, of the Caus, and semeth him∣self to justifie it. for if wee look back to som passages of our Coun∣trie of Spain, what shall wee see, but the like unnatural acti∣ons; the factions of Princes, the sidings of Grandees, and private Gentlemen, who were so audacious, as to rise in arms, against their lawful Kings? and yet they are not so spotted and foul as som would make those of the latter times appear to bee. I do not saie this in justification of these Commonalties, but onely to excuse, in what I may, my own Nation, and the Gentrie thereof. But to return to the purpose: Nothing was left unattempted on either side, that might conduce to the increasing or securitie of their Partie. You have seen in the
precedent Book, that the Iunta sent their Instructions to Val∣ladolid, where Don Pedro Giron, and other Captains of the Commonaltie, were assembled. The time beeing com (al∣though the season was very sharp and unfit for an Armie to keep the field, beeing almost in the depth of Winter) they all put themselvs in a readiness, and in the name of the Iunta, they wrote fresh Letters to the Cities and Towns of their Combi∣nation, to send immediately all the forces they could possibly rais; which they did. Those of the Iunta, according to agreement, Voted Don Pedro Giron Captain General of their Forces, and sent him a Commission from the Queen, and the Kingdom, Thinking that hee beeing a person of so noble ex∣traction, and allied to so many Grandees of Castilla, would gain a great reputation to their Partie; And most men were of opinion, that Don Pedro Giron accepted thereof, and wed∣ded the Interest of the Commonaltie meerly for his own ends, and that by means of these troubles and commotions, hee might get possession of the Dukedom of Mdina Sidonia, which (as hath been already said) hee pretended was his right. This Election did not digest well in Iohn de Padilla's stomach, who, till then, had executed the office of Captain General, and presumed it should bee confirmed upon him, and for his sake, neither the Commissioners of Toledo, nor of Madrid, would give their Votes for Don Pedro. Iohn de Pa∣dilla beeing informed of all these passages, before that Don Pe∣dro Giron came to take his staff, pretending I know not what occasion, rode poste to Toledo; and his men, seeing their Cap∣tain gone, would staie no longer in the Armie, but the next daie took the same waie after him. Notwithstanding all this, Don Pedro Giron accepted the Charge, and came to Torde∣sillas with fourscore Lances of his own, appointed a Rande∣vous for his Armie, wherein hee was much assisted by the in∣dustrie and diligence of the Bishop of Zamora, who brought to the service of the Iunta near five hundred men with arms, of the antient Guards of the Kingdom, (for the rest were gone to the Lord High Constable) hee brought
moreover, seventie Lances of his own, and almost a thou∣sand Foot, four hundred whereof were Priests of his own Bishoprick, besides the people of Zamora, whom hee had at his devotion; for by favor of the Junta, hee had driven the Earl of Alva out of Zamora, and made himself Master thereof. Every daie came fresh supplies from the other Cities, both of Hors and Foot, all well armed, and with them som Gentle∣men and Commanders. From Salamanca came Don Pedro Maldonado, with about a thousand Foot: Other Cities appoin∣ted those who were their Commissioners in the Junta to bee their Captains; As Leon chose Gonsalo de Guzman, son to Ra∣miro Nun̄ez; and the Citie of Toro, Don Hernando de Ulloa, who were their Commissioners; and so likewise did other places. Thus those of the Junta grew from daie to daie more powerful, beeing resolved to end the business by force of Arms. Their mouths were all filled with reproachful and threatning language, especially the Common-people's, who cal∣led the Grandees and Gentrie of the Countrie, Traitors & ene∣mies of the Kingdom, saying, they had destroied & taken away their estates; (wch availed them nothing) but who can restrein a multitude? Amongst other impertinencies, they said, That the Queen should do well to marrie the Duke of Calabria, Don Her∣nando de Aragon, son to Frederick last K. of Naples, who, since the time of the Catholick King, had been kept prisoner in Xativa, in the Kingdom of Valencia; I believ this was onely put up∣on those of the Junta, and that they neither did, nor thought any such thing. But the truth is, their passion was grown to such an height, that they never so much as named the Empe∣ror in their Proclamations, though they had sworn Allegi∣ance to him, as their King, but all passed in the names of the Queen and Kingdom: Insomuch that the hatred and enmi∣tie betwixt the two parties became implacable, and both made all preparations possible for a war. In short time those of the Junta had put their forces in a readiness, and equipage to march unto the field, as was determined.
SECT. II. 'MOngst these occurrences arrived the Lord Admiral at Medina de Rioseco, where hee was met and received by all the Noble-men and Gentle-men, (who were com thither to the Cardinal) with their Souldiers all armed, and drawn up in Battle-Array. Hee expressed much gladness to see so many gallant men, and persons of such eminent qualitie: Yt hee had no intention, to wade through blood to the ac∣complishment of his desires, but rather by fair means, if possible, to settle the disturbed State of the Kingdoms; which to effect, hee left no stone unturn'd, and at last hee obtained, that three or four of the Commissioners of the Iunta should give him a meeting at Torrelobaton, where they consumed five or six daies in treating, but all his reasons, persuasions, and fair promisses could bring them to no reason: Before they would harken to any proposition of his, they demanded that the Lord high Constable should renounce, and leav off the exercise of Vice-Roy and Governor, which hee had begun to execute; And whilest the Lord Admiral was thus treating with them, the Iunta commanded a Proclamation to bee made against the Lord high Constable, and the Earl of Alva de Lista, as is before mentioned, and other Noble-men: And Don Pedro Giron, with the Bishop of Zamora, had orders to draw their Armie into the field, which was seaventeen thou∣sand Foot, besides good store of hors, and much Artillerie, which had been brought from Medina del Campo. Where∣upon the Lord Admiral despairing of any Peace, protested against them, and returned to Rioseco, beeing resolved to ac∣cept the Government joyntly with the Cardinal and the Lord high Constable, in regard those fair conditions of agreement, which hee offred, were slighted and rejected. Don Pedro Giron, Captain-General for the Iunta, and the Bishop of
Zamora with his Souldiers and band of Priests, marched out the 2th daie of November 1520, and quartered their Armie that night in Villabraxima, Tordehumos, Villagarzia, and other places about Rioseco, with intent to starve or drive the Cavaliers thence. And indeed, if the Commoners had been men at that time, they might have done it. From their head-quarters at Villabraxima, they wrote to the Citie of Valladolid, giving them an account of their advance, and that, before they fell upon Rioseco, they would send a King at Arms to require the Lord Admiral, and those of the Town of Rioseco, to cast out those thievs, and destroyers of the Kingdom, (as they called the Cavaliers); if not that they would use means to take them, and hinder the Cardinal's Government, it beeing a thing contrarie to the Laws, and Rights of the Kingdom. SECT. III. AFter this, the Armie of the Iunta, by waie of justification, sent their Heralds, or King's at Arms, to the Lord Ad∣miral, with the other Noble-men, and Gentlemen, then bee∣ing in Rioseco, requiring them not onely to leav that place, but to go out of the Countrie, and desiring those of the said Town, to confirm themselvs to those of the Commonaltie in favor of his Majestie, but this message was so ill resented, that the Heralds found but sorrie entertainment, being apprehended and disarmed by order from the Earls of Venavente, and of Alva de Lista; which beeing known by the Iunta's forces, they presently advanced towards Rioseco, The Bishop of Zamora marched in the Van with five thousand men, fully resolved to do all the mischief hee could to the Cavaliers. Hee was no sooner com to Villabraxima, but the two hundred lances, which the Marquis of Astorga had placed there, took their heels, flying with such disorder and haste, that some of them lost their Arms before they could reach Rioseco, and left
the Place cleer for the Bishop, who entering, said, Let the King and Commonaltie live, and evil Counsel perish. The two hundred Lanciers disorderly flight to Medina, alarmed the Cavaliers, who having put their Armie in good order, marched into the field, with intent to rout the Bishop with his five thousand men, but hee valued them not, though they were numerous, and men of eminent qualities, for hee knew Don Pedro Giron was so neer with the Rere-guard, and so Vigilant, that hee would bee readie to back and assist him, if occasion should require it. Thus the two Armies faced one another, each watching an opportunitie to get the advantage of their enemies, and so they remained both drawn up in Batalia one whole daie, after which, the Cavaliers retreated to Tordehumos, and the Iunta's Armie to Villabraxima, both neer Rioseco. The four hundred Priests, which had left their Altars, in Imitation of the Bishop of Zamora, to sacrifice their bloods in this Holie enterprise, remained at Tordesillas, for the guard of the Town and of the Iunta, who out of respect to their Sacer∣dotal Dignities, would not permit them to march amongst the rabble of the Common Souldiers. Besides these Priests, remained two other Companies of Foot at Tordesillas, and some hors commanded by Hernando de Porras, Com∣missioner of Zamora, Gomez de Avila, and others. Three whole daies Don Pedro Giron kept his Armie in order, offering to give the Cavaliers Battle, but they would not; and indeed it had been madness for them to ingage, beeing far inferior in num ber,Here Don Pe∣dro, and other Gentlemen, begin to plaie the Traitors. and not so well armed, although they were better men, and of higher courages then the Common People, yet they thought it their securest waie to exspect the Earl of Haro's coming, (their Captain-General) who was reported to bee upon his march thither; and besides they were in hopes t obtain the Victorie by some other means, without any loss of blood, the Lord Admiral having some overtures thereof by private intelligence, and dealing with Don Pedro Giron, and som other Gentlemen, who sided with the Cōmoners, whom if hee could handsomly have taken off, it would have been no
hard matter to have routed the Vulgar Pack of Tailors, Shoo∣makers, Skinners, Curriers, & such like; whereof the rest of their Armi was compos'd. But the Cōmoners perceiving themselvs much the stronger Partie, infested the Cavaliers with such skir∣mishes and hot alarms both night & daie, that they could take no rest all the while they staied at Tordehumos; And hearing that the Earl of Haro was exspected with more forces, they determi∣ned to force them to fight before his arrival, or at least, to gain the reputation of proffering them Battle. To this effect, having mde a general muster, they marched with all their Artillerie in very good order towards Rioseco. Sanabria, Commissioner of Valladolid, rid before with 30 Light Hors, to discover the field. Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega led the Vantguard of Cuiras∣siers, Don Pero Maldonado and Francisco Maldonado commanded the Light Horsmen. The Bishop of Zamora was Captain of the Vantguard of Foot; with him marched Don Iohn de Men∣doça, Captain of Valladolid, son to the Cardinal Don Pedro Gon∣calez de Mendoça, Don Gonzalo de Guzman, Captain of Leon, Don Hernando de Ulloa, Captain of Toro, and others. In the bodie marched Don Pedro Giron, called, Duke of Medina Sidonia, with him divers other Captains, and Don Iohn de Figueroa, brother to the Duke of Arcos, who came that same daie to the Armie from Sevilla, besides other Commanders. The Rear-guard and the Artillerie was committed to the charge of other officers. Beeing arrived within Culverine-shot of the Town, they made an Halt, commanding their Heralds, in mean time, to approach so near unto the walls, that they might bee heard, and declare unto the Admiral and Earl of Venavente, with the other Grandees and Gentlemen in Medina, that the Armie of their Sovereign Ladie, the Queen, was com thither, to execute upon them, by her command, those penalties wch they had in∣curred by governing the Kingdom without her orde or con∣sent, and for raising and arming men in contempt, and to the disservice of her Majestie; and therefore they did offer them Battle, and did exspect their coming into the field. Having sent this message to the Town, they remained in the same or∣der
almost until Sun-set. But the Cavaliers, although they were in Arms, made no shew at all of Battel or skirmish, but per∣severing in their former resolution, let them stand cooling their heels there. At last, Don Pedro Giron, having commanded som of his Cannon to bee discharged against the Town, (but the bullets never reach't the Walls) returned with his Armie into his Quarters, losing and neglecting that occasion, which pro∣ved very prejudicial to his Partie. Hee was no sooner gone, but the Earl of Haro arrived with his men, who had march∣ed as fast as possibly they could, thinking to have com time enough to meet Don Pedro, for the Earl had intelligence of his defying the Cavaliers in Medina, though hee had no great sto∣mach to fight with them. All the Nobles and Gentlemen, with their Souldiers, marched forth to receiv their Captain General with great solemnitie, and Militarie order. Hee brought with him three hundred Hors-men in compleat Armor, four hundred Light-hors-men, and two thousand five hundred Foot, all choice men, and twelv or thirteen field∣pieces. The same night came likewise to Rioseco, Don Francis∣co de Zun̄iga y Avellaneda, Earl of Miranda, Don Veltran de la Cue∣va, eldest son to the Duke of Alburquerque, Don Luys de la Cueva his brother, Don Bernardo de Sandoval y Royas, Marquis of De∣nia, with his son Don Luys de Sandoval, and Don Francisco de Qui∣n̄ones, Earl of Luna, with all the servants, tenants and souldiers they could get. This supplie encreased the Cavaliers to above one and twentie hundred hors, and six thousand foot souldiers, besides a good companie of servants. Insomuch that hereby they held themselvs stronger then their enemies; not that they exceeded them in number, but in virtue and courage, besides the Caus which they mainteined was more just, and warran∣table, which add's much confidence and boldness to the hearts of men, and make's their souls insusceptible of any Panick fears.
SECT. IV. THose of the Iunta seeing fresh forces com daily in to the Cavaliers, endeavored to prepossess themselvs of all the Towns and places of strength, and sent besides, to all those of their league, to rais, and have in a readiness, what men possibly they could, notwithstanding they were already much stron∣ger then the other partie. Hereupon in Valladolid, by order from the Iunta, was publickly proclaimed, that all the Townsmen, from eighteen to threescore years of age, should bee trained, and bee readie with their Arms, to march into the field, upon notice from the Captain General of the Armie. The President, and other Judges of the Chancerie in Valladolid, who were Persons of great respect and esteem in the Citie, having never before meddled with either side, seeing the great disorder amongst the people, and fearing further confusion, moved with a good zeal and affection to their Countries good, came with all expedition to Rioseco, to treat with the Lord Admiral, and other Noblemen, about some fair ac∣commodation, whereby the Kingdom might avoid the im∣minent perdition, which through that unnatural war, in all probabilitie, it was like to suffer. They found amongst the Nobles very courteous entertainment, and expression of a de∣sire to condescend to anie reasonable propositions, all the dif∣ficultie and obstacle laie in those of the Iunta's Partie, and especially in the Bishop of Zamora. From Rioseco, the Presi∣dent, with the other Judges, went to Villabraxima, where the Bishop, with his five thousand men, was quartered. The President beeing admitted, entreated him with great earnest∣ness and humilitie, the tears standing in his eies, to consider, and leav off in time the evil and wrong cours they had taken,The President of Valladolid's Speech to the Bishop of Z∣mora. and no to give waie to, much less to bee the occasion of so great mischiefs, murthers, and scandals, which inevitably must
fall upon the Kingdom, if they continued inexorable, alle∣ging, That it would bee much more advantageous for their Countrie's good (which they so much pretended) to ac∣cept of an honorable peace, and accommodation, whereby (with the help of God) the Kingdoms might bee preserved from the present ruine, and restored to their former flourish∣ing condition: for admit the Commoner meet with the suc∣cess which they desire, vanquish the Cavaliers, reduce his Ma∣jestie to such streights, that hee will bee glad to grant them more immunities then formerly they did desire, yet they must live under him, and when hee find's an occasion, hee will put the yoke again about their necks, and load them with ta∣xes at his pleasure. That these violent uproars and mutinies of the Commonalties, in disrespect or disobedience to their Princes, were fickle and very unsecure. That those Gentle∣men and Commanders, which then engaged with them, if fortune gave them victorie over their enemies, would Lord it over them no less insupportably, then the others: neither did those Gentlemen (Defendors of the Commonalties) shew any great discretion, setting themselvs in opposition to all the Grandees and Nobles of the Kingdom, especially in a matter of so much prejudice and disservice to his Majestie. That it would bee an act of greater wisdom, to accept of any fair pro∣positions of agreement, to remain in peace, with a due respect & obedience to their Princes, whereby to gain their loves, and not to expose themselvs to the various & uncertain Chance of War.A gallant and resolute answer of the Bishop of Zamor to the Lord Pre¦sident. The Bishop answered, Lord President! Since in the condition and estate our business now stand's, we have moved & advan∣ced hitherto, I know what is convenientest for us to do, and therefore I will not flinch nor recede one step, but rather per∣severe in my enterprise, and pursue to destruction those wic∣ked disturbers of the Kingdoms. The President seeing the Bishop would not hearken to what hee desired of him, hee required him in their Majestie's names, by virtue of the Roi∣al Seal, which hee brought with him, not to stir from thence, until hee had been to confer about the same business with the
Lord Admiral, and other Noblemen, at Rioseco; but the Bishop gave him no answer thereunto, neither did hee make any more account of him, then if hee had been his servant (this was the perfection of this great Prelate, successor of the Apostles). So the President & the Judges, leaving him, went to Medina, where, by reason of the pervers Cross-grainedness of those of the Iunta,An heroick and gene∣rous Spirit in the Bishop of Zamra bee∣ing a man indefatiga∣ble. they could effect nothing to any purpose; and the Bishop's Con∣science was pricked with such remors at the President's discours, and his tender heart so moved with his tears, that hee scarce had turned his back, but his Reverend Lordship called for his Ar∣mor (for the head-piece and pouldrons were the Pontificial robes wherein hee most delighted): And having commanded his Artillerie to bee secured in the Rear-guard, hee marched forth with his men to encounter a great partie of Foot, and thee hundred hors, which hee had notice, was advancing towards his quarters. But they, having intelligence that the Bishop was com forth in quest of them, with a stronger Partie, retreated to Rioseco. By this time were com into the Armie of the Iunta three thousand souldiers more from the Citie of Leon, besides great numbers from Valladolid, and other places; but chiefly Iohn de Pa∣dilla was exspected with a supplie from Toledo and Madrid. SECT. V. THose of the Council proceeded against those of the Iunta, and all the Cities of their League, according to Law, and having erected a Scaffold, they caused them publickly to bee proclaimed Traitors and Rebels to the Roial Crown; Whereat they were so incensed, that thenceforwards they fought not so much for the nterest of the Kingdom, as for reputation, and to revenge particular quarrels (the off-spring of those troubles and dissentions) or for ancient grudges betwixt particular persons or places. The Bishop swore that hee would keep the field with his men onely, until hee were either dead, or crowned with Vi∣ctorie. The Cavaliers were as resolute on the other side; insomuch that although the President of the Chancerie insisted for peace, hee prevailed nothing. The Cavaliers had manie skirmishes with
the Bishop's men. At last hee, and Don Pedro Giron, seeing that the Cavaliers would not com out to give them battle, they sent a Trumpeter to them with this message,Don Pedro and the Bishop of Zamora's messge to the Cava∣liers. That they should meet them in the field, to the end they might in one battle set a period to all their Contentions, which caused so great disturbances in the Kingdom. That Winter was coming on apace, and it was to no purpose to stand dallying in that manner, and ruine one another by delaies. That if they refused to fight, they would go to their Towns and Lordships, and having plundered them, burn their houses to the ground: But the Lord Admiral could not resolv to put all to so great a venture. In Valladolid, besides the men which they sent to the Armie, (as is said) having muste∣red again, they found seven thousand more Cross-bow-men, Pike-men, and Musketiers, which they could well spare, leav∣ing moreover, enough to guard the Citie; whereupon they sent to the Iunta, that shortly they should receiv another supplie from them, and that if occasion served, they would go everie man in person with their general Standard to serv them, for they esteemed the Caus which they defended to bee Just and Holie. SECT. VI. THe Countess of Modica, wife to the Lord Admiral, bee∣ing a very virtuous and devout Ladie, was grieved at the Soul to see these disorders, and miserable condition of the King∣doms, wherein so many innocent persons suffered, and desiring to compose the sad differences, shee spake to the Lord Admiral, her husband, and the Earl of Venavente, earnestly desiring them to stop the current of those miseries, which would proceed from that unnatural War. The good Ladie prevailed so much, that the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Venavente, Don Pedro Giron, (who called himself Duke of Medina) the Bishop of Zamora, and shee, had a meeting at Villabraxima, one evening; And having ordered and agreed upon certain Articles in favor of the Iunta, the Earl of Venavente said to the Admiral; My Lord, though you desire to keep four or five Licenciado's in your Town, I hope
you will not bring our estates in question,The Earl spoke with much cun∣ning & dis∣simulation, purposely to plas and blind the Bishop, that he might not suspect wat they had in pri∣vate con∣cluded with Don Pedro Giron, by which con∣ference it appear's plainly that they wre betraied, & sol, as An∣tnio de Gue∣ara decla∣reth at large in his E∣pistles. No hng but the pri∣vate trea∣cherie of Don Pedro Giron could have delu∣ded the Bi∣shop and destroied heir A∣mie. and give waie to so many murhers, and robberies, as must needs follow, if so, God forbid that I should have any thing to do with it, but to favor and assist the Iunta, and the Commonalties, since all that they desire is good and just, and I so acknowledge and approve it, and from this time forwards will justifie it: Which said, hee set his hand to the said Articles, the Countess said as hee did; And the Admiral taking the paper in his hands, said to the Earl, Since you have signed this first, I'le do the like: And hee having sub∣scribed, they went all together to supper, very well contented. After supper they returned to Medina, and presently gave a Com∣mand, that the whole Town should declare for the Queen, the King her Son, and the Commonaltie. All this was done with a politick art and cunning, to make the Armie of the Com∣moners leav Medina; For if it had continued longer there, it would have very much streightned and incommodated the Cavaliers, the Commoners beeing already many more in number, and receiving every daie fresh supplies, and the Cavaliers having little hopes of increasing their force, by reason that all the Nobles and persons of honor in the Kingdoms of Toledo, Andaluzia, and Estremadura sat still, exspecting which waie the scale would turn, without declaring for King or Commonaltie. SECT. VII. UPon the agreement between the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Venavente, and Don Pedro Giron, the Armie without know∣ing any reason wherefore, marched from Tordehumos and Villa∣braxima to Villalpando, where, after some small resistance, they were received and quartered peaceably. Don Pedro Giron took up his lodging, in his unkle, the Lord high Constable's hous. All were of opinion that Don Pedro juggled, and plaied legerdemain in this business, and so it appeared by his dislodging his Armie, and leaving the enemie free, besides having nothing at all to do at Villalpando. And indeed Don Pedro Giron might well bee suspected herein, for the Grandees, who were his neer kindred, wrought much upon him, as shall bee seen hereafter. The Cavaliers see∣ing
themselvs free from the incumbrance of that powerful Armie, which blocked them up in a manner, and finding the waie cleer and secure from thence to Tordesillas, marched all out of Rioseco, seizing on all Posts and Travellers, that might give notice of their approach, making as if they had a design upon Valladolid, but with as much speed as an Armie could advance, they went directly to Tordesillas; Those of the Iunta, hearing of their coming, dispatched presently a Post to Valladolid, telling them, that the Cavaliers were marching thither with all expedi∣tion, therefore they desired them to send them speedie succor. But Valladolid having sent neer four thousand of their choisest men already to the Armie, and hearing that the enemie was like to fall upon them, desired to bee excused, thinking they might better have relief from the Armie, where were men enough. But they beeing in good quarters at Villalpando, were not over∣hastie to go to Tordesillas, for the plot was so well laid, that no man knew the certaintie of the design, but that which Don Pedro did a little after, confirmed the suspition the world had conceived of him. One night the Cavaliers stormed the Town, having clapt a Petar to the Gates, but finding strong resistance, the Earl of Haro sent a Trumpet, to tell them they came onely to kiss the Queen's hands, and to set her at libertie, and required them to yeild; Whereunto they giving no satisfactorie answer, the Earl resolved to force them, and encouraged his Souldiers, promising them the pillage of the Town. But what by the natural strength of the place, what through the courageous resist∣ance of the besieged, the Earl lost above 250 men, before hee could make any breach. The Priests, which the Bishop of Zamora left there, behaved themselvs very valorously in this Holie caus: One amongst the rest was particularly observed to have given eleven men their Viaticum with his musket, from behinde the Battle∣ments of the Wall, where hee thought hee stood secure, and as he saw occasion sent his Benediction amongst them, which seldom mist his man. But at last, some of the besiegers, with an un∣sanctified arrow, shot him quite through the head, with which hee presently fell down, and died, not having the time to saie so much as one Miserere. At length an Alferez, with some other
Cavaliers,Trsillas tken by the Earl of Ha∣ro, Captain General of the Cava∣lier forces. having forced their entrie at a smal breach in the wall, and given the sign to their Camarades, the whole Armie gave a shout, and with sound of Drums and Trumpets, cried all out, Victoria, Victoria, which so animated the Besiegers, that in the same, and in other parts of the Town, they made fresh assaults, in∣somuch that the Besieged were no longer able to resist. The Cavalier-Souldiers, beeing thus entred the Town, used no vio∣lence to either man, woman, or childe, for that they were for∣bidden; but neither Houses, Churches, nor Monasteries escaped from plundering: So that no man had so much as a bed left to sleep upon, unless the Souldiers, out of charitie, would let him have any; which punishment they did deserv, for fighting and defending their goods no better, after they were engaged, and put themselvs into a posture of resistance. The Grandees and Gentlemen, beeing entred into Tordesillas, went directly to the Palace to kiss the Queen's hands, and shew her their due re∣spects, they found her with the Infanta, her daughter, Don̄a Ca∣talina, in her own chamber, whence Don Pedro de Ayala, Com∣missioner of Toledo, had persuaded her to withdraw during the fight: Som say, to the end, that from the wall, shee might have commanded the besiegers not to storm the Town; others think, it was with intent to conveie her thence, and carrie her by the Bridg-waie to Medina del Campo;Som of the Commissio∣ners of the Iunta make their e∣scapes. But this escape that was inten∣ded for the Queen, beeing attempted just upon the entrie of the enemie into the Town, Don Pedro de Ayala left her, and fled him∣self to Medina del Campo. Shee shewed the Gentlemen that came to kiss her hands very gracious countenance, though, by reason of her infirmitie and want of judgment, shee cared little how things went; onely it is reported, that while they were batter∣ing the Town, som of the Commissioners beeing there, desired that shee would send a Command to the Besiegers to desist; and shee answered, Open you the gates, and let them in. The Earl of Haro staied at the gates, to see his Artillerie and Hors let in until midnight; which done, hee went likewise to kiss her Majestie's hands, where hee found the rest of the Nobles, who soon after, taking their leavs, went to take their rest; but the Earl of Haro spent all the night in placing his Guards, and taking
order for securing of the place. Nine or ten of the Commissi∣oners of the Cities were taken and imprisoned; the rest fled, som to Medina, others to Valladolid, where they arrived so man∣gled and stript, that 'twas a pitie to see them. The Doctor Zun̄iga of Salamanca,Som are ta∣ken, and a∣gain re∣leased Suero del Aguila, and Gomez de Avila, Com∣missioners of Avila, were released, at the request of som Gran∣dees, who engaged for them. In this manner was taken the Town of Tordesillas; but not the Iunta, nor the good will of the revolted Cities, whose furie was hereby more enflamed. A∣mongst the dead in the field were found divers dangerously wounded, and som Gentlemen, as Don Diego Osorio, son to the Marquis of Astorga, who was shot through the arm, Don Fran∣cisco de la Cueva hurt in the face with a stone, the Earl of Venaven∣te wounded in the Arm with an arrow, the Earl of Alva had his hors killed under him, and divers Commanders, and other persons of account. The King's Standard was shot and tattered with two musket bullets, the Earl of Cisuentes holding it in his hand. However, that daie's work was of exceeding great im∣portance, and was the means of giving a glorious end to these miserable distempers, although not so suddenly; For hereby the Common people were disabused, the allegations and excu∣ses, of those of the Iunta, appearing to bee no less fals then mali∣tious: for to give a more specious lustre to their forgeries, and gain credit with the People, they cunningly gave out, that the Queen was perfectly well, and in her right senses, and that all they did, was by her order (which was nothing so), whereby the blinde ignorant Commonaltie ran themselvs headlong into the precipice of those disasters, which I have, and hereafter shall relate. The glorie of this memorable exploit was properly to bee attributed to the Earl of Haro's valor, who, contrarie to the Votes of divers others, would assault Tordesillas, in stead of fol∣lowing their Armie, to seek satisfaction for having been out-da∣red by them to fight, and blocked up in Rioseco, according to the others opinions and propositions.
SECT. VIII. THose of Valladolid were in great fear, when they heard that Tordesillas was taken, lest the enemie should fall next upon them, in regard they had disobliged the Cardinal, the Council, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Venavente, and other Nobles, in not admitting them, and favoring so much those of the Iunta, that it was generally reported, that Valladolid alone did maintain them. Few men able to bear Arms were left in the Citie, for they had sent all to the Armie in a manner, but those that were left, stood upon their guard.Don Pedro de Giron's and the Bishop of Zamora's Letter to Valladolid. Whilest Valladolid was in this fright, came a Post from Don Pedro Giron, and the Bishop of Zamora, with letters, wherein they said, That they knew not, neither did they think that the Cavaliers in Rioseco would have attempted to take Torde∣sillas, nor have offred that affront or disrespect to the Queen, bee∣ing there; That they could have no intelligence of their design, becaus they had stopt, and taken all the Messengers and Travellers, that might give notice of their march thither, and that when they did know it, and were prepared to go succor the Town, news was brought them, that the Cavaliers were carrying the Queen away to Burgos, which made them turn towards Valladolid, thinking that waie to intercept them: And that now beeing at Villagarzia, they thought good to acquaint them with their mo∣tion, to the end they might receiv provision and orders thence, to prosecute their design; Promising, since that the Cavaliers had taken Tordesillas, and begun the War with fire and sword, that they would do the like, if Valladolid was so contented. These Letters confirmed the Peoples jealousies of Don Pedro Giron, inso∣much that they cursed him in private and in publick, saying, hee was a Traytor,Valladolid's answer to Don Pedro. and had sold them. Moreover, they wrote to this effect to Don Pedro, That in regard hee had clouded his re∣putation by not succoring Tordesillas, to vindicate his honor, hee should forth with go and laie siege to it, and shew himself what hee was; That his Armie on one side, and those of Valla∣dolid on the other, besides the rest of their Associates, might joyntly take their full revenge for so insupportable an affront.
They wrote in like manner to the Bishop, and other Captains, but Don Pedro took no great notice thereof, neither did hee make any other shew, then that hee would go to Valladolid himself. Divers disorderly Captains, like sheep without a shepherd, with their Companies, came and took up their Quarters at Villa∣nubla, two leagues from Valladolid: Others went to Valladolid with their plunder, 'mongst others, two horsmen brought in a thousand Sheep, others fiftie, others two hundred Mules, Mares, and Carts loaden with linnen, and all manner of housholdstuff, taken from the poor Countrie-men, to the value of above three Millions of Maravediz, which they sold in the Citie, for little or nothing; a Wether was sold for two Ryalls, an Ewe for one, and a Cow for two Duckets; But the mischief was the greater, in that the poor shepherds and husbandmen, having ransomed their cattle and goods, before they had gon half a league, the Souldiers would plunder them again, spoiling and robbing friend and foe, as much as they could. By which exorbitancies they began to see, how much better it would have been to have satisfied their King's demands, although the tax was somwhat heavie; But so great acts of disobedience never passed long with∣out such just punishments: Their outrageous impudence grew to such a height, that without any reverence or respect, they robb'd and spoiled the very Churches, as if they had been In∣fidels; Women were not secure in their houses, nor men by the high waies. Valladolid, to prevent further disorder in this kinde, Commanded that those straggling Souldiers, which were to the number of six hundred, should return to their Colours at Villanubla, where their Captains were, and there they gave them ten daies paie more to endear them to go before Tordesillas; whither also marched, with all expedition, men from Salamanca, Toro, and Zamora, in great numbers, thinking to catch the Cava∣liers in the Climm. But they lost no time in fortifying them∣selvs, repairing the Walls, (as was but need) scouring and clearing their ditches, and laying in provisions of Victuals and Ammunition.
SECT. IX. FAme soon carried the taking of Tordesillas through the whole Kingdom, which was diversly resented according to the disposition and inclination of the hearers, as is usual a∣mongst a divided people. Assoon as notice thereof was brought to Quintanilla, who commanded before Alaejos, hee raised his siege, and returned in all haste, with his men, to Medina del Campo, fearing lest that might also bee surprised. The Nobles in Torde∣sillas sent for the Cardinal, who remained in Rioseco, with those of the Garrison. Don Rodrigo de Mendoça, Earl of Castro, who came to Medina de Rioseco with his men, too late for the expedi∣tion of Tordesillas, attended upon the Cardinal thither; where, his Eminence beeing arrived, the Lord Admiral solemnly accep∣ted the Joint-government of the Kingdoms, with the Cardi∣nal, and the Lord High Constable, having first tried all means possible to reduce the people fairly to the obedience of his Ma∣jestie; for after the taking of Tordesillas, hee sent Gomez de Avila, (who was there made prisoner) making him first swear to re∣turn, to treat with Don Pedro Giron, and the rest of the Iunta, of∣fering them very honorable Conditions, if they would laie down their Arms and com in. But Gomez beeing returned without concluding any thing, there was no apparent hope of any ac∣commodation: besides, seeing that the Iunta, and the forces of the Commoners, were retired to Valladolid, (which was but five leagues from Tordesillas) and that it was no time of year to keep the field, or besiege any other Citie, leaving the enemies to them∣selvs; the Governors, with consent of the rest of the Nobles, put all their Souldiers in Garrison in the adjacent Towns; For divers of their men were gon away, having enriched themselvs with the plunder which they took at Tordesillas. The Earl of Haro, with som chois companies, remained in Tordesillas, for the Guard of her Majestie's person, and defence of the Town. Don Pedro Velez, Earl of On̄ate, with som Hors and Foot Companies, was placed in Simancas, though the Government thereof belong∣ed to Don Hernando de Vega, but hee beeing of the Emperor's;
Council of State, it was thought more convenient hee should re∣side at Tordesillas, yet hee went thither somtimes himself, as occa∣sion served. In Portillo (a place of strength, belonging to the Earl of Venavente) was put another Garrison, under the Com∣mand of Don In̄igo de Padilla, cosen-german to the Earl of Vena∣vente. To Torrelobaton (a Town of the Lord Admiral's) be∣twixt Tordesillas and Rioseco (by which all their provisions were to pass) were sent other companies of souldiers, besides those which Don Hernando Enriquez, the Lord Admiral's brother, had there; in regard that was the waie to Burgos, where the Lord High Constable was with the Council, with whom they were to keep continual correspondence. Betwixt the Towns which were for the Commoners, and those wherein were Garri∣sons for his Majestie, was such killing, robbing, and spoiling, as if they had been the most mortal enemies in the world, as shall bee declared hereafter. Artificers could get no emploiment; Husband∣men could not till their grounds, Merchants had no traffick, Cities lost their correspondence with each other, becaus the waies were unsecure; Justice was quite out of date; Ex∣cise, Tributes, Levies, Impositions increased daily, by reason of the excessive charges of the Armie, the Revenue of the Roial Crown (which they had usurped) not bee∣ing sufficient to defraie them. These, and such like, were the fruits and profit which Castilla reaped by their dis∣obedience: And yet for all their miserable condition, they did not humble nor submit themselvs, neither would they accept of the honorable and advantageous Conditions which were offered them: But everie daie they were sending fresh men to maintein and foment the War from Valladolid, where those, who cast the Kingdom into this precipice, had taken up their seat. Although they were so jealous and displeased at their Captain General DON PEDRO GIRON, (especially the Com∣mon people) that they did neither obey nor respect him, neither did hee hold himself secure amongst them, and therefore hee left them soon after, as you shall see.
SECT. IX. THe Bishop of Zamora, and Don Pedro Giron, thinking them∣selvs not secure in Zaratan, (which was but a smal open Village) marched with their Armie to Valladolid (although their coming was not very acceptable to most of the Citie). Beeing there, they quartered themselvs in the houses of those that were affected to the King's Partie, making abominable havock and spoil; their souldiers pulled down te houses of Francisco de la Serna, and Don Alonso Nin̄o de Castro, they plundered the hous of the Comendador Santistevan, robb'd and spoiled all they could laie hands on in the Earl of Miranda's hous, and divers other mischiefs they did within the Citie; whereof the Bishop beeing informed, hee caused many things to bee restored, and som souldiers to bee punished, whereby hee gained much good opinion and affecti∣on. Two daies after their coming thither, they marched both Hors and Foot in goodly order out of the Citie, with intent to go to break down the Bridg of Simancas, but hearing by the waie that the Earl On̄ate, and those of the Town, had saved them that labor, (for the Earl had intelligence, that they intended to sur∣prise him there, and pass thence to Tordesillas) they wheeled a∣bout to take the Fort of Fuensaldan̄a, which they entred without any contradiction, and having left som souldiers with a Com∣mander in it, they returned to Valladolid the same night, giving orders to their men to bee ready the next morning before daie; which was obeied, and they gave out, they would gain the pass at Simancas, proclaiming war with fire and sword against the Cavaliers at Tordesillas. But Simancas, beeing scituate upon the de∣scent of an hill, the river on one side, and a strong Fort on the o∣ther, which the Earl of On̄ate had been very careful and vigilant in poviding with all necessaries, they feared no attempts from those of Valladolid. Most of those that marched out of Vallado∣lid that time, were from Salamanca, Toro, and Zamora; many of them sillie ignorant fellows, and their Captains not much more knowing in Martial affairs, they were so long fitting themselvs, that they made it three a clock in the Afternoon before they were
all out of Valladolid (which was ten hours after the time appoin∣ted); so that they were forced to quarter that night at Laguna, one league from the Citie, som in the Monasterie of Abrojo, o∣thers in the field with the Artillerie. There fell such a difference betwixt Don Pedro Giron and the Bishop of Zamora, that Don Pe∣dro, with his Lanciers, marched to Tudela, but there hee was re∣fused quarters; so hee was enforced to go on to Villavan̄ez. Next  the Bishop gave orders to march to Simancas, but som told him, that 'twas better to return to Valladolid, and there take further advice. The people of Toro, Zamora, and Valladolid had likewise som bickerings amongst themselvs, insomuch that eve∣ry one would carrie their Artillerie home to their own Cities; but those of Valladolid, beeing the strongest partie, carried it to their Citie without any more ado, which bred much discontent and heart-burning: and all exclaimed against Don Pedro Giron, saying all the ill their discontented mindes could imagine of him, for lea∣ving them in that manner, which confirmed all the jealousies and suspicions which they had formerly conceived of him. One daie, twelv Foot souldiers of Valladolid went out upon a partie to∣wards Simancas, and about one league from Valladolid, they met with fourscore Hors of that Garrison, which made them flie, to secure themselvs, into a little Tower amongst the Vineyards, where they defended themselvs until the Alarm was given in Val∣ladolid, and the Bishop of Zamora came out with a partie of Hors, and rescued them; two of those of Simancas were killed, and the rest, seeing more men com from Valladolid, fled all away; so the Bishop returned with som hurt men, but lost not one: Bee∣ing night, the Citie (much satisfied with his courage in this ex∣ploit) sent out many torches to receiv him. The next daie, be∣caus a brother of Francisco de la Serna's had murmured somthing against the Bishop, they commanded his hous to bee pull'd down: and in regard the people thronged thither, out of greedi∣ness to carrie away the timber, they heedlessly cut down the pil∣lars and posts that supported it, whereby the four quarters of the hous fell amongst the people, killed fourteen or fifteen men, and hurt divers others.
SECT. X. THe Commissioners, who fled, at the taking of Tordesillas, to Medina del Campo, came afterwards to Valladolid, where they held their Iunta general, concerning the affairs of the King∣dom. The Lord Admiral, seeing his Towns destroied, his tenants plundered of all their goods and cattle, since the rdi∣nal's departure from Rioseco, sent them a Letter to Valladolid, pour∣porting▪The Lord Admirals Letter to those of the Iunta at Valladolid. That since it had been God's pleasure to laie his Judg∣ments upon the Kingdom, and afflict them with the pirit of dissention, hee desired (to the end there might bee no more spoil∣ing nor murthering one another,) That there might bee a Cesa∣tion of Arms, but upon this condition, That whatsoever dam∣mage and prejudice, hee and the Earl of Venavente had sustained in their Lands, by the robbing and violence of those of Valladolid, should bee repaired, otherwise, That those Arms which they had taken to offend them,Their Vote concerning the Letter. they should take to defend themselvs. This Letter beeing read in the Iunta, it was Voted that no an∣swer should bee returned, nor any other Letter received thence∣forwards from any of the Grandees. Christmas beeing com, they made great preparations to go against Tordesillas; Iohn de Padilla beeing arrived with the men of Toledo at Medina del Campo, it was moved that hee should besiege it on one side, and the Bishop on the other, hereupon were every daie consultations amongst the Commissioners, but they could not determine any thing. At last it was resolved, that Iohn de Padilla should bee sent for to Valladolid, that they might take his advice. The Com∣moners were far more in number then the Cavaliers, but these were the better and more experienced men in matters of Arms▪ Tordesillas they fortified daily, and furnished with all sorts of pro∣visions. Simancas likewise was in so good condition, that the hors of that garrison plagued those of Valladolid in such manner, that no bodie could Travel nor keep any Cattle in the fields, or any thing els, but they would bee sure to snap it. By order of the Iunta it was Proclaimed in Valladolid, with sound of Trum∣pets and Minstrels, that no Souldiers, or others, should rob un∣der
pain of death, albeit they should meet with people coming from the enemies quarters, unless they bore Arms on the other side, (and in such case, they might do what they could) to the end that People might pass to and fro securely, and trade not absolutely bee destroied. The like was proclaimed in Torde∣sillas and Simancas. By this means the waies began to bee som∣what secure, but not altogether, and the People desired there might bee one good battle, for either side falling, the dispute would bee ended.Couagious explit of the Bihop o Zmora. The spirit and Courage of the Bishop was remarkable: One night hee sallied out of Valladolid, and went to Palencia, took the Corregidor, the Alcaldes, and other officers of Justice, and placed others in their steads, hee had an intent to ap∣prehend Don Diego de Castilla also, but hee fled. With the favor and assistance of the major part of the Citie, hee called himself Bishop of Palencia, for which Bishoprick hee was presently offed sixteen thousand Duckets. Thence hee went to Carrion, and Torquemad, in each of which Towns (as in Palencia) hee left two thousand men to guard them, (which the Commo∣naltie had given him) hee gave them strict orders to bee very watchful and Vigilant, but to offer violence to none, except the the people of Burgos, and other places belonging to the Cavaliers, and from such, hee bid them take what they could, and paie themselvs with the plunder, and tell the people, that if they came a second time, they might thank God if they took not their lives away, as for their goods or Cattle, they must exspect to have none left. This done, hee returned to Valladlid, having made him∣self a King, and Pope. SECT. XI. IOhn de Padilla marched out of Medina del Campo towards Valla∣dolid, with  great number of Foot, paid for a long time, but onely threescore hors. And beeing arrived at the bridg of Duero, hee commanded his Artillerie to bee carried up the River to Simancas; At about half a league distance, hee caused four peeces of Ordnance to bee shot at the Town, whereupon the Earl of On̄ate sallied forth with fourscore Lances, with which hee laie
in ambush, thinking to cut off Iohn de Padilla's train, but beeing discovered, Iohn de Padilla let flie four Falconets at them, which made them soon turn their bcks, and hee pursued them to the very Gates of Simancas. Thence hee went to Valladolid, where hee was solemnly received with the applaus and content of the whole Citie, making as if hee were the father of them all, in whom they reposed all their trust and confidence. And there hee was made Captain-General, although those of the Iunta would have given that Command to Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega, but the great credit and esteem which Iohn de Padilla had gotten amongst the Souldierie, made them decline that resolution. The Earl of Haro, having intelligence of Iohn de Padilla's march to Valladolid, had an intent to stop his waie, to which effect, hee sent for Don Geronimo de Padilla to Simancas, with those men hee had at Portillo, but beeing upon his departure informed for certain, that some of Tordesillas had given Iohn de Padilla notice of his design, and that they had agreed, assoon as the Earl was gon with his men one waie, Iohn de Padilla shoud com another, and fall up∣on Tordesillas, where most of the Inhabitants were for the Commonaltie, and desired nothing more, then the effecting of this plo; Hee canged his former determination, and staied to secure Tordesillas. After this, they had intelligence that in a place called Rodilana, betwixt Medina del Campo and Valladolid, were quartered five hundred Souldiers of Salamanca, who beeing so neer Medina, thought themselvs secure, and kept no guards, here∣upon the Lord Admiral, and the arl, consulted how to beat up their quarters, and destroie them. Don Pedro de la Cueva, bro∣ther to the Duke of Alburquerque, a valiant Gentlemen, under∣took the execution of this design, and with few more, then what the enemie was spoken to bee, hee marched one night to Rodilana, and falling in suddenly upon them, hee killed and took most of them, the rest fled. Five or six daies after this, the Earl of Haro, having received other intelligence, that in a small Town called l Zarca, six leagues from Tordesillas, where arrived seven or eight hundred Souldiers from Segovia; Hee incharged the same Don Pedro (who was his Cosen German) becaus hee had been so successful before, to go and surprise the said Souldiers, giving
him two hundred hors and five hundred Foot to that effect. Don Pedro, with those men, marched all night, and going a great league about to avoid Medina del Campo, hee set upon them una∣wares, & though the said souldiers retir'd fighting into a Church, Don Pedro followed them so close, that entring perforce after them, hee killed and wounded many of them, and brought al∣most all the rest prisoners to Tordesillas; which was held an ex∣ploit of great valor, conduct, and importance. SECT. XII. JOhn de Padilla, the Bishop of Zamora, and other Captains of the Commoaltie neglected no opportunities of advancing their Interest, and infesting the advers partie. It was concluded amongst them, that Iohn de Padilla, with the two thousand five hundred men hee brought from Toledo and Madrid, should pitch his camp before Cigales, (a smal Town belonging to the Earl of Venavente, two leagues from Valladolid) and if they did not receiv them willingly, that they should force their entrance, but those of Cigales received them without making the least opposition, and lodged them in their houses, thinking no harm. At mid∣night (which was a base unworthie action) the Souldiers gave the alarm through all the Town, and beeing in arms, they took all their Hosts, (who had so freely given them quarters) and all the rest of the Town, and having manacled, and disarmed them, not leaving them so much as a sword or dagger, they put them all into the Church, and set a strong Guard upon them, saying, They did so to secure the place, becaus it belonged to an enemie. The third of Ianuarie the Bishop marched again out of Vallado∣lid at midnight, with som companies of souldiers, directly to Palnia, his new Bishoprick, where hee staied som time; after which hee gave out, that hee would return to Valladolid, but hee turned another waie;Oher ex∣ploit of the Bishop of Zamora'. and having sent his Scouts before to Moçon, the next morning, by break of daie, hee assaulted the Fort of Val∣depero, whereof was Commander Andres de Ribera, son in law to Doctor Tello; who, after a long dispute, and several men kil∣led on both sides, the Bishop receiving fresh supplies from the
Beherrias, was enforced to surrender upon condition, onely to secure the lives of those that were within. The Bishop took the persons of the Governor, his wife, and Doctor Tello, her father, into his protection,The Go∣vernor of Valdper aken, and the place plundred by the Bishop' mn. but could not, or would not, hinder his men rom plundering all their goods. They found much very rich bootie within the Fort, whereof the Bishop demanded a fifth part, as beeing their Captain, which they gave him, yet hee that had least amongst the Souldiers, carried away fourtie Duckets. The Bishop grown glorious by this prize, dispatched a messen∣ger to Valladolid, requiring them to send him more men, that hee migt take the other Forts about Funtes and Palencia, and put Garsons i them for the Commonaltie, which done, hee sent Doctor Tello, his son-in-law, ad daughter, prisoners to Vallado∣lid, with a Guard of thirtie Hors. SECT. XIII. THe Commanders of the Iunta's forces used all possible diligence to bee revenged of those of Simancas, from whom they received continual affronts and mischief, and there∣fore they sent for more me to Toro, Zamora, Salamanca, and Avila, which they exspected daily; for all those, and other Cities, were possessed with so much disdain and wilfulness, that they asspi∣red and studied nothing more, then the mainteining of that War, as if they thought that their onely means to Salvation; whereof certainly there was weak probabilitie, considering, that for eleven months, which those Domestick or Civil Wars had reigned in Spain, the Divel had transported the hearts of men with this infernal furie. If any one (though but of an ordinarie capacitie) did seiously consider, what destinie would befal those Citis, sor denying their due obedience to their King, (hee granting more then they desired) and persevering in such extra∣vagnt misdemeanors and cruelties to themselvs, besides the of∣ens to God; what could hee think, but that they were quite be∣reaved of natural reason? And that a Bishop (CHRIST'S Vicar) should make himself Captain of such ungratious miscreants, O empora! ô Mores! Impudence and respectless audacitie were
onely in esteem; the vile inconsiderate multitude fought against the noble and virtuous. Those that were of good extraction, or possessed any considerable fortune, durst not open their mouths, for if by chance they did let fall any word which soun∣ded not well in the other's ears, presently their persons were committed to prisons, their goods and estates confiscate, and they proclaimed Traitors. Such was the confusion, such the corruption and reprobate estate of the Castillians, in our Grand∣fathers times, from the year 1519, until 1522; In which year God brought his Majestie back into these Kingdoms: which returning to their obedience, and beeing acknowledged by their King, God raised them to the magnificence and glorie where∣with they flourished in former ages, and enjoie yet at this pre∣sent. To the end the people may see what blessings hee be∣stow's upon subjects that are obedient to their Princes, and how hee punisheth the contrarie; for although the Taxes which they impose upon them bee heavie, they heap upon themselvs grie∣vances infinitely more insupportable, by rising in Rebellion against them. Though this strange Historie of the Commo∣nalties seem opprobrious to this Nation, and an indelible blot to the Castillian honor, having broken their faith to their Sovereign, for which they were so renowned in other ages: yet it is excee∣ding profitable in this respect,Here the Autor g∣veh Kings a lsson, d∣monishing tem not to oppres their Subjcts. that Kings may know how to govern their Subjects without oppression, and the subjects learn to obey without reluctancie; for the contrarie can but produce such sad effects as wee both have and shall see hereafter. But to return to our former relation, I must tell you, That the Garri∣son of Simancas, holding themselvs secure, by reason of the natu∣ral, as well as the Artificial strength of the place, went almost every daie Pekeering to the gates of Valladolid, and not onely brought away all their goods and cattle they could meet withal, but abused and reviled them with most shameful language, cal∣ling them Dogs, and Infidels, bidding them turn Christians again. In revenge whereof, those of Valladolid so reaked their malice upon the Lord Admiral, and other Noblemen, in this manner; The 11 daie of Januarie, in the same year, by order, or at least, consent of the Iunta, they made a Proclamation, that
no Citizen, or Inhabitant of Valladolid, or Jurisdiction thereof, should dare, under great penalties, to go to the Fairs, or Marts, of Villalon, Rioseco, or Astorga, (which Towns belonged to the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Ve∣navente, and Marquis of Astorga) their envie and spight beeing so inveterate, that if they could but blemish any one of these Noblemen's eies, they would not stick to have pull'd out their own. SECT. XIV. DOn Francisco de Veamonte, by order of the Lord high Con∣stable, surprised and possessed himself (finding no great resistance) of the Town of Ampudia, or Fuent Empudia, belong∣ing to the Earl of Salvatierra, who was then playing the mad mutinier in the mountains of Alava, and could by no means bee reduced to the Lord high Constable. The Commoners to gain favor with the Earl of Salvatierra, determined to retake Ampudia. To which effect one night in the said month of Ianuarie, Iohn de Padilla, and the Bishop, made an alarm in the Citie of Valla∣dolid, causing proclamation to bee made, that every hous should furnish a Souldier, to go with Iohn de Padilla as far as Cabecon, for the expedition of Ampudia, in regard they had intelligence that five Companies of Foot and hors were marched out of Torde∣sillas and Simancas, to take it from the Earl of Salvatierra, who was a great supporter of their caus. But the Cavaliers for the better accomplishment of their design, sent ten Scouts before to discover, and ride close to Valladolid, whom those of the Citie perceiving, presently sallied out, and gave not over the pursuit of them, until they had recovered Simancas▪ By which means the the rest went securely on to Ampudia, without receiving the least hindrance from Valladolid, who were diverted by those of Si∣mancas. Iohn de Padilla, with great store of men, one whole Cannon, and three or four field-peeces, marched to Cabecon and Cigales, from whence he sent back again all the men of Valladolid, onely two Companies, with which, and the rest of his men, hee arrived in very good order at Ampudia, where hee found the
Cavaliers, masters, both of the Town, and Fort. Iohn de Padilla's men, beeing mad of fighting, fell to storming the Town, and having made two great breaches, in the old, and new Wall, the Cavaliers, retreated to the Fort, whither they pursued them: But the Cavaliers seeing they were but few, & the enemies manie, and stout-fighting men, they quitted the Fort, leaving in it a Governor, with 60 Hors, & som Foot, & getting out at a private Sallie-port, they fled to the Tower of Mormojon, one league distant from Am∣pudia, whereof when John de Padilla had notice, hee followed them with his whole Armie, and beeing arrived at Mormojon, hee found they had made themselvs strong within the Castle, which was scituate upon the side of the Mountain called Toroços, to∣wards the Champain. John de Padilla's souldiers were all so ani∣mated,Mormojon taken by Iohn de Pa∣dilla. and desirous to grapple with the Cavaliers, that making a furious on-set, and burning down the gates, they were just en∣tring the Town, when all the people came out in Procession, the Priests with their robes, and Crosses in their hands, and the women, and children bare-footed, fell upon their knees with tears, and humble supplications to John de Padilla, that hee would not suffer them to bee sack'd or plundered: But his men cried out, No, no, let us sack the Town. At which words John de Pa∣dilla turned himself towards his souldiers, saying, Take notice, Gentlemen, our intention is not to ransack or destroie any people, especially those who are not culpable: by which, and other such like plausble language, hee pacified the furious greediness of his souldiers, and persuaded them to do what hee pleased: which done, hee told the people upon his word, no man of his should offer them any violence, but they must bring a thousand Duckets to content his Armie, and swear to bee true to the Commonaltie; whereunto the poor Townsmen, out of fear, suddenly conde∣scended, and John de Padilla quartered all his men there, but with express order, that they should paie for every thing, except Pro∣vender for their Horses, which the people were willing to give them. Soon after, John de Padilla commanding one half of his Armie to lay close siege to the Castle, and block up all the Adve∣nues, with the other half he returned to do the like to those with∣in the Fort of Empudia, who would willingly have surrendred
it, and those of Mormojon likewise, if John de Padilla would have secured them their lives onely, but hee refused it, and swore, if they stood out, hee would hang every man of them;Empudia ta∣ken by Iohn de Padill▪ and the Bi∣shop. so hee as∣saulted them several times very furiously; but seeing how coura∣geously they defended themselvs, to the loss of no smal number of his men, hee was glad they would deliver it upon better condi∣tions; which were these, That they should resign the Fort, vvith all things belonging thereunto, as Munition, Victuals, houshold-stuff, &c. And march freely out with all their own Arms, horses, and baggage, which they did to the number of one hundred and threescoe hors and Foot. Fray Antonio de Guevara, in his Epistles,The Bis. speech to hi mn in the Assault. reporteth, that the Bishop of Zamora, encouraging his Souldiers in this assault, said to them, So, my boyes, get up nimbly, fight and die couragiously, and let my Soul go at a venture along with yours, since you die in so just and Holie an enterprise. Iohn de Padilla would not suffer any dammage or havock to bee made of any thing within the Fort, nor stand to batter it much without, becaus the Earl of Salvatierra had written to him, to take it with the least prejudice to him that might bee. Those of the Commonaltie were very well pleased at the taking of Empudia, and Iohn de Pa∣dilla's Armie increased daily, by the confluence of people to him from the Beherris. The Bishop of Zamora departed from Em∣pudia, to Monçon, thence to Magaz, spoiling and doing all the mischief hee could to those of the Cavaliers partie; Hee caused Maçariegos, and other Towns, to bee sacked, insomuch that hee was asmuch dreaded as fire, in places that were not able to resist him. But in Valladolid they found great miss of him, to defend them from the incursions of those in garrison at Simancas. SECT. XV. THe Bishop of Zamora, by Letters, promises, and other private practises, sollicited, and egged on the people of Burgos, asmuch as in him laie, to make another Commotion in the Citie. But the Lord High Constable was so vigilant and zealous to advance his Majestie's service, that hee did not onely keep those of Burgos in good order and subjection, but endea∣vored
by the same means the Bishop used,The Lord High Con∣stabl' plot discovered. to gain the people of Valladolid; The plot beeing discovered, or at least suspected, they cunningly returned an answer to the Citie of Burgos, inclo∣sing therein a Copie of the Letter (which they shrewdly ima∣gined was of the Lord High Constable's own forging, and not from the Citie) to the end they might both bee read publickly, which occasioned such a tumult and mutinie among the people, that like hare-brained inconsiderate creatures,Mutinie in the Citie of Burgos. they presently rose in Arms, and would have turned the Lord High Constable out of the Citie. But hee, seeing fair words and gentleness prevailed nothing at all with them, determined to carrie it with an high hand, and make them to submit per force, having taken the Com∣mand of the Fort from them. To bring this resolution to ef∣fect, one daie hee drew up his souldiers and servants all in Arms, in a broad place before his own hous; thither repaired to him forthvvith Don Iohn de la Cerda, Duke of Medina Cely, Don Luis de la Cerda, Marquis of Cogolludo, his son, Don Alonso de Arellano Earl of Aguilar, Don Antonio de Velasco Earl of Nieva, with his two sons, Don Hernando de Bobadilla Earl of Chin∣chon, Don Bernardino de Cardenas, Marquis of Elche, eldest son to the Duke of Maqueda, and son in Law to the Lord High Con∣stable, besides divers other persons of honor, with their kindred, and servants, who were all resolved to venture their lives with him in this design; which the people perceiving, they all assem∣bled likewise, intending to fight with these Noblemen, and they were so near engaging, that som Arrows were interchanged from each partie, and the bullets began to flie also; but the chief of the Citie,The Com∣mon people submit to the Lord High Con∣stable. seeing the advantage the Nobles had over the People, they speedily sent to require and command the Com∣moners to bee quiet, and peaceably laying down their Arms, to obey the Commands of the Lord High Constable, as their Vice∣King and Governor, which they did without much contestati∣on, and followed, very submissively and quietly, the Lord High Constable, who went directly to the Fort, requiring the Go∣vernor to deliver it him presently, otherwise, hee protested, hee would enter it by force,The Fort is surrendered to him. and execute Justice upon him, and all the rest with him; Som disputes and controversie there was
thereupon, but before night it was surrendered; and the Lord High Constable put in another Governor for his Majestie, pla∣ced a Corregidor in the Citie, and re-established the government in the same manner it had been formerly. Thus Burgos, not beeing able to resist, was pacified, and reduced to the obedience of his Majestie, wherein that Citie continued ever after. SECT. XVI. THis done, the Lord High Constable sent Don Iuan Manri∣que, the Duke of Naxara's eldest son, to suppress those of the Merindades; and by reason hee was very young, Martin Ruiz de Avendan̄, and Gomez de Butron, Gentlemen of great account in those parts, and in Biscaya, were appointed to go along with him; beeing arrived there, those Gentlemen carried the busi∣ness so discreetly, that there was a peace concluded betwixt the Lord High Constable, and those of the Merindades; But it lasted not long, for Gonsalo de Barabona, the Abbat of Rueda, Garcia de Arce, but chiefly Don Pedro de Ayala, Earl of Salvatierra, infringed it, who was grown very powerful in those mountainous parts, and so besotted with that inconsiderate passion, that by his ob∣stinacie, hee brought himself to a miserable end, to the utter ru∣ine and destruction of one of the most honorable and most an∣tient families of Castilla, and the Mountains. SECT. XVII. AT the time that most of the Cities of Castilla declared for the Commonaltie, in the province of Alava, and Citie of Vitoria, that opinion was not generally received nor allowed, al∣though som did take the libertie to speak over lavishly, especially against those of the Council. In this season was brought to the said province, and Citie of Vitoria, a Letter from Burgos, wherein that Citie (as the chief of Castilla) desired those of that province to send two persons (whom they pleased) to confer with them at Burgos. At the same time, were brought other Letters from the province of Guipuzcoa, and the Countie
of Biscaya, desiring that they might all unite together. The Citie of Naxara and Town of Haro desired, that they would assist them, against the Lord high Constable, and the Duke of Naxara, who, they said, did tyrannize too much over them; Vitoria re∣turned civil answers to all, Burgos onely excepted, to whom they would not write, becaus they made themselvs their Superiors, in styling that the Metropolitan Citie of Castilla, for the Citie of Vitoria did presume that they, and their province of Alava, were absolute of themselvs, without any dependencie, or relation to Burgos, as their Head. But they sent Iohn de Alava (who at that time was Merino Mayor, that is, Chief Judg of Vitoria) to let their Embassadors understand, by word of mouth, the prehemi∣nence of that Countrie, and that they could not condescend to the Union which they desired, for they understood that Burgos had shaken hands with their obedience to his Majestie, and they would not bee participant of their disloialtie. This answer was no less unexpected then unwelcom to those of Burgos. About the same time,Troubles in the Countrie of Biscaya. some Towns of the Province of Guipucoa, in∣fected with the Common Contagion, fell foul upon the Citie of San Sebastian, becaus they would not approve of their extrava∣gant opinions, cutting down and spoiling their Orchards, (for they have no Vineyards) and doing them divers other mischiefs. But prevailing not there, they wrote, and held correspondence with divers other places, by means of Pedro Ochoa de Santa Maria de Mondragon, (a subtil fellow) who was their Mercurie. At length, Vitoria tainted with the same diseas, had joyned in con∣federacie with them, but that Diego Martinez de Alava, Deputie-General of that province, with others, his allies and kinsmen, en∣deavored to restrain them from a design so wicked and preju∣dicial to his Majestie. SECT. XVIII. THe Earl of Salvatierra, beeing at difference with Madama Margarita, his Ladie, insomuch that hee would not live with her, shee addressed her complaints to his Majestie of her grievances, and of the indignities, which, through his cross and
unworthie disposition,First ground of Salvaerra's diaie a∣gainst his Majestie. shee was enforced to suffer. Whereupon it was ordered by his Majestie, that the said Countess, with her Children, should remain in Vitoria, and that the Earl should al∣low them maintenance according to their qualities; and an ex∣prss Command from his Majestie was sent to Diego Martinez de Alava, Deputie general of that Province, to see the said order punctually observed, who desiring to execute this Command by the Autoritie and means of the Council, the Earl thought to counterpois that power, by making the Commonaltie of his side, who did him little good in this particular, although those of the Iunta sent to that Province, and to the Citie of Vitoria, a Judg, called Antonio Gomez de Ayala (who afterwards was execu∣ted for a notorious Commoner at Valladolid) with orders and power to give sentence in favor, or against any that should bee brought before him: his addresses were particularly to the Earl of Salvatierra, to the end that hee might assist and support him: The Eal gave him fiftie men, who attended on him at his com∣ing into Vitoria; which the Deputie Diego Martinez de Alava, and Pedro Martinez his brother, with others of their kindred, seeing, and knowing that hee brought particular orders against them from the Iunta at Tordesillas (where the Deputie, and his kinsmen, had been proclaimed Traitors) they thought it a thing much conducing to his Majestie's service, and their own securitie, to ap∣prehend this Judg, which to effect, the sons of Don Fernando de Alava,Diego Mar∣tinez de Al∣va, and his allies, ap∣prehend & imprison the Judg, whom the Iunta sent to Vitoria. Governor of Bernedo, and Iohn de Alava his cosen germane, with twentie men, besides other friends and servants, went to the Judge's lodging, took him and his servants out of their beds, clap't irons upon them, and carried them to the Fort of Bernedo, and took away the Orders which hee brought from the Iunta, wherein they gave the charge of Governor and Captain General to Don Pedro de Ayala, Earl of Salvatierra, from the Citie of Burgos to Fuente Ravia. The Judg remained under safe custodie in the Fort, in mean time the Gentlemen, who carried him thither, re∣turned to Vitoria, where they found the People much distempered, and murmuring at those men's imprisonment.
SECT. XIX. 'MOngst these Occurrences came an Express from the Lord High Constable, with Letters, notifying to those of Vito∣ria, and the Province of Alava, the Orders which his majestie had sent him, encharging him with the Government of the Kingdoms, and commanding all his Subjects, to obey him as their Vice-Roy and Governor. But those of Alava, beeing much inclined to the Earl of Salvatierra, said, That they were upon a certain agreement with those of the Province of Guipuzcoa, which beeing concluded, they would obey as far as they were obliged. But the Deputie Diego Martinez, and all his friends, received the said notification with due respect. The Citie of Vitoria returned an answer to the Lord High Constable, but would not give him the title of Governor; whereupon som words passed between Iohn de Alava, & the rest, who bade him, in scurvie terms, go out of the Assemblie; but he boldly answered, Get you gon, like Traitors and Rebels: for which words, they caused him to bee apprehen∣ded. In this interim, a Priest, from the Earl of Salvatierra, desired to have conference with those of the Assemblie: which the Deputie, Diego Martinez, knowing, privately stole out from the rest, and laid hands upon this Priest, clapt him in prison, and having opened his packet, hee found several Letters to Friers, and other particu∣lar men, desiring them to induce the people to denie their obedi∣ence to the Governors. This bred a main disorder, and libels were scattered about by the people: yet Martinez, & Pedro de Alava, with all those of their kindred and alliance, resolutely determi∣ned to maintein his Majestie's Interest, pressing and requiring all the rest to subscribe also to his Commands; if not, they protested against them, styling them no otherwise, then Rebellious and disloial Traitors. Of all which proceedings, they sent informa∣tion to the Lord High Constable, and hee to the Council Roial, (who then resided at Castroxeriz). Those of Vitoria, seeing their fidelitie brought into question, resolved to submit, and sent their Letters to that effect, promising all obedience to the Lord High Constable, beseeching him to pardon their former extravagan∣cies
and inconsidtrateness, and that hee would give order to burn those Informations, which Diego Martinez de Alava had sent to him against them; which hee did. So by the diligence and resolution of Diego Martinez de Alava, and other Gentlemen of his name and familie, the Citie of Vitoria was reduced, and continu∣ed afterwards their Loialtie and obedience to his Majestie. All these passages were in the year 1520, and the beginning of 1521▪ The Lord High Constable, seeing that no reason would satifie the Earl of Salvatierra, endeavored to do him what mischief hee could. Hee took from him the Town and Castle of Empudia, and put a Garrison of his own therein, who (as you have heard) were again forced to quit that, and other places, by Iohn de Padil∣la; In which time the Earl of Salvatierra, having picked up a number of people out of the Merindades, besides his own servants and souldiers, hee led them as far as the Monasterie of San an Salvador de On̄a, wit intent to go recover Empudia; but beeing in∣formed there, that the Bishop of Zamora had already taken it, hee changed his resolution,Th Earl of Slvati∣erra faceth Vitoria with his Armie. and turned his Forces towards Vitoria, threatning to burn it to the ground, if they did not renounce their obedience to the Lord High Constable, and deliver the Deputie Diego Martinez, and his brother, into his hands. The Citie, bee∣ing not a little stagger'd and affrighted at these high menaces, sent messengers to the Earl, with great submissions, which so much abated his furie, that all the month of Ianuarie, 1521, they re∣mained unmolested. SECT. XX. HIs Majestie's Royal Council beeing at Briviesca, and hear∣ing what notable service Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco, Lord of Cuscurrita, and Dean of Burgos, had done his Majestie in that Citie, and how couragiously hee had behaved himself, they sent for him. Don Pedro not knowing what danger might befall, took about twentie Gentlemen and servants on horsback with him, all well armed, with green Coates over their Armor, that no bodie could discern any thing, besides the hounds and hawks they carried with them, made no creature suspect any other, then
that hee went out to take his pleasure. Beeing arrived at Bri∣viesca, the Council gave him order to subdue the seven Merindades of old Castilla, who were up in Arms. Whereof Don Pedro would have excused himself, saying, That it was not suitable with his Coat to command Souldiers; (for hee went in the habit of a Priest, by reason of his Deanry.) But those of the Council answered, that although hee were effectively a Priest, (much more having onely the habit of one) hee ought to change his surplice into a suit of Armor, especially in cases wherein the service of God, and the King, was so much concerned. Don Pedro, seeing it was in vain to expostulate any further, resolved to put their Commands in execution, and considering hee was the Lord high Constable's Son, discreetly valiant, and beloved of every bodie, many Gentlemen, and persons of qualitie, offered themselvs to venture their fortunes with him. Beeing arrived within a league of Medina de Pumar, (which was hard by those Commoners, whom hee went to suppress) they had intelli∣gence of his approach, and forthwith disposed themselvs to give him battle; Don Pedro, though hee had nothing neer so many men, resolved however to conquer them, or die in the combat; So having passed over a wooden Bridg, hee gave them so hot and furious a charge,Dn Pedro Xuarez de Velasco rou∣teth those of the Me∣rindades. that they quickly shewed their backsides, and scattering themselvs in a disorderly manner, they sought their securitie amongst the Craggie mountains, hee pursued them as far as hee could, and staid some time, thinking they might rallie, but hee heard no more of them. So hee returned Victorious, and lost not one of his men. SECT. XXI. IN the month of March, of the same year, the Lord High Constable, seeing that they exceedingly wanted Artillerie, in regard the Commoners possessed all that which was in Medina del Campo hee gave order to fetch away that which the Catholick Kings had in store at Fuente Ravia. Don Sancho de Velasco was presently dispatched thither, with Commission to bring the Mu∣nition over land, and the Artillerie by sea to Bilbao, thence to
Vitoria, and so to Burgos. The Iunta (then at Tordesillas) ha∣ving intelligence hereof, presently sent to advertise the Earl of Sal∣vatierra, that hee might prepare forces and intercept the Artillerie; Who used such diligence, that in short time, hee had raised, amongst his friends and tenants, above ten thousand men. And a Gentleman named Gonçalo de Varahona, Captain of the said Earl's forces, went to the Merindades, and of those men which Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco had routed and dissipated, hee rallied so many as made up the number of almost fourteen thousand (the like Armie was never known to bee raised in those parts, in so short a time) with these men hee took the Munition that came by land; and hearing that the Artillerie (which was seven great pieces of Ordnance) was coming from Bilbao to Vitoria,The Earl of Salvati∣erra, by or∣der from the Iunta, intercept's the Artille∣rie which wa going to the Lord High Con∣stable, and causeth it to bee broken in pieces. con∣voied by seventeen hundred men, whereof many were Gentle∣men of note of Biscaya, besides the Alcalde Leguizama, and the Corregidor of Vitoria; the third of March, hee marched with his whole Armie nine leagues that daie, and night, the next morning by break of daie hee came into the Vallie of Arretia, where the Artillerie was▪ Don Sancho de Velasco and his men, giving all for lost, dis-mounted their Cannon, and taking away the Carriages, and their Mules, shifted for themselvs. The Earl seized on the Ar∣tillerie, but not beeing able to carrie it away, hee caused it to bee broke in pieces. This done, the Earl returned with his Armie to the Vallie of Ayala, having som intelligence, and encourage∣ment from som of his friends within the Citie, to fall upon Vi∣toria, which was very pleasing to his Captain Gonçalo de Vara∣hona, and other Officers. The report flying about, that hee inten∣ded to sack Vitoria, made a number of rabbling people join, wch swelled his Armie to fifteen, or sixteen thousand, but most of them were ill armed, and wors disciplined. Hee pitched his camp in the plain of Arriaga, one quarter of a league from Vi∣toria. SECT. XXII. THe Abbat of Santa Pia, and Fray Diego de Arna, a Domini∣can Frier, beeing persons, whom the Earl particularly
esteemed and effected, went to him in his Camp, desiring and conjuring him not to enter into the Citie. So falling upon a Treatie of agreement, hee demanded, that they should denie their obedience to the Lord High Constable, and that they would de∣liver unto him the Deputie Diego Martinez de Alava, with his bro∣ther, and certain others of his kindred. The Citzens believing that if those Gentlemen were out of the Citie, the Earl's furie might bee the better appeased, earnestly desired them to absent themselvs, which they did, and carried their wives and families with them to Trevin̄o, a Town belonging to the Duke of Naxa∣ra, where they exspected Don Manrique, his son, with som forces from Navarra. The Citie beeing in this perplexitie, som who had relation to Don Alvaro de Mendoça, Lord of Mendoça de Arriva, (who was an intimate friend with the Earl of Salvatierra) be∣seeched him for Don Alvaro's sake, not to use any violence to that Citie. But hee briskly answered, That they had not performed their promises to him. At last, to satisfie him, they concluded, That hee should enter, with his colors flying, at the gate of Arri∣aga, and march out again at the gate of Santa Clara. Whil'st this was arguing, com's El Licenciado Aguirre, (who was one of the Council) saying, That they ought not to open the gates to the Earl of Salvatierra, and that whosoever should do it, were Trai∣tors. Those that were present gave him a very rude answer, and had laien violent hands on him, if Lope de Xuaço, and som others, had not suddenly conveied him out of the Citie, from whence hee went to staie with Diego Martinez de Alava,The Earl of Salvti∣rra's Ar∣mie enter's into Vito∣ria. and the rest, at Trevin̄o. The Earl came not into Vitoria himself, but sent his Captain Gonçalo de Varahona, mean time hee went to a place called Ondagoya, in the Vallie of Quartango. Those of the Iunta sent the Earl of Salvatierra thanks for the favor hee had done them, in taking that Artillerie which the Lord High Con∣stable (they said) intended to carrie against alencia, and after∣wards join with the rest of the Cavaliers.
SECT. XXIII. THis Earl of Salvatierra,Disosition of Don Pe∣dro de Ayalae Earl of Sal∣vaierr. (who was also Earl of the Vallies of Ayala, Quartango and San Milan) was a man of a mon∣strous hautie and terrible disposition. It happened, when those of the Iunta sent to him, desiring him to wage War with the Lord high Constable, and intercept his Artillerie, that hee then was with his Armie before Briviesca, and without returning any answer to their Letters, hee presently raised his siege. The Messengers of the Iunta thought thereby, that hee had no intent to act according to the contents of the Letters, which they de∣livered him, and were very angrie, saying, That hee did onely make a shew of favor and friendship to them, for now the Commonltie having need of him, hee would do nothing for them. These words were brought to his ears, whereupon hee wrote to the Iunta,His Letter to the Iun∣ta, an he Citie o Valladolid. and to Valladolid, expressing much distaste and anger, that they should harbor any such thought of him, saying, that hee came not of the race of any pedling mercenarie fellows, nor of Traitors, but lineally was descended from the stok of the Loyall Nobilitie of the Gottish King's of Spain. This mur∣muring against him, by those of the Iunta, did so distemper him, that the blood gushed out at his nose and mouth for meer anger, and cast him into a sickness, which had like to have cost him his life. After this, hee sent to the Iunta, and Valladolid, desiring them to have a care that his Town and Castle of Empudia, should not bee destroied, nor spoiled in the re-taking, although hee knew the King would not suffer him to enjoy it. SECT. XXIV. THe Gentlemen of Vitoria, who were retired at Trevin̄o, sent to the Lord high Constable and Duke of Naxara for suc∣cor; The Lord high Constable sent them four hundred Foot Souldiers, and one hundred hors. The same night they arrived at la Puebla de Argançon, the Deputie Diego Martinez went with them to suppress the Earl of Salvatierra at Andagoya, but hee having
notice of their design, shewed them a pair of nimble heels. Beeing entred into the Town, they went presently to his hous, which having throughly ransacked, they burned to the ground; which done, they returned to la Puebla. The next daie arrived at Trevin̄o, Don Manrique de Lara, the Duke of Naxara's eldest son, with two thousand Foot, and fourtie hors. Hee, and the Depu∣tie, with the rest of the Gentlemen there, resolved to go to Vi∣toria, and inflict condigne punishment upon some of the facti∣ous, and encourage those of the Loyal Partie. The Inhabitants of Vitoria, beeing unwilling to receiv so many souldiers into the Citie, sent messengers to Trevin̄o, desiring Don Manrique not to bring his souldiers thither, but they could not prevail. So those men which Don Manrique brought, and the Lord high Con∣stable's, entred all into Vitoria, as also the Deputie with all his kindred. The next daie, beeing Fridaie, Don Manrique marched to the Town of Salvatierra, which was the Earl's, and took it with the Castle also, both which, hee gave the Deputie Diego Martinez charge to keep for his Majestie, leaving him two hun∣dred souldiers; with the which Diego Martinez marched from Salvatierra, to a place called Gauna, where the arl had another strong hous, which having burnt, hee returned to Salvatierra, and Don Manrique the Sundaie following, went back to Vitoria. The Earl seeing they had taken his Town of Salvatierra, and burnt his other houses, went to the Valley of Quartango, and raised four thousand eight hundred men with his servants. Hurtado Diez de Mendoça, hearing this, came to Vitoria, and advertised Don Manrique of all particulars; Whereupon hee presently marched with his men to Quartango. The Earl staied not to make him welcom, but fled with all his men to the mountains; So Don Manrique's men pillaged all the Valley, burned down the Towers of Andagoya, and Morillas. Thence hee marched to∣wards the Merindades, where hee did no great harm, the people submitting themselvs to him, onely hee burned some houses of Gonçalo Varahona's, thence hee went to Burgos, where hee joyned his forces with the Lord high Constable, who was then prepa∣ring for the battle of Villalar. Gonçalo Varahona, and one Captain Brizuela, after Don Manrique's departure out of the Merindades,
did a world of mischief in the houses of those, that had agreed and made their peace with the Lord high Constable, at the Town of Valpuesta, hee killed one Salazar a Batchellor at Law, and burnt his hous, from thence hee went to the Valley of Ayala, where the Earl of Salvatierra was: Where they remained until April next following, raising men, as fast as they could, to go against Vitoria and Salvatierra. Whereof the Citie beeing adver∣tised, they put themselvs in a posture to resist him, got munition from the Sea-side, made readie their ordnance, mustred their en (which were but six hundred fit to bear Arms, besides two hundred Souldiers.) The Lord high Constable sent them from his Towns of Haro, la Puebla, and San Vicente, two hundred and fiftie men more, besides two troops of light hors-men. Hee sent moreover Commissions of Captains General of the Moun∣tains, and those parts, to Martyn Ruyz de Avendan̄o y de Gamboa, and to Gomez Gonçalez de Butron y de Mugica. Upon receipt whereof Martyn Ruyz de Avendan̄o came to Vitoria, and with the men of the Citie, and those that came from other places, re∣solved to give the Earl battle. Hereupon the Deputie Diego Mar∣tinez de Alava, repaired speedily to Salvatierra, to defend that, in case the Earl should make any attempt upon it. Beeing arrived there, hee would have sent his Son to the Castle of Bernedo, whereof hee was Governor, but the Towns-men would not suffer him, and offred to apprehend him, whereupon there a∣rose great disorder, and hee was enforced to retire into the Fort. Divers of the Towns-men, having relation to the Earl, were very desirous that hee should repossess it, and therefore sent him intelligence privately, that Diego Martinez, and his Sons, were in a manner prisoners, and that now was the onely time for him to fall upon the Town. Whereof hee beeing very well pleased, made all the haste he could from Quartango to Salvatierra, but was met in the waie by the hors of Vitoria, who took some of his men prisoners, however hee marched on, and Gonçalo Varahona staied behïnde; The next daie about midnight ee arrived at one of the Gates of Salvatierra, called San Iuan, and his men cried Ayala, Ayala; Which the Deputie's men (who were upon the guard) hearing, put themselvs in a posture of defence, and dis∣charged
some of their Ordnance, which killed and hurt some of his Souldiers. The Earl himself, beeing very neer the Gate, they flung down a great squar'd stone, which raked his shoulders as it fell, and quite spoiled his hors, that made him retreat further off till daie-break, by which time Gonçalo Varahona had brought the rest of his men, so they marched all in a bodie to a place called Vicun̄a, where they burned five houses belonging to Diego Mar∣tinez de Alava. And the Earl having intelligence that the Town of Salvatierra, and the Deputie, were reconciled, and stood upon the defensive, having no Artillerie with him, nor finding any refreshment for his men, the people beeing all fled to the Moun∣tains, hee relinquished his design. But upon his retreat, a Partie of hors with some Foot, sallied out of Vitoria, and took divers of his men at Alegria, with whom returning to the Citie, and giving notice of the order, or rather disorder, of the Earl's Armie, they concluded to fight them; To which purpose all the hors and Foot marched out, and Captain Ochoa de Asua was sent be∣fore to hinder him from passing the bridg of Durana; But his hors beeing already passed, they made it good till the Foot was all over, by which time the whole bodie of the Vitorians was come up.The Erl of Salvaierr put to flight. The Earl at first made as if hee would fight, but they plaied so hot upon him with their muskets, that seeing his men drop so fast, hee rod awaie with onely one Page, which seeing his men began to follow him: Gonçalo Varahona valiantly staied behind, crying to his men to stand. Captain Valenzuela encoun∣tred him, and took him prisoner, who, with six hundred of his men, much pillage, and divers Colours, were all carried to Vitoria; Martin Ruyz de Avendan̄,His Cap∣tain Gnsalo Vaahona taken pri∣soner by those of Vitoia, and beaed in the maket place of thir Citie. who was present at the sight, com∣mitted Gonçalo Varahona to Pedro de Alava's hous for the present, and few daies after, hee was beheaded in the great market place, whereof an express was sent to give the Lord high Constable notice, who was then upon going to Villalar, where, a short time after, the battle was given, which was the ruine and break-neck of the Commoners.
SECT. XXV. TO relate all the troubles which the Lord High Constable had with those of Burgos, and the Earl of Salvatierra, would fill whole Volumes. I shall now onely cursarily men∣tion, what was done in order to the conclusion of the Treatie and Articles,Here Don Pedro Lasso begin's to treat pri∣vately with the Coun∣cil, by means of Alonso Ortiz, who was a Iurate of Toledo, and his fellow Commissi∣oner in the Parlament at Santjago. which the Bishop of Laodicea brought, concerning the reducing of Don Pedro Lasso. Four daies Ortiz remain∣ed in Tordesillas, exspecting until the Lord Admiral had consulted of those Articles with the Cardinal, and given him the result of their determination. But in daie time hee durst not go abroad, so that his negotiation was onely in the night, (for there is no War so dangerous as that betwixt kindred, and people of the same Nation and Language). At last hee was dispatch't, but hee was fain to carrie their Answer in his memorie, not daring to have any writing about him, o hee went coasting and cros∣sing the Countrie in the night, until hee came into the high-waie of Medina del Campo, to the end that if hee should meet any of the Commoners, they might think hee came from Medina, and was going to Valladolid; where, by break of daie, hee arrived, and the Guards knowing him at the Gates, let him in without difficul∣tie▪ He would not go to his own lodging, but alighted at a friend's hous, whence hee went directly to Don Pedro Lasso, and gave him an exact account of what hee had done with the Cardinal and the Lord Admiral at Tordesillas. But in regard hee had not full satisfaction of all his demands (which were, that they should procure his Majestie's approbation and allowance of the principal Articles sent him by the Iunta, for the good of the Kingdoms). It was determined, that the Bishop of Laodicea should send a Friar to Tordesillas, who should correspond with him in their ordinarie cypher, and that Ortiz should likewise re∣turn thither; which hee did cunningly, without giving any sus∣spition, and beeing dispatched, hee returned to Valladolid in like manner as before.
SECT. XXVI. IN this same year, the Kingdom of Toledo broke out into the like disorders and exorbitancies, as were committed in other parts of Castilla. They report in Toledo, of Donia Maria Pacheco, wife to Iohn de Padilla, and daughter to the Earl of Tendilla, that shee was a woman of such a daring and resolute spirit, that shee was the greatest Instrument to support the Commonaltie of that Citie. And (if wee may believ Fray Antonio de Guevara) hee relate's, that shee beeing com into the Vestrie of the great Church in Toledo, to take away the Plate for paiment of her husband's souldiers, shee fell upon her knees, beat her brests with her hands, cried, sighed and sobbed, two torches standing lighted before her, and fell into a kinde of extasie, believing the deceit and conjuring of a Morisca Witch, who told her, that her hus∣band should com to bee a King, or somwhat near it. Hee saith manie other things of her, but let them pass, since afterwards she paied dear enough for her follie: And indeed what otherwise could bee exspected of a woman, that doth so far deviate from the rode of her natural emploiment, as to throw aside the Distaff, and the Needle, and busie her self with matters of State, and War. The Towns of Orgaz and Ocan̄a, with the favor and support of those of Toledo, declared likewise for the Commonaltie, and did a thousand mischiefs and affronts to the inhabitants of Almaguer, and other places; for the remedying of which disorders, the Go∣vernors of the Kingdoms constituted and ordeined Don Antonio de Zun̄iga to bee Captain General of the Kingdom of Toledo; who having raied me at Consuegra, marched into the field to put their commands in execution, what success hee had, shall bee said here∣after. For the Iunta, and the Cavaliers call mee away. SECT. XXVII. THe Citie of Valladolid was grown so passionate in the pro∣secution, and supporting of the Commonaltie's Interests, slighting the Emperor's graces to them, and beeing so malitious∣ly
bent against his Council, the Lord Admiral, and the Earl of Venavente (who out of particular relations did desire, and used all means possible to procure their good) that all their affection was turned into hatred, and their favors into discourtesies. In this occurrence arrived at Valladolid, a certain Priest, with Orders from the Emperor, and the Queen, to the President and Judges of the Chancerie there residing, wherein they were comman∣ded, with the College and Universitie, forthwith to depart that Citie. This coming to the people's knowledg, they were ex∣ceedingly incensed therewith, seeing they should bee deprived of three main benefits they had; which to prevent, they gave out that those Orders were fals, and forged, or counterfeited by the pretended Governors, who studied to do them all the mischief they could. And they determined to apprehend the Priest that brought them; but hee sheltered himself by the President's ad∣vice in the Chancerie. Whereupon the people, all in arms, came thither in a tumultuous manner to demand the Priest. The Pre∣sident not seeing any other remedie, to satisfie the multitude, de∣livered him to them; they presently clap't him into the Com∣mon Gaol, where leaving him, they returned to the President, and in a furious peremptorie manner demanded, that hee would deliver them those Orders wch the Priest brought him; hee answer∣ed, That after hee had conferred with the Judges thereupon, they should have them; but they growing more insolent, told him, That if hee delivered them not without any further delaie, they would set fire on his hous. The President, seeing their mad reso∣lution, thought it his best way to let them have their wills. Those Orders beeing brought, they forcibly entred into the Chancerie, and took away the great Seal also, which they delivered to per∣sons of their own choosing. In the Orders they found, how the Emperor commanded the President, with the fore-named, within three daies to leav Valladolid, and repair to the Governors, under pain of beeing deprived of their Offices, and that for the present they should go to the Town of Arevalo, where they should attend his further pleasure, in regard Valladolid had declined his service, and adhered to those that were Traitors to his Roial Crown.
SECT. XXVIII. THe Cavaliers sent to Valladolid, desiring a cessation for ten daies. The Major part Voted, that they should not con∣sent thereunto, alledging that the Cavaliers would break it, and besides that, they would never have demanded it, but to recrute themselvs with men and arms, which they wanted. At last they returned this answer, that each partie should deposite five thou∣sand Marcos de Plata, or marks of silver, in some faithful and sure person's hands, and whosoever should break the peace in that time, should forfeit the monie, upon those tearms they would hearken to them, but not otherwise. The Cavaliers refused this proposition, and the next daie following, they sent a Trumpeter with a Letter of defiance to those who called themselvs the Commissioners of the Kingdom, declaring open War with fire and sword against the Commonalties, and Valladolid, and required them to laie down their Arms, disband their souldiers, to con∣form themselvs to those whom his Majestie had appointed Go∣vernors of the Kingdoms, and obey their Commands as they ought. Otherwise they protested to hold them as Traitors, and would do them all the spoil and mischief that in them laie. Those of Valladolid answered, That they feared them not, bade them do their worst, and they would serv them with the like sauce: And without any long delay they sent to those in Simancas, charging them, both men, women, and children, presently to depart the Town, or they should all suffer death without reserv. Thus those of Valladolid,A brave re∣solution of Valladolid. and of the Iunta, shewed their in∣sulting pride and crueltie, which spake them rather men given over to despair, then capable of reason and judgment. Not∣withstanding all this, the Lord Admiral, much grieved at the obstinacie of Valladolid,The Lord Admiral's Letter to those of Valladolid. and out of the tender affection which hee bare to that Citie, wrote them another Letter, in his own, and the Cardinal's name, inducing them by all fair means possible, with promises of satisfaction for their grievances, to return unto their due obedience to his Majestie, dis-banding their Amies, disclaiming the Interests, and refusing to harbor or assist with
their men, artillerie, or otherwaies any of the disturbers of the peace and repose of the Kingdoms, assuring, that if they would do so, they should finde him alwaies ready to do them all the good offices that they could exspect or desire of him. And if not, hee protested, that according to his Majestie's Command, and in order to his service, hee would proceed against them as Delinquents, and disloial subjects; and that hee would make som of them suffer such exemplarie punishments, as should de∣terre succeeding Ages from committing any the like acts of dis∣obedience. Those of the Iunta, and of Valladolid, having read the Lord Admiral's Letter, made no great account of the persua∣sive part of it,The Iun∣ta's and Valladolid's answer to the Lord Admiral. neither were they any thing daunted at his threat∣nings; but returned him an insolent mock-answer; wherein they charged him, and those of the Council, with disturbing of the Kingdoms, and required them in the names of their Maje∣sties, and of the Kingdoms, to return to their due obedience, lea∣ving the Queen, with the most illustrious Infanta, to their free liberties; to dis-band their forces, both of Hors, and Foot, and divers other things, which if they refused, or delaied to perform accordingly, they protested, in the names of their Majesties, and Kingdom, to proclaim war against them, and declare them de∣linquents, disloial and disobedient persons to their Majesties, and that they would inflict such punishments upon them, as should make them examples to posteritie, for ever committing any such enormities, &c. SECT. XXIX. AFter these Letters, the Cavaliers wrote another to Valladolid, which I could not procure: But I have seen the answer, which those of Valladolid returned them. It seemed that the Cavalier's Letter to them was not so Civil, and respectful, as they did exspect. Therefore in their replie, they said, That they be∣lieved that their Letter was ill addressed, for certainly it was not intended for them. Then they fell upon the justification of their caus, imputing the fault of all the troubles and disturbances of the Kingdom to the Cavaliers, and making remonstrances of
the Common People's Loyaltie, in what concerned his Ma∣jestie's service, beeing not wedded to their private Interests, like the Cavaliers, who alwaies regarded their own particular ad∣vancements and profit, to the diminution, and almost, consuming of the Royal Patrimonie. SECT. XXX. THe next daie after this Letter was written, the Iunta com∣manded one of every hous in Valladolid to march out with Iohn de Padilla, to receiv Iohn Bravo, who came Captain of those men, which were sent from Segovia, Salamanca, and Avila. They were in all six thousand compleat Foot and hors, besides thirtie Carts loaden with Munition, carriages, and other warlike uten∣sils. They passed the bridg of Duero, to the great grief and dread of those in Garrison at Simancas (which was not far di∣stant) and so marched directly to Valladolid. Upon whose ar∣rival, the Iunta sent for the Bishop of Zamora, who was in the Beherrias, burning and spoiling Cavalier's lands. The Bishop beeing returned, they sat in consultation upon what enterprise they should go next. Those of Valladolid spred a report, that they would fall upon Simancas, in revenge of the damages which they daily received from that Garrison. SECT. XXXI. I Mentioned cursorily before, how Don Pedro Lasso began to wax wearie of the Commonaltie, and bethink himself of the disservice hee had done his Majestie: Now you shall hear furher with what difficultie his reconcilement was accomplish∣ed. Ortiz beeing returned to Valladolid, related to Don Pedro Lasso every particular passage (to his best remembrance, for hee durst not bring any papers) betwixt the Lord Admiral, the Cardinal, and him, concerning the agreement. Wherewith Don Pedro was not well satisfied, seeing they demanded more of him, then hee was able to perform, so hee remained unresolved. About the time that he was in this Quandarie, arrived at Valladolid, Fray Fran∣cisco
de los Angeles of the order of St Francis, a man of a noble ex∣traction and great learning, who afterwards was Bishop of Coria and a Cardinal. Hee went first to Burgos with Letters from the Emperor to the Lord high Constable, and the Articles which hee desired his Majestie to sign for that Citie: thence hee came to Val∣ladolid, where hee had conference with Don Pedro Lasso; but lest their too frequent conversation might breed suspition, Don Pe∣dro agreed, that hee should communicate freely with Alonso Ortiz, whose breast hee found a secure receptacle of any secret. Ortiz told Fray Francisco all the waies and means hee had used at Torde∣sillas, and what treaties had passed betwixt him and the Lord Admiral; That for his part hee came from Toledo to Valladolid▪ meerly to trie if his endevors might contribute any thing to the remedying or composing of those unhappie differences. Here∣upon Fray Francisco took a resolution to go himself to Tordesillas, to confer, with the Cardinal and Lord Admiral; and beeing there, they sent for Ortiz, who went to them upon Shrove-tues∣daie, Anno 1521, hee alighted at the Monasterie of Santa Clara, where Fray Francisco lodged, and in regard it was past midnight, there was then no possibilitie of speaking with the Lord Admi∣ral; but the next morning, hee coming to hear Mass in the same Monasterie, went up into Fray Francisco's chamber, where Ortiz hid himself; all that morning until dinner time they spent in treating about the Articles, in the Afternoon they did the like; and it was God's will, that before they parted, all was fully con∣cluded, to the contentment and satisfaction of each partie, where∣of were transcribed two Copies, one signed and sealed by the Cardinal and Lord Admiral, as Governors, obliging themselvs punctually to perform all and every the Articles therein contein∣ed, and procure them to bee confirmed by his Majestie, provi∣ded that Don Pedro Lasso did make good what hee had promised. Ortiz durst not carrie this writing to Valladolid, fearing lest the Guards should search him. So it was agreed, that Fray Francisco de los Angeles should carrie it to Abrojo, a Monasterie of Friers, a league short of Valladolid, (for hee durst not venture to go into the Citie with that about him) and that Ortiz should send som trustie messenger thither for it. Ortiz returned the same night (half
frozen) to Valladolid, and the Guards let him in without tou∣ching him, hee telling them that hee came from Medina del Cam∣po. Beeing entred the Citie, hee went immediately to Don Pe∣dro Lasso, whom hee informed fully of all the passages, and that Fray Francisco de los Angeles was to bring the Articles of agreement in writing, signed and sealed that same night to Abrojo; which hee did, the Earl of On̄ate giving him a Convoy of twentie Hors from Simancas, who put him safe within the gates of the said Monasterie, Don Pedro and Ortiz were in pain long time, how they should send with safetie for this writing, and at last they re∣solved one Fray Pedro de san Hippolito (of the Monasterie Del Prado (which was without the Citie) who was Don Pedro's Confessor) should go for it. Hee accepted the emploiment, and went to Abrojo, and having received the writing of Fray Francisco de los Angeles, hee returned; but beeing com near to Valladolid about Sun∣setting, hee met with certain souldiers which had been roving abroad, who seeing the Frier in that rode, imagined that hee came from Simancas, and thinking him to bee a Spie (or rather for greediness of his mule) they laid hands on him, saying, Hee was a Traitor, and that hee came from Simancas to give the Ca∣valiers intelligence of what passed in Valladolid. In this rude manner they led him into the Citie, calling him Traitor, and saying, that they wovld strip him, to see what Letters hee brought to any particular persons; so they brought him to an hous close by the gate, where they made him alight to bee stript. But it was God's great mercie to deliver Don Pedro, and the rest that were engaged with him out of this danger: for just as Fray Pedro was forced to alight from his mule,Note that seldom hath there been any Trea∣herie com∣mitted, but a Frier, or som Cler∣gie man, had a hand in it. two Franciscan Friers came most happily thither, to whom Fray Pedro addressing him∣self, with a neat slight of hand, and a notable resolution, drew the papers out of his own sleev, and slipt them into one of theirs, beseeching him for God's sake to fling them into the fire, and let no bodie see them: thus hee deceived the eies of above five hun∣dred people that were gathered together to strip him: vvhich they did, but finding no papers at all about him, they carried him before Pedro de Touar, one of the Regidores, and Captain of Valladolid, vvho knovving him, commanded them presently to
releas him. By this vvile hee saved the lives of all those that vvere concerned in that Writing. SECT. XXXII. THe Franciscan Friers, having read these Articles, did burn them, as Fray Pedro desired; but they could not refrain from speaking thereof to som others, and they to others, so that at last it was the common Town-talk, and it was carried to the Iunta. Don Pedro Lasso somwhat troubled, asked Ortiz what they should do; who bad him bee of a good courage, and if any questi∣on came of it, to saie, it was a trick of the Cavaliers, to sow dis∣cord amongst them, and although they had begun with him, doubtless, ere long, they would do the like to others. It fell out (as Don Pedro feared) that hee was questioned in the Iun∣ta hereupon; but hee was so well prepared to answer them, ab∣solutely denying the Charge, that with his smooth and resolute answers they were satisfied; in regard there was no evidence, nor any ground of suspecting, but meerly from the bare words of the Friers. This sore beeing well salved, Ortiz wen again to Fray Pedro, desiring him to venture once more to Tordesillas, and acquaint the Lord Admiral of what had passed, and be∣seech him to send another Copie of the Articles, like the former, which was lost; which hee told him, hee might safely enough do in the night, there beeing a Monasterie of his Order just in the waie to Tordesillas, whither hee would send another mes∣senger to bring it to Valladolid. The Frier went, and beeing arrived at Tordesillas, hee told the Lord Admiral the storie of his adventures, and how the former Copie had miscarried, and therefore Don Pedro, and Ortiz, desired him to send another. The Lord Admiral wondered at the Frier's strange relation, and thanked God with him for his deliverie, and gave him forth∣with another copie verbatim like the first, wherewith hee re∣turned in the night to his Monasterie, whither Ortiz sent one of his own servants, who brought it safe into Valladolid. Hereupon Don Pedro Lasso began to undermine, & cunningly to confer with som gentlemen & Comissioners of the Junta, concerning the mi∣series
of the times, persuading them to condescend to a peace, & to bee reduced to the good, and tranquillitie of the Kingdoms, in re∣gard that was the end of their Assembling and rising up in arms. Som thought this Proposition but just and reasonable, others absolutely dis-approved it. All these passages were particularly related to the General of the Dominican Order, then beeing at Tordesillas, who persuaded the Grandees of the Kingdom to send Letters to those of the Iunta General, and to the Particular Iunta of Valladolid, to this effect; That in regard both Parties did fer∣vently desire the good, and quiet of the Kingdom, and that each in particular did pretend to advance it, yet they spoiled and but∣chered one another without sens or reason, beeing all Natives of the same Countrie, and their intentions (though in a different waie) steering the same Cours. Therefore for the better under∣standing of each other, if the Gentlemen of the Iunta would no∣minate any two of the Commissioners, and send them to the Monasterie of St Thomas, which is without Tordesillas, to treat with them, they would at the same time appoint two of their partie to go to the Monasterie del Prado, not far from Valladolid, to confer with those of the Iunta; by which means they might com to som reasonable agreement, for the satisfaction and gene∣ral good of the Kingdoms, and that there might bee no more war or dissention amongst them, which had been the occasion of so much damage and miserie. Those of the Iunta (divers of them beeing indifferently well inclined, and seeing Don Pedro Lasso, who was one of the principal amongst them, lean that waie) were so far from dissenting, that without further delay, they appointed him, and Alonso de Guadalaxara, Commissioner of Segovia, to go in their names to Tordesillas, giving first notice to the Cavaliers thereof, and wishing them to send their Agents to Prado, as was agreed, both giving securitie and pledges that their Messengers should pass without danger or molestation. This was concluded on Fridaie, March the 10th 1521. On Saturdaie night following arrived at Valladolid, those whom the Governors sent for pledges; but those who were against this Treatie, ha∣ving consulted with Iohn de Padilla, who likewise did not relish it, gave order to those upon the Guard, not to let any into the
Citie that came from Tordesillas, but to take away their Letters, and seiz upon their persons: Insomuch that a messenger with a Pass for them, beeing com to Valladolid, the Guards would have apprehended him, but hee was so circumspect, that hee got clear of them, and returned to Tordesillas. This was not done by the general consent of the Iunta, but onely by those which were against the Treatie; and the rest of the Junta marvelled that the Cavaliers did not keep their words, in sending their Pass, or safe Conduct for the Commissioners, according to their own motion. SECT. XXXIII. THings beeing thus discomposed, the Captains of the se∣veral Cities, with the Bishop of Zamora, and Iohn de Padilla, agreed to draw all their forces into the field, to stop all corre∣spondence betwixt Valladolid and Tordesillas, that the Treatie might not go forwards, and to destroie and spoil all the Towns or houses they could, tht belonged to any of the Gentrie in Tor∣desillas. With this resolution the Bishop of Zamora, Iohn de Pa∣dilla with his Toledians, Iohn Zapata with those from Madrid, Iohn Bravo, Captain of the Segovians, and Francisco Maldonado, who commanded the men of Avila and Salamanca, went to the Iunta, desiring that they would appoint a Captain General over them all, and it is reported (out of craft, thereby to render him more odious to the Common People) that they press'd to have that office conferred upon Don Pedro Lasso, which plot was imputed to Iohn de Padilla, who never was Don Pedro's friend. The Iunta, to satisfie them, did name Don Pedro, but hee desired som time to think upon it, before hee would accept it, and those that bare him no good will, began to divulge his beeing made General, in a disparaging manner, saying, It was more honor then hee de∣served, in regard hee had given them so much reason to suspect his fidilitie, for holding correspondence with the Governors to sell them, and that Iohn de Padilla was much more fit for that Command. This was so much buzz'd amongst the people, that they began to murmur highly against Don Pedro. The mutinie
growing to such an height, that Don Pedro, and his friends, not thinking themselvs secure, prepared to make resistance, in case they should assault them in their houses, as som gave out they would. And (they saie) the very school-boys, instructed by their masters so to do, ran crying up and down the streets, Let Iohn de Padilla bee General, and not Don Pedro Lasso. The Bishop of Zamora sent him word that his safest waie would bee to ab∣sent himself from the Citie, or at least, to retire into some secret place, for the people were very jealous of him, and in their furie would bee apt to do him some displeasure, but this was onely a plot to entrap him. Don Pedro very resolutely returned the Bishop this answer, That hee had done nothing that hee was ashamed of, or ought to run awaie for, and that hee would not stir out of his hous, if the people had any thing to saie to him, there they should finde him. The people's design upon Don Pedro Lasso bee∣ing publickly known, some principal persons of the Citie came amongst them, and so handled the matter, that they all retired to their houses, and there was no harm done. SECT. XXXIV. THose of the Junta, beeing in consultation about the order∣ing of their Armie (for there was no more thought of peace) some said, that it was very requisite that they should have a Captain General, and although Iohn de Padilla had executed the office ever since Don Pedro Giron had left it, yet hee had not his Commission from the Junta, neither had the present Armie (which the several Cities had raised) acknowledged him. Som stood for Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega; but the major part of the Junta, and all the Common people Voted for John de Padilla. Hee seeing that they would make him their Captain General, out of a feigned modestie refused it, earnestly desiring them all to give their Votes rather for Don Pedro Lasso, who was more worthie and capable of so high a Charge then hee, not that hee declined their service however, but hee would content himself with the Command of the two thousand men which hee brought from Toledo, with whom, and with his own person,
hee would serv the Commonaltie to the last breath. The peo∣ple hearing that John de Padilla was like to bee outed, they came crying in a tumultuous mannertothe Junta, and presing them to make John de Padilla their General, for no man els should bee. And thinking that Dom Pedro Lasso was the onely man that hin∣dred the election of John de Padilla, the multitude ran presently to apprehend him in his hous, laying to his charge that hee had used means to reduce them to his Majestie's service, that hee had been caus that the Cavaliers had taken Tordesillas, having been in the conspiracie with Don Pedro Giron. But the Bishop and John de Padilla followed, and staied them in the great market place. Assoon as ever the rabble saw the Bishop and him, they flocked round about them crying out, Let John de Padilla live, let the Bishop live, long may live John de Padilla, who take's away the taxes of Castilla. In this manner did the multitude carrie him up and down the market place, hooting and shooting as if they had been all mad; insomuch that Iohn de Padilla could not speak to them, if hee would have said any thing, they kept so horrid a nois, saying, Hee should bee their General, and no other. Iohn de Padilla, and the Bishop, seeing this fond madness of the people, withdrew themselvs into a hous, out of a window, whereof Iohn de Pa∣dilla spake to them in this manner;Jhn de P∣dilla's speech to the Com∣mo peo∣pl in Val∣ladoid. Sirs! You know how I came hither Captain for the Citie of Toledo, in favor of the Com∣monaltie of this Kingdom, to serv you; you must know like∣wise, that Toledo is not inferior to Valladolid, but a fiend to it, and all the other Cities of the Kingdom, who all agreed to send mee to assist you, and with the same affection and willingness I have performed my part, and whil'st I have breath, I will omit no∣thing wherein I may serv you; and I thank you for your good wills to mee. But the Lords of the Iunta have determined to choos a Captain General for thir Expedition: Believ mee (sirs!) it is most fit that place should go by Election, and I assure you that I was the first man that made that motion, for that is the best and safest waie; moreover, those Gentlemen know very well what they do. Hee scars had uttered these words, but they all cried out, Wee will have none but John de Padilla, and the Bi∣shop. Thus they continued for the space of a long hour, and
more, Iohn de Padilla entreating them to give their consents, that Don Pedro Lasso might execute that office, for nevertheless hee should bee readie to spend his father's and his own estate, be∣sides the ventring of his life in that Holie Caus, for the service of the Commonaltie. But no reason would stop their mouths, they still continued crying, hee and non els should bee their Captain. Which obstinacie of the people, beeing reported to those of the Iunta, they Voted Iohn de Padilla Captain General of ll their forces. From that daie forwards, Don Pedro Lasso began to relinquish the Commonaltie, and divers of his friends did the like, seeing how blind and void of reason the people were, and how much prejudice they did themselvs, in following a people so overswaied with passion, and the greatest part of them too but men of mean and obscure extraction. SECT. XXXV. FOwer hundred Lanciers of the choisest men of those that cme from the conquest of the Gelves mutined and would have gon awaie becaus they did not receiv the paie, which was promised them from Valladolid, and they demanded moreover paiement of their arreares ever since the death of the King Don Fernando, which amounting to fortie Duckets a man at least made the summe of eight thousand Duckets. The Citie not having monie to satisfie their demands, yet loth to let them go, becaus they were stout, well disciplined souldiers, and wel armed, caused all their Gates to bee shut, whilest they went to procur them monie. In the first place they searched the Cloister of the Benedictans, where they found six thousand Duckets, which som particular persons had deposited there, thinking it more secure then in their own hands.Here the Auor, though  Frier, ex∣presseth more splen and passion hen Chri∣stian chari∣tie to his brthre. After which, they went to other Religious houses & Colledges in like manner; Insomuch that at last, with what they took up by waie of lone, they got enough to give them satisfaction. Thus was that Citie guiltie of their own torment and trouble, by maintaining a fire-brand (for tey deserved no other name) in their own bowels. But that which seemed most grievous to them, was, That they were
daily so molested and affronted by that paultrie Garrison of Si∣mancas: Therefore they flatly told those of the Iunta, that either they should go themselvs, or give them their men, for Valladolid was resolved to unroost those Harpyes. At length Valladolid see∣ing themselvs reduced to so great want and povertie, for they had no way to gain a peny, all Trading and Commerce lost, the roads were so unsecure, that if they did but peep (as it were) out of their houses, they were in danger of beeing kill'd, taken ri∣soners, or at least plundered; and that their War was not in ear∣nest to the purpose, neither had they any hopes of peace, they wrote a Letter to the Cavaliers in these terms: Valladolid's Letter to the Cavaliers. Illustrious Sirs! WEe received a Letter from you, whereby any man of the least judgment or understanding may plainly see, that your actions do absoluely contradict what you express in words. And for a further mani∣festation, that the peace which you publish is directly opposite to your actual proceedings; you have introduced an abominable War in these Kingdoms, under the notion of obedience to their Majesties, battering and forcing the place where the Queen residd, seizing on, and imprisoning er servants, and the Commissioners of the Kingdom, permitting her Court to bee ran∣sack't, the Churches to bee robb'd, women violated, the high-waies stop∣ped, the Iustice of the Kingdom (which was the Chancerie) to bee ta∣ken away, and other horrid things, which never were seen or heard of before; whereby experience sheweth us, that the offers of Peace, which you have and do make us, are onely forms, and a policie to wearie out, divide and procure the utter destruction of the Kingom. Beeing sore aggrieved at, and for the disservices, dammages, and troubles which our Sovreign Lord the King, & his Kingdoms have, and do daily suffer, and seing that with this dissembled Peace which you cunningly publish, may bee brought to ruine and perdition, wee are in the minde to persevere in that which wee have be∣gun, and maintein the name of faithful and loial subjects, in discharging our duties to our Sovereigns, and in executing what wee are obliged to per∣form to our selvs, and our Countrie; not forgetting what's past, wee suf∣fer with chearfulness all these troubles and afflictions, which are worthie
of acknowledgment before God, and his Majestie, our Sovereign, since they pass as obligations which wee owe them. Wee hope hence orwards, that all the oppressions and waies which you have used to divert and withdraw us from this holie purpose, shall not weaken or dis hearten us, but rather streng∣then and encourage us the more to resist and fight against all those that hav been the causers, and so detestable initiators of the miseries of these Kingdoms. d we trust in God that e wil speedily shew som heavie judgment upon the ntors of such pervers actions, that they may alone suffer the punishment of heir crimes, not wee, nor those of the holie Junta; for whosoever will se∣riously and judiciously consider it, shall see, that there is no fear of blame▪ where is faithfulness and truth, neither doth passion dare to presume, wher the publick good is preferred before the particular; nor ambition, wher men without consideration of either honor, life or fortnes, expose them∣slvs to divers hard censures and obloquies. But their actions rather m∣bolden and strengthen them to continue so just an undertaking, the obtei∣ing whereof will procure us the perpetual Peace which wee desire. Yo know, Sirs, that the producer of Peace is War; if our forefathers had not fought and spilt their blood, wee should never have enjoied that happ Peace which wee had during the time of the reign of King Don Fernan∣do, and Donia Isabella of glorious memorie. That war is laudabl, which tend's to the libertie of the King and Kingdom; And abominable i that Peace, whose end is subjection, oppression, and slverie: Therefo our purpose and intention is, That our King may bee free, enjoie his King∣doms as our Sovereign Lord, not subject nor over swaied by any evil favo∣rites, nor fals or cheating Counsels. That his Revenues and Roial Pa∣trimonie may not bee usurped, or lavishly wasted, but preserved, or useful∣ly expended for the good of his Kingdoms, to the end hee may bee beloved, obeied, and faithfully served. And out of this love, obedience, and respect, wee wish, desire, and humbly beseech his Majestie to seek a remedie for his Roial Crown, and his Kingdoms; that, under God, hee onely may bee ou Lord, our King, onely mightie, onely rich, his own and our onely helper an redressor, whom onely we may fear, serv, onor, and obeie: to whom onely wee may asscribe the glorie, and render a due acknowledgment for our pub∣lick good, and to whom onely wee may address our complaints and grievan∣s: which if you would but seriously weigh and consider, you would not so condemn and oppose our holie proceedings, nor the sacred end at which we aim. And since wee cannot accomplish our desire in a peaceable manner,
it is but reason wee should endeavor to obtein them by war, in regard it is just and holie, our end beeing to finde everlasting Peace. So it cannot bee said that the Kingdom is caus of this War, but those disturbers, who hin∣der us from enjoying and procuring the universal good, which wee seek af∣ter; for which they must render a strict account to God and their Maje∣sties, besides all the dammages, slaughters, extortions, and other grand mischiefs, which will all lie upon their score. The true peace is, that ▪ and the other Grandees ceas from disturbing or hindering the universal , which wee labor with all our force and might to procure. For the effecting and settling of which Peace, the Truce which your Lordships did desire was very requisite, if your Actions had been answerable to your Verbal expres∣sions; but that was not granted you, becaus it was demanded onely to a∣muse us, and to gain time to your selvs; and if it were not so, neither is it just nor reasonable, that the Kingdom should disband teir forces, which have cost so much trouble and charge the raising; for the experience of for∣mer passages hath taught us, that your intent is to cosen and overcom us with such formal pretenses. But wee supplicate and require you, to give the Kingdom leav to seek and finde the good which they pretend, and not to set your selvs in opposition and contradiction of our intentions; for our drift and purpose is no other, then to advance our holie enterprise, and repel all those that shall withstand us. of whom our trust in God is, that re long wee shall obtein Victorie. To whom wee make our heartie praiers, that hee will bee pleased to enlighten your illustrious understandings with the true knowledg of our Caus. SECT. XXXVI. ALthough the Cavaliers did treat of an Accommodation, yet they ceased not to get what arms, and assemble what for∣ces they could. The general Letters signed by the Cardinal, Lord Admiral, and Earl of Haro at Tordesillas, with the date in blank, I have seen in the Lord High Constable's hands, with di∣vers other originals. They demanded of Avila eighteen hun∣dred Foot: of Cordova, one thousand: of the Citie of Jaen, three hundred: of Trugillo, one hundred and fiftie Lances, and two hundred Foot: of Badajos, one hundred Foot: of Baeca, two hundred Foot: of Ecija, three hundred Foot: of Ubeda, two
hundred Foot. of Xerez, one hundred and fiftie lances. of Ca∣ceres, two hundred Foot. of Anduxar, one thousand Foot. of Ciudad-Real, one hundred and twentie Foot. of Carmona, one hundred and fiftie Foot. of the Duke of Arcos, sixtie lances. of the Earl of Vruen̄a, sixtie cross-bow-men on hors-back. of Don Fernando Enriquez, twentie lances. of the Earl of Palma, twentie lances. of Don Rodrigo Mexia, twentie lances. of the Marquis of Tarifa, fourscore lances. of the Marquis of Comares, thirtie lances. of the Earl of Ayamonte, thirtie lances. of the Marquis of Villa∣nueva, twentie lances. of the Earl of Cabra, fiftie lances. of the Duke of Medina Sidonia, one hundred lances. All these men they desired, and all paied for three months, promising to repaie the Souldiers, and charges of levying and arming them out of his Majestie's Revenue. At the same time, the Lord high Constable used the like diligence to rais men in the Mountains, saying, hi design was to resist the Bishop of Zamora, and the other Traitors with him: also hee used means to intercept the Arms which were coming from Guipuzcoa to the Commoners. SECT. XXXVII. THe Commonalties, especially Valladolid, were much dis∣pleased that those of the Iunta, and the Commanders of the Armie did so prolong the War, for alreadie they were so ex∣hausted, that they found themselvs not able to sustain it. And Valladolid, who had so vast a charge of souldiers to maintain, and suffered exceedingly, by the continual assaults and incursions, which those of Simancas made into their Territories, was more sensible of the smart then any of the other Cities, and never left praying and threatning in publick and in private, until they had persuaded or forced the Captains to march out with their Armie, and to end the dispute with the Cavaliers in on battle. Upon Saturdaie night of the first week in Lent the 17 of February 1521. Iohn de Padilla, with the greatest privacie that might bee, let his design should bee discovered, marched with his men out of Valladolid to Zaratan (a Village within a league of the Citie) where hee quartered that night. From whence hee went the
same night with fourtie hors directly to Simancas. Beeing ar∣rived at the Watch-Tower, which was upon a hill a little above the Town, Iohn de Padilla asked the fellow which kept it, if hee had perceived any thing of the enemie; The man thinking hee had been som of their Garrison, said, Yes; I saw a great number of men march from Valladolid to Zaratan, which make's my heartake, for wee have but a few left in Simancas. Iohn de Padilla presently laied hands on him, and carried him to his Quarters, where having secured him, hee returned towrds Simancas, by the waie hee lighted upon a partie of their hors, that had been scouring the Countrie, those hee charged and chased into the very Town, after which hee returned to Zaratan, with a great prise of sheep, which hee took from them. Three daies after this, came more men out of Valladolid with the Artilerie of Medina. Next daie after them, marched out those that came from los Gelves, who were quartered in Zaratan, Arroyo, and other places about Simancas, with them came the Bishop of Zamora, who although sick, would not staie behind the Armie, saying, That in defence of the liberties of the Kingdom, dead or alive, sick or in health, how∣ever hee would follow the Camp, such was the courage and animositie of a Prelate threescore years old at least. Besides all these, came to joyn with him likewise Iohn Bravo and Francisco Maldonado, with all their forces and divers hors-men. Some daies they remained in Zaratan, pillaging and taking what they could from those of Simancas and Torrelobaton. Some daies they took from the Inhabitants of the enemie's Quarters 1500 sheep per diem, and though it was Lent, their Bishop gave them leav to eat flesh, so they wanted for no good cheer. Another time Iohn de Padilla marched out of his Quarters with a great partie of hors, and met with some of Simancas and Torrelobaton's Gar∣risons, and after an hot skirmish, wherein som on both sides were killed, Iohn de Padilla took fiftie Cavaliers, horses and arms, for which hee might have had great sums of monie, if hee would have ransomed them, but hee refused it.
SECT. XXXVIII. IT beeing a holie time (in Lent) and the War dangerous and prejudicial, divers good Religious men interceded for an Ac∣comodation of these differences, and to procure an absolute Peace, if possible. At Aniago (a Monasterie of the Carthusians, upon the River Duero, three leagues from Valladolid) was the meeting place to Treat. Those of the Commonaltie had very fair and advantagious conditions offered them, but their heads beeing possessed with prejudice, and their hearts infected with the poisonous vice of War, having the libertie to pillage and spoil as they listed,Here the Autor x∣tend's him∣self as far in flatterie, as in other places in passionate railing. they would not hearken to any reason. In∣deed the Lord High Constable, and the Lord Admiral, are both worthie of immortal prais; for out of a most Christian zeal and affection to their Countrie, they desired this peace, offering the Commonalties all favorable and reasonable terms possible, and indented with the Emperor, in a manner, that hee should grant and confirm whatsoever they agreed upon with them, and that hee should remit and pardon all the injuries they had done to his Roial Crown; Protesting moreover, that it grieved them to the souls that any man should die in that quarrel; yet nothing would do. SECT. XXXIX. ON Thursdaie, the 21 of Februarie, Iohn de Padilla marched out of Zaratan with his whole Camp (which consisted of seven thousand Foot, and five hundred Lances) at two of the clock after midnight, going very silently in good order, and taking Guides along with them to shew them the waie to Tor∣relobaton, in the very Suburbs whereof hee took up his quarters, robbing and plundering all they could lay hands on; but the people had carried all their best goods into the Town, which was very strong.Ihn de Pa∣lla besie∣geth Torre∣lbation. The next daie Iohn de Padilla commanded his great Ordnance to bee planted in convenient places, to batter he Town, which hee did very smartly; but all his shots were
to little purpose, for the rampires were extraordinarie. After this hee gave them a brisk assault, with great clamors of men, and bouncing of Guns, but hee got nothing by that, for the be∣sieged defended themselvs with much resolution. In this Con∣flict (which lasted all daie) were divers slain and hurt, but the most part were of Iohn de Padilla's men, who fought at disad∣vantage, having no defence nor rampires to shelter them; so that seeing the great loss hee received, and the little good hee did, mos of their ladders beeing too short, and those that ventured to mount up, were either knock'd down dead, or shrewdly woun∣ded, hee thought it his best waie to fall off, and sound a Retreat; so the combate ceased for that time: All that night Iohn de Padilla labored to entrench himself, and rais a batterie in another place, that hee might give them another fresh assault the next daie. The Lord Admiral, and the others at Tordesillas, beeing advertised of Iohn de Padilla's beeing advanced to Torrelabaton, sent presently to draw the Garrisons out of Simancas, and Portillo, with intent to reliev Torrelobaton, if possible, although they were but weak in Foot, and the enemie had great store, and very good. First they sent out two Troops of Hors to discover the order and strength of the enemie's Camp, with whom they had som slight skir∣mishes. This daie Iohn de Padilla wasted in raising a new bat∣terie, and planting his Artillerie, but hee found that prt of the Town no less strong then the former, so that hee could do no execution; but on the morrow (which was the third daie of his beeing there) hee removed his Ordnance to another part of the wall, which was weaker, where hee made som brea∣ches, which those of Valladolid and Toledo spying, ran present∣ly hurrying without order to enter; the dispute continu∣ed very hot a great while; but the Besieged behaved them∣selvs so gallantly, that they were forced to retreat with no smal loss. The same daie the Earl of Haro, Captain General, having left a sufficient Guard in Tordesillas, marched out to face the enemie, with a matter of a thousand Lances, intending to give the Alarm on one side of the Town, whil'st the Governor Don Francisco Ossorio, Lord of Valdonquillo carried in a fresh suppli of souldiers on the other. Hee desired of the Lord Admiral
that they might bee Horsmen, but the Earl of Haro thought that not so convenient, hee having more need of the Cavalrie for the field-battle: Beeing com within sight of the Town in the Evening, they staied upon the top of a hill, whence the Earl sent a partie of his Hors to skirmish with som Arcabusiers, (who beeing betwixt the besieged, and the mud-walls, stood much to their advantage) but seeing his men cruelly galled, and able to do no good there, hee commanded they should retreat to the bo∣die, which was still upon the hill expecting Don Francisco Ossorio to put in execution their intended design: but whil'st they were thus staying, arrived a Gentleman with a Letter from the Lord Admiral, to the Earl of Haro, saying, That hee might return a∣gain, for hee had notice since, that there was no such need of putting any succor into Torrelobaton, for there was already strength sufficient to defend it; notwithstanding this counter∣mand, divers Gentlemen offered to go into the Town; but it could not bee attempted, the Lord Admiral having forbidden the Ladders to bee brought, which were agreed upon. So it beho∣ved the Earl to go back again that night to Tordesillas, without bringing his purpose to effect, to satisfie the Lord Admiral, who (as it afterwards proved) was very much over-seen therein: But som say, hee was angrie becaus the Earl of Haro did not follow his advice in the prosecution of that design. Iohn de Pa∣dilla beeing alarmed by these thousand Hors, and finding that hee had not force enough for the offensive and defensive both, sent presently to Valladolid for more. Upon receipt of his Letter, three thousand Foot, and four hundred Hors were ordered to march to the Armie at Torrelobaton, vvho vvent vvith as good a will to fight, as if they had gon to gain the Iubilee. On Satur∣day 28 Febr. they arrived in the suburbs, to the no less rejoicing and encouragement of the Besiegers, then the dis-heartening and terror of the Besieged; who sent to the Lord Admiral, com∣plaining very much of Valladolid, saying, That onely that Citie id them all the mischief. Sunday, Munday, and Tuesday they bat∣tered incessantly with all their Ordnance, and very many were killed on both sides: A man could not peep above the wall, but hee had presently a bullet, or an arrow in his head: yet the Ca∣valiers
stood out manfully; but beeing not above four hundred Foot, and som few Hors, they were not able to defend them∣selvs, and wthstand the continual assaults of the Enemie, ha∣ving no intermission nor time to take any rest, besides provisions began to fail them. Iohn de Padilla having raised several batte∣ries against the Town, at last one of them made a breach, where (whil'st the besieged were defending themselvs in another part of the Town) those of Valladolid entred with their Colors; they sacked the Town with the greatest crueltie in the world: they killed the poor laboring men, becaus they could not give them what they demanded, spilled all their Wines, breaking the tubs in pieces; they plundered the Churches, stript the Altars, and broke open the Tombs, thinking to finde som hidden treasure therein. Finally they did such things, that the most savage bruits, who have not the use of reason, could not do wors, respecting neither humane things nor divine. Next daie beeing Wednes∣daie, they fell to battering of the Tower, which defended it self stoutly, but beeing full of women and children that had retired themselvs thither for securitie (who feeling it shake at everie shot that hit it) cried out, fearing it would fall upon their heads, and having nothing to eat, it was surrendered upon condition to secure all their lives,John de Pa∣dilla take' Torrelobao and the Tower. and half their goods. Thus Iohn d Padilla took Torrelobaton, which was no inconsiderable piece of service▪ Hereby hee gained himself much reputation amongst the Com∣mon-people, it beeing but three leagues from Tordesillas, where the Governors, with all their forces, were. The Towns which stood for the Commonaltie, made great shews of rejoicing for this Vi∣ctorie. The Lord Admiral, and those that were with him, were cruelly netled hereat, and beeing vexed more for their honor's sake, then for the importance of the place, they resolved to bee revenged. So they gave notice forthwith to the Lord High Con∣stable of all passages, who commanded immediately four thou∣sand men (which hee had ready) with four pieces of Ord∣nance, to march by the waie of Palencia to Tordesillas, whereof Don Iohn de Mendoça having intelligence, sallied out of Valladolid with above four thousand Foo, and stopt their passage. Te Cavaliers seeing they could get no succor that waie, nor having
men enough in Tordesillas to encounter Iohn de Padilla, who was very strong, besides all the Cities beeing their enemies, they sent to demand a Truce for eight daies of Iohn de Padilla, which al∣though he, and som of the Commissioners that were with him, were not unwilling to grant, yet they durst not, without con∣sulting with Valladolid; for in regard they stood in great need of that Citie, and were very much favored and assisted by them, they bare them a singular respect, and would determine nothing without their privitie. This was communicated to all the people of Valladolid, and discussed; at length they all agreed to return this answer, That they should by no means grant them any truce, no, not for one hour, but proceed against them with all manner of rigor; for it was most certain, that they demanded a Truce for nothing els, but meerly to recruit themselvs of men and provisions, to the prejudice of the Commonaltie; and if they did grant them eight or fifteen daies libertie, by the ancient law of the Kingdom they might renew their Cessation still to ninetie and six daies, and so from ninetie six to ninetie six, until the year were out; by which procrastinations, the Commonalties would bee destroied and ruined, and the people lose their courage and good zeal, which at present did animate them to defend their Liberties: yet notwithstanding Valladolid sent this answer, the Commissioners of the Kingdom, and the Commanders of the Armie did grant the Truce for eight daies, from Sunday to Sundaie. SECT. XXXIX. THis Cessation was demanded after the taking of Torreloba∣ton, although that much displeased the Lord Admiral, and Fray Francisco de los Angeles went to Valladolid, in his and the Car∣dinal's name, to treat thereof, whom Alonso de Vera a bridler and one of the worshipful Citie officers, meeting at the Gate del Campo, treated very uncivilly, and would not suffer to enter into the Citie. After this, Alonso de Ortiz, with danger enough of his life, ventured to return thither, with Letters of credence to treat about the same business. Who beeing entred into the Citie,
communicated his errand to Don Pedro de Ayala, and Don Her∣nando de Ulloa, (whom hee found died in grain for his purpose) and forth with they gave order, that the Iunta should assemble to hear the message that Alonso de Ortiz brought from Tordesillas. Which beeing heard, and the Articles and conditions of the Truce being almost concluded, and the time for the continuance thereof limited; it chanced that Fray Pablo and Sancho Zimbron (who ar∣ried the Articles of the Kingdom into Flanders, to get them gran∣ted and auhorized by his Majestie, as hath been alreadie menti∣oned) arrived at Valladolid: And hearing that they were about a Treatie of Cessation of Arms, Fray Pablo presently sent notice of his arrival to the Iunta, desiring them that they would not con∣clude of either Peace, or War, or Truce; until hee came to give them an account of the employment, upon which they had sent him into Flanders. Hereupon that business was suspended until the evening: And then the Commissioners of the Kingdom beeing set againe, Fray Pablo came and gave them an account of his journie, and what hee had done. Amongst other rela∣tions, hee told them, that when hee came into Flanders, the Em∣peror was gon into Germanie, whither hee and Sancho Zimbron in∣tended to follow him; but by the waie hee was informed that his Majestie had given order (if they came into Germanie) to have them hanged; Whereupon they went no further. More∣over, that hee knew that his Majestie was so displeased with those Articles, and so incensed against those that had ay hand in the making of them, or in raising those Commotions in the Kingdom, that at his return into Spain, they should bee all severely punished, notwithstanding any engagement or promises the Governors had made to the contrarie in his name. This infor∣mation the Frier gave the Commissioners of the Kingdoms, be∣sides divers other particulars, which are too tedious to relate. In conclusion, hee told them that his advice was, that they should contract neither Peace nor Truce with the Grandees, but stand firm and unanimously persevere in their former resolution. So that if his Majestie would com again into their Kingdom,  might bee through their means,Wholsom counsel of the Frier. and not by the Grandees. For that beeing done by a permissive will of the Kingdom, they
might make their own conditions, and have what securitie they pleased; besides, they might so make their bargain, that if his Majestie did not perform his agreement with them, the King∣dom might remain united and agreed, That all the people should assemble whensoever occasion did require, and stick close one to the other in what concerned them for their defence, and have sufficent assurance that the agreement made with them should bee performed. Wherefore his opinion was, that they ought not onely, not to grant the Truce which was desired, but couragiously to persist in the War, until they had destroyed the Grandees, and made the Commissioners of the Kingdom with the Iunta, Lords of the Countrie. Notwithstanding this dis∣cours of Fray Pablo, the Commissioners commanded Ortiz to continue the Treatie. After all this, it hapned that the Frier sitting next to Ortiz, and taking him to bee a Commissioner of som Citie, that was com to the Iunta since his departure, hee be∣gan to repeat som thing of his discours to the other Commissi∣oners, but chiefly harped upon the Emperor's intent to punish the Commoners, notwithstanding any pardon the Governors should promise them in his behalf. Whereupon, not well brooking his speeches, Ortiz asked him how hee knew the Em∣peror had any such thought: Hee answered hee was told so. Then Ortiz could hold no longer, but with a voice that might bee heard by all in the room, said, That hee wondred that a man of his coat and gravitie, beeing a Doctor of Divinitie, who ought to give good example, should positively saie a thing of such importance (as that which hee had verified to those Gentlemen in these words, (That notwithstanding any pardon the Gavernors should grant, confirmed by his Majestie, those who had raised the Commotions in the Kingdom, his Majestie would punish at his return, as if they had been taken in the fact) upon no other certaintie, but onely hear-saie; In regard those words were enough to disturb and hinder the conclusion of the Truce, which might produce a Peace, and those of his dignitie and profession ought rather to endeavour to make Peace, when other hopes failed, then to hin∣der and obstruct the means of procuring it. The Frier hearing this, was very wrath, and asked who hee was; It beeing told him
that Ortiz was the man that sollicited for the Truce in behalf of the Cavaliers, hee stole out of the Iunta. Ortiz staied still, treat∣ing with the Commissioners about the conditions of the Truce. In mean time Fray Pablo went to som of the Citie, telling them that they had suffered a Traitor to com in amongst them, whom the Grandees had sent under the notion of treating a Truce, to espie what was done in the Citie, and to sound the People's in∣clinations: That in his opinion they ought to turn him out of the Citie, or apprehend him, and make him confess the principal caus of his coming thither. Presently the Commoners, in whose heads hee had buzz'd these things, went along with him to the Iunta, all armed, and boldly rushed into the Chamber where they sate, asking them very peremptorily, why they suffered a Traitor to com into the Citie, to spie and make advantage of their proceedings; requiring the Commissioners forthwith to discharge him the Ciie, otherwise they would apprehend him and make him give them an account of his business there; Other high language and threatnings they used, which put Ortiz in a bodily fear. The Comissioners with smooth and flat∣tering words pacified them in such sort, that they went quietly awaie. Which done, Ortiz thus spake unto them, Gentlemen, If becaus I came hither upon your words and assurance to treat of the Truce, this stir and combustion hath been raisd, rather then the people shall turn mee out of the Citie, I will depart: But if you pleas to treat further of the business, for which I have undertaken this journie, and will promiss as you are Gentle∣men to secure and defend mee, notwithstanding their me∣naces, I will staie until all bee concluded. Those of the Junta answered, that they were contented, and gave him their words, upon the faith of Gentlemen, to defend him. So the Treatie went on, and they stirr'd not from the place until the conditions were all concluded,Alonso Ortiz obtain's a Truce fom those of the Junt with the Cava∣liers. whereof a Copie was given to Ortiz, inclosed with the Conditions and Articles, besides a particular dispatch from the Iunta general, and the particular Iun∣ta of Valladolid to their Captains, then beeing at Torrelobaton, gi∣ving them to understand, that they had agreed unto that Truce, and commanding them to obeie it, and caus it to bee proclaimed
in their Armie, verbatim as it was there written. With these dis∣patches departed Ortiz post from Valladolid, after eleven of the Clock in the night, and arrived at Torrelobaton about one; where hee found neither in the Camp, nor in the Town, any Guard; so hee entred into the Suburbs with his servants, where two thousand men laie fast asleep about their fires, so careless, that two hundred men, falling upon them at that time, had been enough to have destroied the whole Armie. Ortiz lost no time, but forthwith hee notified to Iohn de Padilla, and other Commanders, the Or∣ders for the Truce. That same night, and next morning, they all assembled, and although there were som dissenting opini∣ons amongst them, and difficulties of either accepting or keep∣ing it, especially beeing contradicted highly by Diego de Guzman, Commissioner of Salamanca, who, by command of the Iunta, came into the Armie, under notion of beeing the General's over∣seer. At length the Truce was accepted and proclaimed in the Armie;By order from the Junta the Truce is proclaimed in John de Padilla's Armie. whereof Ortiz taking certificate, departed presently for Tordesillas, where hee was joifully received by the Lord Admi∣ral and the Cardinal, with the rest of the Grandees, who all were very glad of that Truce, as thinking it the precursor of the so generally desired Peace. The same night being assembled in the Cardinal's Chamber, the Lord Admiral, the Earl of Venavente, the Marquis of Astorga, the Earl of Miranda, the Earl of Alva de Lista, the Earl of Villarrambla, the Earl of Cifuentes, and divers o∣ther private Gentlemen, besides Iuan Rodriquez Mausino, Embas∣sador from the King of Portugal, El Licenciado Polanca of the Council, and Pedro de Camaceli Secretarie; Before them all Ortiz related the troubles which hee had gon through, and produced the Dispatches which hee brought concerning the Truce, where∣in those of the Junta said, That they were contented to conde∣scend to the Truce, which was desired in the behalf of the Go∣vernors of the Kingdom, in order to the service of God, and becaus the King of Portugal had so commanded it: The Nobles were much distasted hereat, saying, They would not consent to the Truce upon such terms;The Can∣dee's excep∣tions a∣gainst the Truce. that they were not so ill provided, as that the Commoners should think they had any advantage of them: That they were ready to give them battle whensoever
they would, and that the Truce should not bee accepted nor proclaimed in their Armie, unless those words were altered. Hereupon were different opinions and votes; at last it was re∣solved that Ortiz should go back to Valladolid, to treat thereupon. Som daies were spent whil'st this was in agitation, during which time neither the Truce was well observed, neither was there open War.Thoe of Valladolid disconten∣ed against the Com∣anders of their Ar∣mie, for yielding to a Truce. Whereupon the Commonalties, especially Valladolid, were highly discontented, and went muttering out their complaints in these or the like words, That their Captains having raised themselvs to such high Offices, did but dallie and grew negligent of the Caus; That the Cavliers did amuse them in trifling away the time in Treaties, onely to recruit and streng∣then themselvs, and fall upon them when they saw their advan∣tage; in which opinion they were not much mistaken. SECT. XL. DOn Pedro Lasso, and Alonso de Guadalaxara  sioner of Segovia, were all this time at the Mo  Do∣minicans, without Tordesillas, treating of Peace th the di∣nal and Lord Admiral. But upon the taking and sacking of Torrelobaton, the Lord Admiral beeing very much displeased, the Treatie was broken off for a while; yet out of the great desire hee had to see the Kingdom settled, hee fell to treat again of the Peace. And beeing agreed upon som Articles, it was the gene∣ral opinion of them, that the Cessation would conduce much to the conclusion of the rest; for the better and more speedy effect∣ing whereof, divers Prelates and good Religious men came from several parts to asst at the Treatie. The Governors and Noblemen condescended to the greatest part, and most important of the Articles, which the Commonalties desired, and the Peace was in a fair waie of beeing concluded; but the Commo∣ners were so mistrustful, that they could not agree about the se∣curitie: the Governors and Grandees offered to oblige their per∣sons and estates to procure the Emperor's approbation and con∣firmation of their agreement with the people, besides other very fair propositions which the King of Portugal's Embassador did
much incite the Commoners to accept: But they would have the Grandees engage themselvs to demand it by force of arms, in case the Emperor should denie to ratifie their conditions and promi∣ses to the people, delivering them som principal persons as hosta∣ges, and certain Forts (then in their hands) as pledges of their performance thereof. Insomuch that teir standing upon such terms, destroied absolutely all hopes and probabilitie of Peace. Yet hoping that time might produce som better effect, it was re∣solved before the Truce was fully expired, to procure a Proroga∣tion or a renewing of it; to vvhich effect the Embassador of Por∣tugal, and Don Pedro Lasso, taking som grave Religious men vvith them, the last daie of the Truce vvent to Torrelobaton, and gave John de Padilla, and the other Captains, an account of all passages; who, whether not willing, or not having the power to grant their desires, agreed (although the Truce was out) to go to Zaratan; where those of the Junta assembled to treat thereupon. But they were so high, and fearing thereby to lose their great Of∣fices, especially the Commanders of the Armie, that they could agree upon neither Peace nor Truce, although som of the Iunta did give their Votes for it, whereof Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega was the leading man, who from that time forwards left them, withdrawing himself from that Assemblie, and went to the Governors at Tordesillas.The Truce brokn off again. Thus the Truce and Treaties came to nothing, onely this benefit they produced, that in those eight daies time Iohn de Padilla lost a good part of his Armie; for those souldiers, who had gotten monie, or any good plunder at the sacking of Torrelobaton, the passages beeing free and secure during the Truce, went home to their own dwellings; the like did divers of the Hors of the antient Guards of the King∣dom, becaus they were not paied. After this there was ano∣ther Assemblie at Bamba, whither Iohn de Padilla was sent for, who beeing com, they all agreed to sit at Zaratan. Thither re∣paired divers from Valladolid on hors-back and on foot, to small purpose: The Grandees demanded Truce for eight daies more, or for three; but the Commoners would by no means give consent thereunto, alleging that they would deceiv them: then they went to dinner, but beeing ready to sit down, Iohn de Pa∣dilla
had notice, that they had a design to murther him, where∣upon, without staying to eat or drink, away went hee to Torre∣lobaton, and the rest to Tordesillas. SECT. XLI. BY this time Don Antonio de Zun̄iga had on foot a complete Armie in the Kingdom of Toledo, in favor of his Majesties loial servants, and to reduce Ocan̄a, which with other places of the Maestrazgo of Santjago was risen up in Arms: and beeing at Almaguer, the Gardian of St Iuan de los Reyes of Toledo came to him with certain admonitions and treaties from that Citie, and Commonaltie thereof, insomuch that there was a kinde of Truce betwixt them, and probabilities of a peaceable accommodation: but it fell out otherwise, and their difference grevv to an open War, the Bishop of Zamora beeing made Captain for Ocan̄a, and other revolted places, against Don Antoni. SECT. XLII. IN some papers which I have seen Originals of Fray Antonio de Guevaua, Chronicler to his Imperial Majestie, concerning the Commonalties, Hee mention's that the Town of Duen̄as like∣wise rose up in Arms, and misdemeaned themselvs exceedingly towards the Earl and Countess of Buendia, who making re∣sistance against their furie, the people sent to desire succor from those of the Junta. And hee saie's that those of the Junta and the Commoners also did seem to bee sorrie that those of Duen̄as had desobliged the Earl, becaus neither hee nor his Ladie had expressed any disaffection to the Commonalties, and that of secret friends their miscarriage had now made them open ene∣mies. Yet seeing that it was of no small concernment to have the Town of Duen̄as at their Devotion, the succor which they demanded, was forthwith sent them from Valla∣dolid, to wit, seven hundred Foot, Pikemen, Muskettiers, and Cross-bow-men, and all paid for a certain time. For which they returned thanks in a Letter to Valladolid, wherein they made large expressions and protestations of their firm resolution to
serv the Emperor, and the Commonaltie, with divers other things. SECT. XLIII. THe 27th of March 1521. Both the Armies were in ill con∣dition enough, and neither of them could boast of much advantage over the other, according to the information which Don Pedro Luxan Commendador Mayor of Castilla beeing in Simancas, did give the Emperor; saying, That in that Garrison they stood in want of men; That John de Padilla with the other Captains for the Commonaltie had taken Torrelobaton; That from Tor∣desillas and other places thereabout, his Foot had received some prejudice. That divers of his men had left the Camp, as is usual when an Armie lie's still without action. That the like was done by the Foot in the Loyal Armie also, but of hors they had a sufficient quantitie. That the Armie remaining in Torrelo∣baton, was reported not to exceed two thousand Foot, and three hundred hor. That Iohn de Padilla and those with him were up∣on their departure thence, having a great desire to com to Siman∣cas, where they presumed at least a thousand more would com to them from Valladolid, out of revenge and hatred to those of that Garrison, and to secure themselvs from any further dammage. That monie began to grow scarce amongst the Commoners, and that their souldiers were ill paid. That the same diseas was amongst the Cavaliers, yet they had somwhat salved that sore by the sale of those Noblemen's and Gentlemen's plate that were in Tordesillas, wherewith they had procured monie to give one months paie to the Foot, and two to the hors viz. March and April, (By which time the Emperor had written that hee would bee back in Flanders and readie to take shipping for Spain.) And that those old souldiers which came from los Gelves, came every daie, by two and three at a time, into the Cavaliers Armie, and gave out that the rest would all go neer to follow them. Finis Libri Quinti.
THE CIVIL WARS OF SPAIN. THE SIXTH BOOK. SECT. I. THe passions seated in the Souls of men are in effect not unlike to the recoverie of a bodie out of some desperate sickness: For any the least excess cast's the affected Partie into a re∣lapse, and by an untimely precipitation hur∣rieth him into the Sepulchre. The Cavaliers and the Commoners did not treat with that realtie as they ought: Some made a fair shew, and seemed to desire a Peace, though they were best contented with the War, for divers particular interests which they did receiv thereby.
Others dissembled (though not altogether) and the most part of those (which were called Commoners) were prepossessed with a diffident and distrustful humor, holding for uncertain and onely pretences, all the conditions that were offred them on the behalf of his Majestie and the Cavaliers. Whilest they were in a treatie during the eight daies of Truce, two things hapned which destroyed all the Impostume or poison where∣with their hearts were swoln, bursting out into the disorders which in this Book shall bee related, and shall conclude this de∣plorable Historie. Insomuch that the clouds, which hung over Castilla,Here the Frier m∣keth a di∣gression, falling into his usual manner of flatterie. threatning a cruel storm, were all dissipated in one short and not bloodie battle betwixt the Cavaliers and the Com∣moners, in the plain of Villalar, the success whereof struck such remors of Conscience into the people's hearts, and the Cities ac∣knowledging their errors, returned to their obedience unto him, whom God had given them for their King, serving and loving him, as shall bee een hereafter. During the fore-mentioned oc∣currences, Francisco de Mercado, Corregidor of Medina del Campo, with twentie hors (which in those daies were called Esquiers) and other persons, who by command of the Iunta were coming to Valladolid, at the pass over the River Duero (which is two leagues from Valladolid and one from Simancas) they were encountred by a partie of one hundred and fiftie light-hors of the Earl of On̄ate's, who were going to seek adventures: Four of those of Medina were killed upon the place; Francisco de Mercado, the Master of the Ordnance, and two more were taken prisoners, and carried to Simancas. Notice hereof beeing given at Valladolid, they sent out a strong partie to rescue them but it was too late; and the Corregidor of Medina (who was immediatly released again) hindred them somwhat, for meeting with them hee told them, They might go back again, for the business was nothing; But afterwards knowing the truth of the storie, they apprehended the Corregidor of Medina for a suspicious person, laying to his charge the loss of those men, and would have executed him pre∣sently, but upon more serious consideration they held it best to dissemble and forbear a while, lest they should thereby indanger the lives of those that were prisoners at Simancas. So they sent
first to demand them, making great complaints, that during the Truce they should commit such acts of hostilitie, and break their words with them: But they found no amends. SECT. II. THat which chiefly incensed the mindes of all the Commo∣naltie was, that before the time of the Truce was exspired, there was set up (they knew not by whom) in the market place of Valladolid, a Proclamation made and signed by the Go∣vernors of the Kingdom, wherein they named divers Citizens of Valladolid, Toledo, Salamanca, Madrid, Guadalaxara, Murcia, Segovia, Toro, Zamora, and all the rest of the Commonalties, to the number of five hundred persons, and som Gentlemen, declaring them Traitors, Violaters of their faith to God and their King, and calling the Bishop, and Iohn de Padilla, and other Officers of the Commonaltie, treacherous enemies to his Majestie. This was dispatched in Burgos, and proclaimed with great solemni∣tie before Anton Gallo, Chancellor and Secretarie of his Majestie's Council then at Burgos, and divers other persons of note. The names of the parties mentioned beeing very many, and that im∣porting little or nothing to the substance of the Historie, I shall not trouble the Reader therewith. SECT. III. VAlladolid, in revenge of this Proclamation, set up against them, and the rest of the Commonalties, the next daie after it was found in the market place, they pasted upon the door of Santa Maria Church (which is now the Cathedral) a Paper, with a direction to the Citie of Valladolid, animating them to per∣severe in their holie purpose, and not to bee intimidated for any practices of the Enemies, or bee troubled at their reviling them with such opprobrious terms, and encouraging all those of the Commonaltie to make all forces possible, and march speedily into the field with so numerous an Armie, that the sight of them onely should serv to overcom their enemies without fighting, by
which means they should save the lives of many men, which would bee lost, if their Armies met with equal strength, besides the hazard to which they should expose their Caus. And if they were successful, the War would bee at an end, peace and plentie vvould encreas, the libertie and publick good of the Kingdom ensue, and the name of Traitors remain upon the Conquerred, vvho never vvould dare to face them again: This, vvith som o∣ther things to the same effect, vvas the substance of that Paper, vvhich the Common people read vvith great content and ap∣plaus, crying it up exceedingly, and sending copies of it through the vvhole Kingdom. SECT. IV. JOhn de Padilla's staying so long at Torrelobaton was very prejudi∣cial to the Commonalties; for besides that hee lost many men, hee gave the Cavaliers time to recruit and strengthen themselvs notably, whereas questionless if hee had fallen upon Tordesillas assoon as hee had taken in Torrelobaton, hee had driven them to extraordinarie straits. But he remained there hugging himself with that small victorie, and the applaus of the people, which hee had thereby procured: Hee fell to repairing the walls which hee had battered down, as if hee intended to make that the seat and residence of his Armie, which lasted not long after. The Cities of Toro and Zamora sent him som fresh supplies, whereof the Cavaliers having notice, they sent out a Partie of seven hundred Lances to cut off their waie, and their lives too, if they could; near Pedrosa they met, and after a prettie hot skir∣mish, the Cavaliers forced them into the Town, where they besieged them close; but Iohn de Padilla having notice of his men's distress, soon came to reliev them with three thousand Foot, and five hundred Hors, leaving a sufficient Guard in Tor∣relobaton: whom when the Cavaliers saw with so great force, they made their retreat good to Tordesillas; And Iohn de Padilla marched with his men to Castromonte (another Town of the Lord Admiral's) and having taken it, left a Garrison in it, and thence returned to Torrelobaton, intending to exspect the suc∣cor
for which hee had sent to the Cities of his Combination; in the mean time hee repaired and fortified the Town, (as I said before) lest the Cavaliers of Tordesillas should fall upon him be∣fore the forces hee exspected were com to him. There hee be∣gan to be sensible of his own ill government,John de Pa∣dilla was not so inca¦pable as the Frier make him, thugh o∣ver-seen in this oca∣sion. and of the dam∣mage which hee received by his too great confidence, which soon after hee more plainly saw, to the loss of his libertie and life. For it is a blindeness and imperfection of a man's intellect to thrust himself upon imploiments beyond the reach of his capaci∣tie, and having undertaken them, to bee rmiss in the execution of them. To bee the occasion of any troubles or disturbance in a Common-wealth is not Justifiable, but beeing once ingaged, it is an act of prudence for a man to bee vigilant and active in the atchievment of his design. SECT. V. IT were unjust that the great zeal wherewith the Lord high Admiral of Castilla was moved to reduce the people of that Kingdom (which were up in Arms) by fair means and with∣out bloodshed, to peace and due obedience to his Majestie, should pass without mentioning, for the eternal memorie of so noble a person, and the honor of his generous familie, who (as it is well known) was of the blood Roial. Having advertisment that Don̄a Maria Pacheco Mendoça, wife to Iohn de Padilla, had a great hand with her husband, and might contribute much to the withdrawing him from that imployment, nay, that hee had done the more by her instigation and spurring him on. And that Pedro Lopez de Padilla, his father, was yet living in Toledo, but very old and decrepit; the Lord Admiral sent a Gentleman, one of the Emperor's servants to them, with instructions full of prudent and sage counsels and advice, and strong arguments to convince and persuade them to induce Iohn de Padilla to moderate his over-violent passion, and admit of a Treatie with him, advi∣sing him not to bee so extreme careful and earnest in advancing the affairs of Valladolid, as to forget his own, assuring him that if hee would (as then it was in his power) but contribute his
consent to the concluding of a Peace, hee would not onely pro∣cure a pardon from his Majestie of all past-offencers, but set him highly in his esteem, and obtein divers favors and Mercedes to bee confirmed upon him and his children. These, and divers other good remonstrances hee gave Alonso de Quin̄ones to urge at Toledo, to the above-named persons; but hee might gave saved that labor. SECT. VI. THose of the Iunta, hearing of the great Power which the Earl of Salvatierra had assembled in the Mountains, where∣with hee had possessed himself of the Artillerie, which was coming from Navarra to the Cavaliers, and of the Forces which the Bishop of Zamora had in the Kingdom of Toledo, besides those which were with Iohn de Padilla, had their hearts at eas, thinking their game cock-sure. Moreover, divers of the King∣dom, who had look'd on till then, seeing the Grandees so hard bestead, took up Arms to make good the Caus of the Commo∣naltie. And had things been as those of the Commonaltie could have wished, they would have had partakers and abettors enough. But there is no Law in this life for the good, or the evil to overcom, or bee overcom; for favorable, or an advers fortune. Yet seeing themselvs in so good a condition, and high∣ly resenting the Proclamation which was published by the Go∣vernors, against them and the Cities, they resolved to paie them in the same coin. They fulminated a Process as they pleased them∣selvs, and having commanded a great Scaffold to bee erected in the chief market-place of Valladolid, adorning it with hangings of rich cloth of gold and silk, and steps and seats placed in good order, on Sundaie the 17 of March, 1521, all the Commissio∣ners of the Iunta, and Deputies, with a great number of Atten∣dants, and sound of trumpets, drums, and other musick, came and seated themselvs upon it: Before them went the Kings at Arms, with the Maces and Coats of the Kingdom, and beeing placed in their throne, their Attornie general read with a loud voice. That they had made a process against the Admiral and
Constable of Castilla, the Earl of Venavente, Earl of Haro, Earl of Alva de Lista, Earl of Salinas, Maquis of Astorga, the Bishop of Astorga, against the Secretaries and other Officers of the evil Council (for so they termed his Majestie's Council) and against the High Treasurers, and under Treasurers; the Merchants, and other Inhabitants of Burgos, Tordesillas, imancas, and other places, declaring them Traitors, and breakers of the Truce, expressing divers reasons, especially the burning of Medina del Campo, with the cruel and inhumane sacking of Tordesillas, wherein they alleged, the Cavaliers shewed neither respect to God, nor his Saints, nor the person of the Queen, who was present; and that two Souldiers, without fear of God or their own consci∣ences, broke into a Church, and stript the image of our Ladie, and cut off one of her arms, for greediness of som gold which there was upon it. That som others took away the Custodia, whereof one eat up the consecrated Hostia. They ripped up a thousand more such like things, which I shall now omit to re∣hears. Thus our Spaniards treatd each other, beeing all of the same Nation and language; and yet all this was for their King's ser∣vice, (as they pretended) and to free the Kingdom from Ty∣rants. SECT. VII. AFter this, the War grew very hot, and their passions on both sides implacable, and no daie passed without some sallying out of the Garrisons to robb and spoil each other. Som Com∣panies of musketiers having notice of provisions and munition that was carrying to Tordesillas, marched out of Torrelobaton to intercept them. Whereof the Earl of Haro beeing informed, took a stout partie of hors with him, and gave such a hot charge to Iohn de Padilla's men, that hee left divers of them dead upon the place, and took one hundred and fiftie prisoners, which so scared the rest, that they never durst quatch afterwards, nor make any incursions upon his Territories, as when they came first thither they boasted they would do. Those of Medina del Campo, roving in like manner on the other side, the Earl of Haro with
all the Nobles and Gentrie in Tordesillas (except the Lord Ad∣miral, whom in respect of his age and charge of Governor, they desired to staie with the Queen) went one daie purposely to face it, and scour the whole Countrie about it, at whose appear∣ing, those of the Town sallied forth and skermished with them, in which encounter some of them were sorely wounded, others taken prisoners, amongst whom was Alonso Luys de Quintanilla their Captain, Son to Don Luys Quintanilla, to whom (as is al∣readie said) those of the Iunta committed the charge of her Majestie, when they took Tordesillas. Iohn de Padilla having in∣telligence from some Inhabitants of Tordesillas, of the Earl of Haro's grand sallie. Determined with his Armie to assault it in his absence, and put the Governors to a rout, and some report, that hee had a promiss from those inhabitants to make one of the Gates for him: Which beeing told the Lord Admiral, and that Iohn de Padilla was alreadie upon his march, hee sent word immediately to the Earl of Haro, who lost no time after this notice, but with all his gallant partie came thundring back to Tordesillas; which Iohn de Padilla perceiving, hee durst not pro∣secute his design, but wheeled back to his Garrison of Torrelobaton. After this, they remained some daies prettie quiet, without any encounter or action considerable. For, by reason of Iohn de Padilla's obstinate resolution of staying in Torrelobaton, his Armie was so diminished, that hee had not men enough left to make a sallie of any consequence. Wherefore hee sent to Salamanca, Toro, Zamora, and other Cities, demanding fresh supplies. On the other side, the Governors agreed to put in effect what they had discussed amongst themselvs, which was, That the Lord high Constable coming from Burgos with his forces, they should all joyn in one bodie, and make up an Armie sufficient to en∣counter Iohn de Padilla, in case hee should take the field, (the succors which hee exspected beeing arrived) or to besiege him where hee was: for beeing divided, they could not attempt ei∣ther of those enterprises, without danger and a doubtfulness of the success, neither indeed had they strength enough to perform either design, considering they must leav a competent Garrison in Tordesillas. According to this resolution, the Lord High Con∣stable,
& other Noblemen, with the forces they brought wth them to Burgos, prepared themselvs for the journie. The Duke of Naxa∣ra, then Vice-roy of Navarra, sent him a thousand old souldiers, and som Artillerie, which with his own men, and those other Noblemen's with him, made three thousand choice Foot, and five hundred gallant Hors, well Armed, besides som Gentlemen, and Light Horsmen, and besides those which hee sent before with Don Diego de Sarmiento Earl of Salinas, and those which his Nephew Don Pedro Xuarez de Velasco carried to subdue the Merin∣dades. With these forces marched the Lord High Constable from Burgos, leaving the Citie under the government and guard of Don Antonio de Velasco Earl of Nieva, with a competent num∣ber of men to that purpose. Iohn de Padilla, and the other Cap∣tains of the Commonaltie, having notice hereof, sent presently to the town of Vezerril (which is in Campos) where he was to pass, ad∣vertising and requiring Don Iohn de Figueroa, brother to the Duke of Arcos, (who still followed the Commonaltie with som Cuiras∣siers, and Light Horsmen, then beeing at Vezerril) to defend the pass, and do the Lord High Constable what disturbance and mischief hee could: but hee beeing arrived, commanded his men to storm the Town, which was done, and hee entred without any great difficultie, it beeing a place of no considerable strength. Don Iohn de Figueroa, and another Gentleman with him, called Don Iohn de Luna, were sent prisoners to the Castle of Bur∣gos; which done, the Lord High Constable continued on his march to Rioseco, where hee arrived with four thousand Foot, six hundred Hors, three or four great Pieces of Ordnance, about five hundred Gascones, and six hundred Moors of the Kingdom of Aragon, Vassals to the Earl of Almenara, wherewith hee served the Cavaliers. SECT. VIII. THe Cavaliers had so plaied their Cards in the Kingdom of Aragon, that two thousand souldiers were raised in the Citie of Saragosa, and paied at the Kingdom's charge; who bee∣ing mustered, and ready to depart, the Common people of the
Citie hearing that they were levyed in favor of the Cavaliers against the Commonalties of Castilla; There was such a hub∣bub and uproar of a sudden in the Citie, that all the people fell unawars upon those souldiers, disarmed and routed them quite, saying, that Aragon had nothing to do to meddle or contradict any thing concerning the liberties of Castilla.Here Don Pedro Giron discover's himself to bee a Trai∣tor on both sides. Don Pedro Giron, who was retired to a Town of his named Pen̄afiel, gave intelligence of the raising of these men, to those of the Commonaltie, and that a great part of them, after they were disarmed, marched to the Lord high Constable at Burgos, whom upon this notice, they saie, the Earl of Salvatierra did cut off by the waie, which was a thing of no great difficultie, considering in what ill equipage and condition they then were. Don Pedro said moreover, that hee sent them this advertisement, meerly out of a desire to ex∣press his readiness to serv the Commonalties, and the Citie of Valladolid, telling them, that it would not bee amiss to send their acknowledgments and thanks to Saragosa, for doing them so great a favor without beeing desired. Hee wrote another letter to Valladolid immediately after hee had deserted them, and relin∣quished the office of Captain General, vindicating himself of the suspitions and fault wherewith they charged him, offering to return unto his Command, and desiring them to bee favorable in their censure, until they knew further: Whereupon som gave their Votes for his returning to his Charge, alleging, that al∣though hee had committed an error, and in probabilitie not un∣willingly,Another notorious Traitor to the Com∣mons. Here the Frier flat∣tereth a∣gain the familie of the Girons. in marching to Villapando, and leaving the waie clear for the Cavaliers to go from Rioseco to Tordesillas, the fault was chiefly to bee derived upon Don Pedro Lasso. But Iohn de Padilla had gained so much repute amongst them, and the Common People, that most of the Iunta disliked that proposition: And it was better for Don Pedro Giron they did so, for it was a stain to the greatness of his birth to bee Captain of such people. SECT. IX. BEfore I com to relate the end which befell Iohn de Padilla and the Iunta's Armie, the several passages and exploits of
the Bishop of Zamora present themselvs unto my pen. When hee marched from Valladolid, by the Iunta's order, hee gave out that hee went to take possession of the Arch-Bishoprick of of Toledo, then vacant by the death of Guillermo de Crouij, nephew to Monsieur de Xeures. Hee carried with him an handom Armie of both Foot and Hors, with five field-pieces. In Toledo hee was very well received, and the Citie furnished him with more men and Artillerie, from Alcala de Henares hee took six Pieces more, so that hee had in all fifteen Pieces of Ordnance. Don Antonio de Zun̄iga his adversarie was likewise very strong, having at least six thousand Foot, and pro∣portionable number of Hors, besides divers Gentlemen that were com to assist him. Amongst whom Don Pedro de Guz∣man, a valiant young Gentleman (whom his Majestie made the first Earl of Olivares) was chiefly taken notice of for his good service. I have already mentioned how the Dutchess of Medina Sidonia, Don̄a Leonora de Zun̄iga, by her masculine courage and re∣solution, appeased the disorders and insurrection which Don Iohn de Figueroa attempted to rais in Sevilla: since which, hearing of the Commotions in the Kingdom of Toledo, and that her brother Don Antonio de Zun̄iga, Prior of San Iuan, was engaged in the suppressing of them, shee pick'd out a thousand of her choicest Foot, and an hundred Hors, with six field-pieces, all at the Duke, her eldest son's charges, and sent Don Pedro de Guzman, her third son with them, to the end, in Don Antonio de Zuniga, his unkle's companie, hee should give testimonie of his valor and fidelitie to the Emperor, against those revolters. Don Diego de Caravajal, Lord of Todar, and his brother Don Alonso, came likewise to as∣sist Don Antonio in this expedition with a reasonable number of men. With all which forces the Prior marched out of Almaguer toward Ocan̄a, thinking to reduce it to his Majesties subjection either by force or composition. The Bishop of Zamora, who had no less forces with him, put his Armie in a posture to en∣counter him, and both came into the field with a full determi∣nation to fight, which som devout religious men grieving for the loss that both parties were like to sustein, endeavored by ma∣ny pious remonstrances and persuasions to divert, but all they
could obtein was a Truce for three daies. The event of these Armies is diversly related by two several Autors, whom I chief∣ly follow in this narration; the one saith, That the Bshop ha∣ving put the Prior to flight, and routed his Armie, remained master of the field,The Rela∣tion of the first Autor (who in probabilitie was Gueua∣ra) is he ather to be believed. but was sorely wounded in two places. The other, Pero Mexia, reporteth, That during the Treatie, som scat∣tering souldiers of Don Antonio's Armie beeing engaged with som of the Bishop's, one of Don Antonio's Foot-Captains seeing his men over-match't, without any order from the Prior, char∣ged the Bishop's men with his whole Companie, & so both Par∣ties seeking to favor and rescue their own men, at last the whole Armies were both engaged, and had a furious battle, wherein divers were wounded and kill'd on both sides; at last the Bishop's men being worsted, began to shew their heels, and the execution had been much greater if the night had not separated them, leav∣ing the victorie and glorie of the daie to Don Antonio's men; The darknes of the night befriended the Bishop very much in his escape, and divers of his men, who fled to Ocania: But hee made no long staie there, beeing informed that hee was pursued by Don Antonio, and that the Town was upon terms of yielding to him; So the Bishop beeing gon to Toledo, within three daies Ocania was surrendred to Don Antonio for the Emperor, upon con∣ditions of pardon for their former disobedience, and they received him with great solemnitie and acts of submission. After which Don Antonio's Armie increased daily with fresh supplies, which hee quartered in all the frontiers and Towns adjacent to Toledo, continuing the War against the Toledians. Don Iohn de Ribera did the like on the other side of the River Tagus. SECT. X. AMongst other transactions in this War, the expedition of the Town of Mora was the most remarkable, and the most desastrous that yet hath been related: It was thus, The In∣habitants of that Town beeing inclined to the interest of the Commonaltie, rose up in Arms, and so continued a certain time; But seeing the Power and Victorious proceedings of Don Antonio,
they capitulated with him, and promised obedience to his Ma∣jestie, (yet so little constancie there is amongst the Vulgar) af∣ter their agreement, they revolted again, declaring for the Com∣monaltie, as before: and not contented with this, seeing one of Don Antonio's Captains pass by the Town, with som sheep and other cattle, which hee had taken in the confines of Toledo, they sallied out to the number of three hundred men, and rescued the Prize, forcing him to flie: whereupon, the next daie Don Diego de Caravajal, who was quartered two leagues thence at Almona∣cid, marching out with his Hors, joined with Don Hernando de Robledo, who had the Command of som Foot companies, whom Don Antonio, at the instance and persuasion of Diego Lopez de Ava∣los, Commendador of Mora, had sent to keep them in aw, and make them stand to their conditions; who advancing togeher to the very walls of the Town, (which the Inhabitants had made as strong as they could) summoned them to deliver it for his Ma∣jestie, and give them a peaceable entrance: But they sturdily re∣fused, calling them Traitors, and reviling them in base injuri∣ous terms, accompanied with many musket shots, and arrows. Don Hernando de Robledo, and those with him, enraged at this un∣civil treatment, entred the Town by storm, and forced the Inha∣bitants to retreat to the great Church, wherein they had put all their wives and children, having fortified it, as they could, and dammed up all the doors but one, which, though open, was barrocadoed lustily, and in it they had planted two Fawkenets, with som barrels of powder for their defens. Don Hernando bee∣ing com thither with his men, required those that made good the Church to submit; whereunto they answered with a shot from one of their Guns, which killed a Corporal of hs: where∣at his souldiers growing desperate, without any order or com∣mand, presently fetched a great quantitie of sprey, or bavins, which they heaped against the other doors, and set fire to them, thinking when the doors were burned down, to enter into the Church. But the fire coming to the barrels and the tubs where∣with the doors were barrocadoed on the inside, made such a blaze, that the timber of the Church taking fire therewith, all was immediately of a flame; and the poor people's having no
waie out but through the fire, nor any breathing place within the Church, were well-nigh all consumed; At least three thousand persons lost their lives in that miserable manner, which was very much lamented all the Kingdom over. SECT. XI. THe Bishop of Zamora was not idle all this while, hee had as great a fire, in a manner, as this, within himself. Hee went to Toledo disguised, and alone, having left his men two or three leagues off the Citie, but beeing arrived, hee made himself known; whereupon the people presently flocked to see him with great eagerness, by reason of the high value and esteem which hee had acquired amongst the Commonalties. The Citie made exceeding demonstrations of joie for his coming thither, and forthwith granted him the administration of the Arch-Bisho∣prick, according to his desire, as if they had been Popes. In accomplishment whereof, they carried him with great solemni∣tie to te Cathedral Church, and placed him in the Arch-bishop's seat: Which act and form of taking possession beeing past, they gave him monie, and a good quantitie of Church-plate, where∣with to paie his souldiers. This made him return merrily to his Armie, and soon after hee went to reliev Avila, which was be∣sieged by Don Iohn de Ribera, before mentioned: Which hee did with the loss of manie men on both sides. That done, hee used all means possible to mischief and endammage Don Antonio's Armie, but hee could do him no great harm, hee beeing grown very powerfull, by reason of fresh supplies that daily came in to his assistance, especially by the recruit which his Nephew Don Pedro de Guzman, brother to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, brought him. SECT. XII. AT the same time that the Bishop departed from Valladolid to the Kingdom of Toledo, Don Iohn de Mendoça, with seven hundred men, raised and paid by the Citie of Valladolid, marched
to succor Duen̄as against the Lord high Constable, whom they feared would laie siege to that Town. But seeing there was no great need of him there, hee went to Villacis (which is a wall'd Town and indifferent strong, one league from Carrion) which hee entred by storm and sacked. Thus the confusion and ruine of the Kingdom grew daily greater and greater, which much perplexed the Governors, and grieved all those that were truly zealous for the publick good. Yet there was no waie left un∣attempted to procure a peace, but nothing concluded. The more the Cities of the Kingdom suffred, the more their hearts were hardned, peremptorily resolving to stand to the rigorous arbitrement of War for the ending of their differences. And Valladolid beeing the chief seat of the Commonalties, and as it were, the sinewes of the War, all the other places of the King∣dom made their addresses to that Citie, extolling it to the skies, saying, That was the onely firm Piller which supported their Holie pretensions, whence they expected the benefi of their li∣bertie. Amongst others, the Citie of Leon having levied some monies, in order to the Iunta's command sent a Letter to those of Valladolid, highly magnifying the Justice and holiness of their caus, thanking and commending them exceedingly for their care and vigilance in the mainteinance and prosecution thereof, and lastly excusing themselvs that they could procure no more monie to send them at that present, promising within short time to rais a more considerable summe for the furtherance of that holie de∣sign, and their treasure beeing exhausted, to engage their own persons, with all their friends and allyes in whatsoever they should pleas to command them. SECT. XIII. PAlacios de Meneses, a Town not far from Medina de Rioseco, would needs enter into the same brawl with the Com∣moners, and rise up in Arms with them. Don Alonso Enriquez Bishop of Osma, brother to the Lord Admiral, and the Earl Don Hernando beeing at that time in Medina, drew out three thousand Foot and one hundred and fiftie hors, with which they marched
directly to Palacios de Meneses, intending to storm and sack it in revenge of that which the Commoners had don at Torrelobaton. This design beeing discovered, Iohn de Padilla sent threescore hors into Palacios, which otherwaies was not very ill provided, for having the enemie neer them, their continual fear made them the more careful and circumspect. There was within the Town neer four hundred inhabitants able to bear Arms, all well pro∣vided with Cross-bows and other weapons: insomuch that when those of Rioceco came thither, and required them to let them in, they answered, That their manner of coming was such, that they could not with safeie permit them entrance. Thereupon the Cavaliers bid them send any two of their Towns-men to treat with them; whi  d. But beeing com un∣to them, they stript them,  em back in their shirts, with threatnings and comm liver the town presently, otherwise they would ansack  oy them utterly. The Town not valuing their mena od to their former re∣solution, and would not admi them ping themselvs in a de∣fensive posture, in case they should atte to storm them. The Assault was very furious, and the resistance of the Assailed no less couragious, killing and wounding ch other without pi∣tie, four hours together: At last, those within beeing fewer in number then the Assailers, were forced to quit the walls, which the enemie presently scaled, and placed two Colors upon the top, and divers others were following them: but when those of Palacios saw themselvs in that extremitie, three hundred Cross-bow-men, and many with slings, charged them so thick with stones and arrows, that both the Ensigns beeing killed, one fell with his Colors within, the other on the out-side of the wall; so that those of Rioseco, seeing so resolute a resistance, were glad to make a fair retreat; but they first set fire to the gates, which the Towns people perceiving, the women brought pre∣sently above two hundred great pitchers of Vinegar, and the bow-men sent such clouds of arrows amongst them, that they killed ten of their men, and wounded a great number. With this paiment they returned to Rioseco, and those of Palacios re∣mained very well pleased and satisfied: hereof they presently
gave intelligence to Iohn de Padilla, Don Iohn de Mendoça, Captain of the forces of Valladolid, and to Empudia, desiring uccor, les the Enemie, angrie at their ill success in that attempt, should sur∣prise them another time. Hereupon those of the Iunta com∣manded Don Iohn de Mendoça to go to Palacios. The same night after the assault, came fiftie musketiers from Empudia to Palacios, so secretly, that they were not discovered by the Enemie, who returned the next daie thither, thinking to carrie it, not know∣ing any thing of the succor which came to them of Palacios over-night, which, though it was not much, proved of great importance. Those of Rioseco fell on deperately, but the Towns-men, with the help of those Musketiers, defended them∣selvs very stoutly, and killed their men so fast, that they were fain to retire with loss: And those of Palacios were cried up for gallant men, having repulsed so many enemies two several times, without the loss of one man, they beeing but an handful in com∣parison, and their Town not strong. SECT. XIV. THus the confusion and war daily grew more violent in the miserable Kingdoms of Castilla, Toledo, the Province of Alava, and in the Mountains of Burgos. In the Kingdom of Va∣lencia there was nothing but cutting of throats, and robbing one another: And Valladolid, seeing the Kingdom in so distracted a condition, began to murmure against those that sate at the helm, charging them with the ill managing of the affairs, and that they did nothing but trifle and delaie the time, without knowing when or how to set a period to their miseries: They desired to bring their differences to an end, but chiefly by the conquest of the Cavaliers, that they might bee exempted and free'd from such great mischiefs. The fault of not concluding, either by a firm peace, or an open war, they imputed to the Commissioners of the Kingdom; who to enrich themselvs, and becaus they would not bee brought to an account of one hundred and fiftie thou∣sand Duckets, which they had received, were glad to keep things from a conclusion; of which Valladolid having suffered the most of
any place, and which had been at the greatest expences, was most sensible, and did exceedingly lament. To say the truth on both sides, as well of the Cavaliers, as of the Commonalties, there was trouble and hard measure enough. In Montealegre the Bishop of Osma, and the Earl Don Hernando, put a great num∣ber of the Toledian souldiers to te rout, beeing there with their Captains, swaggering and rioting, and never suspecting to bee surprised by the Enemie. They killed som of them that made resistance, and carried near two hundred prisoners to Rioseco. Thus both parties studied to weaken & ruine each other, and be∣twixt them consumed the whole Countrie. Iohn de Padilla kept his Court in Torrelobaton, like another Annibal in Capua. Upon a Mundaie, the 8 of April, all the people of Valladolid rose up in a tumultuous manner, beeing wearied out with those of the Iunta, and discontented at their secret and long consultations, without concluding any thing. In this disorder they went seeking them from place to place, beeing fully resolved to turn them out of the Citie, or know of them the reason of their delaies; for the dam∣mage which they daily receiv'd from those of Simancas was insuf∣ferable. There was no trading at all, every thing grew so excessive dear, that a bushel of wheat was worth eight hundred Maravediz. The people flocked in multitudes to the great Church, where the Deputies, with the Captains of the Citie, were assembled, with loud voices, and lamentable cries, beseeching them to seek som remedie, for their miserie was insupportable, desiring them moreover, to let them know the reason, why the war was so procrastinated, and urging, that fiftie daies were past without any action of war, neither could their imaginations reach to what they intended. The Officers answered them, That the occasion of those demurres was, the often going to, and coming from Tordesillas about the Treatie of Peace with the Cavaliers, bidding them return quietly to their houses, and before night they should know particularly all the circumstances and passages of the business. Whereupon the people praied them to consider well what they did, and not to let them suffer any further detri∣ment, or bee burthened vvith any more expences, for vvithin less then seven months they had dis-bursed above one hundred
thousand and five hundred Duckets, besides other charges and losses, which they had sustained beyond number, yet they did grudg none of all this, if they could close up their miseries with peace, or revenge themselvs by war, and that they might bee permitted to fall upon Simancas and Tordesillas; for nothing grie∣ved them so much, as that they could not have their wills on them. Towards the Evening, the people of every Ward bee∣ing called together, they were shewed certain Articles which two Commissioners of the Iunta had concluded with the Go∣vernors, and brought from Tordesillas; the substance of them beeing according to the contents of the General Articles of the Kingdom, specified at large already, I shall spare to trouble the Reader with a second relation. SECT. XV. THe people having perused these Articles, would by no means approve of them, nor consent to any agreement, al∣leging, that what the Cavalier promised therein was not suffici∣ent, neither was it certain to bee performed, for they had no warrant from his Majestie so especial, as a business of that conse∣quence did require; besides, they refused to give any pledges, or deliver any strong holds into the Commonaltie's possession for their securitie. And since the conditions they offered them were neither good nor sure, they would have no Peace, but War with them: in regard they found no securitie of their persons or lives without it. The Commissioners and Captains, seeing all the people fully determined and bent to give the Cavaliers battle, and either live with libertie, or end their miseries with death, (most of them beeing of the same opinion, deeming that to bee their onely safe way) cherish'd them in that resolution, presently giving order to all the people of Valladolid to bee in a readiness, all the Artillerie to bee prepared and fitted to carrie into the field: the like was done through all the Cities and Towns of the Com∣monaltie, every Commissioner repairing to his own Citie and Town to that purpose: Thus they intended in one daie to end all their troubles, and that this last bout should paie for all their
delaies and triflings, whereby they had ruined themselvs, and given the Cavaliers time to recruit and strengthen their Par∣tie. SECT. XVI. ONe night, whilest these things were thus in agitation, Iohn de Padilla, by order of those of the Iunta, came pri∣vately to Valladolid, and after they had consulted with him con∣cerning things necessarie for the present expedition, hee return∣ed immediately to Torrelobaton, to secure the Artillerie which was there, having intelligence that the Cavaliers in Tordesillas had a design to surprise it. Order was given to rais him two thou∣sand Foot well armed, with two hundred Lances in Valladolid, and two pieces of Ordnance, for two purposes; the one, to de∣molsh Torrelobaton, which hee did afterwards; the other, to give the Lord High Constable battle, before hee could join his forces with the rest. For those from Valladolid, with the two thousand which hee had in Torrelobaton, and those which hee exspected hourly from Salamanca, Toro, and Zamora, (who were six thou∣sand Foot, and two hundred lances) besides two thousand five hundred from Palencia, fifteen hundred from Duen̄as, four hun∣dred from Palacios, and others from the Beherrias and Merindades, would make him an Armie of fourteen thousand. But those of Valladolid were so long before they could bee in fit equipage to march, and the other Tovvns and Cities not sending in their supplies time enough, Iohn de Padilla could not execute his design against the Lord high Constable; vvho (as you have heard) took Vezerril, and marched into Rioseco vvith four thousand Foot, six hundred lances, three or four pieces of Artillerie, &c. So that, through the vveakness and vvant of care of the Commoners Captains, hee soon after set a period to that so miserably conten∣tious and destructive War. The Cavaliers on the one partie, and the Cities for the Commonaltie on the other, raised all the force they could possibly for this expedition. The Citie of Palencia sent six hundred men and tvvo pieces of Ordnance. Duen̄as four hundred men and tvvo pieces of Ordnance. Baltanas de
Cerrato two hundred. Those of Segovia, Avila, and Leon came not; Salamanca made good the number before mentioned. All these were without any discipline or experience in Martial affairs, and amongst their Officers there was such emulations, every one standing so upon their punctillio's of honor, each Captain would bee chief, scorning to receiv orders from any other: In a word, they were ill bred people, possessed with no less igno∣rance then unadvisedness▪ The Merchants, and other Citizens of Valladolid, seeing the siness brought to the push, and the people resolved to decide eir difference with the sword, fearing or doubting the event, caied all their goods and Merchandises into Monasteries, having shut up all their ware-houses and shops, and laid all other trading aside, onely for matter of arms, every one providing himself the best hee could. The poorer sort of people beeing ready to starv, made lamentable com∣plaints in the streets, crying out to God for mercie, and to releas them out of those calamities, though it were with the loss of their lives. They feared the power of the Cavaliers, who had an Armie of two thousand Lances, and seven thousand Foot, of the choicest men in the Kingdom, all well armed, and in good order, with stout and experienced Officers, under the Com∣mand of the Earl of Haro, who with great Vigilancie, answe∣rable to his Courage, executed the place of Captain General. SECT. XVII. THe Lord High Constable marched out of Rioseco towards Tordesillas, the 19th of April, 1521, to join with the rest of the Cavaliers, where hee was exceedingly desired. Beeing com to Pen̄aflor near Torrelobaton, hee there took up quarters for his forces: wence hee went to Tordesillas, where hee was received with extraordinarie expressions of joie. Iohn de Padilla was yet in Torrelobaton, with eight thousand Foot, five hundred Lan∣ces, and the Artilleie of Medina del Campo, exspecting more sup∣plies from the other Cities, which, by their ill management and slackness, were not com to him; And the thousand men from Palencia and Duen̄as were also hindered from joining with him,
by reason of the Lord High Constable's beeing at Pen̄aflor;Two months hee staid there. whereby hee plainly perceived his own, and the other Captain's unadvisedness and over-sight, in spinning out so much time there. The Lord High Constable, the Lord Admiral, and the other Grandees concluded to make their Rande-vous at Pen̄aflor, leaving with the Queen, and for guard of the Town, the Car∣dinal of Tortosa, Don Bernardo de Sandoval, Marquis of Denia, with his troop of Hors, Don Diego de Rojas, Lord of Santiago de la Pu∣ebla with his, and as many companies of Foot, which was suf∣ficient, the walls of the Town beeing in very good repair. They presently dispatched orders to those in garrison at Portillo, to com to the Rande-vous; and to the Earl of On̄ate to staie with his Hors in Simancas, to hinder Valladolid from sending any succor to Iohn de Padilla. This done, the Earl of Haro having given command over-night to have his men in a readiness, the next morning they all marched to Pen̄aflor, where they reposed that night, beeing Sundaie. Mundaie by break of daie, becaus they would lose no time, the Governors, and the Captain General drew all their forces into the field, which amounted to about seven thousand Foot, and two thousand four hundred Hors, be∣sides som Noblemen and Gentlemen of the greatest qualitie in Castilla. That daie they did nothing but muster their men, sen∣ding in mean time som Light-horsmen to discover in what po∣sture Iohn de Padilla was in Torrelobaton; for they were general∣ly of opinion to besiege him so close, that hee might not go thence without giving them battle; and they made no question of worsting him, their Armie exceeding his, if not in number, in goodness and valor of the men. With this resolution they re∣turned to their quarters. SECT. XVIII. JOhn de Padilla, and the other Captains, understanding the ad∣vantage the Cavaliers would have of them in the field, durst not encounter them, and fearing to bee besieged, they began, too late, to bee sensible of their own carelesness or imprudence, in staying so long at Torrelobaton; and thinking their safest cours
would bee to march secretly thence, assoon as possibly they could, and make no staie until they arrived at Toro, where they might remain securely until the succors came to them from Zamora, Leon, Salamanca, and the other Cities, (whereof they were in daily exspectation) or go from thence to Salamanca, as they saw occasion; they resolved so to do. Whereupon a certain Priest sitting at the table with him,A Priest dissuade's Iohn de Pa∣dilla from encounter∣ing the Ca∣valiers. thus said, Sir! I have seen a Prophe∣cie in which is declared that the Commonalties shall this daie bee vanquished, and the Cavaliers remain victorious, therefore I beseech you Sir, depart not this daie from Torrlobaton. Whereun∣to Iohn de Padilla made this answer,His An∣swer. Go, tust not in such foolish and vain predictions, but in God repose your confidence, to whom I shall willingly sacrifice this life, and my person, for the publick good of these Kingdoms, and in regard it is now no time to flinch, I do resolv to die, and let him dispose of mee as shall bee most for his Glorie▪ This was on Tuesdaie morning, whilest Iohn de Padilla was at break-fast. Which done, his Armie marched out with all silence possible, and in good order, the Ar∣tillerie in the Van, his Foot divided into two squadrons, and hee bringing up the rear with the hors. The Governors and their Captain General soon had intelligence of Iohn de Padilla's march, and presently made after him three several waies, whom with∣out any great difficultie they took prisoner, and routed all his Armie. The manner of their fight is diversly reported by several Authors, but one (who saie's hee was a spectator thereof) relate's it thus: That upon St George's daie, the Cavaliers having notice of Iohn de Padilla's departure from Torrelobaton towards Toro, they sallied out upon him from three several places, those of Tordesillas charged his Armie in the Van, those of Medina de Rioseco in the Rear, and those of Simancas falling desperately in upon the Flanks, put all in disorder. The Commoners marched un∣til they came neer Villalar, in very good order, and the Cavaliers were of several opinions concerning the giving of them battle▪ Some said it was enough to make them flie, and lose their credits; and that it was wisdom not to put a business of such importance to the hazard of one battle. That their Foot was very nu∣merous, and in appearance good: that those which the Lord high Constable brought, were but few and much harassed, be∣sides
if they miscarried in this enterprise, their hopes were all de∣stroied with their forces. But the Marquis of Astorga, the Earl of Al∣va, & Don Diego de Toledo insisted with much eagerness to charge them, & their voices carrying it against the more timorous partie, they did make after them: Who having great store of excellent hors, & I. de Padilla's men being ill disciplin'd, besides the waies being so deep that they could hardly march, & seeing the enemie advance towards them in great bodies several waies, their courage began to fail, yet their Captains animated them all they could. The Cavaliers follow'd them stil in this manner, their hors skirmishing now & then with them, until they came neer Villalar, where, having got within shot of them, they let flie their Ordnance amongst their ranks (who march'd very close) wch kill'd them by heaps. This made their hearts fal to their heels, & for hast to get into the town, they ran one over the other, notwithstanding all their officer's en∣deavors to keep them in order, & for their further misfortune there fel so fierce a shower of rain, that the Foot stuck fast, engaged in the mire to the very knees, neither could they make any use of their Artillerie, partly by reason of the ill wether, & partly through the baseness of their gunners, the chief wherof nam'd Saldan̄a, a native of Toledo not wel understanding his office, fled awaie, & left the Artillerie in a plowed field.A private plot of Don Pedro Mal∣donad's with the Earl of Ve∣navente, to betraie the Artillerie. Although some have reported that Don Pedro Maldonado dealt privatly with the gunners, so to engage the Ordnance, that they should do no execution against the Cavaliers, having so promised his Uncle, the Earl of Venavente, who had made him sensible of his error. However it was, the Cavaliers seized upon all their Artillerie, and divers of Iohn de Padilla's men both Hors and Foot, saved themselvs by coming to them, having first changed their red crosses into white ones, which was the sign of the Loial Partie. Iohn de Padilla expressed a great deal of courage and valour in his own person, and seeing his game quite lost, hee, with five Horsmen more, charged into the Earl of Venavente's troop, and beeing known to bee the General of the other Partie by the richness of his Armor,Notable courage of Ion de Pa∣dilla. was presently encountred by Don Pedro Baçan, Lord of Valduerna, native of Valladolid. Iohn de Padilla was in complete Armor, and bore in his hand a Lance all plated with iron, where∣with meeting Don Pedro Baçan (who was a corpulent heavie
man, and but slightly armed) him hee gave so rude a saluta∣tion, that hee was soon unhors't: Iohn de Padilla still charged on, crying, Santjago, Libertad, (which was the Commoner's word, and the Cavalier's word was, Santa Maria y Carlos) at last hee broke his Lane to the cost of som of his enemies, after which Don Alonso de la Cueva singled him out, and having wounded him,Iohn de Pa∣dilla taken prisoner. bade him deliver his Arms, which hee did. Beeing thus a prisoner, Don Iohn de Ulloa, a Gentleman of Toro, came riding up, and asking who that was, som told him that 'twas Iohn de Padilla, whereupon hee gave him a cut over the Bever, and hurt his nose, but not much, for which hee was mightily condemned by all that saw or heard of that ungentleman-like action. So John de Padilla was dismounted, and remained Prisoner. John Bravo, Captain of the Segovians (who would also signalize himself) was likewise taken: and Francisco Maldonado, Captain of the Sa∣lamanca forces, had the like destinie; but his men having all for∣saken him, hee was catch't running after them as hard as hee could. The Cavaliers spent all the rest of that daie in woun∣ding, killing, and taking, having the pursuit of their enemies two long leagues and a half. Many dying men desired to make their confessions, but there was no bodie would assist them, nor take any compalsion of their condition, which was a la∣mentable spectacle, beeing all Christians, friends, and kindred. The Cavaliers beeing masters of the field, stript all both living and dead, sharing the spoil equally amongst themselvs. John de Padilla vvould oft bemoan his sad misfortune, saying, If, after the taking of Torrelobaton, hee had followed on his victorie, hee should never have been reduced to so deplorable a condition, vvhich vvas very true; for by his staying tvvo months there, the Cavaliers cunningly delaied the time vvith Cessations, until they had so strengthened their Partie, that they over-povvered him. But the All-seeing Providence disposed it othervvise. At first, the Commonalties hearing that their Armie vvas routed, and John de Padilla taken, gave out, that it vvas som plot or treacherie of his to lose the battle, laying many other things of this nature to his charge, but they vvere better satisfied of his realitie to their Caus▪ vvhen they savv hee lost his head for it.
SECT. XIX. THe next morning betimes, the Governors commanded Don Pedro de la Cueva to convoy the prisoners, Iohn de Padilla, Don Pedro Maldonado, Francisco Maldonado, & Iohn Bravo to the Castle of Villalva. While they were preparing to go, Iohn de Padilla asked Don Pedro, whither hee was commanded to carrie them; who answered him, That for the present they were to go to Villalva, whither afterwards hee knew not. Soon after they were sent for thence to Villalar, and put into a hous, with a good guard up∣on them. The Governors beeing infomed of their arrival there, gave order that Iohn de Padilla, Iohn Bravo, and Don Pedro Maldo∣nado should bee beheaded, and Francisco Maldonado carried to the Castle of Tordesillas: But as hee was on the waie thither, a mes∣senger overtook him from the Governors, who told Malbaseda, Lievtenant to Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoça, (who had the charge of him) that hee should bring Francisco Maldonado back again to execution,Don Pedro Mldonado was sved for beray∣ing the Ar∣erie. for the Earl of Venavente had desired them not to behead Don Pedro Maldonado in his presence, beeing his Ne∣phew. And becaus it had been divulged, that Don Pedro Maldo∣nado should bee beheaded, which at the Earl's entreatie was coun∣termanded, the Lords had Voted that Francisco Maldonado should bee executed in his place. So hee beeing returned, the Gover∣nors sent for the Alcalde of the Chancerie of Valladolid, Comman∣ding him to execute Justice upon the persons of Iohn de Padella, Iohn Bravo, and Francisco Maldonado. The Alcalde presently went to the hous where they were prisoners, and bade them prepare themselvs, for the Governors had given order for their executi∣ons. Iohn de Padilla desired him to send him a learned Priest to confess him, and a Notarie to make his Will, and som witnesses. The Alcalde replied, That in the place where they then were, hee could not exspect to finde any men of extraordinarie learning, yet hee would enquire, and if hee could finde one, hee would sa∣tisfie his desire therein: but as for a Notarie to make his Will, hee need not trouble himself, for all his goods and estate were Con∣fiscate. In the condemnation of these Gentlemen, there was no
process, nor formal proceeding made, as used to bee in other cri∣minal causes, by reason of the evidence of the fact, and the qua∣litie of the offence. At last a Priest was sent to them, and Iohn de Padilla beeing at Confession, a Franciscan Frier came, who was thought an abler man, so Iohn de Padilla, and the rest, made use of him. Their Confessions beeing ended, they were brought forth and carried upon Mules to the place of Execution. Before them went a Crier, saying, This is the Justice which his Majestie, and the Lord High Constable, with the other Governors, do command in his name to bee executed upon the persons of these Gentlmen, Their command is, that they shall bee beheaded as Traitors, disturbers of the Kingdom, and usurpers of the Roial Crown, &c. The said Alcalde Zarate, and the Licenciado Cornejo Alcalde de Corte went along with them to auto∣rise the execution of the Justice.Resolute Answer of Jhn Brao. John Bravo hearing the Crier saie that they were to suffer for beeing Traitors, hee replied, Hang∣man! thou liest, and those that bid thee saie so, we are no Traitors, but zealous for the publick good, and defendors of the Kingdom's liberties. Hereupon the Alcalde Cornejo bid John Bravo hold his peace; whereunto John Bravo answered, I know not what, and the Alcalde gave him a punch in the breast with his staff, wishing him to consider his present condition, and not affect such vanities. And John de Padilla said moreover to him,Christian admonish∣ment of John de Pa∣dilla. Sen̄or John Bravo, yesterday was the time to fight, and shew your self a valiant Gentleman, this daie to die like a Christian. So the Crier continued his lesson until they came to the place of execution, where being arrived, they all alighted from their Mules to receiv the fatal blow. John Bravo beeing first called to execution, they bid him bend and settle himself in a fit posture; hee replied, That they might force him, if they would, and so they did, seizing on him, and stretching him upon a car∣pet, which done, the Hangman cut his throat, and would do no more, until the Alcalde Cornejo commanded him to cut his head quite off, saying, Traitors were so to bee used, and their heads to bee set upon the gallows, which was done accordingly. The next beeing Ion de Padilla's turn, hee very willingly prepared himself, and having taken of certain Reliques, which hee wore about his neck, hee gave them to Don Enrique de Sandoval y Rojas, (eldest son to the Marquis of Denia, who amongst other Gentle∣men
men was standing with him) praying him to wear them whil'st the war lasted, which beeing ended, hee desired him to send them to his wife Don̄a Maria Pacheco.Here these three noble Gentelmen died as gal∣lantly as they had li∣ved, beeing Patriots of their Coun∣trie, whose memories deserv an everlasting same. After which, as hee went to place himself conveniently for the executioner's hand, hee saw Iohn Bravo's bodie lying by, to which hee said onely thus, Are you there good Gentleman? and presently his head was cut off like Iohn Bravo's. Soon after, Francisco Maldonado beeing brought forth, was executed in the same manner, which done, their heads were set upon several nails over the place of execution, so the Justice ceased for that time, and those Gentlemen's cares were ended. A Gentleman of the Loyal Partie, the daie before the battle, wrote a letter to one of the contrarie opinion, telling him, that now the business was brought to such a push, that there was nothing to bee thought on els, but everie one to stand upon his guard, for whosoever fell, should bee sure to bear the ignominious brand of Traitor: As questionless it had been; for wee see all the acti∣ons and exploits of this life are more esteemed, and censured by their successes and events, then any other waies. If Cortes had not been fortunate in Mexico, when hee took Motezuma, wee should have said hee had been a rash fool-hardie fellow, but For∣tune having crowned his valiant enterprise with success, all men now applaud his gallantrie, giving him the attributes of Coura∣gious and Prudent. SECT. XX. TO saie the truth, in all that I have read of Iohn de Padilla, I finde him a gallant valerous Gentleman, though hee was engaged in that unfortunate business. It is reported, that one daie going to his hous, very melancholie and dejected, hee said to his wife, sitting on hors-back, and shee at the window: Se∣n̄ora, what do you think now of the condition whereunto you have brough mee? at which words shee made answer, Bee of good courage, for of a poor Esquire I have made you half-King of Castilla. But the Common People are apt to saie manie things in such like occur∣rences, wherein there's not one word of truth. In my judg∣ment, if there had been any such passage betwixt him and his
wife, hee would have expressed some discontent or anger in the letter, which hee wrote to her the same daie hee was beheaded: But there was no such thing mentioned in it, quite contrarie, hee expressed therein very much affection and tenderness to her, seeming to bee more sensible of her grief and sorrow for his sad fortune, then of his own suffering. Besides his letter to his wife, hee wrote another to the Citie of Toledo. The contents vvere as follovveth. Iohn de Padilla's letter to his wife. SEn̄ora! If your pain did not more trouble mee, then the losing of my life, I should esteem my self entirely happie. For death beeing a thing so certain to all Mortals, the Almightie sheweth him a singular favor whom hee honor's with such an one as mine, which, though lamented by manie, is doubtless acceptable in his sight. It would require more time, then what I have, to write you some things for your Consolation, but that cannot bee allowed mee, neither do I desire to deferre the reception of that Crown, which I hope to enjoy. You maie, like a discreet woman, bewail your own misfortune, but not my death, for beeing so just, it ought not to bee la∣mented by any: My soul, since nothing els is left me, I bequeath to you, de∣siring you to entertain it, as the thing which most affected you. I do not write to Pedro Lopez my father, becaus I dare not, for though I was his Son in daring to lose my life, I was not heir to his good fortune. I will not extend my self any further, becaus I will not trouble the Executioner to waite, nor give waie for any one to suspect, that to prolong my life I enlarge my letter. My servant Sossa beeing an eie-witness of my end, and to whom I have communicated the secret of my intentions, shall tell you what cannot bee expressed herein, and so I rest, exspecting the instrument of your sorrow and my comfort. Iohn de Padilla's letter to the Citie of Toledo. TO Thee, the Crown of Spain, and glorie of the whole World, free since the time of the mightie Goths; to Thee, who by the effu∣sion of the blood of strangers, aswell as of thine own, hast recovered liber∣tie for thy self and thy neighbouring Cities: I John de Padilla, thy
legitimate Son, now give thee an account how by the blood of my bodie, thy former Victories are refreshed. If fortune hath not suffered my actions to bee Chronicled amongst thy memorable exploits, the fault was in my de∣stinie, not in my good will: Which as a mother, I desire Thee to accept, since God hath given mee nothing els to lose for Thee, but what I have adven∣tured. I am more aggrieved for Thy resentment, then my own life. But Thou must consider these are but the turns of fortune's Wheel, which never standeth still. This is my contentment and consolation, that I, the meanest of Thy children, do suffer death for Thee; and that Thou hast nou∣rished at thy brests such as may take satisfaction for my wrongs. Many tongues, doubtless, will busie themselvs in the relation of my death, which as yet I know not my self, though it bee very neere: My end will give Thee a testimonie of my desire. My soul I recommend to Thee, as the Patroness of Christianitie, of my bodie I make no account, since it is no more mine, neither can I write any more, for at this very instant, I feel the knife at my throat, with a greater sens of Thy displeasure, then apprehension of my pain. SECT. XXI. THe Victorie beeing obteined at Villalar, and the Commo∣ners Armie quite routed, presently dispatches vvere sent post to the Emperor, giving him account of this good fortune: And the Earl of Haro, as Captain General, wrote a particular re∣lation to the Emperor of all the passages, vvhich hee receiving at Bruxels, the eighth of Julie, hee ansvvered, saying, That al∣though by other Letters, of the 24 April, hee had intelligence of the vanquishing and punishing of those Traitors, (for so hee called them) yet hee vvas better satisfied to receiv it from his hand, thanking him very much for all that hee had done in or∣der to his service, and for the affection and zeal vvhich hee expres∣sed tovvards him in that emploiment; promising, at his return into that Kingdom, to gratifie him according to the merit of his extraordinarie services; hoping, that by his endeavors hee should finde means to settle the whole Kingdom, which hee particularly encharged him to use all his vigilance and industrie to procure: And chiefly hee recommended to his care the War
of Navarra, which was of so great importance, and that hee would assure the Grandees and Gentlemen which had engaged in his service, that at his return hee would gratifie their Loialties according to their qualities and deserts. The Commoners for∣ces beeing all discomfited as wee have seen, and their three prin∣cipal Captains executed, those of the Iunta, who were in Val∣ladolid, fled away, and all was of a sudden blown up like smoke in the aër. Within three daies after, the Cavalier's whole Armie marched to Simancas, and quartered in Towns all about Vallado∣lid, intending to fall upon that Citie, and treat them as such open enemies did deserv. But first, beeing numerous enough, they possessed all the Towns and Villages thereabouts, and stopt up all the Avenues, suffering no provisions to bee carried in to them. Whereupon the most valiant and violent of all the people began to bee crest-fallen: Others that had (as much as they durst) op∣posed those past Commotions, seeing the Governors victorious and powerful, declared themselvs. There was no Captain nor Commander left in the Citie. Whereupon to make short, and prevent a Summons, they thought their onely way was, to yield themselvs upon good conditions, which they hoped the Lord Admiral (though much offended) out of compassion and af∣fection to that Citie, would grant them. In which resolution they sent som religious men, and persons of respect, with much submission and humble acknowledgment of their faults, to de∣sire mercie and pardon of the Lord Admiral: Who at first shewed himself very much displeased and unwilling to hearken to their desires, saying, Hee ought, and would make an example aswel of the principal offendors, as of the Common people. The Souldiers, who exspected notable plunder, their fin∣gers itching to measure out the silks and velvets with their Pikes, (as they bragg'd they would) were mad becaus the word of command, To fall on and enter the Citie, was so long a giving out; which the Inhabitants knowing, every one secured their commodities the best they could. But by God's help, and the indulgence of the Governors, a Peace and pardon was con∣cluded and proclaimed in the market places and streets of Vallado∣lid, with great acclamations of joie, and sound of Trumpets,
Drums, and other musical instruments: All the Inhabitans bee∣ing exempted from personal punishment, confiscation, or loss of offices, excepting twelv, whom the Lord Admiral should nomi∣nate, & appoint to bee left out of the Articles, to bee disposed of as the Governors should think fitting; that they might all take notice, that they had a King and Lord, to whom they ovved obedience and service; and such a King as did not seek after vengeance, or desire the destruction of his Subjects, but to pardon them with clemencie, and chastise them with mercie. SECT. XXII. THe Citie of Valladolid, which had shewn so much stub∣bornness and obstinacie not long before, proclaimed the Pardon with great contentment; and thought they had obteined no smal favor, to preserv their Town from beeing sacked, the Souldiers beeing so ready to make the on-set. The arl of Vena∣vente, and the Bishop of Osma were great instruments of hindring the destruction of that Citie: and the Lord High Constable, with all the rest of the Grandees, were very glad of it, esteeming that the pacification of the whole Kingdom depended upon the surrendering of Valladolid.The man∣ner of the Cavaliers entering in∣to Vallado∣lid. The same daie, April 27, all the Ca∣valiers entred in great state, with their Squadrons in Martial or∣der, the Hors all in Armor, covered with rich scarlet coats: the first that marched in, were the Earl of Venavente, and Earl of Haro, Captain General, the Earl of Castro, the Earl of On̄ate with their Troops, their Armor was covered with scarlet, embroider∣ed with gold. After them followed the Lord Admiral, with the Adelantado, his brother, and the Earl of Osorno, all in green, with their troops in Armor covered with the same Liverie. Next them, marched the Captains and Camp masters of the Ar∣mie, with their Colors flying, and the Gentlemen all clad in cloth of silver and gold. Then came the Bishop of Osma, with those of the Council Roial, the Alcaldes and Alguaziles; And last of all, the Lord High Constable, with the Earl of Alva de Lista, the Earl of Salinas, the Earl of Aguilar, and the Marquis of Astor∣ga, with all their men splendidly accoutred, besides divers Gentle∣men,
and Foot souldiers, all in such stately manner, that Valladolid was worth the seeing that daie: yet it was observed, that the people were so stomackful, that neither man nor woman did so much as look ou, or open a window, as if they disdained or abhorred to see them, who, four daies before, were their motal enemies. (Such are the Comedies and Tragedies of this life). How often did the Cavaliers desire Valladolid to make a eace? what advantageous conditions they offered them? how often did they slight their favors? how many scornful answers did they return them? and at last it came to this, that they were con∣streined, though with heavie hearts, and hanging down their hads, to receiv and treat in their houses thos whom they so ill affected. And those of Valladolid must aknowledg a particu∣lar obligation to the Nobilitie of Castilla, (whom they alwaies found ready to receiv them with open arms, and do them all the good offices and favor possible) aswel for this daie's favor, as others, which by their mediation the Kings of Spain have granted them, notwithstanding so great uproars and disorders as have been committed in that Citie. All the rigor that was don at this time in Valladolid, was the executing of an Alcalde, and an Alquazil of the Iunta, whom the Governors commanded to bee hanged, the rest fled, though no bodie prosecuted them. SECT. XXIII. THe rout of the Junta's Armie at Villalor, and the Justice hat was executed upon the Gentlemen there, with the surren∣dring of Valladolid, and the favor which the Governors shewed them, beeing noised through the Kingdom, the other Cities be∣gan to bee more submissive, who before carried their heads so high. Duen̄as courted their Earl again, whom they had forced to leav the town, rising up in Arms against him. Palencia ope∣ned their gates to the Lord High Constable. Medina del Campo did the same. But Mota stood out a while upon the defensive, yet at last they were glad to make their peace. But the Lord High Con∣stable, and the Lord Admiral were such worthie Noblemen, that they used no acts of rigor in any place, and all those whom
they reduced, found themselvs so well with their present con∣dition, that they held themselvs as redeemed out of thraldom and oppression. Onely those of Toledo continued in their willfull∣ness. The Common People murthered two brothers, Biscayners, named Aguirres, onely upon vain surmises and suspitions which they conceived of them, yet they had both been Captains under Ioh de Padilla. Notwithstanding that the Prior of St Iuan, Don Antonio de Zun̄iga was with his Armie in the confines of that Citie; the Commoners with a great bodie and some pieces of Ordnance, marched to a Castle called Almonacid, and continued battring it for two daies, the Governor valorously defending it; which the Prior hearing, presently gave command to draw all his forces into the field, intending to give them battle. But they having intelligence thereof, soon railed their siege, and returned to Toledo, for fear of beeing put to the worst. Some daies after Don Alonso de Caravajal, brother to Don Diego, beeing quartred with some light-hors-men at Maxcareque, four leagues from Toledo, six hundred Foot, and fiftie Hors sallied out of the Citie, and ta∣king by-waies that they might not bee discovered by the Ene∣mie's Centinels, by break of day they fell upon the Village, sur∣prised Don Alonso and his men, and carried them all prisoners to Toledo, before any of their partie could com to rescue them. They did several other such exploits, and on the other side the Prior did them what mischief hee could. The Governors were much troubled hereat, but could not pass with their Armie to Toledo, until they had quieted all the old Castilla. But that which put them to the greatest plunge,The Frech advance in∣to Navarra. was the news of the King of France his Armie advancing into the Kingdom of Navarra. It was told them that Don̄a Maria Pachco, Iohn de Padilla's wife, with all her kindred in Toledo, mainteined and fomented chiefly this humor in the Inhabitants, therefore they resolved to send thither, and use som means to get her out of the Citie, believing, that if shee were gon thence, the rest might bee more easily re∣duced: To this effect they sent a Captain, with a few men dis∣guised, who offered himself to go to Toledo, and carrie her out of the Citie by fair means, or by foul. Being arrived at Toledo, hee went directly to the Fort where Don̄a Maria was, desiring to
speak with her; But the people having some intelligence of his designe, presently made an Alarme, and came in great multitudes to the Castle, where finding the Captain in discours with Don̄a Maria, they straight laid hands on him, and flung him out at the window, which beeing high, hee broke himself all to peeces with the fall; after this they cut the throats of all those that came with him, insomuch that the Citie was in greater disorder by this means then before.The Fenc Armie re∣pulsed. In the moneth of September 1521. the French beeing beaten out of Navarra, the Governors were in the minde to march with all their forces into the Kingdom of Toledo, and subdue that Citie, but they were again diverted by a second intelligence which was brought them, that the King of France was come to Bayona vvith a very povverful Armie.The Frech enter into Biscaya by Byona. And Don Antonio de Zun̄iga (vvho had begun that enterprise) beeing de∣sirous to bring his design to perfection, drevv all his forces out of their Garrisons, and pitcht his Camp before the Citie on the one side the River, and Don Iohn de Ribera had his men quartred neer the Citie on the other. Don Antonio had with him eight hun∣dred lances, which scoured all the Countrie about, and had daily smart skermishes with the Toledians, vvherein divers fell on both sides. In this expedition vvas Don Pedro de Guzman, third Son (as you have heard) to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, vvho beeing yong and full of mettle,Dn Pdo de Guzman soely wounded and takn prisoner y the Toldi∣ans. and ambitious to shevv his valor, engaged himself too far amongst the enemies, by vvhom hee vvas taken close by the Castle of San Sernan, so desperately vvounded, that the Toledians vvere enfor't to carrie him off the field upon a board, hee not beeing able to go any other vvaies. Don̄a Maria Pacheco, beeing at a vvindovv in the Fort, obsrved vvith great at∣tention all the passages of the fight, and distinguishing Don edo from the rest, shee vvas much taken vvith him, seeing im b∣have himself so gallantly; And beeing brought to the Fort, shee vvent out to receiv him, partly out of respect to Don Pedro's noble birth, but chiefly out of a private inclination vvhich proceeded from the esteem shee made of his valor and animositie. Shee treated him vvith much civility and demonstrations of affection, commeding highly his provvess vvhereof her eies vvere vvit∣nesses, and told him, that his generositie vvas vvorthie of an eternal
mmorie, onely this was wanting him, that his Valor was not emploied in the King's service, and in favor of the Citie of Toledo: (for the Commonalties pretended in all the Cities, That whatsoever they did, was in order to his Majesties service). Don̄a Maria would suffer none of Don Pedro's retinue to staie with him, or any bodie els to visit him, neither would shee permit him to write to Don Antonio's Camp: But treating him with very great care and complements, shee spared nothing that was necessarie for his recoverie: his wounds beeing throughly cured, shee en∣deavored to win him to their side, promising, that if hee would renounce the other partie, they would make him General of the forces of Toledo. But finding her time lost in persuading him, shee resolved to get him exchanged for other prisoners which Don Antonio had taken of the Toledians, which was done; for the better effecting whereof, those of Toledo gave Don Pedro his Parolle for eight daies, to go to his Uncle's Armie, having made him swear first, that hee would return again, in case hee procu∣red not the libertie of those whom they demanded: Amongst other exceptions which they made him renounce in the Oath they administred to him, one was, Tht hee should not allege that those of Toledo were Traitors, and therefore hee was not obliged to make good his Word or Oath to them, which was fulfilled accordingly. The Citie was very well provided for a long time, and they had broken down all the Mills for twelv leages compass, that Don Antonio's men might have no means o grinde their corn. They took all the Plate of Silver and Gold out of the Cathedral Church, which beeing coined, did much enrich them, and made them so stout, that they said, They would never consent to Peace, unless there were first a pardon general granted for the whole Kingdom of Spain, and that Don Pedro Lasso de la Vega were delivered into their hands, for (they said) hee was the principal caus of all those Troubles, and the onely man that put them upon that insurrection.
SECT. XXIV. THe Marquis of Villena beeing entred into Toledo, by consent of the Citie, began to bring them to a right understand∣ing: whereupon hee wrote to the Governors, that they might follow their business in Navarra, as for the Toledians hee would undertake to reduce them to their due obedience. The Gover∣nors glad to bee eased of an affair of such care and trouble, em∣ploied all their industrie and force to resist the incursions of the French▪ as shal bee said hereafter. Hernando de Avalos, and som othr of the Inhabitants, would gladly have received a pardon from the Marquis of Villena's hands; therefore beeing sent to by them, hee came, accompanied with the Earl of Oropesa, and som Hors and Foot, but nothing could bee effected, for the contrarie Par∣tie mutinied in such a tumultuous manner, that the Marquis was forced to go out of the Citie, after hee had spent som daies time to procure a Peace. The same effect had the endeavors of Don Diego de Cardenas Adelantado of Granada, Duke of Maqueda, who, with the same intention, came to Toledo, very well atten∣ded, and was driven out by the Common people. Such was the confusion of that Citie which Don̄a Maria Pacheco did uphold with as much courage, as if shee had been a Captain long exer∣cised in Martial affairs, and therefore shee was generally calld, la Muger valerosa, the valiant Woman: The report goe's, that shee made use of the Crosses in stead of Colors, and to excite the people to compassion, shee made her son to bee carried up and down the streets upon a Mule, with a mourning Hood and Cloak on, and in a Streamer, the picture of her husband Iohn de Padilla beheaded. Divers other things were said of her, it may bee they were but feigned. Amongst the rest, That shee had a fancie that shee should bee a Queen, which was put into her head by som Morisco witches at Granada. At length her partie be∣gan to weaken and diminish, Don Estevan Gabriel Merino prevail∣ing against her, who shewed himself a person of great conduct and prudence. This Prelate (who afterwards was Cardinal of San Vidal) then governing the Bishoprick of Iaen, and bee∣ing
Dean of Toledo, assisted by the Marshal Payo de Ribera, and other entlemen of that Citie, having routed Don̄a Maria, and her adherents, turned them out of Toledo; and shee, having disgui∣sed herself in a Countrie-woman's habit,Dnia Ma∣ria Pache∣co's escape out of Tole∣do. and riding upon an Ass, with som Gees in her hands, escaped: otherwise shee had lost her head aswel as her Husband. So shee spun out the rest of her daies in exsile. After this the Citie was reduced, and en∣joied the benefit of the general pardon,Som sai she died in Portugal. with other good con∣ditions, which, by reason of the War of Navarra, were granted them, and (as they desired) neither Don Iohn de Ribera, nor any of his kindred, were permitted to com into the Citie, until the King returned into Spain; they received Don Estevan Gabriel Merino, and Doctor Zumel,They should ra∣ther have erected a Statue, in memorie that he died a Martyr for his Countrie. for their chief officers of Justice. They pull'd down Iohn de Padilla's hous to the ground, which done, they ploughed it, and sowed it with Salt, becaus the soil, where the Captain of so great troubles and mischiefs had his birth and ha∣bitation, should not produce so much as grass or weeds, erecting there a pillar, with an Inscription, declaring the manner of his life and deplorable end. SECT. XXV. ALthough the whole Kingdom almost was reduced (the fear of punishment exceeding the hopes they had of carry∣ing on their design); Yet the Fort of Fermosel (which was under the command, and properly belonging to the Bishop of Zamora) stood peremptorily upon their defence. The Governors here∣upon sent the Earl of Alva de Lista, with a competent number of men, to take it; who requiring the Governor to deliver it to the Emperor, hee answered, that hee kept it in the Bishop of Za∣mora's name for his Majestie, that if his Majestie did com thither and bring the Bishop with him (whom the Duke of Naxara had taken prisoner) hee would presently surrender it, otherwise not. The Earl laid siege to it hereupon, but to small purpose, for it was very strong. The Duke of Naxara not long after sent to the Governors, desiring them to command the siege to bee raised before ermosel, becaus it belonged to his son; the Bishop
having xchanged it with him. The Governors gave order forthwith that the Earl of Alva should give them Truce for twentie daies, whilest they sent to the Emperor to know his Majesties pleasure.The man∣ner of the Bishop of Zamora's beeing tken pri∣soner. The taking of the Bishop of Zamora was in this manner. Hee seeing all his partie routed, and that it was no boot for him to staie in Spain, resolved to make France his re∣fuge. But beeing in the confines of Navarra at the same time the French King made his attempt upon that Countrie, at a place called Villamediana, a league from Logron̄o (although hee had dis∣guised himself) hee was discovered and taken prisoner by an Alferez named Perote. Who carried him thence to Navarrete a Town two leagues from Naxara, where hee delivered him to the Duke Don Antonio, who kept him there, until the Emperor commanded him to bee carried to the Castle of Simancas, where hee ended his daies, as you shall hear. SECT. XXVI. THe Citie of Valladolid wrote to the Lord Admiral, desiring him to stand their friend, as his Ancestors had done in for∣mer times. Whereunto hee returned a very kind answer, assu∣ring them all the favor hee could do them, or procure them from his Majestie, so that they continned their contrition and ac∣knowledgment of their errors, and refrained from acting any thing misbecoming the obedience of Loyal and faithful subjects▪ And to conclude this tedious relation, I shall tell you onely that the Emperor beeing retured into Spain, called a Counsel in Pa∣lencia, where hee consulted of and concluded a general pardon for the whole Kingdom. But some of the Commoners beeing brought to execution (as shall bee hereafter mentioned) the Castillians not knovving what had past in his Majesties Counsels, began to bee possest with fears; For the absolute distruction and banishing whereof, the Emperor upon the 28th of October 1522, caused a great scaffold to bee erected in the chief market place of Valladolid, and covered with rich cloth of gold and silk, whereon his Majestie cloathed with long robes, after the Antient manner, all his Grandees and Council about him, beeing seated;
his Attornie General with a rich Herald's Coat, and one of the Clarks of the Exchequer named Gallo, having made a long nar∣ration of the troubles and insurrections of Castilla, read with a distinct loud voice the general pardon which his Majestie grant∣ed to the whole Kingdom: wherein were excepted onely some threescore or fourscore persons; whom, in regard the greatest part of them were but ordinarie people, some of them Friers and others already punished, I shall not trouble my self to particula∣rize,They died gallantly as Martyrs for their Countrie. onely the execution of Don Pedro Pimentel de Talavera, (who was taken at the battle of Villalar) and his head was cut off in the publick place of Palencia. The Commissioners of Guadalaxara and Segovia, with some others, beeing prisoners at la Mota de Me∣dina del Campo, the Alcalde Leguizama was sent thither to do Justice upon them: Beeing there arrived, hee commanded seven of them to bee brought out of the Common Gaol (vvhere they were put) with ropes about their necks and set upon Asses un∣til they came into the chief market place of Medina, where all their heads were cut off. In the Citie of Vitoria, a skinner of Sala∣manca, and two or three more of his complices, were executed on Fridaie the 14th of August 1522. That which was chiefly laid to the charge of the Commissioners and other Gentlemen, vvas their daring to take possession of the Queen at Tordesillas, turn∣ing avvaie the Marquis of Denia and his Ladie, vvho had com∣mands from his Majestie to attend her person. And besides that some of them held correspondence vvith the King of France. SECT. XXVII. THe Bishop of Zamora beeing taken (as is related) vvas brought aftervvards prisoner to the Fort of Simancas, vvhere hee continued a good while. During which time with a brick which hee had cunningly put into a bag, wherein hee used to carrie his Breviary, hee knockt out the Governors brains, that had charge of him, beeing in discours with him by the fire side. So leaving the father dead, hee had made his escape, but that his Son discovered him, and having brought him back, lock'd him into his Chamber, without doing any thing els to him, for mur∣thering
his father which was held and commended for a peice of great wisdom and patience in the yong man. The Emperor upon notice hereof,The Bshop of Zamor' death. His Maje∣stie had great rea∣son to g for the los of the g∣test Prelae tht ever Spain bd, being so aged, and so resolue to the lst, for the good of his Coun∣trie. commanded the Alcalde Ronquillo to go thi∣ther, who having too much Justice on his side, and bearing no great affection to the Bishop, by vertue of a licence the Emperor had from Pope Adrian, to punish the said Bishop and other Priests and Friers for their exorbitances, bearing date the 7th of March 1523. Hee cused him to bee strangled within the said Fort; And some report that hee hung him upon one of the Pi∣nacles of the Tower, to the end hee might bee a spectacle to all that passed that waie. This was done contrarie to the Emperor's knowledg, and it grieved him very much, although hee had reason and power enough to do it. This was done An• 1526. SECT. XXVIII. THe end whereunto Don Pedro de Ayala, Earl of Salvatierra was brought, may serv for an example of the various vicis∣situdes of Fortune in this life:Thus died this brave Earl, whom if the other Nobes had seconded, they had made Spai the most glorious Reublic of te wold. After hee was taken hee was car∣ried to Burgos, where hee was kept prisoner in the Earl of Salinas his hous, where hee was let blood to death, Anno 1524, the Empe∣ror then beeing at Burgos, after which hee was carried to his grave, his feet hanging bare over the Bier, with irons upon them, exposed to the publick view of all. This unfotunate Earl was reduced to so much povertie, beeing forsaken of all his friends in his imprisonment, that hee had nothing to eat but a poor mess of pottage, which Leon Picardo, a domestick servant and Pain∣ter to the Lord High Constable, somtimes brought him. His son Don Athanasio de Ayala,Nota pi∣eie of Do Atanasio d Ayala to his fther, the Earl of Sal∣vatierra, be∣ing ready to starv in prison. then Page to the Emperor, out of compassion and pietie, which a childe oweth to his father, sold a hors which hee had to buie the Earl victuals: for which the Master of the Pages would have him punished, and complained of him to the Emperor; whereupon the Emperor calling Don Athanasio to him, and asking him for his hors, hee presently an∣swered, That hee had sold him to buie Victuals for his father. The Emperor was so far from beeing displeased at so pio an act, that hee forthwith commanded fortie thousand Maravediz
to bee given him. Thus this great Earl, who, as hee said of him∣self, was lineally descended from the mightie Gothes, ended his daies by an untimely death. SECT. XXIX. THe Emperor beeing desirous to express the Contentment which hee received by the Pacification of his Kingdoms, and that hee might shew himself a gracious Prince to those that had offended his Majestie in so high a measure, hee comman∣ded that two daies after the general pardon was proclaimed, there should bee great Feasts celebrated in Valladolid, with great solemnitie, with Tiltings, fighting on hors-back with Bulls, and a Turnament or Just-Royal. And the Emperor himself beeing in compleat Armor, and so disguised, that no bodie could know him, entered the List, and brake several Lances with those that had gotten the greatest honor that daie, behaving himself with such dexteritie, courage, and gallantrie, that hee drew the eies of all the Spectators upon him, and kindled a curiositie in their brests to know who hee was, which beeing discovered, their gusts increased with their admirations. Light-winged Fame having filled the World with the Emperor's good success, many Princes and Embassadors, from all parts, thereupon came flocking to his Court. The King of England sent his Embassadors, and Don Luis de Silva, in the King of Portugal his Master's name, came to congratulate his Majestie's return, his reception of the Imperial Crown, and the pacification of the troubles in Spain, desiring moreover, that hee would give order that the Castillians might go no more into the Moluccas, which his Majestie remitted to bee determined by judicious and experienced men. SECT. XXX. HIs Majestie's goodness and clemencie to his Subjects, had it been in the antient Greek's or Latine's ages, should have been celebrated with a never dying memorie, since of so many offendors so few were excepted in the general Pardon, and well
near all those too obteined an exemption from all punishments, aswel of Persons, as Estate: And the Nobles were restored to the same height of honor and esteem as they possessed formerly, the Emperor shewing as much favor and liberalitie towards them and their children, as if they never had committed any offence against him. Whosoever take's the pains to peruse the historie of these fore-related Commotions will finde, that Her∣nando de Avalos, a Gentleman of Toledo, was one of the greatest sticklers for the Commonalties, one of the chief Ring-leaders of these disorders, and one that persevered in them with as great obstinacie and perversness as might bee; for which hee was ex∣cepted, yet nothing was done to him. But whether out of fear, or otherwise, hee privately slunk away out of the Kingdom; for which the Emperor (as hee had reason) was the more displeased at him. And having continued in this voluntarie exile some time, at last having disguised himself, as hee thought, sufficiently, hee took the boldness to return to the Court and en∣deavor to procure his pardon, which coming to the knowledg of one that was neer his Majesties person, hee thinking to do an acceptable piece of service, went presently and told the Emperor, that Hernando de Avalos was in the Court, and that, if his Majestie was so pleased, hee would apprehend him, for hee knew where to finde him. The Emperor took no great notice hereof at the first time. Two or three daies after, the Gentleman think∣ing his Majestie had not well understood him, or els had for∣gotten what hee had told him, gave him a second advice of Her∣nando's beeing there. Whereunto the Emperor with a counte∣nance that express'd no great pleasure in any such like actions, answered; Thou should'st have done better to have advised Hernando de Avalos to leav the Court, then to press mee to give command to have him apprehended. So the pick-thank re∣mained ashamed and confounded, (as all those which delight in such base unworthie offices for the most part are, when their malicious practises do not take effect). It is moreover re∣ported, the testimonie of the goodness of this Emperor, that beeing told hovv fevv had been executed of those offendors, hee replyed, It is enough, let there bee no
more blood spilt. Which vvas a saying indeed becoming the Dignitie of so great a Prince. SECT. XXXI. THe general pardon beeing known through all Spain, the hearts of all the people were filled with no less rejoycing then affection to their Prince, having such notable experience of his clemencie and valour, and thenceforwards the Peace and quietness grew daily more and more in the Kingdom. Those of Valencia hearing what his Majestie had done at Valladolid for the Kingdom of Castilla, presently sent their Commissioners, humbly craving the same grace and favor from the Emperor, and in particular they desired his Majestie would bee pleased to re∣move thence their Vice-Roy Don Diego de Mendoça, whom they abhorred exceedingly, deriving upon him all the fault of their past Commotions, by reason of the many Tyrannies and oppres∣sions wherewith hee had overburthened the people. But those Commissioners not coming in the name and with a general power from the whole Kingdom, their desires were not granted at that time. Whereupon the 12 of November, Anno 1522, four other Commissioners were sent with full power, from the Kingdom of Valencia, to tender, without reserv, into his Ma∣jestie's hands all their honors, lives, and fortunes, that hee might dispose of them at his will and pleasure, absolutely re∣signing themselvs to his clemencie, and desiring onely that hee would give them another Vice-Roy, for they could not endure Don Diego de Mendoça, and that hee would change som other Of∣ficers; Which the Emperor, to satisfie them, did, placing in Don Diego's stead, the Queen Germana, and making Don Iohn, Marquis of Brandeburg, her husband, Captain General of the whole Kingdom, who died in the same year. After which, the Emperor considering the fidelitie and Roial descent of Don Her∣nando de Aragon, Duke of Calatria, (who beeing a prisoner in the Castle of Xativa) in the time of Troubles the People would have set him at libertie, and made him their Captain General, and married him to the Queen, but hee discreetly refused their
offer, saying, That hee would not go out of prison without the Emperor's consent) sent for him to Valladolid, where hee did him great honor and respect, and having married him to the Queen Germana, (who was second wife to the Catholick King Don Fernando) invested them in the Government of the King∣dom of Valencia. SECT. XXXII. WHilest the Governors of Castilla, after this Victorie at Vil∣lalar, were reducing and settling Segovia, and the other Cities of that Kingdom, with intent to pass with their Armie to suppress and quiet the disorders of the Toledians; The Duke of Naxara came to them at Segovia,The French make it cur∣sions into Navara. informing them that a power∣ful Armie of French under the command of Monsieur de Asparros, brother to Monsieur de Lautrech Vice-Roy of Milan, was entred in∣to Navarra, had taken Pamplona, Stilla, and divers other places, and not content to have run all that Countrie over (to which they seemed at first onely to laie claim, and that not in King Francis his name, but for Don Enrique de la Brit, who pretended to bee right owner of the Kingdom of Navarra. At last they declared themselvs (what reallie they were) open enemies, and marched with all their forces to assault the Citie of Logron̄o, their word was Vivat the King and flower de Luce of France, and the Commonaltie of Castilla, which was a great argument that some of them held correspondence with the King of France,The French are forcd to rais their siege before Logonio. and gave him en∣couragement to send his Armie thither; But the valour and po∣licie of those of Logron̄o was such, that the French were enforc't to rais their siege, and go away from thence with no inconsiderable loss, and the Governors beeing com to succor Logron̄o, pursued them,Thir Ar∣mie routed in the Py∣renean mountains, and Navarra also reduced by the Go∣vernors of Castilla▪ and after divers skirmishes they joyned battle in the Pyre∣nean mountain, wherein the French beeing absolutely routed and their General taken prisoner, the whole Kingdom of Navarra was presently reduced under the Emperors subjection. Who perceiving the animositie of the French King, and the means hee used to endammage him in several parts, as well in Flanders as in Spain, notwithstanding the conditions of peace made betwixt
the two Crowns at Noyon; resolved at last to paie him in the same coin, and take his full revenge of him in Italie. To which effect, hee first sent Embassadors to Pope Leon, desiring his friend∣ship and assistance to drive the French out of Lombardy, dispossess them of Milan, and restore it to Francisco Sforza, Son to Lewis brother to Maximilian, from whom the King of France had taken that Countrie; and to retake likewise Parma and Placentia, which belonged to the Church. Hereupon a yearly pension of ten thousand Duckets out of the Arch-Bishoprick of Toledo,The Em∣peror and the Pope combine against the French King. and as much in lands in the Kingdom of Naples, was promised to the Cardinal Iulo de Medicis for Alexander de Medicis base son to Lau∣rencio Son to Pedro de Medicis, who was Duke of Vibino. The Pope was so far from disliking the motion, that hee prepared monie and men to assist the Emperor, making the Marquis of Pescara Marquis of Mantua his General; who joyning with Prospero Colona,Their for∣ces take the Citie of Pama. Captain General of the Imperial forces, they laid siege to the Citie of Parma, which after som daies resistance, they stormed and sacked. The Citie and Castle of Milan they took also,Milan. Pavia. after which the Citie of Pavia, and all the rest of the Cities and Towns belonging to the State of Milan presently sur∣rendered themselvs: This done, the Imperialists (notwithstan∣ding their Armie was much lessened, monie growing short, by reason of the Pope's sudden death) besieged and took the Cities of Como and Alexandria upon the River Ada in Lombardie. About the same time the King of France advanced into Flanders with a very powerful Armie,The French advance in∣to Flanders, and are re∣pulsed. to succor the Citie of Tornay (which then was besieged by the Emperors forces) but beeing repulsed by Henrie Earl of Nassau and Don Hugo de Moncada, hee retreated, and the Citie for want of relief was surrendred to the mperialists. In mean time Francis the first of France, nothing dismaied at the crosness of his fortune, sent another numerous Armie against Spain, (building much upon the absence of the Emperor and the distractions in that Kingdom) which entring into Navarra by Puerto de Ronces Valles,The French take Fuente Ravia. took the Forts of Pen̄ol and Maya, and en∣camp'd before Fuente Ravia, a strong place in the Countrie of Guipuzcoa, four leagues from Bayona, which after ten or twelv daies siege, despairing of any succor, Diego de Vera the Governor de∣livered,
upon condition that the souldiers should all march freely out with bag and baggage, the Inhabitants not to bee plundred, and have libertie to staie or go out of the Town, as they pleased: for which hee was afterwards questioned in Castilla. SECT. XXXIII. HEnrie the eighth, King of England, (whom the Emperor, and King of France made Arbitrator of their differences) having concluded that the French King was the Peace-Breaker,Henrie 8. of England assists the Emperor against the French. sent the Duke of Suffolk (who had married Marie, sister to Hen∣rie the 8th, and Widow to Lewis King of France, with a conside∣rable force, to join with the Imperialists, under the Command of Florencio Egmondio, Earl of Bura, at the Siege of Hesdin, in the frontiers of Flanders, which after two moneths time they were compelled to rais, by sickness, and the over-flowing of the Ri∣ver, besides the unseasonableness of the weather, enforced them to repair into their Winter-quarters. But the Spring following, they took the field again, and marched near fortie thousand strong toward Paris, spoiling and burning without mercie as they went, which put the Parisians to a terrible fright. At the same time the Lord High Admiral of France entred into Lombar∣die with an Armie of above fiftie thousand Combatants:The Vene∣tians assist the Empe∣ror in Lom∣bardie. But the Venetians, beeing joined with the Imperialists, recovered all the places which they had gotten, and drove them quite out of Italie. Not long after the King of France came himself into Lombardie at the head of another mighty Armie, thinking to carrie all be∣fore him,Francis the first of France ta∣ken priso∣ner at Pa∣via. but before the Citie of Pavia (where hee had pitched his Camp) his forces were all routed by the Marquis of Pescara, General of the Imperialists, and hee taken prisoner, his Hors bee∣ing kill'd under him: The Prince of Navarra was likewise ta∣ken and committed prisoner to the Castle of Pavia, whence hee made his escape; the Prince of Scotland was kill'd barbarously by a Countrie-fellow, to whom hee had discovered himself, and promised a great reward to conduct him safe to Vigeven, where his Train and Baggage was, which fellow coming to re∣late to the Marquis his exploit, exspecting som recompence, hee commanded to give him a halter for his news, and hee was hang∣ed
presently. Divers other Noblemen and persons of qualitie were taken, and many killed in that expedition. The King, af∣ter som time, was carried into Spain by Don Carlos de Lanoy, Vice-Roy of Naples, upon his earnest request, hoping to make his conditions the better with the Emperor, if hee could speak with him himself. Hee continued a Prisoner a year and upwards, af∣ter which time, hee was released upon Articles betwixt him and the Emperor, whereof one principal was, That hee should mar∣rie the Emperor's sister, Don̄a Leonor, widow to Don Manuel King of Portugal, and restore the Dukedom of Burgundie to the Hous of Austria, for performance of their agreement, his two eldest sons,Francis the Frst ex∣chang'd for his two sons. viz Francis the Dolfin, and Henrie Duke of Orleans were, at the same time as hee was set into France, delivered as Pledges to the Spaniards. But beeing in his own Countrie, whether by persuasion of ill Counsellors, or, thiking the conditions too unreasonable, and hee not obliged to make good his promise, having been forced thereunto in his imprisonment, hee sent the Arch-Bishop of Bourdeaux to the Emperors Court, requiring him (in regard it was not in his power to give away any part of his Countrie) that hee would give his children their enlarge∣ment upon any reasonable ransom. Which Embassage the Emperor, with great indignation, answered thus briefly; That if the King of France could not perform the conditions (as hee pretended) yet desired to have his Sons at libertie; hee should com back and take their places, (which was in his power to do, and hee had promised by oath) otherwise, hee must not ex∣spect to have his children so soon released. Hereupon the French King giving waie to his vindicative passion, left no means un∣attempted to incite the other Christian Princes to wage War in his favor against the Emperor. And after som time having drawn Henrie the 8th of England to his Partie (who had som other pretences to quarrel with the Emperor) they both sent their Kings a Arms with Letters of defiance to him into Spain, and gave order to their Embassadors to return,The Kings of England and France, sent Letters of Defiance to the Em∣peror. and leav his Court. Whereupon their private animosities broke out into a publick War, which for a time continued more fierce and bloodie then the former: but at last their differences were com∣posed, and an happie peace concluded between those two potent
Princes,Pece made between he Emperor and King of France, by the Archdut∣chess of Austria, and the Dut∣chess of Angulm. His two sons ran∣somed for 2000 of Crowns of Gold. by the no less ingenious then industrious endeavors of the most excellent Princesses, Don̄a Margarita, Arch-Dutchess of Au∣stria, Aunt to his Imperial Majestie, and Madama Luysa Dutchess of Angulema and Anjou, widow to the Duke of Savy, and Mo∣ther to the King of France. Upon which agreement the young Princes were released, after almost four years close imprison∣ment, their Father sending for their ransom two millions of Crowns of Gold, which summe of monie was put into one boat, and they into another at Fuente Ravia, with the like diffi∣dence and ceremonie as was used when the King, their father, was exchanged for them. At the same time Don̄a Leonor the Em∣peror's sister passed into France,The Em∣peror's si∣ster Lono∣ra married to the French King. according to the Articles, who was married by the Cardinal of Tournon to the French King, with great solemnitie and expressions of joie, Anno 1530. This Peace continued not long, for Francis King of France (who in all other Princely qualities and ornaments, was rather surpassing, then at all inferior to any of his Cotemporaries) beeing trans∣ported with an insatiable ambition, and envying the Emperor's greatness, gave several meetings at Boloigne, and Calis to Henrie King of England (who having shook hands with Conscience and Religion, and repudiated Queen Katharine, Charls the Fifth's Aunt, thinking the Emperor would som waie express his discon∣tent, and shew himself sensible of so greatan affront, resolved to give him further occasion of distaste); And there they conspired to suscitate the Lutherans in Germanie,A plot be¦twxt Hen. 8 and Fan. King of Fance, a∣gainst the Emperor. and rais new factions in Italie against him, and under hand they encouraged the Danes to rise up in Arms against their King Christian, whom (pretending a Truce, and a desire to make an Accommodation with him) they surprised, hee not suspecting their treacherie, and impri∣soned him in the Castle of Sundiburgi in Holsatia, where hee mi∣serably ended his daies: The said Princes had no other ground for this pece of malice, but onely in relation to the Emperor, be∣caus Christian was his friend and Allie, having married his sister Ysabella; and not content herewith, at length finding fit oppor∣tunities, they again declared open War against him, the transacti∣ons and events whereof shal bee exactly represented in the Suc∣ceeding Book. FINIS.
