t2078 17349495 106387
TREASON made Manifest; OR, A DISCOURSE By way of DIALOGUE BETWEEN Richard and William: In Relation to the Tryals and Convictions Of the Two Arch-Traytors, VIZ. Edward Fitz-Harris, AND Oliver Plunket, Titular Arch-Bishop of DUBLIN IN IRELAND. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, J. Wright, J. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T. Passinger. 1681.
Treason made Manifest; OR, A Discourse by way of Dialogue BETWEEN Richard and William, &c. Richard. HA Neighbour Will, and where are you going in all this haste, if a Man may be so bold as to ask you the question? William. Why Neighbor is it possible that you should not know where I am going? Rich. Yes, it is possible, for as yet I know not. Will. Then in good faith sit down upon this Ale-Bench, and I'le tell ye. Rich. Be quick then, for I have but a little while to stay. Will. As quick as you will, good Neigh∣bor, for if I overstay my Market, I shall buy but bad Pennyworths.
Rich. VVhy, are you going to Market then, pray what de'y design to buy that you fear to come too late? Will. Buy Neighbour, why News, new Minted News, what do you think I intend to buy, that's the greatest Chaffer now a∣days. Rich. But pray where is it to be sold? Will. Why every where, there is few or no Markets but what yields little or much, but at this I am going to they sell it by Sack∣full, setting it up by way of Auction, so that at the burning of an inch of Candle, and Two-pence price, a Man may purchase as much as his Head can bear. Rich. VVell, but all the News now is about Fitz-Harris, who as 'tis said on the 9th of June was Tryed at the Kings-Bench, for the Highest of Treason that witty Mischief could invent. Will. 'Tis true Neighbour, and there he was Cast for his Life, being fairly convicted of his Treasons. Rich. 'Tis but just he should, and con∣demned too, nay, after that Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, who dare at∣tempt the Deposing and Murthering of his sacred Majesty, who is the Breath of our Nostrils, as a worthy Iudge was
once pleased to say upon the Bench; and not only his, but to destroy all our lives and Liberties, by raising Rebellion and bring in a French Power, thereby to en∣slave us to the Tyranny of the Pope. Will. Could this be proved against him up∣on his Tryal? Rich. Proved, yes, under his own Hand, and by several witness of candid Reputations, who swore it positively. Will. But in what manner, or by what means, did he design to accomplish such his wicked designs? Rich. By Libelling the King, to render him odious to his subjects, by Charging him with such things as no good Man can express without horror and detesta∣tion; by endeavouring to set all in a Flame, or Combustion of Civil VVar, which should be Carryed on under the name of the Non-Conformists, so that the Father should have been against the Son, and the Son against the Father, to have sheath'd their swords in each others bow∣els, till all had been weakned and ruin'd, when as the Popish Army was to be rais∣ed here, and the powers of France was to have broken in upon us, and so to have born down all before them.
Will. That had been sad indeed, for then our lives had been like Chaff before a Tor∣rent fire. Rich. Yes, this had been our case had this Instrument of Rome and Hell set on and mannaged by the art and cunning of the Iesuitick Policies succeeded. Will. But pray how did he go about to per∣fect this Design, I have here the measures he took, but it was so imperfectly related, that I could make nothing on't. Rich. VVhy, he haveing some small acquaintance with one Mr. Everard, be∣ing the Gentleman that was kept so long in the Tower, he came about the 21th of Febr. last to his Chamber, and there fal∣ling into discourse with him about seve∣ral matters, began to commiserate him for the hard usage he had suffered, since his adhearing to the Protestant Intrest, telling, him if he would forsake it, and cleave to the Popish Party, he should not onely meet with great Rewards, but likewise be put into places of trust. Will. And did the Gentleman believe or give credit to what he said? Rich. Yes, he seemed so to do, but it was onely to find what he would be at, for he knew him to be a great Villain.
Will. Well, and how did he proceed, had they any farther discourse? Rich. VVhy then he began to open his mind, and proposed to him the Indicting of so venomous and Treasonable a Li∣bell, that I think no Age e're heard the like, as for me, my hair stood an end when I heard it read in Court. Will. Why, what might it contain that it struck you with such horror. Rich. Nay, it contained what I will not presume to repeat; nor can I liken it to any thing, unless the Box which Pan∣dora sent to Epimetheus, full fraught with Plagues and dire destruction. Will. But how come this to be discovered? Rich. VVhy the honest Gentleman, for so I may well call him for detecting so horrid a Villany, disclosed the business to several worthy persons. Will. But did he let Fitz-Harris know he did so? Rich. No I'le warrant ye, but gave the more countenance to proceed, and promised to take his Instructions for drawing up the Papers, and Appointed him a time to come for them, when as he had placed a Gentleman to over-hear the discourse that passed betwixt them.
Will. And did he come according to Ap∣pointment? Rich. Yes, he did, and uttered many Treasonable words, promising the Gen∣tleman that he should have four Guinnys from the French Embassadors Confessor, and that he should be entred a Pensioner to the French King, and have several Thousand Crowns. Will. And how did the Gentleman like this proffer? Rich. Not at all, for he boggled at it, saying it was a Treasonable Design, and that he knew not what to think on't; Think on't (said Fitz-Harris) why the more Treason the better, am not I deep∣er concerned in it then you? have not you my Hand for it, and is there not ma∣ny great Persons concerned in it, or words to this effect. Will. Well, and what was to have been done with those Papers you speak of just now, how should they have been disposed of? Rich. VVhy several Thousands Cop∣pies were to have been dispersed amongst the People in Penny-Post Letters, and many put into Gentlemens pockets, and they apprehended with them about 'um, so that it could not chuse but blow up a
flame of horrid mischief, for all the Kings good subjects were to have been bought into the Plot, and to be taxed for endea∣vouring to raise Rebellion and Insurre∣ction, so that the Popes Agents thought themselves Cock-sure of prevailing a∣gainst us, this being their last, but most dangerous shift, and shew'd it self to be the very Spawn of the Iesuits, but Hea∣ven that has hitherto blasted their De∣signs, prevented it, and broke the Cock∣atrices Egg e're it could be hatched. Will. And was this Sworn against him at Tryal. Rich. It was, and much more then I can remember; but stay, I had forgot one passage that was very material, which was, That one of the Gentlemen that gave Evidence against him (whose known Fidelity renders him of unspott∣ed Reputation) because he would not be mistaken, marked the Papers that Mr. Everard brought to him, and whilst he looked through a Crevice, he saw Fitz-Harris make several alterations, cross∣ing out some and putting in other some, and after he was departed, found those Papers to be the same he had set his pri∣vate Mark upon, and that at the takeing them up, the Ink was wet.
Will. And did not they apprehend him at that time? Rich. No, but some days after, and carrying him before a Magistrate, he confess'd a Treasonable Paper to be his own hand-writing. Will. Well, but what answer did he make to what was sworn against him: Rich. Truly little or nothing to the purpose, for he rather strove to Iustifie what he had done, then any ways to deny or detest against such wicked designs, in∣sisting that he had been Impeached by the Commons, and that his cause say before them. Will. Well, and how then, was he ever the better for that Allegation? Rich. No, nor could he, for the Court before had over-ruled that Plea, and all the Iudges of England given their opini∣ons, it was in the power of the Court to Try him. Will. But did he produce no Witnesses to testifie for him? Rich. Yes, several, and many of them persons of Quality. Will. And what could they say in his be∣half? Rich. Why truly very little or nothing
that would avoid his Cause, for it was so foul that no good Subject could any ways countenance it, but rather their E∣vidence tended to his prejudice. R. Why did he call them, seeing their Te∣stimonies availed him nothing, and he had better been without 'um. W. Why, to prove that he had been with them from the King about business of importance. R. And did they agree he had: W. Yes, they agreed that he had been with them, but they did no ways believe his Majesty sent him. R. Was that all? W. No, no, he called several to testifie that he had received Moneys by his Ma∣jesties Order, the which he would have put an evil Construction on. R. And was it proved? Will. Yes, that he had received about 200 l. but that it was given him out of Charity, his own Petition being produced, so that you may see what a Monster he is. Rich. Well, but how came he off at last? Will. Why, when about fourteen Wit∣nesses had been heard, the Kings Council summed up their Evidence to the Jury, lay∣ing open to them the nature of the Crime in
all its horrid Circumstances,; and when they had done, Fitz-Harris addressed himself to them in a threatning way, bidding them be∣ware what they did, for his Cause lay before the Parliament, and that if they found him Guily his Blood would lye at their doors, and that he doubted not but that it would be re∣venged. Rich. And do you think they believed him? Will. Nay, I cannot tell as to that, but after the Court had given in their Charge, they made some scruples, and seemed not well satisfied till the Court had given them farther Instructions; and what did they do then? Rich. Why then they went out, and staying near an hour, they returned, and gave in their Verdict, That he was Guilty of the High Treason for which he stood Indicted; which Verdict was accordingly taken and Recorded: the Court telling them they had found a very good Verdict. Will. And did the People seem pleased with it? Rich. Yes, and gave such a Hum as made the Hall ring again. Will. Well, I wish all Traytors the like success: but Neighbour, 'tis reported that
one Oliver Plunket another Irish Traytor, and Titular Arch-Bishop of Dublin, was Tryed the day before, Pray what became of him? Rich. Why he was found Guilty of High-Treason. Will. In what Nature? or where Com∣mitted? Rich. For the most part in Ireland, and the Evidence Sworn against him in Court, was to this purpose, That he held Correspondence with the French King, and that he was to deliver up certain Towns upon the Sea-Coast to the French, that they might Land an Army: and farther, that in order to the leavying War in that Kingdom, he had made several Collections of monies, and that he had endeavour's to compass the Death of His Majesty, and enslave that Kingdom to Popery, and the Insult∣ing Tyranny of the French Power. Will. And was all this prov'd against him in Court? Rich. Yes, and much more, even by his own Country-men. Will. Pray what could he say for himself in this case? Rich. Why truly little or nothing, for
Treason is always attended with a guil∣ty Conscience, only he objected against the Insufficiency of the Witnesses, al∣ledging he stood Convicted upon record. Will. And did he produce those Records in Court? Rich. No, but being asked why he had not done it, his answer was, That he had not time nor opportunity enough to procure them. Will. But had he no Witnesses to testifie in his behalf? Rich. Yes, one or two, I think, but their Evidence was not any thing ma∣terial for his advantage. Will. Why? did not they speak to the purpose? Rich. No, but only endeavour'd to de∣grade some of the Kings Evidence, but could give no grounds for what they said, it being altogether groundless. Will. Well, and why did not he send over for his Witnesses, as he said he would the last Term, seeing he had time enough allowed him? Rich. It's true, he might have done it; nay, he said he did, but that they be∣ing for the most part Priests, they durst not come over without His Majesties
