T506 12763889 93543
A Reply as true as Steele, To a Rusty, Rayling, Ridiculous, Lying Libell; which was lately written by an impudent unsoder'd Ironmonger and called by the name of An Answer to a foolish Pamphlet Enti∣tuled, A Swarme of Sectaies and Schismatiques. By IOHN TAYLOVR. The Divell is hard bound and did hardly straine, To shit a Libeller a knave in graine. Printed Anno Dom 1641.
A Reply as true as Steele, To a Rustie, Railng, Ridiculous, Lying Libell. VVHat Dogs Infernall Snaps and Snarleth thus? (Begot by Tripleheaded Cerberus) No 'tis a pretty Puppy, with one head, A Red haird whelpe, that can both Write and Read. Sprung from the devill and a mad Dun Cow, Nurse in a Dunghill where he suck'd a Sowe, This Amsterdam'd cur, hath strange Libels flirted And much fowle Inke besquitterid and Besquirted That every where his Roguish Pamphlets flies That England's all embrodred or'e with lyes. And late this cankerd viperous hownd of hell His toadlike mallice did against me swell, And did a poysnous lying libell frame Against me, but durst never set his Name. An Annagram Denominotes him well Look into the tenth line fol∣lowing, and there in Capital letters you shall finde that these three wic∣ked words are his A∣nagram. Three scurvey words, a KNAV, REVILER, HEL, These shew his name, his nature and his end (Except before hee's hang'd he meanes to mend.) For who is fitter for black hell to have Then a reviler and a railing Knave, And not to hold you in suspence much longer This fellow is a Quondam Iron-monger And now his coppies Chaung'd, crackd Like a shell In Gracious street, doth Graceles libells sell. If I would be an Idle babling talker Perhaps I then should name him HENRIE WALLKER.
But 'tis no matter, I'le a while forbeare Hee'l hang himself if I should name him heere; He in his title page, six times sets down My name, but never once, durst write his own And though his libell be one Sheete (no more) And Prose and Verse the lines are but eightscore, Ye fifty of these Roguish lines (pray know it) He stole from FENNER, the dead Rimcing Poet. And yet the mungrill Dogg's wits was to seeke That he was faine to pumpe Above a weeke. To answer me, but this reply was soon unwrit and writ in halfe an Afternon. And what sweet stuffe his Giant muse brought forth Those that wil reade may quickly know the worth. He layes about him bravely with his Inke And taxes me with drabs and to much drinke But those that know me well, do know me so That I to both those vices am a foe, But were I given to the veneriall crime I would have seen his wife before this time, If he be Iellious, he deserves for that To wear a faire Ox-feather in his Hat;The Ras∣call sayes that I was invited to dinner, a the Tower it is knowe I was a ser∣vant there 14. yeers. Th' Archbishop nor his men did me invite Nor for a meal did I the book endite For 'tis to sundry gentlemen well knowne That I did write that booke three yeares agone. Let trencher knaves (like Walker) Scrape for scrapps And with the snuffes of Greatmen Rince their chappes, No Bishops not in England living be That I have cause to thanke for gifts to me. He that takes part with Rome, let him have Hell And there is Roome enough, there let him dwell: But though those lines may shew sincerity Yet they are far from Christian charity,) I hate no person, (Layman, or Divine) Nor 'Gainst misguided soules do I repine,
I hate mens crimes, nor do I love mine own, (And charity begins at home 'tis knowne) As men transgresse, so punish the offender As men are men so men should pitty tender; This shallow pated foole that railes and raves I pitty him and all his brother knaves Sure if they had wit they would descry Good manners must not be Idolatry, That Popery is not railes, though too much railing Hath shewed Romes mingle mangle wrangling failing. Thou filthv fellow, dost thou make no ods Between a Stable and a House of Gods, I thinke the devill feares that doomes day's neere And therefore he those adverse Sects doth reare And Buzzeth sundry formes of strange Religions That he may catch the most of them like Widgeons; For what a lamentable case is this When such mad fooles (whom wisemen scorne and hisse) Dares take upon them to reforme and teache Various Rellgions, all beyond their reach. And this rare Rascall, (in his zeale discreet) Went lately to the Owle that's in Kings street There was his Bible paund (for what I pray) For one quarte of Metheglin left to pay. Was not this Rogue rap'd with some spright devine To pawne Gods word for poor Welch Muscadine. He talkes of whipping, and of Iayles to me Of gallowses, and things called Pillorie, And such od whimsyes, which the Gentleman Doth hammer in his Perricranian, Yet late Greatmen of Government thought fit To clap him in the fleet with all his wit, And being thence releas'd, he afterward Was kept in Wood-street-Counter with good guard For why it vvas a matter most unmeet His precisous Pamphlets should bestrow the street.
And make some old men, that for got almost To ride a Horse, to ride each Pissing Poste, And all his patience could not be content To stay for order from the Parliament, I hold it manners to forbear a while Till that High Court our wrongs can reconcile To wait with patience, and with prayers desire That God that Blessed Senate would inspire With Grace, true wisdom, courage, saving health For Heavens Great-service, King and common wealth. But Master Walker and such Knaves as he To wait their leasures cannot quiet be: But they must Libell raile, and keep a Rut, And (as they please their own wayes out to cut, And like unmaunag'd wild untoward Iades Lay by their laudable and lawfull Trades, And sawcily to preach, prate, rore, and lie Against all order rule and descencie; And all such as are not seditious To call them Papists, and idollatrous, As Froggs and Toades do breed from Putred slime So do these Vermine feed upon mens crime Like Swine ith'mire, they love to wallow in The Sordid Loathsom Excrements of Sin. And though offenders suffer worthily Yet will these varlets malice never die, For though unhappy Strafford be struck dead They mount him up a cock-horse sans a head. And this most precious youth, with tongue and pen Is chiefe amongst the devills serving men, For with his serpents tongue and poysned breath He doth his worst to torture after death, And sure because thou canst do Ill so well Thou must expect to have thy hire in hell, This stinking Vermin (mounseir overthwart) Quite oposite to Nature, Law and Art,
Holds it not fit he should be kept in awe Within the Rules and limmis of the Law, And therefore if the Law should bid him stand Then he would kneele, (contrary to command) And when to kneele, good manners holds it fit In opposiion he would stand or sit; For nothing his rebellious minde contents That is not mix'd with disobedience A sister as she chanced to set her eye on The Kings Armes in the Church, the Rampant Lyon, She said his Priap mov'd unlawfull motions Which did disturbe and hinder her devotions, But when her husband came to be Church-warden He caus'd some formes of flowers from field or Garden Or sedge and flagges, 'twixt the Beast legges be painted To hide his whim wham, which her minde had tainted. This was done really, and 'tis no fable To prove it so I quickly can be able, And now thou poysoned pickthank pestilent That writ'st and Rimest so poor so violent Me think this my reply may answer thee, If not, th'art like to have no more of me I scorne and loath, that er'e my pen or tongue Should write or speak to such a lump of dunge; Yet thou, (well skild in foolish impudence) 'Gainst these retorting lines will take offence And with Mockado mouth and judgement Rash, And tongue of Saye, thou'lt say all is but trash, And that 'tis pitty, I should thus disperse A businesse of such consequence in verse, Indeed, with thee it cannot stand for good Nor can it well by thee be understood, Thou hat'st the muses, yet dost love to muse In railing tearmes thy betters to abuse, Verse must have method, measure, order, feet, Proportion, cadence, weight and number, sweet
But thou that hat'st good verse, and libels make Dost with the Devills cloven foot thy measure take And where thou hast no power thou dost deride (so will all Rogues that verse cannot abide) But let such know, that heaven bred Poetry Despiseth mundane poore fellicity, Nor for Vaust ayre will like a mag-py Chatter, Or for he Crummes of greatnes Lye and flatter, I could write lines, (thou fowle ill looking elfe) Should make thee (in Jambicks) hang thy selfe, Th'art fowle within, and my sharp lancing quill Can make Incision, and with Art and skill Search deep for dead flesh and Coroded Cores And from corruptions cleare and clense thy sores. Th'art almost Gangren'd, and I surely think No Ballsm's better then a Poets Inke, My pen can lash detraction and I can Be valliantly bold, and wrong no man, But wherefore (like a Mountebank) doe I Spend time and Ink upon such rascall frye As is this gad-flye. 'Tis not Sergeons Art Can help him, it perhaps may make him smart. But he will be uncured, as he hath bin Except he first be Cleansed and purged within: So, Walker, Walk Knave and more Roguery brew And farewell and be hangd, that's twice adiew. FINIS.
