W1215 13494060 99754
APPIUS AND VIRGINIA. A TRAGEDY. BY JOHN WEBSTER. Printed in the Year 1654.
APPIUS AND VIRGINIA. Actus Primus Scena Prima. Enter Minutius, Oppius, and Lictors. Minut. IS Appius sent for, that we may acquaint him with the decree o'th' Senate? Lictor He is, my Lord, and will attend your Lordships presently. Opp. Lictor, did you tell him that our businesse was from the Senate? Lict. I did, my Lord, and here he is at hand. Enter Appius, his two Cozens and M. Clodius. Appius My Lords, your pleasure? Minut. Appius, the Senate greet you well, and by us do signifie unto you that they have chosen you one of the Decemviti. App. My Lords, far be it from the thoughts of so poor a Plebeian, as your unworthy servant Appius, to soar so high: the dignity of so eminent a place would require a person of the best parts and blood in Rome. My Lords, he that must steer at th' head of an Empire, ought to be the Mirrour of the times for Wisdome and for Policie, and therefore I would beseech the Senate to elect one. worthy of the place, and not to think of one so unfit as Appius.
Min. My Lord, y Lord▪ you ally with your wits. I have seen children oft eat sweet meats thus, as fearfull to devoure them you are wise and play the odest  right to make so many  of our delight Oppius. t yo must ow, what e have once concluded cannot for any private mans affection be slighted: take your choice then with best judgement of these two proffers, either to accept the place prop'd you, or be bnished Rome immediately: Lictors e wa: we expe you peedy reolution. Exet Oppius, Minuts 1. Cozen. Noble cozen, you wrong your selfe extremely to refuse so Eminent a place. 2. Cozen. It is a meanes to raise your kindred. Who shall dare t'oppose himselfe against our Family, when yonder shall sit your power, and frowne? Appius. Or banist Rome! I pray forbear a little. Marcus. Marcus. Cl. Sir. Appius. How dost thou like my cunning? Marcus. Cl. I protest I was be-agued, fearing let the Senate should have accepted at your fain'd refusall. See how your kindred and your friends are mustr'd to warme them at your sun-shine. Were you now in prison, or arraign'd before the Senate for some suspect of treason, all these swallowes would flie your stormy winter, not one ing: their Musick is the Summer and the Spring. Appius. Thou observet shrewdly: well, e fit them ort. I must be one of the Decemvir, or banish't Rome. Banish laugh, my trusty Marcus, I am inforc't to my ambition. I have heard of cunning footmen that have worne shooes made of lead some ten dayes fore a race to give them nimble and more active feet: so great men should, that  eminent place, load themselves with excuse and aint denyll, that they with more speed may performe the trial: Marke his humility saies one; how far his dreames are from ambition▪ aies another:
he would not shew his Eloquence, lest that should draw him into office: and a third is meditating on some thrifty suite to beg 'fore dinner. Had I as many hands as had Briarius, I'de extend them all to catch this office; 'twas my sleeps disturber, my dyets ill digestion, my melancholy past physicks cure. Enter Oppius, Minutius, Lictors. Marcus. The Senators returne. Minu. My Lord, your answer. Appius. To obey my Lord, and to know how to rule doe differ much: to obey by nature comes, but to command by long experience. Never were great men in so eminent place without their shadowes. Envy will attend on greatnesse till this generall frame takes end. 'Twixt these extreames of state and banishment, my minde hath held long conflict, and at last I thus returne my answer, noble friends, we now must part, necessity of State compells it so. I must inhabit, now a place unknowne, you see't compels me leave you. Fare you well. 1. Cozen. To banishment, my Lord? Appius. I am given up to a long travell full of fear and danger, to waste the day in sweat, and the cold night in a most desolate contemplation, banisht from all my kindred and my friends, yea banisht from my selfe; for I accept this honourable calling. Minu. Worthy Appius, the gods conduct you hither: Lictors, His robes. 2. Cozen. We are made for ever, noble kinsman, 'twas but to fright us. Appius. But my loving kinsmen, mistake me not, for what I spake was true, bear witnesse all the gods: I told you first, I was to inhabit in a place unknown; 'tis very certaine, for this reverend seat receives me as a pupill, rather gives ornament to the person, then our person the least of grace to it. I shewed you next I am to travell; 'tis a certaine truth:
Look by how much the labour of the minde exceeds the bodies, so far am I ound with paine and industry, beyond the toyle of those that sweat in warre, beyond the toyle of any Artisan, pale cheeks, and sunk eyes, a head with watching dizied, and a haire turn'd white in youth, all these at a dear rate. we purchase speedily that tend a State. I told you I must leave you, 'tis most true. Henceforth the face of a Barbarian and yours shall be all one, henceforth Ile know you but only by your vertue: brother or father in dishonest suite shall be to me as is the branded slave. Justice should have no kindred, friends, nor foes, nor hate, nor love, as free from passion as the gods above. I was your friend and kinsman, now your Judge, and whilst I hold the scales, a downy feather shall as soone turne them as a masse of Pearle or Diamonds. Marcus. Excellent, excellent Lapwing, there's other stuffe closed in that subtle brest. He sings and beats his wings far from his nest. Appius. So Gentlemen, I take it, here takes end your businesse; my acquaintance, fare you well. 1. Cozen. Heres a quick change, who did expect this cloud? Thus men when they grow great doe strait grow proud. Appius. Now to our present businesse at the camp: the army that doth winter 'fore Agidon, is much distrest we heare: Minutius, you with the levies and the little corne this present dearth will yield, are speedily to hasten thither, so to appease the minde of the intemperate souldier. Minu: I am ready the levies doe attend me, our Lieutenant send on our Troopes. Appius: Farewell Minutius. the gods goe with you, and be still at hand to adde a triumph to your bold command. Exeunt. Enter Numitorius, Icilius, Virginia. Numitor. Noble Icilius. welcome, teach your selfe a older freedome here, for by our love
your suite to my faire Neece doth parallell her kindreds wishes. There's not in all Rome a man that is by honour more approv'd nor worthier, were you poore, to be belov'd. Icilius. You give me (noble Lord) that character which I cood never yet read in my selfe: but from your censure shall I take much care to adorne it with the fairest ornaments of unambitious vertue: here I hold my honorable patterne, one whose minde appeares more like a ceremonious chappell full of sweet musick, then a thronging presence. I am confirm'd, the court doth make some shew fairer then else they would doe; but her port being simple vertue, beautifies the court, Virginia. It is a flattery (my Lord) you breath upon me, and it shewes much like the borrowed painting which some Ladies use, it is not to continue many dayes; my wedding garments will outweare this praise. Numitor. Thus Ladies still foretell the funerall of their Lords kindnesse. But my Lord, what newes? Enter a Servant, whispers Icilius in the eare. Icilius. Virginius, my Lord, your noble brother disguis'd in dust and sweat, is new arriv'd within the City: troopes of artisans follow his panting horse, and with a strange confused noyse, partly with joy to see him, partly with fear for what his hast portends, they shew as if a sudden mutiny orespread the City. Numitor. Cozen take your chamber. What businesse from the camp? Icilius. Sure Sir it beares the forme of some great danger, for his horse bloody with spurring, shewes as if he came from forth a battel: never did you see 'mongst quailes or cocks in fight a bloodier Heele, then that your brother strikes with. In this forme of orespent horseman, having as it seemes, with the distracting of his newes, forgot house, friends, or change of raiment, he is gone to th'Senate house. Numitor. Now the gods bring us safety,
the face of this is cloudy, let us haste to'th Senate house, and there enquire how neare the body moves of this our threatned fear. Exeunt. Enter Appius melancholly after Clodius. Cl: My Lord. Appius. Thor troublest me. Clodius. My hand's as ready arm'd to work your peace as my tongue bold to inquire your diseontents. Good my Lord hear me. Appius. I am at much variance within my selfe, there's discord in my blood, my powers are all in combat, I have nothing left but sedition in me. Clodius. Trust my bosom to be the closet of your private griefs. Beleeve me, I am uncranied. Appius. May I trust thee? M. Clodius. As the firme centre to indure the burden of your light soot, as you would trust the poles to bear on them this airy cannopy, and not to fear their shrinking. I am strong, fixt and unshaking. Appius. Art thou? Then thine ever: I love. M. Clodius. Ha ha he. Appius. Can this my ponderous secresie be in thine ear so light? seemes my disturbance worthy such scorne that thou deridest my griefs? Beleeve me, Clodius, I am not a twig that every gust can shake, but 'tis a tempest that must be able to use violence on my grown branches. Wherefore laugh'st thou then? M. Clodius. Not that y'are mov'd, it makes me smile in scorne that wise men cannot understand themselves, nor know their own prov'd greatnesse. Clodius laughes not to think you love, but that you are so hopelesse not to presume to injoy whom you affect. What's she in Rome your greatnesse cannot awe or your rich purse purchase? Promises and thrats are statemens Lictors to arrest such pleasures as they would bring within their strict commands; why should my Lord droop, or deject his eye? can you command Rome, and not countermand a womans weaknesse? Let your Grce
your purse and power on me. I'le prostrate you. Appius. Ask both and lavish them to purchase ie the rich fee-simple of Virginia's heart. M. Clodius. Virginia's! Appius. Hers. M. Clodius. I have already found an easie path which you may safely tread, yet no man trace you. Appius. Thou art my comforter. M. Clodius. Her father's busied in our forreign wars, and there hath chief imployment; all their pay must your discretion scantle: keep it back, restraine it in the common Treasury. Thus may a states-man'gainst a souldier stand, to keep his purse weak, whil'st you arme his hand. Her father thus kept low, gifts and rewards will tempt the maide the sooner; nay haply draw the father in to plead in your behalfe. But should these aile, then siege her Virgin Tower with too prevailing engines, feare and power. Appius. Go then and prove a speeding advocate; Arme thee with all our bounty, oratory, variety of promise. Enter Valerius. Valerius. L. Appius, the Decemvirate intreat your voice in this dayes Senate. Old Virginius craves audience from the camp with earnest suite for quick dispatch. Appius. We will attend the Senate. Clodius, Be gone. Enter Spurius, Opius, Valerius, Numitor, &c. Opius. We sent to you to assist us in this counsell touching the expeditions of our war. Appius. Ours is a willing presence to the trouble of all State cares. Admit him from the camp. Enter Virginius. Opius. Speak the camps will. Virginius. The camp wants money, we have store of knocks, and wounds Gods plnty, but we have no pay, this three moneths did we never house our heads, but in yon great star-chamber; never bedded but in the cold field-beds, our vittaile failes us, yet meet with no supply; we're fairly promis'd, but souldiers cannot feed on promises; all our provant, apparell's torne to rags,
and our Munition fails us: Will you send us to fight for Rome like beggars? Noble Gentlemen, are you the high State of Decemviri, that have those things in mannage? Pity us, for we have need on't. Let not your delays be cold to us, whose bloods have oft been heated to gaine you fame and riches. Prove not to us (being our friends) worse foes then we fight with: Let's not be starv'd in kindnesse. Sleep you now upon the bench, when your deaf ears should listen unto the wretchlesse clamours of the poor? Then would I had my Drums here, they might rattle, and rowse you to attendance. Most grave Fathers, shew your selves worthy stewards to our Mother fair Rome, to whom we are no bastard sons, though we be souldiers. She hath in her store food to maintain life in the Camp, as wel as surfet for the City. Do not save the foe a labour; send us some supply, lest ere they kill us, we by famine die. App. Shall I (my Lords) give answer to this souldier? Opius. Be you the Cities voyce. App. Virginius, we would have you thus possess'd, we sit not here to be prescib'd and taught, nor to have any suter give us limit, whose power admits no curb. Next know, Virginius, the Camp's our servant, and must be dispos'd, controul'd and us'd by us, that have the strength to knit it or dissolve it. When we please out of our Princely grace and clemency to look upon your wants, it may be then we shall redress them: But till then, it fits not that any petty fellow wag'd by us should have a tongue found here before a Bench of such grave Auditours. Further,— Virg. Pray give me leave, Not here? pray Appius, is not this the Judgment seat? Where should a poor mans cause be heard but here? To you the Statists of long flourishing Rome, to you I call, If you have charity, if you be humane, and not quite giv'n ore to Furs and Metall, if you be Romans, if you have any souldiers bloud at all flow in your veins, help with your able arms
to prop a sinking camp, an infinite of fair Rome's sons, cold, weak, hungry, and clothles, would feed upon your surfet. Will you save them, or shall they perish? App. What we will, we will, be that your answer: perhaps at further leasure We'l help you, not your merit but our pleasure. Virg. I will not curse thee, Appius, but I wish thou wert i'th' camp amongst the Mutineers to tell my answers, not to trouble me. Make you us dogs, yet not allow us bones? Oh what are souldiers come too! Shall your camp. the strength of all your peace, and the iron wall that rings this Pomp in from invasive steel; shall that decay? Then let the forrain fires climb o're these buildings; let the sword and slaughter chase the gown'd Senate through the streets of Rome. to double dye their robes in Scarlet; let the enemies stript arm have his crimson'd brawns up to the elbowes in your traiterous bloud; Let Ianus Temple be devolv'd, your Treasures ript up to pay the common adversaryes with our due wages. Do you look for lesse? the rottenness of this misgovern'd State must grow to some Disease, incurable save with a sack or slaughter. App. Y'are too bold. Virg. Know you our extremities? App. We do. Virg. And will not help them? App. Yes. Virg. When? App. Hereafter. Virg. Hereafter? when so many gallant spirits that yet may stand betwixt you and destruction, are sunk in death? Hereafter? when disorder hath swallowed all our Forces? App. We'l hear no more. Opius. Peace, fellow peace, know the Decemviri, and their Authority; we shall commit you else. Virg. Do so, and I shall thank you; be relieved and have a strong house o're me, fear no Alarmes given in the night by any quick perdue. Your Guilty in the City feeds more dainty
then doth your Generall. 'Tis a better Office to be an under Keeper then a Captain; The gods of Rome amend it. App. Break up the Senate. Virg. And shall I have no answer? App. So farewel. Virg. What Slave would be a soldier to be censured by such as ne'er saw danger? To have out pay, our worths and merits allano'd in the scale of base moth-eaten peace. I have had wounds would have made all this Bench faint and look pale but to behold them searcht. They lay their heads on their soft pillow, pore upon then bags, grow fat with laziness and resty . And us that stand betwixt them and disaster they will not spare a Drachma. O my souldiers, before you want, I'l sell my smal possessions even to my skin to help you, Plate and Jewels all shall be yours. Men that are men indeed, the earth shal find, the Sun and air must feed. Enter Numitorius, Icilius, Valerius, Virginius. Numitor. Your daughter, noble brother, heating late of your arrvial from the Camp, most humbly prostrates her filial Duty. Virg. Daughter rise. And brother I am only rich in her, and in your love, link' with the honour'd friendship of those fair Romane Lords. For you Icilius, I hear I must adopt you with the title of a new son; you are Virginia's chief, and I am proud she hath built her fair election Upon such store of vertues. May you grow, although a Cities child, to know a souldier and rate him to his merit. Icil. Noble father, (for henceforth I shal onely use that name) Our meeting was to urge you to the processe of our fair contract. Virgin. Witnesse Gentlemen, here I give up a fathers interest, but not a fathers love, that I wil ever wear next my heart, for  was born with her d growes still with my age.
Numitor. Icilius, receive her: witnesse noble Gentlemen. Valer. With all my heart. I would Icilius could do as much for me; but Rome affords not such another Virginia. Virgin. I am my fathers daughter, and by him I must be swaid in all things. Num. Brother, this happy Contract asks a Feast, as a thing due to such solemnities. It shall be at my house, where we this night will sport away some hours. Virg. I must to horse. Numitor. What, ride to night? Virg. Must see the Camp to night. 'Tis full of trouble and destracted fears, and may grow mutinous. I am bent to ride. Val. To night? Virg. I am ingag'd: short farwels now must serve, the universal businesse calls me hence, that toucheth a whole people. Rome, I fear, thou wilt pay use for what thou dost forbear. Explicit Actus I. Actus Secundus Scena Prima. Enter Clown whispering Virginia, after her M. Clodius with presents. Virginia SIrrah, go tell Calpharina, I am walking to take the air: intreat her company. Say I attend her coming. Corbulo Madam, I shall: but if you could walk abroad, and get an Heir, it were better, for your father hath a fair revenue, and never a son to inherit. Virginia You are, sirrah— Corbulo Yes I am sirrah: but not the party that is born to do that; though I have no Lorships, yet I have so much manners to give my betters place. Virginia Whom mean you by your betters? Corbulo I hope I have learnt to know the three degrees of compa∣rison: for though I be bonus, and you melior as well as mulier; yet my Lord Icilius is optimus. Virginia I see there's nothing in such private done, but you must inquire after. Corbulo And can you blame us (Madam) to long for the merry day, as you do for the merry night?
Virginia. Will you be gone sir? (nd. Corbula. Oh yes, to my Lady . I remember my er- Vir. My father's wondrous , and withall Exit Corbulo. with a supprest rage left his house displeas'd, and so in post is hurried to the camp: it sads me much; to expell which melancholy, I have sent for company. Enter Clodius and Musicians. Clodius. This opportunity was illy waited, it is the best part of a politician when he would compasse ought to fame his industry wisely to waite the advantage of the houres, his happie minutes are not alwayes present. Expresse your greatest art, Virginia hears you, Song. Vir. Oh I conceive the occasion of this harmony. Icilius sent it, I must thank his kindnesse. Clo. Let not Virginia wate her contemplation so high, to call this visit an intrusion; for when she understands I tooke my message from one that did compose it with affection, I know she will not only extend pardon, but grace it with her favour. Vir. You mediate excuse for courtesies, as if I were so  of civiy, not to esteeme it worthy of my thanks; assure your selfe I could be longer patient to hear my eares so feasted. Clo. Ioyne all your voyces till you make the aire proud to usurpe your nos, and to please her with a sweet eccho; serve Virginias pleasure. Song. As you have been so full of gentlenesse to heare with patience what was brought to serve you so hearken with your usuall clemency o the relation of a lovers sufferings: your figure still does revell in his dreames, he banquets on your memory, yet findes not thoughts enough to satisfie his wishes, as if Virginia had compos'd his heart, and fills it with her beauty. Vir. I see he is a miser in his wishes, and thinks he never has enough of that which onely he possesses: but to give his wishes satisfaction, let him know his heart and mine do  so near together,
that hourely they converse, and guard each other. Clo. Is faire Virginia confident she knowes her favour dwels with the same man I plead for? Vir. —Unto Icilius. Clo. Worthy faire one, I would not wrong your worth so to employ my language for a man so much beneath the merit of your beauty: he I plead for has power to make your beauty populous, your frowne shall awe the world, and in your smile great Rome shall build her happinesse; honour and wealth shall not be stil'd companions, but servants to your pleasure. Then shall Icilius (but a refin'd Citizen) boast your affection, when Lord Appius loves you. Vir. Blesse his great Lordship, I was much mistaken, let thy Lord know, thou Advocate of lust, all the intentions of that youth are honourable, whil'st his are fill'd with sensuality. And for a finall resolution know, our hearts in love like twins alike shall grow. Exit. Clo. Had I a wife, or daughter that could please him I would devote her to him, but I must shadow this scorne, and sooth him still in lust. Exit. Enter six Souldiers. 1. What newes yet of Virginius returne? 2. Not any. 1. O the misery of Souldiers! They doubly starve us with faire promises. We spread the earth like haile, or new reapt corne in this fierce famine; and yet patiently make our obedience the confined ile that starves us: 3. Souldiers, let us draw our swords while we have strength to use them. 1. 'Tis a motion which nature and necessity commands. Enter Minutius. Minut. Y'are of Virginius Regiment. Omnes. We are. Minut. Why doe you swarme in troopes thus? to your quarter. Is our command growne idle? to your trench. Come I'le divide you, this your conference is not without suspect of mutiny. 1. Souldiers, shall I relate the grievances.
of the whole Regiment. Omnes. Boldly. 1. Then thus my Lord. Minut. Come, I will not hear thee, 1. Sir you shall: Sound all the Drums and Trumpets in the camp, to drowne my utterance, yet above them all I'le rear our just complaint. Stir not my Lord, I vow you are not safe if you but move a sinew till you heare us. Minut. Well sir, command us: you are the Generall. 1. No my Lord, not I, I am almost starved; I wake in the wet trench, loaded with more cold iron then a Jaile would give a murderer, while the Generall sleeps in a field bed, and to mock our hunger feeds us with scent of the most curious fare that makes his tables crack, our pay detained by those that are our Leaders: and at once we in this sad, and unprepared plight, with the Enemy, and Famine daily sight. Minut. Doe you threaten us? Omnes. Sir you shall hear him out. 1. You send us whips, and iron manackles, and shackles plenty, but the devill a coine. Would you would teach us that caniball trick, my Lord, which some rich men 'ith' City oft doe use: shall's one devoure another? Minut. Will you hear me? 1. O Rome th'art growne a most unnaturall mother, to those have held thee by the golden locks from sinking into ruine; Romulus was fed by a she wolfe, but now our wolves instead of feeding us devoure our flesh, carouse our blood, yet are not drunk with it, for three parts of 't is water. Minut. Your Captaine, noble Virginius is sent Rome, for ease of all your grievances. 1. 'Tis false. Omnes. I, 'Tis false. 1. Hee's stolne away from's, never to returne, and now his age will suffer him no more deale on the Enemy, belike hee'l rne an usurer, and in the City aire
cut poore mens throats at home sitting in's chaire. Minut. You wrong one of the honorablest Commanders. Omnes. Honorable Commander? 1. Commander? I my Lord, there goes the thrist in victories, the Generall and Commanders share all the honour as they share the spoile; but in our overthrowes, where lies the blame? the common souldiers fault, ours is the shame. What is the reason that being so far distant from the affrighted enemy? wee lie 'ith' open field, subject to the sick humors of heaven and earth: unlesse you cood bestow two summers of us? shall I tell you truth, You account the expence of Ingines, and of swords, of horses and of armor dearer far, then souldiers lives. Omnes. Now by the gods you doe. 1. Observe you not the ravens and the crowes have left the City surfet, and with us they make full banquets. Come you birds of death, and fill your greedy croppes with humane flesh; then to the City flie, disgorge it there before the Senate, and from thence arise a plague to choake all Rome. Omnes. And all the Suburbs▪ Minut. Upon a souldiers word, bold Gentlemen, I expect every houre Virginius to bring fresh comfort. Omnes. Whom? Virginius? 1. Now by the gods, if ever he returne, wee'le drag him to the slaughter by his locks, turned white with riot and incontinence, and leave a president to all the world, how Captaines use their souldiers. Enter Virginius. Minut. See, hee's returned▪ Virginius, you are not safe, retire, your troopes are mutinous, we are begirt with Enemies more daring, and more fierce, then is the common foe. Virg. My Troopes, my Lord? Minut. Your life is threatned by these desperate men, betake you to your horse. Virg. My noble Lord, I never yet poiest to teach the art of ying. , out troopes grown mutinous?
he dares not look on me with half a that spread this wildfire. Where is our Lieutenant? Val. My Lord. Virg. Sirrah, order our companies. Minut. What do you mean, my Lord? Virg. Take air a little, they have heated me. Sirrah, i'st you will mutiny? 3. Not I Sir. Virg. Is your gall burst, you Traitor? 4. The gods defend Sir. Virg. Or is your stomack sea sick, doth it rise? I'l make a passage for it. 5. Noble Captain, I'l dye beneath your foot. Virg. You rough porcupine, ha. do you bristle, do you shoot your quils you rogue? 1. They have no points to hurt you, noble Captain. Virg. Wast you (my nimble shaver) that would whet your sword 'gainst your Commanders throat, you sirrah? 6. My Lord I never dream't on't. Virg. Slaves and cowards, what are you cholerick now? by the gods the way to purge it were to let you blood. I am i'th' center of you, and I'l make the proudest of you teach the Aspen leaf to tremble, when I breath. Minut. A strange Conversion. Virg. Advance your pikes. The word, Omnes. Advance your pikes. Virg. See noble Lord these are no Mutineers, these are obedient souldiers, civil men: You shal command these, if your Lordship please, to fil a ditch up with their slaughtered bodies, that with more ease you may assault some Town. So now lay down your Arms. Villains and Traitors, I here cashier you. Hence from me my poison, not worthy of our Discipline: Go beg, go beg, you mutinous rogues, brag of the service you ne'er durst look on; it were charity to hang you, for my mind gives, y'are reserv'd to rob poor market women. Minut. O Viginius. Virg. I do beseech you to confirm my sentence, as you respect me. I will stand my self for the whole Regiment, and safer far in mine owne single valour, then begirt
with cowards and with traitors. Minut. O my Lord, you are too severe. Virg. Now by the gods, my Lord, you know no discipline, to pitie them. Pretious divells? no sooner my back turn'd, but presently to mutinie? Omnes: dear Captaine. Virg. Refuse me if such traiterous rogues would not confound an Army. When doe you march? when doe you march, gentlemen? 1. My Lord, wee'l starve first, wee'le hang first, by the gods, doe any thing ere wee'le forsake you. Minut. Good Virginius, limit your passion. Virg. Sir, you may take my place, not my just anger from me: these are they have bred a dearth i'th' campe: I'le wish our foes no greater plague then to have their company: show but among them all so many scars as stick upon this flesh, I'le pardon them. Minut. How now, my Lord, breathlesse? Virg. By your favour. I ha said. Mischiefs confound me if I could not wish my youth renewed againe, with all her sollies, onely to'ave breath enough to raile against these—'Tis too short. Minut. See Gentlemen, what strange distraction your falling off from duty hath begot in this most noble souldier: You may live the meanest of you to command a Troope, and then in others youle correct those faults, which in your selves you cherisht, every Captain beares in his private government that forme, which Kings should ore their Subjects, and to them should be the like obedient. We confesse you have been distrest: but can you justly challenge any commander that hath surfeted, while that your food was limited? You cannot. Virg. My Lord, I have shared with them an equall for▪ hunger, and cold, marcht thorough watery fens, tune, borne as great burdens as the pioneer, when scarce the ground would bear me. Minut. Good my Lord, give us leave to proceed; the punishment your Captaine hath inflicted
is not sufficient; for it cannot bring any example to succeeding of pennance worth your faulting: happily it may in you beget a certaine shame; But it will in others a strong hope of the like lenity. Yet gentlemen, you have in one thing given me such a taste of your obedience; when the fire was raised of fierce sedition, and the cheeke was swolne to sound the fatall Trumpet, then the sight of this your worthy Captaine did disperse all those unfruitfull humours, and even then convert you from feirce Tigers to stayed men: we therefore pardon you, and doe restore your Captaine to you, you unto your Captaine. Omnes. The gods requite you, noble Generall. Minut. My Lord, my Lord: Omnes. Your pardon noble Captaine. Virg. Well, you are the Generall, and the fault is quit, a souldiers teares, an elder brothers wit have little falt in them, nor doe they season things worth observing, for their want of reason. Take up your armes and use them, doe I pray, ere long youle take your  to run away. Minut. And what supply from Rome? Virg. Good store of corne. Minut. What entertainment there? Virg. Most honourable, especially by the Lord Appius. There is great hope that Appius will grow the souldiers patron: with what vehemency he urg'd our wants, and with what expedition he hasted the supplies, it is almost iredible. There's promis'd to the souldier besides their corne a bounteous donative; (A shout. but 'tis not certaine yet when't shall be paid. Minut. How for your owne particular? Virg. My Lord, I was not enterd fully two pikes length into the Senate, but they all stood bare, and each man offer'd me his seat: The businesse for which I went dispatcht, what guifts, what favours were done me, your good Lordship shall not hear, for you would wonder at them, onely this,
'twould make a man fight up to'th' neck in blood, to think how nobly he shall be received when he returnes to'th' City. Minut. 'Tis well, give order the provision be divided and sent to every quarter. Virg. Sir, it shall. Thus men must flight their wrongs, or else conceal them, when generall safety wills us not reveale them. Exeunt. Enter two Petitioners at one doore, at the other M. Clodius. 1. Petit. Pray is your Lord at leasure? M. Clodius. What is your suite? 1. Pet. To accept this poore Petition which makes knowne, my many wrongs in which I crave his Justice, and upright sentence to support my cause, which else is trod downe by oppression. M. Clodius. My Lords hand is the prop of Innocence, and if your cause be worthy his supportance it cannot fall. 1. Petitioner. The gods of Rome protect him. Clodius. What, is your paper too petitionary? 2. Petit. It leanes upon the Justice of the Judge, your noble Lord, the very stay of Rome. Clodius. And surer basis, for a poore mans cause, she cannot yeeld. Your papers I'le deliver, and when my Lord ascends the Judgement seate, you shall find gracious comfort. Enter Icilius troubled. Icilius. Where's your Lord? Clodius. Icilius? faire Virginia's late betroth'd? Icilius. Your eares, I hope, you have not forfeited, that you returne no answer. Where's your Lord? Clodius. At's studie. Icilius. I desire admittance to him. Clodius. Please you attend, I'le know his Lordships pleasure. Icilius? I pray heaven she have not blab'd. Icilius. Attend? a petty Lawyer t'other day, glad of a fee, but cal'd to eminent place, even to his betters, now the word's, Attend. This gowned office, what a breadth it bears? how many tempests waite upon his frowne? Enter Clodius. Clodius. All the petitioners withdraw. L. Appius
must have this place more private▪ as a favour, reserv'd for you, Icilius. Here's my Lord. Enter Appius with Lictors afors him. Appius. Be gone, this place is only spar'd for us, and you Icilius. Now your business. Icil. May I speak it freely? App. We have suffering ears, A heart the sofest downe may penetrate. Proceed. Icil. My Lord. App. We are private, Pray your courtefie. Icil. My duty. App. Leave that to th' publick eye of Rome, and of Romes people. Clodius there. Clod. My Lord. App. Place me a second Chaire; that done, remove your self. So now, your absence Clodius. Icilius sit, this grace we make not common unto the noblest Romane, but to you our love affords it freely. Now your suit? Icil. It is, you would be kind unto the Camp. App. Wherein, Icilius, doth the Camp touch thee? Icil. Thus: Old Virginius, now my father in Law, kept from the publick pay, consumes himself, sels his Revenues, turnes his plate to coyn, to wage his souldiers, and supply the Camp, wasting that useful substance which indeed should rise to me, as my Virginia's Dowry. App. We meet that opposition thus Icilius. The Camps supplies doth not consist in us, but those that keep the common Treasury; speak or intreat we may, but not command. But Sir, I wonder, you so brave a Youth, son to a thrifty Romane, should ally you, and knit your strong armes to such falling branches; which rather in their ruine will bear down your strength, then you support their rottenness. Be swayed by me, fly from that ruinous house. whose fall may crush you; and contract with mine, whose bases are of Marble, deeply fixt to uger all gusts and impending stormes. Ca off that beggars daughter, poor Virginia, whose dowry and beauty, I'l see trebled both,
in one lly'd to me. Smile you Icilius? Icil. My Lord, my Lord, think you, I can imagine your close and sparing hand can be profuse to give that man a Palace, whom you late deny'd a cottage? Will you from your own coffers grant me a treble Dowry, yet interpose me a poor third from the common Treasury? You must move me by possibilities, for I have brains; give first your hand and Seal, that old Virginius shall receive his pay both for himself and souldiers, and that done, I shall perhaps be soon induc'd to think, that you who with such willingness did that— App. Is my Love mispriz'd? Icil. Not to Virginia. App. Virginia? Icil. Yes Virginia, Lustful Lord. I did but trace your cunning all this while. You would bestow me on some Appian Trull, and for that dross to cheat me of my Gold; for this the Camp pines, and the City smarts. All Rome fares worse for thy incontinence. App. Mine boy? Icil. Thine Judg. This hand hath intercepted thy Letters, and perus'd thy tempting guests, these ears have heard thy amorous passions, wretch, these eyes beheld thy treacherous name subscrib'd. A Judg, a Divel. App. Come I'hear no more. Icil. Sit still, or by the powerful Gods of Rome I'l nail thee to the Chair. But suffer me, I'l offend nothing but thine ears. App. Our Secretary. Icil. Tempt not a Lovers fury, if thou dost now by my vow, insculpt in heaven, I'l send thee.— App. You see I am patient. Icil. But withal revengeless. App. So, say on. Icil. Hope not of any grace, or the least favour, I am so covetous of Virginia's love, I cannot spare thee the least look, glance, touch. Divide one bare imaginary thought into a thousand, thousand parts, and that I'l not afford thee.
App. Thou shalt not. Icil. Nay, I will not. Hadst thou a Judges place above those Judges that judg all souls, having power to sentence me, I would not bribe thee, no not with one hair from her fair temples. App. Thou shouldst not. Icil. Nay, I would not. Think not her Beauty shall have leave to crown thy lustfull hopes with the least spark of blisse, or have thine ears charm'd with the ravishing sound even of her harshest phrase. App. I will not. Icil. Nay, thou shalt not. Shee's mine, my soul is crownd in her desire, to her I'ld travell through a land of fire. App. Now have you done? Icil. I have spoke my thoughts. App. Then will thy fury give me leave to speak? Icil. I pray say on. App. Icilius, I must chide you, and withall tell you, your rashnesse hath made forfeiture even of your precious life, which wee esteeme too deer to call in question. I I wisht you of my allyance, graft into my blood, condemn you me for that? Oh see the rashnesse and blind misprision of  youth! As for the Maid Virginia, wee are far even in least thought from her; and for those Letters, Tokens and Presents, wee acknowledg none. Alas, though great in place, wee are not gods. If any false impostor hath usurpt our hand or greatnesse in his own behoof, can wee help that? Icilius, there's our hand, your rashnesse we remit; let's have hereafter your love and best opinion. For your suit, repair to us at both our better leisures, wee'l breathe in it new life. Icil. I crave your don. App. Granted ere crav'd, my good Icilius. Icil. —Morrow. App. It is no more indeed. Morrow Icilius. If any of our servants wait, without, command them in. Icil. I shall.
App. Our Secretary, we have use for him. Icilius, send him hither. Again good morrow. Exit Icilius. Go to thy death, thy life is doom'd and cast. Appius be circumspect, and be not rash in blood as th'art in lust: Be murderous stil, but when thou strik'st, with unseen weapons kill. Enter Clodius. Clod. My Honourable Lord. Appius. Deride me, dog? Clod. Who hath stirr'd up this tempest in your brow? App. Not you? Fie, you? Clod. All you Panthean Gods, confound me, if my soul be accessary to your distractions. Appius. To send a ruffian higher, even to my closet, first, to brave my Greatness, play with my beard, revile me, taunt me, hisse me; nay after all these deep disparagements, threat me with steel, and menace me unarm'd, to nail me to my seat, if I but mov'd: all these are slight, slight toyes. Clod. Icilius do this? App. Ruffian Icilius, he that in the front of a smooth Citizen, bears the rugged soul of a most base Bandetto. Clod. He shall die for't. App. Be not too rash. Clo. Were there no more men to support great Rome, even falling Rome should perish, ere he stand: I'l after him, and kill him. App. Stay, I charge thee. Lend me a patient ear; To right our wrongs, we must not menace with a publick hand; we stand in the worlds eye, and shall be taxt of the least violence, where we revenge: We should smile smoothest where our hate's most deep, and when our spleen's broad waking, seem to sleep. Let the young man play still upon the bit, till we have brought and train'd him to our lure; Great men should strike but once, and then strike sure. Clod. Love you Virginia still? App. Do I still live?
Clod. Then she's your own. Virginius is, you say, still in the Camp. App. True. Clod. Now in his absence will I claim Virginia to be the daughter of a bond woman, and slave to me; to prove which, I'l produce firme proofs, notes probable, sound Witnesses; then having with your Lictors summond her, I'l bring the cause before your Judgement Seat, where, upon my infallid evidence, you may pronounce the sentence on my side, and she become your Strumpet not your Bride. App. Thou hast a copius brain, but how in this shall we dispose Icilius? Clod. If he spurne clap him up close, there's wayes to charm his spleen. By this no scandal can redound to you; the Cause is mine; you but the Sentencer upon that evidence which I shall bring. The business is, to 'ave Warrants by Arrest. to answer such things at the Judgment Bar as can be laid against her; Ere her friends can be assembled, ere her self can study her answer or scarce know her cause of summons to descant on the matter, Appius may examine, try, and doom Virginia. But all this must be sudden. App. Thou art born to mount me high above Icilius scorn. I'l leave it to thy manage. Exeunt. Explicit Actus secundus. Actus Tertius Scena Prima. Enter Nurse and the Clown. Corbulo. WHat was that you said, Nurse? Nurse. Why, I did say thou must bestir thy selfe. Corbulo. I warrant you I can bestir my stumps as soon as ano∣ther, if fit occasion be offered; but why do you come upon me in such haste? is it because (Nurse) I should come over you at leisure?
Nurse. Come over me, thou knave? what dost thou mean by that? Corbulo. Only this, if you will come off, I will come on. Nurse. My Lord hath strangers to night: you must make ready the Parlour, a table and lights; nay when, I say? Corbulo. Me thinks you should rather wish for a bed then for a board, for darkness then for lights; yet I must confess you have been a light woman in your time: but now. Nurse. But now? what now, you knave? Corbulo. But now I'l go fetch the table and some lights presently. Enter Numitorius, Horatio, Valerius, Icilius Numit. Some lights to usher in these Gentlemen, Clear all the roomes without there. Sit, pray sit. None interrupt our conference. Enter Virginia. Ha, whose that? Nurse My most—child, if it please you. Numitor. Fair Virginia, you are welcome. The rest forbear us till we call. Sweet cozen, our business, and the cause of our discourse admits you to this Councel. Take your place. Ieilius we are private, now proceed. Icil. Then thus; Lord Appius doth intend me wrong, and under his smooth calmnesse cloaks a tempest, that will ere long break out in violence on me and on my fortunes. Numit. My good cozen, you are young, and youth breeds rashness. Can I think Lord Appius will do wrong, who is all Justice, the most austere and upright Censurer that ever sate upon the awful Bench? Valer. Icilius, you are neer to me in blood, and I esteem your safety as mine owne. If you will needs wage eminence and state, Chuse out a weaker opposite, not one that in his arm bears all the strength of Rome. Numit. Besides Icilius, know you the danger what it is to scandal one of his place and sway? Icil. I know it kinsmen, yet this popular Greatness can be no bug-bear to affright mine innocence. No his smooth crest hath cast a palped film over Romes eyes. He juggles, a plain Juggler. Lord Appius is no lesse.
Numit. Nay, then Cozen, you are too harsh, and I must hear no more. It ill becomes my place and gravity, to lend a face to such reproachful terms 'gainst one of his high presence. Icil. Sit, pray sit. to see me draw his picture 'fore your eyes, to make this man seem monstrous, and this god Rome so adores, a divel, a plain divel. This Lord, this Judg, this Appius, that professeth to all the world a vestal chastity, is an incontinent, loose Leacher growne. Numit. Fy cozen. Icil. Nay 'tis true. Daily and hourely he tempts this blushing Virgin with large promises, with melting words and Presents of high rate, to be the stale to his unchaste desires. Omnes. Is't possible? Icil. Possible? 'Tis actual Truth, I pray but ask your Neece. Virg. Most true, I am extremely tyr'd and wearied with messages and tokens of his love; no answer, no repulse will satisfie the tediousness of his importunate suit. And whilst I could with modesty and honour, without the danger of reproach and shame, I kept it secret from Icilius; but when I saw their boldness found no limit, and they from fair intreaty grew to threats, I told him all. Icil. True: understanding which to him I went. Valer. To Appius? Icil. To that Gyant, the high Colossus that bestrides us all; I went to him. Horatio. How did you bear your self? Icil. Like Appius, at the first, dissemblingly, but when I saw the coast clear, all withdrawn, and none but we two in the Lobby, then I drew my Poinyard, took him by the throat, and when he would have clamor'd, threatned death, unlesse he would with paence hear me out. Numit. Did he, Icilius?
Icil. I made him that he durst not squeake, not move an eye, not draw a breath too loud, nor stir a fingar. Horatio. What succeeded then? Numit. Keep fast the door there: Sweet Couz not too loud. What then succeeded? Icilius. Why, I told him all, gave him his due, call'd him lascivious Judge, (a thousand things which I have now forgot) shewd him his hand a witnesse 'gainst himself, and every thing with such known circumstance, that he might well excuse, but not deny. Numit. How parted you? Icilius. Why Friends, in outward shew. But I perceiv'd his heart: that Hypocrite was born to gull Rome, and deceive us all. He swore to me quite to abjure her love; yet ere my self could reach Virginia's chamber, one was before me with regreets from him, I know his hand. Th' intent of this our meeting was to intreat your counsell and advice: The good old man her Father is from home, I think it good that she now in his absence should lodg in secret with some private friend, where Appius nor his Lictors, those blood-hounds can hunt her out. You are her unkle Sir, I pray counsell the best. Numit. To oppose our selves now in this heat against so great a man, might in my judgment to our selves bring danger, and to my Neece no safety. If we fall she cannot stand; lets then preserve our selves until her father be discharg'd the Camp. Valer. And good Icilius, for your private ends, and the dear safety of your friends and kindred, against that Statist, spare to use your spleen. Iicil. I will be sway'd by you. My Lords, 'tis late, and time to break up conference. Noble Uncle I am your growing Debtor. Numit. Lights without there. Icil. I will conduct Virginia to her lodging. Good night to all at once. Numit. The Gods of Rome protect you all, and then we need not fear the envious rage of men. Exeunt.
Enter Clodius, with foure Lictors. Clodius. and Lictors bestow your selves in some close shops, about the forum, till you have the sight of faire Virginia, for I understand this present morning shee'l come forth to buy some necessaries at the Sempsters shops: how ere accompanied be it your care to sease her at our action. Good my friends, disperse your selves, and keep a carefull watch. 1. 'Tis strange that Ladies will not pay their debts. 2. 'It were strange indeed, if that our Romane Knights. would give them good example and pay theirs. 1. The Calender that we Lictors goe by, is all dog dayes. 2. Right, our common hunt is still to dog unthrifts. 1. And whats your book of common-prayer? 2. Faith onely for the increase of riotous young Gentlemen i'th' countrey, and banquerouts i'th' City. 1. I know no man more valiant then we are, for wee back Knights and Gentlemen daily. 2. Right, we have them by the back hourely: your French flye ap∣plied to the nape of the neck for the French Rheume, is not so sore a drawer as a Lictor. 1. Some say that if a little timbred fellow would juste a great lo∣gerhead, let him be sure to lay him i'th' kennell; but when we shoulder a Knight, or a Knights fellow, we make him more sure, for we ken∣nell him i'th' counter. 2. Come, lets about our businesse. Exeunt. Enter Virginia, Nurse, and Clowne. Virg. You are growne wondrous amorous of late, why doe you looke back so often? Clown. Madam, I goe as a Frenchman rides, all upon one buttock. Virg. And what's the reason? Clown. Your Ladiship never saw a Monky in all your life time have a clog at's taile, but hee's still looking back to see what the devil 'tis that followes him. Nurse. Very good, we are your clogs then. Virg. Your crest is growne regardant; here's the beauty▪ that makes your eyes forgetfull of their way. Clow. Beauty? O the gods! Madam I cannot indure her com- Nurse. Why sir, what's my complexion? (plexion. Clow. Thy complexion is just between a moore & a french woman. Virg. But she hath a matchlesse eye sir, Clow. True, her eyes are not right matches, besides she is a widow. Nurse. What then, I pray you?
Clown. Of all waters I would not have my beefe powder'd with a widowes teares. Virg. Why, I beseech you? Clow. O they are too fresh Madam, assure your selfe they will not last for the death of fourteen husbands above a day and a quar∣ter; besides, if a man come a wooing to a widow, and invite her to a banquet contrary to the old rule, she will sooner fill her eye then her belly. Besides that, if he looke into her estate, first, look you, Here are foure fingers, first the charge of her husbands funerall, next debts, and legacies, and lastly the reversion; now take away debts and lega∣cies, and what remaines for her second husband? Nurse. I would some of the Tribe heard you. Clewn. There's a certaine fish, that as the learned divulge, is call'd a sharke. Now this fish can never feede while he swims upon's bel∣ly, marry when he lies upon his back, oh he takes it at pleasure. Virg. Well sir, about your businesse, make provision of those things I directed. Clown. Sweet Lady, these eyes shall be the clarks of the kitchin for your belly; but I can assure you Woodcocks will be hard to be spoke with, for there's a great feast towards. Virg. You are very pleasant. Clown. And fresh cod is taken down thick and threefold, women without great bellies goe together by the ears for't, and such a num∣ber of sweet tooth'd caers in the market, not a calves head to be got for love or money; Muttons mutton now. Virg. Why, was it not so ever? Clown. No Madam, the sinners i'th' Suburbs had almost tane the me quite away from't, 'twas so cheap and common: but now 'tis at a sweet reckoning, the Terme time is the muttonmonger in the whole calender. Nurse. Doe your Lawyers eat any sallet with their mutton. Clow. Yes, the younger revellers use capers to their mutton, so long till with their shuffling and cutting some of them be out at heeles againe. A bountifull minde and a full purse ever attend your Ladi∣ship. Virg. O I thank you. Enter Clodius, and foure Lictors▪ Clo. See, yon's the Lady. Clown. I will buy up for your Ladiship all the young cuckoes in the market. Virg. What to doe? Clown. O 'tis the most deliatest dish Ile assure you, and newest in fash on: not a great feast in all Rome without a cuckoe. Clodi. Virginia. Virg. Sir. Clodi. Mistris you doe not know me, yet we must be acquainted: follow me.
Virg. You doe salute me strangely. Follow you. Clow. Doe you hear sir, me thinks you have followers enough. Many Gentlemen that I know, would not have so many tall followers as you have for the price often  geldings, I'le assure you. Clodius. Come, will you goe? Virg. Whither? by what command? Clodius. By warrant of these men, and priviledge I hold even on thy life. Comeye proud dame, you are not what you seeme. Virg. Uncivill sir, what makes you thus familiar and thus bold? Unhand me villaine. Clodius. What Mistris, to your Lord? he that can set the raso to your throate, and punish you as freely as the gods, no man to aske the cause? Thou art my slave, and here I sease what's mine. Virg. Ignoble villaine, I am as free as the best King or Consull since Romulus. What dost thou meane? Unhand me. Give notice to my uncle and Icilius, what violence is offer'd me▪ Clod. Doe, doe. Clow. Doe you presse women for diers, or do you beg women, instead of other commodities; to keep your hands in e? By this light if thou hast any eares on thy head, as it is a question, I'le make my Lord pull you out by th' eares, though you take a Castle. Exit. Clodius. Come, will you goe along? Nurse. Whither should she goe sir? here's pulling and haling a poore Gentlewoman. Clodius. Hold you your prating reverence, the whip shall cease on you for your smooth cozenage. Virg. Are not you servant to Lord Appius. Clodius. How ere I am your Lord, and will approve it 'fore all the Senate. Virg. Thou wilt prove thy selfe the cursed pander for anothers lust, and this your plot shall burst about your Ears like thunderbots. Clodi. Hold you that confidence, first I will  you by   co of l, And then I'le alke with you. Enter Icilius, and Numitorius. Numit. How now, faire Icilius. How now, Gen?
What's the offence of faire Virginia, you bend your weapons on us? Lictor. Sir stand back, we fear a rescue. Icilius. There's no need of feare, where there's no cause of rescue: what's the matter? Virg. O my Icilius! Your incredulity hath quite undone me, I am now no more Virginius daughter, so this villaine urges; But publish't for his bond woman. Numit. How's this? Clodius. 'Tis true my Lord, and I will take my right by course of Law. Icilius. Villaines set her free, or by the power of all our Romane gods, I'le give that just revenge unto my rage which should be given to Justice. Bondwoman? Clodi. Sir, we doe not come to fight, wee'le deale Enter Appius. By course of Law. My Lord we fear a rescue. Appius. A rescue? never fear't, here's none in presence but civill men. My Lord, I am glad to see you. Noble Icilius, we shall ever love you. Now Gentlemen reach your Petitions. Icilius. My Lord, my Lord. App. Worthy Icilius, if you have any businesse defer't untill tomorrow, or the afternoone, I shall be proud to pleasure you. Icilius. The Fox is earth't, my Lord you cannot winde him yet. Appius. Stooles for my noble friends.—I pray you sit Clodius. May it please your Lordship. App. Why uncivill sir? have I not beg'd for bearance of my best and dearest friends, and must you trouble me? Clodius. My Lord, I must be heard, and will be heard, were all the gods in Parliament, I'de burst their silence with my importunity, but they should heare me. Appius. The fellow's mad; we have no leasure now to heare you sir. Clodius. Hast now no leasure to heare just complaints? Resigne thy place O Appius, that some other may doe me Justice then. Appius. Wee'l hear't to morrow. Clodius. O my Lord, Deny me Justice absolutely, rather
them feed me with delayes. Icilius. Good my Lord hear him, and wonder when you heare him, that a case so full of vile Imposture, should desire to be unfoulded. Clodius. I my Lord, 'tis true, the Imposture is on their parts. Appius. Hold your prating, away with him to prison, clamorous fellow. Suspect you our uprightnesse? Clodius. No my Lord: but I have mighty Enemies, my Lord, will overflow my cause. See, here I hold my bondwoman that brags her selfe to be descended of a noble family. My purse is too scant to wage Law with them, I am infor't be mine own advocate, not one will pleade for me. Now if your Lordship will doe me justice so, if not then know high hills are safe, when seas poore dales or▪ eflow. Appius. Sirra, I think it fit to let you know, e're you proceed in this your subtle suite, what penalty and danger you acrne, if you be found to double. Here's a virgin famous by birth, by education noble, and she forsooth, haply but to draw some piece of money from her worthy father, must needs be challeng'd for a bondwoman. Sirra take heed, and well bethink your selfe, I'le make you a president to all the world, If I but finde you tripping. Clodius. Doe it freely. and view on that condition these just proofes. App. Is that the Virgins nurse. Nurse. He milc Nurse my Lord, I had a sore hand with her for a year and a quarter, I have had somewhat to doe with her since too, for the poore Gentlewoman hath been so troubled with the green sicknesse. Icilius. I pray thee Nurse intreat Sertorius to come and speak with me. App. Here is strange circumstance, view it my Lord, if he should prove this, it would make Virginius think he were wronged. Icilius. There is a devilish cunning
exprest in this black forgerie. App. Icilius and Virginia, pray come near, compound with this base fellow. You were better disburse some trifle then to undergo the question of her freedome. Icilius. O my Lord! she were not worth a handfull of a bride, if she did need a bribe. Appius. Nay, take your course, I onely give you my opinion, I aske no fee for't. Do you know this fellow? Virginia. Yes my Lord, he's your servant. Appius. Y'are i'th' right: But will you truly know his character? he was at first a pettie Notary, a fellow that being trusted with large summes of honest Citizens, to be imploy'd i'th' trade of usury; this Gentleman, couching his credit like a tilting staffe most cunningly it brake, and at one course he ran away with thirty thousand pound, returning to the City seven year after, having compounded with his creditors for the third moity, he buyes an office belonging to our place, depends on us, in which the oppression and vile injuries he hath done poore suters, they have cause to rue, and I to pity: he hath sold his smiles for silver, but his promises for gold, his delayes have undone men. The plague that in some foulded cloud remaines, the bright Sun soone disperseth; but observe, when black infection in some dunghill lies, there's worke for bells and graves, if it doe rise. Numitor. He was an ill prop to your house, my Lord. Appius. Tis true my Lord, but we that have such servants, are like to Cuccolds that have riotous wives, we are the last that know it: this is it makes noblemen suspected to have done ill, when the oppression lies in their proud followers. Clod. My Lord, it was some soothing sicophant, some base detracting Rascal that hath spread this falsehood in your ears. App. Peace Impudence, did I not yester day, no longer since
surprize thee in thy Study counterfeiting. our hand? Clod. 'Tis true, my Lord. App. Being subscribed unto a Letter fill'd with amorous stuff unto this Lady? Clod. I have askt your pardon, and gave you reason why I was so bold to use that forgery. App. Did you receive it? Virg. I did my Lord, and I can shew your Lordship a packet of such Letters. App. Now by the Gods, I'l make you rue it. I beseech you Sir, show them the reason mov'd you counterfeit our Letter. Enter Valerius. Clod. Sir, I had no other colour. to come to speak with her. App. A goodly reason! Did you until this hour acquaint the Lady with your intended suit? Clod. At several times, and would have drawn her by some private course to have compounded for her liberty. Virg. Now by a Virgins honour and true birth, 'tis false, my Lord, I never had a dream so terrible as is this monstrous divel. App. Well Sir, referring my particular wrong to a particular censure, I would know what is your suit? Clod. My Lord, a speedy tryal. App. You shall obtain't with all severity, I will not give you longer time to dream upon new slights to cloak your forgery, Observe you this Camelion, my Lords. Ile make him change his colour presently. Numit. My Lord, although th' uprightness of our cause needs no delayes, yet for the satisfaction of old Virginius, let him be present when we shall crave a tryal. Appius. Sir it needs not: Who stands for father of the Innocent, if not the Judg? Ile save the poor old man that needless travel. Virg. With your favour Sir, we must intreat some respit in a business
so needful of his presence. App. I do protest, you wrong your selves thus to importune it. Well, let it be to morrow, I'l not sleep till I have made this thicket a smooth plain, and giv'n you your true honor back again. Icil. My Lord, the distance 'twixt the Camp and us cannot be measured in so short a time. Let us have four dayes respit. App. You are unwise; rumor by that time will have fully spred the scandal, which being ended in one hour will turn to air: To morrow is the Tryal, in the mean time, let all contented thoughts attend you. Clod. My Lord, you deal unjustly thus to dismiss her; this is that they seek for, before to morrow they'l convey her hence where my claim shall not seise her. App. Cunning knave, You would have bond for her appearance? say. Clod. I think the motions honest. App. Very good. Icilius shall engage his honoured word for her appearance. Clod. As you please, my Lord, But it were, fitting her old Uucle there were jointly bound with him. App. Well Sir, your pleasure shall have satiety. You'l take our word for her appearance; will you not Sir, I pray? Clod. Most willingly my Lord. App. Then Sir you have it, and i'th' mean time I'l take the honoured Lady into my guardianship, and by my life, I'l use her in all kindness as my wife. Icil. Now by the Gods you shall not. App. Shall not, what? Icil. Not use her as your wife Sir. App. O my Lord, I spake it from my heart. Icil. I very likely. She is a Virgin Sir, and must not lye under a mans forth coming; do you mark? not under your forth coming, leacherous Appius.
Appi. Mistake me not, my Lord: Our Secretary, Take bonds for the appearance of this Lady. And now to you sir, you that were my servant, I here casheire you; never shalt thou shrowde thy villanies under our noble roofe, nor scape the whip, or the fell hangmans book by warrant of our favour. Clod. So my Lord, I am more free to serve the Gods, I hope, now I have lost your service. App. Harke you sirra, who shall give bonds for your appearance, ha? to justifie your claim? Clod. I have none, my Lord. App. Away, commit him prisoner to his chamber: I'le keep you safe from starting. Clod. Why my Lord? App. Away, I wil not hear you. A Judges heart here in the midst must stand, and move not a haires bredth to either hand. Exit. Numit. O were thy heart but of the self same piece thy tongue is, Appius; how blest were Rome! Icil. Post to the campe Sertorius, thou hast heard th'effect of all, relate it to Virginius. I pray thee use thy ablest horsemanship, for it concerns us near. Serto. I goe my Lord. Exit. Icil. Sure all this is damn'd cunning. Virg. O my Lord, seamen in tempests shun the flattering shore, to bear full sails upon't were danger more. So men o're born with greatness stil hold dread, false seeming friends that on their bosomes spread: for this is a safe truth which never varies, He that strikes all his sailes seldome miscarries. Icil. Must we be slaves both to a tyrants will, and confounding ignorance at once? Where are we, in a mist, or is this hell? I have seen as great as the proud Judge have fell: the bending Willow yeilding to each wind, shall keep his rooting firme, when the proud Oak. braving the storme, presuming on his root, shall have his body rent from head to foote; Let us expect the worst that may befal, and with a noble confidence beare all. Exeunt.
Enter Appius, Clodius, and a servant. App. Here, bear this packet to Minutius, and privately deliver't, make as much speed as if thy father were deceas'di'th' Camp, and that thou went'st to take th'Administration of what he left thee. Fly. Serv. I go my Lord. Exit. App. O my trusty Clodius. Clod. My dear Lord, let me adore your divine policy. You have poison'd them with sweet meats, you have my Lord. But what contain those Letters? App. Much importance. Minutius is commanded by that packet to hold Virginius prisoner in the Camp on some suspect of Treason. Clod. But my Lord, how will you answer this? App. Tush, any fault or shadow of a Crime will be sufficient for his committing: thus when he is absent we shall in a more calm and friendly sea sail to our purpose. Clod. Mercury himself could not direct more safely. App. O my Clodius, Observe this rule, one ill must cure another; as Aconium a strong poison, brings a present cure against all Serpents stings. In high attempts, the soul hath infinite eyes, and 'tis necessity makes men most wise. Should I miscarry in this desperate plot, this of my fate in after times be spoken, I'l break that with my weight on which I am broken. Exeunt. Enter Two Serving men at one door, at the other Corbulo the Clowne melancholy. 1 Serving. Why how now Corbulo? thou wast not wont to be of this sad temper. What's the matter now? Corb. Times change, and seasons alter, some men are born to the Bench, and some to the halter. What do you think now that I am? 1. Serving. I think thee to be Virginia's man, and Corbulo. Corb. No, no such matter: ghess again, tell me but what I am, or what manner of fellow you imagine me to be? 1. Serving. I take thee to be an honest good, fellow.
Corb. Wide of the ow hand stil Corbulo is no such man. 2. Serving. What art thou then? Corb. Listen, and I'l describe my self to you: I am something better then a Knave, and yet come shor of being an honest man; and though I can sing a ble, yetm accounted b  one of the base, being indeed, and a the ca stands with me at this present, in∣feriour to a rogue, and three degrees worse then a Rascal. 1. Serving. How comes this to passe? Corb. Only by my services successe. Take heed whom you serve. Oh you serving Creatures; for this is all I have got by serving my Lady Virginia. 2. Serving. Why, what of her? Corb. She is not the woman you take hee to be; for though she have borrowed no money, yet she  entered into bonds; and though you may think her a woman not sufficient, yet 'tis very like her bond will be taken. The truth   challenged to be a bond woman; now if she be a bond woman and a slave, and I her servant and Vassal, what did you take me to be? I am an A, a Coat, a worm, a Wood∣cock amongst birds, a Hodmondd amongst flies, amongst Cus a trindle tale, and amongst fishes a poor Ipèr; but amongst Serving men worse, worse then the mans man to the under Yeomen Few∣rer. 1. Serving. But is it possible, thy Lady is challenged to be a slave? What witness have they? Corb. Witness these Fountains, these Flood-gates, these Well∣springs: the poor Gentlewoman was Arrested in the open Market; I offered, I offered to bail her;  (though she was) I could not be taken. The grief hath gone so ar my heart, that  I be made free, I shall never be mine own man. The Lord Appius hath com∣mitted her to Ward, and it is thought she shall neither lye on the Knight side, not in the Troping Ward, for if he may have his will of her, he means to put  in the Hole. His Warrant hath be out for her, but how the case stands with him, or how matters will be taken up with her, s yet uncertain. 2. Serving. When shall the Tryal be? Corb. I take it to be as soon as the morning is brought a bed of a new son and 2. Serving. And vvhen is that▪ Corb. to ,  every morning you knovv brings forth a nevv n, b they   short liv'd, for every night shee drovvns them in the Western ea. But  hese , as too high for your dll app . Shall   you at the Tryal to morrow? 1. Serving. By  lp  e there.
2. Serving. And I, if I li▪ Corb. And I, if I dye for : Here's my hand I'l meet you. It is thought my old master will be there at the Bar; for though all the timber of his house yet stand, yet my Lord Numitorius hath sent one of his Posts to the Camp to bid him spur cut and come to the sen∣tence. Oh we have a house at home as heavy as if it were covered with lead. But you will remember to be there. 1. Serving. And not to fail. Corb. If I chance to meet you there, and that the Case go against us, I will give you a quart, not of Wine, but of Tears; for instead of a new Role, I purpose to break my Fast with sops of sorrow. Explicit Actus tertius. Actus Quartus Scena Prima. Enter Virginius like a slave, Numitorius, Icilius, Valerius, Horatio Virginia like a slave, Julla, Calphurina, Nurse. Virginius. THanks to my noble friends, itnow appears that you have rather lov'd me then my fortune, for that's near shipwrackt: chance you see still ranges, and this short dance of life is full of changes. Appius! how hollow that name founds, how dreadful? It is a question, whether the proud Leacher will view us to our merit; for they say, his memory to vertue and good men is still carousing Leth. O the Gods, not with more terror do the souls in hell appear before the seat of Rhadamant, then the poor Clyent yonder. Numit. O Virginius. Why do you wear this habit? it ill fits your noble person, or this reverend place. Virg. Thats true, old man, but it well fits the case thats now in question. If with form and shew they prove her slaved, all freedome I'le forgo. Icilius. Noble Virginius, put out a bold and confident defence: search the Imposture, like a cunning Tryer, false meals bear the touch, but brook not fire:
their brittleness betrayes them; let your breath discover as much shame in them, as death did ever draw from Offenders. Let your truth nobly supported, void of fear or art, welcome what ever comes with a great heart. Virginius. Now by the Gods, I thank thee noble youth. I never fear'd in a besieged Town Mines or great Engines like you Lawyers Gown. Virginia. O my dear Lord and father, once you gave me a noble freedom, do not see it lost without a forfeit; take the life you gave me and sacrifice it rather to the gods then to a villains Lust. Happy the Wretch who born in bondage lives and dies a slave, and sees no lustful projects bent upon her, and neither knowes the life nor death of honor. Icil: We have neither Justice, no nor violence, which should reform corruption sufficient to cross their black premeditated doom. Appius will seize her, all the fire in hell is leapt into his bosom. Virginius. O you Gods, extinguish it with your compassionate tears, although you make a second deluge spread, and swell more high then Tenerif's high head. Have not the Wars heapt snow sufficient upon this aged head, but they will stil pile winter upon winter? Enter Appius, Oppius, Clodius, six Senators, Lictors. Appius. Is he come? say. Now by my life I'l quit the General. Numit. Your reverence to the Judge, good brother. Virginius. Yes Sir, I have learnt my complement thus, Blest mean estates who stand in fear of many, and great are curst for that they far not any. App. What is Virginius come? Virg. I am here my Lord. App. Where is your daughter? Numit. Here my reverend Lord. Your habit shewes you strangely. Virginia. O 'tis fit, it sutes both time and cause. Pray pardon it,
App. Where is your Advocate? Virg. I have none my Lord. Truth needs no Advocate, the unjust Cause buyes up the tongues that travel with applause in these your thronged Courts. I want not any, and count him the most wretched that needs many. Orator. May it please your reverend Lordships? App. What are you Sir? Orat. Of counsel with my Clyent Marcus Clodius. Virg. My Lord, I undertake a desperate combat to cope with this most eloquent Lawyer: I have no skill i'th' weapon, good my Lord; I mean, I am not travell'd in your Lawes. My suit is therefore by your special goodness they be not wrested against me. App. O Virginius, the gods defend they should. Virg. Your humble servant shall ever pray for you. Thus shall your glory be above your place, or those high titles which you hold in Court, for they dy blest that dy in good report. Now Sir I stand you. Orat. Then have at you Sir. May it please your Lordships, here is such a Case so full of subtilty, and as it were, so far benighted in an ignorant mist, that though my reading be sufficient, my practice more, I never was intangled in the like pursenet. Here is one that claimes this woman for his daughter. Heres another affirms she is his Bond-slave. Now the Question (with favour of the Bench) I shall make plain in two words only without circumstance. App. Fall to your proofs. Orat. Where are our papers. Clod. Here Sir. Orat. Where Sir? I vow y'are the most tedious Clyent. Now we come to't my Lord. Thus stands the Case, the Law is clear on our sides. Hold your prating. That honourable Lord Virginius, having been married about fifteen year, and Issuless, this Virgins politick mother Seeing the Land was likely to descend to Numitorius. I pray Sir listen. You my Lord Numitorius attend, we are on your side. Old Virginius
imployed in forraign wars, she se him she was with child; observe it, I beseech you, and note the trick of a deceitful woman: she in the mean time fai the passions of a great bllyed woman, counters their passions and their  and verily all Rome held this for no posterous stuff. What's to be done now? heres a rumor spread of a young Heir, gods bless it, and belly bumbasted with a cushion: but their wants, (What wants there?) nothing but a pretty babe, bought with some piece of mony, where it skils not, to furnish this supposed lying in. Nurse: I protest my Lord, the fellow i'th' night cap hath not spoke one true word yet. App Hold you your prating woman til you are call'd. Orat. 'Tis purchast. Where? From this mans bond-woman The mony paid. What was the sum of mony? Clod. A thousand Drachmas. Orat. Good, a thousand Drachmas. App. Where is that bond-woman. Clod. She's dead, my Lord. App. O dead, that makes your Cause suspicious. Orat. But here's her deposition on her death bed, with other testimony to confirm what we have said is true. Wilt please your Lordship take pains to view these writings. Here, my Lord, we shall not need to hold your Lordships long, we'l make short work on't. Virg. My Lord. App. By your favour. If that your claim be just, how happens it that you have discontinued it the space of fourteen years? Orat. I shall resolve your Lordship. Icil. I vow this is a practis'd Dialogue: comes it not rarely off? Virg. Peace, give them leave. Orat. 'Tis very true, this Gentleman at first thought to conceal this accident, and did so, only reveal'd his knowledg to the mother of this fair bond-woman, who bought his silence during her life time with great sums of Coyn. App. Where are your proofs of that? Orat. Here, my good Lord, with depositions likewi.
App. Well, go on. Orat. For your question of discontinuance. Put case my slave run away from me, dwell in some near City the space of twenty years, and there grow rich, it is in my discretion, by your favor, to seize him when I please. App. That's very true. Virginia. Cast not your nobler beams, you reverend Judges on such a putrified dunghil. App. By your favour, you shall be heard anon. Virg. My Lords, believe not this spruce Orator. Had I but fee'd him first, he would have told as smooth a tale on our side. App. Give us leave. Virg. He deals in formal glosses, cunning showes, and cares not greatly which way the Case goes; Examine I beseech you this old woman, who is the truest witness of her birth. App. Soft you, is she your only witness? Virg. She is, my Lord. App. Why, is it possible such a great Lady in her time of child birth, should have no other Witness but a Nurse? Virg. For ought I know the rest are dead, my Lord. App. Dead? no my Lord, belike they were of counsel with your deceased Lady, and so sham'd twice to give colour to so vile an act. Thou Nurse observe me, thy offence already doth merit punishment beyond our censure, pull not more whips upon thee. Nurse. I defie your whips, my Lord. App. Command her silence Lictors. Virg. O injustice! you frown away my Witness; Is this Law? is this uprightness? App. Have you viewed the Writings? This is a trick to make our slaves our heirs beyond prevention. Virg. Appius, wilt thou hear me? You have standred a sweet Lady that now sleeps in a most noble Monument. Observe me, I would have ta'ne her simple word to gage before his soul or thine. App. That makes thee wretched. Old man, I am sorry for thee that thy love, by custome is growne natural, which by nature
should be an absolute loathing. Note the Sparrow, that having hatch'd a Cucko, when it sees her brood a Monster to her proper kind, forsakes it, and with more fear shuns the nest, then she had care i'th' Spring to have it drest. cast thy affection then behind thy back, and think.— Orat. Be wise, take counsel of your friends. You have many souldiers in their time of service father strange children. Virg. True: and Pleaders too, when they are sent to visit Provinces. You my most neat and cunning Orator, whose tongue is Quick-silver, Pray thee good Janus look not so many several wayes at once, but go to th' point. Orat. I will, and keep you out at points end, though I am no souldier. App. First the oath of the deceased bond-woman. Orat. A very vertuous Matron. App. Join'd with the testimony of Clodius. Orat. A most approved honest Gentleman. App. Besides six other honest Gentlemen. Orat. All Knights, and there's no question but their oaths will go for currant. App. See my reverend Lords, and wonder at a Case so evident. Virg. My Lord, I knew it. Orat. Observe my Lord how their own Policy confounds them. Had your Lordship yesterday proceeded as 'twas fit, to a just sentence, the Aparrel and the Jewels that she wore, more worth then all her Tribe, had then been due unto our Client: now to cosen him of such a forfeit, see they bring the maid in her most proper habit, bond-slave like, and they will save by th' hand too. Please your Lordships, I crave a sentence. Virginius. Appius. Virginia. My Lord. Icil. Lord Appius. Virginius. Now by the Gods here's juggling. Numit. Who cannot counterfeit a dead mans hand? Virginius. Or hire some villain to swear forgeies? Icil. Clodius was brought up in your house my Lord, and that's suspicious.
Numit. How is't probable, that our wife being present at the child-birth, whom this did nearest concern, should nere reveal it? Virg. Or if ours dealt thus cunningly, how haps it her policy, as you term it, did not rather provide an Issue male to chear the father? Orat. I'l answer each particular. App. It needs not, Heres witness, most sufficient witness. Think you, my Lord, our Lawes are writ in snow, and that your breath can melt them? Virginius. No my Lord, We have not such hot livers: Mark you that? Virginia. Remember yet the Gods, O Appius, who have no part in this. Thy violent Lust shall like the biting of the invenom'd Aspick, steal thee to hell. So subtil are thy evils, in life they'l seem good Angels, in death divels. App. Observe you not this scandal? Icil. Sir, 'Tis none. I'l show thy Letters full of violent Lust sent to this Lady. App. Wilt thou breath a lye 'fore such a reverend Audience? Icil. That place is sanctuary to thee. Lye? see here they are. App. My Lords, these are but dilatory shifts. Sirrah I know you to the very heart, and I'l observe you. Icil. Do but do it with Justice. Clear thy self first, O Appius, ere thou judg our imperfections rashly, for we wot the Office of a Justice is perverted quite when one thief hangs another. 1. Senator. You are too bold. App. Lictors take charge of him▪ Icil. 'Tis very good. Will no man view these papers? What not one? Jove thou hast found a Rival upon earth, his nod strikes all men dumb. My duty to you. The Ass that carried sis on his back, thought that the superstitious people kneel'd to give his dulnesse humble reverence. If thou thinkst so, proud Judg, I let thee see I bend low to thy Gown, but not to thee.
Virg. There's one in hold already. Noble youth fetters grace one being worn for speaking truth; I'l lye with thee, I swear, though in a dungeon; the injuries you do us we shall pardon, but it is just the wrongs which we forgive, the gods are charg'd therewith to see revenged. App. Come, y'are a proud Plebian. Virg. True my Lord. Proud in the glory of my Ancestors, who have continued these eight hundred years: the Heralds have not knowne you these eight months. App. Your madness wrongs you, by my soul I love you. Virg. Thy soul? O thy opinion old Pythagoras, Whither, O whither should thy black soul fly, into what ravenous bird or beast most vile? only into a weeping Crocodile. Love me? Thou loy'st me (Appius) as the earth loves rain, thou fain wouldst swallow me. App. Know you the place you speak in? Virg. I'l speak freely. Good men too much trusting their innocence do not betake them to that just defence which Gods and Nature gave them; but even wink in the black tempest, and so fondly sink. App. Let us proceed to sentence. Virg. Ere you speak One parting farwel let me borrow of you to take of my Virginia. App. Now my Lords, we shall have fair confession of the truth. Pray take your course. Virg. Farewel my sweet Virginia, never, never shall I taste fruit of the most blessed hope I had in thee. Let me forget the thought of thy most pretty infancy, when first returning from the Wars, I took delight to rock thee in my Target, when my Girl would kiss her father in his burganet of glittering steel hung'bout his armed neck; and viewing the bright mettal, smile to see another fair Virginia smile on thee. When I first taught thee how to go, to speak, and when my wounds have smarted, I have sung
with an unskilful, yet a willing voice, to bring my Girl asleep. O my Virginia, when we begun to be, begun our woes, increasing still, as dying life still growes. App. This tediousness doth much offend the Court. Silence: attend her Sentence. Virg. Hold, without Sentence I'l resign her freely, since you will prove her to be none of mine. App. See, see, how evidently Truth appears. Receive her Clodius. Virg. Thus I surrender her into the Court Kills her. of all the Gods. And see proud Appius see, although not justly, I have made her free. And if thy Lust with this Act be not fed, bury her in thy bowels, now shee's dead. Omnes. O horrid act! App. Lay hand upon the Murderer. Virg. Oh for a ring of pikes to circle me. What? have I stood the brunt of thousand enemies here to be slain by hang-men? No. I'l fly to safety in the Camp. App. Some pursue the villain, others take up the body. Madness and rage are still th' Attendants of old doting age. Enter two Souldiers. 1 Is our Hut swept clean? 2 As I can make it. 1 'Tis betwixt us two; but how many think'st thou, bred of Roman blood, did lodg with us last night? 2 More I think then the Camp hath enemies, they are not to be numbred. 1. Comrague, I fear Appius will doom us to Acteons death, to be worried by the Cattel that we feed. How goes the day? 2 My stomack has struck twelve. 1 Come see what provant our knapsack yeilds. This is our store, our Garner. 2 A smal pitance. 1 Feeds Appius thus, is this a City feast? This crust doth taste like date stones, and this thing if I knew what to call it.
2 I can tell you: cheese struck in years. 1 I do not think but this same crust was bak'd and this cheese frighted out of milk and whey before we two were souldiers: though it be old I see 't can crawl; what living things be these that walk so freely 'tween the ind and pith? for here's no sap left. 2 They call them Gentles. 1 Therefore 'tis thought fit, that Souldiers by profession Gentlemen should thus be fed with Gentles. I am stomack sick, I must have some strong water. 2 Where will you hav't? 1 In you green ditch, a place which none can pass but he must stop his nose, thou know'st it well, there where the two dead dogs lye. 2 Yes I know't. 1 And see the Cat that lyes a distance off be flead for supper. Though we dine to day as Dutch men feed their souldiers, we will sup bravely like Roman Leaguerers. 2 Sir, the General. 1 Wee'l give him place, but tell none of our dainties, lest we have too many guests to supper. Enter Minutius with his souldiers reading a Letter. Minut. Most sure 'tis so, it cannot otherwise be, Either Virginius is degenerate from the ancient vertues he was wont to boast, or in some strange displeasure with the Senate; Why should these letters else from Appius confine him a close prisoner to the Camp? and which confirmes his guilt, why should he fly? needs then must I incur some high displeasure for negligence to let him thus escape; which to excuse, and that it may appear I have no band with him, but am of faction oppos'd in all things to the least mildeed, I will casheir him, and his Tribuneship bestow upon some noble Gentleman belonging to the Camp. Souldiers and friends, you that beneath Virginius Colours march, by strict command from the Decemvirat,
we take you from the charge of him late , and his Authority, Command, and Honour we give this worthy Roman. Know his Colours, and prove his faithful Souldiers. Roman. Warlike General, my courage and my forwardnesse in battel, shal plead how well I can deserve the title, to bee a Roman Tribune. Enter the first mutinous Souldier in haste. Minut. Now, the newes? 1. Sould. Virginius in a strange shape of distraction, enters the Campe, and at his heels a legion of all estates, growths, ages, and degrees, with breathlesse paces dog his frighted steps. It seemes half Roo's unpeopled with a traine that either for some mischiefe done, pursue him, or to attend some uncouth novelty. Minut. Some wonder our fear promises. Worthy souldiers, martial your selves, and entertaine this novel within a ring of steele: Wall in this portent with men and harnesse, be it ne're so dreadful. Hee's entred by the clamour of the camp, that entertaines him with these ecchoing showts. Affection that in Souldiers hearts is bred, survives the wounded, and out lives the dead. Enter Virginius with his knife, that and his arms stript up to the elbowes all bloudy; coming into the midst of the soul∣diers, he makes a stand. Virg. Have I in all this populous Assembly of souldiers that have prov'd Virginius valour, one friend? Let him come thrill his partisan against this brest, that through a large wide wound, my mighty soule might rush out of this prison to flie more freely to yon christal pallace, where honour sits inthronis'd. What, no friend? Can this great multitude then yeild an enemy that hates my life? Here let him seise it freely. What, no man strike? am I so wel beloved? Minutius then to thee. If in this camp there lives one man so just to punish sin, so charitable to redeem from torments a wretched souldier, at his worthy hand
a death. Minut. What means Virginius? Virg. O if the Generals heart be so obdu, to an old begging souldier, Have I here no honest Legionary of mine own Troo at whose bold hand and sword, if not . I may command a death? 1. Sould. Alas good Captain. Minut. Virginius, you have no command at all, your Companies are elsewhere now bestowed. Besides, we have a Charge to  you here. and make you the Camps prisoner. Virg. General, thanks. For thou hast done as much with one harsh word as I beg'd from their weapons. Thou hast kill'd me but with a living death. Minut. Besides, I charge you to speak what means this ugly face of blood, you put on your distractions? Whats the reason all Rome pursues you, covering those high , as if they dog'd you for some damned act? What have you done? Virg. I have plaid the Pacide, Kill'd mine own child, Minut. Virginia? Virg. Yes, even she. These rude hands ript her, and her innocent blood flow'd above my elbowes. Minut. Kill'd her willingly? Virg. Willingly, with advice, premeditation, and settled purpose; and see still I wear her crimson colours, and these withered armes are dy'd in her heart blood. Minut. Most wretched villain? Virg. But how? I lov'd her life. Lend me amongst you one speaking Organ to discourse her death; It is too harsh an imposition to lay upon a father. O my Virginia! Minut. How agrees this? love her, and murder her? Virg. Yes, Give me but a little leave to a few red tears, (for souldiers should weep blood) and I'l agree them well. Attend me all. Alas, might I have kept her chaste and free, this life so oft ingag'd for ingrateful Rome,
lay in her bosom. But when I saw her pull'd by Appius Lictors to be claim'd a slve, and drag'd unto a publick Sessions house, divorc'd from her fore Spousals with Icilius, a noble youth, and made a bond-woman, inforc'd by violence from her fathers armes to be a Prostiture and Permour to the rude twinings of a leacherous Judge; Then, then, O loving Souldiers, (I'l not deny it) for 'twas mine honor, my paernal pity, and the sole act, for which I love my life. Then lustful Appius, he that swayes the Land, slew poor Virginia by this fathers hand. 1 Sould. O villain Appius. 2 Sold. O noble Virginius. Virg. To you I appeal, you are my Sentencers: Did Appius right, or poor Virginius wrong? Sentence my Fact with a free general tongue. 1. Sold. Appius is the Parricide. 2. Sold. Virginins guiltless of his daughters death. Minut. It this be true, Virginius as the moan of all the Roman fry that followes you confirmes at large, this cause is to be pityed, and should not dy revengelesse. Virg. Noble Minutius, Thou hast a daughter, thou hast a wife too, so most of yôu have Souldiers. Why might not this have hapned you? Which of you all, deer friends, but now, even now, may have your wives deflowred, your daughters slav'd, and made a Lictors prey? Think them not safe in Rome, for mine lived there. Roman. It is a common cause. 1 Sold. Appius shall dy for't. 2 Sold. Lets make Virginius General. Omnes. A General, a General, lets make Virginius General. Munit. It shall be so. Virginius take my Charge, the wrongs are thine, so violent and so weighty that none but he that lost fo  a child, knowes how to punish. By the Gods of Rome, Virginius shall succeed my full command. Virg. What's honor unto me, a weak old man, weary of life, and covetous of a grave? I am a dead man now Virginia lives not, the self same hand that dar'd to save from shame
a child, dares in the father  the ill himself. 1. Sould. Stay noble General Minut. You much for nge, Virginias. Who, if you dye, will take your ause in hand, and proscribe Appius, should you pish thus? Virg. Thou oughtest Minutius. Soldiers, so ought you. I'm out of fear, my noble wife's expir'd, My daughter (of blest memory) the object of Appius lust, lives  the Elyan Vestals, my house yeilds none fit for his Lictors spoil. You that have wives lodg'd in you prison Rome, have Lands unried, houses yet ; your freeborn daughters yet unstrumpeted, prevent these mischiefs yet while you have time. 1. Sold. We will by you our noble General. 2. Sold. He that was destin'd to preserve great Rome. Virg. I accept your ch▪ in hope to guard you all from my inhumane sufferings. Be my pride that I have bred a daughter whose chast blood was spilt for you, and for Romes laing good. Explicit Actus Quartus. Actus Quintus Scena Prima. Enter Opius, a Senator, and the Advocate. Opius. IS Appius then committed? Senator. So 'tis . Opius. How will you bear you in this turbule state? You are a Member of that wretched Faction. I wonder how you scape imprisonment? Advocate. Let me alone, I have learnt with the wi Hedog. to stop my cave that way the pest drives. Never did Bear-whelp bling down a hill with more art shrink his head betwixt his clawes then I will work my safety Appius is in the sand already up to th' chin, and shal I hazard landing on that shelf? Hee's a wise friend that first  himself. Opius. What is your course, of ? Advoc. Marry this
Virginius with his Troops is entering Rome, and it is like that in the market place my L. Icilius and himself shall meet. Now to encounter these, two such great Armies, where lies my Court of Guard? Senat. Why in your heels. There are strange dogs uncoupled. Adv. You are deceiv'd, I have studied a most eloquent Oration, that shall applaud their fortune, and distaste the cruelty of Appius. Senat. Very good Sir. It seems then you will rail upon your Lord, your late good Benefactor. Adv. By the way Sir. Senat. Protest Virginia was no bond-woman, and read her noble Pedigree. Adv. By the way Sir. Opius. Could you not by the way too find occasion to beg Lord Appius Lands? Adv. And by the way perchance I will. For I will gull them all most palbably. Opius. Indeed you have the Art of flattery. Adv. Of Rhetorick you would say. And I'l begin my smooth Oration thus, Most learned Captains. Senat. Fie, fie, thats horrible, most of your Captains. are utterly unlearned. Adv. Yet I assure you, most of them know Arithmatick so well, that in a Muster to preserve dead payes, they I make twelve stand for twenty. Opius. Very good. Adv. Then I proceed, I do applaud your fortunes, and commend in this your observation, noble shake-rags. The Helmet shall no more harbour the spider, but it shall serve to carowse Sack and Sider. The rest within I'l study. Opius. Farewel Proteus, and I shall wish thy eloquent bravado may shild thee from the whip and Eastinado.
now in this furious tempest let us glide, with foulded sails at pleasure of the Tyde. Enter Icilius, Horatio, Valerius, Numitorius (at o door) with Souldiers; Virginius, Minutius, and others at the other doore. Icil. Stand. Virg. Make a stand. Win Icil. A prly with Virginius. Minut. We wil not trust our General 'twixt the Armies, but upon terms of hostage. Numit. Well advised! Nor we our General: who for the leaguer? Minut. Our selfe. Minutius and Numi∣torius meet embrace, sa∣lute the Generals. Virg. Who for the City? Icil. Numitorius. Numit. How is it with your sorrow noble brother? Virg. I am forsaken of the gods, old man. Numit. Preach not that wretched doctrine to your self, It wil beget despaire. Virg. What doe you call a burning Feaver? Is not that a divel? It shakes me like an earthquake. Wilt a, wilt a give me some Wine? Numit. O it is hurtful for you! Virg. Why so? are all things that the appetite of man doth covet in his perfect'st health, what ever Art or Nature have invented, to make the boundlesse wish of man contented, Are all his poison? Give me the Wine there.—When? Do you grudge me a poor cup of drink? Say, Say. Now by the gods, I'll leave enough behind me to pay my debts, and for the rest, no matter who scrambles for't. Numit. Here my noble brother I Alas, your hand shakes. I will guide it to you. Virg. 'Tis true, it trembles. Welcome thou just palsie, 'twere pity this should doe me longer service, now it hath slain my daughter. So I thank you; now I have lost all comforts in the world, it seems I must a little longer live; bee't but to serve my belly.
Minut. O my Lord, this violent Feaver took him late last night, since when, the cruelty of the disease, hath drawn him into sundry passions beyond his wonted temper. Icil. 'Tis the gods have powred their Justice on him. Virg. You are sadly met my Lord. Icil. Would we had met in a cold grave together two months since, I should not then have curst you. Virg. Ha! Whats that? Icil. Old man, thou hast shewed thy self a noble Roman, but an unnatural Father; thou hast turned my Bridal to a Funeral. What divel did arme thy fury with the Lions paw, the Dragons taile, with the Bulls double horne, the Cormorants beak, the Cockatrices eyes, the Scorpions teeth? and all these by a father to be imployed upon his innocent child? Virg. Young man, I love thy true description; I am happy now, that one beside my selfe, doth teach me for this act. Yet were I pleased, I cou'd approve the deed most Just and noble; and sure posterity, which truely renders to each man his desert, shal praise me for't. Icil. Come, 'twas unnatural and damnable. Virg. You need not interrupt me. Here's a fury wil doe it for you! You are a Roman Knight. What was your oath when you receiv'd your Knighthood? a parcel of it is, as I rememember, rather to die with honour, then to live in servitude. Had my poor girle been ravish'd, in her dishonour, and in my sad griefe, your love and pity quickly had ta'ne end. Great mens misfortunes thus have ever stood, they touch none neerly, but their neerest blood. What do you meane to do? It seems, my Lord, now you have caught the sword within your hand, like a madman you'le draw it to offend those that best love you; and perhaps the counsel of some loose unthrifts, and vile male contents hearten you to't: goe to, take your course, my faction shal not give the least advantage
to murtherers, to banquerouts, or theeves, to fleece the common Wealth. Icil. Do you term us so? Shal I reprove your rage, or is't your malice? He that would tame a Lion, doth not use the goad or wierd whip, but a sweet voice, a fearful stroaking, and with food in hand must ply his wanton hunger. Virg: Want of sleep wil do it better then all these, my Lord. I would not have you wake for others ruine, lest you turn mad with watching. Icil. O you gods! You are now a General; learn to know your place, and use your noble calling modestly. Better had Appius been an upright Judg, and yet an evil man, then honest man, and yet a dissolute Judg; for all disgrace lights lesse upon the person, then the place. You are i'th' City now, where if you raise but the least uproare, even your Fathers house shal not be free from ransack. Piteous fires that chance in Towrs of stone, are not so feared as those that light in Flax shops; for there's food for eminent ruin. Minut. O my noble Lord! Let not your passion bring a fatal end to such a good beginning. All the world shal honour that deed in him, which first grew to a reconcilement. Icil. Come my Lord, I love your friendship; yes in sooth I do, but wil not seale it with that bloody hand. Joine we our armies. No phantastick copy, or borrowed President wil I assume in my revenge. There's hope yet you may live, to outwear this sorrow. Virg. O Impossible. A minutes joy to me, would quite crosse nature, as those that long have dwelt in noisome rooms, swoun presently if they but scent perfumes. Icil. to th' Senate. Come, no more of this sad tale, for such a tel-tale may we term our grief, and doth as 'twere so listen to her own words, Envious of others sleep, because shee wakes.
I ever would converse with a griev'd person in a longe journey to beguile the day, or winter evening to passe time away. March on, and let proud Appius in our view like a tree rotted, fall that way he grew. Enter Appius, and Marcus Clodius in prison, fettred and gyved. App. The world is chang'd now. All damnations seize on the Hydra headed multitude, that only gape for innovation. O who would trust a people? Clod. Nay, who would not, rather then one rear'd on a popular suffrage, whose station's built on Avees and Applause? There's no firm structure on these airy Bases. O fie upon such Greatness. App. The same ands that yesterday to hear me conscionate. and Orarorize, rung shril Plaudits forth in sign of grace, now in contempt and scorn hurry me to this place of darkness. Clod. Could not their poisons rather spend themselves, on th' Judges folly, but must it needs stretch to me his servant, and sweep me along? Curse on the inconstant rabble. App. Grieves it thee to impart my sad disaster? Clod. Marry doth it. App. Thou shared'st a fortune with me in my Greatness, I ha'd thee after when I climb my State, and shrink'st thou at my ruine? Clod. I loved your Greatness, and would have trac'd you in the golden path of sweet promotion; but this your decline sowrs all these hoped sweets. App. 'Tis the world right. Such gratitude a great man still shall have that trusts unto a temporizing slave. Clod. Slave? Good. Which of us two in our dejection is basest? I am most sure your loathsome dungeon is as dark as mine, your conscience for a thousand sentences wrongly denounc'd, much more opprest then mine.
then which is the most slave▪ App. O double baseness, to hear a drudg thus with his Lord compare! Great men disgrac'd, slaves to their servants are. Enter Virginius, Icilius, Minutius, Numitoriut, Horatio, Valerius, Opius with souldiers. Virg. Souldiers, keep a strong guard whilst we survey our sentenc'd prisoners: And from this deep dungeon keep off that great concourse, whose violent hands would ruine this stone building and drag hence this impious Judg peice▪ meal, to tear his limbs before the Law convince him. Icil. See these Monsters, whose fronts the fair Virginias innocent blood hath visarded with such black ugliness, that they are loathsome to all good mens souls. Speak damn'd Judg how canst thou purge thy self from Lust and blood? App. I do confess my self guilty of both: yet hear me, noble Romans, Virginius, thou dost but supply my place, I thine. Fortune hath lift thee to my Chair, and thrown me headlong to thy pleading bar. If in mine eminence I was stern to thee; shunning my rigor, likewise shun my fall. And being mild where I shewed cruelty, establish still thy greatness. Make some use of this my bondage. With indifference survey me, and compe my yesterday with this sad hour, my heighth with my decline, and give them equal ballance. Virg. Ucertain fate, but yesterday his breath 'd Rome, and his least ved frown was death: I cannot chuse but pity and lament, So high a rise should have such low discent. Icil. He's ready to forget his injury. (Oh too relenting age!) Thinks not Virginius, if he should pardon Appius this black deed, and set him once more in the Ivory Chair, he would be wary to avoid the like, become a new man, a more upright Judge, and deserve better of the Common Weal? Virg. 'Tis like he would.
Icil. Nay, if you thus begin, I'l fetch that shall anatomize his . Exit. Numit. Virginius, you are oo  to deeds of this nature. You must fashion now your actions to your place, not to your passion, severity to such acts is as necessary as pity to the tears of innocence. A shout. Minut. He speaks but Law and Justice. Make good the streets, with your best men at arms: Valerius and Horatio know the reason of this loud uproar, and confused noise. Although my heart be melting at the fall of men in place and Office, we'l be just to punish murdrous Acts, and censure Lust. Enter Valerius and Horatio. Valer. Icilius, worthy Lord, bears through the street the body of Virginia towards this prison; which when it was discovered to the people, mov'd such a mournful clamour, that their cryes pierc'd heaven, and forc'd tears from their sorrowing eyes. Horat. Here comes Icilius. Enter Icilius with the body of Virginia. Icil. Where was thy pity when thou slewest this maid, thou wouldst extend to Appius? Pity? See her wounds still bleeding at the horrid presence of you stern Murderer, till she find revenge; nor will these drops stench, or these springs be dry till theirs be set a bleeding: Shall her soul (whose essence some suppose lives in the blood) still labour without rest? Will old Virginius murder her once again in this delay? Virg. Pause there Icilius. This sight hath stiffned all my operant powers, ic'd all my blood, benum'd my motion quite. I'l powre my soul into my daughters belly, and with a soldiers tears imbalm her wounds. My only dear Virginia! App. Leave this passion, proceed to your just sentence. Virg. We will. Give me two sword. Appius grasp this, You Clodius that. You shall be your own hang-men, do Justice on your selves. You made Virginius. uce his own blood: lodg'd in his daughters brest, which your own hands shall act upon your selves.
If you be Romans, and retain their spirits, redeem a base life with a noble death, and through your    yo ath. App. Virginius is a noble Justicer, had I my crooked paths levell'd by thine. I had not swayed the ballance. Think not Lords, but he that had the sit to oppose the Gods, dares likewise suffer what their powers inflict: I have not dreaded famine, fire, no strage, their common vengeance, poison in my cup, nor dagger in my bosom, the revenge of private men for private injuries; nay more then these, not fe'd to commit evil, and shall I tremble at the punishment? Now with as much resolved constancy, as I offended, will I pay the mulct, and this black stain laid on my family, then which a nobler hath not place in Rome, Wash with my blood away. Learn of me Clodius, I'l teach thee what thou never studiest yet, thats bravely how to dy. Judges are term'd the Gods on earth; and such as are corrupt read me in this my ruine. Those that succeed me that so offend, thus punish. This the sum of all, Appius that in'd, by Appius hand shall fall. Kils himself Virg. He dyed as boldly as he basely err'd, and so should every true bred Roman do. And he whose lise was odious, thus expiring; in his death forceth pity. Clodius thou wast follower of his fortunes in his being, therefore in his not being imitate his fair example. Clod. Death is terrible unto a conscience that's opprest with guilt. They say there is Elizium and Hel, the first I have forfeited, the latter fear. My skin is not sword proof. Icil. Why dost thou pawse? Clod. For mercy, mercy I intreat you all. Is't not sufficient for Virginia slain that Appius suffered; one of noble blood, and eminence in place, for a Plebian? Besides, he was my Lord and might command me: If I did ought, 'twas by compulsion, Lords,
and therefore I crave mercy. Icil. Shall I doom him? Virg. Do, good Icilius. Icil. Then I sentence thus: Thou hadst a mercy, most unmeriting slave, of which thy base birth was not capable, which we take off by taking thence thy sword. And note the difference 'twixt a noble strain, and one bred from the rabble: both alike da'd to transgresse, but see their odds in death: Appius dy'd like a Roman Gentleman, and a man both wayes knowing; but this slave is only sensible of vitious living, not apprehensive of a noble death. Therefore as a base Malefactor (we) and timerous slave, give him (as he deserves) unto the common Hangman. Clod. What, no mercy? Icil. Stop's mouth, away with him: the life of the Decemviri expires in them. Rome thou at length art free, restored unto thine ancient liberty. Minut. Of Consu: which bold Iunius Brutus first begun in Tarquins fall. Virginius you and young Icilius shall his place succeed, so by the peoples suffrage 'tis decreed. Virg. We martial then our souldiers in that name of Consuls, honoured with these golden bayes. Two fair, but Ladies most infortunate, have in their ruins rais'd declining Rome, Lucretia and Virginia, both renown'd▪ for chastity. Souldiers and noble Romans to grace her death, whose life hath freed great Rome, march with her Course to her sad Funeral Tomb. Exeunt. Flourish. FINIS.
