W1672 11258564 47181
The Manner of ye Preist Whipping out ye Devill London Printed for Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultry. 1683.
A Whip for the Devil; OR, THE Roman Conjurer. DISCOVERING The intolerable Folly, Profaneness, and Superstition of the Papists, in endeavouring to cast the Devil out of the Bodies of Men and Women by Him possest. Containing an Account of 1. Several Documents and Rules to be obser∣ved by a Popish Exorcist. 2. The Conjurers Rubrick. 3. Their several inward and outward Reme∣dies for Expelling Evil Spirits. 4. Their Methods of making Holy Water for that Vse. 5. Their Methods of Clearing Houses Haunt∣ed by Evil Spirits, &c. All faithfully Collected from their own Authors, with pleasant Notes and Observations intermixt. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Malthus at the Sun in the Poultry. 1683.
A WHIP FOR THE DEVIL. Several Documents requisite for a Popish Exorciser of the Devil. Right Worshipful and dearly Beloved, YOu have all heard of the cun∣ning of Sathan, and how that by his extraordinary craft he has and does not only daily in∣sinuate into the Affections of men, but that he actually possesses the very bo∣dies of several Mortals, and turning the Soul out of her Office, makes use of all the passions and senses of the party posses∣sed at his own arbitrary will and pleasure. You are also to understand that there is
no Religion in the World which the De∣vil so much affects as that of the Papists. For among them you shall frequently hear of several in whose bodies Belzebub takes up his Lodging without paying any Rent; and yet so unruly, that many times you would think he would throw the whole house out at window. On the other side the Papists are the only persons in the World among whom there are several who, by long study and industry, have found out ways and means to ferrit him out of his Buroughs without the tedious formality of a Lease of Ejectment. These People are called Exorcisers, such as by the virtue of Charms and Prayers and hard Words so terrifie the Devils nestling within the bodies of Mortals, that he is forced to cry, Beso los manos and march off: Nay, many times he is so put to't, that he can∣not stay to complement. Now though it be a thing well known that the Devil is generally hated, and as true that it is an easie thing to find a stick to beat a dog, yet is it not so easie to find a Rod to whip the Devil. But we have found one out at length by the help of Monsieur Jerome Mengus (unhappy was the day for poor Sathan that ever he was born) which if men will but apply themselves to make use
of, it is impossible that from hence for∣ward the Devil should live a quiet hour in the World. He then that intends to have the Devil at his beck, must be so and so qualified. You'l say how? Why I'le tell ye, if you'l have a little patience. Lessons and Documents to be followed by him that intends to be an Exorciser of Evil Spirits. The first Document. WHoever he be that desires gentilely, neatly, and after the true manner to tread upon the necks of the Infernal Spirits, must abstain from all unlawful, vain and su∣perstitious Actions. For as Hornets never hurt Hornets, nor Serpents sting Serpents, so one Devil will never hurt another. There∣fore an Exorciser must be a man of a pure conscience, make frequent Confession of his sins, and by as frequent Repentance make his peace with Heaven. For the Exorci∣ser's sins being forgiven through repen∣tance, are concealed from the Devil, whereby he is utterly disabled from casting them in his Masters dish; so that when he commands him to be silent, the Devil must of necessity hold his tongue. But above all things it behoves an Exorciser to
be very humble, for the Devil cannot en∣dure so much as the smell of Humility. What sort of smell humility has, I cannot so well tell; but the Devil has, it seems, a very quick Nose, and you must take Fa∣ther Mengo's word for it. Neither is it improbable but that there may be some smells which the Devil cannot endure; for we find that when that Devil of a disease called the Mother afflicts a Woman, she is presently brought to her self again by hold∣ing Assa foetida and stinking Feathers to her Nose: and so it is not unlikely but that Humility may have a certain smell which the Devils pride is not able to suffer. The second Document. AN Exorcist ought to be very diligent to discern whether the Party be re∣ally possessed by the Devil or no, and whe∣ther it be not a fallacy. For it would be a very great blur to the Credit of an Exor∣ciser to be baffled in his attempt for want of Judgment. Not only the Friends of the Party, but the Devil himself would laugh at him for his pains. Now an Ex∣orcist shall certainly know whether the Party be possessed or no, if he hears him speak and understand those things which it
would be otherwise impossible for the per∣son afflicted to understand or discourse without the Devils Instruction. Another way to try this Experiment is by touching the party with some Religious Relick, or by reading Holy words out of the Four Evangelists to the party concerned. Thus a Demoniac being brought to the Bishop of Angers, in France, he caused the Wenches Coats to be taken up to her bare knee, and then pulling a Key out of his pocket, laid it upon her naked skin. You cannot ima∣gine how the poor Wench screamed, and roared, drew her mouth a one side, and foamed and fumed, so soon as she percei∣ved the cold Key upon her flesh. Then the Bishop pulled out of his pocket a piece of Petronius Arbiter, and read to the De∣moniac these words, There was a certain Ephesian Matron. But then the Devil was ten thousand times madder than before, the Wench raved and tore, and stampt and stared, and it was a million to six pence, but that the Devil had split her into two parts, as he took his leave; he flew away in such a violent rage, as if he had resolved to demolish the Tenement of which he could not keep the Possession. So that if you can privately and without the parties knowledge do it, 'tis a most excel∣lent
way to tye some holy Relique or a piece of paper full of Godly Names, to some part of the Demoniac's body: For then if the party be troubled and tormen∣ted with strange Convulsions, or utter furious and raging Expressions, 'tis a sign of a Diabolical Presence. But you are to ob∣serve, for the sake of those who detract from this Art, that the Devils entring in∣to humane bodies, very rarely speak La∣tin: first, because the Devil is too polite to speak the Language of the Beast: second∣ly, because it would lay him too open to discovery, if he should use any other than the natural Instruments of those whom he possesses. And therefore the Devil posses∣sing an illiterate Idiot never speaks Latin; or if he possess an Italian, he never speaks French, unless the party were known to speak both Languages before, in regard the Tongue being habituated to one sort of Language, becomes more pliable in its motion to the Devils occasions. Neither indeed will they speak either Hebrew or Greek, as being Languages altogether out of use, unless it be among the Learned; and the Devil is too cunning to come un∣der their clutches.
The third Document. THirdly, an Exorcist may attack the Devil possessing humane bodies by outward means, as Holy Water, Incense, Sulphur, Rue, and by several other Brew∣ages and Doses, which however must be first exorcised and blessed. 'Tis true, we cannot say that musical Sounds, or Herbs, or any other material Substances have any natural efficacy totally to expel the vexa∣tions of the Devil, but they may very much prevail to mitigate the extremity of the trouble. For all limited Causes pro∣duce Effects more or less intense according to the matter more or less disposed and fit∣ted for the Operation. And so the Devil may be said to have more power over a melancholy person, than over a jolly brisk Compotator, who needs no other Devil to plague him than the Wine it self, when it gets the upper hand of his Reason. And to shew you that great things may be done by ordinary means, Father Mengo tells you the story out of Tobit, of the Devil's being sent packing by the stench of a Fishes liver broiled upon the coals. Which was the reason that Pope Alexander the First, and He was no small Fool, commands all the
Popish Priests to consecrate those exterior means, and bless them for the use of the people. Upon which foundation he built a world of Superstitions imposed upon the Vulgar. For if the Prophet cured the barren∣ness of the water by throwing Salt among it, how much more may it be thought that the charming of outward means may prevail against the snares and subtilties of the De∣vil? For the same reason he recommends the use of Music, not doubting but that sometimes it may happen to make the De∣vil dance. And was not he a rare Fellow in Titus's Army, that sent several Devils away with Fleas in their Ears by means of a stone which he carried in his Ring? Or what may we think of that other who sent Sathan a wool-gathering by the force of a Root of a certain Herb which he put up the Demoniac's Fundament in the nature of Suppository? But there is yet another reason why an Exorcist ought to make use of exteriour means. For it is one of the greatest addi∣tions to the punishment of the Devils, that they are made subject to the virtual Ope∣rations of sensible Things: and that being a Spirit, he is forced to be under the com∣mand and power of corporeal and fading substances. Therefore saith Raymund Lully,
make use of Physic and Antipharmacons to dislodge the Devil. Which however are of greater force, if you mix in the said Medi∣cines the Root of the Herb Hypericon. For such is the virtue of the seed of that Herb, that being burnt, it raises a smoke so offen∣sive to the Devils nose, that it makes him sneeze ten millions of times in less than a quarter of an hour; which must of necessi∣ty be a great vexation to him. Nevertheless Father Mengo will not allow these exterior things to have that extraordinary virtue, unless they be first consecrated with the Exorcisms of the Roman Church. For then the Devil looks upon those things as done a purpose to disgrace and reproach him, and then 'tis no wonder if he take them in snuff. And therefore it is the duty of an Exorcist to apply those things to the party grieved, and to provoke the Devil with ill language and opprobrious and affrontive expostulations. All which things the De∣vil, being as proud as Lucifer, can by no means brook, as being done in derision and contempt of him. And therefore he is for∣ced to pack up his Aules, and be gone, as being buffeted on the one side with holy Exorcisms, and laden on the other side with nothing but scorn and affront. So that whoever they be that have a mind to
see the Devil look like a Dog that had stole a Pudding, must go this way to work. The fourth Document. IN the fourth place it behoves an Exor∣cist not to ask the Devil any imperti∣nent Questions. You may ask him his Name, and how many there are abroad of his Gang, what reason he had to enter the party; at what hour he has a mind to be spoken with, by what person or what Saint he has most mind to be expelled; what enemies he has in Heaven, and what friends in Hell, and what words those are which will plague him most? You may also ask him, whether he be a Whig, a Tory, or a Trimmer? To what Regiment of Devils he belongs, and who's his Colonel; whe∣ther he be constrained to enter into the Party, or whether it be his own voluntary act? These you'l say are all very material Questions; but how if the Devil should refuse to answer? Why then the Exorcist were a fool to ask him. But the Exorcist knows better things by his own experience: for if the Devil refuse to answer, the Ex∣orcist deals with him as they do in Chan∣cery, that is, he prosecutes him to a Com∣mission of Rebellion, and commands Luci∣fer,
Virtute Dei, to punish him in Hell for his refractory disobedience: and to give Orders to the Chief of the Squadron in the Body possessed forthwith to withdraw with all his Associates under several pains and penalties that shall come thereon. For though I said before that the Devils would not hurt one another, because it was con∣venient to say so; yet now because it is convenient to say otherwise, I say the De∣vils have variances and animosities, and differences and quarrels among themselves, and will hurt one another; and the lesser Devil must needs go, when the greater Dévil drives. The fifth Document. IN the next place the Exorciser must be careful that he stand to his Pantables, and that when he has laid any command upon the Devil, he never bate him an Ace, though the Devil should happen to be so rash, as to deny his Jurisdiction, and con∣temn his Authority for some time. For that would give the Devil an occasion to grow malapert and slight his Exorcism. But then cause the Party to make a Confession of some one Article of the Roman Catholic Faith, and at the same time let him knock
his head against the ground three times: yet not so hard neither as to knock out his brains: for then the Devil would laugh in∣deed, and run away to rights with the par∣ties Soul instead of his body. The Exor∣cist is also to be very cautious in the appli∣cation of exterior things to the Demoniac, such as are the Reliques of Saints, the wood of the Cross, and the like: for the Devils are so crafty, that very often they feign themselves to be afraid of those things, which many times prove not to be real Re∣liques, which is a great disparagement to the credit and honour of the Sacraments of the Roman Catholick Church, which have done wonders. Nor are all Devils alike; for some are more desperate, and can brook affronts, reproaches and injuries with more resolu∣tion than others. Sometimes also divine power leaves it to the Devils discretion whether he will depart at the first bidding or no, for several concealed reasons; and they are often excused for a time from yielding obedience to our Imperative Moods, because the means we use are not seasonable, or not proper. But then again, if after long perseverance the Devil remain obdurate and dally and play the fool against the positive command of Holy Words and
Applications, then the Exorcist is to make use of Goads and Spurs, which are Exor∣cisms and Charms, by which the Devils are tormented in their spiritual Entities, as men are pained in their corporeal bodies with Whips and Scourges. You'l say this is a sort of nonsence — I can't help that — 'Tis such as Father Mengo dedicates to no less a person than a Cardinal — and which Father Mengo looked upon to be as good sence as any was in the World, or else he spent his time very ill to cloath his work in such good competent Latin as he has done. But you must understand, that Conjurers deal in Mysteries, which for want of knowledge, are esteemed non∣sence. There's the Conjurer that hangs out his face against Ludgate-Church — Why — discourse that Mysterious Mortal, that has the Devil in a string, a whole year together, and if you hear him talk three words of sence together of his own Art which he professes, and can make it out, you may win many a fair wager. And therefore pray be not such Enemies to Non∣sence, especially when it treats of Myste∣rious Matters.
The Sixth Document. WHat opinion others may have of the Popish Eucharist is left to their con∣sideration; but Father Minorite Fryer Men∣go, advises it should be frequently given those that are possessed with the Devil, Nay, saith he, it was never forbidden by our Forefathers to the Spirits of Wickedness; to whom they rather thought it was to be administred every day, for that being ta∣ken by a Demoniac, it drove him from roost∣ing in his body, and made his Mansion too hot for him, by burning him with a certain kind of Fire. And so the Abbot Androni∣cus was cured. For the Devil will insult over his Landlord, if he once find him de∣nied the Heavenly Remedy, and will at∣tack him with greater violence, and swag∣ger like a Hector when he finds him depri∣ved of his Spiritual Physic. If you object, That no person is to receive unworthily, which Demoniacs cannot do, because they want the use of their reason, St. Thomas Aquinas replies, That men may be said to have lost their reason in a twofold sence (for take a Jesuit without a Salvo and hang him) he may be said to have lost his rea∣son that has but a weak use of it: and thus
they are said not to see who see but weak∣ly. Others are said to have lost the use of reason; as being born Idiots. As to the first, if it appear that they have any devo∣tion for the Eucharist, it may be given them. As to the second, they are denied the Priviledge. In another place the same St. Thomas, like a good man, advises the giving the Eucharist to Demoniacs, unless they are possessed for any crime by them committed. But then there arises another Question, whether they may be said to be possessed who want their reason? For the Devils in them if they want reason, that keep company every day with the Devil, who was ever so far from being counted a fool, that he was always thought to be fu∣periour in Reason to Thomas Aquinas him∣self, though one of the nicest Splitters of a distinction in the World. And then a∣gain, it behoves the Exorcist to charm and give his Benediction to the Eucharist, as well as to all other things which are to be applied to the Demoniac, his Victuals, his Drink, his Pottages, Unctions, and the like, and all other things requisite to con∣jure the Devil out of humane Bodies. More∣over the Exorcist is to make diligent In∣quisition in the Bed-cloaths, in the Mats under the Bed, over the Tester, behind
the door, and in every corner of the house for all the instruments of mischief and dia∣bolical Treachery that he can find, and pre∣sently to throw them into the fire. Nay, it would do well for the party to change his Bed, nay his Cloaths, nay his very House, and remove to another habitation; for it would put the Devil to his Trumps to find out the meaning of such sudden al∣terations. It would be to him just like the finding out of a Plot (for the Devil knows himself always guilty) and unsettle him in all his Methods of proceeding. The Seventh Document. BY no means the Exorcist must make use of unknown names, as being of dan∣gerous consequence so to do, according to the Opinion of St. Chrysostome. And there∣fore Father Mengo is careful to give a List of the most necessary, to the end the well∣minded Exorcist may proceed the more boldly and securely in his Conjurations: and therefore take 'em in their order. El Elion Jah Elohim Esereheieh Tetragrammaton Sabaot Adonai Sadai Hagios Ischyros Athanatos Soter Jehovah Homousion Eheieh.
Moreover the Exorcist is to make use of certain Billets or Notes containing these or some other holy Names or Words, and ap∣ply them to the parties under the Devil's Oppression, but with respect however to the following Conditions. First, That those holy Words do not contain any thing which pertains to the Invocation of Devils either Express or Tacit. Secondly, That the Exorcisms do not contain any unknown Names, for the a∣voiding of Superstition; that is to say, the Popish Conjurers do forbid all persons whatever to make use of the Names of the Indian Pagods, or any of the Mahometan Saints; nor of the Pinner of Wakefield, nor of the Names of Adam Bell, Climm of the Clough, or William of Cloudeslee, and yet these were Fellows that would have fought with the Devil himself. But because the De∣vil was not so well acquainted with them, as not being in the Popish Legend, there∣fore it would be a great piece of Superstiti∣on to make use of their Names. But you may make use of the Names of Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, Bell and the Dragon, Mars, Neptune, Mercury, St. George, and all your Gaming Ordinary Oaths; of which the Devil can∣not be so much the Devil of a Dunce as to
be ignorant, because they are so frequent∣ly in use. Thirdly, Great care must be taken, lest the matter of the Words contain any thing of falshood; for that would frustrate the expectation of the Operator. For the De∣vil would never be afraid of a Lye, who is the Father of them himself. Which is the reason that Old women fail so often in their Charms, because they are stufft so full of idle vanities and sottish impertinencies. Fourthly, All foolish Characters and Fi∣gures are to be avoided, unless it be the figure of the Cross. And the same cau∣tion is to be given against Images made by Astrologers (for Astrologers are no Popes) and artificial Rings, Amulets and Stones: for your true Exorcisers would have none to deal with the Devil but themselves. Fifthly, Let the Exorciser beware of putting any confidence in the manner of writing, or any other such like impertinent Vanity, nothing to the purpose, for that would be altogether superstitious; so care∣ful are the Popish Priests, the most super∣stitious of men toward God, of being su∣perstitious to the Devil. Sixthly, That in the rehearsal and pro∣nunciation of Holy words and sentences respect be only had to the words themselves
and their true meaning. Great reverence is also to be given to the Power of God, from whom a good effect is to be expect∣ed; and next to the Reliques of the Saints, which next to God, chiefly conduce to∣ward a happy success against the Devil. For as the Devil is known by his cloven foot, a true Papist is known by his blend∣ing Piety and Superstition together. Which conditions being observed, it is lawful to exorcise Demoniacs, and kick the Devil about like a Foot-ball. The eighth Document. AN Exorcist ought to make it his busi∣ness to understand the subtilties of Devils entring into humane Bodies, that he may be the better able to deal with them at their own weapons. Know then that most Devils, having taken up their Quarters, love to lye very private, and to keep themselves either from speaking or trembling, for fear of being discovered, or that he may seem to the Priest to be the more stout and undaunted; yet if he be by the power of Sacred words constrained to tremble, he is careful however of speak∣ing according to the mind of the party pos∣sessed. Or if he be compelled to speak
from within, he is very cautious of speak∣ing through the mouth of the Demoniac. And therefore it behoves the Priest to ad∣monish the Party to tell him truly what the Devil mutters in his belly; and fre∣quently to adjure the Devil to answer to Interrogatories. But when after a great deal of do he is at length brought to speak outwardly, then he does all he can to di∣vert the Demoniac from hearing or under∣standing the words which are read. He also strives to disturb the attention and devotion of the Priest, either with bawdy discourse, crying, scolding, or acting the Tumbler. And therefore it behoves the Priest, well knowing his Tricks, to com∣mand him to desist from this or from that action, and to leave his babooning. Some∣times if it happens to be a young Woman that is to be exorcised, he feigns himself sick, and then the Woman desires the Priest to touch her face, or handle her breasts, to feel harder, yet harder, on purpose to put voluptuous fancies into the Priests mind; sometimes at the Devils instigation she de∣sires the Priest to ease her Torments, but laying his cheek to hers, or his lips to hers, meerly, wicked Devil as he is, to debauch an honest vertuous Priest of the Church of Rome. And therefore it behoves a Romish
Priest to be chast of his Eyes, chast of his hands, and indeed of every member, especi∣ally when he meets with the Devil & a Wo∣man together. Sometimes the damn'd De∣vil plays at Bo-peep with the Priest; so that when the Priest asks him the name of the Principal Devil of the Company, he tells him his own, and conceals the names of his Companions, which as he pretends he dares not name, because they are bawdy or beastly, which you will; which may be sometimes true, but is ten times oftner false. So that the Priest knows not where to have the Devil. But he is well enough served to expect Truth from a common Lyar. Therefore when the Priest finds himself thus abused by one, let him command him to stand by, and call another to his Cate∣chism, commanding him to speak, and not be afraid of the other, and command∣ing the other not to disturb him. If nei∣ther by this means the Priest can find out the truth, then let the Priest be as jocose as the Devil is surly, and call the rest co∣ram nobis by contemptible names; as, You Tom-Fool, you Hell-Baker, you Sirrah, Hell-Cook, and the like; for this will make 'em open their jaws, or the Devil's in 'em.
Sometimes when the Devil finds the Priest too hard for him, he sends for his Accomplices, either to animate him, or assist him with their presence; a common thing for one friend to chear up another in distress. In this case the Priest must make it his business to know what Enemies his Antagonist hath either in Heaven or Hell, and then to invoke his Enemies the Saints; to conjure up his Enemies the De∣vils; and lay his commands upon the De∣vils his Friends. Sometimes the Devil is so wearied with talking to the Priest, that he endeavours to sneak out of the mouth of the party pos∣sessed, to rest himself either in the parties heart or under his neck. And then it be∣hoves the Priest to fetch him back with a Sisarara, and keep him waking above board. To this purpose these words are very prevalent, Ecce Crucem Domini, (for though the Devil be unwilling to speak Latin, yet he understands Latin very well) making the sign of the Cross at the same time upon the head or forehead of the par∣ty. Or else let the Priest utter these words, Usque quo, Domine, obliviscêris me? Com∣manding the Devil to make an answer, which many times, without any other Ex∣orcism, works a very good effect.
Sometimes when a poor Soul thinks he is rid of his troublesom Guests, there are some that will stay behind in a corner, as it were to keep possession, and let in the rest at their return. To avoid this Sham, it behoves the Priest to lay his commands upon the Corporal of the Gang, to take all his Tribe along with him. It behoves also the party freed to fortifie all the ave∣nues of his body with the Padlocks of Pray∣er and Fasting for many months together; and if he be a married person, let him per∣swade his wife to continency, till he hath made all fast, according to the Proverb, Fast bind, fast find. But if the woman be of another temper, let her not act for lust's sake, and then she may do it with the Priest himself; for the Devil will never come near him. In Conjuration, when the Priest begins to perceive the Serpent tremble under his consecrated hand, let him presently de∣mand his name, and the names of his Com∣panions, the time and cause of his En∣trance, as before; and write every thing down in a piece of paper, that if the De∣vil should afterwards grow obstinate, he may burn the said paper with consecrated Fire. For these are great affronts to the Devil, as being done to his disgrace, and
putting him in mind of Hell. When the Priest hath drawn the Devil to a Confessi∣on, let him cause him to ratifie it, by put∣ting his paw to it, if he can. When he hath so done, and that he finds the Devil ready to march, Iet the Priest be sure not to give him leave, till he hath got an abso∣lute promise from him, to take all his ragged Regiment with him, and never to return again. Above all things, let the Priest be careful never to let the Devil rest a quiet minute, but be sure to worry him with continual importunity, reading, and imperious Commands; and let him never enter into disputes with him, or fall to talk of stories with him, especially amorous; for by that means the Priest wastes his Spi∣rits, and the Devil recovers his strength. The ninth Document. IN the ninth place, let the Priest beware of exorcising the Devil in private Hou∣ses, but in the Church, or some other place dedicated to God or some Saint. For such are the Houses of Prayer. But in private Houses the Priest will meet with Women, whose company is to be avoided with all care imaginable by all Exorcisers, lest they fall into the snare of the Devil.
As for the time, the work of Exorcising may be performed upon any day; but the better day, the better deed; therefore Our Lady-day, Christmas-day, Easter-day, Whitsunday, the several Holy days dedi∣cated to the Apostles, and their Eves are most proper. And for the time of the day, betimes in the morning after early Mat∣tins. Thus you see as cunning as the Devil is, he may meet with his match: Set a Knave to catch a Knave, is a Proverb will never be out of date. Were it not better then for the Devil to turn Lutheran, than thus to lye at the lash of these merciless Exorcisers, who command him with such petty For∣malities? If it may not rather be thought that he gives way now and then to these little pieces of Superstition, that they may the more easily delude greater numbers. The Conjurers Rubrick. The First Exorcism. AND now the Exorciser, being thus instructed, has no more to do but to prepare himself by Confession of his
sins, three days fasting, and humbling himself before God. Which done, he shall go to the Church, with the party possessed, and there being clad in all the Formalities of his Order and Degree, and kneeling before the Holy Altar, he shall make the sign of the Cross upon his Fore∣head, his Mouth, and his Breast, and then say as follows. Let the sign of the CrossChrist says, Ye shall cast out Devils in my Name: But the Pope says, in the name of the Cross and the Virgin Mary. be upon my Forehead; the Word of Christ in my Mouth; the Arms of Christ in my Breast. By the sign of the Cross de∣fend us, O Lord, from our enemies. Let the power of the Father strengthen me; the wis∣dom of the Son teach me; and the love of the Holy Spirit enlighten me. Blessed be the day and hour wherein our Lord Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin MARY. In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen. May the Virgin MARY with her holy Off-spring bless us.
Then shall the PriestIf there be occasion, you may use the same signa∣tures upon the Buttocks and Privities. sign the party possessed with the sign of the Cross upon the Fore∣head, Breast and Mouth, saying, The power of the Father comfort thee; the wisdom of the Son teach thee; the love of the Holy Ghost enlighten thee. Blessed be the day and hour wherein our Lord Jesus Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. In the Name of the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen. After this say the whole Consiteor quite thorow, and give Confession to the possessed party and the standers by, saying, Be merciful, &c. Indulgence and Absolution, &c. These you are to understand are parts of the Mass. Then pronounce the following Com∣mands. I command you, O Devils, who came to the assistance of those Devils that vex this Creature of God, in the Name of the Sacred Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and under the penalty of Excommuni∣cation, and under the pe∣naltyOrpheus went a much more gentle way to work, and sped bet∣ter. of being plunged into the Lake of Fire and Sul∣phur, and of being con∣demned
to the Lake of Fire and Sulphur for a thousand years, that you give no farther aid or assistance to those Devils that vex the body of this Creature of God, but that you depart immediately to the places appointed for you by God. Behold the Cross of the Lord; fly Man∣kind's enemies hence, the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, the Root of David has overcome. I also command you, O Devils, who vex this Creature of God, that departing from his bo∣dy, you leave him free without any harm or detriment either to his body or Soul. Also I command all your Enemies in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that they compel you to yield obedience to my Orders and Commands. And under the same penalties I command you, that you neither say or do any thing which may displease either those who are present or absent, but what shall be demanded by me. In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. Then the Priest bind∣ingYou must know the strong scent of a Monks Body is very offensive to the Devil. his Stole to the neck of the possessed party, shall say, O all you most abominable Spirits and Rebels to God, I conjure, adjure, call to, call forth, compel, constrain, defy, and duel ye
in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and by the most powerful Name of God, Eloi, in whatever part of this man ye are, I exorcise Thee, and adjure You, O unclean Spirits, and command Ye by the authority which belongs to me, by the power of God, and the most wise Creator who created all things, and keeps you under his Power, from which you are not able to fly, that ye take immediate notice of the words and power of my Conjura∣tion, and that you confess your selves van∣quished by the command laid upon ye, that ye do not now presume to de∣partFor the Devil must now do Penance for his presumption. from this Creature of God and Image of Christ, without absolute leave given by my command, and that you be thereby bound and chained; seeing that as the Saints of God bound the Devils in chains, so I bind you with that same Stole of gladsomness. In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. Before, he bid him be gone, now he commands him to stay — What? must he neither stay nor go? No marry must he — there's something more to be done, that will make him remember possessing of Mankind, as long as he lives; as thus.
Then the Priest putting his hands upon the Head of the Demoniac, shall say, Let the power of the Devil be extinguished in Thee — by the imposition of our hands yea, by the Invocation of all the Saints, Arch∣angels, Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and all the Saints together. Amen. Behold the Conjurers Posse Comitatus. — And must the Devil stay till it be raised upon him? There's no remedy — He is bound with three knots, and all the Devils in Hell can't help him. — Well go on then. Then shall the PriestWhat's a Work-man without his Tools? say the following words, signing the Demoniac with the sign of the Cross upon the Fore∣head; which he shall always observe where-ever he meets with a Cross. El, Elohim, Eloa, Eheye, Tetragrammaton, Adonai, Sadai, Sabaoth, Soter, Emmanuel, Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End, Hagios, Ischyros, Otheos, Athanatos, Agla, Jehova, Homousion, Jah, Messias, Esereheieh: Christ over∣comes, Christ reigns, Christ commands; the
uncreated Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. By the sign of the Cross defend us, O Lord, from our enemies. Now don't you think the Devil begins to have it on both sides his ears? There's ne're a one of these words but pricks him to the heart with ten thousand needles a piece. — But there's no avoiding the three knots for all this. A most unparal∣lel'd piece of folly, to think that these Sa∣cred words could not hold the Devil with∣out the three knots of a Friers Cool! nei∣ther must the Devil think to 'scape so, for all his haste. For after all this done; The Priest shall say some part of the Go∣spels under-mentioned, always mo∣ving his hands over the Demoniac's Head. The first Gospel is taken out of the Gospel of St. John, beginning at the first verse, to the 14th. Which being concluded, the peo∣ple standing by shall answer, Praise be to thee, O Christ. Then shall the Exorcist re∣joyn after this manner, By these Evange∣lical sayings, let the power of the Devil be ex∣tinguished in thee (such a one) and the Divine power be infused into thee. Amen.
Which is to be observed at the end of every Gospel. After this let the whole Creed be said quite thorow: which done, say these words, Behold the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, fly hence Mankinds Enemies, the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, the Root of Jesse has overcome. Then must be said another Gospel out of the 16. Chap. of St. John, begin∣ning at the 25th verse, and ending at the 30th. Verily, verily I say unto ye, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father, &c. At the conclusion of which repeat again, Behold the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, fly Mankinds Enemies, the Lion of Juda, the Root of David has overcome. After this read the whole Psalm, beginning, Miserere mei Dues, then another Ecce Crucem, &c. and then say as follows. God be my aid; the Lord hasten to my de∣fence. Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek my soul. Let them be turned back and be ashamed that seek my destruction. Let them be ashamed that say to me, Aha, Aha. Let them be glad and rejoice in thee, all they that seek thee, and let them say, Let
the Lord be magnified, who seek thy salvation. I am poor and needy, help me, O God. Thou art my helper and defender, O Lord, lest I die. Glory be to the Father, &c. Then this single verse. Remember not, Lord, our of∣fences, nor those of our forefathers, nor take vengeance of our sins. Thus the World may see how the Pearls of divine Writ are wasted upon the swinish Trumpery of Papistical Exorcism. For no man of reason will ever believe, that the Devil is to be frighted by these words or sentences, first defiled by the very breath, and then uttered from the mouths of Monks and Friers, either sillily or kna∣vishly superstitious. Gospels, and pieces of Psalms, and hard Names, and what is looked upon as the most powerful Ingre∣dient, the sign of the Cross! 'Tis a very odd kind of Jumblement; but alas, the Devil will swallow an hundred of these Bolus's without choaking. However if this won't serve, here's more. For after all the foregoing Formality,
The Priest in a kneeling posture must say the following Litany in behalf of the Demoniac. Kyrie Eleyson Christe Eleyson Christ hear us, &c. Holy Mary pray for him. Holy Mother of God, pray, &c. Holy Virgin of Virgins, pray, &c. S. MichaelHow came these Arch∣Angels to be Sainted, who never had any need of it? S. Gabriel S. Raphael, pray, &c. All the holy Angels and Archangels, pray &c. All the Orders of blessed Saints, pray, &c. S. John Baptist S. Joseph, pray, &c. All Saints, Patriarchs, and Prophets, pray, &c. S. Peter S. Paul S. Andrew, pray, &c. S. James S. John S. Thomas S. Philip S. James
S. Bartholomew S. Matthew S. Simon S. Thaddens, pray, &c. S. Matthias S. Barnaby S. Luke S. Mark 'Tis good to be sure: first some, then all; that is, both all and some. All the Holy Apostles and Evangelists, pray, &c. All the Holy Innocents, pray, &c. S. Stephen S. Laurence, pray, &c. S. Vincent S. Cyprian S. Fabian S. Sebastian S. John and Paul, pray, &c. S. Cosmas and Damian, pray, &c. S. Gervasius and Protasius, pray, &c. From particulars to universals is no good Logic. All the Holy Martyrs, pray for him. S. Sylvester S. Gregory S. Ambrose S. Austin, pray, &c. S. Geminian S. Martin
S. Nicholas S. Lewis S. Bonaventure, pray,Well thought of in good sooth: for the Devil sure will never deny his choicest acquain∣tance a small courtesit. &c. All Saints, Popes, and Confessors, pray for him. All the Holy Doctors, pray, &c. S. Benedict. Because he was dis∣inherited by his father for theft. S. Francis For thou wert the Devil of an Impostor. S. Dominic, pray, &c. For thou wert the Devils Shepherd, and keptest his Hogs. S. Anthony S. Bernardine S. Bernard, pray, &c. All the Holy Priests and Levites, pray &c. All the Holy Monks andi. e. All Knaves and Fools. Hermites, pray &c. S. Anne S. Mary Magdalen S. Agnes S. Lucy S. Cecilia S. Agatha S. Catherine She was St. Fran∣cis's concubine, and run away with him. S. Clara S. Elizabeth S. Anastasia, pray, &c. All Holy Virgins and Widows, pray, &c.
All He Saints and SheHad this been said at first, all the rest might have been left out. Saints intercede for him. From all Evil, Good Lord, deliver him. From all Sin, From thy Anger, From sudden Death, From the snares of the Devil, From Malice, Hatred, and all ill Will, From Lightning and Tempest, O Lord, deliver him. By the Mystery of thy Holy Incarnation, We sinners beseech thee, &c. That thou wouldst give him peace and comfort. That thou wouldst look upon him with the eyes of thy pity. That thou wouldst behold his trouble and affiction. That thou wouldst bless and preserve this thy servant. That thou wouldst free him from the trou∣ble of the Devil. That thou wouldst free him from the ve∣xations of Evil Spirits. We humbly beseech thee.
Behold the Cross ✚ of the Lord, &c. Hoyda! what's all this for? They that have business with great Personages make all the friends they can. And therefore you must not blame the Conjurer for ma∣king all the friends in Heaven he can for the poor Demoniac. 'Tis good to have a strong party, especially when you deal with the Devil. But why must they pray first singly, then all together; why so many petitions, when one would have served? For that one petition to free a man from all his sins, will assuredly secure him from the Devil. Oh, Sir, you forget that a∣mong the Papists all things are done with Decency and Formality. Besides, the more Cost the more Worship, the more the Ceremony, the more the amusement; the more the amusement, the more the Veneration; and the greater the show, the greater the pay. But this is not all yet, there are more Prayers, more Con∣jurations behind still: for so the Conjurers Rubric goes on.
Then follows the Prayer. LOrd Jesu Christ, who for the Redem∣ption of the World didst vouchsafe to be scorned by the Jews, and to be be∣trayed by Judas with a kiss, and as a Lamb to be led to the slaughter, to be accused by false witnesses, and to be nail∣ed to the Cross; to be despised and spit upon, and crowned with Thorns, to be mocked with Gall and Vinegar, to be wounded with a Lance, and crucified between two Thieves, by these thy most holy Sufferings, which I most unworthy and miserable sinner lay hold of, and by thy holy Cross I beseech thee, that thou wouldst not look upon my sins, nor the sins of this thy Creature — but accord∣ing to the multitude of thy Mercy free him from the Devil that vexes him. And grant to me thy unworthy servant power, that I may expel the Evil Spirits that vex him, to the bottom of the Abyss, by vir∣tue of thy most holy Words. Then follows, Ecce Crucem, &c. Then again, The Cross is good, the Cross is worthy; the wood above all woods. By the sign of this Cross all Evil is repelled. Then a little scrap of Rhyme,
Lest they seduce the mind, Get Fantomes all behind. For no stone must be left unturn'd against the Devil, whether Rhyme or Reason, Sense or Nonsence. Then, Ecce Crucem Domini, &c. Then an Ejaculation or two, as thus: Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee. Bow down thine ear to the voice of my supplication. Be my tower of de∣fence against all evil spirits. Let them be as the wheel, or as chaff before the wind. Then follows another Prayer. OMnipotent Lord God, the Author of invincible Power, King of an in∣superable Empire, always magnificently triumphing, who dost potently suppress the power of hostile Domination; who didst expel Lucifer and his Angels from Heaven for their pride and rebellion, who desirest not the death of a sinner, nor the destruction of those that die, be merciful to this thy Creature N — not regard∣ing his sins, but thy own clemency, and free him from all the snares of Evil Spi∣rits wherein he is daily intangled, and from all trouble and vexation wherewith
he is infested, and as thou didst free Mary Magdalen from seven unclean Spirits, and the daughter of the Canaanite from the vexation of the Devil, so now vouchsafe to free thy Creature N — from all those Evil Spirits that infest him, and as thou didst free Jonas from the Whale's belly, Susanna from false accusation, and the Three Children from the fiery Furnace, Daniel from the Lions den, and Joseph from Pharaoh's prison, so now vouchsafe to free this thy Creature N — redeem∣ed with the Blood of thy Son, and wash∣ed with the Water of Baptism, from all vexation of Evil Spirits and Devils. And as thou didst give power to thy Apostles over Evil Spirits to cast them out of the bodies of men, so now grant to thy un∣worthy servant, regenerate by Baptism, and consecrated to thy Holy Name, by the gift of thy Grace, to put to flight all malignant Spirits possessing this poor Creature N — by virtue of thy Power and the Invocation of thy Holy Name. Amen. Then, Ecce Crucem, &c. Then another short Prayer.
OMnipotent Eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we thy Sup∣pliants beseech thee, that thou wouldst command these Evil Spirits that possess thy servant N — to depart and be gone, and to free him, because he believes in his true Saviour our Lord Jesu Christ, thy Son, who liveth and reigneth with thee world without end. Amen. Then, Ecce Crucem, &c. again. All's well that ends well, says the Pro∣verb: but it does not thence follow, that all's well that begins well. These Con∣jurers borrow their first Positions from ve∣ry good Prayers; but then they do so blind 'um with their superstitious admiration of the Cross, that it utterly spoils all again. There's nothing to be done without the Cross — The Cross is all in all — The Cross is this, and the Cross is that — as if the Cross were more to be adored than the person who was crucified upon the Wood. Ecce Crucem is the burden of their Song, and the Chorus to their Prayers. And then again, what an impertinent Dunce was this Conjurer, to pray so zea∣lously to God and the Cross to command
the Devils departure, when he knew how hard he had tied his Nose to the Grind∣stone with his Cool in three knots? and had commanded him not to stir till he him∣self should give him leave? But stay a lit∣tle; their Devilships have not been whip∣ped about the Pig-market enough yet, and therefore the Conjurer proceeds. Here the Priest rises from his Prayers, and before he begins to adjure the Devils, he must Exorcise the Party possessed after this manner. The EXORCISM. I Exorcise thee N — in the Name of the Father Omnipotent, and in the Name of Jesus Christ his Son, and in the power of the Holy Ghost, that thou become a clean, holy, and purified Vessel from all spot of iniquity, and from all Witchcrafts, Incantations, Contracts, Signatures, and Actions done and committed in or about thy body. Farther also, I the un∣worthy servant of God, though a sinner, by the Authority to me committed in the Name of the said Omnipotent God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and in the power of the Holy Ghost, dissolve all those Ties, Ligatures, and evil Actions, and command thee, most accursed
Devil, that thou presume no longer to have power in this body from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, but that thou depart with all thy Witchcrafts and Incantations. And all this through him that shall come to judge the quick and the dead and the world by fire.Amen. Then must be said this Prayer. GOD of pity and compassion, who according to the multitude of thy mercies correctest whom thou lovest, we invoke thee, O Lord, that thou wouldst be pleased to grant thy Grace to thy Ser∣vant N — who suffers weakness of his members in his body: and that what is corrupted by earthly frailty, or disorde∣red by diabolical fraud, thou wouldst unite to the Body of thy Church. Pity his crys, have pity on his tears, and ad∣mit him to the Sacrament of thy Recon∣ciliation, having no other confidence than in thy mercy through Jesus Christ. A very good Prayer, were it upon a better occasion, and not accompanied with the following piece of Superstition.
For now the party possessed must be washed with a showre of Holy Water, and then follows the ensuing Exor∣cism. I Exorcise thee N — weak in body, yet regenerate by the Water of Baptism, by the living God, by the true God, by the holy God, by the God who redeemed thee with his most precious Blood, that thou become a man exor∣cised, that all fancy and fraud of diabolical wickedness may depart from thee, and every adjured unclean Spirit: through him who shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Then this short Ejaculation. O God, who governest thy handy work with a pious care, incline thine ear to our supplica∣tions, and look upon thy servant N — la∣bouring under extreme weakness of body: Vi∣sit him and afford him the healing relief of thy salvation and heavenly grace, through Christ our Lord. Here ends the last Scene of the fourth Act, and 'tis greatly to be feared the De∣vil will be vengeance-weary before the Play be done. 'Tis no matter for that,
he'l be the more glad to be gone; 'twas done to that intent and purpose. And yet one would think the Devil should laugh in his sleeve to see how his Adversary does and undoes: For in his Incantations he assumes a power committed to him already to remove the vexation, and arbitrarily commands the removal. In his prayers he desires that to be done, which he de∣clares he had power to do before. Nor does the Priest complain of any limited Commission neither. This therefore must certainly be a very great comfort to the Devil under his affliction of Three Knots. For you may be sure that the Devil listens, like a Sow in the Beans, to every word that is said, and if there be any hole to creep out of his misery, he'l never strain a point of Curtesie with the Priest. But till the Exorcist has quite done, he knows not what to think on't. Only he's sure there's a dismal storm coming, by the great bundle of Hyssop in the Holy Water Bason. And now the first Act being begun, the Priest spares for no Holy Water, which he plentifully bestows upon the Party possessed: The showre being over, and the Devil's courage, as he thinks, being sufficiently cool'd, the Exorcist full of hope and faith, falls briskly to work, that is, to conjure all the Devils remaining in the De∣moniac's Body, after this bold manner.
HEar, unclean SpiritHe's mistaken that takes these for Com∣plements. and infamous De∣vil, I admonish thee, I exorcise thee, and command thee, O Tempter, vain, hare-brain'd, false, heretical, wicked, drunkard, mad man, thrown from the grace of God and Christ. By him I exorcise thee who for our sakes descended to Earth, who was named by the Angels, incarnate by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, and grow∣ing in years and wisdom, in the twelfth year of his Age disputed with high understanding in the midst of the greatest Doctors. I con∣jure thee by him who was baptized by John the Baptist in the River of Jordan, tempted by theNote, That Tauto∣logy may be used in Conjuring. Devil, sold and betrayed by Judas his Disciple, fed with Gall, made to drink Vinegar, crowned with Thorns, despoiled of his garments, upon which they cast lots. I con∣jureA thick-skull'd De∣vil that knew not what he meant with∣out all these repeti∣tions. thee by him who was crucified, dead and buri∣ed, and rose from the dead the third day, ascended
into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father, from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the World by fire, that thou immediately go forth and fly from this Vessel and Creature of God, without any damage to him, or hurt to me or any of the standers by. I exorcise thee by him, of whom the Angel Gabriel declared that he should be born of the Virgins womb, and John saluted in the womb of Elizabeth, and by him I conjure thee to answer me to all and every such questions which I shall ask thee, and thatThis seems to be in order to some In∣dictment. thou answer me the truth, what is thy Master's and thy own name, and whether thou beest in this body or without it; whether thou art alone, or one or more Legions with thee. Here the ExorcistQuaere, Whether the Devil be bound to ac∣cuse himself? ought to examine the name of the Devil Pos∣sessor, what Companions he has, under what Order of Devils he is, for what cause he possest the Party, whether he be bound there by any Art of Witchcraft; how that tye may be dissolved; how long he had lived there; by what Saint or per∣son he may be expelled, who are his great∣est enemies in Heaven, and who in Hell?
and what signs he will give of his depar∣ture? Then command him that he do no harm to the Patient, and that from thence forward he never presume to return. But let the Exorcist be prudent and circum∣spect in his Interrogatories, lest he be de∣ceived. Rather let him endeavour to free the poor man from his vexation, than stand prating with the Devil. At last having sufficiently examined the Spirit, if he nei∣ther depart, nor answer, or whether he do or no; he shall prosecute his Conjura∣tion. The Conjuration. THou therefore, OWhat need he ask the Devil his name, when he knows him so well? Homicide, Repro∣bate, Son of Perdition, I conjure thee by his sign that appeared in the Heavens, which the Shep∣herds saw, and the Wise-men adored; by him whom Angels and Archangels praise, that thou presently depart from that Vessel and Creature of Christ, that thou go to the bottom of the Sea, orIt seems there are worse places than Hell. into some old Trees, or in∣to some Desarts where no Christians inhabit, and where the Lightning from Heaven may consume thee. May the
Son, and Holy Ghost, and true Majesty of God compel thee to go forth. I conjure thee, wicked Devil, by him whose Name is Jesus of Nazareth, that thou presently depart at the first word of the Lord from this Servant of God, I conjure thee by him, at whose Birth the Holy Angels sang, Glory be to God, &c. Whom the Wise-men coming from the East a∣dored, offering to him Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh. I conjure thee by him at whose Birth a Star appeared in Heaven, of whom Isaiah prophesied, saying, A Star shall arise in Jacob: andHe supposes the De∣vil well read in Scri∣pture, and as good an Expositor as him∣self. by him whom the mute A∣nimals knew, as it is writ∣ten, The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib. I conjure thee by him whom Herod would have slain, but could not; and for whom the holy Innocents were martyred, with whose blood the holy Jerusalem is adorn∣ed. I conjure thee by him who fled with his mo∣ther into Egypt, and at Canaan in Galilee turn∣edwaterHe is very careful to rub up the Devils memory. into wine; whom Pilate crowned with a Crown of Thorns; whom That perhaps was more than the Devil knew. Longinus pierced with a Lance, and who upon the Cross cryed out, Eli,
Eli, Lammasabachtani. I conjure thee by him who was found in the Temple disputing with the Doctors; was crucified upon the Cross between two Thieves, and in the midst of the Air. And by him who after his Resurrection stood in the midst of his Disciples, saying, Peace be unto you, fear not, 'tis I. I con∣jure thee by him who died and was buried, who de∣scendedThis is Conjurers Theology. into Hell, and de∣livered his own from the Devil, particularly Adam the first Man, and rose again the third day, and forty days after ascended into Heaven. May he eject thee, and compel thee to depart this body, and the joynts of the members of this Creature of God N — He that cast thee from Heaven, let him compel thee to declare the name of thy Master, and whether thou art alone or not, or whether any Legion be with thee. I conjure thee by him that built Pa∣radise, encompassing it inHe takes the Devil for a Nicodemus; o∣therwise a word to the Wise had been sufficient. with the four Rivers, Gy∣on, Physion, Tigris and Euphrates, whom thou wouldst have tempted, say∣ing, If thou art the Son of God, com∣mand these stones to be made bread; and then shewing him all the Kingdoms of the World wentest on, All these will I give thee, if
thou wilt fall down and worship me. I con∣jure thee by him, who gave thee for his answer, Hence Satan, thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God, but him only shalt thou serve. Here are so many Notes and Marks gi∣ven by the Conjurer what he means, that one would think the Devil should have no excuse. But for fear the Devil should have been lull'd asleep with so much vain Repetition and Tautology, he is resolved to rouse him again with Another Conjuration. WIcked Devil, an∣cientIt seems there's no∣thing to be done with the Devil by fair means, or good words. Serpent, I conjure thee by the most holy and inexplicable Name of God Tetra∣grammaton. I conjure thee by the Name of God Alpha and Omega. I conjure thee, O Devil, by the Name of God Adonai, which is great and admirable,For the Devil takes no Lease, and is not therefore bound to leave the Tenement in repair, unless you can force him this way. that thou forthwith de∣part without any hurt or terror to this Creature of God, without any harm to any person, and with∣out
any spoil or damage to his Body at thy Exit. I conjure thee by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and by the Spiritual Unction of him who is God three in one. I conjure thee, O Devil, by Her who gave suck to Christ, and bare him in her Womb, that thou abide no longer within this Creature. I conjure thee by St. Michael the Archangel, who threw thee headlong from Heaven, when he fought with the Dragon, and overcame him, that thou forsake the place where now thou art, and fly to some Desart, or to the deepWhither should the Devil be sent but to the Devil? Abyss of Hell. I conjure thee, O Devil, by the Archangel Gabriel, who brought Tidings to the blessed Virgin Mary of the Incarnation of Christ; When he said, Ave Mary full of Grace, bles∣sed art thou among women, that thou no sooner hearest these words but that thou forthwithAs being more effe∣ctual in his opinion than Father, Son and Holy Ghost. depart, withou harm to any person, out of this Creature of God N — I conjure thee by the Holy Angel Raphael, who preserved Tobias and Sarrha, and freed them from the Devil, who bound the Devil to an Ass in such a manner, that he could do no hurt, that thou forthwith depart out of this Creature N — never more to return or do him
any farther injury. I conjure thee, O Devil, by all the Holy Angels and Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers, Cherubims and Seraphims, who never cease to cry aloud, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of Sabaoth. This was some terrible Devil certainly, that such a powerful Host must be assem∣bled together to assist the Trinity in his Ex∣pulsion, when Michael had fought with him singly hand to hand, and been too hard for him too. Only from hence we may infer, That the Popish Conjuring, Exor∣cising Priests never stand upon a piece of Blasphemy, when it may serve their turn to deceive the people. Oh, but now comes a Thunderbolt from whence the Devil can expect nothing but ruine. For when the Popish Priests have said as much as need to be said, and much more than is necessary, yet they love to say more still. Now there∣fore Monsieur Diable, lye at your close Guard.
The Conjuration. AGain I conjure thee, accursed De∣vil, by all the Prayers of the Patri∣archs, by the Merits of the Prophets, the Testimonies of the Apostles, the Con∣quests of the Martyrs, the Faith of the Confessors, the Supplications of the holy Virgins, and by the Intercession of all theWho ever were or e∣ver shall be. Saints both Male and Female, that you forthwith depart from this Creature of God N — I also conjure thee byThis is news, Gen∣tlemen! St. Abel, who was the first among the Martyrs. By St. Enoch, who walked with God, and was translated out of the world. By St. Noah, who was preser∣ved in the Floud for his Righteousness. By the Faith of Abra∣ham, who first belie∣vedIf that be true, how came Abel, Enoch and Noah to be Saints? in God. By St. Isaac, who through Faith, was obedient to his Father till death, and was the Type of Christ to be offered for the sins of the World. And by the happy Jacob, who saw the Angel
of God coming to his assistance. I also conjure thee, O Devil, by the Holy Mo∣ses, who spake with God face to face, And by the Holy Prophets, Amos, Micah, Oseah, Joel, Abdias, Abacock, Jonas, So∣phoniah, Aggi, Malachi, Zachariah, Esdras, Jeremy, Isaiah, Ezechiel, David, and I al∣so conjure thee by all those other Pro∣phets, that thou answer me the naked truth to whatever questions I shall put to thee, and that thou in no wise refuse to give obedience to whatever I shall command. I conjure thee by Micah the Prophet, who prophesied that Christ should be born in Bethlehem of Juda, say∣ing, And thou Bethlehem, &c. I conjure thee by the Prophet Joel, who prohesied that the Sun and Moon should be darkned at the Death and Passion of our Saviour, saying, The Sun shall be turned into dark∣ness, and the Moon into blood. I conjure thee by the happy Jacob, who prophesied of the death of Christ, saying, Into their council let not my soul come, nor my glory en∣ter into the assembly of them, because they slew a man in their fury. I conjure thee by the Holy Prophet Zachary, who pro∣phesied of Christ's Temptation, saying, I saw Joshua the High Priest, and Satan stood at his right hand, and the Lord said,
The Lord rebuke thee, Satan, who hath chosen Jerusalem. I conjure thee by the holy Prophet David, who prophesied that Christ was to be betrayed by Judas his Disciple, thus, The man of my peace, in whom I trusted, who eat of my bread, hath supplanted me. Again, I conjure thee by the holy Zachary, who prophesied of the Selling of Christ: And they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of the thing ap∣praised, as they praised it to the children of Israel, and gave them for the Potters field. I conjure thee, O Devil, by the blessed Prophet Isaiah, who prophesied of the Coming of Christ, in these words, A Virgin shall conceive a Son, and his Name shall be called Emmanuel. I conjure thee by the Prophet Habacuck, who was car∣ried by the Angel to feed Daniel in the Lions Den. Again, I conjure thee by the Prophet Jonas, who was three days in the Whales Belly, and afterwards preached to the Ninevites. I again con∣jure thee, O Devil, by the Prophet Eli∣sha, who was carried up to Heaven in a siery Chariot; who prayed that it might not rain, and it did not, and then prayed that it might rain, and it did. I again conjure thee, O Devil, by the chosen Prophet Daniel, who interpreted the
King's Dreams, and was delivered out of the Lion's Den. I conjure thee by the holy Prophet Malachi, who prophesied of the Coming of Christ: I will come near you in judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, the adulterers, and false swearers, and those that oppress the hire∣ling in his wages. I conjure thee by the Three Children that were delivered out of the fiery Furnace. I conjure thee by the Twelve Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by all his holy Disciples. And by the blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles, that thou departConjurers never de∣sire a Quarters warn∣ing. forthwith out of this Servant of God, and that thou leavest all his members safe and sound, as thou foundst them, and that thou answer me the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth to all such Questions as shall-be by me demanded, and that then by the Merits of all the He Saints and She Saints, that at my command thou de∣part without delay from this Servant of God, without presuming to give mole∣station, vexation or trouble to any person whatsoever, and betake thy self to the internal Abyss, thence never to return till the day of Judgment.
This done, repeat the old Ecce Crucem, &c. behold the Cross of God; fly Man∣kind's Adversaries, the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, the Root of David has overcome. In this last Exorcism the Exorcist, you see, not only makes use of all the Saints from the beginning of the World to his own time, and as it were plays them a∣gainst the Devil at the stake, but gives the Evil Spirit particular Reasons why he ought to obey them more than others. Only one would think that the Exorcist forgot himself, in leaving out one parti∣cular Saint, who perhaps would have been more terrible to him than all the rest, that is to say, St. Dunstan; and the reason is, not because he was delivered from the Li∣ons Den, but because he took the Devil by the Nose with a red-hot pair of Tonges. He forgot also to add to those words Ecce Crucem, &c. Ecce Forcipes, &c. However believing he has pretty well teaz'd his Sa∣tanical patience, the Exorcist grows bold, and falls to examine the Devil so strictly about the Interrogatories above-mention∣ed, that the severest Justice of Peace of 'um all in Quorum, could not act more haughtily; particularly he demands of him sowrely what he intends to do, whe∣ther
he intends to be gone or no, and when? Or if not, what course he intends to take? But to this the Devil answers him only with a Bow; and therefore he proceeds after the following manner. The EXORCISM. OLD Serpent, I conjure thee by the Judge of the quick and the dead, by the Creator of the World, and him that has power to cast thee headlong into Ge∣hennah, that thou depart from this same Servant of God, who flies for succour to the Church, and that thou make haste to be gone. I adjure thee, not by my own weakness, but by the power of the Holy Ghost, to depart from this same Servant of God, whom Christ created in his likeness. Give way not to me, but to the Minister of Christ. His power en∣forces thee, who being fixed to the Cross, subdued thee under his feet. Tremble at his power who recovered the Souls of the Just from the Infernal Wail∣ings. Let the body of man be a terror to thee, and be afraid of the Image of God. Make therefore no longer resi∣stance, but depart with speed from this man; since it has pleased God to make
him his Habitation: and do not think me to be contemned, because thou knowest me to be a Sinner. The Holy Ghost commands thee. The Faith of the Apo∣stles, Peter and Paul, and the rest of the Apostles commands thee. The Blood of the Martyrs commands thee. The Sa∣crament of the Cross commands thee. The Word made flesh commands thee. Avoid Transgressor, out Seducer, full of deceit and fraud, the Enemy of Truth. Give way, most cruel Devil, give way, impious Devil, give way to Christ, who has despoiled thee, and destroyed thy Kingdom, who vanquished thee, and bound thee in chains, and cast thee into utter darkness, there to be tormented eternally with all thy Angels. Darest thou mutter? Darest thou rashly delay? Guilty before God, whose Statutes thou hast transgrest: Guilty before Christ his Son, whom thou didst boldly presume to tempt and crucifie: Guilty before all Mankind, whom thy perswasions allured to taste the Fruit of death. I conjure thee therefore, accursed Dragon, in the Name of the immaculate Lamb, who walks upon the Asp and Basilisk, and treads upon the Lion and the Dragon, to depart from this man and from the
Church of God. Tremble and fly, dread∣ing his Name, at which the Infernal Spi∣rits tremble, to whom the Powers of Heaven are subjected, and whom the Cherubims and Seraphims incessantly praise. Obey Jesus of Nazareth, who when thou contemnedst his Disciple, cast thee raging and tearing out of the Man, in whose presence, when thou wert cast out, thou durst not so much as touch the Herd of Swine without his leave. There∣fore now thus conjured, depart from this man whom he has formed. 'Tis a dan∣gerous thing to resist Christ. 'Tis a dan∣gerous thing to wince against the pricks. For the longer thou delayst, the greater will be thy punishment; for thou con∣temnest not Man, but the Lord of the quick and the dead, who shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the World by fire. Amen. Now Monsieur Devil, will ye go or stay? Does not your heart ake? If you delay a minute longer, here's one little tickling Touch for ye more.
The CONJURATION. AGain and again I conjure thee, O De∣vil, by him who gave power to his Di∣sciples to give light to the blind, to cleanse the leprosie, to raise the dead, and cure all dis∣eases. I conjure thee by him who restored the first man by the wood of the Cross, who gave sight to the blind, and raised up Lazarus from the grave, who cured all diseases, and de∣stroyed the Magical fictions of Jannes and Jambres, and by this Exorcism, and by all the former Conjurations, and holy Words and Offices which are celebrated over the World, by all these I command thee, where-ever thou art, or wert, that thou vanish away forthwith like smoke, and that thou retire to some De∣sart or to the deep Abyss, without doing harm to any one, and that thou never more return. In the Name of the Father, &c. Ecce Cru∣cem, &c. Amen. This Sparring Blow has done the busi∣ness. Exit Diabolus, Exit Exorcista. And thus the Popish Vulgar are abused by a company of idle Drones, who having no∣thing else to do in their Sties of Laziness and Superstition, make it their business by such figments as these to maintain their
Credit among the Ignorant. Neither is the Devil such a Fool, to be against his own profit: for by this means he seduces thousands, and increases his Harvest. Else Reason could never believe the Devil to be such a Sot, to be led by the Nose by his own Servants. He himself knows too well how to play the Hypocrite, and can∣not be thought to be afraid of godly Words and pious Sentences, who makes use of them so often. But for Sport's sake, let us see a little more of their Trumpery. For this is certain, the more you see, the worse you'l like.
Most Efficacious REMEDIES For the Expelling EVIL SPIRITS. And for the clearing Bodies possessed from Incantations and Sorceries, with their Benedictions. The Method how to make Holy Water. THE Priest being habited in his Sacerdotal Ornaments, or with his Stole, must say these words. Vers. Our help is in the Name of the Lord. Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth.
The Exorcism of Salt. I Exorcise thee, O thou Creature Salt, by∣the living God, by the true God, by the holy God, by the God who commanded thee to be thrown into the Water by Elisha the Pro∣phet, that thou mayst become Salt Exorcised to the Salvation of Believers, and mayst be to all that take thee, health of body and soul; and toThis is the reason, that Witches at their Feasts never use Salt, for fear it should be Exorcised. the end that all wickedness and subtilty of Diabolical fraud, and every unciean Spirit, conjured by him that shall come to judge the quick and the dead, may avoid the place where-ever thou shalt be strewed. The Prayer. OMnipotent Eternal God, we humbly implore thy insinite Clemency and Goodness, that thou wouldst be pleased to bless and sanctisie this Creature Salt, which thou hast given to the Use of Man∣kind, that it may be health of body and mind to all that take it, and that what∣ever is touched or strewed with it, may be free from all uncleanness, and corru∣ption mortal or spiritual.
What would not our Butchers give for this Salt to preserve their Meat that lies upon their hands in Summer; not a Fly would dare to blow upon their Stalls. The Exorcism of Water. I Exorcise thee, O Creature Water, in the Name, &c. that thou mayst become Water exorcised to expel all Power of the Ene∣my, and to root out and supplant the Enemy himself with all his Apostate Angels, through the Power of Him who shall come to judge the quick and the dead. The Prayer. THou who hast made Water the sub∣stance of some of our Sacraments, be propitious to our Invocations, and to this Element prepared by many purifications, that this Water may be effectual to the casting out of Devils, and expelling no∣xious diseases, and that in whatever Hou∣ses or places it shall be sprinkled, they may be free from all uncleanness, from all harm, from all corrupt and pestilent Air, from all the snares of the lurking Ene∣my; and that nothing offensive or that may disturb the quiet and health of the
Inhabitants may presume to approach the sprinklings of this Water. Let the Operators have a care; here's a Plot upon the Queen of Hungary's Rose∣mary flowers, and all the Book-sellers Scur∣vygrass Glasses. Quaere, whether the French disease be a Devil or no; if it be, here's a present Expulsion to cure the Patient. The Salt and the Water thus far prepa∣red, the Salt must be put into the Water in the form of a Cross, and so both mixed together, of each q. s. the Priest at the same time saying, Versicle. The Lord be with you. Respons. And with thy Spirit. After which must be said the following Prayer. THou who suppressest the power of Satanical dominion, who subduest the fury of the roaring Lion, we trem∣bling and suppliant implore and beseech thee to look upon these thy Creatures of Salt and Water thus mixed together, and to sanctifie them with the dew of thy pi∣ty, that where-ever they shall be sprin∣kled,
they may be prevalently efficacious to expel all unclean Spirits and Terror of the venomous Serpent. A surpassing piece of Magic, which if it will not prevail against the Devil, may be of excellent use to expel Worms out of young Children. Therefore put it up in a clean Vessel, and reserve it for use. A most Approved Benediction of Oyl against all sorts of Incantations, Sorceries, Diabolical Ligaments and Contracts, and of all evil Operations of the Devil upon the Body of Man. Which Receipt is by some ascribed to St. Cyprian. As also the manner of using the said Oyl. The Priest must have a large Vessel of Oyl ready, and then putting on his Sacerdotal Robes, it behoves him to bless it in this manner. In the Name, &c. Amen. Vers. Our help is in the Lord. Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth. Vers. Lord shew us thy Mercy. Resp. And grant us thy Salvation. Vers. Lord be thou our Helper. Resp. And for the Glory of thy Name preserve us.
Vers. Let not the Enemy prevail against us. Resp. Nor let the Son of Iniquity ap∣proach to hurt us. Vers. Lord, shew thy mercy to us. Resp. As we do put our trust in thee. Why but two Ejaculations apiece for Water and Salt, and ten for the Consecra∣tion of Oyl? The reason's plain; Oyl is ten times more worthy than Water, and will stick ten times longer upon the De∣vil's Skirts: therefore Oyl requires ten times more devotion than Water: and it is requisite that there should be a distin∣ction and difference in the Formalities of pious Cheats. The EXORCISM. I Exorcise thee, unclean Spirit, every assault of Satan, and every evil Apparition, in the Name, &c. that ye depart from this Oyl, that it may be an efficacious spiritual Diet∣drink to cleanse and cure the Infirm, to the end the Holy Spirit may dwell in them through God the Father and his most beloved Son, Je∣sus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, and the World by fire. Amen.
The Prayer. O God send down thy Holy Spirit up∣on this Oyl which thou hast produ∣ced from green wood for the refreshment of mind and body, that through thy blessing it may be, to whoever touches it, the preservation of mind and body, by evacuating all melancholy humors, all pains, all infirmities and distempers of mind and body, with which thou hast therefore anointed Kings, Prophets and Martyrs; let it be blessed in the Bowels of thy Servants in the Name, &c. who liveth and reigneth, &c. Now what is this Oyl a Quart? In truth I can't tell; dear enough you may be sure: for you see 'tis got into Hucksters hands. Here the Priest having send for the De∣moniac, let him lay his hands upon the Party possessed, and then adjure the Devil in this manner. The Adjuration. I Adjure thee, O Satan, and all Evil Spirits by the Name of the living, true
and holy God, by the Name and Merits of the Virgin Mary, by the Power of all the Celestial Spirits, and the Nine Cele∣stial Hierarchies, to thy confusion and the augmentation of thy torments to be increased an hundred-fold from day to day to the last day of Judgment, if thou dost not depart, accursed Satan, from this same Servant of God. By him that shall come to judge the quick and the dead, &c. The Conjuration. AGain I conjure thee, O Satan, to re∣move out of this same person both thy own, and all malignant Fascination, Sorceries, infirmities and pains of body and mind by the words of the foregoing Adjuration: cursed be thy name, O Satan; and thy works accursed andThe Fox never thrives better than when he is curs'd. confounded to Eternity. Cursed be thou by the Om∣nipotent God, and by me through the power committed to me not only in Baptism, and the administration of other Sacraments, but also by the administration of the real Body and Blood of Christ, by the authority of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul; and if ye prove rebellious, contumacious and disobedient, I
conjure against thee and against ye all, all the infernal Spirits to drag ye forth by head and ears, and as Dathan and Abiram were swal∣lowed up in the earth, so to bind ye fast in the bottomless Pit until the last day. This said, read a piece of the Gospel of St. Mark, Chap. 16. from ver. 14. to the end. Then say this Adjura∣tion. I Conjure ye, O unclean Spirits, by him that is, was and shall be, who created and re∣deemed us with his Blood, by his Cross, Passion, Death, Burial and Resurrection, who is here and every where, and who promised that where two or three were gathered together, he would be in the midst of them, that ye pre∣sently depart hence with all your foul Practi∣ces, evil Deeds and Sorceries, never never to return more. Vers. Our help is in the Name of the Lord. Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth. Vers. Arise, O Christ, to help us. Resp. And deliver us for thy Name's sake. Observe by the way the Civility of these
Exorcists; they suffer the Devils to de∣part with all their Bag and Baggage, and never go about to distrain for Rent. Then follows a short Prayer. O Immense Power, O individual Tri∣nity, we Christians beseech thee to extend thy power and mercy toward this thy Creature, and through thy mer∣cy to deliver him from every unclean Spirit. Amen. There is no wonder to be made, that these Popish Priests are so daring in their attempts upon the Devil, when they are so impudent as to dally so vainly, nonsen∣sically and triflingly, with the Names and Attributes of God Himself. After this the Priest proceeds to bless the Oyl as follows. THE most Imperial Majesty bless thee, O Creature Oyl, the Royal Divinity protect thee, the immense Trinity defend thee, the Power of the Father govern thee, the Wis∣dom of the Son enliven thee. The Cross of Christ preserve thee, the Twelve Apostles keep thee, the Holy Martyrs help thee, the Holy
Confessors bless thee, all the holy Priests of the Old and New Testament exorcise and san∣ctifie thee. The Holy Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers, Hierarchies, Cherubims and Seraphims defend thee. The Holy Trinity defend thee, and endue thee with power and efficacy against all Diabolical De∣vices and Sorceries, that through Thee I may be able to destroy and eradicate out of the Souls and bodies of men all Incantations, Sorceries, Contracts, Devices and evil Works of the De∣vil. Amen. Say you, now, let the Devil have a care of this Oyl — but I say no — for this Oyl can never be so pure as these Ex∣orcists would pretend, that had such a foul deal of ridiculous folly and tinsel pie∣ty bestowed upon it. Had the Exorcist blessed the same Quantity of the Quintes∣sence of Aqua fortis after the same manner and form, there might have been some∣thing in it: But the nature of Oyl is to smooth and supple, not to eradicate and destroy; neither is it to be thought that all the Nonsense in the World can ever bless it out of its Nature. Well then, be∣cause you Hereticks are so hard to be plea∣sed;
Here are other Benedictions of Oyl as well for the Patient to drink, as wherewith to be anointed. Vers. Our help is in the Name of the Lord. Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth, and all that is therein. The EXORCISM. I Exorcise thee by the living, true, holy God, O Creature Oyl, to the end that all the power of the Adversary, all the Hosts of the Devil, and all the Temptations of Satan may be by thee destroyed, and that thou mayst prove to all that make use of thee a remedy to expel Satan and all his works, with all the Devices, Contracts, Sorceries and Incantations of his Ministers. Then follows the Prayer attendant. THat whoever shall drink or anoint themselves with this Oyl, may en∣joy a remedy against all the Assaults, Ma∣chinations and all the Works of the De∣vil whatsoever.
The second Exorcism. I Exorcise thee, O Creature Oyl, in the Name, &c. that through this Invocation of the Holy Trinity all the power of the Adversary, all the inveterate malice of the Devil, and his violent assaults, and every wild and noxious Fantome may be destroyed and eradicated, and all the venomous qualities of Satan removed from this Oyl, that whoever drink of it, or anoint themselves with it, may be delivered from all the Machinations of the Devil, &c. With the same Ceremonies the Priest also blesses a certain Quantity of unleave∣ned Bread, which for its lightness is given to the infirm person before he drink the Oyl. After the usual scraps of the Litany re∣cited, and several Prayers to God to infuse a Devil-frighting power into the Bread, the Dough is sprinkled with Holy Water; which done, the following short Prayer ensues. COme, Holy Ghost, and bless and sanctifie this Bread, that it may be delivered from the works of Satan and his Ministers, &c.
However the Exorcist must take special care how he gives this Oyl, or any other potable Remedy without the Physicians advice; for that the Tempers and Com∣plexions of the Patients being various, both these and other remedies are to be variously applied, seeing one mans meat is another's poison; and thus the Divinity-Quacks help the Quacks in Physic, lest the one should peach the t'other. The manner of taking the foresaid Oyl and blessed Bread, as also of anointing the Patient with the said Oyl. These Benedictions being ended, let him that has the care of the Patient observe this Method. Take one or two pound of Veal, or other Flesh in season, and let it boil in Water without Salt till it be well boiled. Then take six or eight ounces of the Bread blessed with either of the fore-recited Be∣nedictions, and two ounces of the foresaid Oyl. Incorporate all these together, and give the whole to the Patient in the mor∣ning for his Breakfast, and let the Patient eat a slice or two of dry Holy Bread with it. It will nourish the Patient, but make the Devil spue his heart out. In giving
this Dose to the Patient, the Priest shall say as follows: Receive this Holy Bread to the destruction of Satan, and all his works of mischief in thee done. This may be also recommended to the Rat-catchers at the Exchange for the de∣struction of Vermin in Ships and Merchants Cellars. If Women lay but a piece of this Holy Bread in their Blankets, it will de∣stroy all their Fleas. The Patient must observe this Diet for eight or ten days, and every day anoint the party with the foresaid Oyl upon the Eyes, the Forehead, the Ears, the Breast and Heart, the pulses of the Wrists, the Hands, the pulses of the Feet, and Feet themselves: and as the Priest anoints the several parts aforesaid, let him repeat the following words. I anoint thee N — with this blessed Oyl, and by this Vnction absolve thee from all the Sorceries, Incantations, Contracts, Signatures and Machinations on thee practised by Diabo∣lical Art. In the Name, &c.
Another Benediction of Oyl to anoint persons insested by the Devil, and the way of making the said Oyntment. Take Rue, Sage, of each three handfuls. Dill, Ashes of Olive-wood, Holy Water, of each a sufficient quantity Boil all these in Oyl; then bless them with the following Benediction. Vers. Our help, &c. Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth. The EXORCISM. I Exorcise thee, O unclean Spirit, by the living, true and holy God, who made Hea∣ven and Earth, the Sea, and all that therein is, to the end that all the Power of the Adversary, all the Armies of the Devil, all the assaults and Apparitions of the Enemy may be utterly rooted out, and made to fly from this crea∣ture composed of Oyl and the Herbs that are in it, that it may be a burning fire to consume all the snares of the Enemy, and that whoever shall be anointed with this Oyl, may enjoy health and sincerity; and that all Evil Spi∣rits and Diabolical Visions may be separated from him.
Then anoint the Patient, as hath been already shewn. A way to free any person from all man∣ner of Sorceries operated in the body of man by the Devil. First of all, it behoves the Exorcist to observe in what part of the infested Body the pain lies. For generally Demoniacs are chiefly tormented in three parts, the Belly, Stomach and Heart. If the pain lye in any lower part of the body, give him the Holy Oyl of the first Benediction, as hath been already shewn. And every day that the party drinks the foresaid Oyl, he ought to be exorcised for three or four hours together. But if the pain lye in the Stomach or Heart, then give him the fol∣lowing Medicine. Take White Ellebore, St. Johns-wort, of each an ounce and an half. Sugar of Roses, Frankincese, of each a dram. One would think this were a Bolus ra∣ther for a possessed Horse, than a possessed Man. Boil all these together in a pint of the best white Wine, to the consumption of
one half; afterwards the Priest having strained, blessed and exorcised the remain∣der with an Adjutorium nostrum, &c. give it the Patient at a convenient hour, twice a day for three days, if need require. And every day notwithstanding the Patients vomiting, let the Patient be confessed and exorcised for three or four hours together. A Medicine for persons possessed by the Devil. Take Broom-flowers, St. Johns-wort, Horehound, Ivy and Rue, of each two ounces. Make a Decoction in water to the con∣sumption of half; then let the Priest strain it, and bless the remainder, with an Ad∣jutorium nostrum, and give it the Patient at a convenient hour. Then let the Priest pray with the Pati∣ent in this manner. Vouchsafe, &c. to bless this Medicine, and to pour upon it thy most plentiful blessing, that by the virtue and efficacy which thou shalt give unto it, it may be able to vex, teaze, torment
the Devil infesting and vexing this thy Ser∣vant, and being delivered from the troubles of Satan, to preserve him so delivered through thy goodness. Amen. Then let him be well sprinkled with Holy Water. For it is a greater trouble to the Devil to sleep in a wet skin, than in any other skin; he cares not so much whether his skin be whole or no, as that it be dry. A Benediction of Water to expel the Devil and all his Works. The EXORCISM. I Exorcise thee, O Water, by the four Ri∣vers that watered Paradise, by him that purified Nahman from his Leprosie; I exor∣cise thee by him that turned water into Wine; I exorcise thee by all the Sacraments of the Holy Church; I exorcise thee by the Virgin Mary and the Milk of the same Virgin, and by all the Angels, Archangels, &c. that thou mayst become holy and healthful, and a burn∣ing fire, to destroy the Devil and all his works, and all the snares of Satan, &c.
Then blow three times upon the Water, saying, I puff and blow ye, all ye Legions of Satan. In the Name, &c. The Benediction of Rue. Vers. Our help is in the Lord. Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth. Vers. The Lord be with you. Resp. And with thy Spirit. Then pray, That where-ever it be laid, it may have power to terrifie and put the Devil to flight, and that whoever be fu∣med with it, may be free from all assaults of the Devil, &c. The Benediction of Fire to burn the In∣struments of Sorcery. Vers. Our help is in the Name of the Lord. Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth. Then say, I bless, exorcise and conjure thee, O Creature Fire, by him who causes the Earth to tremble, that thou dost not fail to be my aid against these Infernal Thieves and Robbers, to crucifie, asflict and torment them an hundred times more than all the Sulphur in Hell.
Then sprinkle the Fire with Holy Wa∣ter, but not so as to put it out, and cast the Devils Tools into it, saying, Let God arise, and let his Enemies be scat∣tered. The Benediction of an Incense to fume Demoniacs. Vers. Our help, &c. Resp. Who made, &c. Vers. The Lord be with you. Resp. And with thy Spirit. The Pomander. Take Galbanum, Sulphur, of each three drams. Roots of Assa foetida, Birthwort, St. Johns-wort and Rue, of each three drams. Let all these be blest and conjur'd with the following Conjuration. I exorcise &conjure thee, O Creature called Incense, by all the holy Names of God, that thou mayst become an exorcised, blessed and conse∣crated Fumigation to the Salvation of Vs and all faithful Christians, and a perpetual punish∣ment
to all Evil Spirits, and a fire to torment and burn them beyond the Sulphur of Hell∣fire, &c. What merciless Fellows these Exorcists are, to desire a more heavy punishment for the Devil than God has thought fit to ordain them? Then throw the Pomander into the fire, and hold the Demoniac's Nose over the smoke whether he will or no. Certainly it had been much better to have made a Pomander to fright the Devil of Gelsomy-flowers and Orange-flowers, Lignum Aloes, and such like; for he is so used to ill smells, that he cares not a f — t for 'em. Besides, if the Devil has no head, as they say he has not, then he has no Nose; and then what will all the nasty scents in the world signifie. If ill smells operate so strongly upon the Devil, these Exorcists were extremely overseen, that they did not set down a Form for the Benediction and Exorcising a House of Of∣fice, and for setting the Demoniac up to the neck in the consecrated Ordure for three or four days together. But Bernar∣dus non videt omnia. 'Tis easie to add to invention, but not to invent.
A Benediction of Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, against the Devils called Incubi and Succubi, and against the assaults of Evil Spirits. First, be sure to have the Gold, Fran∣kincense and Myrrh ready. Then bless them as follows. Vers. Our help is in the Lord. Resp. Who made, &c. Then read the Psalm, Lord, give thy Judgments to the King, quite through. Then cry, Lord, have mercy upon us. Then sing the following Anthem, And the Wise-men, who were three Kings, open∣ing their Treasure, offered Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh. Then say, Kyrie Eleyson, Christe Eleyson, Pater noster. Vers. And lead us not into Temptation. Resp. But deliver us from Evil. Vers. Lord, shew us thy Mercy. Resp. And grant us thy Salvation. Vers. Hear our Prayer. Resp. And let our Cry come unto thee. Vers. The Lord be with you. Resp. And with thy Spirit.
The first Prayer. OMnipotent and Eternal God, we humbly pray thee, that as thou didst receive these Creatures, Gold, Fran∣kincense and Myrrh, offered to thee by the Three Kings, as to the King of Kings, true God and Man; so thou wilt vouch∣safe to bless, consecrate and sanctifie, and pour thy benediction upon these Crea∣tures, that whoever shall carry them a∣bout their bodies, may be delivered from all danger of body and mind. Amen. The second Prayer. THerefore bless, O Lord, these Crea∣tures, Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, that as thou wert pleased to excite the three blessed Wise∣men, Giaspar, Baltha∣sarNow, Gentlemen, you have the Christen Names of the Wise∣men; but for their Sirnames we are still in the dark. and Melchior, who offered these Creatures devoutly to adore thee, and illuminate them in the knowledge of thy Mysteries, and to preserve from snares and dangers, so that thou wouldst be pleased to illuminate with thy light,
to inflame with the love of thee, and to preserve from all diabolical dangers, snares, injuries and calamities, those that shall make use of these thy Creatures, Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh. This Benediction being finished, when any person shall happen to be infested with any Incubus or Succubus Devil, let him put these three things together, mixed with a little Rue, blessed as before, into a little Bag, and hang them about his Neck, be∣ing first sprinkled with Holy Water, and wear them with fear and reverence. He may also lay four other little Bags at the four corners of his Bed, and the Devil will never trouble him. This was a notable Invention, but the success of it seems very dubitable; for if it be true that the Devil is the God of Riches, where-ever the Devil finds any of his own Treasure, he'l certainly be there to guard it. And it is as preposterous to think that the Devil should be afraid of that which sends so many to Hell, or be scared with one of his greatest Tempta∣tions. It may be indeed, had it been the same Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, which the Wise-men offered, there might
have been something in the case. And how the Popish Priests and Exorcists came to be without it, or at least some Reliques of it, seems wonderful strange; seeing they have in every hole so many Nails and Bones, Napkins and Pillowbears, and pieces of Petticoats of the Virgin Mary, and the ancient Saints. Those Reliques would have spared 'em the labour of these Consecra∣tions and Exorcisings. But they can spare nails and bones, when they cannot spare so much Gold to lye by in thousands of boxes at thousands of places, having other occasions for it. But the mischief is, that none but Fools offer them Gold, there∣fore there must be a way found out to make as many Fools as they can; and a∣mong the rest, this Inchantment of Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh unfortunately happens to be one. Otherwise if there were any thing of efficacy in this Exorcism of Gold, the Devil might be thought to be the greatest Fool of all, to run away from the Gold, and let these Shammaking Exorcists run away with it.
A present Remedy against all Molestations and Plague of the Devil either in Men, Cattel or Houses. Take a piece of Paper, and Exorcise it thus. I Exorcise thee, O Paper, by the words of the triumphant Title of Christ, and by all those other words which are spoken of the Crea∣tor of all Creatures, who is able to endue thee with that virtue, that all things which are written upon thee, may be effectual to eternal Salvation, that all fallacies and ma∣lice of the Devil may go out of thee, and all the virtue and efficacy aforesaid may enter into thee. In the Name, &c. Then sprinkle it with Holy Water, then write upon in the form of a Cross these words. Which Word was made flesh, andINRI dwelt among us, being born of the Virgin Mary, through his most in∣effable goodness and mercy. By the Intercession therefore of the same Virgin Mary, and of the Angels, and all the Saints, especi∣ally the Apostles, and his Evangelists John,
Matthew, Mark and Luke, that they would vouchsafe to free me from all vexation of the Devil and all his Angels. Then take Exorcised Salt, Wax of a consecrated Candle, especially at Easter, and Rue blessed with its proper Benedi∣ction, being all sprinkled with Holy Wa∣ter, and put these Ingredients all together into the said Paper, and hang it about the neck of the Patient, or upon the place affected. Probatum est. There may be something in this; for Paper is a miraculous Utensile: being well prepared by an Observator, it expels the Devil of Whiggism, a villanous sly Devil; and being charmed by a Pacqueteer, it claws away the Devil of Torism, a ranting roaring Devil; being marked only with four and twenty Letters, variously trans∣pros'd, it sets all the world in a flame, and yet never burns it self. Therefore 'tis no wonder the Devil is afraid of paper. Only the Exorciser was mistaken in this, that instead of a Cross, he should have di∣rected the figure of a Printing-press to have been put upon it. For by the help of a Printing-press, Paper works Miracles. The Devil dares no more come near a Sta∣tioners
Heaps, or a Printers Work-house, than some men dare put their Noses into a Cheesemongers Shop. But to put a Cross upon Paper signifies nothing. The Knights Templers wore Crosses, that were themselves Devils Incarnate. And Wo∣men, when they grow to be She Devils, prove the greatest Crosses in the world to their Husbands. Therefore let this Ex∣orcism be mended according to direction, and it may chance to do. The Benediction of a House haunted with Spirits. Before the Priest enter the House, let him say the following Prayer. OMnipotent and Eternal God, who hast bequeathed that favour to thy Priests, that what is done worthily and perfectly by them, is looked upon as done by thee; vouch∣safe to visit in the same manner as we shall visit, and to bless as we shall bless, and to ex∣tend thy right hand of Power to what we shall do, and through the Merits of thy Saints to be upon our entrance a terror to the Devil, and to permit our footsteps to be the entrance of the footsteps of peace.
A Prayer to be said when you come to the place haunted. GIve ear, O Lord, to our supplications, and enlighten this house with the eyes of thy goodness, and let thy blessing descend upon the inhabitants thereof, that abiding with safety in this habitation, they may be thy ha∣bitation also. Or thus. WE beseech thee, O Lord, bless this building with all the rooms and build∣ings, that health, holi∣ness, vertue, humility,These are dear bles∣sings to the poor, for 'tis a very poor bles∣sing indeed that is not worth half a Crown. goodness, charity, fulness of the Law and Obedience to God may be therein. Let this blessing be upon this place, and upon all that dwell therein. Or thus. HEar us, O holy Father, Omnipotent and Eternal god, that whatever Evil Spi∣rits or mischievous Devils be in this house, they may be expelled through the Authority of thy Name.
Then rehearse the several Psalms. In my affliction I cryed, &c. I lifted up my eyes to the mountains. To thee I lifted up my eyes. Concluding with a Gloria Patri; then wa∣ter the House, and sprinkle the People with Holy Water. Then say, Kyrie Eley∣son, &c. Pater noster. And lead us not into temptation. Resp. But deliver us from evil. Vers. Lord, hear our prayer. Resp. And let our cry come unto thee. Vers. The Lord be with us. Resp. And with thy Spirit. Then pray. MErcifully, O Lord, enter into this thy House, that no malice or wickedness of the Devil may reign therein. Then throwing Holy Water about the House, as before, repeat the following Psalms. They who trust in the Lord. Un∣less the Lord build the house. Blessed are they that fear the Lord. Then Kyrse Eleyson, &c. and what follows, as before. Then cast the Holy Water, as before, and read the following Psalms. Out of the deep, &c. Remember David, Lord, &c. Behold how good and joyful, &c. Then Kyrie Eley∣son, &c. and what follows, as above.
This profusion of Holy Water is done out of a belief, that Devils are Cats, as Cats are supposed to be Devils, and that neither can endure to wet their feet. I will not trouble my self whether Cats be Devils or Devils Cats; but sure it can ne∣ver be, that the Devil should be so terri∣bly afraid of Holy Water, when he stands in so much need of a Cooler. Men that are not half so hot as he, nor come out of half so hot a place, drink Snow in their Wine, and shall the Devil be afraid of a little cold water? Afterwards read the following Gospels in the principal parts of the House. When Christ was born in Bethlehem of Juda the Wise-men came from, &c. And this o∣ther. At that time the Angel gabriel, &c. And: In that time Jesus went to Jericho, and behold, a man whose name was Zacheus, &c. Afterwards bless the Incense after this manner. By the Intercession of the blessed Archangel St. Michael, who stands at the Altar of In∣cense, and of all his Elect, vouchsafe, O God, to bless this Incense, and accept it as an Odor of sweetness.
Vers. Lord, be merciful unto us. Resp. And shew us thy salvation. Vers. Lord, hear our prayer. Resp. And let our cry come unto thee. Vers. The Lord be with you. Resp. And with thy Spirit. Then sign the House and all that dwell in it, saying at the same time Lord, set the sign of Security upon this House, and suffer not the destroying Angel to enter in. In the Name, &c. Thus you shall find in Homer and Ovid's Art of Wooing, that the Heathens conse∣crated their Carousing Bowls with Sul∣phur, and the Old women charmed the young peoples Beds with Sulphur and Eggs. If a man had committed any Vil∣lany or Murder, he was purified by wash∣ing his hands in the blood of a Pig. And for the lustration or purification of any place, they used to fume the said place with the smoke of burnt Brimstone, at what time it was the custom to cast a quan∣tity of Salt into a Vessel of Water, and with an Olive-branch or any other conve∣nient bough, to sprinkle the room or field with the said water, as now the Priests
water haunted Houses with Holy Water; which sprinkling was to be done three times together. Thus you find in Ovid's Metamorphosis, that Juno returning from Earth to Heaven, being the Devil of a Scold, was sprinkled three times with wa∣ter by the Rainbow, to fetch the Devil out of her, before Jupiter would admit her into his presence, fearing a Peal in his Ears. They also said several Prayers like∣wise at the same time, as our Priests do. For so says Ovid, He sprinkled his Locks with Laurel dipped in water, and then poured forth his earnest prayers with usual zeal. And thus Heathens taught our Po∣pish Priest to purifie haunted Houses, and charm the Devil.
A Most terrible Thundring EXORCISM TO Expel the Devil not only out of Men but Women. Which if a Man could be assured of, were worth its weight in Gold. THE Exorcist coming to eject the Devil, must in the first place sign himself with the sign of the Cross, and say, In the Name of the Father, &c. Then let him go to the Party possessed, and sprinkle him with Holy Water, say∣ing at the same time: Through the One would think a Flail should do bet∣ter, for there is no sence against a Flail. Sprinkling of this Water with the help of God, let the Evil Spi∣rit
depart from thee, and let the power of the Holy Ghost enter and remain with thee; for now is the Judgment of this World; now shall the Prince of this World be cast forth. In the Name, &c. Pointing to the Body of Christ in the Cup or in the Shrine, the Priest must say these words, O wicked Spirit, here is true Piety; The Exorcist might have had more man∣ners than to tell the Devil such a notori∣ous lye to his face. Here is he who suffered for our Sal∣vation. Now, faith he, shall the Prince of this World be cast forth. This is that Body which was taken from the Body of the Virgin, which was stretched out upon the Cross, which lay in the Grave; which rose from Death, and which ascended into Heaven in the sight of his Disciples; by the terrible Power of this Majesty, I command thee, wicked Devil, to depart from this Image of God, to fly from it, and never more to molest it. But the Devil's a true Jailor, he seldom takes notice of the first Ha — Cor — And therefore the Exorcist must fall to his Prayers, and say,
Vers. Our help is in the Lord. Resp. Who made Heaven and Earth. Vers. Lord, shew us thy mercy. Resp. And grant us thy Salvation. Vers. Lord, hear our crys. Resp. And let our cry come unto thee. Then follow the Prayers. O Eternal and Omnipotent God, who mad'st Heaven and Earth and all that therein is, save and deliver this thy Servant from these Evil Spirits, and from all Diabolical Power, that all men may know, how great is thy mercy, and how infinite is thy power. The second Prayer. LOrd Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, free this thy Servant from all his languishings, and from all the disturban∣ces of Ghosts and Evil Spirits, through thy most holy compassion. The God Sa∣baoth, the God Emmanuel, the God Elo∣him, the God Agla free and deliver him by virtue of the Prayers and Merits of the blessed Virgin Mary thy Mother, and of all the Saints; and by virtue of the Intercession of the blessed Michael the
Archangel, and all the Angels; of St. John Baptist and the holy Apostles, Peter, Paul, Andrew, James, John, Thomas, James, Philip, Bartholomew, Simon, Thaddeus, Barnaby, and all the rest of the He-Saints and She-Saints; by the Mediation of the Cherubims and Seraphims who continu∣ally praise thee, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabaoth. Father Omnipo∣tent, who desirest the Salvation of all Mankind, and that they should attain to the knowledge of thee, be merciful to this thy Servant a Sinner, and hear my prayer which I now pour out before thee in the behalf of this poor Creature who is molested by the Devil, and flies to thy compassion. Here the Exorcist rising up, and lay∣ing his hand upon the Head of the Demoniac, shall proceed and say, Let all power of the Devil be extinguished in thee through the Imposition of our Hands, as also by virtue of our Invocation of all the Saints, Angels, Archangels, Patriarchs, Pro∣phets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and Holy Virgins.
Then read the following words out of St. Matthew. In those days Jesus was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted, &c. Then, Vers. The Lord be with you. Resp. And with thy Spirit. Then Pray. VIsit, O Lord, we beseech thee, this Habitation and Creature of thine, and remove far away from him all the snares and assaults of the Devil. Let thy Angels, Michael, Raphael and Gabriel dwell therein, to preserve it in peace and from all unclean Spirits; and let thy blessing be always upon us. Let the Exorcist here begin to conjure the Devils abiding in the body to depart. But let him take heed of answering to any words of theirs without urgent necessity. For that they being subtle and deceiving Spirits, will seek all ways to entrap the Exorcist, and hinder the progress of his Art, and many time ignominiously threa∣ten the Exorcist, and command him to let them alone; therefore let the Exorcist boldly proceed and say,
The Conjuration. I Conjure ye, O accursed Devils, abiding in this body, from whatever part of the world ye come, to whom Power is given by God over this Creature of God — and all you Ethereal Powers, and Infernal Spirits, and all you general and special sorts of evil Demons, of whatsoever kind ye are, or whether sent from the East, or from any other point of the Com∣pass, I conjure ye all, I say, by the Power of God the Father, by the Wisdom of God the Son, and the virtual Efficacy of God the Son, by virtue of the Authority granted me by our Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who was cru∣cified, Son of the most Potent Creator, who made all things out of nothing, that ye may not have any power of keeping silence, or of abiding or remaining in this Creature of God — But I constrain and command you, whether ye will or no, that laying aside all fallacy, fraud or deceit, you declare unto me your Names, and through the Merits of the Virgin Ma∣ry,Men go when the Devil drives, and the Devil must go when worse than himself drives. Ergo this Ex∣orcism signifies nothing, or the Popish Exorcists are worse than the Devil. and all the Saints, I discharge all you unclean and wicked Spirits from
this Body, and send you to the lowest depths of the profound Abyss. Therefore be gone ac∣cursed into everlasting fire prepared for ye, and all your Companions. And if ye rebel, or prove contumacious and disobedient, I a∣gain by the same Authority conjure, constrain and command all the Devils your Enemies, all the Princes in Hell, and all the Infernal Spirits, to come and punish and torment, and moreover to carry ye away in the Name of Jesus to the aforesaid place of infernal Tor∣ture, and there to chain you fast by these most holy Names of God, El, Elion, Eloa, Sabaoth, Elohim, Eserejeh, Adonai, Je∣hova, Jah, Tetragrammaton, Sadai, Mes∣sias, Hagios, Ischyros, Ho Theos, Athana∣tos, Soter, Emmanuel, Agla, and Jesus, who is Alpha and Omega, send ye headlong into the deepest depth of the Abyss, to the end that from henceforth ye may have no power to abide, remain or inhabit in this Creature of God, &c. and Image of Christ, nor that you take up or possess this place or any other place, through the virtue and by the virtue of the aforesaid Names. And let the Angel Michael And thus you see what a fine employ∣ment these Exorcists have found out for the Archangels to be the Devil's Jailors. bind ye in the depth of the Abyss.
This done, read the following words out of Luke. And he was casting out a De∣vil, &c. concluding with a Laus tibi, Christe. Then go on with the following words of St. Matthew. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, &c. Then pray again after this manner. OMnipotent Lord God, who didft create all things by thy Word, who wert from the beginning before any Ima∣ges were made, or Prayers ever said. Pre∣serve us and confirm the work which thou hast wrought in us. Stretch forth unto us thy right hand, and preserve and defend us thy unworthy Servants from all adversity, and send thy Angels from Heaven to preserve, strengthen, help and corroborate us and this thy Creature, and to render us more stout and coura∣gious by virtue of thy Names of Jehova, Agla, El, Adonai, Sadai, Tetragrammaton, Elohim. Most holy and merciful God, be thou our Protector and Defender, and our buckler of defence. For thou art God alone, and there is no other besides thee.
Upon the strength of which Prayer fol∣lows a swinging Conjuration. I Conjure you, O Devils and unclean Spi∣rits, from all parts of the World, to whom power has been given to hurt this Creature of God, &c. and all you Aereal Spirits and Powers, Infernal Princes, and all you special and general sorts of Devils of what sort or condition soever, sent from the South, or any other point of the Compass, by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and by virtue of the Function and Authority by which I act from crucified Christ Jesus of Nazareth, Son of the living God, and most potent Creator, who created me and you, and all the Creatures of nothing; by all this, I say, I conjure ye, O Devils, that ye pretend to have no farther power or authority to stay or abide in this Creature, &c. For that I sentence ye by virtue of the Sentence given by the most high Creator, I constrain, compel andThese Exorcists are like to succeed, when they put the Devil upon impossibilities. command ye, that laying aside all fraud, fal∣lacy and deceit, you tell me directly your Names, that we may be able to find out and know your Names certainly, truly and without any he∣sitation or Equivocation. And by the same
authority and by virtue of the same Sentence, I discharge you from this Body, and send eve∣ry one of you Devils a∣foresaidAs if the Devil did not know his time better than they could tell him. to the bottom of the Abyss into eternal fire. And therefore go ye cursed into eternal fire prepared for you and your servants, for that by virtue of these most holy Names I send you to the bottom of the Abyss. Hel, Heloim, Eloa, Sabaoth, Elion, Esereheje, Adonai, Jehova, Jah, Te∣tragrammaton, Sadai, Messias, Hagios, Is∣chyros, Otheos, Athanatos, Soter, Emma∣nuel, Agla, Jesus, Alpha and Omega, I send you to the bottom of the Abyss into eter∣nal Fire, that ye may not have any longer power or pretence ofThe Parson said, the Devil was a Lawyer from the beginning, and therefore several words of the same signification are very proper. staying, abiding or inha∣biting in this Creature of God and Image of Christ, nor in this place, nor in any other place, nor in any other Creature, by and through the virtue of the Names above∣writ: And let the Angel Gabriel bind ye in the depth of the Abyss, by virtue of the Holy Paith of Adonai, and by Alpha and Omega, till the Day of Judgment, and may the Power of the most high Triumpher Jesus Christ affict ye. In the Name, &c.
By this terrible Writ the Devil stands outlaw'd for Felony after Judgment, and any Man, Angel or Archangel may knock him o' the head where e're they meet him; however the Devil hangs an Arse yet, and therefore you must go on and read the fol∣lowing words of the Gospel out of St. John. In the beginning was the Word, &c. Then the following Prayer. LOrd Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, have mercy upon me, and do not, with the rest of the wicked, de∣stroy my Soul. Powerful Helion, mereiful Helion, God of Fear, God of Hosts, God of Mercy. Lord Eternal, Adonai, won∣derful ineffable God. Omnipotent Love, Sadai, Vertue never failing, provident over all things, Benignity of a Saviour and Creator, Alpha and Omega, God most high and compassionate, God that requirest the prayers of sinners, Sacrifice of Praise, in most suppliant manner we implore thee with our prayers to hear us, deliver and save us thy most unwor∣thy Creatures by thy mighty Power and Holiness, and by thy Name which is a∣bove all names. O thou our Redeemer, who camest into this world, born of our Redeemer, we beseech thee to help and
assist this thy unworthy Servant whom thou hast redeemed with thy most pre∣cious Blood. Into thy hands I recommend my Spirit and my Body this day, now and ever, and at all hours and moments, preserve me thy vain and sinful Servant and this thy Creature, that we may re∣turn thee thanks in the midst of thy Church. The Conjuration follows. I Conjure ye all you unclean Spirits coming from all the four corners of the World, to whom power has been given to hurt this Crea∣ture — and all you Ethereal Powers and In∣fernal Princes, and all you particular and ge∣neral Spirits and Devils of whatsoever quality or condition. Again, I conjure and exorcise you, all ye wicket and malicious Devils above∣named, and all others whatsoever, in what∣soever part of the World, I shut ye up in the Earth, I tie ye up in the Air, I bind ye up in the Wind, I imprison ye in the Fire, and chain ye in the Water, and in the caverns of the Rocks. I command ye from the caverns of the Mountains, from the tops of the Hills, from the Abyss, from all places under Heaven, by the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and by virtue of that Authority granted to me by his
Son Jesus Christ of Nazareth, who was cru∣cified, and who created me and you and all other creatures. I say by all these Charms I charge ye at your peril not to pretend in the least to any power of abiding or remaining in this Creature of God: For that I sentence ye by virtue of the Sentence pronounced by the most high Creator, and also charge and com∣mand you, that laying aside all fraud, covin and deceit, whether ye will or no, you declare and tell us your NamesAnd who were their Godfathers and God∣mothers. truly and faithfully. And by the same Sentence I send ye to the deepest A∣byss of Hell, into Eternal Fire. And there∣fore, O wicked Devil, tell me thine and thy Master's Name. Here the Exorcist may interrogate the Devil touching his Name, his Associates, and whatever else concerns the delivery of the Demoniac from the Devil that posses∣ses him, going on with his Conjuration in this manner. THerefore be gone, accursed Devils, into fire everlasting prepared for you and your Angels. For by these Sacred Names of God, I dissolve and discharge ye from this body, and by virtue of these words and sacred Names, I
send ye to the bottom of the Abyss into eternal Fire. Hel, Heloim, Eloa, Sabaoth, He∣lion, Esereheje, Adonai, Jehova, Jah, Te∣tragrammaton, Sadai, Messias, Hagios, Is∣chyros, Otheos, Athanatos, Soter, Emma∣nuel, Agla, Jesus, Alpha & Omega, Beginning and Ending, Root of Jesse, Lion of the Tribe of Juda. Let all these send thee to the bottom of the Abyss, that hereafter ye may have no power of lying, abiding or staying in this Crea∣ture of God and Image of ChristThe Popish Priests are very punctual with the Devil, well knowing what be∣longs to Equivocati∣on., nor in this place, nor in any other place by virtue of the Names a∣foresaid. And may the Angel Raphael bind ye in the bottom of the Abyss, and there may ye be bound and tormented till the day of Judgment. In the Name, &c. This Warrant is very peremptory and very large in extent, and besides, the Mit∣timus's are very severe: But the Devil knows when he has got a good Lodging, and therefore there is something more yet to be done. The Exorcist after all this, must read a Gospel out of St. Mark. At that time as the eleven Disciples were sate at meat, &c. If after all this the Devil will neither hear nor obey willingly, take
fire and Brimstone, and hold the Demo∣niac's Nose over the smoke whether he will or no. Till the De∣vil has For an ordinary Sub∣poena would signifie nothing.answered truly and He must be the De∣vil of a man that knows when the Devil speaks truth. certainly to all the Interrogatories put to him. Whereto to constrain him, the Exor∣cist must prosecute him with the following Conjuration, which is in nature of a Commission of Rebellion. A Gain I conjure ye, wicked Devils above-mentioned, Rebels against God, to whom power has been given o∣ver this Body, that ye presently depart. I conjure ye &charge ye by all the These are some amo∣rous Devils, or rather Smell-smock Spirits, and who knows how these Ladies may have obliged 'em? Holy Virgins and chast Women. I conjure ye and charge ye by St. Mary, Magdalen, St. Cathe∣rine, St. Agnes, St. Lucy, St. Agatha, St. Margaret, St. Ursula and her Society or Sisterhood, and the rest of the holy Virgins, Widows and chast Wo∣men, that ye depart immediately. A most powerful Charm I promise ye. For should all these Women set up their
clacks together, 'tis impossible the Devil should ever be able to endure such a Cur∣tain Lecture. But because these Exorcists never know when to have done, therefore this same Conjurer must fall to his Prayers again. For the Devil's resolved not to stir before Quarter day. The Prayer. OMnipotent God,This is like the Lease of Ejectment left at the House of Tenant in possession. to whom all the Creatures which thou hast created are obedi∣ent, who didst cast down the Angels of Satan for their Pride, we beseech thee through Jesus Christ thy Son, who sit∣teth at thy right hand, who shall come to judge the quick and the dead, and the world by fire, who is Alpha and Omega, theExcellent Varnish for a holy Cheat. first and the last, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, El, Ischyros, Messias, and by these holy Names and by all others I invoke thee, and implore by the Nativity of thy Son, by him that carried the Cross, by his Baptism and Passion, by his Resurre∣ction and Ascension, by the Wounds in his Body, by his Death and Burial, by
the blessed Virgin Mary, by the An∣gels, Archangels, Principalities, Powers, Thrones, by all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, all He-Saints and She-Saints. By all these we intreat, implore, beseech and pray thee to hear our praises and our prayers, that thou would'st be plea∣sed to give me thy Servant power over the Angels of Satan which were cast from Heaven and deceive Mankind, that I may be able to make them speak, to bind, shackle and expel them, and force them to fulfil my Commands immediately, without muttering at my words, but that they may obey me to day, to mor∣row, and in all places and at all times, more especially by virtue of the Sacred Names and Powers above-written, to be able to constrain this Devil, or these very Devils that now possess this thy poor Creature — to speak and tell me the truth as to what I shall demand of him; and for so doing I will praise, magnifie, laud and adore thy Name.
The Conjuration. I Conjure ye, O De∣vilsFor you must know this is a damn'd obsti∣nate Devil. and unclean Spirits, in all parts of the world, to whom power has been gi∣ven to hurt this Creature, and all you Ethereal Powers and Infernal Princes in∣habiting within this Creature of God, of whatsoever quality or condition you be, fromThe Devil must now needs be in a peck of troubles, having no place left to bestow himself. the South part of the World, or from any other part of the Earth, I exterminate ye from the Earth, I bind ye from the Fire, I ba∣nish ye from the Winds, from the Wa∣ter, from the Caverns of the Rocks, I command ye from the Mountains, from the Abysses, from Hell, and from all pla∣ces under Heaven. In the Name, &c. And by the Authority committed to me by Jesus of Nazareth, I charge you to pretend to no farther power of lying or abiding in this Creature; and therefore I sentence ye by the Sentence pronounced by the most high Creator, I command ye likewise, that all fraud, fallacy and deceit being laid aside, you tell us di∣directly
your Names;You must always al∣low of Nonsence and Contradiction in Ex∣orcisms. For the De∣vil is no stranger to sence; but he abhors Nonsence and flies it. and by the same Sen∣tence I discharge you out of this Body, and send you to the Infer∣nal. Therefore depart accursed Spirits into Eternal Fire prepa∣red for you and the rest of your Compa∣nions. For by the virtue of those most holy Names, by those most holy Names themselves I send ye to the bottom of the Abyss: El, Elohim, Eloa, Sabaoth, Helion, Esereheie, Adonai, Jehova, Jah, Tetra∣grammaton, Sadai, Messias, Agla, Ischyros, Otheos, Athanatos, Soter, Emmanuel, Ha∣gios, Jesus, Christus, Alpha and Omega, I send ye to the bottom of the Abyss, and tie ye up from having any farther power over this Creature of God, and that you neither posses that place nor any other, by virtue of the above-mentioned Names; and by him that sits on the Throne; by whose Power I condemn ye to the eternal Burnings in fire everlasting, and there I chain ye till the day of Judgment. Now, Gentlemen, do not you think we should have a brave time on't, could these Exorcists but do as they say? Alas, we should not have a Devil of any sort or size
stirring at this side the great Lake. But, alas, there are some of opinion, That if the Devil would go with a good Fee in his hand either to the Fleet or Kings Bench, and take Counsel, he would there find that none of these Exorcisms would stand good in Law; or if they did, he would there find such cunning pieces of Ingenuity, as would make him too hard for all the Ex∣orcists in the World. And indeed the Devil had need of good advice and good friends, considering what follows. The second Conjuration. AGain I conjure ye, O Devils above∣mentioned, Rebels against God, by the Virgin Mary Mother of Christ, by her Nativity, by her Conception, by her most holy Milk, which was suckt by him who is called Alpha and Omega, by her Merits and by all the most blessed Names of the Virgin, as Virgin, Flower, Cloud, God-bearing Queen, Empress, Lady, Au∣rora, Handmaid, Fountain, Well, Moon, Sun, Portal, House, Blessed, Glory, most Benign, Pious, Court, Bramble, Ladder, Star, Tower, Assister, Ark, Bridecham∣ber, Pearl, Tabernacle, Friend, Vail, Fair∣Mother, beautiful Soul, blessed Rose,
Mary the Spouse. By all these Names above-mentioned I command and send ye, and throw ye down headlong into the Lake of Brimstone and Fire, and thi∣ther perpetually condemn ye. And the foresaid Virgin Mary, and all the hoIy Virgins and chast Women rejoice with Christ in Heaven, so by virtue of his Pas∣sion I enjoin ye to depart for ever from this Creature; otherwise by all the afore∣said Names and words, and by all the aforesaid words and things I condemn ye ipso facto without mercy to all the Dam∣nation and Torments before expressed as Rebels to God. The Papists affirm, That when this Sentence was proclaimed in Hell, there was such a horrid roaring and bellowing among the Devils, that it was heard over all the Land of the Antipodes, even as far as Ethiopia. But you must know, that when the Priest pronounced this Sentence, he laid his Book upon the Head of the De∣moniac, and holding forth a Crucifix to the Devil, said these words, BY the Prayers of this Book, and by all their Efficacy, by all the Miracles and words of our Saviour, by all the
Prayers which are made in Heaven and Earth. By all the Powers in Heaven, and by all the virtue of the most holy Names of God, I command ye to retire from hence, and that you do not dare to do what we command ye, otherwise we will cast ye headlong into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone to be burnt alive. Therefore in whatsoever part of this Body ye are, whether within or without, come and behold the Sign of the Cross conse∣crated by our great Creator Jesus Christ; for by virtue of that you are bound to obey us. And therefore by virtue of that we constrain ye to appear before Us whe∣ther ye will or no; for the words of GodThey'l make the Devil believe the Moon's made of green Cheese by and by. which proceed out of our mouth are most burning fires, which shall burn ye eternally; and this is the Cross at which all the World trembles, and every Creature quakes for fear, and you are Rebels to ours and your own Creator. Be ye therefore accursed and excommunicated, in eternal Torment, and may ye never rest at any time, if ye do not presently obey these Commands of mine laid upon ye by the Power of Christ, and the words which are said
of him who causes all the World to tremble. A fair Sentence to be pronounced against the Devil possessing Man or Woman. BEing as it were the Vicar of the Su∣preme Judge by virtue of the Power delivered to me by Him, I thus declare, pronounce and command, That without delay, and all excuses set aside, you forsake this Creature whom you have so long molested, and leave him to enjoy his former health, and that you never hereafter adventure to trouble him again. I also, by the Authority aforesaid, enjoin and command Lucifer, Belzebub and Satan, and all the Infernal Furies, That presently and without delay they throw themselves headlong into the Lake of Fire and Brim∣stone, and that without any impartiality, they bind and torment one another till the day of Judgment. And because ye rebelled against your Creator, andThat was unpardo∣nable. against Us; and neglected the words and sayings of the Virgin Mary, the holy Apostles and Evangelists, Martyrs and Confessors, &c. I therefore condemn ye to Infernal Pu∣nishment,
and to those Fires that shall tor∣ment ye far from the presence of God, and which shall burn ye at the Command of him who liveth for ever. Here let the Exorcist again shew the Devil the Sign of the Cross, conjuring him by that Sign, and by the aforesaid Names of God, that he presently depart; but if he demur to the Sentence, and plead, That by certain Incantations, Charms and Bonds he is not to abandon the Party possessed, then let the Exorcist give the Devil another Black-Sanctus in this manner. I Conjure, adjure, exorcise and discharge all you Evil Spirits before mentioned, who are bound by any prevailing Charm upon this Creature, that by virtue of the aforesaid Pow∣ers, Miracles, Graces, and Powers of God and of his holy Image the Crucifix, and of all the Names of God, and by these Conjurations, Prayers, Bonds and Exorcisms, which have power in the Name of Christ to damn, con∣strain and exercise ye, and by the Power and Favour of God and that most terrible Day, whichLet her alone till that day comes, quoth the Welchman. shall one day bind ye to Eternity, in the deep Lake of the Abyss, forthwith speedily to depart out
of this Body without any hurt or detriment ei∣ther to Body or Soul. The Popish Legends tell us, That when the mighty Lucifer heard this piece of mul∣tum in parvo, he was taken with such a griping in the Guts, that he scummer'd for fifteen months together. And it had certainly thrown him into a Feaver, but that one of his great Counsellors cured him with a comfortable piece of advice. For said that Machiavilian of a Devil, Your Highness, you know, has a gene∣ral and unquestionable Licence to ramble about the World like a roaring Lion: Give Exemplifications of this Licence to all your Officers that you send to the Earth, and let them shew the Exorcists those Ex∣emplifications, when the Exorcisers shew them the Sign of the Cross, and then let them bid the Exorcisers kiss their back∣sides. This Counsel wonderfully pleased Lucifer, who advanced his Admonisher for his advice, and by that means it is re∣ported, That the lesser Devils have disap∣pointed many a Bucket of Holy Water. The Oath which is to be given to the Devil to extort from him the truth of all things appertaining to the Delivery of the Demoniac.
The Exorcist may give the following Oath to the Devil possessing the body of Man, at any time of the performance of this or any other Exorcism, as he shall see cause, and may use all ways to sist and probe the Devil to find out the Truth, as well by fair as foul means; as well by mild∣ness as threatning language. I Swear and promise to thee the Priest and Minister of Christ, to observe all things, which thou shalt command me on the part of God and our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall appertain to the delivery of this Creature. And if I fail in perfor∣mance of any thing which I promise, I invoke the Omnipotent God, who is high∣ly offended against me, in revenge of this my Perjury, to send his holy Angels po∣tent in Battel, to cast me forth from this Body. I also invoke the mighty Lucifer with all the Princes and Potentates of Hell, to use their utmost indignation against me, and to carry me into the deepest and most tormenting place in all Hell, there to use their utmost Cruelty toward me. But suppose the Devil should be for∣sworn for all this? Then you'l say — Try him by a Jury of God Dammee's and
the Devil confound mee's — They'l ne∣ver find him, if it be but to save their Ba∣con hereafter. Certainly the Popish Ex∣orcisers believe the Devils to be Creatures as silly and as nonsensical as the poor sim∣ple people whom themselves delude. As if they had lent the Jesuits all their stock of Equivocations, and not reserved so much as one for themselves in point of an Oath or a strict Examination. But you'l say, A man may as soon believe the Devil as believe a Jesuit. Seeing there∣fore the Papists do believe in the Jesuits, why should they not believe in the Devil? Yes — and sooner too —. Then why may not a Popish Exorciser give the Devil his Oath? I am convinced — pray go on, Sir. Now because it happens, that several parties possessed cannot be delivered from the unclean Spirits that possess them at the first, second or third time; therefore the Priest having at length with much ado, as he believes, put an end to his Conjura∣tion, may command the Spirits which are departed out of the Body by virtue of a certain Precept, as follows.
A Precept to all Unclean Spirits departed out of Bodies possessed. I Command you, allThe Devil had cer∣tainly obeyed this Com∣mand, but that he knew the Priest had lain with a Wench three times the night before. unclean Spirits, who are departed out of this Body, in the Name, &c. that ye take upon ye no farther Power or Au∣thority of shewing your selves to this Crea∣ture of God, or of imposing upon him any delusion, or of offending or hurting him either in Body or Soul, or of returning back, or of sending any other Devils to possess or molest the same person, but that ye be forced, by virtue of this Pre∣cept, to go quietly and without murmur∣ing to your Infernal Habitations, or to the places appointed for You by God, where you may be able to hurt no Crea∣ture either rational or irrational. Behold the Cross, &c. Fly Devils with a Witness. If the Party possessed be not delivered, and yet the Priest is constrained upon ear∣nest business to leave off before he has fi∣nished his Conjuration, then command all the unclean Spirits remaining in the Body, and not only command, but see it done,
that they depart out of the principal parts of the Body, as the Head, Breast and Sto∣mach, and to descend to the inferior parts of the Body, as the With your good leave the Devil cannot leave the Heart nor the low∣er part of the Belly, till the Surgeon washes him with a Syringe, and then he is forced to run for't. So that the Exorcist need do no more than get him down to the lower part of the Belly, and there leave him to the Surgeon his Deputy. Nails of the Feet, and beware that thou per∣mit them not to return upwards again, but when thou hast got them down, then lay thy Commands upon them, as follows. A Command to be given to Spirits remaining in the Body, when the Conjurer has not time to finish his Conjuration. I Command Ye, all you unclean Spirits, that possess this Body, in the Name, &c. under pain of being plunged over head and ears into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone for a thousand years presently after your departure out of this Body, (from whence we are resolved to pull ye by head and shoulders) that you remain no longer in the Head or other members of this body, but that ye remove to the ut∣most and lowermost parts, till ye be called
upon by me or some other Exorcist, or that ye be permitted by God to ascend to your own Consusion; and the Salvation of the Parties Soul, but that you permit this person to eat, drink, sleep, and do all those things which are necessary for life. To which purpose I bind ye to your good behaviour till I come again. I do not like this way of commanding the Devil by halves; for if you expel him to the lower parts, he presently turns to the Stone or the Gout, that a man had better harbour the Great Lucifer, or Ma∣ster Tormenter of Mankind himself, than any of those his small Officers. And in∣deed what trust can be given to Exorcism, or how can we be made believe that these Exorcisers can eject a Grand Devil, when they cannot move so much as the Gout or the Stone or the Spleen, which are but petty Tormenters to the Saucer-ey'd Satan himself. Here it is to be noted, That if the De∣vil in any Exorcism make answer and say, That he is the Soul of any person deceased, you are not to believe him, because it is a Heresie; but urge him to tell his proper Name which he had from the beginning when he was expelled out of Heaven.
Ask him also of what Order and Quality he is of, and the Name of his Superior, and for what cause he entred into the body of such or such a party, and conjure him not to depart without leave, and to give notice of his departure, and cause him also to leave his habitation in the same condi∣tion as when the party was first baptized. There is great reason that the Exorcist should know the Devils proper Name; for otherwise the Devil might bring his Action against the Exorciser for suing him in a wrong Name. But why should the Devil be so loth to for sake this or that single ha∣bitation of a pitiful poor mans Body, when so many Monasteries, Colledges, Frieries, Nunneries, nay the Popes own Palace, and the very Colledge of Cardi∣nals are all so much at his devotion, that he may take up there what Lodgings he pleases and be welcome? And it were to be wished, that it were not the Popish Exorcisers fault that the Devil has so much power over men as he has. For he is forced to seek for shelter among men, because they will not let him be any where else. The Air must not hold him, though he be Prince of it. Thence they thus ex∣pel him.
The Air Conjured. I Conjure and exorcise thee, O Air, in the Name, &c. by him that commands the Winds and the Sea, by all the Angels and Archangels, &c. by the whole Court of Hea∣ven, &c. not to entertain in any place this accursed, wicked and malicious Transgressor of a Devil, nor any of his Confederates, but to refuse, reject and turn him out of doors, as the Virgin Mary rejected all contamination of sin. They exterminate him from the Earth, and will not let him have so much as a rotten Nut-shell to rest in. The Earth Exorcised. I Exorcise thee, O Earth, in the Name, &c. and by all the Prayers and heavenly sollici∣tations which are daily made in thee and upon thee, not to give any harbour or entertainment to this wicked Spirits, nor to any of his Accom∣plices, &c. They will not suffer him to live in the water, nor to have so much as the benefit of a Menows belly.
The Water Exorcised. I Exorcise ye, O Waters, both great and small, by the power of Moses's Rod, by the water that issued from the side of Christ, by the Virgin Mary, by all the Angels and Archan∣gels, &c. by all the Prophets, Patriarchs, Doctors, Saints and holy Hermits, not to har∣bour or entertain the wicked Spirit, or any that belong to him, but to chase him from all your boundless Territories with all the zeal imaginable, as the Devils were cast out of Mary Magdalen. They expel him out of the Fire, so that there is never a Glass-house in the World dares to admit him. The Fire Exorcised. I Conjure thee, O Element of Fire, in what∣ever place or part of the World thou art, by him that appeared to Moses in the burning Bush, by him that freed the Three Children out of the fiery Furnace, and by all the Sacred Holocausts which were made by thee, and by all the Angels and Archangels, &c. not to entertain this Evil Spirit, nor any of his Con∣federates, but to send him with all speed (up∣on
the receipt and sight of these Presents) to the infernal dismal Lake of ever burning. Flames, and that you do not let him stir from thence till the day of Judgment. Again, I exorcise all things that live in thee or by thee to the same effect, &c. But now having thus chased the Devil out of all the four Elements, they com∣mand Lucifer to take him into custody, and give him no Quarter, as if they were the sole Commanders of that Infernal Bridewel. Hell Exorcised. O Hell, and thou Fire Infernal, all you infornal Torments, and all you infer∣nal Devils, hear, hearken and understand the words of my mouth. I conjure ye by him who raised Lazarus, after he had been three days dead, when the Devil trembled, and all his Ministers were in a Pannic fear. O Hell and Fire Infernal, &c. I conjure ye by his Power that subdued ye to his Dominion, that ye obey us in all things, and fulfil our Com∣mands in whatever we shall impose upon ye. O Hell, the Holy Trinity commands thee to obey us. The whole Host of Angels and Arch∣angels, &c. commands thee. I conjure thee
therefore, O Hell, and ye infernal Fires and Torments, and all you Devils, of what qua∣lity or condition soever ye be, by him that brake down your Gates, and took from ye all theHe should have ad∣ded, by Theseus and Hercules that Clap∣per-claw'd your Dog Cerberus. Holy Fathers, by the Vir∣gin Mary and John the Baptist, and by the ter∣rible day of Judgment, and by all the words by which you infernal Fires, and Devils infernal may be constrained, com∣pelled and forced. I conjure thee, O Lucifer, Prince of Hell, not to let this wicked Spirit rest any where in quiet, but to send thy special Warrant for him and all his Accomplices with all speed, and when thou hast him in thy clut∣ches, to cast him into the burning Lake, where I conjure you, O infernal Torments, to plague him a thousand thousand times more than ac∣cording to the usual rate of Tormenting. Thus the World may see what sorts of Whips and Scourges the Papists pretend to have for the Devil; what a Power they challenge to have over him; and how un∣mercifully they exercise it, while, to shew their Authority, they command one Devil to punish another, not for any misdemea∣nours committed one among another, but for doing his Duty and his Office, which
is to do Mankind as much mischief as he can. And this Authority they assume from the Repetition of holy Names, and the Cooperations of Saints, some of which were as ignominious as the Devil himself, the assistance of the Cross and Holy Water dablings. Whereas there never was any such power given them, which the Devil well knows, and therefore 'tis no wonder he gives no more credit to their counter∣feit Warrants. To display therefore to the full the Folly, Superstition and Igno∣rance of these Exorcists, let us consider what true Divinity says concerning these Exorcisms; first, when they began, and secondly, whether they are still to be re∣tained and made use of among Christians. As to the first, we do not find in all the Old Testament any mention made of Ex∣orcisms to cast out Devils. And Adjura∣tion or charging by an Oath we find in the fifth of Numbers, by which the Woman was not adjured by the Priest, to the end he might cast out Devils out of her, only he wished her good or evil, as she had be∣haved her self in the point of Chastity or Uncleanness, upon which he charged her with an Oath, and either absolved or cur∣sed her. Joshua also adjured Achan, not to cast out the Devil out of him, but to
make him confess the concealment of the Spoils. Some are of Opinion however, That David exorcised Saul, which is not to be believed. For he only played upon his Harp before him, and the Songs he sang were only the Praises of God. But that he made no use of Exorcisms, may be con∣firmed from hence; first, for that he did not perfectly cure Saul, only when David play'd, Saul was refreshed, and the Evil Spirit departed for a time. Neither did David use any form of Conjuration, but only certain Musical Verses, which were delightful to the ear, and therefore not unfit to recreate the heavy Hypochondria∣cal humor of Saul. As for the Jews, it is plain there were certain Pretenders to Exorcism among them, as appears by the twelfth of Mat∣thew. If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your sons cast them out? By which words, your sons, St. Jerome understands certain Exorcists, that ran about the Coun∣try conjuring unclean Spirits in the Name of God. But it does not hence follow, that the Pope has power to erect Colledges and Societies of Exorcists, as if it were in the power of man to bind and tye the Grace of God to Institutions and humane Elections.
Afterwards Christ renewed this power of casting out Devils, and was himself the Head and Chief of those that did, and acted with great Command and Authority against Unclean Spirits. He also bequeath∣ed this Gift to his Disciples, who neverthe∣less were not always obeyed by those Evil Spirits, as appears by the seventeenth of Matthew; and Christ tells them the reason why, because of their unbelief. How then can these Popish Priests and Exorcists pre∣sume to such a miraculous Gift, who give greater credit to fictitious Saints and Ima∣ges, than to that Jesus in whose only Name they ought to perform that great work which they pretend to undertake? How long then this Gift of adjuring Evil Spirits remained in the Church is uncertain: Justin Martyr, who lived in the time of Antoninus Pius, affirms, That several Chri∣stians performed great Cures of this na∣ture, which other Enchanters, Exorcists, and Charmers could not do; and Tertul∣lian, that the same Gift of expelling De∣vils continued in the time of Severus, and numbers himself among the rest; but he adds withal, We cast out Devils, not for reward or hire, as the Popish Exorcists do, meerly to pick the pockets of the deluded people.
But though it be not so clear how long this great Gift continued in the Church, most certain it is, that Superstition and Prophaneness soon trod upon the heels of primitive Piety, and the Devil tyred and curbed with the commands of entire San∣ctity, soon found out a way to rid himself out of those bonds, and to be at more li∣berty. Therefore St. Austin tells us of a certain Roman Tribune in his time, that having his House haunted, was presented by his Friend with a piece of the Earth ta∣ken from the Grave where Christ was bu∣ried, and out of which he rose again, which the Tribune hung up in his Bed∣Chamber, to terrifie the Devil. Afterwards when the ancient Bishops and Parochial Priests were so far from cor∣recting these Errors, that, as they call it (out of a good intention) they rather in∣creased and added to them, they augmen∣ted to a prodigious number. And then it was that the mercenary Exorcisers mind∣ing more their profit than the good of the people, not only called upon Christ, but invoked an hundred sorts of Saints, not minding the saying of St. Paul. How then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? But the Popish Exorcisers call upon the Saints, in whom they believe,
how then shall they call upon Christ in whom they do not believe while they a∣dore the Saved before the Saviour. Others believed the mumbling of Ave Mary to be of special force against the Devil, whenas it is certain, that that Ange∣lical Salutation was no Prayer, but an An∣gelical relation of the happy Tidings which he brought the Virgin; for so the follow∣ing words, full of Grace, explain, deno∣ting that God had at that time conferred his Grace upon her, and not that she is the Fountain of Grace, as the Papists would thence collect. Now there is a great dif∣ference between the person that confers the favour, and the person upon whom the favour is conferred. But now adays the Papists all implore the Virgin Mary, as expecting from her more favour and assistance than from Christ himself. Afterwards as Superstition increased, they fell to exorcising and consecrating Water, Salt, Herbs, Candles, and an hun∣dred more such sort of things, and gave them to silly people to keep in their houses, as Preservatives against the Devil. But the Sign of the Cross out-did all, so that about the year 1098. when the Cestertian Order first begun to appear in the World, several Armies being seen in
the Air near Wormes for many nights and days together, and at such a certain time being observed to retire to a Mountain not far distant, and there to vanish, a cer∣tain Cestertian Monk of Limburgh was re∣solved to know their business. To which purpose he first fortified and armed him∣self and his Companions with the Sign of the Holy Cross, and so going to the Moun∣tain when they appeared again, he con∣jured and adjured them in the Name of the holy Trinity so terribly, that one of the Troop made answer, That they were the Souls of Souldiers that had been slain in or near that place some time before. The Monk asked them, Whether they ex∣pected any assistance or succour from men. The Spirit answered, Yes, by their Fast∣ing and Prayers, but more especially by the Oblation of the Body and Blood of Christ; and so saying, the whole Host cry∣ed out three times, Orate pro nobis, Pray for us. And thus you see the great Virtue of the holy Cross, and a Popish Tale to confirm it. And thousands there are at this day, who deceived by their Priests, most stedfastly believe, That if they do but sign their Foreheads with the Sign of the Cross, the Devil has no power to come near them, nor to hurt them.
From whence it is apparent, That in the primitive Times, for the Confirma∣tion of the Divine Truth of the Gospel, there was a heavenly Bequest to several holy Persons to excel in Miracles, who by the Imposition of hands did deliver many Demoniacs from the vexation of Evil Spi∣rits. Which extraordinary Gift then cea∣sed, when those other extraordinary Gifts that accompanied it, were at a period. So that the Herd of Popish Exorcisers that fill the World with their false Invocations and miraculous Operations of sanctified Water and Salt, are a meer Troop of Mo∣ney-hunters, Impostors, Coney-catchers, and Vagabonds. And their Whips for the Devil are no more to be valued than the Rods that excite the decayed Venery of old Lechers in common Brothel-houses. Men of sence among the Papists them∣selves deride 'em. And therefore you find in Erasmus's Colloquies Cardinal Pole himself making the greatest Fool in the world of a Country-Priest, and acting the Spirit himself to carry on the Sport. At length when the Cardinal and his Confe∣derates had sufficiently fool'd the silly Ex∣orciser, they framed an Epistle curiously writ in such Paper as the Gold-beaters put their Gold in, wherein the freed Spirit
sends Eternal health and thanks to his De∣liverer, and having dated it from the Coe∣lum Empyreum, in the Ides of September 1498. they laid it secretly upon the Altar for the Priest to find when he came next to say Mass. Which the Priest shewed to all persons he met with, believing nothing more certain, but that it was brought him by an Angel from Heaven. And in regard Stories many times pre∣vail above Arguments, it may not be amiss to insert two authentic Relations of two Demoniacs out of the Famous Thuanus, to shew not only the Superstition, but the Knavery and Impiety of these pretended Devil-whippers. The first is of a certain Maid, Adriana Fraxinet, born of poor Parents not far from Amiens. This Maid, being looked upon as possessed by the Devil, was brought to Paris, and lodged in the Monastery of St. Victor, where she was shewed for the rarities sake to vast concourses of people. Among the rest came Peter Cotton a Jesuit with a strong resolution to expel the De∣vil; the rather, because that being very inquisitive, he thought to pick out of the Devil an Answer to several Questions, of which he had no other hopes to be resol∣ved. To this purpose he borrowed a Book
of Exorcisms (such another Whip for the Devil as this may be supposed to be) and to help his memory, put into the Book a Catalogue of such Questions as his Curio∣sity led him to be informed of, written with his own hand in Latin. After he had performed the Ceremony of Exor∣cism, he delivered the Book back to his Friend, but imprudently forgot to take out his own paper. By which means the paper known to be his writing, was hand∣ed from one to another till it came to the hand of the Duke of Sully, who shewed it to Henry the Fourth. Therein Cotton had made inquiry of the Devil, what God had permitted him to know concerning the present Pope? What about his own stay at Court? What he knew about the Con∣version of Souls? What about the War with Spain and the Hereticks? What course he should take to perswade most efficaciously? What course he should take to abstain from sin? To these he added several Questions in Learning. Whether Languages came from God? What was the most proper place in Scripture to prove Purgatory and the Invocation of Saints? What were those Sons of God that loved the Daughters of Men? How all the beasts were taken that were put into Noahs Ark?
Who was King of the Angels? What number of the Angels fell? What hindred a firm Peace with the Spaniards? Which was the best way to convert the Queen of England, and overthrow the Turks? How long Heresie should endure? With several others of the same nature. These things many laughed at, and others bitterly Satyrized. For, said they, if Cotton were induced out of a love of Truth to ask these Questions, why did he inquire of the Father of Lyes? Others taxed him for going about to be resolved in Scripture-doubts of the Devil who con∣temned it as Divine Writ. And the De∣vil finding that the Jesuit had more faith in him than in God, did not think him worth the trouble of his answering. Whence we may conclude, That if a silly Wench could so easily delude a top∣ping Jesuit, it is not for the pitiful Herd of common prostituted Exorcists to master the Devil himself. The Story of Martha Brosser is yet much more remarkable. She was the daughter of James Brosser, born at Remorantin, in the County of Blois, who weary of his poor Trade of Weaving, took upon him the more lazy Trade of a jugling Mounte∣bank, and taking along with him his
daughter Martha, whom he feigned to be possessed with the Devil, began to practise his Tricks among the common people in the neighbouring Cities, with great con∣courses of people drawn together by the novelty of the thing. But being soon de∣tected nearer home, he removed to An∣gers, where Charles Miro, Bishop of the City, before he would attempt any thing by way of Exorcism, sent for Martha, and caused her to sit down at his Table; at what time when he observed her to be no∣thing moved when he drank to her in Holy Water, which he told her was only com∣mon water; but that when he drank to her in common water, and told her it was Holy Water, she presently fell into Con∣vulsions and Ravings, he began shrewdly to suspect her; but for his better satisfa∣ction, while Martha was in the midst of her Fits, the Pope calls out aloud for a Book of Exorcisms, which being brought him, he immediately repeated the first Verse in Virgils Eneads, Arma virum{que} cano, &c. Which hard words Martha no sooner heard, but she began to tear and torment her self, as if the Devil had been in her indeed. Thereupon the Bishop be∣ing fully convinced of the Cheat, would have no more to say to her, but dismissed
her, with this advice to her Father, to carry his daughter home again, and to forbear deluding the people any longer with his Impostures. But the Father ha∣ving other designs in his head, would not be so easily admonished, but goes directly for Paris, where he lodges his daughter in the Monastery of St. Genoved, a place much resorted to for the Opinion of its Sanctity. There he had no sooner craved assistance of Sacred means for his daughter Martha, but the Capuchin Friers never standing to examine the condition, repu∣tation or health of the Maid, fall to work, and while Martha flings and boun∣ces to hear their Exorcisms, easily per∣swade the ignorant Vulgar, that she was possessed with the Devil. And now there was nothing talked of in Paris, but of Martha's being possessed with the Devil, when Monsieur Gonde Bishop of the place, resolving to interpose his own Authority, sent the chiefest and most approved Phy∣sicians, Morescot, Albin, Riolan, Duret, and others to observe the strange Motions, Contortions, and Gesticulations which Martha made, who upon their return to the Bishop, unanimously declared, That there was nothing of Devil in her, many things counterfeited, and some few things
which proceeded from her distemper of body; that her tongue was inflamed, and that something of wind more than ordi∣nary grumbled in her left Hypochondrium. However, because she did not stir or cry out when Duret the Physician ran a needle into her hand between her Thumb and Fore-finger, therefore the Devil was cer∣tainly in her, and Father Serafin the Frier falls asresh upon the Devil with new Ex∣orcisms. Which Martha no sooner heard, but she began to roll her Eyes, lill out her Tongue, and screw her Body at a most dreadful rate: but when she heard the word, And he was made man, she gave a jump, as if she had had no bones in her body, and flew to the door of the Chapel where she was, at which Serafin the Exor∣ciser cryed out, Now if there be any that re∣mains incredulous, let him venture his life, and stop the Devil if he can. Upon which Mon∣sieur Marescot the Physician, not enduring the Imposture, ran after her, laid hold of her in spite of all her struggling, and made her stay. Which the Wench perceiving, to conceal the Imposture, pretended that the Devil was gone, and had left her. And the Exorcist, for his credit, confirm∣ed the lye, saying, That she now was Mar∣tha her self, and that the Spirit was gone.
to which Marescot replied, That then it was he that had frighted the Devil. Here∣upon the Bishop for his farther satisfaction caused the Exorcisms to be repeated. At first she was nothing moved, finding Ma∣rescot ready to handle her without Mittens; but when she thought that he and the rest of the Physicians were gone, she threw her self upon her back, and fell to her wont∣ed pranks. But then the Physicians ap∣pearing again, they easily laid hold of her, and held struggling and striving to no pur∣pose. However by these latter motions she brought over two of the Physicians to her Party, who now do think her really possessed. Thereupon other Physicians were called, neither Marescot, nor the other Dis∣senters being admitted, in whose presence, and in the presence of the Exorciser Ser a∣fin, and Father Benedict, an English man, both Capuchins, Martha, besides the won∣ted Gesticulations of her body, answered the Physicians in Greek and Latin, which she would not owne that she understood before, and to the English man she an∣swered in English; and thereupon they all pronounced her possessed with the Devil, and great Arguments followed on both sides. In the midst of these Contentions the King commands Martha to be delive∣red
over to the Secular Magistrate, with Orders to such and such persons to observe her diligently with the help of Physicians and other able persons for forty days, and then to make their Report to the Parlia∣ment, who all attested, That they had obser∣ved nothing preternatur al in her. Upon this the Priests grew angry and complained in their Pulpits, that the Ecclesiastical Pri∣viledges were infringed by the Kings Ma∣gistrates. Whereupon the Preachers are sent for and soundly ratled. And at length a Decree was made, That Martha Brosser and James her Father should be conveyed back by the public Office to Ramorantin, the place of their Habitation; That Mar∣tha should be committed to the Custody of her Father, with this Injunction, That he should not permit her to wander out of the Town without permission of the Judge, under pain of Corporal punish∣ment. Thus vanished the Fable of Mar∣tha, and thus it is apparent, That the Po∣pish Priests must be either grear Fools or very great Knaves to let a silly Wench give so much trouble to the greatest part of a Kingdom: And how little Credit there is to be given to these paltry Exorcisers, that are not able to discern a true Devil from a counterfeit.
Let the Papists therefore tell us by what places of Scripture they will confirm these idle Ceremonies? Where Christ or his Apostles teach us to expel the Devil who is a Spirit, and consequently without a body, by corporeal means. Let them shew us one real Example of any that have done it by this way or means. r the Devil does but feign to give way to these Ceremonies; not that he fears them, but to the end he may graft the roots of Superstition more firmly in the minds of men. And therefore the best Whip for Martha Brosser had been such a Whip as they use at our Houses of Corre∣ction; and for the Exorciser of such a De∣vil, and such are most of your Popish De∣moniacs, a good Cat a Ninetails to teach 'em a better way of Living, than by pro∣phaning the Name of God, and deluding the unwary and superstitious with their Impostures. FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by Dor∣man Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry. Books in Folio. A Compleat Treatise of the Muscles, with Anatomical Observations, and curious Copper Plates. By J. Brown sworn Chirurgion to his Majesty. Causins Holy Court. Clelia, a Romance. Reynolds of Murder and Adultery. Bentivoglio's Wars of Flanders. Sir Robert Stapleton on Juvenal. Baillium Operis Historici &chronologici. Twiss de Scientia Media. Hughs on Genesis and Exodus. Vignola's Architecture. Davis of Uniformity of Churches. The Exact Politician, or Compleat Statesman. All the Works of Mr. Isaac Ambrose. His Looking unto Jesus. War with De∣vils, and Communion of Angels. Alone.
Bentivolio and Vrania. Heylins Cosmography. Cambridge Concordance. Charnock on the Attributes. Caryl on Job. In two Volumes. Memoires of the Dukes of Hamilton. Pools English Annotations on the Bible. Two Volumes. The Tryals of the five Jesuits, White∣bread, Harcourt, Fenwick, Gavan, and Turner. Their last Speeches, with Animadver∣sions on them. The Tryals of Sir George Wakeman, Wil∣liam Marshal, William Rumly, and James Corker. The Tryal of Richard Langhorne. Smiths Account of the Behaviour of 14 Popish Malefactors in Newgate. Mr. Prance's Narrative. Mr. William Boyses Narrative. Dr. Oates's Popes Warehouse. A Discourse of the Peerage and Jurisdi∣ction of the Lords Spiritual in Parliament. A Relation of the Ceremony of the Mar∣riage of the King and Queen of Spain. Mr. Jennisons second Narrative. Bloods Life and Death. — His Narrative of the Plot. John Fitz-Gerralds Narrative of the Plot.
A Vindication of Dr. Oates against L'∣Estrange. Naked Truth. The third Part. The Proceedings of the Students of E∣denbourgh to burn the Pope. A modest Apology for the Students of Edenbourgh. The Lord Staffords Speech, with Ani∣madversions. Sir William Wallers Narrative of the De∣positions of Captain Bury and Alderman Brooks of Dublin. Two great Questions determined con∣cerning the Succession. Mr. Everards Depositions of the Plot. — His Discourse on the present State of Europe. Mr. Bedlows Plot in a Play. Books in Quarto. Sir Henry Vanes Meditations. Crofftons Catechism. Gales Court of the Gentiles. Third and fourth Parts. Caryl on Job. Sixth and seventh Parts. Durham on the Canticles. — on the Commandments. Brooks Key. First and second Part. Cases Mount Pisgah.
Firmins Real Christian. Leybourns Penorganon. Alexander against the Quakers. Burroughs Gospel Remission. Baxters Apology for the Nonconfor∣mists. The Quakers Spiritual Court proclaim∣ed. A Warning to Souls to beware of Qua∣kerism. Mr. Williams Sermon on the Fifth of No∣vember. Mr. Blakes Sermon at Mr. Sharpes Fu∣neral. An Answer to Mr. Reads Case. Mr. Nicholets Sermon at Mr. Bernards Funeral preached at Sea. A Call to the Shepherd of Israel. L'Estrange resuted with his own Argu∣ments. A Disputation proving, That it is not convenient to grant unto Ministers Secular Jurisdiction, and to make them Lords and Statesmen in Parliament. The Obligation which lyes upon Mini∣sters to preach the Gospel to other places and Parishes besides their own, and in o∣ther places besides the Temple. The English Mans Right concerning Ju∣ries.
History of the Seven Champions. Poor Robins Perambulation from Saffron∣Walden to London. Books in Large Octavo. Smiths Grammatica Quadrilinguis. The Doctrine of Devils. Mr. Naltons Twenty Sermons. Fergusons Interest of Reason in Religion. Heywoods Life in Gods Favour. Bonhome against Atheism. Tesmary's Rhetorick. Rythers Morning-seeker. Swincock's Sins of Omission. Bloomes Description of Jamaica. Pollhill against Sherlock. The present State of Russia. Blaky's Sermons. Basil Valentine of Antimony. History of the Treaty at Nimeguen. Bunians Holy War. Conold of Schism. Homer Ala Mode, or the ninth Book of Homers Iliads Burlesqu'd. Winchester Phrases. Dr. Manwarings Method and Means of injoying Health, Vigour, and long Life. A Synopsis of Vocal Musick. The young Clerks Guide Compleat.
Bruchers Rudiments of the Latin Tongue. Dr. Bates's Sermon. A Synopsis of Quakerism. Quakers Canons. Small Octavo's and Twelves. Clapham's Guide to the True Religion. Janewayes Legacy. Guthries Interest in Christ. Vincent on the Assemblies Catechism. Simpsons Dialogues. — Medela Medicorum. — Of Feavers. Dyers Cabinet of Jewels. Nesses's Christians Walk. — Antidote against Popery. Sherly of the Gout. Tachmas Prince of Persia, a Novel. Roberti Bayfield Exercitationes Anatomicae. History of the Life and Death of Mode∣ration. Queen Mother's Life and Death. Ralphsons Star of the Eastern Sages. Loves Empire, or the Amours of the French Comte, a Novel. Dutch Grammar. Dutch Dictionary. Helvici Colloquia. Cheyny's Call to Prayer.
Life and Death of Mr. Tho. Wilson. Smiths Weaned Christian. Sir George Downings Disc. against the Dutch. All the Works of the Author of the Whole Duty of Man. In two Volumes. Dr. Robothams Sermons. A Protestants Resolution, shewing his Reasons why he will not be a Papist. The Adamite, or the insensible Jesuit. A new Novel. Londons Jests, or a Collection of all the curious Jests, never before published. A Plea for Lay-Communion with the Church of England from the Writings of above 100 famous Nonconformists. Erastus, or the History of the seven wise Masters. Small Octavo. Fryer Bacon. Crown Garland. Sir Lawrence Lazy. Valentine and Orson. Vinegar and Mustard. The Crossing of Proverbs. The Wonders of the World. Venus Turtle-doves.
