W3621 12738662 93064
IMPRIMATUR; Junii 19. 1689. Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo Pat. ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Domest.
THE DOCTRINES OF THE Resurrection AND THE REWARD to COME, Considered as The Grand Motives to an HOLY LIFE. Discoursed of, from 1 Cor. XV. 58. BY The late Pious and Learned JOHN WORTHINGTON, D. D. LONDON, Printed for Awnsham Churchill, at the Black-Swan in Ave-Mary-Lane. 1690.
To the Honourable Sir PAUL WHICHCOT Knight and Baronet. SIR, IAm embol∣dened by the singular Ver∣tues and o∣ther worthy Endow∣ments I have been an Admirer of in You, to make choice of Your∣self to be the Patron of the following Discourse.
And the Law of Grati∣tude commands me like∣wise, to take this occasi∣sion of making a thank∣ful Acknowledgment of the many Favours, which, as unworthy as I have been of them, I have received from you. As to this Treatise and its Authour, Silence best becomes me in regard of the near Re∣lation I bear to him.
Onely this I would sug∣gest, That since he had not prepared it for the Press, that Accuracy and Exactness ought not to be lookt for in it, which otherwise might be expected: But I doubt not, 'twill have the Approbation of all good men, as a Dis∣course well adapted to the Promoting and Fur∣therance of true Piety.
And that it may be suc∣cessful to this best of Ends, is the Hearty Prayer of, SIR, Your most Obliged Kinsman And Humble Servant, John Worthington.
A DISCOURSE ON 1 Cor. XV. 58. Therefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye Stedfast, Unmoveable, always Abound∣ing in the work of the Lord, for asmuch as you know that your Labour is not in vain in the Lord. THESE words are a most just Inference from that great Fun∣damental Truth of another State, ano∣ther Life after the Death of this Body, a reward and blessed Immortality after this present Life; which grand important Truth the Apostle doth assert, largely confirm, and illustrate
in this Chapter; and that in opposition to those that denyed the Doctrine of the Resurrection, or of any other Life besides this present Life; as appeared by that wicked Speech of theirs, mentioned in Vers. 32. Let us Eat and Drink, for to Morrow we shall Die; that is, Let us live in pleasure, be merry and delight our Senses, let us take our fill of the good things of this World; for to Morrow we Die, for within a little while we shall be taken out of this World, Death will come 'ere long and seize on us, and then there will be an end of us. This is at large and in very lively expressions described in the Book of Wisdom, where wicked Men are brought in speaking out the inward Atheism of their Hearts, Chap. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. Come on, let us enjoy the good things that are present, and let us speedily (or earnestly, ) use the Creatures like as in Youth. Let us fill our selves with costly Wine and Qyntments; and let no Flower of the Spring pass by us. Let us Crown our selves with Rose-buas before they be withered. Let none of us go without his part of our Voluptuousness (or jollity) let us leave Tokens of our joyfulness in every place. All this is a larger account of that, briefly exprest by the Apostle, Let us
Eat and Drink. And as it follows, for to Morrow we Die; so upon the like con∣sideration do these in Wisd. 2. encourage themselves to a Sensual Life, Vers. 1. Our Life is short; Vers. 5. Our time is a very shaddow that passeth away; and after our end there is no returning. And the like in Vers. 2. 3, 4. But let the Sensual ones, those that are Atheistically dispos∣ed, talk at this rate, and rejoyce in their Youth; let them walk in the ways of their Hearts, and in the sight of their Eyes; let them mock at the Righteous, and account his Life Madness, (Wisd. 5. 4.) They shall one day know, That verily there is a reward to the Righteous, and doubtless there is a God that judgeth in the Earth; The Righteous shall live for ever∣more, their reward is with the Lord, and the care of them is with the most High; they shall receive a Glorious Kingdom and a Beautiful Crown from the Lords Hand, (Wisd. 5. 15, 16.) or as the Apostle here, their Labour is not (shall not be) in vain in the Lord. The Words may be easily resolved in∣to these Propositions. 1. Christians must be Stedfast, well-groun∣ded
and rooted in the Faith, Established in the Truth. 2. Christians must be Vnmoveable in the Profession of the Truth, particularly in the Profession of the Faith of the Resurrection and a Life to come. 3. Christians must always Abound in the work of the Lord. 4. Christians have good ground to be as∣sured that their Labour shall not be in vain in the Lord. They that abound most in God's work, in the Labours of Religion, may perswade themselves that they shall not lose their Reward, their Labour is not lost, is not fruitless; but shall certainly be rewarded. In speaking to which Propositions, we shall not need to seek for Proof else∣where then in the Text: For the following Proposition doth fully and pertinent∣ly prove the former, as thus. Christians must be Sted fast, for else they cannot be Vnmoveable. Christians must be both Stedfast and Vnmoveable, for else they will not, they cannot be Abounding al∣ways in the work of the Lord. Christians must Abound in the work of the Lord, for their Labour will not be in vain in the Lord.
PROPOSITION I. Christians must be Stedfast, well-groun∣ded and rooted in the Faith, Established in the Truth. That the Soul be without knowledge, it is not good, saith Solomon, Prov. 19 2. Here is a Litotes, not good, i. e. it is a sad and miserable condition. But in Heb. 13. 9. It is a good thing that the Heart be established with Grace; that is, in the Go∣spel, be grounded in the Truth of the Gospel (which is frequently called , Grace, in the New Testament) in opposition to the Mosaical Law, which is here described by Meats, and in Chap. 9. 10. 'tis said to stand only in Meats and Drinks and diverse Washings, &c. It is S. Paul's advice to Timothy, Hold fast the form of sound words which thou hast heard of me, 2 Tim. 1. 13. The word  is a short form or draught, a summary, no long and tedious business for the Memory, nor made up of many Nice and subtle Speculations: The main Substantials of Religion lie in a little room; they should be delivered briefly, and in an easie and evident way; not
clog'd with obscure and intricate No∣tions, with unnecessary or doubtful O∣pinions; sound or wholesome words and Doctrine, and what that is, is plain in 1 Tim. 6. 3. where wholesome words, and the Doctrine which is according to Godli∣ness are the same: That Doctrine which is proper and powerful to beget and to encrease a Godlike disposition and Life, this is sound Doctrine, and it makes sound and healthful Christians: Being well di∣gested, it makes strong Men in Christ, it strengthens the Heart, it makes the Soul lively and cheerful, able to Run a Race, the Race set before us, it mends the Con∣stitution and Complexion of the Soul. It was the commendation of the believ∣ers at Rome, that ye obeyed from the Heart that , form of Doctrine deli∣vered unto you, or unto which ye were deli∣vered up, , Rom. 6. 17. It becomes Christians to be ready to give an Answer to him that asketh a Rea∣son of their hope and Faith which they profess, 1 Pet. 3. 15. They should be knowingly Religious, 1 Cor 14. 20. Be not Children in under∣standing: howbeit in Malice, , in wickedness, be ye Children (as to innocency and harmlesness) but in understanding be Men.
Reason, Christians must be Stedfast, for else they cannot be Unmoveable. There can never be Erected and Rear∣ed up a firm and lasting Structure of Re∣ligion, except a good and sure Foundati∣on be first layd. In Building, that which requires the first and exactest care, is the Foundation and Groundwork; if that be not well ordered, the Builder Builds in vain, does as good as nothing. The Foolish Man that Built his House upon the Sand. (as it is Matth. 7. 26.) is said to Build without a Foundation, (Luk. 6. 49.) the Sand was a fluid and uncertain bottom, nothing could be fasten'd to it, as good as no Foundation at all: And therefore it was no wonder that the House Built upon the Sand fell immediately, (, saith Luke) when the Rain, Floods and Winds beat upon the House: As on the contrary, the House which the Wise Man Built, was unmoveable, the Winds and Floods could not shake it, (saith Luke) because it was well Built upon a sure Foundation, for it was Founded upon a Rock, (say Matthew and Luke) he Dig∣ged deep, saith Luke, till he came to a Natural Mine of Stone, a Rock; and his
Structure was sure and firm, it fell not, but held out, though it was assaulted by the Rain, and Winds, and Floods; by which Three Words, are meant all sorts of difficulties and trials in this Life, that try the strength and reality of our Christian Profession: Rain and Hail falls with violence upon the Roof and upper part: Winds try the sides of the House, the Walls: The Floods, and rushings of Water, Torrents and Land-floods, caused by the immoderate Rain, try the lower parts; (so that the House was tryed every way, how sure and firm it was) yet it fell not, but stood unshaken and unmoveable, for it was Founded upon a Rock. The House Built by the foolish Man, might to the Eye seem a fair and goodly Building, and as well Built as the other; the formal Christian may make a fair show, and his outward Profession may have the praise of Men (as our Sa∣viour speaks of the vain glorious per∣formance of several Duties in Religion, Matth. 6.) but when Afflictions and Temptations came, the difference between these Two Buildings (though when all was quiet and calm, they seem'd so like and equally exact) easily appeared: The Wise Builder's House stood, his
Structure of Religion was firm and last∣ing: But the meer outward Profession of the other, the Foolish Builder's House, fell immediately when the Rain came, and the Winds blew, and the Floods beat vehemently upon it; and great was the fall of it; it made a great show while it stood, and it made as great a noise when it fell: The fall was the more notori∣ous, by how much the former Profession was more specious. The same Truth [That we must be Stedfast and well grounded in the Faith, else we cannot be Vnmoveable] may be Il∣lustrated from another Similitude, in the Parable of the Seed and Sower. Mark 4. 16. we Read of some that receive the word, , immediately, and , with gladness: So Herod heard John Bap∣tist gladly, , (nay, further) and did many things, Mark 6. 20. Some things he did, and not a small some, yet he was but partial in Obedience; his Herodias he would not part with, his peccata in delicijs; in some less beloved Sins he would Reform. So they in Ezek. 33. 31, 32. heard with gladness. But even these that with gladness, with some gust and affection, receive the Word immediately, when Affliction or
Persecution ariseth for the Word's sake, immediately they are offended. Observe the double immediately here. They for a while believe, (saith Luke Chap. 8. 13.) and in time of Temptation fall away. What's the Reason of all? See it in Mark 4. 17. They have no Root in them∣selves, and so endure but for a time. They were not rooted, grounded and setled in the Faith; and being not Stedfast, they could not be Vnmoveable. There may be such Outward Christians as may receive the Word immediately with some kind of affection, yet such sudden flashes and motions and appearances of good affecti∣ons are not to be trusted to; nor are they from thence to think highly of them∣selves. See an Example in Luke 4. When Christ was Preaching in a Synagogue at Nazareth (the place of his Education) they all in the Synagogue did bear him Wit∣ness, and wondred at the Gracious Words which proceeded out of his Mouth, Vers. 22. and yet on a sudden, presently after, the same persons, all they in the Syna∣gogue, were filled with wrath, and rose up and thrust Christ out of the City, and led him to the brow of the Hill, that they might
cast him Headlong, Vers. 29. Such an uncertain, slight and inconsiderable a thing is all that affection, that is begot by a slight, superficial and formal know∣ledge. Before I conclude this, I shall only add, That to be unmoveable or unchangeable, fixed and setled, is not simply and necessarily a praise-worthy quality and disposition, but onely as the matter and object there∣of is, as the things are wherein we are unmoveable. Gal. 4. 18. It is good to be Zealously affected in all good things. To turn from Errour to Truth, from Evil to Good, is Vertue and Praise; and an hap∣py change. Whereas to persist, to be stiff and unmoveable in an Opinion and Tenet, after strong Reason to the con∣trary, and all because it has been their Opinion and way, is a fault, and that no small one; it argues a great self-love, self-seeking, and undue affection to their own praise or profit, and a greater regard to their Credit, then to Truth it self. Nor is it Vertue or Praise to be un∣moveable as to all External indifferent things; for the Apostle Paul himself, for the promoting a greater good, was not so strictly tyed up and confined in his own
Spirit to these lesser things of an indiffer∣ent Nature, but he put himself into all shapes (yet so as to keep from what was sinful) and became (as far as lawfully he might) all things to all Men, that he might by all means' save some, and win them un∣to Goodness. It was not out of Ambition or Love to the World, but out of a seri∣ous regard to the good of others, and that he might be in a capacity, and have the fairer advantages to promote the Interest of Christianity among Jews and Gentiles, that he denyed himself the use of his Christian Liberty, and framed himself to the observance of certain Mosaical and Jewish Rites, as on the contrary he be∣haved himself otherwise among the Gentiles, 2 Cor. 9. 20. PROPOSITION II. Christians must be unmoveable, par∣ticularly in the Profession of the Faith of the Resurrection, and a Life to come.
BE NOT MOVED, 1. By any hardships and troubles from the World. The Apostle that here exhorts Christians to be unmoveable, was so him∣self; as he speaks of himself, Acts 20. he knew that bonds and afflictions did abide and wait for him, But none of these things move me (saith he, Vers. 24.) Neither count I my life dear unto my self; so that I might finish my Course with joy: And having thus bravely quitted himself, he could say with Triumph a little before his Death, I am now ready to be offered, , I am already poured out, I am as it were Wine (for a Libamen or Drink-offering) poured out upon the Sacrifice; The time of my departure is at hand; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith; and therefore he had a Holy confidence, that God the Righteous Judge (as the Judge or Rewarder in the Graecian Games did adjudge the Crown or Prize which hung over the Goal to the Conquerour) would give to him the Crown of Righteous∣ness, as the reward for behaving himself
well in his Christian Combate, 2 Tim. 4. 6, 7, 8. The same Apostle in Rom. 8. fortifies and encourages believers against afflicti∣ons and hardships upon this score, that they should reckon and make account, that the Sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which should be revealed; bear no proportion with the Glory to come. For if sufferings be laid in one Ballance, and the Glory or Reward in the other, the Glory will far out∣weigh them. For, 1. The sufferings or afflictions are but Momentary, for a Moment, , 2 Cor. 4. 17. and  of the time now, of this  but the Glory is Eternal, an Eternal weight of Glory. And Vers. 18. The things which are seen are Temporal, or Temporary, , but the things which are not seen (the things of the other World) are Eternal. 2. The sufferings and difficulties here are but light, our light affliction; but the Reward to come is a weight of Glory, ; and therefore it is far be∣yond, and beyond compare doth exceed, the sufferings; yea a far more exceeding, , a super super∣lative
weight of Glory. Such forms of Speech use not to be met with in other Authors (either Philosophers, Poets or Orators) for they never had such great things, such high and excellent objects to think and speak of, as the Holy and Heavenly Apostle, who had another per∣ception of things Heavenly and Divine, and who was caught up into the Third Heaven or Paradice, and there heard words unspeakable. Nay further, The sufferings and hard∣ships which the better sort of Men meet with in this World, should rather fortifie in them the belief and hope of a Resurrecti∣on and Glorious Reward, then any way abate it; for Verily there is a Reward to the Righteous: If Lazarus has evil things here, he shall have his good things hereafter, and infinitely better then those good things which Dives had here, as the evil things Lazarus had here were nothing to the evil (those worse) things that Dives was to feel hereafter. 'Tis not possible that the better sort of God's Creation, his best Servants, his friends and faithful ones, should always be in a Calamitous condition; that there never should be a difference between them that fear God, and them that fear
him not. What? Shall it never be better with those that Love God, and whofe serious care is to please him and obey him, who endeavour to be like him, purifying themselves as he is pure? Shall it never be better with them then com∣monly it is in the World, where they suffer for Righteousness sake? Shall it never be worse with the wick∣ed, who live in Enmity against God and Disobedience, who live after their own Lusts and own Will, who make no Con∣science of their ways, but respect them∣selves wholly, their profit, pleasure, interest, &c. and love not God nor their Neighbour, but are onely lovers of them∣selves, not caring how they Rebel a∣gainst God, and Oppress Men? Certainly it is easie to infer hence, There is a God who will Judge the Earth, and a time com∣ing when it shall be well with the Righteous. 2. Be not moved by the Allurements of the World, the Blandishments of this present Life, the Tentations of Pleasure or Profit, any Worldy or Fleshly Lusts whatsoever. The Glory and Lusters of the World, Honours and Greatness, the Pleasures of
the Sensual Life, Softness and Ease, these and the like have a very bad influence upon the Minds and Hearts of Men, upon their apprehensions and affections; they are apt to enfeeble and darken the Notions of a future State and Life. Prosperitas effaeminat virtutem fidei, saith Tertullian. The good Seed of Truth (as also good Principles and Purposes) is stifled and made unfruitful by the Thorns, which in the Parable of the Seed and Sower are said to be the cares of this World, the deceitfulness of Riches, and the Lusts of other things, Mark 4. 19. Luke adds, the pleasures of this Life: These Worldly and Fleshly Lusts call Men off from what is Spiritual and the things above, fasten and nail them down to the Earth; unqualifie Men for ei∣ther apprehending or relishing what is Heavenly and Spiritual. Sensual Men that provide for the Flesh to fulfil the Lusts thereof, are very untoward and unfit to frame an Idea (a right Notion) of what is Spiri∣tual. The more a Christian lives Godly, So∣berly and Righteously in this present World, the more easily will he appre∣hend
the things of the World to come: To such a one the things which are Eternal and concern the Life to come, are more clear. The more thou art purged from all in∣ordinate desire to the things of this World, and the less Earthly and Sensual thou art; the better thou wilt conceive what is Heavenly, the better thou wilt apprehend the State of the Life to come. The more thou art Spiritualiz'd, Spiritually-minded (and to be so is Life, Rom. 8.) the more thou livest a Life worthy of thy Soul, and art not enslav∣ed to thy Body, the Sense, to this out∣ward World; the more thou livest a Lise of Purity, Temperance, Humility and Sobriety; the better thou wilt conceive of what is Spiritual and Immaterial, of Life and Immortality. Immersion (or a being sunk) into the Body, Sensuality eagerly pursued (as if there were nothing higher, nothing bet∣ter then what is common to Man and Beast) as also those more dry and seem∣ingly cleaner sins, viz. Earthly-minded∣ness, Anxious cares and busie endeavours about geting and encreasing, and keep∣ing much of the things of this outward World; a Spirit of Earthy self-seeking
Policy, an Ambitious Spirit after Glory and the Splendours of Titles and Places; these and the like make Men that they cannot Relish or Tast (so neither clear∣ly apprehend) what is Heavenly and Spiritual, they cannot receive the things of God. Such Sensual Epicureans, and also Worldlings, are great Strangers as to Heaven, so to any clear and full appre∣hensions of what is Spiritual and Im∣mortal. Of such there is this account in Wisdom 2. 21, 22. Their own wickedness hath blinded them; as for the Mysteries of God they knew them not, nor discerned they a Reward for blameless Souls. Men must live better Lives, if they would know these things as they ought to know. 3. Be not moved by the Apostacy and falling away of others. That some even in the Apostles times were moved and fell away from the Sted∣fast Belief and Profession of this grand Fundamental Truth [the Resurrection and Life to come] appears by some pas∣sages in S. Paul's Epistles. Three are mention'd by Name, Hyme∣naeus, Philaetus and Alexander, who as they
are said concerning Faith to have made Ship-wrack, 1 Tim. 1. 19. and (in 2 Ep. 2. 18.) to have Erred concerning the Truth, particularly that great Truth and Article of the Resurrection and any fu∣ture State or Life, (for they said, that the Resurrection is past already) And thus as they, were far from being  and , Stedfast and Vnmoveable, so did they unsettle others and cause them to back-slide, overthrowing the Faith of some, Vers. 18. For their words (their Speech or Discourse, ) did Eat, or spread, as a Canker or Gangrene, their wicked Principles did spread and corrupt many, Vers. 17. and therefore the Apostle bids Timothy to shun, to look to and avoid them, Vers. 16. That which the Apostle did fear and warn the Christians of in those times, is still very seasonable; and it is strange that many, who are otherwise shy and wary, are not aware of the Devils cun∣ning and devices. It is the great Policy of the Devil to amuse the World with things of less mo∣ment and consequence, and about these things to provoke the Zeal, enflame the Passions and Choller of Men, and heigh∣ten
differences about things either more obscure, or less necessary, and that into such heats, as if the whole Stress of Re∣ligion or Salvation were to be laid upon such or such Notions and Opinions, as if the Kingdom and Honour of Christ and Glory of God were mainly concern∣ed herein: And all this the Devil is so busie at, that so some more dangerous principles might be more secretly and undiscernably conveyed and spread a∣mongst Christian Professours; viz. such principles as tend clearly to the advan∣cing of his Kingdom of Sin, to the bring∣ing in and cherishing of all ungodliness and unrighteousness, to the eating out and consuming of any good principle left in the Conscience, which testifies for God; in a word such as tend to the cor∣rupting of good Manners, to the debauch∣ing of the World, such as strike at the Fundamentals of Religion and Christian Life, (as Gnosticism, Siddu∣cism, Atheism do) that these may be more secretly conveyed and spread in the World. Is it not matter of just wonder, That amidst the many animosities and eager contentions and bitter strifes amongst Christians about the Externals or Extra-essentials
of Religion (for which they Un-saint and Un-christian one another) that they are so little sensible of that Gnosticism, that Sadducism, that Atheism that hath grown and spread in the Christi∣an World? But to speak more particularly, such Doctrines and Notions as these, [That the Soul is extinguished and perisheth with the Body; That there is no other State or Being but in the World; That there is no Angel nor Spirit, no Immaterial or Spiritu∣al Being, nothing but Body or Matter; That there is no Resurrection, no Judg∣ment to come, and therefore no Punishment or Reward hereafter (which Doctrines are the Leaven of the Sadducees of old, and the modern Sadducees; Sowre and unwholesome Sadducism) as also those corrupt Doctrines, viz. That nothing is intrinsecally good or evil; That Religion is onely a Politick device, a trick of Polititians to keep People in awe.] These Doctrines and Opinions, as well as those that deny there is a God, (as the Atheists do) or, if there be a God, That he sees no sia in such who conceit them∣selves to be his People, to be nearly allyed to him (as the Gnosticks of old, and the Ranters of late) That Men may be
free to any thing: Such Doctrines and Principles as these tend clearly to the advancing of the Kingdom of Sin and Satan, to the bringing in and cherishing of all ungodliness, &c. And therefore there is good Reason for the Apostles advice, That every serious Christian that minds the Salvation of his Soul, would take heed and flee such, keep at a distance from Men of such cor∣rupt minds, and beware of the Leaven of the Sadducees. And if others go a Whore∣ing after such Doctrines pleasing to Flesh and Blood, if others Apostatize and fall away from the Truth, yet (as S. Peter speaks) do ye beware lest ye be led away with the Errour of the wicked, and fall from your own Stedfastness, 2 Ep. 3. 17. Reason. Christians must be Stedfast and Vnmoveable in the Belief and Profession of the Truth, those great things of the Christian Faith, the Resurrection and Life to come; Because else they cannot, they will not be always Abounding in the work of the Lord.
Clear and strong persuasions of the Resurrection of the Dead and of a future State, are a Root and Principle full of sap and lise, and Holiness is the kindly Fruit thereof. Whereas on the contrary, the denial of the Resurrection and Judg∣ment to come, is the principle of sin and dis∣obedience, and opens the way to all manner of wickedness. They that banish out of their Minds all sense of a future State, will (instead of abounding in the work of the Lord) abound in every evil work; all that being taken away which onely is able to lay a powerful restraint upon the unbridled Lusts of Men. And here I may Appeal to the experi∣ence and observation of discerning and serious persons; Let it be considered and observed whether those that can hardly imagine, or cannot conceive any thing but Body, Flesh and Matter, those that slight the Notion of Spirit, Immaterial and Immortal Substance; Whether the Commandments of God are not grievous, and Religion a burden something to them, whether it be not more desireable to them, to be Epicuri de grege porci, to wallow in the Mire of sensuality, then to be of Christ's little Flock, to follow Christ in innccen∣cy and purity of Life and universal obe∣dience;
although perhaps some of the more crafty Epicureans may have some care to live inoffensively, that so they may keep out of danger of the Laws, and keep up a Reputation in the World for their advantage, and they may abstain from some sins for their Bodies sake, to keep themselves in Life and health. Both the Apostles Peter and Jude, and other Apostles (saith S. Jude in Vers. 17.) did in their Epistles foretel, that in the last times should come Scof∣fers, walking after their own Lusts, (2. Pet. 3. 3.) after their ungodly Lusts (so saith Jude, Vers. 18.) And what the Apostles did fear and fore∣warn of, is come to pass: Such Mock∣ers as these are even to this Day to be found, and where Christianity is Pro∣fest: But observe the Character of these Men, they are such as have a mind to walk after their own ungodly Lusts, such as would not be restrain'd from the forbidden Fruit, such as would gratifie their self-will, and would live as they list; to these Men, the Doctrine of the Resurrection and Judgment to come, is very unpleas∣ing; and therefore they Scoff at it
and oppose it withal their might. But as we are to shun them, their Principles and their Practices, so let it be our care to shun the giving any occa∣sion or advantage to them. For know that Men may condemn Atheism and Sadducism in words, and yet by their Lives and Conversations give great advantage and countenance thereto: Both Atheism and Sadducism  steal nourishment and advantage from the Lives and Practices of those who seem to be far removed from them As for Atheism; the  present∣ing God and   foolishly, the attributing to God what is un∣worthy of God, what is most unlike God, and that fair Idea of him repre∣sented in the Holy Scriptures; the attributing to him the very imper∣fections of sinful Man: The Represent∣ing him in such a way as is not con∣sistent with his Infinite Goodness and Mercy, his Holiness and his Justice. And again, Mens Professing that they know God, and yet denying him in their Works (as the Apostle speaks Tit. 1. 16.) their so living in the World, as if there were not in them any powerful and real sense of God's
all-seeing and pure Eyes, nor of his Justice and Righteousness: This is that which hath given too much ad∣vantage to the spreading and strength∣ening of Atheism. And for Sadducism, which slights the Notion of Spirits or Immateri∣al Beings, and denys the Existence of Souls after their Separation from this Earthly Body, and dis-believes the Doctrine of a future State, of Glory and a reward in Heaven, of Misery and punishment in Heli. How are the Modern Sadducees and Epicureans the more hardned and confirmed in these their Notions, by considering that Men generally mind Earthly things, their Belly is their God, they mind and seriously take care for the things on Earth, and do but little relish and set their affections on things above. They see also that ge∣nerally Men (who Profess to believe a future Reward and Punishment) seem not much to be sensible of any Danger to the Soul by Sin, nor much to be affected with the Hellish Misery that is threatned: For most Men are very secure, and manifest but little watchsulness over themselves, and
little care to break off from Sin, to subdue their Passions, to mortifie their Lusts and inordinate Affections: All which may seem to argue that they do not heartily Believe what they Profess, and that they have no such thoughts of the danger of Sin hereafter, as Men have of the danger to their Life by drinking a Cup of deadly Poyson. Nor do they seem to be much Sen∣sible of the future Reward and Fe∣licities of Heaven, the happiness of another State: For they are general∣ly unwilling to leave this present World, and it is very unpleasing to them to think that they must Die. They do not seem to account Hea∣ven their home and Country, and themselves to be but Pilgrims and Strangers in this World: Their hopes of such a Glorious State do not seem so much to enravish and strongly af∣fect their Spirits as the hopes of some outward accommodation or enjoy∣ment would do, which would tickle, and overjoy them and transport them to excess, when possest: And the hope of obtaining these outward things does engage them to far greater
endeavours then the hopes and ex∣pectations of Heaven, and the Reward to come, do usually put Men upon; which indeed are but slight, and for∣mal, and very cold, if compared with the other, and far from a worthy seeking of the Kingdom of Heaven, and as becomes those that believe there is a Glorious Reward there to all Eternity. Thou therefore that sayst there is a God, dost thou in works deny him? Dost thou live without God in the World? Dost thou Mis-represent him, and so report of him as to make him like to sinful Men? Or short of Men in those things wherein he requires they should imitate him? Thou that sayst there is a Resur∣rection and Life to come, a Reward and Punishment, Heaven and Hell: Dost thou so live as one that looks after no other Portion, Consolation and Reward then what is in this Life? Art thou swallowed up in the cares and ambitions of this World, hasting to be Rich and Great in the World? And art thou immerst and sunk in the pleasures of this World, so as not to relish the things above?
Be it therefore your care to make it appear by your Life and Spirit, your Conversation and Disposition, that you are Stedfast and Unmoveable in these Fundamentals of Christian Religion; that so living agreeably to these Truths, ye may be the Chil∣dren of the Resurrection and counted worthy to obtain that World, the World to come, Luke 20. 35. Learn therefore to Die to this pre∣sent World, as S. Paul was Crucifi∣ed to the World, and the World to him. To die to this World here, to leave it in affection, makes the Physical Death, the going out of this World less strange and less uneasie. Count your selves to be but as Pilgrims and Strangers here, and therefore as Pil∣grims abstain from Flesbly Lusts which War against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2. It is remarkably said of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (who confessed them∣selves to be Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth, or the Land of Canaan (Heb. 11. 13.) and accordingly be∣haved themselves in all Points as such, Sojourning in the Land of Pro∣mise as in a Strange Country (Vers. 9.) that they that say such things
(say and do, for it was not a meer Verbal Profession) they de∣clare plainly (or make it appear, ) that they seek a Country, even a better Country, that is, an Heavenly (Vers. 14. 16.) Accord∣ingly do ye so live, be so affected, that ye may plainly declare and make it appear to others that ye seek and desire a better Country, a better In∣heritance, a better Portion at the Resurrection of the just; and according∣ly prepare for it. Let not the word [Heaven] be in your Mouths onely, but let it be in your Hearts. Let us do the Will of God on Earth as it is in Heaven, and then we shall make it appear, that the Kingdom of God is come, is come into us. But if thou art swallowed up in the cares and ambitions of this present World, making hast to be Rich and Great, loving and seeking onely thine Ease and Pleasure, and a Soft Life; if thou art either overjoy'd or over griev∣ed at the abundance or want of Earth∣ly things, as if thy Hope, thy Portion and Consolation were in this Life; Doest thou live as becomes one that
is Stedfast and Vnmoveable in the be∣lief of a better Life, the Life to come? Nor do they think so worthily as they ought of that future Reward and Glory, that think it so easily attain∣able, as by a Death-bed Repentance. Nor do they who would seem bet∣ter, think so honourably of it, who from some Outward performances in Religion, or some partial obedience, would flatter themselves that they are the Heirs of that Kingdom; whereas their dispositions are wholly unsuiteable to that State, and unfit for converse with the Spirits of just Men made perfect. These make that Glorious Reward to come, all that great and rich Prize to be but a mean and cheap thing, who think they shall have it, and win the Crown, though they have not overcome, and though they do not earnestly strive for the mastery over their Lusts and corruptions, and are not temperate in all things, nor keep under their Body and bring it into subjection to the Law of their Mind. Certainly it would argue more Humility in them, and more Wisdom (as being the safest
course) to think more of Inward Pre∣parations for that Heavenly State, that their Minds might be purified and wrought into a temper suiteable to it, that they might be made meet for the Inheritance in Light; then to flatter themselves into an hope and conceit that such great Glory and Happiness should be cast upon them for some lip-labour in Religion, for outward Sanctimonious shows, for External performances, while in the mean time they so little mind that which is the due and necessary pre∣paration of their Souls for such en∣joyments. Although this Reason be suffici∣ent to perswade Christians to be Sted∣fast and Vnmoveable in the Belief and Profession of this Truth; Yet I shall here superadd four Reasons, the more to confirm it, and perswade them. 1. It is a main Fundamental Truth of the Gospel, and indeed, one of the First Principles of Religion. Accor∣dingly the Apostle speaks in 1 Cor. 15. 3. I have delivered to you first of all,  principally, or as that which
is to be counted amongst the first and principle Articles of Christianity. That God is a Rewarder of those that seek him diligently, is one of the First things to be known and firmly em∣braced (Heb. 11.) without which be∣lief all the motions in Religion will be very weak and slow. But if the Joy be set besore a Christi∣an, he will then run with patience and perseverance the Race that is set be∣fore him, and endure the Cross (as Christ did, Hebr. 12.) and despise the shame: As the Apostles reioyced that they were counted wor∣thy to suffer shame for the Name of Christ, Acts 5. 41. that is, for Teach∣ing and Preaching Jesus Christ, as it is in Vers. 42. sor Teaching the People, and Preaching through Jesus the Re∣surrection from the Dead, at which the Sadducees (being then in Power) were grieved (Acts 4. 2.) and filled with indignation or envy, Chap. 5. 17. If there be a Prize to be received at the end of the Race; and this Prize a Crown of Life and Glory, incorrup∣tible, unfading (1 Cor. 9. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 4.) not like those corruptible and withering Crowns and Garlands made
of Oaken leaves or Olive-branches, but this made of the leaves of the Tree of Life in the Paradise of God; there will then be wrestling and striving, and (the better to prepare and enable for the winning of it) a being temper∣ate in all things, a keeping under of the Body and bringing it into subjecti∣on; as the Apostle tells the Corinthi∣ans who well knew the sitness of those allusions, the Isthmian Games being Celebrated here, in that Isthmus or Neck of Land on which Corinth was Built. So great an Insluence and Power hath the due consideration of the Re∣compence of Reward to the raising and animating of a Christian to the great∣est Atcheivements! To conclude this particular, we may observe that the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews (Chap. 6. 1.) in that short Institution consisting of Six Articles, which Christians were first to be acquainted with, mentions these Two, viz. The Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Judgment, when God the Righteous Judge of all the Earth shall dispence Eternal Rewards (undefiled Rewards, as the
phrase is, Wisdom. 4. 2.) to those that Believe and Obey, and Eternal Punish∣ments to every Soul that doth Evil Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath to them that obey not the Truth, but obey Unrighteousness, Rom. 2. It may be fit also to observe, That this Truth of the Resurrection and a future State is called the Gospel, 1 Cor. 15 1. and the Truth, and the Faith, in 1 Tim. 1. where it is said of Hymenaeus and Alexander, who denyed the Doctrine of the Resurrection and Life to come, that , concerning the Faith, of or in the Faith, they have made Shipwrack; and in 2 Ep. chap. 2. it's said of Hyme∣naeus and Philaetus, that they have erred concerning the Truth, (the Faith and the Truth, by way of Eminency) and in 1 Tim. 1. 20. they are said to Blaspheme; and therefore for these their Principles destructive to Religi∣on, to all honesty and godliness, and to a good Conscience the great Apostle delivered them up to Satan. One thing more we may observe, That the Doctrine of the Resurrection (as being a Truth of great Importance
and Influence in Christianity) was from the first by Christ himself and his Apostles strongly asserted and pro∣fest against the Sadducees, and against those false Christians that fell from this Truth: And the so early falling away and revolting from this Truth (one of the Truths of Christianity which was so soon and first of all de∣parted from) was an ill Omen and Prognostick of that wickedness which followed after. The Apostles (after Christ was Ascended) took great care to preserve and promote this Truth: And therefore when Judas was fallen from his Apostleship, and one was to be chosen into his room; What's the work he was to be chosen to? It is thus described in Acts 1. 22. — Must one be Ordained to be with us a Witness of his (that is, of Christ's) Resurrection; and not onely of his, but of ours through him. S Peter and S. John Preached through Jesus the Resurrestion from the Dead, Acts 4. 2. And both these are largely insisted up∣on (and no part of the Christian Faith more largely elsewhere) in 1 Cor. 15. If there be no Resurrection of the Dead, if we rise not, Christ is not Risen:
And if we Rise, Christ is Risen. If Christ be not Risen, we are yet in our Sins, Vers. 17. We may observe also that all the four Evangelists are very particular and full in the History of Christ's Resurrection, upon which ours doth depend. 2. This great Truth and Doctrine of the Resurrection and Life to come (an hope more then in this Life) is worthy to be embraced, and that we should be Stedfast and Vnmoveable in it, because it is a Truth and Doctrine of sweet and strong Consolation, full of strengthen∣ing Joy, the most Soveraign Cordial and Restorative, when our Flesh and Heart may begin to fail through either inward or outward griefs. And therefore not without great cause our Saviour Christ repeats this four times in one of his Sermons (John 6.) I will raise him up at the last Day, Vers. 39, 40, 44, 54. where it is repeated as being a Truth full of comfort and encouragement. And further it is observable, That the Resurrection, with the Appendant Glory and Reward in the World to come, is called in Scripture more
then once The Hope. Acts 23. 6. saith S. Paul, Of the Hope and Resur∣rection of the Dead I am called in question: Which words [of the hope as being no new, no other thing, are omitted in Chap. 24. 21. where that former Speech of his is mentioned a∣gain and refer'd to. See this also in Acts 24. 15. and more fully in Acts 26. 6, 7. which will clear that in Acts 28. 20. For the hope of Israel (that is, for asserting the Resurrection) I am bound with this Chain. And hence it is, that Christi∣ans, who believe that Jesus died, and rose again, and that those who sleep in Jesus (die in the Lord) will God bring with him: they are not to sorrow con∣cerning them which are asleep, as others which have no hope, no such knowledge and assurance of a Glorious Resurrection and Reward to come; and therefore the Apostle having treated hereof, might well conclude, Where∣fore Comfort ye one another with these words, 1 Thes. chap. 4. In Titus 2. 13. are mentioned to∣gether the blessed hope and glorious ap∣pearance of our Saviour Jesus Christ, which they may look for with com∣fort
who are wrought upon by the Grace of the Gospel to live Godly, Righteously and Soberly in this pre∣sent World, as it is in the foregoing words. The Primitive Christians thought it the most welcome Morning-Saluta∣tion, , The Lord is risen. Of Mary Magdalene and the other Women that had the first notice by an Angel of Christ's Resurrection, it's said, that they went from the Se∣pulcher with great Joy (Matth. 28. 8.) to tell it to his Disciples as they Mourn∣ed and Wept, (Mark. 16. 10.) S. Paul did Die dayly, Fought with Beasts at Ephesus, was in Jeopardy every hour (as he speaks in 1 Cor. 15.) Now what did comfort and encourage him in all this? It was this, That the dead should rise. But there is one famous Instance for the further Illustrating of this parti∣cular, which I may not omit; and it is, that of the Seven Brethren with their Mother, mentioned in 2 Maccab. Chap. 7. to which that passage in Hebr. 11. 35. doth clearly refer, where it is said, Others were tortured () not accepting deliver∣ance,
that they might obtain a better Resurrection. In the Story it is said, that they were Tormented with Scourges and Whips, Verse 1. Their Tortures are called Extreme Tortures, Vers. 42. (as appears by the description of some of them in Vers. 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 13.) and all this they suffered unto Death at the hands of Antiochus Epiphanes (that Monster of Cruelty) because they would not Transgress the Law in eating Svines Flesh, Vers. 1. They might have been delivered, if they had yielded to do it; Nay, Antiochus ex∣horted the Youngest Brother with words, and also assured him with Oaths, that if he would yield, he would make him both a rich and an happy Man, and also take him for his friend, and trust him with Affairs, Vers. 24. Now what was it that did make them Sted∣fast and Unmoveable unto the last, what was it that did comfort them in the midst of all their bitter pains, what was it that did animate and for∣tifie them against all the either allure∣ments or terrors which the King did try them with? It was clearly this, The hope and belief of a Resurrection to Everlasting Life after the Death of the
Body. And this doth evidently appear by Six Passages in the Story. The first is, the Second Brother's Speech to Antiochus (in Vers. 9.) Thou like a Fury takest us out of this present Life, but the King of the World shall raise us up, who have died for his Laws, unto Everlasting Life. And this he is said to speak, when he was at the last gasp. A second Passage is that Speech of the Third Brother (in Vers. 11.) who said Courageously, These (meaning the Members of his Body, his Tongue and his Hands, which he held forth Man∣fully, Vers. 10.) These I had from Hea∣ven, and for his Laws I despise them, and from him I hope to receive them again. A third Passage is the Fourth Bro∣ther's Speech, which is more full, (in Vers. 14) It is good, being put to Death by Men, to look for hope from God, to be raised up again: As for thee, thou shalt have no Resurrection to Lise. And this will explain the Speech of the Youngest, which is, The fourth Passage (in Vers. 36.) Our Brethren who now have suffered a short pain, are dead under
God's Covenant of Everlasting Life. A fifth Passage is the Speech of the Mother, who was Marvellous above all, and worthy of Honourable Memory; for being filled with , Courageous Spirits, she exhorted every one of her Seven Sons, and stirring up her Womanish Thoughts with a Manly Stomach, she said unto them (in Vers. 23.) Doubtless the Creatour of the World, will also of his own Mercy give you Breath and Life again, as you now regard not your own selves for his Laws sake. A sixth Passage is her Speech to her Youngest Son, who was most of all Tempted by Antiochus to accept deli∣verance, and it was this (in Vers. 29.) Fear not the Tormentour; but being Worthy of thy Brethren, take thy Death, that I may receive thee again with thy Brethren. This is part of her Excel∣lent Speeches to her Sons, and an Il∣lustrious proof of her great Faith and Hope as to the Life to come; For when she saw her Seven Sons Slain within the space of one Day, , she bare it with a good Courage, be∣cause of the hope that she had in the Lord; as it is exprest in Vers. 20. and last
of all, aster the Sons, the Mother Died, Vers. 41. Thus we see by this admirable In∣stance how this Noble Mother and her Sons, rather then Transgress one Commandment of God, forbidding to Tast Swines Flesh, suffer'd the most Exquisite Tortures with a Magnani∣mous Patience, despised their Bodies, (Vers. 11.) regarded not their own selves for his Laws sake, (Vers. 23.) offered up their Bodies and Lives for the Laws of their Fathers, (Vers. 37.) loved not their Lives to Death (as it is said of the faithful in Apocal. 12.) reproched, or disdained, disesteemed, their Lives unto Death, (, as it is said of Zibulon and Napthali, Judg. 5. 18.) or as it is in Hebr. 11. would not accept of deliverance, which was offered to them. And that which enabled them thus to choose rather to die gloriously was this, That they might obtain a better Resurrection, a Resurrection to Life, which the Fourth Brother plainly told Antiochus that he should not have (Chap. 7. 14.) a Resurrection far more acceptable to them then to be deliver∣ed from their present sufferings, and
to have their Life prolonged and respited for a while upon Earth upon the terms offered, to live a little time and a moment longer, as the phrase is Chap. 6. 25. And the same Spirit of Faith hath no less shined out in the faithful Martyrs of Jesus under the New Testament, who loved not their Lives unto Death, (Apocal. 12.) who did bear in their Bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus (2 Cor. 4.) in Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and Thirst, in Fastings of∣ten, in Cold and Nakedness, in Stripes and Imprisonments, (as S. Paul saith of himself, 2 Cor. 11.) and were faith∣ful unto Death; not accepting of deliverance upon the terms of scatter∣ing a little Incense upon the Altar, or puting a little Incense into the Censors. And all this they suffer'd willingly, as being mindful of that of our Saviour's, I will raise thee up at the last Day (Jo. 6.) or that in Apocal. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Consider therefore (O faithful Christian) and often consider the
great encouragement and strong con∣solation, that it stored up in this Fun∣damental Doctrine of the Resurrection and Life to come. If thy Body lie in a Dungeon, in cold Irons, and perish here; Yet it shall be raised up and sit upon a Throne. If it be Ioden with Chains; it shall hereafter put on Robes of Glory, and be Clothed with the Royal Apparel. What though thou be here (as Christ was) Crowned with Thorns, yet hereafter thou shalt have a better Crown then a Crown of Gold, then the Richest Crown that ever any King or Em∣perour did wear. What though wicked Men Eat the Flesh of Gods People, as it is in Micah. 3. 3. yet their Flesh doth rest in hope, Psal. 16. To conclude this second Particular, I might observe, That the Doctrine of Christ's Resurrection (upon which ours doth depend) is full of the greatest comfort and encouragement: For as he was delivered (to death) for our Offences, so he rose again for our Justi∣fication, Rom. 4. 25. His Resurrecti∣on did evidence his Death to be an acceptable Sacrifice to God, and availe∣able to the making of Atonement and
Expiation of our Sins. For had it been otherwise, had not Christ our Surety fully satisfied, had he not done and suffered all that God required at his hand to the making Atonement for our Sins; God would not have loosed the Bands, or Cords of Death, in raising him up again, but he should have been holden fast by Death (Acts 2. 24) and still detain'd in the dark Prison of the Grave; he had not been taken up into Heaven, and Seated at God's Right Hand: But his being raised from the Dead, and received up into Glory, and his Interceeding there in the Vertue of his Death, and pre∣senting his Sacrifice in the behalf of all who truly believe and repent, are evident proofs of the acceptableness of his Sacrifice, and that God was well pleased, and fully satisfied, and that Christ had fulfilled all that God re∣quired of him to make Reconciliation for Iniquity (Dan. 9.) The Apostle therefore in Rom. 1. 4. saith, that Christ was declared (or demonstrated) to be the Son of God, by the Resurrecti∣on from the Dead. And this (if duly consider'd) makes much for comfort and strong consolation unto all sincere
Christians: Hence that of the Apostle (in Rom. 8. 34) Who is he that Con∣demneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is Risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of God, who also maketh Intercession for us. 3. This Doctrine of the Resurrection and Life to come is such as properly and powerfully tends to, and engages a Christian to the greatest Self-purificati∣on, to all manner of Purity, inward and outward, in Soul and in Body, to the cleansing of himself from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; which is to perfect Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. And because it makes so much for the Advancement of Holi∣ness and Purity in Heart and Life, it is most worthy to be firmly Believed and Profest. Accordingly its said, in 1 John 3. 3. He that hath this hope (the hope of seeing God as he is, Vers. 2.) purifies himself even as he is pure: He endea∣vours after the greatest Self-purificati∣on, as knowing that onely the pure in Heart shall see God, who is Purity it self, Holy, Holy, Holy, as it is thrice repeated in Apocal. 4. 8. but in some Greek Copies Nine times These two
are therefore joyned together [we shall be like him, and we shall see him as he is. The Soul must first become like unto God in Purity and Holiness, be∣fore it is capable of seeing God as he is, of enjoying him and having any near and blissful Communion with him. The onely means to behold the Face of God, is to behold it in Righteousness, and Purity, and Holiness; and such a Christian shall be satisfied, when he awakes from the sleep of Death, with God's likeness. It was to this purpose well observed by Plotinus, one of Origen's Schollars (in Ennead. 1. lib. 6.) . Let every one that would see God (who is Holy, and Pure, and Good, the Ori∣ginal and Fountain of all Beauty, and Excellency, and Goodness, ) make account first to become God-like; his Soul must first be purified as ever he would hope to seé and enjoy God. And now as the Soul sets it self in good earnest upon Self-purification, as that which is a necessary Preparation for the enjoyment of God; and as it prospers in its sincere and earnest en∣deavours
to purge and cleanse it self from all that within which is contrary unto God; by the same degrees and proportion, , (as Hierocles to. wards the end of his Comment upon Pythagoras his Golden Verses, speaks of the great privileges of a Purified Soul) it revives, and becomes more lively, active and vivacious, is more collected within it self, and is filled with Divine Strength and Power: Now it is that the Locks of Samson are grown again (Judg. 16.) and the Strength which went and was gone from the Soul by its yielding to the Blandishments and Softnesses of the Sensual and Animal Life (that most dangerous and enveigling Delilah) is return'd again: Now it is that the Wings of the Soul grow again and better, , and it moves more freely, being delivered from what did hitherto clog and stop  its Heavenly slight and Journey upwards. There are some indeed (and they not a few) who seem to acknowledge this Belief and Hope of the Resurrecti∣on and Life to come, who yet do only
reach to a slight and superficial Purity, in outward appearance, answerable to their slight and superficial know∣ledge of this Grand and Important Truth, such as was that knowledge of the Pharisees. The Power of Sin within is stronger and more operative then the Form of Godliness without; and be the Form never so Glorious to the Eyes of Men (as the Pharisaick Purity was very Specious and taking with the vulgar in our Saviour's time) yet there is little security, no confidence concerning such Men, but that they will shamefully prejudice the Truth and the Religion Professed by them: For they all this while under this disguise do Cherish, and Foment, and make much of diverse Lusts and Pleasures (which they serve, Titus 3. 3.) and such Sins as are most gainful: These are uncrucified, alive and strong, for they have all Provi∣sion made for them (Rom. 13. ult.) and are ready to break out when there are Tempting occasions; and hereby the Name of God is Blasphemed (1 Tim. 6. 1. Rom. 2. 24.) and by Christians of this Temper is the Holy Doctrine of the Gospel, the
way of Truth, evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. But where there is the Power of God∣liness within, there will also be the Form of Godliness without, and a better Form then that meer external Righte∣ousness which the Spiritual Pharisees boast of, who would make a fair shew in the Flesh, as the Apostle speaks, Galat. 6. When Christians have Puri∣fied their Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit, (as S. Peter speaks in 1 Ep. Chap. 22.) there is no doubt but this inward Purity of the Soul will be emproved to the Purity of the Body, the Purity of outward conver∣sation. There is the greatest security concerning their ordering the outward conversation aright, whose Hearts are Purified, and where there is a liv∣ing Fountain and Principle of Holiness within: For as the Heart is, so will the words and actions be, Matth. 12. 35. It was therefore absolutely the best Counsel and the right Method for Self-purification, which our Saviour delivered, Matth. 23. 26. Cleanse first that which is within, that the out-side may be clean also. That the Streams be Pure and Chrystalline, it's necessary
that the Spring and Well-head be clear. Purity in Heart is Purity in the Spring, Purity in Actions is Purity in the Streams. God requires Self-purification as to both; Clean Hands and a Pure Heart, Psal. 24. 4. The Cleansing of the Hands and the Purifying of the Heart, Isa. 4. 8. where the Hands, as being the most active parts of the Body, and the Instruments most used for action are put for all the Members of the Body, and denote all outward actions which are visible to others, the out∣ward visible Course of Life and Con∣versation. And as God requires both the In∣ward and Outward Purity, and the Doctrine of the Resurrection obliges a Christian to the Inward, so likewise to the Outward, that of the Body: He that longs and waites for the Redemp∣tion of the Body (Rom. 8. 23.) he that hopes for a Glorious and Spiritual Body, believing that it shall be raised in Power to such Purity and Glory, must needs infer from hence that it becomes him to possess his Vessel (his Body) in Sanctification and Honour, and not in the Lust of Concupiscence,
or Passion of Lust, , as the Greek hath it: That so the Body may be in a fit and capable condition of being raised to Eternal Life, an Incorruptible and Heavenly State. And therefore the Apostle Paul (in 1 Cor. 6.) where he hath many Ar∣guments to perswade to Chastity, and to discountenance Uncleanness, argues from Christs Resurrection and from ours, Vers. 14. God hath raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own Power. As we believe and expect that God will raise up our Bodies, and that to an Incorruptible, Spiritual, Pure and Undefiled State, as he rais∣ed up the Body of Christ to such a one, and so we shall bear the IMage of the Heavenly, the last Adam, the Lord from Heaven (for as is the Hea∣venly, such are they also that are Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. They shall have such a Body as Christ now hath) it becomes us to keep our Bodies Un∣defiled, and in a State of Purity here on Earth. And in Vers. 15. Know ye not, that your Bodies are the Members of Christ? Shall I then take the Mem∣bers of Christ, and make them the Mem∣bers of an Harlot? God forbid.
4. The fourth and last Argument to perswade to a being Steadfast and Vnmoveable in the belief of the Resur∣rection and Life to come, is taken from the excellent properties and effects of this Doctrine, so adequate to the several needs and exigencies of a Christian here, and furnishing him with such considerati∣ons as may be greatly helpful to him in the several Tryals and Exigencies he may meet with in this World. As particularly. 1. This Doctrine firmly and heartily entertain'd, begets in Holy Souls the greatest Equanimity and Contentedness of Spirit, in opposition to the disturb∣ing and wasting Cares and Ambitions, which other Men have experience of. For the Lord is at hand, and therefore let your Moderation be known unto all Men, Phil. 4. Your Moderation,] in the largest and most comprehensive Sense of the word; Moderation as to the desires and pursuits of Worldly things, the  things of this Life, (1 Cor. 6.) or  (1 Jo. 3. 17.) Worldly Goods: For how Indecorous is it for that Christian to be Anxious or Eager
about the getting and having much of this World, who looks and hopes for the better and enduring Substance in Heaven, (Heb. 10.) who expects Trea∣sures of Glory and Goodness, which Christ hath to bestow on his faithful Servants; and these are not far off, the Lord is at hand to dispense them; and 'ere long thou shalt tast and see how good and gracious the Lord is. Moderation] as to the great things of this World; for how little and mean are these things to that Crown and Kingdom which the Righteous Judge will give? What are they, what is the Glory of this World and the Glory of Men, to the Glory of God (Jo. 12. 43.) the Reputation with God himself, the Honour that cometh from God onely (Jo. 5. 44.) that Glory and Honour with which God will reward the patient Continuance in well doing? Rom. 2. 2. It begets a sober Cheerfulness and Joy in them. To such it is said, Re∣joyce in the Lord alway, and again I say Rejoyce, Phil. 4. and this Joy is ac∣companied with the forementioned Equanimity and Contentedness of Spirit; for if our delights and satisfactions be
(as they should be) in God, he will give us what is best for us to have, ei∣ther in kind what we desire, or else that which he knows to be better, and is more fit for us to desire and have. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy Heart, (Psal. 37. 4.) Whereas if our delights be placed chiefly in other things which we desire, its better we should not have them; or if we have what we desire, God may give it us in Judgment: As it is said in Psal. 77. 29. He gave them their own desire; they were weary of Manna, and slight∣ed it: They would have Flesh; and for Manna he gave them Quails: But while their Meat was in their Mouths, the Wrath of God came upon them, &c. But the sober chearfulness and joy (we speak of) arising from the belief of the Resurrection, this together with a due Moderation and Equani∣mity, is a safe repast, and is greatly availeable to the health and well being even of the Body in this State, as the Doctrine of the Resurrection assures of a better, an Heavenly and Spiritual Body hereafter.
3. It secures us against the most win∣ning and dangerous Tentations and Allurements of this present World; as it did Moses in Pharaoh's Court, who when he was come to Years, refused to be call'd the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the plea∣sures of Sin for a season, &c. (Heb. 11.) The Instance is remarkable, and what is here said of him, is fit to be a little more consider'd. Moses when , when he was grown big, a grown Man (not a Novice, not a Child; nor when Old and Doting, not when Weak and Decrepit, and unfit to tast the pleasures of the Court, as Aged Bar∣zillai speaks of himself, 2. Sam. 19. 35. but) Moses in his Ripe Years and setled Strength, being then full Forty Years Old, Acts 7. 27. This Moses refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter. Thermutis (that was her Name, as Josephus relates) Pharaoh's onely Daughter, and much beloved of him, that saved his Life, and caused him to be Nursed, and afterwards took care for his Ingenu∣ous Education, in all the Wisdom
and Learning of the Egyptians, (Philo Jud. in his de vitâ Mosis, saith, she was at great Charges in procuring Men from Forreign Parts to Instruct him.) She took him for her Son (Exod. 2. 10. Acts 7. 21.) Intending him to Inherit her Father's Kingdom: She that took him (when an Infant) out of this Ark of Bull-Rushes, where he was laid, would have set him in the Throne, Adopting him for her Son. But he refused to be called her Son, and consequently to be the Heir of a King∣dom; he rejected the offer of a Throne and Kingdom, the hopes of the great∣est Dignity upon Earth; and chose the Cross rather then Crown; or if a Crown, he would rather have a Crown of Thorns then a Crown of Gold, he chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season, or (to render it more closely to the Greek) to have the Temporary enjoyment of Sin, . He chose rather to be in the Wilder∣ness, then in the Court; yea in that great and terrible Wilderness, wherein were Fiery. Serpents and Scorpions, and drought, where there was no Water,
(as it is described, Deut. 8. 15.) He chose rather to endure the hardships of the Wilderness, then to enjoy the Delicacies and Pleasures of the Court, to live there in all ease and softness, to enjoy the Delights and Sensual sa∣tisfactions which Courts afford, to have Riches, and Honours, and Digni∣ties, and the great things and out∣ward Glory of this World, which others so much scramble for; to have these, and what he would (if Egypt could afford it) heaped upon him; all this would have flowed in upon him, if he would have been willing to be Adopted by Pharaoh's Daugh∣ter for her Son. And besides his own Personal Worth and Accomplish∣ments, the unordinary Amiableness of his Person, the Excellency of his Parts emproved by the best Educa∣tion, the singular sweetness of his Spirit (Meek and gentle above all Men upon Earth, Numb. 12. 3.) would have won and gain'd him all Love and Respects and Venerations, and the good Words and Applause of all; and made him more capable of gratifying and pleasing himself, and emproving the advantages which the Court-life
might afford. But for all this, he chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, and as it follows in Vers. 26. He esteemed the reproach of Christ (for Christ is meant by the Angel that did lead them and keep them in the way, and brought them to Canaan) greater Riches then the Treasures in Egypt, of which Wealth and Power he had been Possest, had he been content to go for the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter. But what was it that enabled him to do all this, to deny himself at such a rate as this, that he was worthy to be famed for the most Self-denying Man (as he was for the most Meek Man) upon Earth? It was his Faith: Heb. 11. 24. By Faith Moses when he was come to Tears, refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter. He did it not out of Sullenness, or in a Pet or Humour, but deliberately, and upon choice, and upon the best reason and ground, the hope of the Re∣ward to come; and it was Faith that enabled him to Eye it. This is the Account given in Vers. 26. For he had respect unto the Recom∣pence of the Reward, . The expectation
of better Treasures in Heaven, a better Crown then what Thermutis could have helpt him to, a better Kingdom then that in Egypt; the ex∣pectation of better pleasures, and a more happy condition hereafter, in∣finitely above the Temporary delights of Sin, the pleasures of Sin for a Sea∣son, for a little while in this World, which if he had given up himself to, he had lost those purer and permanent pleasures at Gods Right Hand; The belief of better things that he should be Heir of, if he approved himself as a Son of God, then he could ever be Heir of in Egypt, if he were called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter; This was it which enabled him to do all this, and to suffer all the hardships and difficulties he met with, which were not few nor small. Grotius interprets (as the Socinians do)  to be the Possessing of Canaan, the Land Promised to their Fathers. But the word being used in the foregoing Chap. Vers. 35. for the Heavenly Reward, where it fol∣lows what is said in Vers. 34. A better and an enduring Substance (or being) in Heaven, we may well here also
understand it in the same Sense. But had it been onely an Earthly Ca∣naan that Moses had respect to, we may hence argue; If an Earthly In∣heritance, which is uncertain, and short (as our Life is) and not secured from troubles and crosses, could thus far affect Moses, and prevail with him to do and suffer all this, and secured him against the Tentations of the Court, and made him to choose Piety with afflictions, rather then Pleasures accompanied with Sin; How much more should the Heavenly Inheritance, the Land of the Living (as Heaven may be better call'd so then Earth, as being the Land and Country of the Living to Eternity) how much more should the upper Canaan (of which it may be rather said then of the lower and Earthly Canaan, Deut. 8. That it is a Land wherein thou shalt Eat Bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it) a Land that flow∣eth with what is sweeter and better then Milk and Honey; How much more should it prevail with us to deny our selves, and to overcome the Tem∣porary delights of Sin!
4. This Doctrine of the Resurrection and the Life to come, makes the Spirit of a Believer Impregnable, when assault∣ed with the greatest difficulties and dan∣gers from without. It Arms and For∣tifies him against the most threatning Terrours of the World, as well as a∣gainst the most alluring Tentations; an instance and eminent proof where∣of we have in the Seven Brethren and their Mother who suffer'd under An∣tiochus; of which we spake before. 5. It enábles Christians to take pa∣tiently the Loss of Friends, the Decease of nearest and dearest Relations that die in the Lord, and sleep in Jesus: As knowing that God will bring them again with Christ at the last Day, God will raise them out of their Graves, and they shall as soon be with Christ when he Descends from Hea∣ven with a Shout, with the Voice of the Archangel and the Trump of God, as those that are alive upon the Earth at his coming; who shall not prevent them which are asleep; but the Dead in Christ shall Rise first, and so all of them (both the newly raised Saints,
and the then living who shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye (1 Cor. 15.) their Bodies being to be made Incorruptible and Immortal, and so qualified for Heaven, as well as the Bodies of them that were raised from the Dead) I say, all of them shall at once be taken up in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, to attend upon the Judge, the King of Glory; and so shall they ever be with the Lord. All this we have in 1 Thes. 4. And are not these words of comfort in the case of Christian Friends Deceased? And it enables also to take patiently, yea, and joyfully, the spoyling of their Goods, the loss of their Worldly Goods, their Estates and Possessions, as it is expresly said of the believing Hebrews, in Chap. 10. 34. Where also is men∣tion'd that which enabled them to such a joyous patience, for it immediately follows in the same. Verse, knowing in your selves that you have in Heaven a better and more enduring Substance, better Treasures, and such as can∣not be taken away, none can spoile them of; and that for their losses and sufferings here, they shall be Infinitely Rewarded and Recompen∣sed
at the Resurrection of the Just. 6. It makes Believers more mindful of, and faithful to, the great ends of Life and Being in this World; It melts them into softer Compassions to the Souls of others, and enlarges them into greater desires of and endeavours after the good of others every way; That they also may with them be the Children of the Resurrection, and ac∣counted worthy to obtain that World and the Resurrection from the Dead (Luke 20. 35.) and to stand before the Son of Man (Chap. 31. 26.). These are those that love the appear∣ing of Christ (as it is in 2 Tim. 4.) and prepare for it, and they would fain have others also so minded, and therefore while they are in the World, they endeavour to do what good they can. These long and look for the Blessed Hope and Glorious Appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ (Tit. 2.) Then shall the shadows of this dark Life flee away; Then shall the Day break, and the Night be gone; Then will the Eyelids of that Morning begin to open, when they shall awake and
see the Face of God in Righteousness; The Morning to that calm and fair Day of Eternity (, 2 Pet. 3. ult.) the Day that shall have no Sun-set, no Evening; the Day which the Lord hath made, we shall re∣joyce and be glad in it, (Psal. 118.) To these Children of the Resurrection is that encouraging passage of Scrip∣ture in Luke 23. 28. where, after the mention of Christs coming in a Cloud with Power and great Glory, it is said, and by Christ himself, When these things come to pass, then look up and lift up your Heads, for your Re∣demption draweth nigh. The Phrase is like to that in Rom. 8. 19. , Exerto capite facta expe∣ctatio Creaturae: Where the Apostle by a Pathetical Elegant Prosopopeia brings in the whole Creation expect∣ing, looking and longing for, with Head lifted up, the Manifestation, and Vers. 21. the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, and to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption and the being sub∣ject unto Vanity, under which it groan∣th and travellèth with pain until now. But the word in Luke respects rather the then becoming temper os the Mind
then any gesture of the Body, it im∣ports the greatest longing and most joyous expectation: And therefore the Syriack attending to the Sense of the place, rather then to the letter, doth not unfitly render the Greek [ Look up] by  Be of goood Cheer, have a good Heart. But this comfort is onely for the Children of the Resurrection, for those that love the appearing of Christ (as the Apostle Characterizes those Christians to whom God the Righteous Judge will at that Day give the Crown of Righte∣ousness:) and such onely can love the appearing of Christ, his Illustrious ap∣pearing, his coming then with Power and great Glory, who have already endured and felt with patience the Day of his coming, and the Power of his Spiritual appearance within them, when he was not disturb'd, nor oppo∣sed in his Refining and Spiritual Work, for he is like a Refiners Fire, and he shall Sit as a Refiner and Purifier of Silver; as it is in Mal. 3. PROPOSITION III. 3. Christians must always Abound, or Excel, in the Work of the Lord.
The Greek word [] signifies not onely to Abound, but to Excel: So in 1 Cor. 14. 12.  that ye may Excel; And Matth. 5. 47. saith Christ to his Disciples, ; What Excellent, or what Sin∣gular, what Extraordinary thing do ye? Both come much to one, Christians must Excel others, or Abound more then others, and they must Excel them∣selves, or Abound more then themselves, in the Work of the Lord. And what herein S. Paul exhorts others to, he himself practised; He excelled others, he abounded more then others, so he saith of himself in 1 Cor. 15. 10. , I Laboured more abundantly then they all, then the rest of the Apostles; and in 2 Cor. 11. 23. , in Labours more abundant: Witness his Preaching from Jerusalem and round about even unto Illyricum (Rom. 15. 19.) Three Hundred and Fifty German Miles (as Paraeus upon the place observes) particularly, in Arabia (Gal. 1. 17.) at Damascus (Gal. 1. 17) at Antioch (Acts 13. 1.) at Seleucia (Acts 13. 4.) in Cyprus (Acts 13. 4.)
in Pamphilia (Acts 13. 13.) in Pisidia (Acts 13. 14.) in Lycaonia (Acts 14. 6.) in Cilicia (Acts 15. 41.) in Phrygia (Acts 16. 6.) in Galatia (Acts 16. 6.) at Troas (Acts 16. 8.) at Athens (Acts 17. 15.) in Achaia (Acts 18. 1.) in Macedonia (Acts 16. 10.) besides o∣ther places, and those places especial∣ly where Christ was not Named (for to Preach here was his Holy Ambition, Rom. 15. 20. ) which made his labour the greater, which would have been far easier, if he had onely Preacht where others had laid the Foundation of Christian Know∣ledge. And as he excell'd others, so he ex∣celled himself also. So he saith of him∣self, Phil. 3. 3. Forgeting those things which are behind (not looking at that which was behind, to see how much of the Race I have passed, or how much others are behind me) and reach∣ing forth unto those things which are before ( stretching as hard as I can to get to the end of the Race which is before me, and to overtake and out-run others) I press towards the Mark, or Goal, for the  the Prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Thus we see what the blessed Apostle Taught, and what he Practised; and in Conformity to his Doctrine and his Example; 1. Christians must Excel themselves, must Abound more then they have done, in the Work of the Lord: Their last Works must be more then the first, as it is said of the Church of Thyatira, in Revel. 2. 19. They must not be weary in well-doing, but go on and mend their pace, still making a sar∣ther Progress in Religion, and going onto perfection (Heb. 6. 2.) And the nearer they are to the Goal, the end of their Race, the faster they must Run Thus the same Apostle writing to the Thessalonians (Chap. 4. 1.) doth beseech and exhort them by the Lord Jesus, that as they had received (had been taught) how they ought to walk and to please God, so they would Abound more and more. And truly the more Excellent Christians have a Spirit of great In∣genuity in them, For
1. They are Sensible of the much God hath done for them already. He hath Blessed them with all Spiritual blessings in Christ, Ephes. 1. and Spi∣ritual good things are the choicest of Blessings. And they judge themselves less then the least of Gods Mercies, as Jacob did, Gen. 32. 10. I am less then all the Mercies, and then all the Truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy Servant, which the Chaldee Para∣phrast fitly renders,  My deserts are less then all the Mercies, and all the Benefits which thou hast done to thy Servant. 2. They are Sensible of the much more he hath promised to do for them, and is reserved for them in Hea∣ven (1 Pet. 1. 4.) They have cause to say with David (Psal. 31. 19.) O how great is thy Goodness which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee: As they have cause also to reckon with S. Paul, that the sufferings of this pre∣sent time, all their labours and services, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed.
3. They are Sensible of the little they have done for God, what mean and poor returns they have made to God who hath dealt bountifully with them. None are more deeply sensible of their Omissions, none are more apt to judge themselves unprofitable Servants (Luke 17.) then they that have aboun∣ded most in the Work of the Lord. It was the Speech of that Holy and Learned Bishop, Bishop Vsher, not long before his Death, Lord forgive me my Omissions: And yet he was a most Industrious and Diligent La∣bourer in God's Vineyard. Admir∣able is the humble Ingenuity of those good and faithful Servants of God, who when Christ at the Day of Judg∣ment before Angels and Men doth remember to their Honour what they had done for Him in their life time, reply, Lord when saw we thee an Hungred, and fed thee; or Thirsty, and gave thee drink; or a Stranger, and took thee in; or Naked, and clothed thee, or Sick, or in Prison, and came unto thee?
A Lover of God, who serves him not out of Mercenary regards, but from an Ingenuous Spirit, doth not score up his Duties and keep an ac∣count of his Performances, does not Register and then reckon how many good Offices he hath done for the Cause of God in the World, he keeps no Catalogue of his Services; and then sits still and applauds and pleases himself in what he hath done. But he forgets the things which are be∣hind; he is as little elated as if he had done nothing; and therefore presseth hard forward, and reacheth to the things that are before. Whereas on the contrary, Formal, meer Outward Christians, being of a Pharisaick and Servile Spirit, they that are far from serving God accep∣tably (Heb. 12) they set an high value upon their Performances; and (like the shallow Streams which are most loud) they boast of their Out∣ward Services, and please and pride themselves in their often reflections upon what they have done; and they would also be applauded by others; for all their Works they do, for to be seen of Men (Matth.
23. 5.) . The word [] used here (and in Matth. 6. 5.) is very proper and fit to express Hypocrites, Stage-Players and Actors of a Part in Religion, and it imports such a seeing, such a look∣ing on by Men, as in a Theatre or Stage, a looking on with Admiration and Applause: And to this purpose is that other word in Matth. 6. 2. , that they may be Glorified, or Honoured of Men; Yea, and of God too. And yet it is but some Outward Service, void of Inward Life, that they perform to God. But it is their All, it is All that they will part with; and they would have it valued at no mean rate; they have no small opinion of their Lip-devotion, and the Bodily exercise of Religion; their Honouring God with their Lips, some good words, or some good works not proceeding from a right principle, nor directed to a right end: And hereby they think they do demereri Deum, and oblige Him for ever. And yet all is but an empty Shell which they bring, a Shell without a Kernel, a Cabinet without the Jewels. But such is their high esteem of it, that
they are ready to take it ill, and to challenge God for not taking due notice of the Honour and Service they do him; and he is not, as they think, so sensible and regardful thereof as he should be, when things go other∣wise with them then they wish. The Inward Language of their Hearts is fully exprest by Isa. Chap. 58. 3. Wherefore have we Fasted, say they, and thou seest not? Wherefore have we Afflicted our Soul, and thou takest no knowledge? And yet this was but a meer Outward Humiliation, as it is exprest in Vers. 5. The bowing down the Head as a Bul-Rush for a Day, and the spreading of Sackcloth and Ashes under them. But alas, what is the hanging or bowing down the Head, while the Heart is unbowed and unhumbled? And what is Sackcloth and Ashes, when∣as Pride compasseth them as a Chain, (Psal. 73. 6.)? Here then is the difference between those that are Christians Outwardly, and those that are Christians Inwardly (as the the Apostle speaks of the Jew (Rom. 2.) The former make great ac∣count of their trifles, as if they were the most solid realities, and the most
precious rarities: The other account themselves, and their Best perform∣ances, their most substantial Services, to be as nothing before God; But though it becomes them to think thus humbly and meanly of themselves, yet God who weighs the Spirits of Men and tryeth their Hearts, he hath an high esteem of them; God is not un∣righteous to forget their Work and La∣bour of Love, which they have shewed toward his Name, (Heb. 6. 10.) but he will remember them and their Per∣formances, and an Honourable Com∣memoration shall be made of them at the Last Day, Matth. 25. 34. 4. As they are Sensible of the little they have done for God, and are griev∣ed at their Omissions; so they are sensible of the little time they have to repair their neglects of those fair ad∣vantages which they have had for do∣ing good: They are apprehensive of the Shortness and Uncertainty of their Life and continuance here; that their time is but Short here to Testifie their Love to God in their Love of others, and caring for their good, they have but a Short space to Labour in; and it is
but short, (and as nothing to Eternity) if they be in the Morning of their Age, or in the Afternoon (and in∣deed such serious Thoughts as these do more commonly possess those that are in the Afternoon of their Life:) And therefore they rouse up and excite themselves to a greater diligence, Awake, awake, up and be doing, they say unto their Soul; Stir up the gift of God in thee, be strong in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus: And show forth that Strength in a Power to do more, and to endure more bard∣ness, as becomes a good Souldier of Jesus Christ, (2 Tim. 2.) While it is Day, while the light of Life shines, thou must Work the Works of him that sent thee, the Works of God, the business of Religion must be heeded by thee; For the Night cometh when no Man can Work, (Jo. 9. 4.) the Sunfet of thy Life, the Night of Death approacheth, and then the sea∣sons and advantages for an active em∣ploying thy self about the good of others, and Glorifying the Name of God in this World, will be over and past. And therefore, because there is no Work, nor deliberation, nor Wisdom
in the Grave whither thou art going; whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might, (Eccles. 9. 19.) Love God  (a more Empha∣tical word then ) with all thy Strength, with all thy Mind, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul; with whatsoever is in thee, and in thy Power; all thy faculties must be rais∣ed up to their best pitch: And the best expression and proof of this Love is in serving the Will of God in thy Generation to the best of thy Skill and Abilities. Live much in a Short time, for the time past of our Life may suffice us to have wrought our own Will; But Christ hath suffered for us in the Flesh, that we should no longer Live the rest of our time in the Flesh, to the Lusts of Men, (to the gratifying of those Appetites which Men generally Indulge them∣selves in) but to the Will of God, which is worthy to be obey'd and complyed with in all things by us. Let it be our wonder and our grief, that we were for so long a time (the shortest time is too long) Strangers to God and the ways of Religion, that we should for any time live without God in the World,
and be unacquainted with the Best of Services and Employments, which are the Services of Religion; That we should be estranged from the Life of God, which is the Noblest and Sweetest Lise, a Life of the highest Excellency, and of the most satisfying Pleasure: And therefore being now restored to God, and having found him whom our Souls Love, and whom our Souls should ever have loved, him who loved us first, how should we cleave the more close to him, even with full purpose of Heart; How should we live wholly to his Will; and Walk Worthy of him unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good Work; studying to know what will please him, what is that good and acceptable and perfect Will of God, and then to do it with all Alacrity and Faithfulness. Live then much in a short time, Redeem the time, repair thy Omissions in some measure by Redoubling thy diligence. Let the Book of thy Life (the Book that must be opened at the Last Day) be full of Sense and worthy Matter; Let there be no void spaces and empty lacunas (Idle Words and an Idle Life are such) in it: Let every
Page of it (every Day) be fill'd with what is Significant, Intelligible, Ra∣tional, and Worthy to be Transcribed and Copyed out by others. Live in an Exemplary way, and follow that best Exemplar, the Holy Jesus, of whom S. Peter gives this short Char∣acter, (in his Sermon to Cornelius, Acts 10.) , He went about doing good. Think thou hast lost a Day (as its said of the Emperour Titus Vespasian) if thou hast not done some good in it. Think thou hast not lived, if thou hast not lived to the Service of Religion: As that Courtier who retired from the Vanities of this World, and seriously applyed himself to the Services of Religion Seven Years before his Death, would have this Epitaph, Hic jacet Septuagenarius qui septem vixit annos. Let that Speech of the Apostle (Rom. 12. 11.) be often in thy Thoughts, let it be Written in fair Letters upon thy Heart, Not Slothful in business, Fervent in Spirit, Serving the Lord. We must not be Slothful in Business, , as to diligence and industry in our Calling and what concerns us. Whatsoever thy Hand findeth to do, as
the occasion shall offer it self, and the thing shall require (so the phrase is used in Judg. 9. 33. and 1 Sam. 10. 7.) do it with thy Might, do it as well as thou canst: As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all Men, or as we have Ability, Gal. 6. But especially do not the Work of the Lord negligently (Jer. 48) be not negligent and lazy in Religion; make that thy business, let it be thy , make it not thy , as if the Work of the Lord were to be done onely by the by; be serious and in good earnest in it, it is for the Life of thy Soul. We must be Fervent in Spirit,  (the like is said of Apollos, Acts 18. 25.) burning in Spirit, not coldly affected towards God's Service and Honour, but with enfla∣med affections and earnest endeavours ever following that which is good; this the Apostle calls in Titus 2. Zeal∣ous of good Works. It follows, Serving the Lord, or the Season, or Opportunity that is before us (for not a few Greek Copies instead of  read , the time or season) embracing and emproving all the ad∣vantages that present themselves to us
for procuring the good of others, and winning others, and doing Honour to God. And this indeed is a good Time∣serving, free from the least Self-seek∣ing; and we serve the Lord, when we serve the time or season, that is, lay hold on and improve the present opportunity, and every advantageous occasion of doing good. And indeed, the more excellent Christians, such as are more emprov∣ed in Grace and Spiritual Wisdom, account themselves more obliged to this Abounding in the Work of the Lord, from the consideration of what the Apostle intimates in Rom. 13. 11. that our Salvation is now nearer to us then when we believed, when we were first called and converted to the Faith of Christ; we are now nearer to the end, or reward of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls; we are nearer to the Coal and end of our Race, and conse∣quently nearer to the Prize of our high Calling in Christ Jesus. This Life of Action draws nearer to its Period, and the Life of Reward is more near, the Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand; and therefore knowing the time, that this is the season of loving
our Neighbour, of doing all the good we can to others, (of which the Apostle speaks in the foregoing Verse) it is high time to awake out of Sleep, to shake off all drowsiness, to awake out of a Lazy Profession, to be up and be doing: For we have not long to live in the World, and e're long we shall lay hold on Eternal Life, and receive the Reward far beyond all our Services, infinitely above all our Labours here. And here it may not be unfit to take notice of a Three fold Self-denyal, full of Nobleness and Ingenuity, in the more Excellent Christians. 1. Though they are Sensible of a Better State in the other World, of better Enjoyments, and Satisfactions more pure and permanent then in this present Life; and though they are full of comfortable hopes of their safe arrival and happy entertainment in that World of Souls ( as the Jews call it) when they shall be gathered to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect: Yet they are not un∣willing, nay rather desirous, to stay longer for their Reward, so that they may do more Service here, and Mini∣ster
to the good of others; they would Labour more in God's Vineyard, they would Abound more in the Work of the Lord. They are not over-hasty to receive their Wages, their Penny for Labouring in the Vineyard. They do not complain of their bearing the Bur∣den and Heat of the Day. They are willing with Jacob to serve Seven o∣ther Years for Rachel. They are not impatient of the length of the way to Canaan, nor do they murmur that they are kept from tasting the Fruits thereof. They are not eager to enter upon the full pleasures of the Hea∣venly Jerusalem. They are content with some Clusters of Grapes here, to Hearten and Strengthen them for their Work and Labour. They would not go to rest, to their Beds too soon (so the Grave is called, Isa. 57. 2. He shall enter into Peace, they shall rest in their Beds.) They are de∣sirous to Work longer; and when they have Labour'd more, and finish∣ed the work which they desired to do for God, then they can better sing with Old Simeon, Nunc dimittis, Lord now lettest thou thy Servant depart in Peace: And when they lie down, their
Sleep shall be sweet unto them, Prov. 3. 25. And now for the verifying of all this that hath been said, we have an evident proof in S. Paul, an Illustri∣ous Example of this kind of Self-deny∣al, who though he was assured of a Better State after his Decease, yet he was content to stay longer for his Reward, he was willing to be absent from the Lord, to be out of Heaven, and to abide longer here; that he might do more Service in the World, and Minister to the good of others: He rather consider'd what was more Needful for Others, then what would be more Gainful for Himself. This is plain out of Philip. 1. from Vers. 21. to 25. The whole Paragraph is worthy to be opened and further ex∣plained. In Vers. 21. he Professeth, To me to Live, is Christ] that is, If I Live, my Life shall be wholly spent in the Service of Christ, this is the main design and business of my Life; this is my choice, and I do not count it worth the while to Live in the World, Life is not valuable, but onely on this account, that I may bring Honour to Christ, and win Souls to the Gospel. It follows,
And to Die is gain] that is, If I Die, I shall be a Gainer by it, Eternal Life and Happiness being infinitely above all the enjoyments in this pre∣sent Life; And if I Die a Martyr at Rome (where I am now a Prisoner of the Lord, Ephes. 4. 1. a Prisoner for the Cause of Christ) if I Seal and Con∣firm the Truth of Christ by my Blood, the Service and Glory of Christ shall be advanced by my sufferings, yea and my Death shall be more eminently gainful to me; this suffering and Mar∣tyrdom being rewarded with a further Accession of Glory, and a more rich En∣crease of Happiness: So that I am resolved, that Christ shall be Magnified in my Body, whether it be by Life or by Death, Ver. 20. Vers. 22. But if I Live in the Flesh, this is  the Fruit of my Labour] Our Translation makes the place obscure, which otherwise is clear enough, if it be con∣sider'd that  is the same with operae pretium (and several such Latinisms there are in the New Testa∣ment) and it signifies worth the while, worth my labour. And so the Sense of this Verse is this, If I continue in this Fleshly Tabernacle, is I yet live in the
World, it is worth the while, it will not be altogether unprofitable to me, nor to others, because thereby I may gain some to Christ; and as for you Philip∣pians and other Christians, I may be helpful to you and them, for your and their furtherance and joy of Faith, (Vers. 25.) It follows in the same Verse, Yet what I shall choose, I wot not]: There are weighty and pressing Reasons on both sides: so that I know not well whether I should choose and desire to Live or Die, if the choice of both were given me. Vers. 23. For I am in a streight betwixt two] Here are two different desires, each have their Reasons to move; on the one side, Having a desire to depart] I have a great desire to return home. For so the Greek word should be render'd, rather then to depart; and the fitness of the Metaphor doth by the way suggest this to us, That this Life is a State of Banishment, or a Pilgrim-condition, a State of absence from God (2 Cor. 5.) and from our Fathers House, and that Heaven is the proper Country and Seat of Souls, it is their Home.
It follows, and to be with Christ, which is far better] Our English Tran∣slation is not here so full, and leaves out a word; it is exactly thus, for this is much better by far, or this is far bet∣ter by a great deal, . And here by the way may be observ∣ed; That the Soul hath a Being and doth also act, and is capable of joy or pain, and sensible of the good or evil condition she is in, after the Death of the Body; and that therefore she doth not fall into a deep Sleep, and con∣tinue (as the Body doth) in a sense∣less condition for many Hundreds, if not Thousands, of Years, till the sounding of the Shrill Trumpet of the Archangel at the great Day of Judg∣ment: Otherwise it had not been ex∣ceedingly much better for S. Paul to depart this Life, but to have lived and continued in the Flesh till the coming of that great Day; S. Paul had not been in a strait between two, nor at a loss whether to choose, but he would easily have preferr'd it as more desireable to be awake and alive here to the Service of Christ, and to the endeavouring the good of others;
To act for God in the World, and to be sensible of that satisfaction, and to reap that joy and pleasure which would follow (and did flow into his Soul) upon such labouring and abound∣ing in the work of the Lord, being plainly more eligible and a better State; And to fall asleep, which is to be in a condition of doing nothing for Christ, and of being uncapable of that joy and pleasure which accom∣panies the doing of good, being as plainly a worse Estate. If to be with Christ, be to fall asleep, to do nothing, to feel nothing, not to be sensible of his being there, it were better for him to be from Christ; and to be Mini∣string to the good of others in the World; considering also that it was so needful for the Philippians and o∣thers that he should abide in the Flesh: To live and to act, and to enjoy the comfort of such acting being simp∣ly better, then for the Soul to Sleep, that is, to do nothing, to perceive nothing, which is all one for the time as if the Soul were really Dead, or did Sleep the Sleep of Death. And whereas some (as Grotius and others) understand no more by this
Phrase [To be with Christ] then this, to be in Christi custodiâ quoad parten∣potiorem, i. e. animam, to be received by Christ into safe custody, to be committed to his trust and keeping; I Answer, First, That so the Faithful were in this Life kept by him and by God, Jo. 17. 11, 12. and Chap 10. 28, 29. 1 Pet. 1. 5. , which implys a safe custody, and Chap. 4. 19. which plainly is meant of this Life; and therefore if this be meant by being with Christ, they might be said to be with Christ here, in this Sense. Secondly, That though the Souls of the faithful be after Death received into Christ's custody and keeping, yet this doth not imply nor infer their falling into a senseless, unactive, dead Sleep. In Jo. 12. 26. Christ promi∣seth to every one that serves him and follows him, where I am, there shall also my Servant be; and after∣wards, him will my Father Honour, that is reward, so the Greek word imports. So that the being where Christ is [or the being with him] and God's Rewarding, go together. When S. Stephen at his Death said, Lord Jesus rceive my
Spirit, this doth no more prove that his Spirit fell asleep, as soon as it was received by Christ into his custody, then that the Spirit or Soul of Christ was asleep for three Days, after his Death, immediately before which he said, Father, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit, Luke 23. 46. Thirdly, I add, That this Phrase [To be with Christ] doth in the Style of the Scripture imply a State of Life and Sense; not a senseless Sleep, but such a State wherein the Faithful en∣joy Christ, and perceive the good of being with him: As appears by com∣paring several passages of Scripture. Thus in Jo. 17. 24. It is joyned with their beholding the Glory which God hath given him. And it is made use of by Christ as an, Argument to com∣fort his troubled Disciples, Jo. 14 3. and by the Apostle Paul to comfort Christians when grieved for the de∣cease of friends, 1 Thes. 4. 17. Where, to be for ever with the Lord, that is with Christ, is more then to be taken into his custody, and is far from signi∣fying for ever to be asleep. In all these places it signifies a State of Activity and Sense, and Perception, and a Per∣ception
of that Joy and Happiness, which being considered should fortifie Christians against all trouble and Sorrow. And so to be with Christ, is the same with to live with Christ, 2 Tim. 2. 11. and to reign with Christ, Vers. 12. And although their being with Christ, after they have received their Spiritual and Heavenly Body at the Resurrection, doth signifie a greater degree of Hap∣piness and a fuller measure of Reward, of which they are now more capable by reason of their Spiritual Body: Yet their being with Christ in the inter∣mediate space, between their Death and the Resurrection or last Judg∣ment, is far from signifying nothing at all, no lesser degree of Happiness, no enjoyment of Christ, no comfor∣table and joyous Perception of their being with him, nothing but a being kept safe or kept in being, nothing but being in a Dead Sleep in his Arms. But to return to the rest of the Para∣graph. Vers. 24. Nevertheless, or but, to abide in the Flesh is more needful for you] Though it would be more advantage∣ous
and gainful to me to Die, to go home and to be with Christ; Yet it is more for the advantage of you Philip∣pians, and of others, that I should live and continue longer in this World. And thus we see how S. Paul was plainly divided between two desires; the one of his own happiness, in re∣turning to his Father's House and be∣ing with Christ; the other of his doing good to others; and he inclines at last rather to this latter: Upon this score, of being in a capacity to do good to others, he is inclined to live; as appears by the following Verse, where he expresseth his hope (which argued his desire) that he should abide and continue with them, live a while longer, for their furtherance and joy of Faith. He is willing to stay for his reward, he is content to be absent from Christ, to have his more immediate and blissful enjoy∣ment of him deser'd, he is willing to be out of Heaven, that he may do the more good upon Earth; content to be less happy for the present, that he may be the more serviceable in the World. He would not so soon be at
rest from his labours; though his con∣tinuing in the World was likely to bring him more suffering and hard∣ships: He was now at Rome, a Pri∣soner for Christ, and in the days of Nero, that Lion (as he calls him, 2 Tim. 4) and he never stir'd out of his hired House there, but with a Souldier which held him fast to him by an Iron Chain (of which he speaks Acts 28.) and therefore it were far better for him, and especially in these Circumstances, to be with Christ, the Lamb, who is said (in Revel. 7. 17.) to feed those that are his, and lead them unto Living Fountains of Water, so that they shall neither Hunger nor Thirst any more; Yet he is willing to stay at Rome, and to await the fury of the Lion, that Monster of Raging Cruelty, Nero; before whom he was brought once at least, and he was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion, (2 Tim. 4. 17.) Good stood with him and strengthened him, when he stood at the Bar before the Emperour, and delivered him, and to this end (as it follows in that Verse) that by me the Preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear
(might receive the Gospel) and there were even in Caesar's Houshold those that received the Gospel (Phil. 4.) Christ had a Flock near the Lions Den, a Church in Nero's House. This was that which was most in S. Paul's Eye, for this he valued his deliverance, and the preservation and continuance of his Life (as we observed before) And that according to his hope and confidence mention'd to the Philip∣pians, of his coming again to them, he was delivered and restored at his first being at Rome, is proved by some Writers. In a word, Though it were more for his ease to be freed from his Chain and his Bonds in (or for) Christ, which (he saith Phil. 1. 13.) were manifest in Caesar's Court; as well as to be freed from the Bonds and Fetters wherewith his Soul was encompast, while it was in the Prison of this Ter∣restrial Body; Though it were more for his advantage to move in the free Air and spacious Regions of Immor∣tality and Bliss; Yet he chooseth ra∣ther to wear these Chains and Bonds; and to wear this great Fetter of the Body, then to wear that Royal Ap∣parrel
with which the King of Hea∣ven will Invest those whom he de∣lights to Honour, and to partake of that. Glorious Liberty of the Children of God in Heaven (that I may borrow that Phrase in Rom. 8.) He chooses rather to continue in the number of those who groan in this Earthly Ta∣ternacle, being burdened, then to Sing joyful Hallelujahs in the Jerusalem which is above and is free (Gal. 4.) And it was his Love to the good of Souls, his Zeal for the being more Instru∣mental to the Service and Honour of Christ, that was a stronger Chain to hold him here: This was his great business while he was at Rome in Chains, to Preach the Kingdom of God, and to Teach those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 28. 31. He calls his Philippians (in Chap. 4. 1.) his Joy and Crown; and that he might for some time longer abide in the Flesh for their furtherance in Christi∣anity, he is willing to be without the Crown of Life reserved for him in God's Kingdom. And was not this a rare and re∣markable peice of Self-denyal in him? And it will appear the more remark∣able,
if we consider that S. Paul had been rapt up into the Third Heaven, he had been caught up into Paradise, and there had heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawsul, or possible, [] for a Man to utter; and con∣sequently he knew more of the Feli∣cites and Glories of that Place and State. 2. A Second instance of the Self-denyal of the more excellent Christians is this. Though they are Sensible of the inward delights and sweetnesse which accompany a Contemplative Life, and are enjoy'd by a Soul with∣drawing it self from the noise and cares of the World; Though they are sensible what an Heaven it is upon Earth to have more inward Com∣munion with God, and in great still∣ness and quietness of Spirit to Con∣template the Divine Excellencies and Perfections, as also to Contemplate the Divine favours and kindnesses, which he hath already bestowed on them, with the much more that he reserves in Heaven, and designs there to bless them with; And though by such Contemplation of the Divine Excel∣lencies
and Favours, though by such a seeing of God and tasting how good the Lord is, they are melted into Love, and ravisht into Holy Joys; And though in this deep silence of the Soul they hear the still Voice of the Holy Spirit, the Comforter, speaking Peace and Love unto them: Yet they are willing to abate of those Spiritual Satisfactions and Delights in Com∣munion with God (which are to them far better) that so they may bestow themselves upon Services and Labours for the good of Others (which are to those others more needful.) They are willing to abate of the sweetness of Contemplation, that they may ap∣ply themselves more to Action; they account it the greatest Charity to abound in the Works of the Active Life, and prefer the Advantages which thereby may come to Others, before the Contentments which might come to Themselves by a Life more Con∣templative. When S Peter with the two other Disciples saw Christ Transfigured on the Mount, together with Moses and Elias, who appeared in Glory; he was so Transported and Enravished with
this Glorious sight, (this Model os Heaven upon the Mount) that he said, Lord, it is good for us to be here, let us make Three Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias: He wisht that he might always stay upon the Mount, and was loth to re∣turn to converse with those below; though in saying this, he knew not what he said, Luke 9. But the more Excellent Christians though when they are retired and upon the Mount of Contemplation, they sometimes see Christ Transfigured be∣fore them, though they see him in his Glory and Beauty, and are Enravished hereby with Love and Delight, and could ever dwell on the Mount: Yet they do not talk of Building Tabernacles there; They are willing to Descend to those in the Valley, to converse with the meanest and lowest in order to their Spiritual good. And though they gain a more Divine Splendor by such Contemplations, and are raised up to more Spiritual Heights and Ac∣complishments (as Moses his Face did shine by being with God on the Mount) yet they are ready to put a Vail over their Face, and to the Weak
they will become as Weak, that they may gain the Weak; They are willing to make themselves Servants unto all, that they may gain the more, as the great Apostle speaks of himself in 1 Cor. 9. They consider that they are not to please themselves, but to please their Neighbour (every other) for his good to Edification, Rom. 15. It's more pleasing to God that, ra∣ther then spend most of thy time in silent affectionate Contemplation of him, thou shouldst earnestly apply thy self to the Works and Labours of Love for the good of others; which are proper to the Active Life: And that thou shouldst testifie and express thy Love to him in Loving thy Bro∣ther who more needs the effects of thy Charity, then God doth thy af∣sections and praises, and without loving of whom God doth not account that thou lovest him, as we read in 1 John 4. where its also said, Vers. 16. That God is Love, and he that dwelleth in Love, dwelleth in God, and God in him. And the more there is of this Hearty Good-will, and endeavours for the good of Others, the more of this enlarged Benignity and Love to
Mankind; the more is the Love of God perfected in us, Vers. 12. the more shall we have of Gods peculiar Pre∣sence, his Shechinah is in such Souls, he dwells in them, he makes his abode with them, and will Manifest himself unto them. There is a Season for all things; The Contemplative Life is Beautiful in its Season, and so is the Active Life in its Season: And Contemplation should the more engage, and enable us to Action. The more we fix our In∣ward Eye upon the Divine Excel∣lencies, the more we Adore and Love him, the more we consider his Good∣ness and Benignity towards all his Works, and in particular his Mercies to us; the fitter we are to speak of his Glory, and the more should our Love of God awaken and excite us to endeavour the Spiritual good of others, that they also may Adore and Admire, and Love, and Praise Him who is Worthy to be Praised. There is great need of observing fit Seasons for Religious Retirement, and withdrawing thy self from the noise and busie cares of this World: But this is more or less to be used, accord∣ing
as the State of thy Soul requires it, and as Christian Prudence shall di∣rect. Thou art not to dwell upon the Mount, this is but one part of thy Duty; it must be done, but there are other Duties which must not be left undone; which though not so sweet to thee as the other, yet it con∣cerns thee to mind them; and by minding them thou mayst do more good in the World, and consequently glorifie God more. Thou art not onely to consider what is comfortable to thy self, but what is profitable to others, to thy Family, to the Church or Common-wealth thou livest in. It was a fault in the Euchite (a sort of mistaken and unskilful Christians of Old) to account themselves obliged to Pray without ceasing: Whereas God would rather that they should have been up and doing; and instead of being so much on their Knees, their Feet should have been Swift to Charity, to procure the good of others, as its said of the Feet of wick∣ed Men, they are Swift to shed Blood, (Rom. 3.) To conclude, The best Example for our direction in this kind is the
Life of Christ. He was for the mixt Life, the Life both Contemplative and Active. As S. Peter said, He went about doing good, and his Life was full of action, full of the effects and proofs of his good Will towards Men, in do∣ing good to their Souls and Bodies: So also at Seasons which seemed most fit to him, he would send away the Multitudes, and withdraw himself from his Disciples, and retire into the Wilderness, to Pray (Luke 5. 16.) or to a Mountain, Luke 6. 12. where it is said he continued all Night in Prayer to God; And that the Mount of Olives was a place he made Use of for the Ascending of his Heart in Prayer to God, as it was made choice of by him for the place whence he would Ascend to Heaven, appears by Luke 21. 37. where it is said, that in the Day-time he was Teaching in the Temple, and at Night he went out and abode in the Mount of Olives. And thus much for the Second sort of Self-denyal, which is a lesser Self∣denyal then the other, in that this Foretast of Heaven, this Heaven up∣on Earth, in Communion with God here, is less then the Enjoyment of
God hereafter, then those larger tastes of the River of Life, the River of Pleasures, the Fulness of Joy in that greater Heaven above. 3. A Third instance of their Self∣denyal is their disvaluing of their own Services and Labours (of which I spake before) and their looking up to God for the encrease and blessing. Though they are , God's fellow Labourers, (1 Cor. 3. 9.) yet they acknowledge with S. Paul (Vers. 7.) that neither is he that Planteth any thing, neither is he that Watereth: Nothing is to be attributed to either; but all the Praise is to be ascribed un∣to God. So far are they from the the Vanity of Theudas, who boasted himself to be some body (Acts 5. 36.) or of Simon Magus, who gave out that himself was some great one (Acts 8. 9.) But rather are they the followers of the Humility of S. Paul, who ac∣counted himself nothing, though he was in nothing behind the very Chiefest Apostles (2 Cor. 12. 11) They desire that all the Praise may run in the right Channel, may go the right way, that is to God: As for themselves,
they are nothing, and their Services are nothing in their esteem. Instead of applauding themselves in reflecting upon the much they have done, they rather complain of their little of the much they should have done. To Conclude, As a Christian grows in Grace and advances in Religion, there is in him more of a Godly Sorrow, more of an Holy Shame and Ingenuous Blushing at his little. II. As Christians are to Excel themselves, and Abound more and more; so they are to Excel others, to Abound more then others in the Work of the Lord. If others are coldly affect∣ed, yet they are to be a People Zeal∣ous of good Works: Else they will not Answer the full Intendment of Christ's Death and Sufferings, who gave himself for them, and Redeemed and Purified them to this end, as its said, Titus 2. Let then Christ see of the Travail of his Soul, the Fruit and desired effect of his great Sorrows and Suf∣ferings; let him see of the Travel of his Soul with joy and delight, and be
satisfied, taking full content, and being highly pleased in seeing the fruit of all his labours and pains. Shall a dull and dead, lazy and live∣less Profession of Religion be all the fruit of Christs Sufferings? Will he be satisfied where he sees no better fruit then this? Did Christ Sweat in the Garden, that we should Freeze? Is there no Sap, no more Life in the Tree of the Cross, then to put forth onely Leaves or Blossoms? Assuredly the due consideration of Christ Cruci∣fied, is that which will make a Christi∣an fruitful in Holiness and in every good Work. Christians must be , Patterns of good Works, Titus 2. and Examples, they must shine as lights in the World, (Phil. 2.) If Others are lazy, and con∣tent themselves with doing a little; Yet They must be Exemplary in diligence, go early into the Vineyard, and work hard. They must do more then others, not onely more then Publicans and Sinners, but more then the seemingly-strict Scribes and Pha∣risees, more then Formal Christians; for they are Men of another Spirit (as God said of Caleb and Joshua, and
must follow God fully. They have received from God other Helps and Advantages (Spiritual Light and Strength) God has made all Grace to Abound towards them; that so they may Abound to every good Work, 2 Cor. 9. They have other Hopes and Expectations, better grounded hopes of a Glorious Reward: They have received Mercies more peculiar then others: And therefore they should do more then others, they should not live as others; as they said (Wisdom 2. 15.) His Life is not like other Mens, his ways are of another fashion. Yea amongst Real Christians, one must strive to Excel another; A good strife this is (— ) to provoke to Love and good works, not onely by words but deeds; to strive who shall do most for God, who shall most Abound in His Work, La∣bour most in his Vineyard, who shall live Best. But then they that Abound and Excel others, must also Excel in Humility; So S. Paul in 2 Cor. 12. 11. and 1 Cor. 15. 10.
PROPOSITION IV. Christians have good ground to as∣sure themselves, and to be perswaded, that their Labour shall not be in Vain in the Lord. I. They may be assured from the Revelation of the Gospel, whereby Light and Immortality is brought to light (2 Tim. 2. 10.) Light and Im∣mortality, that is, Immortal Life, Eternal Blessedness both for Soul and Body, is now more clearly revealed and fully assured by the Gospel. S. Paul had Preached at Corinth the Chief City of Achaia for a longer space of time then he used to do in other Cities, (for he continued there a Year and Six Months, Acts 18. 11.) and God encouraged him hereunto, not∣withstanding the many troubles and oppositions he met with from the Jews, who unanimously and with one accord set themselves against Paul, (Vers. 6. and 12.) God spake to him by Night in a Vision, that he should not be afraid nor hold his peace; for though some did oppose, yet (saith
God) I have much People in this City, (Vers. 10.) and accordingly its said (Vers. 8. That many of the Corinthi∣ans believed and were Baptized, yea Crispus, the Chief Ruler of the Syna∣gogue, believed on the Lord, with all his House. And in Obedience to this Heavenly Vision, S. Paul did for a long time (a Year and an half) Preach the Gospel to them of Corinth clearly, and freely, and with much affection∣ateness to them; his whole Heart was set wide open to them, they had a great place in his affections; This he means, when he tells them in 2 Ep. 6. 11. 12. O ye Corinthians, our Mouth is opened to you, our Heart is enlarged, ye are not straitned in us. And what was it that S. Paul took such care to Preach amongst them, and which he did first of all deliver unto them (1 Cor. 15. 3.)? It was this, That Christ died for our sins accord∣ing to the Scriptures, and that he was Buried, and that he Rose again the Third Day according to the Scriptures: And this last-mentioned Article of the Re∣surrection of Christ (on which Our Resurrection doth depend, 1 Thes. 4. 14.) he particularly enlargeth upon,
proving it from Eye-witnesses, and they not onely some single persons, as Cephas, and James, but above Five Hundred Brethren, of whom he was seen at once; there were Five Hundred Christians, and more, that at one and the same time saw him after his Resurrection from the Dead; of whom although some were fallen asleep or were dead, yet (saith he Vers. 6.) the greater part remain (most of them are alive) unto this pre∣sent, or () until now, and therefore from some of them they might know and be satisfied about his Resurrection, and that he who was Dead, was Alive again. Yea, they might assure themselves of this from S. Paul's own Testimony; who though he was no Disciple, not a Christian, nor an Apostle while Christ conversed upon Earth; yet he was afterwards at his Conversion an Eye-witness of Christs being alive again; last of all (saith he Vers. 8.) he was seen of me also; and by this appearing of Christ from Heaven was S. Paul Converted: The remark∣able Story we have recorded by S. Luke in Acts 9. where Christ in
Glory and Power, with dread and awful Majesty (for there was Thun∣der,  Vers. 3. and Lightning which flash'd and shone about him, Vers. 2.) appeared to Paul who was still breathing out threatnings and Slaughters, , (Aristophanes in his . hath a like Phrase, ) Thun∣der and Lightning was in his Mouth; and Christ to meet him in his fury, appears in Dread to him, makes him to tremble (Vers. 6.) Strikes him down to the Earth (Vers. 4.) and turns this Raging Lion, this Ravening Wolf, into a Meek Lamb; Lord, saith he, what wilt thou have me to do? The Men that were with Paul, saw no Man (Vers. 7.) not him that spake, but Paul saw him, and He declared himself who he was; I am Jesus whom thou Persecutest, Vers. 5 And besides this Testimony from his own seeing of Christ to be alive, he useth other Arguments in this 15. Chap. to the Corinthians to prove the Resurrection of Christ. But what is this to the Resurrection of Christians? Very much. For Our Resurrection depends on Christ's. If
Christ be Risen, then there is a Re∣surrection from the Dead, Vers. 13. 16. and then shall We also Rise again. For we must know that Christ is be∣come the first Fruits of them that Slept or were Dead. He is twice in this Chapter called the First fruits (Vers. 20. 23.) and Col. 1. 15. The First born of every Creature, or more sully in Vers. 28. He is the Head of the Body the Church, He is the Begin∣ning, the First born from the Dead, as he is also Styled Apoc. 1. 5. And these three Titles and peculiar Pre∣rogatives of his (for in all things he was to have the Preeminence, saith the Apostle) evince the Doctrine in hand. 1. That of First-fruits [the First-fruits of them that Slept.] For as by the Consecrating and offering up to God the First-fruits, the whole Lump or Masse, the whole encrease was Sanctified and Consecrated (for if the first-fruits be Holy, the Lump, or Masse, is also Holy, Rom. 11.) So if Christ be Risen, all true believers who are fallen asleep, shall also be Raised.
2. That of the Head, [He is the Head of the Body, the Church] Christ is the Head, and He and true Beleivers make up one Body. And as Adam is consider'd as the Head of Mankind, in whom all die, all that come from him and partake his Nature: So is Christ the Second Adam to be consider'd as the Head of all Believers, in whom all shall be made alive; All that partake of him, of his nature and Spirit, and are like him in Spirit and Life, they shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam in having an Immortal and Glorious Body, such a one as Christ now hath. 3. That of the Beginning, and the First-born from the Dead, or more plainly (and without a Metaphor) Acts 26. 23. the first that should Ris from the Dead. He is the first among those who shall Rise from the Dead unto Glory, the first which from the Grave was raised and exalted to Hea∣ven: The First, as being the Cause of the Resurrection of others (in which Sense he saith, Jo. 11. 25. I
am the Resurrection and the Life) and the First in Order of Time, — Christ the first-fruits (he first was to Rise) afterwards they that are Christ's at his coming; and at his coming to Judg∣ment they shall then Rise who are his Members, who belong to him, and are his peculiar Possession. But not onely from the Resurrection of Christ doth the Apostle Labour to prove and clear to the Corinthians the Resurrection of Christians, but from several other Arguments and Proofs, of which there are not a few in this Chapter; and he doth more largely insist upon this Doctrine here, then he doth elsewhere in his Epistles upon any other: He speaks also more particularly here about the Nature and Quality of the Body to be Raised, of its being Spiritualiz'd and Immor∣taliz'd, as also in his 2 Ep. to Cor. Chap. 5. And something he tells them that was a Secret, undiscovered here∣tofore, , Behold, I shew you a Mystery, or I tell you a secret, 1 Cor. 15. 51. and the same he told to the Thessalonians, in 1 Ep. Chap. 4. which he ushers in with this Preface, the more to assure them of it, Vers. 15.
[For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord.] And there was great need that the Apostle should be so large and earnest in the confirming of this Truth, be∣cause there were some at Corinth that having before received it, began to deny the Resurrection of the Dead, Vers. 12. And indeed this Leaven of the Sadducees, the denyal of the Re∣surrection and Life to come, was likely to spread there, such a Doctrine there were many that were apt to receive in this place, and to wish it true (and generally Men from wishing such a thing to be true, in time think it to be true) because Corinth the Metropolis of Achaia being grown a Wealthy City by Merchandise (for the which it was excellently fitted by its Scitua∣tion) and as Luxurious and Voluptu∣ous as Wealthy (Riches usually Mini∣string to Luxury and Lust) so that it grew to a Proverb, Non est omni∣bus Corinthum appellere; which Horace hath exprest in this Verse,Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum. There was a Temple in this City
Dedicated to Venus, and (as Strabo relates, Geogr. l. 8.) so Richly En∣dowed, that above a Thousand Whores were Dedicated and Devoted for her Lustful Service, and they were very costly, demanded great Wages for their luiquity; which gave occasion to the forementioned Proverb; and because of the Uncleanness that did abound here, and to which the Corinthians were addicted (so that , was as much as Scortari) there was great reason for the Apostle (in 1 Ep. Chap. 6.) to heap up (though in few words) so many Arguments against Fornication. Now to such a sort of People as these were, the Doctrine that denyed all Resurrection and the Judgment to come, was very plea∣sing. To conclude therefore, from the Arguments used by the Apostle in this Epistle for the proof of the Re∣surrection, and from what he Preach∣ed at other times (as he intimates in Vers. 1. 3) concerning it; the Co∣rinthians might well be assured that their Labour should not be in vain in the Lord; And therefore He might well say , for as much as ye know,
&c. and the rather because (as he tells them in Vers. 1. 2.) ye have received the Gospel which I Preached unto you, this great Evangelical Truth, and ye did stand or had stood  in it, it had been firmly embraced by them; And he might well also exhort them to be Stedfast and Vnmoveable, to stand firm in the Profession of it (as he doth in the last Verse) and to the like purpose he tells them, in Vers. 11. Therefore, whether it were I or they, so we Preach, and so ye Believed: Where having before spoken of Cephas and the other Apostles, all which were Eye-witnesses of Christ's Resurrection (for to them he appeared more then once upon Earth) and having also spoken of himself, to whom Christ appeared from Heaven, and there∣fore he of his own knowledge could Testifie that Christ was Alive again; he adds whether it were I or they, whether ye look upon my own Testi∣mony, or upon the Testimony of his Apostles (of whom he speaks in the foregoing Verse) so we Preach (both I and they Preach the same thing) and so ye Believed; ye did receive this Truth, and held it without waver∣ing,
as indeed there was no cause after such Ample and Clear Proof and Testimony to doubt of it. This Doctrine of the Resurrection and a Reward to come the Corinthians might also know from the Preaching of Cephas or Peter, or of some of his Disciples: And from the Preaching of Apollos, Who was an Eloquent Man and Mighty in the Scripture, and being Fervent in Spirit, (an instance of which is that in Vers. 28. , with great vehemency he convinced the Jews) he taught  exactly (with exact Truth) the things of the Lord, or concerning the Lord, , the Lord Jesus (This he did at Ephesus) and being more perfectly instructed in the way of God by Aquila and Priscilla whom S. Paul did high∣ly value and calls his Fellow-labourers in Christ Jesus, Rom. 16. 3, 4. he went into Achaia, and coming to Corinth the Metropolis thereof, , he helped them much (or he much advantaged and emproved) them that believed through Grace (Vers. 27.) viz. upon the Preaching of S. Paul; for Paul planted and Apollos watered, (1 Cor. 3.) And as some might know
this from the Preaching of Paul, and Cephas, and Apollos, so some from Christ himself pretended to have been instructed in the Christian Doctrine: As appears by those divisions amongst them, in saying, I am of Paul, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ; as we read in 1 Cor. 1. 12. And no wonder that S. Paul and the Apostles were so much upon this: For the Doctrine of the Resurrection, of Christs Resurrection first, is a Doctrine of greatest Importance, as it makes for the encouragement of our Faith and Hope in God (for he was raised for our Justification, Rom. 4.) and as it makes for the justifying and con∣firmation of the Gospel, the Doctrine that he taught; there being no greater proof or evidence that the most Doubting and Sceptical and Prejudiced could desire or expect to have, to prove one to be a true Prophet, a Teacher sent from God, and that his Doctrine was from God, then this, if the Prophet or Teacher should fore∣tel and give it them for a Sign to be∣lieve in him, That after his being put to Death by those that would not be∣lieve him, he should arise and live
again in the World, and within such a time; which was fulfill'd and verified in our Saviour; and this was his last Sign superadded to the other Signs, the Miracles which he wrought, and is called The Sign of the Prophet Jonas; For as Jonas was Three Days and Three Nights in the Whale's Belly, so shall the Son of Man be Three Days and Three Nights in the Heart of the Earth (Matth. 12. 40.) And indeed this Sign of the Prophet Jonas was was very fitly remarkeable, Briefly to gloss upon it. In this great Sea of the World its no wonder if the great Tempest of God's Anger doth arise by reason of Mens Sins, so that all are in danger to be cast away and Perish: And there∣fore it was expedient that one should Die (as Caiaphas the High-Priest spake, and more Prophetically then he was aware of, Jo. 11. 50) Jonas was cast into the Sea, that the rest might be saved, and the Sea calmed. He of∣fered himself to them, to stav the ra∣ging of the Sea, and to save them from perishing; And Christ offered him∣self to those that came with Judas to apprehend him and bring him to
his Suffering, which was designed and agreed on by the Chief of the Jews (Jo. 18. 8.) I have told you that I am he. If therefore ye seek me let these (his Disciples he means) go their way: I am the Man that must stay the Storm. Jonas was in the Belly of the Whale (Jon. 2. 1.) and in the Heart of the Seas, (Vers. 3.) and this Belly of the Whale he calls the Belly of Hell, so that he was as good as lost or dead, it was a wonder that he was not con∣sumed, he was dead in a Figure (as tis said of Isaac, Heb. 11.) And Christ was in the Heart of the Earth, in the Belly of the Grave, he was dead not in a Figure onely, but really dead and buried. Jonas was restored the Third Day to the dry Land alive [Thou hast (saith he) brought up my Life from Corruption, O Lord my God] And so was Christ restored the Third Day to the Land of the Living. And to cast in and superadd one Resemblance more, though not of this kind, Jonas arose and went to Nineveh (a great and populous City) to Preach Re∣pentance to them: And Christ being risen from the dead, Repentance and Remission of Sins was to be Preached
in his Name, among all Nations, not to one City or one Nation onely, though first it was to be Preacht at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 47. And as the Apostles Preached Jesus, and his Resurrection, and did it with great Power, as it is exprest in Acts 4. Vers. 33. And with great Power gave the Apostles Witness of the Resur∣rection of the Lord Jesus. S. Peter Preacht it at Pentecost before the Jews then Assembled at Jerusalem, from every Nation under Heaven, and this he did , Acts 2. 29. freely and openly: And again he did it, at the Temple in Solomon's Porch besore the Jews; and with a boldness that Astonished them. He and S. John asserted it before Annas the High-Priest, and Caiaphas, and the Rulers and Elders and Scribes, Acts 4. 13. and this they did again, and in the Temple, as we read in Acts 5. in obedience to Gods Message sent them by an Angel, Vers. 20. Go, stand and speak in the Temple to the People, all the words of this Life. So the Apostles also Preacht Our Resur∣rection (which is consequent upon Christ's) with all freedom, though
it Gall'd the Sadducees, who were grieved that they Preached through Jesus the Resurrection from the Dead, Acts 4. 2. And S. Peter in his Preach∣ing to Cornelius and his near Friends and Kinsmen (the first converted Gen∣tiles) as he Preacheth Christs Resur∣rection (Acts 10. 40, 41.) so he tells them that Christ Commanded us (viz. the Apostles) to Preach unto the People, and to testifie that it is He which was Or∣dained of God to be the Judge of Quick and Dead; whence it follows, That Christ was to Rise from the Dead, and that the Dead shall Rise again: The words suppose both the Resurrection of Christ, and Our Resurrection. But to return to our Apostle Paul (who by the Grace of God laboured more abundantly then they all) He very largely and freely, Preached Christs Resurrection, and Ours: That this was his constant Employment, He affirms it in his defence before King Agrippa and Festus the Roman Go∣vernour, Acts 26. Vers. 22. I con∣tinue unto this Day, Witnessing both to small and great, That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should Rise from the Dead; And
in the beginning of his Apology or Defence, why should it be thought a thing incredible with you that God should Raise the Dead? (Vers. 8.) And as here before the Greatest Persons, so before the Greatest Judicatory in Greece, the Judges in Areopagus, be∣fore the Philosophers at Athens (that famous University, , the Greece of Greece, as it was called) he Preached Jesus and the Resurrection, Acts 17. 18. for the which he was op∣posed by the Epicureàns, and counted at Athens no better then a , a Babler, a Trifler, a Despicable fellow; and the same Entertainment he met with after he had Preached the same before the Judges in Areopagus, as we find it in Vers. 32. And when they heard of the Resurrection of the Dead, some Mocked, for he had said in the words immediately foregoing, That now God Commandeth all Men every where to Repent, because he hath ap∣pointed a Day wherein he will Judge the World with Righteousness, by that Man whom he hath Ordained (viz. by Christ) whereof he hath given assurance, in that he Raised him from the Dead. Though he had seen before how this Doctrine
was entertain'd with scorn, as idle talk and for which he was counted , (and for such and no better it was esteemed by Pliny (in Hist. Nat. l. 2. c. 7. and l. 7. c. 55.) pnerile deliramentum, and also by the Heathen Cecilius in Minutius Felix, Christianorum aniles fabulae) yet he knowing of what great importance and weighty consequence it was to Preach this necessary Doctrine of the Resurrection and (that which it is in order to) the Judgment to come, and what the Power of it was, as it after∣ward made Felix, the Roman Go∣vernour, to tremble; he thought it Seasonable to declare it before that Grave and Severe Senate and Judi∣catory of the Areopagites at Athens. And what he did here assert and Preach before them, was very fit and Seasonable; for that Court or Judica∣tory was a little Figure and Emblem of the great Day of Judgment. This Court was the Supreme Court of Justice at Athens, the Judges were persons of great note, and renown'd for their Wisdom and Integrity, able and fit to Judge of the most weighty matters, and therefore were the most
difficult causes wont to be refer'd to them; they sat in the Dark, that they might not be moved to any un∣due affection and compassion upon Sight of the Malefactor; they would not permit him  or , to use any Rhetorick to move their affections, but onely to make a plain and bare Narration: They were also very strict and severe in enquir∣ing into the Lives and Manners of Men (for this was another End to which this Court was appointed) and taking an account hereof, ubi quid quisque Atheniensium ageret, diligen∣tissimè inquiri soleb at, ut homines honesta∣tem (vitae rationem memores reddendam esse) sequerentur (as Valerius Maximus describes it) they were strictly inquisi∣tive what any one of the Athenians did, how he demean'd himself, that Men might see it to be their interest to live well, as considering that they were to give an account of their lives and be∣haviour; and therefore it was called Sanctissimum Consilium, the most Holy Council or Judicatory; and by this it seem'd a little Representation of the Great Tribunal of Christ and Solemn Day of Judgment, at what time the
Books shall be opened, the Rolls where∣in Mens Actions are Recorded; and when All must appear before the Judg∣ment-Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he hath done, whether good or evil, as the Apostle speaks in 2 Cor. 5. 10. And upon this account and consideration (as a proper and powerful perswasive to a good Life) he would have Christians to make it their great design and Holy Ambition to live so as to be acceptable unto God, in the foregoing Verse, as he adds also in the following Verse, Knowing therefore the terrour of the Lord (this dreadful appearance of the Lord at the Last Day) we per∣swade Men. Thus we see how the Apostle made it his great care and business to Preach the Resurrection of Christ, as also the General Resurrection, or (which a∣mounts to as much) the Great Day of Judgment. What ever Doctrine, more smooth and flattering, and com∣plying with Mens ee and carnality, Others might Teach, yet this is that which S. Paul with all faithfullness Preacht unto the World, this was
his Preaching of the Gospel, he made sure always to clear, and confirm, and inculcate this great Evangelical Truth, this Fundamental Article of Christi∣an Religion, The Doctrine of the Re∣surrection. Concerning which, I shall onely add this one Consideration more (and its worthy to be well consider'd by us) That though in this Fifteenth Chapter to the Corinthians he useth many Ar∣guments to evince and perswade the Belief of Our Resurrection, yet first of all, and principally, () he makes use of the Resurrection of Christ for the proof of it, who rose as the Head of the Church (the Second Adam being a Common Head, as well as the First, in the Sense we have shewed) and as the First fruits of them that Slept, and the First-born from the Dead. And further consider. That the Argument drawn from Christs being Raised to Life, and to a Life of Immortal Blessedness (Rom. 6. 9) is a most plain and easie Argu∣ment to prove that there is a Blessed Life and Immortality hereafter. There are other Arguments to evince this,
but some of them are too sublime for every capacity; but the meanest are capable of understanding this; For the Man Christ, one in our nature and flesh, Died, and Rose again, and is now Alive, and liveth for Ever; which is an evident proof of a future Life after the Death of the Body, and a fair pledge of a Blessed Immor∣tality hereafter, which God will re∣ward the faithful with, those that have the Spirit of God dwelling in them, as the Apostle speaks, Rom. 8. 11. And now having seen how Chri∣stians have good ground to hope for, and expect a Future Reward of Soul and Body from the Light of Reve∣lation, we shall shew (in the follow∣ing Arguments) how they may hope for it from the Light of Rea∣son. 2. From the Justice of God, they may know their Labour is not in vain. His Justice manifests it self in ren∣dring to every one according to his
works, and this without any respect of Persons: Both Maximes are much insisted upon in the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament. The first is acknowledged by David the Royal Psalmist, in Psal. 62. 12. by that Royàl Oracle of Wisdom, Solomon his Son, Prov. 24. 12. by the Prophets, Jeremy 32. 19. Ezek. 33. 20. and by one greater then Solomon, and the Prophets, even Christ Jesus, the Judge himself, in Matth. 16. 27. Revel. 22. 12. and by his Apostles, S. Paul, Rom. 2. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 10. and S. Peter, 1 Ep. 1. 17. Now the ways or works of Men are either good or evil; and God who rewards, cannot be deceived or mi∣staken; (as not corrupted or wrought upon by fear or flattery) but he has a perfect knowledge, and just value of Mens works, knows the inward Springs and Principles of their actions: And he which is Lord over all, shall fear no Mans persons, nor shall he stand in awe of any Mans greatness, &c. Wisdom 6. 7. He seeth not as Man seeth, for Man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the
Heart, 1 Sam. 16. 7. The Righteous Lord tries the Reines and Heart, Psal. 7. 9. And this, That he may give every Man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings; which is mention'd with God's search∣ing and pondering the Heart, and trying the Reins, Jer. 17. 10. Prov. 24. 12. And that God renders to every one without respect of persons, is a Maxime frequently also asserted in Scripture, in the Old Testament, Deut. 10. 17. 2 Chron. 19. 7. Job 34. 19 and in the New Testament, Acts 10. 34. Rom. 2. 11. Gal. 2. 6. Ephes. 6. 9. Colos. 3. 25. We read in Prov. 11. 1. that A false Ballance is Abomination to the Lord, surely then God will not Practise that himself, which he Abominates in Men; but he will weigh the actions of Men in a true Ballance. He will be far from all Partiality and respect of per∣sons, which are false Weights and Measures, and Ballances of deceit. He will not accept or respect persons in Judgment. In the dispensation of Rewards and Punishment, he will not regard or look at any thing but
the temper of their Minds, and their Actions, whether good or evil. Now the Justice of God requires ut bonis bene, malis male sit. Isa. 3. 10, 11. Say ye to the Righteous, That it shall be well with him. Wo unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him. But we often experience it other∣wise to be in this World, yea good Men in the Old Testament found it not seldome to be otherwise; and yet under that dispensation there is more abundant mention of Temporal good things in the Promises there recorded; and hence were those complaints in Mal. 3. 15. and in Psal. 73. from Verse 3. to 12. (as Job 12. 6.) and in Jer. 12. 1. and Holy David observ'd the like of wicked Men, the Men of the World, Psal. 17. 14. and in the Epistle to the Hebrews the Calamities of the most Eminent in goodness are described, Vers. 36. 37, 38. The Israelites (God's People) gather Straw. make Brick, live a Life of bitter affliction, when as the Egyptians live at ease, and in pleasures. When Jacob and his Children were
afflicted, partly as being in a Sojourn∣ing and uncertain condition, and partly while they were Strangers and Servants in Egypt, Esau and his Po∣sterity flourished in Honour. Lazarus (a Son of Abraham) had many evil things, was in hard Cir∣cumstances, not onely poor, but full of Sores, a sick weak thing, unable to get his Bread with labour and sweat of his brows; desired but the Crumbs that fell from the Rich Mans Table. Dives the Rich Man, and wicked, had his good things; he was Richly Attired, and fared Deliciously every Day, (Luke 16. 19.) , Every Day he enjoy'd all that made for pleasure, and not onely at some great or Solemn times; He and his Five Brethren with other jolly Company: While others (as Lazarus) fared hardly. So that Sin is not alway punished in this Life, nor Holiness rewarded. God did not render unto Lazarus, and those of whom the World was not Worthy, he did not render unto them in this Life according to what they had done or suffered.
God did not render unto Dives here according to the evil he did, his Un∣mercifulness, his Luxury and Riot, with the Sins attending thereon; He had the good things of this Life, lived in ease and pleasure, he received in full Measure his good things: Now this was not a Reward according to what he did; he Reaped what was better then he Sowed. And therefore if Divine Providence does not equally distribute Rewards and Punishments here; it follows, since God is Just, That in the World to come he will dispense Rewards and Punishments according as they have lived here; that every one may receive according to what they have done in the Body, whether good or evil. There is therefore a time, a Day to come, wherein the Judge of the World will make it appear that he did weigh and consider the Spirits and Lives of all Men, and now they shall be dealt with according as they have done well or ill here, and therefore this time is called, Rom. 2. 5. The Day of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God.
This Argument taken from the Justice of God, is mention'd by the Apostle in 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7. It is a Righte∣ous thing with God to recompense Tribu∣lation to them that trouble you: And to you who are troubled, Rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels. In short thus, God the Wise and Righteous Law-giver and Ruler of the World, hath given us a Law and Rule to walk by and govern us, and he hath shewed us what is good, and what the Lord our God requires of us, (and his Will is Holy, and Wise and Per∣fect) this Law he hath Written in Mans Conscience, and hath more fully declared it in his Word: Now he will not let the Transgression of his Righteous Law, the open and constant violation of it by wicked Men, go un∣punished; tho' he may bear with them here for a while, he will not suffer them to devour and cruelly to treat his obedient Servants; the Rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the Lot of the Righteous, (Psal. 125.) But they shall know that there is a God that Judgeth in the Earth, and
shall find that Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath, will be to every Soul that doth Evil, Rom. 2. Nor will God forget the faithful and sincere obedience of his Servants, but will render Eternal Life to them that by patient continuance in well-doing seek for Honour, and Glory, and Immortality. So in Hebr. 6. 10. God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of Love. He hath his Book of remembrance, Mal. 3. He hath promised and Eternal Re∣ward, a Crown of Life; and this Crown of Life and Glory is also a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Tim. 4. And God as he is the Righteous Judge (as well as a God of Mercy) will give it, because he hath promised to give it upon the Terms of Faith and sincere Obedience, or patient continuance in well doing: And he who hath promised, will be Just and Righteous to perform; as he is abundantly Merciful in Pardon∣ing our Infirmities and Imperfections, and also in Rewarding us and doing for us exceeding abundantly above all that we have done. So Rich is his Mercy, and so Noble his Goodness: And so far are our works, our doings
or sufferings from any Merit or any Worthiness, to be compared with the Reward and Glory to be revealed, Rom. 8. It is a Merciful Justice, and therefore its said in Psal. 62. 12. Also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth Mercy: For thou rendrest to every Man ac∣cording to his Work. Human Judicatories and Tribunals cannot take notice of all Sins and Of∣fences; and where they do, they may be corrupted or bribed, or they may be deceived and mistaken. But the Judge of all the Earth, he regardeth not persons nor taketh reward, Deut. 10. 27. Nor can he be deceived by false pretensions; for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weigh∣ed, 1 Sam. 2. and before him all things are naked and open, Heb. 4. Humane Laws onely restrain Words and outward Actions; But the Divine Law reacheth the Spirit of Man, his inward Thoughts, and Secrets of the Heart. There are Spiritual Sins, as Hypo∣crisie, Pride of Heart, Envy, Lusts of the Heart, Murder of the Heart; These, and the like, are not punished
by Human Laws, but are greatly Criminal before God. There are Speculative Sins; Sins acted over in the Phansy, and there repeated and remember'd with de∣light (when the outward act is past) which are highly provoking to God, and shall be judged: For, for Men to do this, to recal in their thoughts with pleasure and delight such and such Sins, is to act over the same Sins in Phancy and Speculation, to ag∣gravate their Sins by new and fresh guilt, it is to stand to and make good their former Transgressions, instead of repenting of them; for then they would be remembred with Sorrow and Abhorrence. These Sins not falling under Mans Cognisance; as onely Words and Actions do, but not Thoughts (which yet are the first contrivers of that Sin and evil in Words and Actions) and these Sins escaping the Judgment and Punishments of Humane Judicato∣ries; yet shall not escape the Judg∣ment of God. The Day of Judgment is described by this, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the Hidden things of Darkness, and will make mani∣fest the Counsels of the Heart; and then shall every Man have praise of God; that is, every one that hath done well; as on the contrary, they shall have shame and everlasting contempt (Dan. 12. 2.) that have done evil, how cunning and close soever they were, and whatsoever fair pretences they might make before Men. The Day of Judgment is described here by the time when Christ shall bring to light the Hidden things of Darkness, and make manifest the Counsels of the Heart: And so in Rom. 2. 16. its call'd the Day when God shall judge the secrets of Men by Jesus Christ. 3. From the Testimony of Conscience. Conscience is God's Deputy and Vice-gerent. The voice of Conscience is God's voice, and it does powerfully witness a Future State, and the Re∣wards and Punishments to be dispen∣sed therein, according to what we have done here, Good or Evil.
Upon the Consciousness of doing their duty, there arises within Men a Peace, and Satisfaction, and Com∣fortable expectations from God who is the Father of Mercies. And there is no such satisfaction, no such joyous reflections as those; as 'twas said of the Athenians, . A con∣tinual Feast is a good Conscience; But this Feast is but an Antipast, a foretast of a better in Heaven. Now on the contrary, there follows upon Sin, inward Trouble, and An∣guish, and Fear, a fearful expectation of a sad after-reckoning and Judg∣ment to come. Hae sunt impijs assiduae domesticaeque furiae (saith Tully.) And these inward Fears and Troubles, Terrors of another World, are not imprest upon Men by Politians and Statesmen, for Secular ends and in∣terest of State, to awe Men into o∣bedience; For, (1.) They follow upon such sins as are not punishable by Human Laws, as Secret Sins, Sins of the Heart, Speculative Sins and Spiritual
Wickednesses; which are such Sins as no Earthly Judges, no Magistrates can have Cognisance of, and no Human Laws can reach: It would be a vain thing for the Supreme Powers to make Laws about what its impossible for them to know, and consequently impossible for them to punish. (2.) Yea, they follow upon such Sins as are hid from Men, if punish∣able by Laws when discovered, such Sins as no Man can accuse the Male∣factor of, or not prove them against him. (3.) Yea, they follow upon such sins, as being known by Man, yet are not punishable by the Laws of that Country, nay sometimes are applauded and esteem'd by Men. Judas his sin was so far from being punished by the Jewish Powers, that he was rewarded for it; But the re∣ward he had, and all the applause and encouragement they could give him, could not ease and sree him from the Anguish in his Con∣science,
and Fear of what was to come. (4.) Yea these Fears and Terrors are found to be amongst them in whom is no Policy, Nations that are rude and barbarous, and not governed by Crafty Polititians; yet even in such appear'd Magna vis Conscientiae: So universally have they possest Men, and in all ages; whereas vain and causeless and Panick Fears are of a short and uncertain continu∣ance, and not so universal, as these inward Fears and Troubles of Con∣science. Nor are these Fears pleasing and grateful to Men (as is easie for any Man to judge and acknowledge) but contrary to the inclinations of Men, who are carried out to the love and practise of such Sins (as Revenge, Injustice, Lust, and the like) whence these inward Troubles arise. (5.) To what hath been said, I shall superadd this, That the Deep∣est Polititians and Greatest States∣men, the Greatest Potentates of the Earth are not more free and secure
from these inward Fears then the populus terrae, the mean Peasants and those of low degree (which yet these Grandees could not have been disturb∣ed with, had they known that these were but arts and a juggle invented by them for State-reasons) yea the Great Men of the Earth, Men of Policy and Power, have been rather more severely lasht caeco verbere, with these secret and unseen lashes: They have been more severely assaulted and haunted by these domesticae furiae and inward Horrors, though they would fain have been delivered from them, and have used all arts to be freed from this evil Spirit, a Self-corroding and tormenting Conscience, which troub∣led them. 4. From the Souls inward Sense in good Men. There are certain Instincts and Sym∣pathies and Propensions in the Soul of Man to Religion, to God and the En∣joyment of him; and these are more especially enlivened, and vigorous, in Holy and renewed Souls. There
is a vehement thirst and longing in such Souls after Union with God, the Father of Spirits: Their Souls pant after God, after the living God, that they may see and enjoy him whom their Souls love, whom they have chosen for their Portion, for whom they have forsaken all the vani∣ties of the World, and denyed All to enjoy Him; They have none in Heaven but Him, none in Earth in comparison of Him. As for this present Life and State, they groan being burdened, while they are in this Tabernacle; this is their State of Pilgrimage; while they are here, they are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. And hence it is that these Holy Souls perswade themselves that the Father of Spirits, God who is Love, that implanted these Instincts and Affections in them, that hath awake∣ned them by his Grace, that hath drawn out their Hearts after him, so that the Love of God hath con∣strain'd them to count nothing that he commanded them grievous to do,
nothing hard to suffer for him, they perswade themselves that God will satisfie these Desires and Affections of his own begetting in them, I shall be satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness (as Holy David speaks Psal. 17.) and that their Souls who cleave to God in love, who desire and love him above all things, and do more thirst after a full Enjoy∣ment of him from the lesser tastes and relishes of his Goodness here, and hope to see him as he is, face to face hereafter, shall not be frustra∣ted of their desires and hopes; but God will satisfie these by the mani∣festation of some better State and Enjoyment then of this World, which is not their Portion, nor did they mind Earthly things. They per∣swade themselves that God will not forsake them, nor thrust away the Soul that thirsts after him, and loves and desires him above all, and places her Felicity in him; and when it has most prepared her self, as a Bride adorned for her Husband, for the other State, and is more near to enjoy him, as it is
when the Death of the Body is near. That such a Soul should be cut off from God, and cast into the place of forgetfulness and be no more, so as she should never enjoy God (nor indeed any thing else) is not to be conceived, it being mani∣festly contrary to the Divine Good∣ness. Hath God implanted in Brute Beasts such and such Propensions and In∣stincts, Sympathies and Antipathies, the Passions of Fear and Aversation, the Affections of Hope, and Desire, and Joy, with real and proper Ob∣jects for them to be respectively exercised upon; So that they na∣turally fear and avoid what is for their hurt, and they hope and de∣sire and delight in what is for their welfare and pleasure? And is it to be imagined that the same Passions which are implanted by God in Better and Higher Beings, the Souls of Men, and in Holy and renewed Souls (the Best Souls) have not
suiteable Objects for them also? Is the Hope of enjoying God, and a Blessed Immortality, and the Future State (and the Joy thence arising, or, as the Apostle speaks, Rom. 5. the rejoycing in Hope of the Glory of God) a vain Hope, a vain Joy? Do the Best Men act like Fools, and unwisely, in denying themselves as to many advantages and plea∣sures in this World, for an Vtopian Paradise, for a Nothing, for that which is not? Are all the Religious Instincts and Propensions towards God, which are rooted in the Souls of Men, and are most active in the Souls of Holy Men, and e∣specially towards the end of their Life, are they Frustraneous and Vain? But we cannot imagine things to be thus, without highly reproach∣ing the God of Nature, God most Wise and most Good, who made all his Works in Wisdom, (Psal. 104. 24. which Wisdom reacheth from one end to another, and sweetly orders all things, Wisdom. 8. 1.) and who
saw every thing that he had made, that it was good, very good (Genes. 1.) and accordingly fitted every Creature for its End, which it knows, and observes the proper means to attain it; this Wise and Good God did not surely do other∣wise in making of Man, but he hath excellently fitted him for the Highest and Best End; and Holy Souls are in the readiest capacity for it. Hence that in 2 Cor. 5. 5. He that hath wrought us for the self same thing, is God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. And thus much for the Argu∣ments from the light of Reason: Concerning which, if any shall object, That this last Argument (as also the former) seems not so much to prove the Resurrection of the Body, as a Life to come, or a Blessed Immortality of the Soul after the Death of the Body; I answer, Be it so, yet they are of force to prove that which was
the matter in hand, viz. That those who Abound in the Work of the Lord, their Labour shall not be in vain in the Lord. THE END.
