E186_23 53403934 97700
Numb. 31. THE Parliamentary Intelligencer, COMPRISING Sum of Fraign Intelligence, with the Affairs now  Agitation in England, Scotla and Ireland. For Information of the People. Published by Order. From Monday July 23. to Monday July 30. 1660. Elsenore July 7. THe Swedish Commissioners in this place are now daily imployed, to see the rest of their Soldiers transported hence. Many Officers have got their discharge upon payment of their Arrears, so that they seem to be well satisfied therewith, and content is likewise given to the Common Troopers that are disbanded. From Stockholm of the Thirtieth last past, it is certified, that the English Ambassa∣dor Sidney had audience on the 28. of that month, and withal taken his leave. His Majesty hath presented him with a chaine of Gold, and a precious picture case, set round with two Rows of Diamonds, having within the Pictue of his late Majesty of Sweden; and the same night the said Am∣bassador
was entertained with a magnificent Supper in the Kings Garden. I understand that the like Present is to be given to the French Ambassador; there is shortly a person of Quality to be appointed to go in an Embassie Extraordinary for England, to congratulate his Majesties happy restitution to his Crown and Kingdoms. The Reader may take notice that after several mature Debates concerning this Summers Assizes, his Majesty was graciously pleased to set forth a Proclamation the 23 of this instant July, wherein, out of His Princely care that His loving Subjects may have timely notice of the alterations of the days, hath Declared the several Prefixions given in by His Majesties Justices, for holding the Assizes in the several Circuits, as hereafter fol∣llow, viz. SƲrrey ss. Monday the third of September at Kingston upon Thames. Sussex, Friday the seventh of September, at Est-Greensted. Kent, Tuesday the Eleventh of September, t Maidstone. Essex, Monday the Seventeenth of September at Chelmsford. Hertford, Friday the One and twentieth of September at Hertford. Bucks, Thursdy the eighth of August at Aylesbury. Bedford, Mondy the third of September, at the Town of Bedford. Huntingdon, Wednesdy the fifth of Sept. at the Town of Huntingdon. Cambridge, Thursday the sixth of Sept. at the Castle of Cambridge. Suffolk, Monday the Tenth of Septemb. at Bury St. Edmonds. Norflk, Saturdy the fifteenth of Sept. at the Castle of Norwich. City of Norwich, The same day at the New-hall of the City of Norwich. Brks, Tuesday the fourth of September at Reading. Oxon, Fridy the Seventh of September at Oxford. Glocester, Wednesdy the Twelfth of September at Gloucester. City of Gloucester, The sme day at the City of Gloucester. Mnmouth, Monday, the Seventeenth of September at Monmouth. Hereford, Thursdy the Twentieth of September at Hereford. VVorcester, Tuesdy the Five and Twentieth of Sept. at Worcester. City of Wrcester, The same day at the City of Worcester. Sal, Fridy the Eight and twentieth of September at Bridgnorth. Sffrd, Wednesdy the Third of October at Stafford. Lanster, Thursdy he Thirtieth of August at Lancester. Wstmorland, Thursday the sixth of September at Appleby.
Cumberland, Monday the Tenth of September at Carlisle. Northumberland, Fridy the Fourteenth of September at the Castle of Newcastle upon Tye. Newcastle upon Tyne, The same day at the Guild-Hall of the same Town. Durham, Tuesday the Eighteenth of September at Durham. York, Monday the Twenty fourth of Septemb. at the Castle of York. York City, The same day at the Guild-Hall of the same City. Southampton, Mondy the Third of September at the Castle of Winchester. VVis, Wednesday the Fifth of September at New-Salisbury. Dorset, Monday the Tenth of September at Dorchester. City of Exeter, Thursday the Thirteenth of September at the Guild-hall of the City of Exeter. Devon, The same day at the castle of Exeter. Cornwall, Wednesdy the Fifteenth of September at Launceston. Somerset, Tuesday the Twenty fifth of September at the city of Bath. City of Bristol, Saturday the Twenty ninth of September at the Guild-hll of the city of Bristol. Northampton, Tuesday the Fourth of September at the castle of Northampton. Rutland, Friday the Seventeenth of September at Okeham. Linl, Monday the Tenth of September at the castle of Lincoln. City of Lincoln, The same day at the city of Lincoln. Nottingham, Saturday the Fifteenth of September at Nottingham. Town of Nottingham, The same day at the Town of Nottingham. Derby, Tuesdy the Eighteenth of September at Derby. Leicester, Friday the Twenty one of September at Leicester. Town of Leicester, The same day at the Town of Leicester. City of Coventry, Monday the 24th. of September at the city of Coventry. Warwick, Tuesday the Five and Twentieth of September at VVarwick. July 19. This day the Borough of Plymouth, as an expression of their unfeigned joy for his Majesties happy Restauration, pre∣sented by the hands of the Right Honorable Sir William Morris, one of his Majesties principal Secretaries of State.
and Governor of Plymouth, Sergeant Maynard Recorder; Edward Vowel, Samuel Trellany, Esqs; and Timothy Alsop Alderman, an honorable Present of Plate, which for the largeness of the pieces, and curiosity of the work, was a Noble Present, and was received very graciously by his Majesty: Amongst the rest was a Fountain Caved with rare art, and curious Figures, out of which, Perfumed Waters were cast up Twenty foot high, and had at the top thereof a curious Perfuming Box, which at the same time issued forth Perfumed Fire. His Majesty, with several persons of Honor was pleased to entertain himself with the sight of it. At the same time the City of Exeter, by the said Sir Wil∣liam Morris, Tho. Bampfield Esq Recorder, Symon Snow Alderman, and Thomas Westlake Town-Clerk, as a Pledge of their Congratulations of his blessed Restauration, and an earnest of their hearty affections, did present His Majesty with several parcels of rich Plate, to a very considerable va∣lue for the Mass thereof All persons of both Corporations had the Honor of his Majesties Hand, Serjeant Maynard having declared the af∣fection of the said Citie and Borough in a most elegant Speech, to which his Majesty manifested a particular Ap∣probation, the Serjeant being better heard here than when he forc'd his entrance into the House of Commons (after two moneths Seclusion) when those horrid Regicides fell upon that bloody debate, where the Serjeant by Cromwel was divers times demanded to the Bar, as unable to bear the strength and force of the Serjeants Arguments when he pleaded so admirably for the life of the King. July 24. 1660. This day some of the Clergy of the County of Lincoln, in the name of the rest, being brought into the Royal pre∣sence by the Earl of Manchester, presented an Address to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, which his Majesty was graciously pleased to accept, with several expressions of favor to the presenters, giving them also the honor to kiss his hand. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The most humble Address of the Ministers in the County of Lincoln. Most Dread Soveraign, AMong all the great calamities, which God most justly for our sins hath brought upon us, since the first com∣mencing of our National distractions, none have made so deep impressions of real sorrow upon our hearts, as the bar∣barous Inhumanity cted upon your Royal Father of blessed memory, by certain wicked and deceitful men; the remem∣brance of which, as it doth renew our utmost abhorrency of the Act, so of all those Jesuitical Principles, which under any pretence whatsoever have any tendencie to the Deposing, and much more the Murder of Kings. After the loss of the best deserving King the world could then boast of, which was attended with the voice of Blas∣phemy uttered by our enemies against the true Religion, because some who did profess it, had stained her beauty with their bloody hands; Gall was added to our Wormwood, by the forced Exile of your Majesty, during whose absence abroad, we could hardly think our selves to be at home. But God who comforteth those who are cast down, gave us hope, in the wonderful preservation of your Majesty a Worcester, the many supplications made for you by your faithful people, and establishment of your Royal heart with his grace, to resist and overcome a great crowd of temptati∣ons both on the right hand and the left, by holding fast the true, antient, Catholique and Apostolical Faith, once de∣livered unto the Saints. These things were to us as the dawning of the day of Salvation, which God after a dark night of Confusion, hath now (not by an ordinary working
of Providence) caused to shine upon us. And we have cause to believe, that he who hath subdued the power of your Enemies, will also subdue their hearts; that as your Maje∣sties Return hath been accompanied with the cordial desire and joy of the most of your Subjects, so your Reign will be with the great love and full satisfaction of all. And this our confidence is more increased by your Majesties gracious, charitable, and healing Declaration of the First of May, and your early Proclamation issued against vicious, debauched, and prophane persons; for which, as we are always bound to praise God, so we do with all humble thankfulness acknow∣ledg your Majesties special grace and Princely favor. And whatsoever our earnest prayers to God, exhortations to our hearers, and dutiful subjection may possibly contribute to the happiness of your Sacred Person and Government, we shall with all alacrity and faithfulness perform; beseeching him by whom Kings reign, to increase your graces, preserve your health, prolong your days, and establish the Crown upon your head. It was presented by the hands of the reverend and most learned Doctor Sanderson, his Majesties Professor of Divi∣nity of Oxon, accompanied with that worthy Gentleman Sir Tho. Meeres, and several of the Orthodox and Loyal Clergy, viz. Mr. William Lincoln, Mr. Edward Dixe, Mr. Charls Woodward, Mr. George Cuthbert, Mr. John Coope, Mr. John Merryweather, Mr. Edward Askew, Mr. Edward Boteler, Mr. John Nailor, Mr. Jeremy Vasin, Mr. William Dale, Mr. Robert Alington, Mr. Henry Vaughan, Mr. Andrew Arnold, Mr. Tho. Trot, &c. and about two hundred more, whom (only for brevities sake) we omit. The Gentlemen of the Artillery Company, having appointed yesterday the Twenty fourth of July for an extraordinary Exercise of Arms in the Artillery ground, His Highness the Duke of York, (their Commander in chief▪ having notice thereof, came thither about four of the Clock in the afternoon, and first passing through the Front of the Body (who were Four hundred compleatly habited) to a Tent prepared for his Highness, he then on Foot marched to the Head of them, where that most valiant and most learn∣ed John Lord Lucas (after an Elegant short Speech on his knees to his High∣ness)
presented him with the Leading-staff of the Company, whereupon the Drums beat with a very loud Acclamation of the Gentlemen in Arms. After silence was commanded, his Highness was pleased to declare, how willingly he accepted of their offer, and would maintain all their Priviledges; then (throwing off his Cloak) he commanded them to march, himself on foot be∣fore them; and having led them about the ground and drawn them up, he went to the Tent-door, whre he sate whlst the Company marched by, pleased to see such a gallant Company. After that they divided into two Bodies, the one commanded by the Lord Lucas, and the other by Major-Gen. Sir Edward Massey; the great guns playing, they immediately fell to skir∣mish, first by Forlorns, afterwards in several figures. At his Highness de∣parture, several Vollies were given. After his departure, the Bodies being joined, the Lord Lucas acquainted them, That a Gentleman, a member and welwisher of the Company, had presented to them a Silver-Partizan, for which (in name and behalf of all) his Lordship gave the Donor thanks, July 24. 1660. This day Joseph Payne Esq Major of the city and county of the city of Norwich, and Thomas Rant and William Barneham Esquires, Members of Par∣liament of the said city, Christopher Jay Esq Alderman, Thomas Wise one of the Sheriffs, Thomas Johnson Alderman, Francis Norris, Robert Bendish Gent. and Tho: Baeston Town-clerk, and divers other Citizens of the said city, were brought nto the presence of his Majesty by the L. Howard L. Richardson and Sir Horatio Townsend, accompanied with Sir John Holland, Sir Philip Woodhouse. Sir Ralph Hare, Sir William Doyley, with divers other Esquires and Gentlemen in the county of Norfolk; where the Mayor and the rest of the Citizens pre∣sented his Majesty with the resignation of the Feefarm-rents of the said city, under the common seal of the said city, amounting to One hundred thirty and two pounds eighteen shllings and three pence yearly, and One thousand pounds in gold, in a Crimson velvet purse, with the word Norwich imbroider∣ed in Gold upon it, as a testimony of their thankfulness to God for his Majesties safe return to the government of his Kingdoms, and of their loyalty and faithfulness to him. And his Majesty gave them a gracious reception, and was pleased to confer the honor of Knighthood upon the said Thomas Rant and Joseph Payne, and gave the honor of his hand to all that company, and pro∣mised his constant favr and protection to the said city. Since the last, Coloel Cook (who formerly kept the Office of Treasurers Remembrancer of the Exchequer) is come under the Black Rod; but we forbear to say any thing of him, or any who willingly surrender themselves. We are daily ask'd what's done in Scotland, by some who are troubled that all is at quiet, and bcause 'tis so, themselves sweat to beet pretty tales of the Presbytery, Covenanters, &c. as if there were no difference 'twixt 1640. & 1660. But twenty years will not make some men wiser. Yet (even for their sakes) we will say and speak truh, That his Majesty hath gven ad∣mittance and auience to those Personages and others from Scotland, who came from Court highly satisfied with admiration of his Majesties wisdom, justice, and affection to his people. And if you hear any speak otherwise, know them for such as wsh it so, because 'tis false: They take liberty to all but those that scribble or print it, ere long may repent.
His Majesty hath given leave unto Henry Williams, alias Cromwell, of Ramsey in the County of Huntingdon Esq to leave out the alias Cromwell. It is therefore desired you would take notice, that this Mr. Henry Williams is Grand∣child to Sir Oliver Williams, and son to Colonel Williams a Commander in his late Majesties Army, to whom only (with his family) this favor is granted: And (to deal clearly) in those black days of the Protectordom, this Gentleman was not only civil to all, but made it his endeavour to assist and relieve all honest and loyal persons. It is his due, and 'twere base to deny it. From Hamborough, July 17. The Danish forces which at their last muster were found to be about 4000 lye as yet still in their old quarters, and it is not likely that any of them should be disbanded, since it is constantly reported, that more are to be entertained; neither do the Imperial and Brandenburgs forces stir from their quar∣ters, however the Governor of Gottorp hath given his Highness the Duke of Holstein hopes to surrender that place to him very suddenly. The Bishop of Munster hath sollicited for aide at the Emperors, and the Elector of Bran∣denbourgs Court against the City of Munster, but whether or no he is likely to obtain it, the next shall informe you. That City maketh all possible preparations for her defence, and relieth on the assistance of the States General of the uni∣ted provinces, in case the controversie be not ended by an amicable composition. His Electoral Highness of Bava∣ria hath already disbanded half of his new raised forces, and the Elector of Mentz doth likewise begin to discharge some of his Soldiers; it being believed, that the Dukes of Bruns∣wick and Lunnburg with the other Princes will suddenly follow the example of the former. His Imperial Majesty hath sent orders to those forces that lye quartered in Silesia, to remove thence, and to march into Hungaria; it being supposed that those which now are in Holstein and Mecklen∣burgh are to take up their quarters in Silesia. The Turkes have not proceeded far in Transylvania, but yet seem to be
willing to fall out with the Emperour, pretending they are only sent to assist the new Prince of that Country; where∣fore his Imperial Majesty hath likewise given a strict charge to his General de Souches, to attempt no hostility against the Turks, but to keep himself within the terms of defence. The defeat of the Muscovites is again confirmed by Let∣ters from Prussi; and it is certified thence, that the Ratifi∣cation of the Peace lately made with Sweden, is arrived there from Poland. From Sealand we have nothing worth the communication. Madrid, June 24 By a Courrier dispatched from Valladolid, we were in∣formed yesterday morning, that his Catholique Majesty is as yet in perfect health, and will be here on Saturday next. We hear from Barcelone that the Prince Ludovisio arrived there the 20 of this moneth, to take possession of his Vice∣royship of Arragon. News being brought that his High∣ness Don John de Austria was somwhat indisposed, the Queen hath sent the Duke of Montalto to Aranguez to vi∣sit him, and the principal Physitians of this City are like∣wise gone thither by order from her Majesty, to take care of his health. They write from Portugal, that the Portu∣guez with five hundred Horse, and two thousand Foot, to∣gether with two Field pieces, had attaqued Alcaginis, but the Garrison (seconded by the Inhabitants) had so well re∣ceived them, that they were forced to retreat with great loss and confusion, and in their retreat, they rencountred the Governour of Cridad Rodrigo, who coming to relieve the place, charged the enemy with such a fury, that he put them quite to the rout, leaving two hundred dead upon the place, and above one hundred prisoners. In the mean time preparations are made to invade Portugal with three Armies, consisting of about forty thousand Horse and Foot.
Venice, July 6. Prince Almeric of Mdena is here as yet, but prepareth to be going to the Levant, to command the French suc∣cour, which having taken some refreshment in Sicily, was arrived at Candia, and was thence gone by the way of Ce∣rigo to joyn with our Naval Forces, and to keep a Council of War. We understand from Dalmatia, that the Turks continue to make havock there, which hath obliged our Senate to take a resolution of sending the Troops of Savoy that way, which are a coming to assist this Commonwealth. Dantzick, Iuly 9. The Duke of Courland arrived at Riga the twentieth of the last past, where he was honourably received, in order to his being restored to his Dukedom. The Treaty of peace concluded at Oliva between the Pole and Swede, is unanimously ratified by all the Senators of Poland at War∣sovia, who rendred solemn thanks to the King, Queen, and Monsieur de l' Ombres, Ambassadour of France, for their care and pains taken in this particular. This Crown is re∣solved with all possible force, to continue the War against the Muscovites, and the Polish Commissioners sent to the Frontires of Muscovia to treat with them, are returned without effecting ought. The King is to go in person into the Field, with all his Nobles, and all the Forces of Po∣land and Lithuania are commanded to march. P. S. Just now news is brought that Gneral Czarnecki with the assistance of the artars, hath totally beaten and ruined the Muscovian Amy near Grodno, consisting of fif∣teen thousand men, whereof seven thousand were killed upon the place: And that the Tartars and Cossacks had in∣vaded Muscovia, the Poles having in the mean time by a Stratagem surprized Bichow, a place of great importance.
Paris, Iuly 17. The Prince of Conde and the Duke of Longueville  turned hither from Court the 13. instant, which Court came the same day to Fontainbleau, as one of the fairest places to be chosen near this City for divertisement of so charming a Queen, who now is expected here with much longing, and will be received with all possible magnifi∣cence, for which daylie preparations are made. Letters from St. Sebastian certifie, that three Adventurers of Osend had engaged with, and taken a Vessel, the Admiral of the Turks, mounted with forty six pieces of Canon, and ha∣ving three hundred and fifty Turks on board, which Ves∣sel they have brought up to a safe place. The Baron of Bareville hath received his Instructions from the King of Spain, to go Ambassadour Extraordinary for England. Paris, 24 Iuly, Their Majesties having on the 19. current, left Fountain∣blew, came to dinner at Vaux to the house of the Over∣seer of the Finance; and thence to Soysi, the President Baillent his house, where the King and Queen stayed till next day, and then returned to Vincennes. The Queen Mother accompanied by Monsieur and the Princess Pala∣tine, came the same day, viz. the 19. instant, to this City, where her Majesty alighting out of her Coach, was re∣ceived by the Prince of Conde, the Duke of Longueville, and all the Lords and Ladies that are here. The day following, her Majesty went to Val de Grace, the 21. to Vincennes, in companie of the Queen of England, and the Princess her daughter, which she took up at the Palace Cardinal; on the 22. being the feast of St. Magdalen, she payed her De∣votions in the Church of the great Convent of Grey-Fri∣ers, which she continued at Val de Grace, and at the Car∣melites;
she came afterwards to the Palace of Orleans to visit Madam, where she was met on the Stone-walk, and received by Mademoiselle of Orleans, and her Sisters, Mon∣sieur gave her likewise a visit at his return from Vincennes, where the King and the Queen take such pleasures and di∣vertisements, as so sweet a place affords, which they are not to leave until all things be finished, which are a prepa∣ring here for the reception of so great a Princess. On the same day, his Eminency finding himself somewhat better of his late indisposition at Fontainblew and Vincennes, came likewise from this last place to this City, at his own Palace, there to rest himself a little of his long and painful tra∣vels. ADVERTISEMENTS. THese are to give notice, That some day this week, Hs Majesty lost from White∣hall a Spniel Dog of the largest size, of a bright red colour, with a white face, aig about his Neck; and that i any person hath taken him up, or can bring tydings of him, he should forthwith reurn him to His Majestys assuring himself a good reward. On Friday the 27 July, betwix 7. and 8. at night, on the Road between Kensington and Knightsbridge, were stolen a large gray dped Guiding about fifeen hands high, more white on the near shoulder towards the Nck then in any part of the bdy, somhing cloudy on the face, long tail, litle or no foretop comes seven, and hh al his paces with a thin mane, much worn aay on the Withrs. Also a brown Bay Glding without any white, excpt saddle spots somthing lowback'd a very large walk, wherein he staddles much bhinde, trts and gallps excellently well, a small racking pac; taken from a little boy by a pale fac'd youg man, whitish hai, hanging lanck, a gray suit with block trimming, a plai leather black belt, only em∣boydered, n hair on his face, slder bodies, and an indiffen sta∣ure. The oher a thick shrt stubbd ellow, round acd, ruddy complexion, dark brown hair and eye brows, with a sad gray sui,  person can bng tydings to M. Ro∣ger Higgs in Woodstreet near the Boling Ay in Westminster, he shll be wel rewarded for his pains. A  of Accons belonging unto Andrew Woodhouse, lost bout a forenight since. I any one bring tydings thereof to M. Camfeld at the three Golden Heats in Cheapside,  to M. Cart at the Red Lyon withut Bshpgat, they shall receive cotent fr  pais. There hath been lately a Pamphlet re-printed, printed Anno 1640. (and not in 1642. as this hath it) entituled, The Bishp of Amagh's direction to the Huse of Com∣mons concerning the Lyturgie and episcopal Government, &c. The Arch-bishp discaimed it, and upon his Petition, it was suppreed by Order pon the House of Lords 64. which I have thought fit by this to give notice of, hw he is and hath been injured by it, being none of his. N. Brnard.
Advertisements of Books. Justice Restor'd or a Guide for his Majesties Justices of Peace, both in Sessions, and  of Sessions, according to the ancient Laws of the Kingdom. By J. H. Gent. With directions for Clerks of the Peace. Printed for H. Twyld, , and J. Place, and are to be sold at their Shops. The Book of Common Prayer for the use of Churches and Families in Folio. The Book of Common Prayer for Bibles in Quarto, Octavo, and Twlves. Te Bk of Common Prayer, of the best Print, in 24. All to be sold by John Starky, at the Miter in Fleetstreet, betwixt the Middle Temple Gate, and Temple Bar. Whitehall. We have already given you an account how highly the Nation of Scotland is satisfied; We shall now present you with the state of Affairs in Ireland, wherein it will be very considerable to look into the affections of the Arm, which we shal offer you in their own words, as they were presented in an Address to his Majesty, by the Right Honourable the Lord Broghil, viz. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Address of the Officers of your Majesties Army in and near Dublin in Ireland. NOthing can in degrees so fully proportion our sorrow for the murther of your Royal Father, as our joy for your Restauration; 'Tis your Majesties Glory, and our satisfaction, that God hath effected it without blood; the world sees 'tis the day of his power, the people are so wil∣ling in it, none as men but must say 'tis wonderful in our eyes, and none as Christians but will say it is the Lords doings. Yur Majesties Gracious Declaration and Letters to the Parliament, have not onely prevented, but granted our chiefest desires, and we owe you our most sincere and hum∣ble acknowledgment, as much for the manner of giving as for the gift, in this we are safe, in that we are happy. Your Majesty desires nothing more then to act your clemency, and we desire nothing more then not to appear unworthy of it. God hath preseved you a broad in your person, and which we know is dearer to you, in your Religion, signal evidences
whereof we have already received, for no other Tree could produce such fruit. All your subjects virtually are in Parliament▪ and by Parliament you do graciously promise to be advised, your Majesty could not grant more, nor your People ask more. And to manifest you will Rule by Example as well as Precept, you decline being your own Judge in your deepest concernments: Your Royal Fathers Murtherers could not desire a greater favour, nor your Parliament a greater trust; neither could your Majesty more sensibly and graciously let the body of your people know, you esteemed them in∣nocent of that sin then by leaving it to them to punish. You do not onely observe your Laws your self, but you freely pardon all your subjects that have broken them; To be just is what all Kings ought to be, but to be merciful is what our King is; the best of our former Princes appeared worthy of the Crown, but after they wore it, your Majesty has done so before, the providence of God having taught you to raign over your self, before you raigned over your Kingdoms, out of which you were put by violence, but you are restored by consent, by which through mercy we now live to see more then hopes of that which we have so long thirsted after, an happy and full agreement between King and people, towards the ataining whereof, we can truly say, neither our prayers, nor our indeavours in our respective stations have been wanting, nor through the goodness of God shall they cease, till what is so happily begun be com∣pleated. Your Majesty should have earlier received this Tribute of our Loyalty and affection, but that we stayed till this time to assure you which now we presume to do, that gene∣rally the Officers and Souldiers in this your Army, have not onely joyfully proclaimed your Majesties Royal un∣doubted right to your three Kingdoms, but with their hands have subscribed the same; and we are confident, if your service require it, would do the like with their bloods against all opposers.
We have nothing can Apologize for the confidence of this duty, but that out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth will speak, which in all humility we hope will obtain both your Majesties belief, and your pardon for Your Majesties most humble and most faithful Subjects and Servants. Signed by the Lord Broghil, Sir Charles Cot, and all the Officers in and near Dublin. Thus you see how the Souldiery are inclined to His Majesties service. Not is there any doubt to be made of the general consent of the whole Kingdom of Ireland, who have expressed so much loyalty to His Majesty, and towards whom His Majesty hath shown so much care and tenderness, in declaring the Right honble L. Roberts to be His Deputy there; which the Commissioners of that Nation look upon no ny as the highest point of prudence in His Majesty, but as an especial Act of Grace and Favour to that Kingdom, he being a person so fitly qualified both for his Wisdom and Integrity for the management of so grand an Affair. On Thursday the 26. instant, the poor and small Inland Corporation of Eye in the County of Suffolk, did by the hands of Thomas Dey and Francis Cheney Gent. Mem∣bers of the said Corporation (who with Sir George Reve Knight, and Charls Corn∣wallis Esquires, Members of Parliament for that place, were conducted to His Majesty by Sir Frederick Cornwallis Knight and Baronet, Treasurer of His Majesties houshold) present His Majesty with one hundred pounds in Gold. Though this seem in it self but smal, yet if we look upon the place, we may justly judge their Loyalty to be great, and if we consider the sum, with the abilities of the Inhabitants, littl, if at all inferi∣our to the largest Presents. His Majesty was graciously pleased to accept it, gave them thanks, and assured them of his favour to their Corporation. This day the Lord Edward Montague, who commanded the Fleet when they received His Majesty and His two Royal Brothers, being for this and other eminent services created by His Majesty Earl of Sandwich, Viscount Hinchinbrook, and Lord Baron of St. Needs, took his place in the House of Peers. To these we shal add some other Tiles of Honour and Offices which His Majesty hath likewise conferred on this honourable Person; and then we must tell you, that be∣sides his Command at Sea under his Highness the Duke of York, Lord High Admi∣ral, that he is Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garer, Master of His Maje∣sties great Wrdrobe, one of the Commissioners of His Majesties Treasury, and one of His Majsties most honourable Pivie Council. Here give us leave to acquaint you. That his Mjesty was pleased to confr the ho∣nour of Knighthood on William Tredenham a Member of Parliament, for St. Mawes i Cornwel, as likewise to grant the favour of his hand to Major Iohn Blackmore, who was introduced to his Majesty by his Excellency. On Fryday his Majesty was pleased to go to the House of Peeks, and to make a prcious Speech for the speedy passing of the Bill o Indempnity and Oblivion, whein his Majesty acquainted them how a his first coming o them, he did both by Himself, and the Chancellor, recommend to them and the House of Commons, the speedy dis∣patch o that Act, how since by a particular Message he pressed the House of Commons to hasten that work, and di by Proclamation publish to the whole Kingdom, wih what impatience he expected that Act should be presented to him for his Aent, as the
most reasonable and solid, foundation of  nd security; how he thought the House of Commons too long about it, and  efore would not have them guilty of the same dela, thanking God that he had the same Inten it n and Resolutions which he had a Breda and thn reading what he then said viz. And to the end that the Far of punishment may not engae any, Conscious to them∣selves of what is pssed to a prseverance in Guilt for the future, by oppsing the Quic and Happiness of their Country in the Restauration both of King, Peers and People, to their Just Ancient and Fundamental Rights: We do by these Presents Declare, That We do grant a Free and General Pardon which We are ready upon de∣mand to pss under Our Great Seal of England, to all Our Subjects, of wat degree or quality soever who, within forty days after the publishing hereof shall lay hold upon this Our Grace and Favour, and shall by any Publique Act declare, their doing so; An that they return to the Loyalty and Obedience of good Subjects, (exping only such persons as shall hereafter be excepted by Parliament.) Those onely excepted, let all Our loving Subjects, how faulty soever rely upon the Word of a King, So∣lemnly given by this present Declaration That no Crime whatsoever committed against Us or Our Royal Father, before the Publication of this, shall ever rise in judgement, or be brought in Question against any of them, to the loast endammagement of them, either in their Lives, Liberties or Estates, or (as far forth as lies in Our Power) so much as to the Prejudice of their Reputations, by any Reprach or term of Distin∣ction from the rest of Our best Subjects, We dsiring and Ordaining, that hencefor∣ward all Notes of Discord, Spration and Difference of Parties be utterly Abolished amng all Our Subjcts, whom We invite and Conjure to a perfect Union among them∣selves under Our Protction, for the Resettlement f Our Just Rights, and theirs, in a Free Parliament; By which upon the Word of a King, We will be advised. His Majesty then ded, That if they did not then joyn with him in extinguishing the fear which keeps the hearts of mn awake and apprehensive of safety and security, they would keep him from performing his Promise. His Majesty thank'd them for their justice to those that had been the immdiate Murtherers of his Father, and assured them he never thought excepting any other. Many other Arguments his Majesty was gra∣ciously pleased to make use of, desiring and cojuring them again and again, that lay∣ing l particula Anim fies aside, they would pass that Act without any other ex∣ceptions, then of those who ee immediately guilty of the Murther of his Father. On Saturday the 28. The truly Honourable, and perfect Pattern of Loyalty, Marquis of Ormond, being created and mmoned by Writ from his Majesty, as Earl of Brecknock, took his place in he Huse of Peers. Hving in our former shet acquainted you with the times and places of the Cir∣cuits, we shall now give you the names of the Judges. Judges for he West Circuit, are Justice Foster and Justice Tyrrill, of the Common Pleas. The home Circui, Lord Chief Baron and Serjern Waller. Oxford Circuit, are Justice Mallet of the Kings Bench, and Baron Turnr. Nrh Circuit, are Justice Twisden of the King Bench, and Serjeant Barnard. Northampton Circuit, are Baron Atkins and Serjeant Earle. Norfolk Circuit, are Justice Hyde of the Common Pleas, and Serjeant Archer. The same day his Sacred Majsty went to the House of Peers, and gave his Royal Assent to  Ats following viz. An Act for Continuing the Excise. An Act for Tage and Pounlage; An Act for Commissioners of Sewers. London, Printed by John Macock, and Tho. Newcombe, 1660.
