A3260 E449_29 99864481 161872
ANOTHER FIGHT AT COLCHESTER, AND The storming of the Town on Fryday night last, by the Parliaments Forces, and the successe thereof. TOGETHER, With the proceedings of His Majesties loyall Subjects; in the Counes of Northempton, Liecester, and Rutland, touching their raising of sixe Regiments for the defence of King, Parliament, and Kingdome. Likewise, a great Fight in Scotland, between Duke Ha∣miltons Forces commanded by the Eatie of Kalender Lieu∣tenant Generall, and the Mquff or Agyles Party, with the number sln and taken prisoners, the Lord Chancellours escape, and hun∣dreds fled to the Mountains. Also, Duke Hamiltons Speech to the Estates of Scotland, con∣cerning the advancing with his Army into England. LONDON. Printer for G W. 1648.
Two Fights, the one in the North of England near Carlie, the other in the West of Scotland. Right Honoured: MAjor Gen. Lambert, taketh all opportunities to engage Langdale to fight, but can by no meants faciliate the same, the Enemy still keeping off, and retreating from our Van; But Major Gen. Lambert pursues, and upon the 13. 14 and 15. of this instant, drew up his Army, within 6. miles of Car∣lile, and faced the Town, our Trumpeters sounded a Challenge, but the enemy refused to fight, and would not ingage: whereupon a party of our horse advanced towards them, and charged a body of Langdales, and after some dispute worsted them kil∣led 7. or 8. took 20. prisoners, and put the rest to flight, their main body not all this while once mo∣ving towards us: The Major Gen. seeing no pro∣bability of engaging the Enemy, after some consul∣tation with his Offices, drew off his Army, and marched as far as Perith, where (at present) they re∣main
in an excellent postute of Discipline. Wee ex∣pect action very suddainly. From Scotland we heare, that the Marquesse of Argile, the Lord Eglenton the Lord Castles, and some others in the West of Scotland, are very active in raising of an Army to oppose Duke Hamilton; but to blast the Bud, before it comes to two much ma∣turity, a party of the Hamiltonians commanded by the Earl of Kalender, the Lieut. Gen. is advanced a∣gainst them, and (as we hear) have fallen upon the Earl of Castles quarters, killed some of his men, and took some prisoners, but with great losse; for by a Messenger from Edenburgh, it is intimated, that the Lord Exlinton, upon notice thereof, fell upon their Rear, and after a very sharp encounter, worsted a party of the E. of Kalenders horse, killed some, and took divers prisoners; but the Hamiltonians over powring them with horse, it is feared, they will have the worst out, as appeares by this ensuing abstract. Sir, Since the E. of Kalenders advance into the West of Scotland, the nearer part of the West is come in, and so submit to the Levy, and by their ex∣tream cruelty to the Countrey as they go, they are forced to obedience. Argile and the rest must upon necessity yeald, by reason they have no horse to withstand them; all the men in many of his Towns have left their houses, and are fled into the Woods and Mountains, to hide rather then to ingage, 3500. Horse 6000. Foot, 500. Dragoons of Hamiltons par∣ty are in a marching posture, besides the Cavalle∣ring party about Barwick and Carlile, which will be all one, and without qustion ready to joyne.
The L. Lodian Chancellour of Scotland, the L. Car, the Lord Wariston, and divers others, are gone to the Navy of Argile, to assist him in the raising of forces a∣gainst the Royall party. The Ministers and 15. of the Committee about Glasco that came with a Petition are imprisoned, and their houses plundered, the Lord Elcoe in Fife his Tenants plundered for not rising, Belmorino his Tenants plundered and 2 killed. There remaines little possibility of the Commissio∣ners of the Parl. of England to do any good by their longer stay; for all their friends are, or presently will be withdrawn: If D. Hamitons party can make good their designe by force, they will never hearken to any other means; but if at this day there had been bu 4 or 5000. Horse and Foot upon the brders, in all probability England would not this year be troubled with an Ar∣my from Scotland; but the expectation of them to make a diversion, hath occasioned some honest people in the West to draw together; but the Lord Calender with a great body of horse and foote, is like utterly to destroy them; some have been imprisoned already, and this week many hundreds plundered and utterly ruined, for refusing to joyn with them: the Lord Wariston was plun∣dered upon Saturday night last, and it is thought that both he and the Lord Chancellour will be put out of their places, an impisoned ere long: when it was de∣bated in the Parl. in answer to severall Petitions, which desired that there might be a Treaty with England be∣fore they proceeded to their Levie; Duke Hamilton an∣swered, that so many Horse were raised already, that no such thing could be hearkened to before they had brought their Horse into England to quarter them.
And thereupon he had an order to have a Randevouz upon the borders when he thought fit which will be as soone as they have done their work here; who having above 3000. horse already, though they have no foote besides the old Army, yet they will soone both ruine all the considerable men, who dare oppose them, and force the rest to rise in a very short time. The Parl. of Scotland have passed an oath that all should subscribe; it is that they should obey, and in their places execute all the Acts of this present Parl. the Committee came from the Committee of Estates, to tender it this day to the L. Chancellour, but he was first got away, and the L. Wa∣riston is also out of the way, all his goods having been taken away first: There is raised besides the old Army, above 40. new compleat Troopes, they have but a few foot as yet, but they rise a pace; for they who refuse have good store of Souldiers upon them; the Commis∣sioners of the Kark did make an Act, That if any Mini∣ster should not warn the people, and tell them of their hazard if they did ingage, they should be suspended; the Parl. did make an Act, That those Ministers that should approve of the ingagement, should have their stipend sure to them while they lived, whether they did preach or n: They have given power to the Committee of E∣states, to put any Officer or Minister of State out of his place, that shall not obey the Orders, and they shall put others into their places and offices: this is chiefly in∣tended against the L. Chancellour, and the L. Wariston; they have also made an Act, that they who will not o∣bey the Act of Levy, their goods shall be forfeited, and their persons secured. Kendall in Westmerland 21. Iune 1648.
Sir I Thought it fit in my last, to let the House know the readinesse of the County of Licester, and how forward they were for common safety; and now since they have put themselves (by the advice and appearance of my Lord Grey, and indeed whose interest doth the busines) into such a foreidable posture; that I think they maybe the pattern to the rest of the Counties of England, for they have chosen their Officers, and formed their Regi∣ments, viz. fix Regiments of Horse and Dragoones, three hundred in each; the Foot are not as compleated; my Lord Grey is chosen Commander is chiefe, so that now there wants nothing but power from the House, to inable my Lord Grey to give Commissions to the Officers thus chosen by the Countrey; I can assure you they are all right men, and when this is done, they wil be in a marching posture will in 3. dais upon their own charge, when they shall be commanded. We in Rutland and Northamptonshire shal joyne with Leicester, in an As∣sociation upon the same way & grounds as they do, & it is in some forwardnesse; I can assure you it is so in Rut∣land, and the honest party in Northamptonshire are going about it, and do not question but to ffect it; for both Presbyter and Independent joyne no cordially in that County, & indeed it is so in every place where I come? This I thought fit to make known unto you, and to de∣sire you and our friends to take the first opportunity to effect this considerable work. Market Harborough the 22. of Iune 1648. Whereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament as∣sembled did upon the Twentieth of May, 1642. for the preventing of the late War, pass these three Votes. 1 That it appeares, that the King (seduced by wic∣ked Councel) intends to make War against the Parlia∣ment,
who in all their Consultations and Actions, have proposed no other end unto themselves, but the care of the Kingdoms, and the performance of all Duty and Loyalty to his Person. 2. That whensoev∣er the King maketh War upon the Parliament, it is a Breach of the Trust reposed in him by his people, con∣trary to his Oath, and tending to the Dissolution of this Government. 3 That whosoever shall seve or as∣sist Him in such Wars are Traytors, by the Funda∣mental Laws of this Kingdome, and have been of ad∣judged by two Acts of Parliament, and ought to suffer as Traytors, in Richard. 2. 1 Hen. 4. And whereas there ore now at this time divers per∣sons in Arms, who endeavor to raise War against the Parliament; The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for better enforming of the Subjects of this Kingdome in their Duty, do now at this time De∣clare, That it doth appeare, that divers who have as∣sisted the King in the late war against the Parliament, is also divees others do endeavor to seduce the people, and do atully Levy War against the Parliament. That whosoever shall make war against the Parlia∣ment of England, or assist in such war, are Traytors, by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. & have been so adjudged by two Acts of Parliament, and ought to suffer as Traytors, 11 Ric. 2. 1 Hen. 4. H: Elsyage, Cler. Parl. D. Com. On Fday last our Souldiers thinking they lay too long idle before so flight a Towne (without Order) fell suddainly on the Enemy and began very fearsely o Storme it, but the Ene∣my being better provided then they expected, galilantly defen∣ded the place, whereupon our Souldiers seeing their was no good to be done for present, made good their retreat with little or no losse at all. FINIS.
