A3909 R170385 45504697 171592
God's King the People's Blessing. A SERMON Preached on the Day of THANKSGIVING FOR PEACE, At St. Ann's Church in Dungannon, In the Diocess of ARMAGH. By EDM. ARWAKER, Rector of Drumglass, and Chaplain to his Grace the DUKE of ORMOND. DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray, and are to be Sold at his Shop in Skinner-Row, over against the Tholsel. M DC XC VIII.
To His GRACE MICHAEL Lord Archbishop of Armagh, Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland. MY LORD, I Can make no Apology to the Publick, for sending this Dis∣course abroad; nor to Your Grace, for its appearing under Your Patronage; but that I believe the Occasion of it suf∣ficiently Agreeable and Satisfactory to Both, to gain Your Approbation of the Design: For the Sincerity whereof, I am induced to hope You will Accept the Performance, and Par∣don its Imperfections. 'Tis true, His Majesty has done so Great Things for our Na∣tions, that He needs not the Help of any Weak Endeavours to Support His Interest, or Endear His Person and Government to their Inhabitants; Yet since He who was above all Praise of Men, did vouchsafe to Accept it from the Mouth of Babes and Suck∣lings, to still the Enemy and Avenger; Why may not as mean an Orator prove Serviceable to put to silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men, who have said of our Soveraign, as those in the Parable, of their King, We will not have this Man to Reign over us? The Hope of such Good Success, and some little Good Liking that my Hearers discovered to this Sermon, after its Delivery from the Pulpit, encouraged me to venture it to the Press: And that Presumption drew me into a Greater, to shelter it under Your Graces Name.
But, Since Men that fly to Altars for Sanctuary, ought to bring Offerings thither with them; I humbly beg leave to Assure Your Grace, That in this Dedication, I aim no less at an Acknow∣ledgment for Your past Favour, in Collating me to a Considerable Benefice, than at Your Future Countenance and Encourage∣ment. And I esteem my self under the Greater Obligation to Your Goodness, that notwithstanding Your Grace's Extraordinary Care to provide an Able and Deserving Clergy for Your Diocess, You have however Admitted me into that Learned and Reverend Society; my Unworthiness of which, makes me seem to my self like Saul among the Prophets. Might I be Improved by the Advantage of such Excellent Conversation, to Prophesie to the Edifying of the People whom I have in Charge, I shou'd be Happy in several respects: But in none more, than in making Your Grace, by that means, the Best Return within my Power, for all Your Benefits; Since no∣thing is so pleasing to You in Your Clergie, as the Diligent and Exact Performance of their Duty on their Cures. For the Continuance whereof, May Your Grace live long, to Oblige and Encourage them to it: And as You have Honourably Born, and Faithfully Discharged, the Highest Offices in our Church and State; So may You, when You shall be taken from this World, Arrive at a Proportionable Degree of Glory in the Coelestial Hierarchy, to receive Above, the Reward of all the Good You bave done Below; and particularly to, My Lord, Your Graces most Obliged, and most Dutiful Son and Servant, EDM. ARWAKER.
2 CHRON. IX. 8. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee on his Throne, to be King for the Lord thy God: Because thy God loved Israel to Establish them for ever, therefore made he thee King over them, to do Judgment and Justice. SO Great, so Valuable is the Blessing which we this Day Celebrate, even the Blessing of Peace in all our Lands, Psal. 29. 10. So long has it been Want∣ed and Desired, so Earnestly has it been Pursu'd and Sought, Psal. 34. 14. And at last so happily Ob∣tained and Settled, that we can never sufficiently Adore the Goodness of our God, the Author, nor enough Applaud the Gonduct of our King, the Instrument of its Joyful Re∣storation. But tho' our Gratitude cannot reach the Inaccessible Height of this Obligation, yet shou'd we fail in our Just Endeavours to Acknowledge it, the Queen of the South wou'd rise up in Judgment with us, and condemn us, Mat. 12. 42. For she was drawn from the uttermost parts of the Earth, to hear the Wisdom of Solomon, and to admire the great and wonderful Effects of it, not only in his Proverbs and Answers, but in the Grandeur and Magnificence of his Court, and in the Plenty and Tranquility of his Kingdom, 1 King. 10. 4, 5. And behold! thro' the tender Mercy of our God, if not a Greater, yet one little less than Solomon is among us; a Prince by whose Excellent Management our Circum∣stances are brought to resemble Israels, in his Days, when every man dwelt safely under his Vine, and under his Fig-Tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, 1 King. 4. 15. Since then our King, like Solomon, has Peace on all sides
round about him, 1 King. 4. 24. Since the Lord has given him Rest and Safety from the Fatigues and Dangers of a Tedious War; and since we, not only in our Just Concern for Him, but through His Care of us, partake of this In∣estimable Benefit; so that there is neither Adversary, nor Evil Occurrent, 1 King. 5. 4. No Complaining in our Streets, Psal. 144. 14. but the Voice of Joy and Gladness: If the People are happy, who are in such a case; if they are bles∣sed who have the Lord for their God, to Establish their Fe∣licity, by giving them so Excellent a Prince; We ought cer∣tainly to be Sensible of our Happiness, and Grateful for it. And how can we better render, either to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, or to God the things that are Gods? Mat. 22. 21. How more suitably extol the Merits of our King, or the Goodness of the King of Kings in giving him to us, than in the Queen of Sheba's Congratulatory Complement to Solomon, when she found how much the Fame she had heard, was inferiour to the Truth of his Acts, and of his Wisdom, 2 Chron. 9. 5, 6. Blessed be the Lord thy God? &c. Which Words afford three things to our Observation. First, The certain Evidence of God's Favour and Affe∣ction to his People, in placing a Good King over them: Because thy God loved Israel, to Establish them for ever, there∣fore made he thee King over them. Secondly, The Excellent Qualifications of the Prince whom God makes choice of to convey Blessings to his Peo∣ple; implied in these words, Which delighted in thee, to set thee on his Throne, to be King for the Lord thy God. Thirdly, The Grateful Acknowledgements due from Gods People, both to God and the King; for the Unspeak∣able Benefits of the One's Care and Kindness, in the Ex∣traordinary Advantages of the Other's Government; which oblige them to say, Blessed be the Lord thy God.
That God's Placing a Good King over his People, is a certain Evidence of his Favour towards them. The Blessing of leading a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty, is by St. Paul ascribed to the Just Administration of the Regal Power; wherefore he exhorts that Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, be made for Kings, and all that are in Authority, 1 Tim. 2. 1, 2. that they may be Good, in order to make their Subjects Happy. And indeed, the General Welfare of a Nation depends so much upon the Temper of its Governours, that God de∣clares he gave Israel a King in his Anger, when he placed Saul on the Throne, Hos. 13. 11. And he threatens it as a Punishment for their not fearing him, that they shou'd be deprived of the Benefits they enjoyed under the happy In∣fluence of their better Princes; and say, We have no Kings, Hos. 10. 3. And the severity of this Curse will appear from the Observation, That when there was no King in Israel, eve∣ry one did that which was right in his own Eyes, Judg. 17. 6. And what is to be expected but Confusion in that State, where every distemper'd Humour is the Rule for disorder'd Actions? Where there is no Superiour Power to controul the Unruly Wills of Men, sway'd by their Lusts and Pas∣sions? But the Advantages of a Good King are not so well disco∣vered from the Inconveniencies of having No King, as from the Miseries which a People suffers under an Evil King. When Israel had desired a King, and the Prophet thus described the manner of the King that should Reign over them; That he wou'd take their Sons and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen, and some shou'd run before his Chariots; And that he would appoint him Captains over Thousands, and Captains over Fifties, and set them to Ear his Ground, and to Reap his Harvest, and to make his Instruments of War, and Instruments of his Chariots: And that he would make their Daughters to be Confectionaries, and
Cooks, and Bakers: And that he wou'd, with an Arbitrary Injustice, take their Fields, and their Vineyards, and their Olive-yards, and dispose of them to his Servants: And that he would take their Men-servants, and their goodliest young Men, and their Asses, and put them to his work; nay, and make themselves his Servants, 1 Sam. 8. 11. to 18. Wou'd they not have Reason to cry out in that day, because of such a King; and conclude that instead of a Nursing Father, Isa. 49. 23. God had given them a Devouring Lion? Nor wou'd they be Sufferers only from the Tyranny and Injustice of their King; his Imprudence, Intemperance, Irresolution, or Impiety, would be as injurious to them. Solomon denounces a Wo to that Land whose King is a Child, Eccles. 10. 6. That is, Not so much in Years, as in Understanding; whose Ignorance how to Govern, destroys his People by Male-Administration: For even a Child, in respect of years, if Wise, is better than an Old and Foolish King, that will not be admonished, Eccles. 4. 13. That being grown old and hardned in his Folly, is Irreclaimable by Reproof, and past all Hope and Expectation of Amend∣ment by Advice. How miserable must a People be under such a Gover∣nour, who, tho' ignorant how to Rule them, will not however be Advised, but is obstinately wedded to his own Opinion, and rejects that Safety which is in the multitude of Counsellors? Prov. 11. 14. Thus, Not the green Years, but Imprudence of Rehoboam, in making him slight the Counsel of those Old Men that stood before Solomon his Father, and prefer the Advice of others, whose want of Judgment and Experience render'd them unfit to be consul∣ted; made Israel cast off his Government, and Rebel a∣gainst the House of David, 1 King. 12. 8. and 19. And he justly deserved the Ignominious Character which the Son of Sirach gives him, That he was the Foolishness of the People, and one that had no Understanding; since he turned away the People through his giddy and inconsiderate Counsel, Ecclus. 47.
23. Which sufficiently declares God's severe Displeasure against Judah and Jerusalem, when he threatens that he will take away from them the Prudent, the Ancient, and the Counsellour, and give Children to be their Princes, and Babes to Rule over them, Isa. 3. 2, 3, 4. For the consequence will be Oppression, Rapine, Ruine and Destruction, Vers. 5, 8. And how sad and calamitous must the condition of a People be, when their Domestick Jars weaken and expose them to Foreign Outrage and Insults? How easily shall they be Overcome and made a Prey, when the same want of Pru∣dence in their Ruler, which hinder'd him from keeping them in Peace, will not let him with good Advice make War? Prov. 20. 18. Nor is a People in more danger from the Imprudence, than from the Intemperance of a Prince, whether in respect of Excess as to Meat and Drink, or Immoderation in other Appetites. Misfortune attends that Land, whose Princes eat in a Morning, for Drunkenness and not for Strength, Eccles. 10. 16, 17. For when Kings drink Wine, and Princes strong Drink, they forget the Law, and pervert the Judgment of the Afflicted, Prov. 31. 4, 5. They incapacitate themselves to Govern by Law or Reason, and so cloud their Under∣standing, that it cannot discern what is Just and Equitable. And when Reason is so weakned, Passion will quickly be predominant; and then as he that cannot rule his Spirit, will be as a City that is broken down, and without Walls, Prov. 25. 28. So he will break down all the Fences of Law and Justice, of Clemency and Moderation, and will run into all the Violence and Outrage, to which his Ungo∣vern'd and Misguided Will inclines him; will be like a Lion in his House, and Frantick among his Servants, Ecclus. 4. 30. And as when his Belly is his God, Phil. 3. 19. he will sacrifice the Revenues of his Kingdom to his Appe∣tite; so when his Will is his Law, he will subject the Li∣berties and Properties of his People to its Determinations. But neither Imprudence nor Intemperance make a Prince
more pernicious to his People than Irresolution and want of Courage, without which they cannot long continue in Peace, nor shall be Victorious in War. He whose strength is so small, that he faints in the day of Adversity, Prov. 24. 10. and turns himself back in the day of Battel, Psal. 78. 9. leaves his Realms Defenceless, and his People without Protection. He that has not Courage enough to do Valiantly, and to play the Man for his People, and the Cities of his God, 2 Sam. 10. 12. will leave them like Sheep without a Shepherd, 2 Chron. 18. 16. to glut the Sword and Fury of their Enemies, to be spoiled and slaughtered by them. For when he that shou'd lead them on, is the first whose Heart faints, and seeks for Safety rather in Flight than Forwardness, how shall they but follow his Example, and turn their Backs to the Smiters? Isa. 50. 6. Courage is so necessary a Qualification for a King, for the Defence and Safety of his Subjects, that we find when∣ever God rais'd up a Deliverer for his People, he inspir'd him with an extraordinary Valour, Taught his hand to war, and his fingers to fight, Psal. 144. 1. The time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, of Sampson and of Jephthah, who through Faith were endued with that Courage by which they subdued Kingdoms, escaped the edge of the Sword, waxed valiant in Fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens, Heb. 11. 32, 33, 34. And the People of Israel were so sensible of the evil consequences of wanting a King to go out before them, and fight their Battels, 1 Sam. 8. 20. that they still persisted to desire one for that reason, notwithstanding all the Incon∣veniencies of it, represented to them by Samuel, to divert them from that Request. And tho' Saul proved as great a Scourge to Israel, as the Prophet had fore-told he would, yet since from the Blood of the Slain, and from the Fat of the Mighty, the Sword of Saul returned not empty; David reckoned it as just a reason for the Daughters of Israel to weep over him, as his Cloathing them in Scarlet, and putting Ornaments of Gold on their Appa∣rel;
and he knew that the occasion of their Sorrow would make the Daughters of the Philistines rejoyce and triumph, to find the Mighty fallen, by whom Israel stood, and the Shield of Saul, which was his Peoples Shelter, vilely cast away, 2 Sam. 1. 19. to the end. But the Weapons of War were not wholly perished, while David yet survived, and succeeded in the Kingdom; since 'tis part of his Character, That he play'd with Lions as with Kids, and with Bears as it had been Lambs; that he slew a Giant when he was yet but young, and took away the reproach from the People, whn he lifted up his hand with the Stone in the Sling, and beat down the boasting of Goliah, Ec∣clus. 47. 2, 3. So great a Man of War he was, so mighty valiant, that he could as well put to flight the Enemies that Invaded Is∣rael, as the Evil Spirit that disturbed Saul; and compose the Troubles in the heart of his Country, as the Disquiets in the Breast of his King, 1 Sam. 16. 18, 23. But the Safety and Honour which his Country found in the great Effects of his Invincible Courage, was afterwards often lost and laid in the dust, by the want of that Vertue in many of his Successors: Which may suffice to shew how fatal this De∣fect in a Prince is to his People. But in no Miscarriage of the King, is the Misfortune of his People so great, as in his Impiety and Disregard of God; for be∣sides the Grievances of his Evil Reign, and the Mischiefs they suffer from himself; the Wickedness of a King brings Afflictions from Heaven upon his People, in that his Example generally pre∣vails with them to deserve them. Thus when Rehoboam forsook the Law of the Lord, all Israel did so with him, 2 Chron. 12. 1. And tho' at the Preaching of She∣maiah, they Repented, and were delivered from Destruction, yet were they not exempt from Spoil; For Shishak King of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the Treasures of the Lord's House, as well as of the King's, Vers. 9. and the People were made his Servants, that they might know Gods Service better, Vers. 8. Thus Ahab's Wickedness provoked God to shut up the Win∣dows of Heaven, 1 King. 17. 1. and to with-hold from Israel the
common Mercies of Dew and Rain, which he usually bestows alike on the Just and Unjust, Mat. 5. 45. so that there was a sore Famine in Samaria, 1 King. 18. 2. and the People wanted their dai∣ly Bread, because their King had forsaken Him, who alone fills all things living with Plenteousness, Psal. 145. 16. Thus Jehoram's working that which was Evil in the Eyes of the Lord, caused the Revolt of the Edomites and Libnah, not only from under his hand, but the hand of Judah: And 'tis as∣signed for the reason of this Defection, Because he had forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers. For which Impiety of his, his People are threatned with a Plague, 2 Chron. 21. 10, 14. To die an Un∣timely Death, for the Irregularities of his Life. Thus Ahaz's wicked Reign exposed his People as well as him∣self, to the hand of the King of Syria, who not only smote him, but carried away a great multitude of his Subjects Captives to Damascus, 2 Chron. 28. 5. And afterwards he was delivered into the hands of the King of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter, so that there were slain in Judah in one day 120000, which were all valiant Men; and the Israelites carried away cap∣tives to Samaria 200000 Women, Sons, and Daughters, with much Spoil, Vers. 6, 8. And as if this had not been enough, the Philistines also invaded, and took no less than six of the Cities of Judah, whom the Lord brought low because of Ahaz; for he made Judah Naked, and transgressed sore against the Lord, V. 18, 19. Since then the Sin of an Evil King is often the Reproach and Ruine of his People, Prov. 14. 34. How great a Blessing is a good King to his Subjects, because he not only frees them from this Misfortune, but is Instrumental to procure and promote their Happiness? Which occasioned that saying of the Psalmist, of such a one, Thou hast set him to be Blessings for ever, Psal. 21. 6. for so 'tis in the Original; signifying that a Good King is the means of conveying many Blessings to his People. And this Truth has been proved by a Cloud of Witnesses, Heb. 12. 1. How did Ju∣dah enjoy the Benefit of Asa's Piety? The first ten years of his Reign the Land was quiet, 2 Chron. 14. 1. and he had no War, be∣cause the Lord had given him rest, Vers. 6. so that the People built
and prospered, Vers. 7. And when Zerah the Ethiopian came to disturb their Peace, he did it to the Ruine of his own, Vers. 9. for the Men of Judah overthrew and spoiled him, Vers. 13. and had no War unto the five and thirtieth year of the Reign of Asa, Chap. 15. 19. This Tranquility his People had, because he did that which was good and right in the Eyes of the Lord his God, 2 Chron. 14. 2. And they, after his Example, had entred into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers; which as they had sworn with all their heart, they performed with their whole desire. Chap. 15. 15. And Jehoshaphat succeeding to his Father's Piety, as well as to his Throne, continues his Peoples happiness. The Kingdom was not only stablished in his hand, so that he had Riches and Honour in abundance, 2 Chron. 17. 5. but the fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no War against Jehosaphat, Vers. 10. And when afterwards the Children of Moab and Ammon came against him to Battel, they were destroyed; but his People re∣turned to Jerusalem with Joy; and his Realm was quiet, because the Lord had given him rest, 2 Chron. 20. 30. So certain it is, that when a Mans Ways please the Lord, he maketh even his Enemies to be at Peace with him, Prov. 16. 7. For this are Good Kings called, The Breath of their Peoples No∣strils, Lam. 4. 20. who live Safe under their Shadow, and enjoy Peace and Prosperity by their means. And since it is by God that Kings Reign, Prov. 8. 15. it must needs be an Evidence of his sig∣nal Favour to that People over whom he places a Good King, whose Excellent Qualifications establish their Felicity, and whose Great Example teaches them the Practice of that Righteousness which exalts a Nation, Prov. 14. 34. Since then Solomon had not only brought Plenty to his People, in making Silver as common at Jerusalem as the Stones, 1 King. 10. 27. but Peace and Splendor too; the Queen of Sheba might very reasonable conclude, that, Because God loved Israel, to Esta∣blish them for ever, therefore he made him King over them. And as his love to Israel made him bless them with so Good a King; so his taking a delight in Solomon, induced him to make Choice
of him, to set him upon his Throne, to be King for the Lord his God; since he found in him those Excellencies and Perfections which endear a King to God, and render him a Blessing to his People. For the Vertues of Justice, Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude and Piety, (the want of which in a King, I have al∣ready shewn to be of pernicious consequence to his Subjects) were so signally Eminent in Solomon, that his People could not desire a more Accomplish'd Soveraign to compleat their Happi∣ness: Justice, which is a constant and perpetual Will to render every Man his Right, or rather a habit of so doing upon all oc∣casions, was the Rule of all Solomon's Administrations. This was Judah's and Israel's Security in the Possession of their Rights and Properties, and gave every Man a safe Enjoyment of his own Vine, and his own Figtree, all the Days of that Righteous King. And this could not but be well-pleasing to God, as giving Man a near Resemblance of himself, who is Righteous in all his Ways, Psal. 145. 17. And being advantagious to his People, in keeping them from Injuries and Oppression, and securing them in the Possession of those Acquists to which they had just Right and Title. Thus, A Divine Sentence is in the Lips of the King, when his Mouth transgresseth not in Judgment, Prov. 16. 10. and by it he establisheth the Land, Prov. 29. 4. But to do Impartial Justice, requires a Solid Prudence; which being a True Habit of Acting with Reason, in respect of those things that concern the well or ill being of Men, must there∣fore be a Requisite Qualification for Kings, on whose Manage∣ment the Happiness or Misery of their Realms must necessarily depend. The Consideration of this, prevailed with Solomon, when God left it to his Option to ask what he should give him, to desire an Understanding Heart to judge his People, that he might discern between Good and Bad, 1 King. 3. 9. Which Choice, was an Argu∣ment that he was in great measure endued already with what he so judiciously desired: And God was so well pleased with his Petition, that he not only gave him what he asked, but an Over∣plus of Riches and Honour, Vers. 13.
Now how signal his Prudence was, and how great the Bene∣fits thereof, appears from his Celebrated Decision between the Harlots, who contended for the living Child, ver. 27. Which proves it as much the Happiness of a People, as the Honour of a King, that he shou'd be able to search out a matter, by so nice a Scrutiny, Pro. 25. 2. And since the Wisdom of God was in him to do Judgment, 1. King. 3. 28. it must needs please him to see the Stream retain the Pureness of its Fountain, and he wou'd Love him for this, as much as all Israel Feared him. Nor did Solomon permit his Justice to be perverted, or his Prudence baf∣fled, by any manner of Intemperance, but as those Virtues were his Peoples Safeguard against Injuries and Outrages from one ano∣ther, so his Temperance was their Defence against all Op∣pressions and Severity from himself. But, when magnified in the noblest part and demonstration of it, Clemency; it free'd them from the Just Punishments they had deserved, and pro∣voked him to inflict on them, by their Crimes. This was evident in his dealing with Adonijah, whom tho' he had set up a Title to the Crown, he pardon'd; and assured that if he wou'd shew himself a worthy man, there shou'd not an hair of his Head fall to the earth, 1 King. 1. 52. Nor was it less visible in his proceedings with Abiathar, who promoted the Usurpation; for tho' the King declared him worthy of Death, yet he contented himself with deposing him from the Priesthood, and confining him to his House at Anathoth, 1 King. 2. 26. Thus by his slowness to Anger, did he render himself better than by all his Might; and greater in Ruling his Spirit, than in the Government of Judah and Israel, Pro. 16. 32. and as it was his Glory, so it prov'd his Peoples Safety; and God, who his is slow to Anger and of great Goodness, cou'd not but be de∣lighted with Qualities so resembling his own, and chuse him for the Representative of his Power, as fittest to Rule Others, who had so great a Government over Himself. But if Judah and Israel were thus obliged to their King for their Domestick Ease and Enjoyments, they were no less indebted to him for their Protection from Foreign Ravages and Incursions,
Fortitude, which is a Mediocrity between Fear and Confidence, was so eminent in Solomon, that it left him no Famous Opportu∣nities of exerting it, more than in the Methods which took the occasion from him. It led him to strengthen himself with all the ne∣cessary Provisions of War; at Land, with a powerful Army, 2 Chron. 1. 14. By Sea, with a sufficient Fleet, 1 King. 9. 26. Which sup∣plied him with Gold from Ophir, to support the charge of both, ver. 28. So that he kept his People in Peace Fourty Years, a Blessing which needs no other recommendation than the Terrors and Calamities of War. Their young men were not slain with the Sword, nor their Cities wasted; there was no desolation in their Fields, nor complaining in their Streets; but Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the Sea in multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry; 2. King. 4. 20. There was no one durst attempt to disturb or trouble them, but their Tranquillity was firm and unshaken as the Resolution of their King; who cou'd not have manifested his Fortitude so much in subduing Enemies, as he did in prevent∣ing his having Enemies to subdue; and keeping his People in so perfect a Peace, that it was preferable to the greatest Victories. And as God, who was always loving to Israel, and desirous of their Establishment, had reason to be delighted with that Cou∣rage, which so highly contributed to it; and to place the Owner of it on his Throne, to be King for the Lord his God; so he found in Solomon another Vertue, which crowned the rest, and ren∣dered them more Amiable and Advantageous; and that was Piety, or the Love and Fear of God. I shall not trouble you with many Instances of this, but let one suffice for all, I mean that Everlasting Monument thereof, the Temple at Jerusalem. Which Work, as it received Gods Extraordinary Approbation, when it was finished, 1 Chron. 7. 1, 2, 3. So it remains upon Re∣cord, in sacred Writ, as an Evidence of its Founders Zeal and Reverence for his Worship, Acts 7. 47. And since the concurrence of these Vertues in a King, tend to Compleat and Establish the Prosperity of his People; it is un∣questionably
certain, that God, by giving any Nation a Prince in whom they are Eminently Visible and United, does thereby give the most convincing Evidence of his Favour and Affection towards them, and of his being highly delighted in the Person who is so much after his own Heart, 1 Sam. 13. 14. So qualifi∣ed to be his Vicegerent. And this certainly requires the most Extensive Gratitude and Acknowledgments of that People, for whom God makes such a happy Choice, in admiring his Good∣ness which design'd, and applauding their Soveraigns Excellen∣cies, which concur with it, to effect their Establishment and Se∣curity: That having a King like Solomon, they shou'd say as much to him, as the Queen of Sheba to that Great and Glorious Monarch, Blessed be the Lord thy God, &c. And if ever People had reason to Adress their God, or their King, on such an account, and in such a style; We certainly of Great Brittain and Ireland, lie under as great, and as many Obligations to Both. For our Almighty Soveraign Above, has blest us with a King Below, sufficiently furnish'd and inrich'd with all those Vertues that are requisite to make us as happy a People as we can pro∣pose to be in the largest extent of our own Wishes. So Just he has proved in the Administration of his Govern∣ment, that he has not only eschew'd the Evil of incroaching on our Liberties and Properties, but he has done the Good of Se∣curing us in those Rights of Englishmen, with which all who are truly such, shou'd as obstinately refuse to part, as Naboth with his Vineyard, since we have the same reason to alledg, That they are the Inheritance of our Fathers, 1 King. 21. 3. But so careful our Soveraign has been to oppose the Fence of our Ancient Laws and Priviledges against all Incroachments from Himself as well as Others, that nothing has been laid upon us in all his Reign, to which we have not first consented by our Representatives. Nor cou'd we fear he shou'd offer any Violence to our Laws, who came to us on purpose to Maintain them, when he saw an Arbitrary Power ready to throw down that hedg, and lay us open to its Devastations.
This quick and happy foresight of the Storm that then was gathering, and ready to discharge its fury on us; to Crush us with the weight of Lawless Power, and Poyson us with the Ve∣nom of Popish Principles; and the Timely as well as Happy Prevention of those Calamities, have sufficiently magnified his Prudence; so that whether we consider him on the Throne, sway∣ing the Regal Scepter, or in the Camp, weilding the Martial Sword, we must confess he has guided us by the Skillfulness of his Hands, Ps. 78. 72. And as his Wisdom has made us Safe, so his Great Tempe∣rance and Moderation (Sufficiently known to all men, Phil. 45. even to his greatest Enemies) has rendred us Easy too, un∣der his Government: No Indulgence either to his Palate, or his Passion, has disturbed the Evenness of his Temper. Tho he has often been provoked to be Vindictive, by horrid Designs of Barbarous Assassinations, yet he has shown as little Inclination to Revenge, as Fear; and has spared to shed Their Blood, whose Thirst was Insatiable after His. Nor shou'd it seem strange he shou'd be so tender of his Sub∣jects Lives, for whose Safety he has frequently exposed his Own; and that in the greatest Instances of an Unparallell'd Fortitude; in Doing and in Suffering things almost incredible. Perhaps never any King made his way so often thro' the Sea, even among those who claim the Soveraignty and Dominion of it; and that not only in Calm and Temperate Weather, when the Winds were Still, and the Ocean Smooth; but even when Tempests Roard aloud, and the Waves Raged horribly: Nay when they were Congealed to Rocks of Ice, by the Coldness of the Climate and the Season. Yet as he engaged in these Difficulties, with an Undaunted Constancy and Resolution, so he under went them all with an In∣vincible Patience, and an Unwearied Perseverance: Tho' he knew he was to run these Hazards only in pursuit of Greater, and went to expose his Life to an Host of Enemies; among whom, there neither wanted some who had Gallantry enough to attack it Bravely and with Vigor; nor others, whose Malice led them to attempt it Basely by Assassination.
His Generous Courage prompted him to press with greatest Eagerness, where he saw the most imminent Danger in his way: So that he was in Labours abundant, and in Deaths oft; in Pe∣rils in the City, and in Perils on the Sea; in Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings and in Cold, 2 Cor. 11. 23, 26, 27. And all this he endured for us, and for our Establishment; to perfect which, he has added Piety to his other Qualifications; and ex∣prest as much Fear and Reverence of God, as Slight and Con∣tempt of Dangers. His Precepts and Example have all along contributed to bring Religion into Vogue and Countenance; and to make us rather Sincere in the Practice, than Noisy in the Pro∣fession of it; that we might reap the Fruit of Righteousness, dwell in a Peaceable Habitation, and in quiet Resting Places, Isa. 32. 17, 18. And that he might as happily Compleat, as he gloriously Undertook the Restoration of our Peace. And this, Thanks be to the God of Peace, he hath Accom∣plished, and Settled upon such a Foundation as may by the Bles∣sing of the same Power, prove a firm and lasting Tranquility to Europe. And now since War is ceased in most part of the World, Psal. 46. 9. so that Nation doth not lift up a Sword against Nation, but instead of Military Discipline, make Agriculture their Employ∣ment, break their Swords into Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning-Hooks, Mic. 4. 3. Will not this tend to Wealth and Plen∣ty? Shall not our Pastures be cloathed with Flocks, our Valleys co∣vered with Corn? And while we eat in safety the Fruits of our Labours, shall we not shout for joy, and sing? Psal. 65. 13. And what Songs will so well become us, as Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving to our God, who by giving us so excellent a King, does build our Jerusalem, strengthen the Bars of her Gates, bless her Children within her, make Peace within her Borders, and fill her with the finest of the Wheat? Psal. 147. 13, 14. And if we desire still to see Peace within her Walls, and Plen∣teousness within her Palaces, Psal. 122. 72. let us walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever, Mic. 4. 5. Offer Sacrifices of sweet savour
unto him, and pray for the Life of the King, Ezra 6. 10. That he may live to Rectifie Corruptions and Abuses, effectually to Dis∣courage Prophaness and Immorality, and employ his Thoughts in Advancing the Happiness and Flourish∣ing King's Speech to Parliament. Estate of all his Kingdoms; that he may so preserve our Laws and Liberties Entire, and leave them so to Posterity; that nothing may be left for his Successors to do, but that which hath been already done, Eccles. 2. 12. to continue them as they find them. And let our Gratitude to him, who next to God has been the happy Instrument of conveying these Blessings to us, make us so quiet and peaceable under his Government, that he may re∣joyce in the Pains he has taken for us, and be a Sharer in the Benefits that accrue to us by them. And let no Factious Male∣contents be displeas'd with him, in whom 'tis Evident God De∣lighted, to set him on his Throne; and whom, because he lo∣ved us, he made King over us, to Establish us. May it please him therefore to continue the Mercy to us, in giving our Defender a long and prosperous Reign; that tho' we incessantly Commemorate with Thanks the Blessing of this Day, we may never in our time have a Second Occasion of Thanksgiving for the Conclusion of a General Peace. Which God, &c. FINIS.
