D1176 E459_5 99864520 116750
THE DESIGNS AND Correspondencies of the present COMMITTEE of ESTATES AND That part of the Scotish Nation which is now entred into this Kingdom in Hostility, In some measure discovered by two PACKETS of LETTERS intercepted in the North, and sent up to the House of COMMONS. WITH AN INTRODUCTIVE AND Some Marginal Notes and Animadversions, By a private Pen. DAN. 2.26. There is a God in heaven that revealeth Secrets. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons. August 16. 1648.
THat the great and glorious work of erecting a throne for the Lord Christ, & promoting the powers of god∣liness by a thorow Reformation in Church and State (which is a principal part of that Cause the Parlia∣ment hath hitherto travelled with) shall prosper, and notwith∣standing the fraud and force of men or devils, shall ride on con∣quering and to conquer, till captivity be fully lead captive, and grace become glory; no pious heart but believes, But whither the Lord will honor this generation of men, and make them an in∣strument in his hand to accomplish this work in these Kingdoms, we cannot so confidently determine: For, when we reminde our high Rebellions against our God, our want of real and personal Reformation, and neglect of executing judgement upon the Ene∣mies of this Cause (in which sence it cannot be denyed but our solemn Covenant hath been as solemnly broken) we may have cause enough to expect, That the Lord will so visit upon us those provocations, as to make England an Aceldama, or as Germany, a perpetual desolation, and bury this Parliament in their own ruines, by the unjust indignation of those very people, whose life and welfare is bound up in theirs; and yet endeavor in a blinded zeal, Sampson-like, to pull down those pillars that should sup∣port them, and let fall the Vindication of his Cause, to be resum'd by some more faithful generation that shall succeed. Yet if we do but consider, with what Vicissitudes and Alternations the Lord hath been pleased to dispence his providences, suffering us many times to be brought to the pits brink, and thence as often recovering us, and blasting the highest expectations of the Ene∣my, we may with some reason hope, That the Decree is not yet gone forth against us; but rather that he beholds us, as once he did Israel, with a troubled heart and repentings kindled toge∣ther, when he said, How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? How shall I make thee as Admah? &c. as it were unresolved what to do with England, and Englands sometimes dear and desired Par∣liaments. But if we adde thereunto the consideration of the
maner of our Deliverances, wherein he hath imprinted generally some character of special favor and mercy; and of the great and glorious things he hath done for this Parliament, the meer works of an Almighty arm, to which the creature could not pretend, not onely of old, when his hand was so lifted up, that all the world saw and confest his marvellous doings in behalf of his ser∣vants; but even that now again, since the like troubles have been renewed, he hath repeated the like Administrations, giving us in the midst of our dangers (by so much the more formidable as re∣lapses are worse then the first diseases) many seasonable, and little less then miraculous Deliverances; as, in Wales, the North, Kent, Surrey and elswhere, the least of which we could not want, or having wanted, must probably have perisht. We can∣not without a sinful ingratitude, and inobservance of former mercies, which with God are arguments and obligations for fu∣ture, but think that he will yet do this Parliament good at the latter end; and having been at the cost of so many mercies and miracles for them, That he will carry on this Cause by these hands, unto a happy and blessed issue for these Kingdoms. But in no sort of Dispensations hath he more remarkably appeared, and testified the continuance of his favor to this Parliament and his people, then in discovering and disappointing the secret Plots and Machinations of such, as under the character of friends lay in our bosoms, to which he hath always hitherto given a miscarrying womb and dry brests; and in unmasking and taking off those specious vizards, wherewith those apostatized friends, and other more professed Enemies that have risen up in arms against us, have clothed their undertakings, to lure our people from us, and proselyte them to their assistance: By means whereof, and by the good hand of God, the affections of those that first engaged with us, and were in some measure withdrawn, seeming to sleep in the ashes of discontent for their long continued burthens, and long delayed reparations, have been reinlivened and recovered to us, they by such providential Discoveries being brought to see aswel the wickedness as the unsuccessfulness of their Designs; and from thence gathering cause to resolve, That as the Enemies ma∣lice levels at the Destruction, so their welfare is onely to be se∣cured in the Preservation of this Parliament, That in the ruine of
this they may bid Good-night to all future Parliaments, and in the change of this have small hopes of bettering their con∣dition: A fresh occasion of this is given in from our Neighbors of Scotland, who being entred this Kingdom in open hostility, yet by their plausible Declarations and publike Overtures, would have the world think their errand honest and honorable, that they have nothing in their eye but the good of Religion, the Pre∣servation of the Kings Person according to the Covenant, and those other ends of the Covenant and Ingagements in the joynt Declaration of the 6. of January; whereas by that which fol∣lows it will appear, That it is even amongst themselves a question, whether Duke Hamilton, who commands their Forces in chief, be at all a friend to Presbytery (by which generally they under∣stand Religion) that those conditions in the Covenant with which the Defence and Preservation of the Kings Person is qua∣lified, are wholly forgotten, as always omitted in their publique Expresses; and that instead of bringing Delinquents and the Enemies of this Cause to condign punishment, which both by the Covenant and recited Declaration they are joyntly with us ingaged to, their principal assistances are raised, and correspon∣dencies laid with such, and particularly those Northern noto∣rious Incendiaries, Glemham, Langdale, Musgrave, with Hart∣ford and Holland, and other Southern Malignants; and, not to be infinite, That their Intentions of good to this Kingdom are so worthy of suspect, as that the Lord Lauderdale, who might be thought (though misguided) to have some honest principles left, is judg'd fit to be packt away to France, as a likely opposer of their bad ends; and the Prince himself, who is content to use their ayds, doubts to trust himself amongst them; and not without reason, if it be true, as many wise observers of Affairs believe, That Duke Hamilton, with the help of the active Secretary his brother, hath got himself in the head of these Forces, more with Design (according to some old pretentions and predictions) to get the Crown of Scotland, and the conquest of England to him∣self, then for any service to this King or Kingdom; and though much of this lay hid and unsuspected by many well meaning men (that having lost their way in a Scotch mist, and out of zeal to Presbytery, in which both the Scots and they concentred) were (in
compliance with them) gon further on the malignants errand then ever they intended, yet now they are printed in such legible Cha∣racters, as he that runs may read them, in two packets intercepted; which having stated the occasion by which they come to the Par∣liaments hands, without further anticipation of the Readers judgement, shall be left to speak their own sense, with this onely Observation premised, That though much thereof be in Cipher, yet those instruments which God hath qualified with skill to open them, will be able to evidence to any competent under∣standing, that the language they now speak is most genuine and natural; which will the rather be believed, if it be considered that the translation put upon the Naseby and other Letters which came in Characters, by the Decipherers were never yet disavow∣ed or contradicted in the least. But now to the occasion, When the new Committee of Estates had all things in readiness for their expedition, and invasive entrance into this Kingdom, they dispatcht from Edenburgh (upon the very same day that Duke Hamilton entred into England) their Vaunt-currier or Agent Mr. Haliburton, to give the Parliament an account of (the Rea∣sons we cannot call them, but) Pretences of their march and return into this Kingdom, by a Letter and Declaration from them, and another to the King, for which he was qualified by Commission, and for that onely; upon considence whereof, he ap∣proaches Major General Lamberts Quarters for his pass and safe conduct, which was not denied him, but finding him possessed of divers other Letters doubtfully directed, and by Characters, he caused them to be put in a case under both their seals, and him to be fairly waited upon by persons of trust and credit, that the judgement of Parliament might be had concerning the same: Being thus sent up (having in his passage principally desired con∣ference with such as were known abetters to the Kings cause) the House of Commons, though tender of the Laws of Agencies and publique Ministers, observing (besides that he pretended no Commission for bringing those other Papers) that the Com∣mittee of Estates in that publique Express to the Houses, held forth as one cause of their coming in, that they were invited by divers persons in this Kingdom engaged in Covenant with them; for the more hopeful discovery of the persons that might have
invited them, Ordered them to be opened and viewed by a Com∣mittee of their own, and a report (of such as were of any im∣portance or signification) to be made, which after the difficulty of Deciphering them (that were in Characters) was mastered, was done accordingly, and by their Order thus made publique. The first that is thought worthy of publique view, is directed to a person of Honor here, and sometimes a zealous Asserter of the Parliaments Cause, by a Character endorsed, which besides that the Postscript clears it, is known to signifie the Countess of Car∣lisle, and comes from the Lord Lauderdail, written partly in Cyphers, but all with his own hand, as by comparing it with ano∣ther written to his own Countess residing at Highgate, will be demonstrated. 8 July, 1648. MADAM, It hath been an old ob∣servation, That there was ne∣ver any great Treason carried on without a Woman and a Priest: Since your Ladiship is pleased to lead the Van in this, 'tis thought Time may discover some of our late Dissenting Brethren and non-Subscribers of the Clergy that will bring up the Rear. AT last our business is brought to some ripe∣ness; for D. Hamilton 30 writes, That this day he enters England 22: but this Bearer will more particularly acquaint your Ladiship, for he goes by the Army. He brings up to the Honorable Houses of Parlia∣ment the Declaration of this Kingdom, of the Necessity, Grounds and Ends of their undertakings, and of the return of our Army into England; your Ladiship will receive a copy of it: I dare both an∣swer for the honesty of the matter, and the rudeness of the form and language; for truly it was the work ofHow long this Cocka∣trice Egg hath been hatching, we are not yet so instructed as to affirm; but they that have observed the cold and listless prosecution of the War by the Scotish Army, called in and well paid for that Service, from the Siege of Hereford downward (at which time Trea∣ties and Negotiations were admitted by some principal persons in that Army, to which this Epistler was no stranger, with Sir William Fleming in the Kings behalf) will reason∣ably judge, That the Design cannot be of a much yonger date, but laid there. very few hours, not aboveGreat bodies commonly have slow Births: Naturalists observe, That the Ele∣phant goes three years with yong; but this great Lord is (ye see) of quicker dispatch, and may perhaps repent it at leisure. four and twen∣ty: but God willing it shal be honestly pursued. This Gentleman hath order absolutely to obey your La∣diship in every thing. We owe so many obligations to E. Holland 31, and I have no cypher with him; there∣fore
E. Lanerick 35 and I have written this enclosed to him, which you will please to deliver: it is only a testimony of our respects, and an assurance, when ever we are able, of our service. E. Lanerick 35 thought it fit also to write a general Letter to the Lo: Hartford, which is done; and I have from my self written to E. Manchester 39, I know not if he will tell it you. Your Ladiship will please to address the Bearer to 164. 197. 193. andIf the City or (that which represents them) the Common-Councel shall take occasion from hence to put a Test upon their Members for discovery of those that have invited the Scots, or corre∣spond with them, they shall justifie their Integrity, and rear a Monument of their Praise to all succeeding gene∣rations. our Friends in the City. I can adde no more to what I wrote so fully by the last Express, but that I am most faith∣fully and unfainedly, Your most humble Servant. I would not write to your Brother Northumber∣land, but none is more his Servant. Be pleased to send the copy of the Declaration to L. Jermin 28. Endorsed )·( Count. Carlisle. This inclosed in the former, though without any Superscription to di∣rect it, must according the intimation in that Letter, belong to 31. the Earl of Holland. My Lord, Your Lordship hath givenWhich have not been without some convenient and prudent intermissions, varted and alternated pro temporum ratione. so many eminent Testimonies of your Loyalty to the King, of your good affections to both King∣doms, their Unity, Peace and Happiness, and of your particular respects toMore respects to his own Nation might more have becom'd his Lordship; for want of which it may be said, Hic amor est Odio majus seclus. our Nation, That we thought it fit to appoint this Gentleman to wait on your Lordship, to acquaint you with our Resolutions, and our proceedings in order to all those we have been engaged for. If we had not thought it too publique a way, the Committee of Estates would have said thus much to you. Be pleased therefore to let us know how we mayWe know not how you may better serve him, then by sending a competent sum (wor¦thy your great obligations to him) for his ransom. serve your Lordship, and we dare answer, This Kingdom will ever be ready to give testimonies of their respects to your Lordship, as we shall be particularly to approve our selves, My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servants, Lauderdale. Lanerick. Edenburgh, July 8.
MY Lord, Your Lordship hath given such eminent proof of your Loyalty and Fidelity, as that we are confident (now while His Majesty is in theHis Lordship might do better to repent himself of counselling and abetting the King in his defection from the Parliament, which hath brought him to this extremi∣ty; from which, a clear and cordial compliance with the Parliament can onely rescue him with Honor and Advan∣tage. extremity of a low condition) your Lordship will shew your self for His Rescue. The Bearer is commanded to represent to you our condition and Resolutions here; by whom we will earnestly desire you would please to convey to us such Advices and Commands as you shall think fit, for he may be absolutely trusted, and they shall be faithfully obeyed by, My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servants, Lauderdale. Lanerick. Edenburgh, 8 July, 1648. Here follow a few (of many) Letters of Credence, by which their Agent Mr. Haliburton, was recommended to divers persons in this Kingdom, some of which remain yet undiscovered. JULY 8. RIght Honorable, You know this Bearer, therefore I shall onely say, you may trust him as you would do Your most obedient Son and Servant, Lanerick. Endorsed, For the Right Honorable the Earl of Derlton, but known in England by the name of Mr. James Maxwel, now or late Gentleman Ʋsher of the Black-Rod to the Lords House. If this Noble Courtier shall not without the rack confess what he knows of Design against this Kingdom, where he hath Reapen so many gol∣den Harvests, and which Transplanted into the other, have prospered into an Earldom, I shall think the stool of Repentance too good a Penance, and a Horning from hence but too gentle punishment for high Ingratitude. JULY 8. SIr, This is onely to beg an absolute trust to the Bearer hereof, in every thing which he shall impart to you from Your faithful Servant, Lanerick. It is so long since I heard from Mr. 52.6.8.44. that
I dar'st not write to him, if his'Tis hoped many gal∣lant men will change their in∣clinations, since you have so notoriously changed your Cause; and upon that ac∣count only were your friends, 1. us{que} ad aras. Inclinations be changed we will lose a gallant Friend; Let this Bearer receive his directions in conveying his com∣mands to me, if he hath yet any good wishes for us, which certainly we never so much deserved from Men of Honor as now. Endorsed, 409. JULY 8. MAdam, The little we have more to say then what we did by the last Express, will be fully offered to your Lady∣ship by this Bearer, for whose Fidelity and Secrecy I dare abso∣lutely engage my self, and that he will faithfully obey such com∣mands as you shall think sit to lay upon him. Madam, Your Ladiships most humble and most obedient Servant, Lanerick. Endorsed, 367, 154. 17. What use their Agent Mr. Haliburton was to make of the great trust and power conferred upon him by these absolute and unlimited Cre∣dentials, will appear in this that follows. JULY 8. SIr, This Bearer hath full Authority to engage the Publique Faith of Scotland, for such sums of money as can be procured upon a National security: We dar'st not hazard to put your name in the Commission, for we cannot answer for the Secrecy of all that have signed it; beside our fears of having it miscarry, & so a possibility of wronging you: But he hath so positive a com∣mand to follow your directions, as he will address himself to none but such as you shall advise him; he will fully shew you our Condition, and the best ways in our Judgements of your being assisting to us, give him the same trust you would give to Your most humble Servants, Lauderdale. Lanerick. Endorsed, 189. IOhn Donne, I am commanded by the Committee to let you know, That this Gentleman Mr. Haliburton is employed by them to London to the two Houses of Parliament, and to go to the King: you shall direct Letters as he bids you, and receive
and direct our Letters as formerly, when he is in the Isle of Wight. He carries up Copies of our large Declaration, which you shall transcribe, and in ourThough the fashion be old, certainly it never became you; and though while you lived amongst us you were with an unexampled patience suffered to publish your scan∣dals and our wrongs by our own Instruments, insooth 'twere high time now to leave it off, lest it stick upon you with the superadded badge of a shamoless Impudence. old fashion provide a Printer, and see that he print it correctly: I am confident many Printers will be glad to print itYou have so long plow∣ed with our Heifers, that you may be confident of the Beasts that they will do your work: But, my Lord, afford us the like in Scotland, and I shall not envy it, if you enjoy that liberty here to your utmost wish; in the mean time I shall content my self with that easie Reproof, Licebit Clazementis turpuer agere: I hope you know the Story, which fits you but too well. without a Warrant; therefore you shall be careful that it be not false printed: Before you can get it printed there, we shall have it printed here. I rest, Your assured Friend, Landerdale. Edenburgh, 8 July, For Mr. John Donne. The other Packet was intercepted by the Northumberland Forces, and transmitted to the House of Commons by Sir Arthur Hesil∣rige Governor of Newcastle; It was directed to Mr. John Donne, the Agent to the Committee of Estates for the King∣dom of Scotland, at his Lodging in Black-Fryers. Barwick: 19 July, 1648. MAdam, I have received two together, one of the 6. the other of the 11. till now I thought it not possible a Letter from yourYou see, my Lord, a fair hand may draw black lines; but comfort your self, for Sables and Crosses are good bearing in Heraldry. Lady∣ship could have brought me so much trouble as your last hath done, for the sad disaster of so many gallant persons. I could disgest the ruine of that Design (though I was raised to a greaterTis happy with Eng∣land when the Enemies best hopes lean upon such brek in Reels; and considering the  you had of that  valor, when he commanded the Kings Horse in Scotland, we wonder upon what Basis you raised such great Expectations from him; you know who said,  cerborum Duce Loone quam Leonum Duc. cervo. expe∣ctation from it then any thing else in England)
but the great loss by the imprisonment of the Earl of Holland, I confess I cannotHave a little patience, my Lord, and you shall have some Mustard after your din∣ner to help your digestion. disgest, nor your Ladyships trouble which you express in the end of your Letter. But I will insist no more on so sad a subject; onely thus much I may with confidence aver, That except the King, who is a prisoner, none in England could have been made prisoner, that Scotland would have been so ready to relieve as the Earl of Holland, and none in the world more for∣ward to it then I. From France we are strangely neglected; I got not so much as a Letter, except what was directed in common, not the half of the Ammunition pro∣mised, and that was MustardSince your Lordship is so unsatisfied with the me∣thod of your service, I wish you had had your Mustard before dinner. after dinner, after our Army was marched; not a peny ofNot a peny, my Lord perhops it come all in Carde∣cues, or else 'twas thought that the clippings and filings of our English money which you carried hence in your last, might defray the charge of this Expedition. Ammu∣nition by haives, and Money by nulls, so let our Enemies be always supplied. money: but that which is worst, is the strangeIt is not strange, but reason enough to make a prov, Crete sis agere cum isi∣bus, to break Faith with Faith breakers. conditions demanded, contrary to all our ingagement, and shewing a great distrust of Scotland; but I will re∣peat nothing of what you may read here, and after you have read it, be pleased to send it away. Your most humble Servant. Endorsed, )·( Count. Carlisle. Barwick: 10 July, 1648. MY Lord, We have at last received the Queen's and Prince's pleasure by Sir William Fleming, with about the half of that Arms and Ammuni∣tion we expected; yet as much as he could get at Amsterdam, though he staid long for it: butIt may be the Queen and Prince were informed and satisfied with the Advice D Hamilton gave in Scotland, who to that preposition in Parliament, concerning sup∣ply of money for this Service, bade, Set the Lads into Eng∣land; and they would do well enough; which we found a sober truth, when they came hither upon an honester Errand. no Money, whereof we stood most in need. And as we are very sensible of, and thankful for Her Maje∣sty and His Highness gracious favor exprest in the Letter they honored us with; so we cannot but let your Lordship know, how much we are troubled with those hard conditions in the additional In∣structions,
which indeed are such as we dare not make them known but to very few: For should it be known in Scotland that the Prince demands in our Army the exercise of that'Tis much that they have concell'd all Obligati∣ons of Honor and Honesty, lost the remembrance of what we did for them in Q Eliza∣beths day and what we would not do against than in the beginning of thes. Troubles, that have broke then Vows to God, Faith and Treaties with men, should stick at any form of Worship,  scruple a Ser∣vice-Book, Qui emth modesciae limites transierum, oporta na∣viter esse impudenies, which they could afford, were it not to give advantage to their op∣posers Form of Wor∣ship formerly used in England (which the King ne∣ver had with us it would give so great advantage to the violent opposers and have such an operation, as we shall not be guilts of: Some of the other De∣mands look so likeWonder not, my Lord, at that, since every Age hath afforded instances of them that have loved the Treason, but hated the Traytors. distrust, as we dare not shew them. But we have sent Sir W. Fleno to the Army, and when he comes back, and brings the opinion of D. Hamilton and Calendar, such a return shall be made, and such assurances given, both by the Com∣mittee in the Name of the Kingdom, and by those that wrote formerly, as shall witness our loyalty and fidelity to their Majesties service, and of our duty to the Prince, whose'Tis thought the Prince remembers his Fathers usage amongst you, and may ex∣pect,  your Army meet with a disaster, his person may be made a price for your redem∣ption, with some money per∣naps into the bargain presence with, and confidence in the Scots, will be found to be the best, if not the onely means of the Kings rescue, and the Princes real good. The Scots Army is now at Perith, Lambert re∣tires before them Fast enough; they are in a condi∣tion to stand upon their own legs: The greatest part of the Forces expected from Ireland are land∣ed in Scotland; as soon as they come up to the Army, and some Regiments now upon their march in Scotland, the Army will march into better quarters, The Earls of Lauderdale and Lanerick are sent to Barwick with Forces to secure a Ga∣rison thereThis Parenthesis was writ in Characters in the sust person, which proves them the Authors of this Letter; the rest of the clause being in words at length, and in the third person, to blinde the Reader. (which we have done) They are to return to EDENBURGH, where the Ge∣neral Assembly now sits, as violent against us as ever the Commissioners of the last were. The mis∣fortunes of our friends in the South, and at Pom∣fret is sad, most especially the taking of the Earl of Holland. But no difficulties nor discouragement can make us less active, as we shall, God willing, (how∣ever we may be looke upon) give real proofs of
our zeal and constancy to the Kings service; and that we are most faithfully Your most humble Servants, Lauderdale. Lanerick. For my Lord Jermin. Another inclosed. Barwick: 19 July, 1648. MAdam, We have now lost all our hopes in the South, since the Earl of Holland his sad misfortune and restraint; but as our Difficulties grow, so does the justness of our quarrel; for to the rescue of the King is nowNothing to nothing will not advance the sum, nor one bad Cause to mother mend the matter, but iniqui∣ty to iniquity may increase vvrath against the day of wrath, if not prevented by a timous repentance. joyned our best and no∣blest friend. With GodsWe hope he is left out of all your correspondencies, for we may safely say, God is Independent, and will not as∣sociate with such faithles pre∣tenders to Presbytery, as have the powers and piety of it un∣der the notion of Impertiner∣cy assistance we will effectuate both, or bring our selves to the same condition. This is aMadam, 'tis ill trusting to such votaries; he is ill like to keep his personal vow, that hath broken his National, more solemnly made then this, and with a hand lifted up to the high God. vow now solemnly made, and shall as faithfully be kept by Your most humble and most obedient Servant, Lanerick. Barwick: 19 July, 1648. MIstris,Yet more Ladies! sure that war which at first, and with the Scots was Bellum Episco ale, and since in Eng∣land Bellum Basilicum, will at last resolve it self between both into Bellum Faemininum; but that God who has inabled us to outride the storms and impetuous force of our Mas∣culine spirited Enemies, will not let us fall under the at∣tempts of such effeminate conspirators. If the satisfaction of two long Letters from you had not allayed it, yours of the third of July would have made me quarrel, there is a great deal in it too like Complement; and then you tell me in plain English, 4 will imploy Lauder∣dale no more, what ever necessities he have; and that upon a great mistake, as if I had by that woful little sum prejudiced my occasions: But I must say no more of this, lest again I grow angry. You will, I hope, by the next, do Lauderdale more right, and send your picture, which will make amends. Now for answer to your two last, you desire to knowî is taken to signifie the Lord Jerin. how î and Duke Hamilton agree, I wrote you my minde of that already, which it seems you had not then received, but it came that night to London, so I shall not repeat it. Since that time, Informations are come to Lanerick, that î does
Hamilton and him ill offices in France, which re∣news the distance, I do what I can to mend it, but I cannot do you the good offices you expect with Duke Hamilton at this distance,'Twas observed in the Pre∣face, That Duke Hamiltons af∣fection to Presbytery is su∣spected by their most confi∣dent Abettors and Cabalisti∣cal correspondents Here's my Voucher. yet I have told La∣nerick what a Champion you are. Your next que∣stion is, of the affections of Lauderdale to 163. which I assure you is as great as ever, as also to Presbytery, though he abhors the impertinencies of some Presbyters, most especially Gilespy: And this affection is most consistent with all duty to the King and to England, which Lauderdale can de∣monstrate, though for his own part, to both he be∣lieves it much above dispute. I shall here write no∣thing of News, it comes to you by another address, as you desired. I am most unsatisfied with the Princes delay, and more with those hard conditions Sir William Fleming hath brought, which indeed argue a great mistrust of the Scots, and an unjust one: For assure your self, what ever you may think of other Designs,It is hard to distinguish between the Nation and Par∣liament of Scotland, that un∣der a present distemper is in∣gaged in this Design: yet I dare not call it National, when I finde so many there that have not bowed the knee to Baal, and amongst them so considerable a body and So∣ciety of men, as the Reverend Assembly, and others our Co∣venant-ingaged Brethren of all qualities and degrees, who desire to serve and save the King and England. It is Scotland, and Scotland onely must save the King and England, all others have their rise from the expectation of Scotland, and I am sorry with so little success, most particu∣larly for E. Holland. And now whilest Lauderdale is so unsatisfied, and indeed almost despairing that the Prince will come to Scotland, if he can chose; I am earnestly prest to go to France to invite him; Lauderdale shuns it, and opposes it with all his strength, but is resolved, rather then the blame of not inviting Him should be charged upon him, he will go, although he should be laugh'd at at his re∣turn, for coming without his errand: 2 will go, though Lauderdale hath no hope of prevailing, as to his Regiments full establishment. But all shall be done that is possible, which you easily expect from me: if Lauderdale go, he shall not relieve 4. yet you will know his Regiment by the Cornets, which are hair-colour'd and white. I have ventured so
long a Letter, though I have no hope it will go safe, always if it be intercepted, you are eased of so much trouble, and they that gets it may let it go, for they will not be much the wiser, for there are no State-matters in it. Adieu. Endorsed, ΔΔ. This Letter is not without some obscurity and inconsistency; but far be it from this hand to adde or supply any sence that seems to be lest in the Character on Decypherer: Gods Cause needs not our lye. Beside, the next of the same Direction, whith runs in a more current uniformity and analogy of sence, in many parts expounds and justifies this. YOu will be clearly perswaded it was not want of resolution to part, made me stay here so long, when you see that since I wrote last, I have taken a firm one to go to France within ten days at most: It is both the desire of î signified by Sir William Fleming; and every thing else invites, and is fully ripe for it: One singular instance is, Lauderdales going along with me, as you will hear fully from himself: I get a Letter from the Com∣mittee to the King of France, one to the Queen, another to the Cardinal, to get my Regiment established with all advan∣tages, which I know will take no effect, onely it will conciliate some respect to my affairs, and furnish me a handsom retreat when I list to come off, having got a refusal; both which you may make an account of, for it is very like this summer will go near to make an end of the greatest part of my men, and un∣less the Countrey undertake the recruits, and that upon terms granted by France, for the sure payment of the Regiment, and admission of it to guard the King, it were madness to look after it any more: Lauderdale will take course for Address, and you shall hear from us at all occasions: The General Assembly here will go as high against the engagement as can be imagined, but it is nowSo thought Haman, when he had gained a Commission for the destruction of the Iewish Nation: but though the Medes and Persians could not reverse such Decrees, the God of Israel could, and did control and invert them to the ruine of the Designers. past their hindring, and all that op∣pose it will be ruined, unless some strange accident hinder it; Duke Hamilton and Calendar have not
both the same spirit;If Lanerick rule Scot∣land, D. Hamalton, who is the elder Brother, hath the more wrong; but if either rule it, King Charls wants some of His Right. Lanerick doth now abso∣lutely rule Scotland, and though it be indeed most perfectly necessary for Lauderdale to go, yet the Hamiltons press it vehemently to have him out of the way, that they may rule all without any impe∣diment, which is impossible (while he is present, at least) to bad ends, so that things will surely go strangely here shortly: all other particulars of our voyage Lauderdale will communicate; and all I adde is, that you fail not to write us Lauderdales addresses, what you will have me say to î. Endorsed, ΔΔ. These three that follow, amongst many others that speak the same sence, being writ at large, are added as concurrent Testimonies to those in Cypher, though it needed not, when the principal con∣tents are so universally, and (by that unhappiest way of proof, Experience) found to be too true; as namely, That the Earl of Calendar hath the Command of Carlisle in Cumberland (as the Earl of Lauderdale hath of the Countess of Carlisle at Westminster) The same Lord Lauderdale and Lanerick were sent to secure Barwick, upon an Information that some thou∣sands of English Horse were in Northumberland; and that the Information proving false, they resolved to prove false too, and secure the place notwithstanding, with the breach of Faith, and the Articles of the National Treaties: And lastly, but that which is worth all the rest, That learned Gillespy is Moderator of that Reverend Assembly, that will never (to say no worse) pray a Blessing upon this horrid Violation of the Publique Faith of their Nation, by many ancient Obligations, and the late Covenant and Treaties, so solemnly and religiously en∣gaged with this. For the Countess of Lauderdale at Highgate. My deart heart, IT is very likely this Letter may come to other hands before it come to you, yet I may tell you,
that I am well, thus much nearer you then I was; for it pleased the Committee of Estates to command my Lord Lanerick and me to come hither and secure this Town, which we have this day very quietly done: TheYou had no reason to expect other from those Renegado English, who were sent into that Town by your selves, to keep it for your coming. English are marcht out, and we in, we have made Col: Lodowick Lesley Governor under my Lord Duke, the Earl of Calendar hath the command of Carlisle: As for the condition of our Army, I send you the last Letter I had from thence, which comes from one that is in the English Army; within two days or three I go back to Edenburgh, where Mr. Gillespy is Moderator of our Assembly. Be careful of the inclosed Letters, you know to whom 151, is, the other is for Mistress 108.23.71.13.65.95.109.21.45.104.11.60.66.17. I pray you cause write on the back of it and send it to her: This is all at this time shall be said by Your own LAUDERDALE. Barwick, 19 July. For 151. I was sorry to see you trouble your self and me both, with an account of what money you received, you need no more but take upon my account as you need it, and advertise me. I can tell you but few news: Our Army is at Peerith, Lambert hath still retired, but our Army will not go in far, till the Forces from Ireland come to them, most
part are landed; the General Assembly sits, and Gil∣lespy is Moderator: The Committee sent the Earls of Lauderdale and Lanerick to secure Berwick, upon an information that some thousand English Horse were in Northumberland, and gave them power to take what force they could get for that service, but the in∣formation is proved false, and they are gone with no more then are necessary for the place: Sir William Fleming is returned with a good proportion of Ammu∣nition and some Arms: This is all I can tell you at this time. For Mr. GEORGE HALIBURTON. 19 July, 1648. George, VNtil I know of your being at London, I shall not direct the Packets to you; I can say little by this Post, the condition of our Army being better known to you then to me. Most of our Irish Forces are now landed, and within few days will joyn with our Army; two hundred of them in their passage were taken by one of the Parliaments Ships, and carried to Col. Monk,Whence you may see all fairness (I hope it deserves no other name) towards the Scots, none from them. Omnia adversum spectantia nulla retrorsum. who as we are this day informed, did immediately cause send them back to Major Gen. Monro, declaring, That he had no Order for hindring of Scotish men to return to their own Land; most of our Forces in the North are likewise upon their march, and within few days will be up with the Army. This day the Earls of
Lauderdale and Lanerick have secured the Town of Berwick from the Sectaries with a Scottish Garison, and have placed Col. Lodowick Lesley Governor there: It is impossible to satisfie this General Assembly, who are resolved to fly very high in their Censures and Declarations, though many pious and eminent men of theTis likely there wants the word Episcopal, who onely will be scandalized at their proceedings in pursuance of their Co∣venant. Clergy are so scandaled with this rigid pro∣cedure of theirs, as they can hardly force themselves to live under their Government: This is all which for the present shall be said to you by Your Friend. FINIS.
