D2919A 99895679 153186
Geographia Ʋniversalis: THE Present State Of the Whole WORLD: GIVING An ACCOUNT of the several Religions, Customs, and Riches of each People; The Strength and Government of each Polity and State; The Curious and most Remarkable Things in every Region; With other Particulars necessary to the under∣standing History, and the Interest of Princes. Written Originally by the SIEƲR DƲVAL, Geographer in Ordinary to the French King; And made English, and Enlarged By FERRAND SPENCE. —Venient annis Soecula seris, quibus Oceanus Vincula rerum laxet, & ingens Pateat Tellus, Tiphysque novos Detegat Orbes; nec sit terris Ʋltima Thule. Senec. Tragaed. Med. v. 374. London: Printed by H. Clark, for F. Pearse, at the Blew Anchor at the West-end of St. Pauls, 1685.
John Ward of Capesthorne in the County of Cheshire Esq. and of the Inner Temple 1704 bookplate
To the Honourable Edward Coke, Esq SIR, ONE of the Principal De∣signs of most Dedications inscrib'd to Men of Eminence and Condition, is the imploring their Patronage and Protection. This the Authors ever pretend, and add, that their Books, being to travel in a wide and censorious World, do want a Pass∣port from some Grea Name, which may defend them from the arrogance and obloquy of Cri∣ticks, a sort of Men, that are born to be the Scourges of Mankind in
all Ages, and therefore ought ei∣ther to be tied up by the Publick Magistrate, or awed down by Persons of Celsitude and Honour; so that if Hobbs his State of Na∣ture awakens and kicks-up in 'em, they may vent all their Malig∣nity on the Dust, without any Noise of their own, or the Hear∣ing of others. They pretend, that the least Trifles and Dwarflings of Wit, are most mightily safe and secure, provided they have but kindly and favourable Patrons: And, to hear at what rate they talk, a Man would say, that those glorious and adorable Per∣sonages, whom they with so much Religion invoke, and to whom they so devoutly conse∣crate their Labours, have either the Will or the Power to give Estimation to such things, as by no means deserve it; as if, like
Deities, they cou'd Create some∣thing out of nothing, and the Merits of one Man cou'd be transferr'd upon another. This Custom, SIR, I shall not follow, tho' I have so much good Company, it being bottom'd upon a very Chimerical Founda∣tion; but shall leave the Book and its Author to shift for them∣selves, as well as they can. Yet even this Amusement is su∣perseded by their having done so already: For, Both of 'em have, for some Years, stood the Test of France; and as it has been the Happiness of the Author to be applauded and preferr'd by that Great-Prince, for his profound Skill and Know∣ledge in these no less pleasu∣rable than useful Studies of Geo∣graphy, so hath his Book been Universally receiv'd and Una∣nimously
approv'd by the learned part of that King's Subjects, as it appears by the repeated Edi∣tions of this Work in the Ori∣ginal. As to my share in it, that am only the Englisher, I can pretend to nothing of Merit, but only that of Translating it Faithfully. It is a Subject made more for Ʋse than Ostentation, and serves rather to the Infor∣mation than Divertisement of Hu∣mane Life. Here are none of the Heroick Flights of Eloquence, nor the more Delicate Curiosi∣ties of Wit: But the Words both are and ought to be as plain and un-metaphorical as those in the last Confession of a Dying Man. Wou'd it not be an horrid, ab∣surd and amasing Spectre, Sir, to see a Fellow, when he is rea- to Expire, use either a starch'd
Eloquence or Nice Witticisms, when he was to draw all the Linea∣ments of his Soul, to shew the several risings and tumours of his Passions, and consequently his Vices depending thereon, to di∣scover all the Deformities, and let the By-standers guess at the Landskip of his Vertues, and (in one word) when he was to write or dictate the whole Geography of his Mind? The same thing holds good in this kind of Knowledges: They must be drawn as Naked, as Truth or Nature; Otherwise, Poetry wou'd Commence Geography, and this Globe of Earth wou'd be like a Castle in the Air, not only in its local Hanging, but its real Existence. But tho' the Argument does not admit of much Verbal Or∣nament, yet it carries a great
deal of Delight along with it, which arising from the things themselves, most undoubted∣ly, is much more real, steady, and substantial, than what de∣rives its Origine from Words. Here we are only tickl'd, but there a solid Joy runs through the whole Circle of Blood, which keeps it warm a good while afterwards. By the former we are put, peradventure, into a small sort of Ecstacy, but we are flush'd and transfix'd by the later. The First slackens and relaxes the Mind, but the Se∣cond enlarges it and fills it up. And (to instance in the Studies under my hands) when we take a Prospect of the several Scenes of this Globe, of its dif∣ferent Soils and Climates, of its various Kingdoms and Nations, of their respective Arts and Policies,
of their divers Religions and De∣votions; tho' all this be describ'd without any Rhetorical Paint and Fucus, it must needs both ex∣tremely divert and sate the wi∣dest Capacities of our Souls, not only upon account of the Nature of the Things them∣selves, but likewise of their admirable Variety: And, for my part, I am unable to ex∣press the mighty Satisfaction I took two Years ago, when I ran this thing over with my Pen, only to settle these Notices in my Mind. It is my Opinion, SIR, that our Minds stand in need of as much Nutriment as our Bodies: As we are perpetually recruit∣ing the latter, so we must be al∣ways refreshing the former, and not let it, by continual Expi∣ration either grow Empty or be
harrass'd by Famine. Men are not to imitate their Methods in fur∣nishing their Houses, while they lay out so much in adorning all their lower Rooms, but the Garret is either Empty or fill'd with Rubbish. Yet it is gene∣rally seen, that when Men have got some small stock and smattering of Learning, there they stick and proceed no further; they have already enough for common Conversation, and talk the rest by hints and guesses; not considering, that so frail is the Mind and Memory of Man, that even that knowledge runs through it, as through a perfo∣rated Vessel, and they must imitate the Danaides in their Labour, tho' they do not in the vanity of their Labour: for in the sifting of Letters, as in other things, tho' the greater part
passes through, yet what's fine remains, and the more it's sifted the finer and richer it is: But those, Queis arte Benigna Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan, tho' they have less Necessity, yet take more Care about this Reple∣tive Faculty, (as I may call it;) and as what Aliment enters the Stomach, turns gradually into Chyle, and Blood, and Animal Spirits; so they refine more and more the Notices that come into the Brain; and Conversation [the true Touchstone] turns what they Read into good and current Coin, as Midas turn'd all he touch'd into Gold. Another Reason, for a Constant Infusion of Knowledge into the Mind, arises by immediate De∣duction from the former; since
the Soul ought no more to be in the same temper and frame than the Body, if we intend either to live happily or in health. As a con∣tinual renovation of the Blood con∣duces to the health of the Body, so a constant Redintegration of thoughts makes up the welfare and good estate of the Mind. Variety is the great Mistress of the World, and what wou'd become of Love it self, and all other Mistresses, if she was not ador'd? What Man in the World wou'd be always in the same Garb, or be always chewing the same Meat? Great∣ness it self is tyrannical and tiresom without Learning on a Day of Physick or Rain: and Men ought to value 'emselves as much upon their Minds as their Bodies. Now, to apply, Sir, that which I have said to the present Case; what can be more charmingly va∣rious
and diversifi'd, than the know∣ledge of the several Circumstances of this sublunary Globe? What can be more serviceable and con∣ducive toward our Attainment of a Vitae Modus, (as Terence calls it) than our reading the greater World, and so learning how to form our own Microcosm? What better way, Sir, can there be taken to understand the Constitution of our own Government, and be able to shake St. Stephen's Chappel by a Logical Eloquence, than by weigh∣ing the Frames of all other Poli∣ties and Regiments on this side the Sun? What other Considerati∣ons can better incite you to a bra∣ver Mettle and more sudden Skill and Experience in the Arts of Gallantry and the Sword, than the Fancy of a Fame Equal to the extent of the whole World? These sublime and lofty Meditations have
precipitated me into the undoubted Foresight of future things: And ev'n now I see a Life, that will be the Labour and Embellishment of our Chronicles, not only the Illustrious Greatness and Divine Wisdom of your now Grandfather, with the Excellencies of that your other so celebrated Ance∣stor of your own Name, but all the Personal Perfections of your glorious Mother center'd and conspicuous in you; insomuch that as you will be the Orna∣ment and Support of the Mascu∣line, so I must necessarily Infer you the triumphant Delight of the Fair Sex; and in passionate Expectation of that time, I lay the whole World, and my Self, at your feet; Who am, SIR, Your most Obedient, And most Humble Servant, F. SPENCE.
THE Englisher's PREFACE TO THE READER. THo' the Multitude of Books of this Nature is already very great in our own, as well as other Lan∣guages, yet I question not, but what incited our Author, (the French King's Geographer in Ordinary) to the first Writing this Tract, will also suffici∣ently excuse, if not justifie me in Copying from his Original. For besides, that com∣monly this subject, among Us, is expanded into vast Volumes gathered out of Antient Authors, which some People, very desirous of this kind of pleasant and necessary Know∣ledg,
have not the leisure to read, you will find herein a short, and yet (I think) no unpleasant view of the Great World, Colle∣cted from the newest Relations, that the latest Travellers have made, of all parts of the Habitable Earth: Insomuch, that our Author is not afraid to call his Book, The Present State of the Whole World. Otherwise, this is a Title I durst not have ventured upon, in Down-right-honest-Eng∣lish, with reference to Asia, Africa and America, in regard there have been some Mutations in those Parts since this Version of mine; and 'tis impossible to give a Per∣fect, or so much as an Indirect Account of the present Circumstances, under which all those parts of the World now lie: And ac∣cordingly, the Consideration of 'em is Brief, tho' interlined with many Curious and No∣table Observations, which make up about half the Book. The other half is wholly de∣stin'd to Europe, and gives a ready Prospect of Affairs and Things, as they now stand, and have stood since the last publick Treaty of Peace, and since the Mighty Growth of the French Monarchy, excepting some Abatements of very late Transactions. Nevertheless, our Author is not wholly to be Condemn'd for his wide Title, since,
in some measure, he may lay Claim to have given very Necessary and Present Notices of the farthest Parts of the Earth; where he shews the settlements the Europeans have made in the West and East-Indies, and the Passages, Tracts and Courses they now take, or of old took in Navigation, with other particulars, of the like stamp, peculi∣ar to our Times. And here, one thing I must not be silent in, that since our Author was very short and Careless in the Description of our Co∣lonies and Plantations abroad (and who could expect any other from him; I have presumed, and, I hope, innocently enough, to add several things, to him, in several places, and would have added many more, had not the Sheets been committed to the Press without my re-touching them, and the greater part of them Printed off with∣out my Privity: And this true Excuse I have for the sparing and stingy Descrip∣tion of France, and for the want of our own Routs to the East-Indies, and other Places, which I had design'd to have en∣larg'd and added. For, though no one, in strict Justice, has such a Right over ano∣ther Man's Work, as may Authorize and Priviledg him to change and alter what he please, yet having so much good Compa∣ny, I must confess, in the Additional way
among my Brother-Translators [though we did not learn it from our Great Coun∣try-Master, Philemon Holland] I hope I may have the English Reader's pardon, especially since 'tis for the Glory of our Com∣mon Mother, whose Reputation and Ho∣nour we ought not only to defend with our Swords and Pens, but to propagate to the utmost borders of the Universe. And the Author, I suppose, will think no injury done him; for if he had been an Englishman, he wou'd have Writ so: But if he thinks him∣self concern'd, I must give him satisfaction from his own Countrymen, who, when they translate our Books, are notoriously known to corrupt them in much more material Points, witness some of my Lord Bacon's Works, which, while they are taught to speak French, are instructed also, by the highest Injustice, to speak him a Roman-Catho∣lick. You must not expect here any Praecognita to this Geography, nor the treating of that part of it, which is called Spherical, it being no part of his Design, and the World being cloy'd with Books enough of such a Concern already. Our Author does not dispute the roundness of this Body of Earth and Wa∣ter from the Celestial and Terrestrial Phae∣nomena, nor where this Globe is situated. Here are no Lectures upon Zeniths or Na∣dirs,
Azimuths or Almicanters: Neither does our Author divide the Winds into 64 Parts, as some very nicely have done. He has not determin'd, whether the first Discoverer of America's right Name was Columbus, or Colonus; Nor whether the Quadripartite Division of the World is rational, or any Equality to be found in it. The Reader is suppos'd to have some acquain∣tance with these things, and to know what is the meaning of the Meridian, Aequator, Zodiack, Tropicks, Polar Circles, and Zones; or at least, without these Know∣ledges, may reap benefit enough from this Book. But tho' this Treatise doth not pre∣tend to shew, how the Latitude (in the Abstract) may be found either in the day∣time by the Sun, or in the night by the Stars, though it doth not brag of having invented any new, more certain and ready, way than hitherto has been used for the find∣ing out the Longitudes of Places, yet in the Descriptions of the most considerable Regions, the Longitudes and Latitudes of them are not past over, but are very careful∣ly set down. There is one Exception more, which I am to take notice of: That whereas our Author having divided the World into Upper and Nether Hemisphere, has con∣sidered the first with Relation to France,
which will not do exactly in England, yet, since that England, for the most part, is under the same Meridian with France, I have made bold to venture all Coun∣tries, so considered in English, without any Change or Alteration, because there will be no great Squares broken: For the like reason, and by a Pardonable figure of Speech, I call Europe, Asia and Africa, our Continent, though we live in an Island, which yet, as some have said and proved (how truly I shall not here question) to have been once joyned to the Terra Firma. I said, I had but one Exception more to wipe off; for I am sorry I have not forgot that nice one, which some Criticks may make, that, I say, of different Places, such a thing, in such a Place, is the best in the World: But besides, that some things may be best in different Prospects and Relations, these sort of Expressions follow the French, and are vulgarly us'd in our own Tongue, and are of a very ancient Date, as ap∣pearing frequently in the Lively Oracles of God, when both Hezekiah and Joshua are commended, To have had none like unto them, neither before nor after them.
THE PRESENT STATE Of the Four Parts of the WORLD. The Terrestrial World. WE mean, by the Terrestrial World, this round Mass, which Comprehends the Earth and Water. The Earth, whose Description, is here intend∣ed, consists principally of two great Conti∣nents, and some Lands towards both Poles. The first of these Continents has three great Parts; to wit, Africa, Asia, and Europe: Africa lyes toward the South and the West; Asia on the East; Europe North-West. These three great Parts are in our Hemisphere, which we call Superiour and Oriental, with regard had to that of the Americans, which seems to be below us, and is West of us. America posses∣ses the other great Continent in the Inferiour and Occidental Hemisphere. The Lands near the Poles are of two sorts, Artick and Antartick; neither have they long been, nor is there much of them discover'd, than what's along the
Sea-Coasts. The Antartick Lands are separated from the other great Continents by the Ocean; the Turn that Merchants and Travellers take in circling the World, from East to West thro' the South Seas, having left no subject of doubt. We cannot with certainty say the same thing of the Artick Coasts, tho' some affirm the Nor∣thern Sea communicates with the Oriental, to∣wards the North-East of our Continent, and with the South-Sea toward the North-West of Northern America. The Artick Region. THese Parts have been call'd by the name of Artick, because they are near the Artick Pole: they are called Northern, because of the North, in which they are sci∣tuated; Boreales, from a Greek Word which signifies the North-Wind: they consist of Islands and Peninsula's, where there are Bears, Foxes, and Rain-Deer, in abundance, the Inhabitants living commonly on Hunting or Fishing. The Seas of these Regions make a part of the the great Ocean, which is here known under the name of Northern and Frozen. The Ice there lasts a long time, because to these Parts the Sun during several Months disco∣vers not himself, and when he appears, he doth not heat or thaw it. The Bays and Streights of Hudson, Davis, and Forbisher, are in the Inferiour Hemisphere;
that of Weygats, otherwise of Nassaw, in the Superiour Hemisphere, on the North of our Continent: Cabot, Willoughby, Forbisher, Davis, Hudson, and other English men, have sought a Passage to the East-Indies through the three former Streights; Barenson, Heemskirk, and other Hollanders, have done the same, thro' that of Weygats; but all to no purpose, by reason of the Ice, which is almost continually there, and stops Ships in their Navigation; and this it is, that has hindred 'em from going beyond the 80. Degree of North Latitude. Three Courses have been commonly steer'd in these Northern Seas, to Archangelo into Mos∣covy, for Furs; to Spigelberg, and Greenland, for Whales; and into Norway, for Herrings and Timber. The Artick Lands are Estotiland, Greenland, Island, Spigelberg, Nova Zembla, to which may be added, the Land of Jesso, tho' it be in the Northern temperate Zone. Estotiland is towards the North of the great Continent of America. Greenland is of a vast extent to the North of Estotiland. Christian the Fourth, King of Den∣mark, call'd it His Philosophers Stone, because the Ships he sent thither could hardly find it out. His Successours keep a Governour there, at Bearford. The Greenlanders Cloaths are made of the Skins of Wild Beasts, and their Wast∣coats of Birds Skins, garnish'd with their Fea∣thers: the Flour of the Bread they eat, is made of Fishes Bones: they drink Sea Water, without receiving any inconvenience by so doing.
Iseland. ISeland, the Thule of the Ancients, one of the greatest Islands in the World, lyes towards the North in both Hemispheres, where it is part of the Dominions of the Crown of Den∣mark. This advantage it has of not having so many Rocks upon its Coasts, as have the other Northern Countreys. There are two Principal Villages, Hola and Schalholt: As for Cities, it has none; the Houses in other places are commonly of Wood; cover'd with the Bark of Trees and with Turfs. The Inhabitants are of the Confession of Augs∣bourg; have no Physicians, feed their Oxen and their Horses with dry Fish, when they are in want of Hay. They receive often great floats of Ice, which are loosen'd from the Northern Shores, whereon is Wood and several sorts of Creatures, which they accommodate themselves withal. Therefore they inhabit more willingly the Sea-Coasts, than the inner part of the Island. There are several Mountains, whereof Mount Hecla is the most considerable; It casts forth Fire, and is not to be approached within six Miles distance. Danish, Hambourger, and Lubecker Ships, frequently refort thither with diverse Commodities of Europe, which the Islanders stand in need of. The Danes fetch from thence dryed Fish, Whale-Oyl, Butter, Suet, Sulphur, Ox-Hides, and those Teeth of Valrushes, which some esteem as much as Ivory. Spigelberg, or Spitsbergen, is a Countrey in our Hemisphere, the most advanc'd toward the
Artick Pole. It produces only green Moss: those that have been left there to make a full discovery of it, perish'd through cold, after having fought with White Bears, who pre∣tended a right to eat them. Upon its Coasts Whales are taken of a prodigious bulk, since from one alone has sometimes been drawn a a Hundred and twenty Tun of Oyl. The Eng∣lish and Hollanders lay claim to the Dominion of it. Nova Zembla is the Island Carambice of the Ancients, very near our great Continent, from whence one may pass to it upon the Ice, and one way stretches as far as Spitsbergen, nay, and much farther; so as it may probably be said, that this is the place, where those pass'd who first of all inhabited America: the streight which parts it from the Terra firma, has in its Eastern part high Mountains of Ice, which are call'd Pater-nosters. This Name of Nova Zembla, is by reason of the Way that has been so long sought after along those Coasts, to go to the East-Indies, through the Tartarian-Sea. In the year 1676. Capt. Wood, that Ingenious and In∣dustrious Seaman, was again sent out by His Ma∣jesty, King Charles the Second, to make a more perfect Discovery of that North-East Passage; perswaded unto it by diverse Relations of our own and Dutch Mariners; who reported many things concerning it, which Capt. Wood upon his own experience conceives to be false; as that they were either under or near the Pole; that it was there all thaw'd Water, and the Weather as warm as at Amsterdam, &c. He saith further, That he himself cou'd pass no further than 76 Deg. where he found the Sea
as far as he cou'd discern, entirely frozen with∣out intermission. That it is most likely, that Nova Zembla and Greenland are the same Conti∣nent, at least that there is no passage betwixt them; for that he found scarce any Current: And that little, which was, ran E.S.E. along the Ice; and seem'd only to be a small Tide, rising not above Eight Foot. And whil'st he was in that Degree, there were nothing but Frogs, Frost and Snow, and all imaginable ill Weather, tho' at the same time the heat seem'd to be as great as at any time in England. The Land of Jesso lyes between Asia and Ame∣rica, being separated from each of those Con∣tinents by great Arms of the Sea. Its Inhabi∣tants exchange in those Cities of Japan that are nearest 'em, their Fish, their Skins, the Tongues and the Fat of their Whales, for other Merchan∣dize which they fancy most. The Planks of their Vessels are not nail'd; they are sewed very dexterously with Ropes made of the Rind or Bark of Cocoes, and they do not rot in the Water. The Hollanders have been there seve∣ral times. Their Relations affirm, That part of this Territory acknowledges the King of Japan for its Soveraign; That the Comman∣der in Chief of this Country, who has his Re∣sidence at Matzimai, carries that Monarch every year, Silver, Birds Feathers of several Colours, with very fine Furs.
The Antartick Lands. THe Antartick Land is often called Australis Magellanica Incognita. We might with just title name them the Southern Indies, and the third World. Those who would engage Sove∣raign Princes, to promote the discovery of these Lands, say, that they are of as great an extent as all America, nor less Peopled, or less Fertile, than Europe: They may have above Six thousand Miles of Coast in three several Zones of the Southern part of the World, the Hot, Tem∣perate, and Cold: Perhaps Countreys might there be found of all manner of temperament, tho' none have yet been beyond the 68 Degree of Southern Latitude. Amongst the Streights that are there, that of Magellan, first afforded a way in the year 1523. to voyage it round the World through the South Sea: this Streight is Two hundred Leagues in length: in breadth, in some places, two, three, in others, five, six, or ten. Those who pass through it, receive great incon∣veniencies, by reason of the sinuosities and wind∣ings, and the frequent storms that are there. The Streights of Maire, which were discovered in the year 1615. are much more commodious; 'tis but ten or twelve Leagues in length, and as many in breadth. That of Brouvers, which was pass'd in the year 1643. is on the South-East, and has the same advantages with that of Le Maire. The English and Hollanders sometimes steer this Course to go to the East Indies. Besides, under the name of Antartick Lands, are reckoned Countries which indeed are very
far distant from the Southern Pole, but which cannot be attributed to the other great parts of the World, since they are separated from it by Seas of a vast extent; New Guiney, the Isles of Solomon, New Zealand, the Land of Fire, the Land of Parrots, New Holland. There's hardly any thing known of the other Southern Parts befides the Names of those who discovered them. New Guiney, towards the South of the Equi∣noxial Line, and in the Inferiour Hemisphere, is a very great Isle, and bears this Name, because it seems to be Diametrically opposite to the Guiney of Africa. The Isles of Solomon are in the South Sea, at ten or twelve Degrees of the Southern Lati∣tude. The Spaniards, who have them in pos∣session, give them the name of Solomon, to per∣suade the World, that that wise King sent for his Gold from thence. New Zealand is the Country where the Hol∣landers have met with scurvy usage, when they would have setled themselves there. There it is, they say, are great Men, and of a huge sta∣ture; whether they really be so, or fear made them appear such, at least each of their two Com∣panies to the Indies avouched the same thing. In all probability it was discovered by Fernandez de Quir, who tells a thousand advantageous par∣ticulars of it; He spent Fourteen Years in his Travels, Fourteen Months at Court, and pre∣sented, in vain, Eight Petitions, to the King of Spain, to persuade him to send Colonies thi∣ther. Between New Zealand, and the Streights of Magellan, some have placed several small Islands, which are said to have been discover'd in
the Name of the King of Spain, by Hernando Gal∣lego, in the year 1576. The Land of Fire, on the South of America, consists of several Islands that are called Ma∣gellanic, and the Fires that were seen there, the first time the Europeans went on shoar, have given occasion to this Name. The Land of Parrots is probably that which we call Terra Australis. In the year 1504. a French-man, called Gonneville, went on shoar there, and was kindly receiv'd by a petty King, called Arosca: After several Months abode, he brought away with him some of the Inhabi∣tants, and amongst others, one called Essomeriq, a King's Son, who has left of his Posterity in Normandy. New Holland seems to be that Land, or rather those two great Islands of Petan, and the lesser Java; which Mark Paul saith, lies South East of the Isle of Java. The Hollanders set so great a value upon these New Lands, that they have caused the Map of them to be cut in inlaid or Mosaick Works upon the Pavement of their Stadt-House in Amsterdam.
America. IS a part of the World, bearing the Name of Americus Vesputius, a Florentine, tho' Christopher Columbus, a Genoese, discover'd it before him. It has been also call'd, the New World, because it was not well known until the last Age, and its bigness has made it pass for the greatest Continent of the Earth. Sometimes it is called the West Indies, and the Little Indies, to distinguish it from the East In∣dies, which are great and part of Asia. Some give it the Name of the Spanish Indies, because the King of Spain has the greatest and better part of it in his possession. Thus the Name of Indies is common to two great Regions; the one in our Continent, the other in the other Hemisphere; whether they were discover'd at the same time; or that in both the Inhabitants go commonly naked; or that from the one and the other are brought rich and precious Mer∣chandize and Commodities; or lastly, whe∣ther the Pilot Alonze Zanches d' Andalousia, be∣ing the same that saw America, before Colum∣bus, and left him his Memoirs, did think that it was joyn'd to the Indies of Asia. In all pro∣bability, America is the Atlantick Island of the Ancients: some say that it is the real Tarsis; which Monarchs, to take from their People the knowledge of its great Riches, and the desire
of trading thither, had given it very strange Names, calling it Hell, the Elysian Fields, and the Fortunate Islands: and that for the con∣founding the Name of Tarsis, they had called by the same Name several Places of our Conti∣nent, where the Merchants had their Banks and their Correspondencies. Several are persuaded, that the City and Island of Cadiz are now what was formerly Tarsis. Those Soveraigns pretend∣ed there were Dragons, Infernal Rivers, some∣times a Cherubim with a flaming Sword; which were probably nothing else than those storms which are frequent in the Torrid Zone, and the Insults of Corsairs and Pyrates, who watcht the the coming of the Gallies and Fleet from Terra firma, to get Booty. Several do assure us, that it was to the Atlantick Isle, Hanno the Cartha∣ginian went, when he conducted towards the South West, a Fleet of Sixty Sail, with Thir∣ty Thousand Men. They also say, That five years afterwards, the same Hanno, being re∣turn'd into his own Countrey, prohibited all such Voyages to his Citizens, that their City might not be depopulated, by their going to dwell there, charmed with the great Riches that were to be found in those-Countries, for fear the Rebels might make it an Asile, to the ruin of their State. Those Authors find but little credit, who undertake to prove by a feigned Medal of Augustus, which was pretended to be found in those parts, or by a supposed Marble, taken out of the ground in Portu∣gal, under King Emanuel, with Latin Verses of a forged Sybile, touching the discovery of this New World. If it be then true, that Ame∣rica was known by the Ancients, we may say,
that the perils People must expose themselves to in traversing the Seas that are between the two great Continents before they arrive there, and the little experience the Ancients had in Navigation, did make 'em abandon the persuit of their Commerce into these Regions; and that had it not been for the favourable re∣ception that was made by Ferdinand, King of Arragon and Castile, to Columbus, whose pro∣posal had been rejected by the Government of Genoa, the Kings of Portugal, and England, we should perhaps be still to learn, if there was any other Continent than ours. America is divided into two great parts or Peninsula's, the one Northern, called Mexicana; the other Southern, called Peruana. This Di∣vision is according to the Isthmus or neck of Land which lyes near Panama, and not accord∣ing to the Equinoctial Line. The Spaniards had once a design in their heads to cut through that Isthmus, for the sparing the Charges, which are far greater to them in that Tract of Land, by the transportation of their Merchandizes, when they go to Peru, or return from thence, than in all the way by Sea they make between Spain and America, tho' this way be above two thousand Leagues; But were not able to bring this Enter∣prize of theirs about. The Countries of Nor∣thern America, are as you go from the North to the South, Canada or New France, Virginia, Flo∣rida, New Mexico, Mexico or New Spain, and the Islands of the Antilles. You find in Southern America, all along the Seas, the Terra firma, where is Castella del Oro, and Guyana, Peru, Chili, Magellanica, Paraguay, where is Tucuman, and la Plata, and lastly Brasile.
America is environned with the Sea, if it be true, that towards the North West it is sepa∣rated from the Land of Jesso by the Streights of Anien. Those who make it as big as Asia and Africa together, compare its Northern part to Asia, and its Southern to Africa. It has the advantage of being fertil and temperate, by reason of its great and goodly Rivers, and of the cool Winds that arise there, even in the Torrid Zone, where the Inhabitants have not the blackness which is natural in most of the Africans, and in some Asiaticks of our Conti∣nent, who inhabit under the same Zone. This makes us see, that the most or the least heat is not always caused by the proximity or remoteness of the Sun, and that which contributes thereto often is the situation of Places, the disposi∣tion of the Mountains and Valleys, the quality of the Soil, and the diversity of the Winds which blow in those respective Regions. The Riches of America are so great, that Spain has drawn out from thence, and does still draw every year a prodigious quantity of Gold and Silver, of which many private persons of Europe, both in Peace and War, under diverse borrowed Names, receive a good share. The Mines of Potosi have always furnished an immense number of Millions. Never were any Riches comparable to those of Atabalipa, and of Guai∣nacapa, Kings of Peru, and to the precious Furnitures of the City of Cusco, It was no ex∣traordinary thing, during the Reign of those Kings, to see in some Cities of those Coun∣treys, Temples Wainscoted with Silver, and Houses Cover'd with Sheets of Gold. The Spaniards do affirm, their King draws from
thence every year, above Twelve Millions of Livres, by means of the Impositions he lays upon Commodities that are transported from those Parts; As Gold, Silver, Pearls, Eme∣raulds, Skins, Sugar, Tobacco, Cutchenelle, Sarzepareilla, Ginger, and several other things. Yet it is made out, that the first Expence, for the discovery of America, came but to Fifteen Thousand Ducats, which were advanced to Columbus, by a Secretary of the King of Spain. The Mexican and Peruvian, were the only Nations amongst the Americans, who had Cities. These Cities, tho' built by People we stile Sal∣vage and Barbarous, yielded in nothing to those of Europe, or for bigness or magnificence. No Horses were in America. An Indian of good sence, reckoned a Horse in the number of the three things he most esteemed; the two others were, a new laid Egg, and Light. Horses gave so much terrour to the Americans, that for above a hundred years they could not be prevailed with, to mount 'em. The Inhabi∣tants are of four sorts, Europeans, Metis, Ne∣groes, and Salvages. Most of the Nations of Europe have Colonies in this Portion of the World, which for the most part bear the Names of their respective Provinces and Cities. The Spaniards stand possess'd of the greatest, the richest, and the fertilest Countreys of Ame∣rica; Among others of Mexico and Peru, for∣merly two famous Kingdoms; the latter Here∣ditary, the other Elective: their King pretends a Right to All, by vertue of the Donative of Pope Alexander the Sixth, in the year 1493. But this other Nations do not allow of. The
Portugneezes have the Coasts of Brasile▪ The French have Colonies in Canada, in several Islands, and upon the firm Land: The English have fair and great Establishments all along the Coasts of Northern America, and in the Islands: The Metis are those who are born of the Euro∣peans and Indians. In the Territories, conque∣red by the Spaniards, they call Crioles, those who are born of a Spanish Man and Woman, and these are they whom the Spaniards of Europe have a mortal aversion to, and whom they put by all great Offices, for fear of a Revolt. The Negroes are transported into America, from Angola and other parts of Africa, to labour in the Mines, which drudgery the Americans are not able to support. The Salvages here live commonly on Hunting, Maiz, Cassave, which is their Corn. They have amongst 'em almost as many Tongues, as Villages; He who has the use of those of Mexico and Casco, may make himself understood through all America. This diversity of Tongues, is the cause that we have little knowledge of their Origine. They are all naturally dexterous and active, good Run∣ners and excellent Swimmers. Several amongst 'em live like Beasts, without King, Policy, or Law. The Sun, Moon, nay, and the Devil too, are consider'd by them, as so many Divinities: The Sooth-sayers, who are very numerous in these parts, keep 'em in these Errours. The Kings of Spain have caused five Arch-Bishop∣ricks to be erected there, and about thirty Episcopal Sees. The French have one Bishop in Canada. The Portugueezes have at this present three in Brasile, under the Arch-Bishop of S. Sal∣vador. The other Nations, who have Settle∣ments
in these Countreys, have likewise esta∣blish'd there the Religion they profess. America is not peopled comparatively with the parts of our Continent; perhaps by reason of the continual Wars which the Inhabitants wage there against one another, or else because of the cruel treatments the Indians have received from the Spaniards: some Authors do attest, they have put to Death there several Millions of Persons, whether for Religion, or for other Pretexts; and that the Blood of those who have perished in the, Mines where they have been forc'd to labour, would weigh more than the Gold and Silver they have thence extracted. The Spaniards met with no strong resistance in their Conquests, where they found none to make head against 'em, but naked People, whose Armies were easily broken by the Noise only of a Canon-shot, or at the sight of a Horse-man. The poor Indians stedfastly be∣lieved, that the Spaniards were the Masters of Thunder; they thought 'em half Men and half Horses, or some Sea-Monsters, when they saw 'em on Horse-back; And when they saw them on board their Ships, eating Bisket, and drinking Claret, they said they were descended from Heaven upon a great Bird; that they eat Stones, and drank Blood. If we confider the situation of the Islands of that part of the World, we shall find that Cali∣fornia is in the West of Northern America; the New Lands, the Bermudas, and the Antilles, to∣wards the East. The Mountains of the Andes Cross all Southern America from the North to the South. That of Potosi in Peru, is esteem'd the richest of all, by
reason of its Silver Mines. The Spaniards would persuade us, that there are others in the Neighbourhood at least as rich. The North Sea is so call'd, because it is on the North of the firm Land, which makes part of the Southern America, and was sooner discovered than the Northern America; in regard of which it cannot bear the Name of the North Sea. 'Tis called the Green Sea towards the Tropick of Can∣cer, by reason of the Herbs found there upon the Surface of the Waters. The South Sea is really Southern, in regard of that North Sea; but if we consider all America, both Northern and Southern, we shall find that it is Western. It's often called Pacific, by reason of its pertina∣cious Calms, or else because very few Acts of Hostility are perform'd there. Between Mexico and the Island of California, 'tis call'd the Ver∣million Sea: It hardly receives any considerable Rivers. The Sweet Sea, which is in Canada, and the Parime Sea, in Southern America, bear the names of Lakes, because they are in the midst of Lands. Many are of opinion, that by this Sweet Sea, the Northorn Sea communicates with with the Southern. Among the Rivers of America, that of Cana∣da, or St. Lawrence, is vulgarly call'd the Great River, perhaps for that it receives above two thousand others, great and small, and that above five hundred Leagues above Quebeck; its source has not yet been found out: It makes some Lakes grow narrow; sometimes it casts it self among the Rocks with such impetuosity, that 'tis impossible to pass there, by reason of the number of Water-falls, which they call Saults, and Carria∣ges, because those who mean to go over, must
carry their little Boats upon their shoulders, which they term Canoes. Its ordinary breadth is full twelve or thirteen Leagues; its depth does often exceed two hundred fathom: it keeps its Waters clear as far as below Quebeck. The River of Chayre, upon the Confines of the two America's, affords means for the Transpor∣tation of Merchandizes from one Sea to the other. L'Orenoyu is the largest of all those of America. The Amanzon is esteemed the great∣est, strongest, and deepest of all those of these Countreys, and one of the fiercest in the World. In the Year 1638. the Portuguese, who were then under the Crown of Spain, remounted it up as far as Quito in Peru, and came down again the following Year. It has its Inundations as well as the Nile, whereby the neighbouring Coun∣trey is not incommoded with Insects: Above a hundred and fifty several Nations have been observ'd to dwell in the Neighbourhood of this great River, and those which fall into it. La Plata has its Name from the Mines of Silver which are near it. Towards its beginning it bears the Name of Paraguay, after having joyned that of Parana; it rowls its Waters for above sixty Leagues, without any mixture: 'tis not deep, tho' towards its mouth it is sixty or eighty Leagues broad, and ten for the most part of its Course, where after having form'd several Islands, and the greatest Cataract in the World, it keeps its swiftness for above forty Leagues distance in the Sea. It might contri∣bute much towards the carrying on the Com∣merce from one Sea to the other; but the Spa∣niards do not think fit to put this Adviso in pra∣ctice, for fear other Nations might thereby
become acquainted with it, who would make better advantage than they do of such Disco∣veries. Canada. THe Name of Canada is that which the Cana∣dians gave their Countrey, thro which passes the greatest River of Northern America, which they call the River of Canada. This Countrey is full of Woods, and the Climate colder than that of France, tho' both be in an equal distance from the Equinoctial. Canada furnishes [Us] with Beavers, Stock-fish, Mouse-skins and Whale-oyl. According to the late Relation, you cannot go for half a League together along the great River, without meet∣ing with either another River or a Lake. Wood costs nothing more than the trouble of cutting it. All these Conveniencies would be conside∣rable, if there happen'd not from time to time horrible Tempests, which they call Hurricanes. In the Year 1663. an Earthquake lasted there for above six Months. The Savages are distributed into several Na∣tions under the Government of their Sagamos's, who are the eldest of their Families. They wear Vestments of Skins, almost like to those which our Painters very generously bestow upon Hercules, or John Baptist. They make use of Bows and Arrows, the points whereof they garnish with Iron and Fish-bones, and make War by Courses and Surprises. They are al∣most
most all alike in manners, but are different in tongues; some are wandring and Vagabonds, others have Villages and setled Abodes; that is to say, Hamocks, which consist in some Cottages. They live almost all of them without any care of Futurity, and are very fond of Tobacco. And therefore they call their Festivals and their Feasts, Tabagies. They can bring but very few men into the Field, for which reason the Euro∣peans found it no difficult matter to settle them∣selves there, tho' they brought along with them for that purpose, but very inconsiderable Forces. The French have Forts here for the security of Commerce, and to put a stop to the Courses of the Savages, who are their Enemies. The Jesuits, Capuchins and other Religions have their Convents. Canada contains the following Countries, New France, New Denmark, New Wales, New Britain, otherwise the Land of Labrador, and Terra Coterialis; Accadia, New England, and New York, formerly called New Holland. Be∣sides these Countries, there is that of Sague∣nay, which receives its name from a River, whose mouth is not above a quarter of a League broad, but which enlarges it self when you go up it, and is above two hundred fathoms deep in several places. This Circumstance hath gi∣ven occasion to some Adventurers to seek a pas∣sage there for the going to China thro' the Northern Ocean. Quesbeck the Principal Colo∣ny of the Country, Founded in 1608. is the Capital of all Canada, the Residence of a Vice-Roy and Bishop. The City is divided into High and Low, with a Fortress upon the Rock, which commands the great River, that carries
the flowing of the Sea above the City. Tadou∣sac, the three Rivers and Montreal upon the same River, are three very considerable Colo∣nies of the French. The two best Sea Ports are Miscou, and the Port Royal of Accadia. As con∣cerning the people, the Hurons and the Algon∣quins towards the beginning of the great River, have ever been friends of the French, the Iro∣quois are cruel and great Buccaniers, that is to say, they suck the flesh of their Enemies, they fortifie their abodes with Palisadoes: They have been sturdy Enemies to the French, and have done them great damage by means of the fire Arms they had from the English and the Hollan∣ders of their Neighbourhood. Yet the French boast that they have prevailed over them; and that tho' these Savages have been able to bring several Troops into the Field without dis∣garrisoning or emptying their Retreats, which are inaccessible; they have nevertheless been constrained to yield to the Arms of France. Their Country is pretty fruitful, see∣ing it produces Muscadine Grapes, Lemmons, vence and Melons, even as good as those of Pro- in France. The principal Isle of New-Found-Land, is one of the greatest in the World, with a great number of Ports, whereof that of Plaisance pos∣sessed by the French, is the best. Heretofore they burnt one part of the Forests of this Island, to render it the more habitable; But the Ro∣sin and other Gums which ran into the Sea, were the occasion of the Fishery being spoiled in the Neighbourhood for above seven years. Almost the like thing happened in the Isle of St. Christophers, when several Ships loaded with
Tobacco, perished there; the strength and bit∣terness of that Herb poysoning the Fish. France sends every year a great number of Ships to this Island, which it calls for that reason Terra Neu∣viers. The English have likewise fetled them∣selves here. The Isle of Cape Breton, has the Port of Chibou in its Eastern parts, which Na∣ture has formed with all possible advantages for the security of a Fleet. There is a Shoal and Ridge of Sand on the East of New-Found-Land, notorious for the taking of Stockfish, and its extent of two hundred and sixty Leagues, which has given it the name of the Great Bank. 'Tis not a Rock as several do imagine; they call it Bank by reason of the shallowness all along by its side, in respect of the Depth which is very great in the other parts of that Sea. The fishing there is of two sorts, The one for Cod, and the other for dry Stock-Fish. The Seamen who Fish there, have at the same time the pleasure of taking with the Line great Birds, or Fowl, which they call Fauquets and Happefoyes, which they effect by baiting their Hooks with the Livers of Cods. Virginia. VIrginia bears this Name in honour of the most Illustrious and Renowned Elizabeth, the Maiden-Queen of England. First some French nested themselves in this Countrey, but the English were too hard and powerful for them, took absolute possession of it, in the Year 1584, and have continued in their settle∣ment
there, notwithstanding the loss of five or six Colonies. They have a Governour, an Ad∣miral, and several particular Officers. This Establishment facilitates to them the communi∣cation of what they have in New England and Florida. The Air of Virginia which is extream∣ly healthful, produces several sorts of excellent Fruits. It is somewhat cold, and yet the Inha∣bitants go naked: the Oyl and the Colours with which they rub themselves, defending them against the injuries of the Weather. From thence is Exported Tobacco and Silk, which is drawn from an Herb wholly peculiar to Virgi∣nia. They would make us believe that there is a flying Squirrel, which makes use of its paws as if they were wings. The Inhabitants of Virginia love to make good Cheer, are Idolaters, and have divers Lords, whom they call Werouns. Their Towns which they surround with Pallisadoes, have on∣ly 18 or 20 Houses. Pomeiock and James-Town, are the Principal places of this Region. The Bay of Chesapeack is very considerable, be∣ing seventy five Leagues in length, for the most part six or seven broad, and ten or twelve to∣wards its entrance. The Ships sail up above sixty Leagues, for it is often fifteen or sixteen fathom deep, and six or seven where it is most shallow. The Islands of Barmudas, or Summer Isles, are under the same Crown, and almost in the same Parallel with Virginia, distant above three hundred Leagues from the Continent of Ame∣rica. They are several in number around the principal one, and almost all invironed with Rocks, and sufficiently known for the Ship∣wracks
that happen there. The Merchants bring thence Cocheneal, Tobacco, Pearls, and Amber; there are found Tortoises of an excessive bigness, and Spiders without venom, extraordinary large, of a streak'd colour, which spin Webs capable of holding little Birds. In the Year 1516. five men being imbarked at the Barmudas in a little Pinnace, traversed above twelve hundred Leagues at Sea, and by a singular happiness ar∣rived in Ireland. In the Year 1525. a Portu∣guez who was in the East Indies, being desirous to do a notable piece of service to his Prince, undertook a Voyage which was no less perilous; for with a small Gally, but sixteen foot long, and six-broad, he departed from Cochim, and ha∣ving traversed the Occan, and all its particular Seas, at last he arrived at Lisbon, where he brought the King of Portugal the news of the building a Cittadel at Diu; a piece of news which was agreeably received in that Court. Florida. THe Spaniards and French, the Discoverers of this Province, have but very small know∣ledge of it, as not having been very far in the Country: the Spaniards under divers Leaders, and principally under Soto, made some Expeditions into it, but both he and most of his men, dyed in the prosecution of their design. The Name of Florida was given it, either upon the account
of its Flowers which it produces in great abun∣dance, or by reason of the first Discovery of some of its parts, which was on a Palm Sunday. The French that setled themselves in that part which lies towards the North-East, had left there the names of the Scine, Lonaloire, Garrone, Gironde, Chorcute, to the Rivers they met with∣al in those parts. But the Spaniards jealous of the French Names, having given them others, and the English, who have lately setled several Co∣lonies here, do still at this day Christen them anew. In the Year 1562. John Ribaud caus'd to be built upon the River of Port-Royal, the Fortress of Charles's Fort, which he called by that Name, in consideration of King Charles the Ninth of France. Two years after, one Laudonier built the Fort of Carolina, upon the River of May, (Now, by the way, it is to be ob∣serv'd, that several Geographers do not give to these two Places their true Position.) Since which, the French were constrained to abandon 'em, both upon the account of the Civil Wars which arose in France, and of the jealousie of the Spaniards, who could not well bear with the Frenchmen having footing in Florida. The Spa∣niards made Florida much greater than it really is, for they attribute to it Virginia, and New France, perhaps not to prejudice the Pretentions of their Soveraign, who attributes to himself all America, tho' his Subjects have only appear'd in some of its Provinces: Others give only this Name of Florida to the Peninsula of Tegesta, which advances to the South, and contributes to form the great and famous Gulph of Mexico, and the Channel of Bahama. The Air of Florida is so temperate, that there has been
often seen old Men at the Age of Two hundred and fifty years, whilst the Children of five Ge∣nerations are all alive at the same time. The Land is fertile, full of Fruit-trees, and its Towns the best peopled of all America, having in several places rich Furs, and an immense quantity of Pearls. Its Mountain Apalatei, produces abundance of Copper: Its principal River is that of Spirito Sancto, or Chucagua, which falls into the Mexican Gulph. The Coast is not over convenient for great Ships, because the Sea is but very shallow. The Inland parts are possess'd by the Savages, under the Govern∣ment and Jurisdiction of divers Paroustis or Ca∣ciques, who are their Lords. Relations ac∣quaint us with the Brave Resistance they made against the Spaniards. These Savages adore the Sun and Moon. Upon the Coast the Spaniard holds St. Austin, and St. Matthews, two Colo∣nies of small consideration, tho' in each there be a Castle. St. Austin is of the greatest im∣portance, by reason of its Haven, and its nearness to the Channel of Bahama, where the Spanish-Fleets commonly pass, when with their Cargoes, they return from Havana into Eu∣rope.
New Mexico. THis Mexico is call'd New, because it was one of the last Conquests of the Spaniards in Northern America, not being subdued till after the Year 1583. 'Tis the Ancient Mexico, ac∣cording to some Authors, who say, its Inhabi∣tants people part of New Spain. The scarcity of Victuals, and other inconveniencies of this Countrey, have not hindred the Spaniards from going to search for Mines in its Entrals. The Natives are Idolaters, and call their Chiefs, Caciques. New Mexico, California, Anien, Quivira, and Cibola, are its principal parts, and Santafe the most considerable Town. Cali∣fornia, on whose Coasts some Pearls are found, is one of the greatest Islands in the World. Anian gives its Name to a famous Streight, be∣yond which is the Land of Jesso. The Wealth of Quivira consists in certain Bulls or Oxen, which are very benificial to the Inhabitants; their Flesh is their Food: of their Skins they make Cloaths and Coverings for their Houses; Thread of their Hair; Bow-strings of their Nerves; Awls and Bodkins of their Bones; Trumpets and Bugles of their Horns; they preserve Water in their Bladders, and make Fewel of their Dung dryed. This Creature has something of the Lyon, the Camel, the Goat, and the Sheep. There is in Cibola, Grandeda, Acoma, and some other Fortresses upon the Mountains, with Palisado's and Ditches, which shew that the Americans were
not ignorant of the Art of Fortifying such places as they meant (or stood in need) to de∣fend. Other Enumerations are made of the Countreys of New Mexico, but very uncertain are they: the Inhabitants commonly have no setled abode; give the Names of their Chiefs to their Villages, and those Names only sub∣sists during the Life of each of those Lea∣ders. New Spain. THe Indians name this Countrey Mexico, and the Spaniards, New Spain; so that hereby they call their King, the King of Spains. The Spaniards here establish'd in this Countrey seve∣ral rare Colonies, as in the most considerable of their Conquests, notwithstanding the mis∣understanding that arose between Cortez and Narvaez their principal Commanders. This Re∣gion, tho' under the Torrid Zone, seems to enjoy a perpetual Spring, by reason of the purity of its Air, and the goodness of its Soyl. 'Tis the finest, the most agreeable, and the most populous of all America: All Northern America is called Mexicana. It has Mines of Gold and Silver, wherein they work with more ease than in those of Peru: the Silver that is drawn from thence, is unquestionably the best in the World. It produces that admirable Plant of Magucaz, which produces small Wine, Vinegar, Honey, Needles, Thread, Stuffs, and
Timber proper for building. It has Cotton, Hides, Silk, Wool, Balm, Sugar, Salt that is made in its Lakes, and several sorts of good Fruits. It has all the Commodities of Europe, unless Wine and Oyl. Formerly 'twas an Ele∣ctive Kingdom, full of great Cities, governed with great Policy, and its Inhabitants very civil. Its Kings could bring into the Field, Armies of three or four hundred thousand tall fighting Men. The Kings of Spain, who have a Vice-Roy there, whose Residence is in the Castle of Mexico, have taken care to erect several Bishop∣ricks. The Mexicans are well made, dexterous in melting their Metals, and in making Pictures of their Feathers, which they have off their Cincons, small Birds of their Countrey, which live only upon Dew. They keep their Balls in the open Field, where it is pleasant to see 'em Dance, or rather, make Gamboles, and perform the Double Sommerset, sometimes two or three thousand together. Formerly the Mexicans divided their Coun∣treys into hot and cold. At present the Spa∣niards reckon their several small Provinces; as New Galicia, Guadalaira, New Biscay, Mexico, Mechoachan, Panuco, Jucatan, Guatimala, Hon∣duras, Nicaregua, Costarica, Veragua, and others. They have establish'd Royal Audiences, I mean Parliaments, at Mexico, Guadalaira, and Guatimala. There is a sort of Ravenous Birds in Guadalaira, which are not much greater than our Sparrows, and nevertheless make a horrible distruction of their Corn: they have Bees too without stings. The Province of Mexico, properly taken, is that which lies near the City of Mexico, the greatest, richest and
best peopled of all America. This City suffer'd a great loss in the Year 1629. all its Digues, and most of its Houses, having been carried away by the violence of the Waters, its scitua∣tion being neer a Salt-water-Lake, of about twenty five or thirty Leagues in circuit, where there enters another Lake of sweet Water. Since that, it has been rebuilt, and has full a hundred thousand Houses, great and small. Be∣fore the coming of the Spaniard into this Coun∣trey, there were several places very conside∣rable neer Mexico. Chulula contain'd above twenty thousand Houses, with as many Temples as there are days in the year; and its Inhabi∣tants did annually put to death five or six thou∣sand of their Children, in sacrificing them to their Idols. Tezeuco was twice as big as Seville in Spain. Queretaro had a Fountain which wou'd furnish Water for four years together, and cease running four years after. Los Angelos, upon the way from Vera Cruz to Mexico, is a City of ten thousand Inhabitants, where is a Bishoprick of great Revenue; there's also a Mint for the coining of Money: Cloth, Hats and excellent Glasses, are made there too. Acapulco upon the South Sea, with a Fort of five Bastions, is a Bay of good security, tho' at the entrance it be but a League in breadth. Ju∣catum is a Peninsula between the two Gulphs, where the City of Merida is so call'd, upon the account of its ancient Structures and Buildings, which were found equal to those of Merida in Europe. Tabasco, the first City that made any defence against the Spaniards, is a Province, where the Inhabitants have great Priviledges, because they contributed much to the Conquest
of Mexico. Near Tabasco, Cortez gain'd a great Victory in the Year 1518. over Monte∣zuma, the Ninth and last King of Mexico; We killed there upon the spot above three hundred thousand Indians. This Land is so fertile, that a Peasant having caused two Sheep to come thi∣ther from Castile, those two Sheep multiplied in such a manner that there were above forty thousand of 'em in a few years: The Isle of Co∣zumel, near the Coast, is famous upon the ac∣count of its ancient Idol. Guatimala produces Balm, Sulphur, Wood, and Cacao, which is a Fruit like to little Almonds, whereof the Inha∣bitants make a very delicious Drink. Near Guatimala, is a Vulcan, that is, a Mountain which casts forth Fire; where a private person seeking after Treasures, which he fancied there, found the End both of his Wealth and his Life. The Henduras furnishes Honey, Cotten, Cloaths, and Wool. Niceregua was first of all named the Paradice of Mahomet, by reason of its fertility, and the quantity of its Gold. Its Lake of a hundred and thirty Leagues in length, ebbs and flows and disgorges it self into the North Sea. There was once a design of com∣municating it with the South Sea, but they imagin'd this would cause a great deal of disor∣der, this Sea being much higher than the North Sea, because of several Rivers, which have their source in its Neighbourhood, and nevertheless fall into the North Sea. One of the last Kings of Niceregua, seems to have had some knowledge of the Mysteries of our Faith; He ask'd the Spaniards, What they knew of the Deluge? If any was to happen? If the Sun and Moon won'd one day lose their light? What was
the Cause of their Motion? Whither the Souls went after the separation from their Bodies? If the Pope and Emperour were immortal? And for what rea∣son they sought after Gold and Silver with so much Eagerness and so many Perils? The Caribby Isles, or the Antilles. UNder the Name of Antilles are generally known, all the Islands of the North Sea which are between Florida, New Spain, and the Firm-Land of Southern America. The Luccayes, seem to be so called from that of Lucayonequo. Bahama gives its name there to a Channel wondrously rapid from the South to the North, and famous at present for the pas∣sage of the Spanish Fleets in their return from Mexico, and from the Terra Firma of America in Europe. Bimini which is a place of no easie access, by reason of the Flats and Rocks there∣abouts, has had the renown of having a Foun∣tain which made people young again, because the Women there were extraordinary Beauti∣ful, and that for their sakes several Men went to dwell there. Guanahani is that which was first spyed out by Columbus, who called it San. Salvador, by reason it was the cause of saving him from the Conspiracy of his Men, who a lit∣tle before would have cast him into the Sea, as
not in their mind meeting soon enough with those Lands, whereof he had given them such hopes. Hispagniola [otherwise Saint Domingo] is the first Country in the New World, where the Spaniards built Towns and Fortresses. It has abun∣dance of Cattle, Hides, Cassia, Sugar, and Gin∣ger, Cocheneal, Guiacum, and other Herbs for Physick and Dying. It has Mines, from whence came the first and finest Gold of America; Here was found that rare piece of Gold which weigh∣ed full thirty seven pound, and was lost in the way when it was bringing to Spain. It has little Birds called Cuyeros, which gives such a light in the night time, that by it one may see ones way plainly, and hunt, & fish, & read and write; and the Priests make use of them by night instead of Candles to read in their Breviaries. Amongst the fish that are taken upon that Coast, there is the Manate, which is a Sea Calf above twenty foot long: the Revers which is very small, and serves to catch Fish of another sort, by fastening them on the thorns of its back. St. Domingo, the Metropolis of the Isle Hispaniola, drove formerly a more considerable Trade than it does at present: The French have possessed the most Western part of this Island, where they have a great number of Buccaniers, as well as the little Island la Tortue, which is near it; this has made the Spaniards change the Course they held when they returned into Spain. Cuba is more fertil and temperate than Hispa∣niola. It has Parrots, Partridges, Turtles, and Gold sand in its Rivers; for which reason, some Authors have placed here the Country of Ophir, from whence Solomon sent for his Gold.
One of the Caciques or petty Kings of that Island, having made his escape out of the hands of the Spaniards, told his people that the Gold and Silver of their Country was the God of their Enemies, since that to possess it, they sought for it in their very Entrails, and that so to enjoy their own repose, they must aband on it all to them. Another of those C aciques being Condemned to be burnt, was sollicited by a Priest to turn Christian, that he might go into Paradice, but he openly protested he would not go thither, since Spaniards were there too. The poor Savages abhorred them to that degree, that they abstained from their Wives, that their Children might not become slaves of such Ma∣sters; And when they fell upon them to bou∣canize them, or to eat their flesh, it was rather out of revenge, than out of any relish they found therein; for they frankly said, That the flesh of a Spaniard was too hard, and that to make it fit for eating, it was first to be souz'd and mollified for two or three dayes in Vinegar. St. Jago is the Capital City with a Sea Port, and Havana the Key and Staple of all the West Indies, the Magazine of the riches of America, by reason of the scituation, the bigness, and conveniency of its Harbour, which can shelter above a thousand Ships. 'Tis the usual Ren∣devouze of the Spanish Fleets when they return into Europe, and is defended by three Castles, whose strength is compar'd by the Spaniards to that of the Cittadels of Antwerp and Milan. Yet for all this, the English plundered the City in the Year 1662. The Port de Matanzas is the same where in the Year 1629. Peter Hein a Hollander, made himself Master of the Spanish
Fleet, which was prodigiously rich. Jamaica now belonging to the English, who have setled themselves there, since the Year 1655. has three small Cities, wherof Seville is the most conside∣rable. It produces so much Yuca whereof Cassia is made, that it passes for the Granary of the Antilles. The Civil Wars of the Spaniards in America began in this Island, where Christopher Columbus to free himself out of danger foretold the Savages an Eclipse of the Moon with as much prudence as success. These Savages had Letters missive in admiration, thinking one must necessarily partake of Divinity, to disco∣ver by a scrowl'd paper ones sentiments to ano∣ther a great way off. Porto-rico with the City, of St. John, has Sugar, Ginger, Cassia and Skins; this is the Island where the Spaniards passed for immortals, till one Salsedo was drowned, at the Passage of the River Guarabo. The Caribby Islands are twenty eight princi∣pal Ones, possessed for the most part by Euro∣peans, sometimes they have been called by the Name of Camereanes, and because they are more Eastern, and as in the head of the Others, they have had particularly attributed to them that of the Antilles, which seems ought to be com∣mon to all the Neighbouring Islands. They enjoy so temperate an Air, that they feel there no excessive heats, nor do they ever see any Ice. There is indeed but three Seasons, the Spring, Summer, and Autumn, unless we give the name of Winter to the rainy Season. They have all manner of good Pulse very plentifully; but their Corn does not attain to its maturity, and can only serve to make Green-sawce of. There
are Trees which produce excellent Fruits, and others which furnish Wood for Physick, for Dy∣ing, for the Carpenters use, and Wainscot∣ting. Those parts of these Islands go un∣der the Name of Cabissi-terre, which have the Cape to the Wind, which in those parts blows almost alwayes from the East: and Buss-terre is called what is towards the West. They name the little Mountains Marnes, the Villages Car∣bets, the great Winds of short continuance, Rufales; and those that take their Turn a∣round the Horizon, Huricanes. These Hurry∣canes often cause great disorders: They com∣monly happen at the times of the Equinox up∣on the Eastern Coasts. The Pilots foreseeing them, get their Ships off from the Shoar. Saint Christophers has Colonies of the French, who in the Year 1627. shared it with the English, establishing Customs, which have since been re∣ceived in the Neighbouring Islands: No place is there out of France, where the French have a greater Establishment; Its Governour is said to be able to bring seven or eight thousand Foot into the Field, besides several Troops of Horse; and they have four good Forts. Martinico has a∣bout 1000. French, besides Indians, and Ne∣groes in great numbers. Guadaloupa, vulgarly Gardeloupa, furnishes fresh Water to the Ships that come from Europe. It has made great ad∣vantage of the ruins of the Dutch Colony of Recif in Brafil. This occasioned its being Cul∣tivated with Sugar Canes, whereby it has pro∣fited more than by the Tobacco Trade, drove before.
Barbadoes. BArbadoes is one of the best of the Antilles, and the most considerable of them, which the English possess. They have there above twenty thousand Inhabitants beside the Savages and Slaves, who are full as many again. It has two or three small Hills which are very fruitful, and fit for Culture, to the very top. This Island is divided into a Eleven Precincts or Parishes, in which are fourteen Churches and Chappels, and is throughout beset with Houses, and no great distance from one another, so full of Planters is it; but the principal Towns are St. Michaels, formerly called the Bridge-Town, or Indian-Bridge, scituate at the bottom of Charles le Bay, in the Southern part of this Isle. This Bay is in the form of a Crescent, very capacious, deep, and secure for Ships; being big enough to se∣cure five hundred Vessels at once from all storms. The Town is long, containing several Streets, and adorned with abundance of well built Houses, being the place of Residence of the Governour, or His Deputy, where the Courts of Judicature are kept. It hath two strong Forts opposite to each other for its de∣fence, and the security of the Ships, but the Town is ill seated, the Ground being lower than the Banks of the Sea; Little Bristol for∣merly Sprights Bay, scituate about four Leagues from St. Michael, a commodious Road for Ships, well frequented, and defended by two strong Forts, St. James, formerly called the Hall, seat∣ed
not far from Bristol, here is a good Road for Ships also, and is a place of considerable Trade, Also Charles-Town, about two Leagues from St. Michael, where are kept weekly Markets, and Monthly Courts for the Precincts; there are also several good Bays belonging to this Island, as Fowle-Bay, Austins-Bay, Maxwel-Bay, &c. and here are divers Caves, some of which are very deep, and large enough to hold five hundred men, and those Caves are often the Sanctuaries of such Negro slaves as run away, and it is supposed that these Caves were the Ha∣bitations of the Natives. The Riches and Commodities of the Island, consist in Indico, Cotton, and Ginger in great abundance, Log∣wood, Fustick, Lignumvitae, and Sugars, where∣of there is so great a quantity, that they freight above a hundred Ships with it every year; the Inhabitants truck it for other Commodities at the rate of thirty shillings the Quintal; this Isle is so very fertil that it bears Crops all the year long. The Trees, Fields and Woods, being alwayes in their Summer Livery. They have here in their Seas several sorts of Fish, as Cava∣los, Cong-fish, Green Turtles, &c. which of all other are the most delicious, with several other sorts appropriate to this and the rest of the Ca∣ribby Isles; Here are also almost all sorts of Eng∣lish Herbs and Roots, and several sorts of Fowls, and great variety of small Birds; but no Beasts or Cattel, but what are tame and imported as Camels, Horses, Asne∣groes, Oxen, Bulls, Cows, Sheep, Goats, and Hoggs in great plenty; here are also Snakes a yard and a half long, Scorpions as big as Rats and Lizzards, but neither of them hurt∣ful
to Man or Beast, Musketoes, Cock-Roches and Merry-Wings, which are very troublesom in the night in stinging, and here are Land Crabs in great abundance, which are found good to eat; and a small Flie called Cayo, whose Wings in the night, as it flies, affords a mighty lustre, and the Indians do commonly catch them, and tye them to their hands and feet, and make use of them instead of Comets which are forbidden them; here are also abun∣dance of Fruits, as Dates, Oranges, Pomgra∣nates, Citrons, Lemmons, Icacos, Cherries, Raisins, Indian Figgs, Pine-Apples, the rarest Fruit in the Indies, with several other sorts; and for Trees here are great varieties fit for se∣veral uses, as the Locusts, Mastick, Red-wood, the Prickle Yellow-wood, Ironwood-tree, Cedar, Cassia Fistula, Colloquintida, Tamorins, Cassary, Poyson-tree, Physick-Nut, Calabash, the shells of which Tree serv∣eth them for Troughs, to carry liquid things in, and the Roneon, of whose Bark is made Ropes, and also Flax, Lignum-vitae, with several others: The other Antilles Islands which are Inhabited, have Colonies either of English, French, or Hollanders. There are some other Isles along the Coasts of Terra-firma; which are called Sotavento, be∣cause that in respect of the others which are on the North-East, and which go under the Name of Barlovento, they are below the Wind which blows commonly from the East to the West. Margareta, and Cubagua, had former∣ly the Fishing of Pearls, which prov'd very profitable to the Spaniads, having used all ima∣ginable stratagems to Fish there for those Oy∣sters,
wherein they found the Pearls. Tobago, which has given its name to Tobacco, or else has received its own from that weed, has a Colony of Zelanders. Tobacco was formerly called the Ni∣cotion Herb, by reason one Doctor Nicot was the first who introduced the use of it into Eu∣rope. Those who call'd it the Queens Herb, gave it that name, as having been first presented to a Queen of Spain. Castella Aurea. CAstella Aurea, so called from the Gold which the Spaniards found there in so great abundance, that in the Year 1514. several of their Country-men would needs go thither, in the Opinion that it was there to be Fisht for with Nets. Its Inhabitants eat Crocodiles & Ser∣pents, whose flesh they find very delicate Food. The Spaniards have there several Provinces, Terra-firma, Cartagena, Sancka Martha, the Rio de la Hacha, Venezuela, New Andalousia, Popay∣en, and the New Kingdom of Granada. The Terra-firma lies near the Isthmus, which joyns the two America's. It is different from the great Terra-firma which makes part of the Northern America upon the North Sea. Its called so as being the first Land of the Con∣tinent of America that was discovered after the Islands. Its City of Panama upon the South Sea, is the Store-House, or Magazine of the Gold and Silver of Peru, which is afterwards carried by Land to Porto Belo, which is sixteen or eigh∣teen
Leagues from thence, upon the North Sea, which is much augmented from the ruins of the City of Nombre de Dios, which the ill Air had caused the Spaniards to abandon. At Porto-Belo, this Gold and Silver is put on board of Ships, which carry it into Spain. In the way from Pa∣nama to Porto-Belo, they have the conveniency of the River of Chagre, if they please to make use of it, and then departing from Panama, you have but five Leagues by Land; after which they Embark upon that River. By the same way do they bring their Merchandizes out of Spain into Peru. In the Year 1668. the English plundered Porto Belo, & exacted very considera∣ble summs from the Spaniards before they would restore it them. The Buccaniers and other Pri∣vateers have done the like. Cartagena affords Balm, Rosin, and several sorts of Gums. Its In∣habitants had formerly peculiar places, whi∣ther they carried the Bodies of their Dead, with their Gold, their Necklaces, and other most precious Ornaments: The Spaniards to take ad∣vantage of this, have shown those Relicks the light for the second time; the City which is in a Peninsula, has had its Name from the resem∣blance of its Harbour, with that of Cartagena in Europe. 'Tis one of the best of America, the Rendezvouze of the Fleets which come from Cadiz for the Terra-firma. Sancta Martha pro∣duces almost all the sorts of Fruits that are had in Spain; and there you see the beginning of those High Mountains, which under the Names of Andes, advance towards the South. The Rio de la Hacha, no longer affords the fishing of Pearls in its Neighbourhood. Venezuela had this Name from a Town that was found built
there upon Piles of Wood in the midst of Wa∣ters. When this Countrey was Discovered, the Germans to whom Charles the Ninth had en∣gaged it, had a design to build a City at the mouth of the Lake Macaraybo, upon the model of that of Venice, but in a little while after they changed their design, and chose rather to return into their Countrey; New Andalousia is otherwise called Paria from its great River; Its Coast as well as that of Venezuela, goes un∣der the name of Costa de las Perlas, by reason of the Pearl-fishing that is there, since they have ceased so doing in the Neighbourhood of the Isles of Margaretes and Cabagna. Some Indi∣ans maintain and defend themselves there still against the Spaniards; and most of the Sea Towns have often been pillaged and plunder'd by the English. That of Comana has Salt Pits in its Neighbourhood. The Countrey and Ci∣ty of Popayen have kept the Name of their last King. The New Kingdom of Granada, which was discovered by one Ximanes a Granadian, furnishes Silver, Copper, Iron, and Emeralds. There was formerly one brought from hence to Philip the Second, King of Spain, that the Goldsmiths could not sufficiently esteem the value of it: It was put into the Treasury of the Escurial.
Guayna. THis Countrey has been named by some, the Savage Coast, the Countrey of the Amazons, El-Dorado, and Guayna; this last Name, which is Indian, has prevailed over the rest. L'Orenoque bounds it on the West, the Amazon River on the East, the North Sea on the North, and the high Mountains towards the South; and all these bounds leave it a figure, which approaches very much to Oval. L'Oronoque, called also Paria, which in the Indian Tongue, signifies River, does often constrain its Inhabitants, by its over-flowings, to make lodgings upon Trees, which resemble the Nests of great Birds. Amongst other Rivers of Guayna, Surinam is the most Navigable: Cayenne forms the Island of the same Name. At the Mouth of these Rivers, and all along the Coast, which is generally low, and extends above two hundred and fifty Leagues, there are several Colonies of English, French, and Hollanders. The Territories that lie near the Lake Pa∣rima, which is in the mid'st of Guayna, are said to acknowledge for their Soveraign, a a Successour of Guainacapa, of the Family of the Incas of Peru, and compose the true King∣dom of the Golden King. The rest drawing towards the Sea, is possessed by divers Nations, who are Idolaters, and obey the most ancient
of their Families. Some Relations make men∣tion of Amazons inhabiting there, or rather great Women, who make War with an admi∣rable Dexterity and Valour; that those of the Isle of Arowen, which is at the Mouth of the Amazon River, go particularly under that Name, by reason of their long Hair: that there are some Nations in those Parts, where they truck their Women, and where the Men com∣monly seek after the oldest, because they are more laborious, and fitter than the young for the management of their business. The Inhabitants of Guayana are long liv'd, by reason of the good Air they breath. The East Winds are regular there; and it is never excessively hot or cruelly cold. There are places proper for the Cultivating of Manioc, for Cotton, for Sugar and Tobacco, and others, which furnish Gums, Timber, Precious Stones of several sorts, Parrots and Monkeys. Hunting and Fishing are here equally useful and plea∣sant. Manoa, near the Lake Panima, the principal City of Guayna, is called Eldorado, by reason of the quantity of Gold, which is said to be there so great, both in Coin, Plate, Armour, and other Furniture, that the Inhabitants make their Arms of it, cover their Bodies with it, after having rubbed them with Oyl or Balm: from whence it comes, that people would make this Town pass for the Richest in the World. The Island Cayene, the principal Colony of the French in those parts, is sixteen or seven∣teen Leagues in circumference, whereof it presents five to the Sea, the rest is between the arms of the River of the same Name. It
has several Hills and Meadows which are there called Savanes. Peru. PERƲ is so considerable a Region, that the Spaniards thought fitting to comprehend under that Name, all the other parts of Sou∣thern America. It is almost all under the Torrid Zone, and yet it has not the Qualities of the Countreys of our Hemisphere, that are in the same Zone. There are three sorts of Countreys very different from one another, the Plain, the Mountainous, and the Andes. The Plain, which borders upon the Sea, and where it hardly ever rains, is sandy, and subject to Earthquakes, and but ten or twelve Leagues in breadth. The Mountainous, which has full twenty, consists in Valleys, in Hills, and Moun∣tains, where it is very cold. The Andes, that are as broad as the Mountainous part, and where there be almost always continual Rains, are Mountains excessively high, and nevertheless fertile and well peopled: so as under the Name of Peru, many more Territories have been contained than those that have been con∣quered. The Spaniards have a Vice Roy in this Coun∣trey, where they have particularly fortified Arica, as a Sea-Port, whether are brought the Commodities of Lima, and the Riches of Po∣tosi. They invaded this Kingdom under Pi∣zarra,
in the Year 1525. the Civil Wars which followed, did for some time retard the abso∣lute Conquest. The Indians not being able to defend themselves, pay them Tribute. The King of Spain draws immense Sums from the Mines of Peru; the principal Towns have al∣most all of 'em some, and the Fond of Earth is there often of Gold and Silver; for which rea∣son Peru is without contradiction, the richest Countrey in the World. It is certain, that the Spaniards brought from thence to the value of above twenty Millions of Ducats, in the first Voyage they made thither. The security of the Ways is so great, that Commodities often to the worth of three or four hundred thousand Ducats are frequently conducted under the Con∣voy only of four Musqueteers. The Incas had reign'd hereditarily in Peru for above three hundred years, before the coming of the Spaniards. They had caused there to be made two Royal High-ways, the one in the Plain, where they were at great Charges in setling the Sand; and the other in the Mountains, where it was necessary to fill up several Valleys. These Ways were each of 'em five hundred Leagues in length, and there were Houses where Travellers were entertain'd by the Inhabitants, with all the care and civility imaginable. The same Incas had also caused Temples to be built to the Sun, to the Moon, and the Stars, which they called the Moons Wait∣ing Gentlewomen, to Lightning, to Thunder, and the Rain-bow, which they said was the Executioner of the Kings Justice. Some say, that their Policy resembled in some manner that of the Greeks and Romans; that their Go∣vernment
was full of Ease, Franchises, and Liberality. They divided the World into three parts, High, Low, and Subterranean, signifying thereby, Heaven, Earth, and Hell. Atabalippa, one of the last of those Incas, said, The Pope was not wise, to give away what belonged not to him; and that he the said Atabalippa, had right to prefer the Divinity of the Sun, be∣fore that of a Crucified Man: He likewise threw down upon the ground a Breviary that was of∣fered him, because it spoke not a word, and they had made him hope it would tell him fine things. This unhappy Prince having been de∣feated and taken by the Spaniards at Camamalca, offered as much Gold as a Room seven and twen∣ty foot in length could hold, seventeen in breadth, and proportionably high, to the half of its height: Notwithstanding which, he was put to death, as a Conspiratour and a Tyrant. It is not to be wondred at the abundance of the Incas Gold and Silver, since they had in Gold all the Animals and Plants they had the knowledge of, and had Temples, where they plac'd a number of Statues of pure Gold, and an infi∣nite company of Precious Stones: those rich Fabricks have been demolish'd by the Spaniards, in hopes of finding Gold in the Materials and joyning of the stones, which were cemented with it, tho' they were of a prodigious big∣ness. The Provinces of Peru, are Quito, los Reyes, los Charcas, la Sierra. Quito has a great deal of Gold, Cotton, and Medicinal Herbs, and a Town of the same Name, the ancient abode of the Inca Guainacapa. The Province de los Reyes, has the finest Cities of the Countrey, Lima and
Cusco. Lima is new, and one of the best of all America: Its great Trade, as well as the Resi∣dence of the Vice-Roy, and of the Arch-bishop, have rendred it the Capital of Peru. Callao, a Sea-port Town, two Leagues from Lima, is capable of receiving and securing seve∣ral Ships. Cusco, built four hundred years before the Spaniards took it, is very Popu∣lous, because the Kings kept commonly their Court there, and oblig'd the Caciques, or Lords of the Countrey, to build each a House there, and make it the place of their Chil∣drens Residence. There is in the Province de los Charcas, the Cities de la Plata, and Petosi; this last, one of the best inhabi∣ted in all the West Indies: It has all the Conveniencies and Delights of Life; and for that reason several persons go to dwell there. The Silver Mines of its Mountain are really the richest in the World; they are in no wise subject to the Inconveniencies of the Waters, which commonly incommode o∣ther Mines. The King of Spain drew thence formerly every year above a Million of Du∣cuts for his Fifth; but since, they are much diminished. The Spaniards are not spa∣ring of proclaiming from time to time the discovery of other Mines in their Provinces of America.
Chili. CHili derives its Name from that of one of its Valleys, or from the Cold which people suffer in its Mountains, that environ it to∣wards the North and East. The difficulty of passing through these Mountains, obliges the Spaniards of Peru, when they go thither, to take their way by Sea: They have had it in possession since the year 1554. Some parts of this Coun∣trey are so fruitful and pleasant, chiefly to'wards the Sea-Coasts, that there are none of all America that better resemble those of Europe, which we esteem the finest. They have Ostridges, Copper, and the purest Gold in the World: there are so many Mines of that pre∣cious Metal, that Chili is compared to a golden Sheet, which has made the King of Spain re∣solve to keep it; tho' what he holds there, costs him more to defend, than the rest he has in America. The Cold is excessive. Almagre lost more Men and Horses by the Cold, than by the Sword. At the four Months end, after he had invaded this Countrey, they found some of his Troopers dead, in the same posture, and as fresh as if they had but just mounted on Horse-back. The Rivers only run in the day time, and remain frozen during the night. This does not hinder, but there are a number of Vulcano's, or Mountains belching forth fire. The Spaniards have a Governour, who depends on the Vice-Roy of Peru. The Arauques made such a Resistance against them, that in the
year 1641, they were constrain'd to make Peace with them. There is not in all Ame∣rica a more Warlike and Valiant People than these Arauques; they know how to make Swords, Muskets, and Cuirasses: they have the dexterity to draw up in Battel, to Attack, fight in a Retreat, to Encamp advantagiously, to build Forts, and they put in practice most of the stratagems of War; which they have learnt in having seen them but once used. They have often surpriz'd and ruin'd Cities, massa∣cred Garrisons; they have also demolished the Fortresses of Arauco, Turen, Tucapel: An Arauque makes no difficulty to attack a Spa∣niard. San Jago, the Conception, and the Impe∣rial, are the principal Cities of Chili: San Jago has its Sea-Port, called Valparaiso: the Conception is the abode of the Governour, by reason of the Neighbourhood of the Arauques. La Mocha, at five Leagues distance from the Terra firma, is a small Isle, where the Ships go often to take in fresh Water, and where seve∣ral Inhabitants of Chili have taken refuge, to exempt themselves from the rigour of the Spa∣nish Yoke.
Magellanica. MAgellanica is at the point of Southern Ame∣rica, near the Streights of Magellan. 'Tis sometimes called Chica, and the Country of the Patagons. 'Tis is a Land very poor and subject to cold, by reason of its high Moun∣tains, whereon Snow is almost ever lying. The Natives dwell in Dens, where they adore the Devil, for fear he should do them some mis∣chief. The English, Spaniards, and Hollanders, have given very different Names to the places to which they have resorted. The Spaniards, in the time of their King Philip the Second, built Ciudad del Rey Filippe, and some other Fortresses at the Eastern entrance of the Streight of Magellan, with design to hinder their Ene∣mies from passing into the South-Sea; But the Channel was found too large for the compassing such an Enterprize, and the want of Victuals caus'd that Colony to perish there. So that Ciudad was called Puerto del fame. The Haven of St. Julian, where Magellan wintered and punished his Mutineers, and the wish'd-for Ha∣ven, are upon the Eastern Coast. Here is Sweet Water, wherewith most Ships have provided themselves, as those of Magellan, Drake, Can∣dish, Olivier de Nort, le Maire, Schouten, and others, that have touch'd there. The Spanish Relations affirm, there are Men called Patagons, ten foot high, that will thrust Arrows of two foot and a half long, down to the bottom of their stomach, and drew 'em out again, without
receiving any harm; that eat at one Meal, a great Basket full of Bisket, and drink as much Wine, as a Horse can drink Water; that one alone can carry a Tun of Wine; that three or four of 'em can launch a Ship into the Sea; that they run as swift as Staggs; and lastly, that fifty Spaniards can hardly bind one of these Pa∣tàgons. The English, who have since landed in Magellanica, relate things quite contrary to what is before specified, and say, that the In∣habitants there are not bigger than the Euro∣peans. Tucuman. TƲcuman is a temperate Countrey, interlaced with several Rivers, which after having watered the Plains, fall into the great River de la Plata. Its Inhabitants are docible, and in∣genious, being more given to Peace, than War; the Spanish Captain, who subdued them, stood in no need of very considerable Troops for that purpose. They obey Caciques, their Lords; their Riches consist in Cattle. The Spaniards have there a Governour, and their principal Town is San-Jago d' El-Estero. Cordoua is the next best Town of Tucuman. Chaco and Trapalan∣da, are two of its principal Countreys. Its People, Quirandies, towards the Southern part, have much of the Scythian humour; they have their move∣able Habitations, and have always made a great resistance against the Spaniard.
La Plata. THe Name of La Plata was given by the Spaniards to this Countrey, and a great Ri∣ver which waters it, in consideration of the Silver they received there, and of the Mines they found. This Countrey is pleasant and fertil: It has a good Corn-Soil, Vineyards, fruitful Trees, and Cattle in abundance. It has a Rock, which by Antithesis is called Poor. Several Europeans have had a passionate desire to settle themselves here, in hopes of finding great Treasures. The King of Spain is acknowledg'd in most of the places of De la Plata: Wherefore in the year 1680, the Colonies of the Coun∣trey sent Men to hinder the settlement of the Portuguese in the Isles S. Gabriel, near Buenos∣aires. The Spanish Governour has his Residence in the City of the Assumption, wherein there is a Garrison. The true Paraguay is towards the beginning of the great River of the same Name, which in our Tongue signifies the River of Feathers. Parana is along the River, which has Cataracts, or falls of Water, near two hundred Yards high. Buenos-aires is one of the best Spanish Colonies, by reason of the Com∣merce it drives in Brasile, from whence it re∣ceives the Merchandizes of Europe; which has invited the Spaniards of Potosi to go often thi∣ther to furnish themselves with Necessaries, in exchange for their Ingots of Silver, notwith∣standing the rigorous Prohibitions of their King, whose Rights are lost by these means. A Propo∣sal was made to his Catholick Majesty, to have
his Silver of Peru brought this way, which is much nearer and shorter than that of Pa∣nama: But he thought not fitting to con∣sent to it, for fear his Subjects should commu∣nicate their Commerce of Silver with the Por∣tuguese of Brasile. The Inhabitants have great Trees, which they call Zaines, whereof they make Boats all of a piece. They shew the right wayes to several places by the felling of Trees: and as those Trees are some green, others ei∣ther black, yellow, or red, the Forests are agree∣ably diversifyed by them. The Orechons are there remarkable for the bigness of their Ears. According to the Relations of the Year 1627, there are in La Plata, People more Civiliz'd, and more succeptible of our Arts and Religion, than in the other parts of America; they say that according to a Tradition, left their Fore-Fathers by St. Thomas, whom they call St. Sume, Priests should come into their Countrey with the Cross to instruct them, and teach them their salvation. Brasile. BRasile has its Name common with a sort of Wood, which it furnishes in abundance. It was called the Country of the Holy Cross, when discovered in the Year 1501, in the Name of the King of Portugal. It extends a∣long the North Sea towards the North. It has
great Rocks under Water, whose Mouths make several good Harbours. Its Bounds towards the West are unknown; those it has towards the South, are placed diversly according to the will of the Castilians and Portuguez, who ex∣plain, their own way, the Regulation of the Year 1493, Each pretending the Possession of the River La Plata, with that of the Molucco Islands, and causing Geographical Cards to be made for that purpose to their own advantage. By the Regulation above mentioned, Alexander the 6th, whom Sixtus the 5th Lists in the Rank of the three greatest Popes of the Church, in∣vested Ferdinand King of Arragon, and Isabella Queen of Castile his Wife, in all the Lands, which they should cause to be Discovered on the West of a Line, which was imaginarily to be drawn from one Pole to the other, a hundred Leagues beyond the Islands Azores: What was to Discover on the East of that Line, was to belong to the King of Portugal. Now the diffi∣culty was in the Execution: the Castilians would reckon those hundred Leagues, from the most Western of the Azores; the Por∣tuguese, from the most Eastern, with design of making pass, for what they abandoned within the Desarts of America, the rich Possession of the Molucco's, which since was pawned to their King, by the Emperour Charles V. for Three hundred and fifty thousand Ducats. In short, these two Nations not agreeing in this affair, no more than in several others, the Portuguez reckon'd, as Brasile, all that extends, from the River Maranon, unto that of La Plata, and the Spaniards plac'd the Southern Bounds of it at the Capitania of St. Vincent. In the Year 1680. the
Portuguezes have shown, by their Descent into the Islands of St. Gabriel, that they mean not to abate the least of their Pretensions. Tho' Brasile be under the Torrid Zone, its Air is temperate, its Waters the best in the World; Its Inhabitants live often a hundred and fifty years and more. Besides the Woods of Brasile, there is Amber, Balm, Tobacco, Whale-Oyl, Cattel, Confitures; Sugar in abundance, the Engines with which they prepare it, being of great value. There are such Animals, Trees, Fruits, and Roots, as are not seen in other parts. The Serpents Adders, Water-Snakes and Toads, have no Venome, and serve for Food for the In∣habitants. The Fields are destined to Sugars, the Mountains for Woods, and the Valleys for Tobacco, for Fruits and for Mandioche, which is a kind of Root, which the Inhabitants make their Bread of. In this Region is an Herb, called Viva, which if toucht, will shut up as a Dazy in the night, and will not open till the Party, that in∣jured it be out of fight. Most of the Towns are not of above a hundred, or an hundred and twenty Houses. The Coast of Brasile is divided into four∣teen Praefectures, or Lordships, which are called Capitania's, and belong at present all to the Portuguese. In the Year 1654, the Hollanders lost all they had Conquered in these parts, the War they had then with England not suffering them to send succours thither, and the Portuguese Colonies were there much better established than theirs. In the Year 1662, the Portuguese entred into Treaty with them, to give them sa∣tisfaction, that they might not have them their Enemies, at the same time they were to defend
themselves against the Spaniards. Amongst the Capitanias, Tamuraca is the most ancient, tho' the smallest: Fernambuca is esteemed a Terre∣strial Paradice, by reason of the Beauty of its Territory. Bahia de todos os Santos, to the Ci∣ty of San-Salvador, at present an Archbishops See, and the Residence of the Governour: It was taken in the Year 1624, by the Hollanders, who got such a Booty there, that each Souldier had for his share above fifteen thousand Crowns: This good fortune occasion'd their Retreat, and their Retreat gave occasion to the Spaniards and Portugueses to retake it. The Ca∣pitania of Rio-Janeiro, which the Savages call Ganabara, has a great resort of Ships by means of a Navigable River, or rather of an Arm of the Sea which advances full twelve Leagues within the Land and is seven or eight in Breadth. In the Year 1658, a Mine of Silver was found in the Capitania. The City of Santos can receive Ships of two hundred Tun by means of its River. As concerning the inward part of Brasile, it is not much known; but what is known, take as followeth; The Inhabitants there go naked for the most part, and have the dexterity of passing great Rivers by the help of a Panyer, and a Rope. Three Letters of our Alphabet, are of no use amongst them, F, L, R; Some say, its because they have neither Faith, nor Law, nor Ruler. The Principal nations a∣mongst them are, the Toupinambous, the Morgui∣ces, the Tapuyes, and others who differ in Man∣ners, and in Language, and commonly are di∣stinguish'd by divers Head-Gears, and Forms of Hair they wear. Their number was much grea∣ter
before the coming of the Portuguese among 'em; several Toupinambous, to preserve their freedom, have traversed great Desarts, and are gone to dwell near the River Maranhaon. The Tapuyes are more hard to be Civiliz'd, than the Brasilians who inhabit Aldea's. These Al∣dea's are Villages, which have but five or six Houses, but very long, and each capable of con∣taining five or six hundred Persons. Most of the Inhabitants of Brasile have made a brave Defence, notwithstanding the Wars they make among themselves; they have hindred the Europeans from making any progress in the In∣lands of their Countrey, and have often ruined the Towns and Sugar-Engines, which the Chri∣stians had made along the Coast.
Africa. THat, which the Romans call'd Africa, was known among the Greeks under the Name of Libya. Thus these two Nations styled the Provinces that were opposite to them towards the South, on the other side of the Mediterranean Sea, and these Names were afterwards communicated to the rest of Africa: The Writers of Holy Mat∣ters call it the Country of Cham, because that, in the Division made by the Children of Noah, it fell to Cham's share. Africa is a great Peninsula, which represents in some manner the Figure either of a Heart, Pyramid, or Triangle. Those who compare it to a Bow, say that the Cape of Sierra-Leona, and that of Good Hope, are the two ends of it; that the Isle of St. Thomas in the Ethiopick Sea, is the Middle of the string where they put the Arrow, whose Heel they place at the Isthmus of Sues in Egypt. This part of the World advances thirty five Degrees beyond the Equator, and as many on this side the same Line, and yet the Inhabitants of the Southern parts, are much blacker, and less Politick than those of the Northern. Its length is from West to the East, from Cape
Verd, to that of Guardafuy, which are above two thousand Leagues distant from one ano∣ther: Eighteen hundred are reckon'd from Cape Boa, towards the midst of the Coast of Barbary, as far as the Cape of Good Hope. The Portuguese were the first who discovered the African Coasts upon the Ocean. Some say, it was first sail'd round under the Ptolemeys, others that Solomon sent Fleets to Ophir, which ha∣ving been fitted out in the Red Sea, return'd to Joppa in the Holy Land, by the Mediterranean Sea. Three famous Seas serve for its Bounds, as the main Ocean, the Mediterranean, and the Red Sea. The Ocean communicates it self to the Mediterranean Sea, by the Streights of Gi∣braltar, and to the Red Sea, by that of Babel-Mandel. Several Opinions walk about touch∣ing the rise of the Name of the Red Sea; the Vulgar believe this Sea to be so call'd by reason of its red sand: some assert, that the reflection of the Mountains, which seem reddish, burnt, and glowing, communicates that Colour to it: Others attribute it to the Rain-Waters, and to those of a Fountain, which run into that Sea from the Coasts of Arabia. Probably this Name of Red, and that of Rubrum, which the Latins, have given the Gulph of Arabia, came from that of Erithrean, which is Greek, and was peeu∣liar to that Gulph, which was known to us sooner than the other parts of the Erithrean Sea. The Red Sea is very long and narrow, full of Rocks, and divided into three Channels ac∣cording to its length: The middle one, called the Long Sea, is from twenty five, to fifty Fathoms deep, Navigable by night and day; the two others, along the Shoars, are so full of Rocks,
small Islands, and Woods, that they are only to be sail'd in the day time, nor that neither, without having Pilots, which are taken at Ba∣bel-Mandel, or Zeilan. This Sea receives no considerable Rivers. There is green and red Corral, and they fish and take some Pearls, near the Island Dalaca. The ebbing and flow∣ing is so great, that some Naturalists have af∣firmed, that the Children of Israel past it dry∣foot, during the Ebb, and that the Egyptians, having not well nicked their time, were over∣taken and lost by the return of the Tide. But the Holy Scripture tells us, that the Sea divided it self for the facilitating the passage to the Isra∣elites, and the Arabians still show the place of their passage between Azirut and El-Tor. The greatest Rivers of Africa, are the Nile and the Niger. The Nile according to the newest Relations, has its Sourse in Abyssinia, at twelve Degrees of Northern Latitude; and runs a Course of full five hundred Leagues, after having pass'd thro' the Lake Bar-Dambea. Its Cataracts, or Water-falls, are towards its Source, and in the Confines of Aethiopia and Egypt; its Mouths make their influx into the Mediterrane∣an Sea out of Egypt, where the Ancients have left seven, and the Neotericks four: Tho', indeed, there are but two of them now, unless there's an Inundation. Its Waters enrich and fatten the Land, and nourish Egypt, by their regular O∣verflowing. Its ufual height and encrease is to sixteen Cubits: more or less proves incon∣venient. It is to be perceived by the retreat of the Cattel by the marks which are in the Pits, and by the heaviness of the Rivers Mud, which they
expose in the night out o' doors, to receive moisture or Dew, which precedes and fore∣shews this Overflowing. The cause of it has been diversly alledged; some have said this River communicates its self with the Ocean, by the Lake and River of Zaire: and that the storms of the Sea cause its Waters to swell: Others affirm, that the sand, which gathers to∣wards its Mouths, stops them, and that the Northerly Winds drove them up. Several Mo∣derns believe that these Waters encrease from the thawed Snow, and from the Rains, which fall regularly, and abundantly in Ethiopia. It has lately been found out, that the Nitre, wherewith the Nile abounds so much, is the cause of all these wonderful effects, and that being heated by the Sun, it mingles it self with the Water, renders it troubled, swells it, and makes it pass over its Banks, insomuch that the Mud, which the Nile conveyes, does not come from elsewhere, nor does it make its Banks the higher. The Niger keeps its ancient Name, which it received from the people whose Countrey it Waters; It sometimes goes under the Earth, and before it empties it self into the Atlantick Sea, it forms three principal Branches, the Senega, Gambia, and Rio Grande. It fertilizes all the places it passes through, and an abundance of Grains of Gold are found in its Sand. The Zaire is considerable for the rapidity and plen∣ty of its Waters: the Zambre forms three Branches, Cuama, Spiritu-Santo, and Rio-de los Infantes. The Ghir often loses it self in the Sand, and almost as often gets out thence again.
The three greatest Lakes, are Zaire, Zembre, and Zaflan; all three in Ethiopia. Amongst the Mountains of Africa, none are more renown'd than Atlas, and those of the Moon. The Poets have feign'd, that Heaven was supported by Atlas, by reason of its exces∣sive height, or else upon the account of a King of Mauritania, called Atlas, who was one of the first that studied Astrology. Antiquity thought this Mountain to be the boundary of the World. In respect of its scituation, the Romans have divided all Africa into Citerior and Ʋlterior, and those of the Countrey divide it into Interior and Exterior. Strabo and Mela separate Africa from Asia by the Nile; some Arabian Geographers shut it up between the Mediterranean, the Ocean, and the Rivers Zaire and Nile: In matter of divi∣sion it seems more proper to follow the Seas, than Rivers. The Isthmus of Sues, which hin∣ders Africa from being an Isle, is of about nine Leagues between the Red Sea and the nearest Channel of the Nile: for from one Sea to the other, there is above twenty five Leagues, or three days journey by Camels. They say, that one of the Ptolemeyes, Queen Cleopatra, some Sultans and other Soveraign Princes of Egypt, have endeavour'd to no purpose to pierce or cut the Neck of this Isthmus, and that they have been discouraged from their undertaking, by the vastness of the Work, and by the damage the Waters of the Red Sea might do, being found higher than those of the Mediterranean; and so might have corrupted by their bitterness that of the Nile, the only Water that's drunk in Egypt. Ptolomey intended a Memorable Work,
in making Africa an Island; Cleopatra's design was to make her Ships pass into the Red Sea, that she might have escap'd falling into Au∣gustus's hands. The Sultan's meant to facili∣tate the Commerce of the Europeans through their Dominions, towards the constant Levy of a vast Tribute. The Africans exact great Services from their Elephants, their Camels, and their huge Apes; Dromedaries they call a sort of Camels, smal∣ler and swifter than the others: they have wild Asses, Unicorns, Barbes, Cameleons, Marmou∣sets, and Parrots. They get fine Feathers from their Ostriches, and their Civit Cats are much esteem'd for their scents. There is no living-Creature in the World, that becomes so great, from so small a begin∣ning, as does the Crocodile: it is form'd of an Egg, and still grows as long as it lives; inso∣much that there are those that attain to twenty five or thirty Cubits. The scituation of Africa, under the Torrid Zone, and the abundance of its burning Sand, occasions insupportable heats, principally to∣wards the Tropicks, and make it the least fer∣tile and worst peopled part of our Continent. Its greatest Rivers have Crocodiles; Its Moun∣tains and Desarts are full of Lions, and other wild Beasts: The lack and scarcity of Water produces several Monsters, Creatures of seve∣ral kinds, coupling commonly at the Watering∣places, where they meet. The Anthropophagi, or Man-eaters, that have been found in those, parts, and the Slaves that are daily transport∣ed from thence, do also very much contribute to the rendring it desart.
The Africans, to consider them in general, are no great Soldiers, and their Armies are more numerous, than good. Their Combats are perform'd on Horse-back, with the Lance, and confusedly. The Arabians, who have taken up their Habitations in Africk, trust in their dexterity and Address: their being harden'd and enur'd to labour, and their long habit of fighting, renders 'em formidable to their Neighbours. Some say, there's no Nation, but has some good and evil, but that the Africans have nothing that's good. As concerning Religion, there are Idolaters, Cafres without Law, Mahometans, Jews, and Christians of several sorts. The Portuguese have some Bishopricks in those places, where they have made any Establishments. We may consider Africa under a treble re∣spect; the Countrey of the Whites; that of the Blacks, and Ethiopians; the Islands make a fourth. The Countrey of the Whites, comprehends Barbary, Egypt, Biledulgerid, and the Zaara, or Desart. The Countrey of the Blacks has three parts, Nigritia, Nubia, and Guiney. Ethiopia is of two sorts, Higher and Lower. Ethiopia Superior, is much of Abyssinia, in the in∣ward part of the Countrey. Ethiopia Inferior, contains Congo, Cafreria, with Monomotapa and Zanguebar. The Islands attributed to Africk, are either in the Ocean, as the Tercera's, Ma∣dera, the Canaries, the Isles of Cap-verd, Mada∣gascar, and others; or in the Mediterranean Sea, as Maltha. We are not acquainted with those of the Red Sea. The Island Gueguere is within the Arms of the Nile.
Egypt, and almost all Barbary, belongs to the Turk; with exception to the Kingdoms of Mo∣rocco and Fez, which have a Prince of their own; and to the Cities of the Corsairs; and some Towns of the Christians upon the Coast. Abissinia, Nubia, Congo, and Mono-motapa, have their peculiar Kings. There are Arabian Cheiques in Numidia, and in Libya. The rest of Africa belongs to several little, petty Sove∣raigns; some of whose Dominions extend no farther than the compass of one Town or Bur∣rough. But, to speak the truth, we have but little knowledge of the inward part of the Countrey. The Monarchs of England, Spain, and Portugal, and the States-General of the Ʋnited Provinces, have some Places upon the Coast, which furnish 'em with the means of carrying on the Commerce with the inland parts of the Countrey. The French have some places of Traffick in Barbary in Guiney, and in the Isle of Madagascar, which they have called the Isle Dauphine. The Great Master of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, is Prince of the Isle of Maltha. Barbary. THe Ancients knew in Africa, under the Name of Barbary, what we call Zangue∣bar, whereas the Modern Barbary is all along the Mediterranean-Sea, where it comprehends the best Countrey of all Africk, and the most
populous, by reason of the conveniency of trade. Some Sea-men call Barbary, the Coast of Africk, from the Streight of Gibraltar, as far as Cap-Blanc, which is at twenty Degrees of Northern Latitude. The Romans, Sarazens, Vandals, Arabians, Moors, and Turks, who have been consecutively the Lords of the Barbary we treat of, have given very different Names to its Towns. The Turkish Emperour sways over the greatest portion of it. The Kings of Fez and Morocco, possess what is most towards the West. The Spaniards, Portuguese, and Eng∣lish, have Towns upon the Coast, which else∣where shall be enumerated. Susaon, Couco, Labes, are little States, which maintain them∣selves in the Mountains. Salley, Tituan, Al∣gier, Tunis, and Tripoli, are Towns belonging to Corsairs; the three last under the Protection of the Grand Seignior, who sends Bashaws thi∣ther; but they have not much authority. The French have the Bastion of France, and Genoveses the Isle of Tabarca, which they keep for the bringing thence the Merchandize of the Coun∣trey, which consists in Barks, Corn, Hides, Corral, which is of three sorts, red, white and black. The Portuguese were the first that made Con∣quests in Africa, and had it not been for the design they entertain'd of carrying their Arms into the East-Indies, from which they expected more advantage, they would undoubtedly have made Progresses there much more considerable, by reason of the Divisions which were at that time in the Kingdoms of Fez and Mo∣rocco.
There are chiefly seen in Barbary, Africans, or Bereberes, who are called Barbaresques, and most commonly Moors. Also there are Arabians, who came thither about the Year 999, of three Broods. These last live in the open Field by Adarous, which are Communities compos'd of several Families, call'd Baraques, where they have commonly a hundred, or two hundred Tents disposed around; they esteem them∣selves much more Noble than those, who inha∣bit the Towns, and cultivate the Earth; nor do they take any care but of their Herds and Flocks, or to make Incursions into the Moun∣tains: the Moors apply themselves particularly to Commerce. Amongst some of their Customs 'tis observ'd, they are at excessive charges in their Nuptials, as the Christians are in their Law-Suits, and the Jews in their Passeovers. They cause themselves to be buryed in those places, where no Body was enterred before, that when they rise again, they may not be puzzled to know and distinguish their Members from those of others. They were used to crucifie their Criminals, but since they took notice, that the Christians have a respect for Crosses, and that a great Drought once happened during some Executions, which nevertheless was followed with some Rains, after that the Crosses were taken away; they attributed this blessing to Mahomet, and order'd that, for the future, Cri∣minals should either be Hang'd or Beheaded. They make five Quarters of their Sheep, by rea∣son of their extraordinary large Tails; never∣theless they often cause them to be roasted whole, nay, and served so upon the Table too.
Barbary comprehends several Kiugdoms, which have Cities of the same Name, Marocco, Fez, Tremisen, Algier, Tunis, Tripoli, and Bar∣car. The Kingdom of Morocco, is upon the Ocean, which goes under the Name of the Atlantick Sea. 'Tis full of Mountains, excessive high, and alwayes covered with Snow. Its King styles himself Emperour of Barbary and Morocco, King of Fez, of Suz, and Tafilet; Lord of Da∣ra, of Gago, &c. He takes also the Title of Grand Cherif, of Mahomet, and Successour of his Family. This Name of Cherif shows, That his Predecessours made use of the pretence of Re∣ligion in their Establishment; they were also called Amiiel-Momins, and by corruption Mira∣momoulins, that is to say, Emperours of the Faith∣ful. The City of Morocco, formerly longer and more populous than it is at present, has up∣on its Royal Palace, three or four Golden Ap∣ples, esteemed at more than two hundred thou∣sand Crowns, which are said to be Enchanted, because they cannot be taken from the place where they are. The Land about it affords Grapes, as big as Pullets Eggs, and Goats hair, which serves to make fine Chamlets. Morocco and Safi, have Consuls of Europeans, for the maintaining the Priviledges there of their seve∣ral Nations. Mazagan is a Fortress of which the Portuguese have made use for the bringing the open Country under Contribution, after the examples of the Arabians. The little Island of Mogodor, five miles from the Continent, has a Castle with a Garrison for the security of some Mines of Gold and Silver, which are in its Neighbourhood.
The Kingdom of Fez is fruitful, by reason of its Rivers: It has four sorts of Land, Moun∣tains, Valleys, Plains, and Sea-Coasts: the City of Fez, which passes in Africa for the seat of the Western Court, is the best, the finest, and and most populous of all Barbary, with a Famous University and a Library, in which there are above two thousand Manuscripts. 'Tis said to have above fourscore Gates, a hundred thousand Houses, two hundred Hospitals, thirty two Suburbs, and a great number of Temples and Mosques, whereof one alone is half a Mile round. There is the Old and New Fez, this the abode of the Prince, and the other accompa∣nied with a Fortress. It is near the River of Cebu, which has towards its source a very ex∣traordinary Bridge, for it is raised a hundred and fifty Fathoms out of the Water, and is only a kind of Pannier of Sea-Rushes, capable of holding eight or ten Persons. This same Pan∣nier is hung up betwixt two Ropes, which turn upon two Pulleys fasten'd to the two ends of two Wooden Posts, which are upon the Rocks of each side the Valley. Salley is a Nest of Corsairs, who have alwayes several Pyrate Ships. Rubat opposite to Salley, was Built after the Model of Morocco, and has an Aqueduct of above 12000 Paces. Alcazar, is known by the Battels of 1578, wherein dyed three Kings, one of whom was Sebastian, King of Portugal. Anafi or Anfa, a ruin'd Town with a Castle of the Arabians, is thought by the Moors, to be an Enchanted Place, where are still, as they say, the Treasures of their first Emperour. Tremisen, or Telensin, is a great City, belong∣ing to the Turk, seven or eight Leagues distant from the Sea.
The Town of Argiers, is one of the best In∣habited, and the Richest of all Africk, by means of the Pyracies, which the Inhabitants Exercise upon the Ocean and Mediterranean Sea. It has full fifteen thousand Houses, twelve or fifteen thousand Gardens in its Neighbourhood; the Christian Slaves are there, to the number of thir∣ty or forty thousand. Cardinal Ximenes said, That if Argiers could be taken, Money enough might be found there to Conquer all Africa. A∣mongst the Tents which are out of the Town, there is that of the beautiful Cava, the Daugh∣ter of Count Julian de la Betica, who first caused the Moors to pass over into Spain, to revenge himself by their means of King Roderic. The Emperour Charles the Fifth, had the disatisfa∣ction of seeing the finest Fleet he ever had, lost before Argiers. The Kingdom of Tunis can pride it self in the Birth of Hannibal, Asdrubal, Terence, and other great Men: and Christianity is obliged to it for the Birth of Tertullian, St. Cyprian, and St. Au∣gustin. The City of Tunis has encreased it self from the Ruins of Carthage the Great, former∣ly the Rival of Rome, and the Capital City of a very considerable State. At present it obeys a Prince whom they call the Dey. Bizerta and Souza, are two places, where those of Tunis do often keep their Pyrate Ships. Souza is compo∣sed of the High and Low Town. Mahometa, is the ancient Adrumetum or Adrumyssus, near which some have been pleased to say, that for∣merly thirty Gaulish Cavaliers, repulsed above two thousand Moors. Caraan has been the Seat of a Calif, that is to say, of a Mahometan Pon∣tiffe. It is the Ancient Thisdrus, where Massi∣nissa
gained, over Asdrubal, the Battel, which Scipio was spectator of. Beja is in a soyl, so fertil in Corn, that it's a saying of that Coun∣trey, That if there were two Beja's, there would be as much Corn, as there are grains of sand in the Sea. Guadibarbar, makes so many turnings and windings, that it is passed full five and twenty times in the way, from Bone to Tunis. Between the Kingdom of Tunis, and the Isle of Maltha, there are some small Islands: Pan∣talaria, belonging to the King of Spain, with a Gulph, where the vapour, which clings to the Rock above, distils as much Water, as is ne∣cessary for the use of the Inhabitants. Lampa∣dosa, and Linosa, depends on the Order of Mal∣tha. There is in Lampadosa a Chapel, famous for the Offerings both of Christians and Turks: And it has been observ'd, that the Sacrilegious have never been able to carry any thing away from thence with impunity. The Kingdom of Tripoly, is a barren Land, considerable only for Pyracies, and the Com∣merce of its City, called Tripoly of Barbary, that it may be distinguish'd from those others of Souria, and Natolia, which go under the same Name. Upon the Coasts of that King∣dom, is the Island Zerbi, where in the Year 1560, the Spaniards were defeated by the Infi∣dels. In this Island was it also, that the Cor∣sair Dragut, escaped from the famous Doria; this last held him there so narrowly Besieg'd, that he could not stir out; the other bethought himself of making a Channel, without the Chri∣stians perceiving it, and so, in a clear night, he had the means of Transporting his Galleys into another part of the Island, and of retiring to
open Sea, where he came and presented himself before his Enemy, who was in no small sur∣prize. The Land of Barca begins at the place, where stood formerly the Altars of the Philenians, which had also served for Bounds to the States of Carthage, and Cyrene, and since, to the Em∣pires of the West, and East. 'Tis only a mea∣ger, and desart Plain, where stands the City of Caruenna, formerly Cirene, the Capital of a small State, which was given by Cirus, for a re∣treat to King Croesus. In this Country did the Psilloe inhabit, who had the reputation of ma∣king Serpents die only by their presence. Egypt. FEw Countreys have had so many ancient Names as Egypt; the Hebrews and Jews call'd it Mesraim, and the Egyptians at present call it Chibet. Its length, that is to say, its extent from the North to the South, is two hun∣dred Leagues; and its breadth, which is what it contains from the West to the East, is con∣fin'd by the Mountains, which bound the Valley of the Nile. It is the only Region of Africa, which touches Asia, and the Countrey the most populous in the World, tho' the Air be some∣what bad. Its Women do often bring forth two or three Children at a time, which is attri∣buted to the Water of the Nile. Egypt was no less peopled formerly, if it be true, that under
Amasis, one of its ancient Kings, it had full twenty thousand Cities. The plenty of Corn it affords, made the Ancients call it the Publick Granary of the World. The abundance or fa∣mine of the Roman Empire, depended on the good or ill Harvest in Egypt. The Nile, by the inundation of its Waters, which are full of Nitre, (as we said before) gives it this advan∣tage; not by wholly covering the Lands, as se∣veral have imagin'd, but being brought into several Channels, after the Inhabitants have broke the Dikes. That part which is on the East of the Nile, is more fruitful than that which is on the East of the River. Its Plants grow so abundantly, that they would stifle one another, if they did not prevent it by casting Sand in the field. Thus it is somewhat sur∣prizing, that the Egyptians make their Lands lean with Sand, whereas other Nations endea∣vour to fatten theirs with Dung. Besides Corn, they transport out of this Countrey, Rice, Sugar, Dates, Sena, Cassia, excellent Balm, Skins, Linnen, and Cloth. They are but ill inform'd, who say, that it never Rains there, whereas there are frequent Showers, during the Months of November, December, and January, prin∣cipally on the Mountains, and in the lower parts. Still are there at this day to be seen in Egypt, Pyramids, Obelisques, Labyrinths, and other Works which its ancient Kings caus'd to be made at an extraordinary charge, to shew their Power, and to give Employment to their People. The Statue of Memnon was formerly very consi∣derable there, as well as the Pharos near Alexan∣dria: But among all these several Works, it
has been observ'd, that the Pyramid is the most solid Monument Antiquity has left us. There remains nothing more in the Lake Meris than the place of the Labyrinth, which is said to have had above three thousand three hundred Cham∣bers. The Mummys, which are very frequent in this Region, and which Travellers take de∣light to bring into Europe, are Humane Bodies pitch'd and embalm'd, that have been preserv'd above two or three thousand years in Caverns, whither the ancient Egyptians took care to car∣ry them. They passed for that purpose a Lake in a Bark; and so first gave occasion to the Fable of Charon. Fiction has made Gods, He∣roes, and Men reign in Egypt. History gives an account of several of its Kings before Alexan∣der the Great: It says that, among those Kings, Sesostris was the greatest Conquerour: that Memnon having dedicated his Statue to the Sun, it saluted that Star at its rising: that Busiris pass'd there for a Tyrant, by reason of the Cruelties he exercised over the Hebrews: that Cencres is the Pharoah, who was drowned in the Red Sea: that Protcus had the repute of chan∣ging his Form, because he had divers sorts of Head-array: that Chemnis employed three hun∣dred and sixty thousand Men, for twenty years together in building the first and greatest Pyra∣mid: that Sesonchis, with an Army of four hundred thousand Foot, and sixty thousand Horse, took Jerusalem; and that Sennacherib, King of the Assyrians, being come against him, wild Rats gnaw'd the Bow-strings in the Assy∣rian Army: that Necaus began the Channel for the joyning the Nile and the Red Sea, and made all Africa to be travell'd round about.
Under Amasis the Kingdom of Egypt fell into the hands of the Persians; afterwards into those of the Greeks, and then to the Romans; and after the Romans it was swayed by the Califes, whose abode was first of all at Medina, then at Bag∣dad, at Damas, and at Caire. The Sultans succeeded the Califes. The Turks have had it in possession since the year 1518. They reckon there 18 Cassilifs or Governments, where they are commanded by the Bashaw of Caire; and the standing Soldiery there, are the bravest and the most esteemed of all the Ottoman Empire. And indeed this Government is the most ho∣nourable of all those that are out of the Port, and the Grand Seignior receives every year from hence, above a hundred and fifty thou∣sand Piasters, a Turkish Coin worth about 4 s. sterl. The Egyptians are the best Swimmers in the World, gay, pleasant, brisk, and very inge∣nious. The Invention of Astrology, Arithme∣tick, and Physick, is attributed to 'em; Where∣fore Egypt is often called the Mother of Arts: They say, it was Ptolomey Philadelphus, who took care to have the Version of the Bible out of Hebrew into Greek, done by the serenty In∣terpreters; and to make a Collection of above two hundred thousand Volumes. There was also a prodigious number of Books in the Libra∣ry of Alexandria, which was unluckily burnt, when Julius Caesar there made War. The Na∣tives of the Countrey have a peculiar way of hatching Chickens, by means of Furnaces, or Ovens, wherein they put sometimes three or four thousand Eggs together, and when they are hatch'd, they sell them by the Bushel. They
are for the most part Mahometans, but have amongst them Jews too, and Christians, known under the Name of Copties. These Copties are Natives of Egypt; they have a Tongue wholly peculiar, and a way of Writing little different from that of the ancient Greeks. The an∣cient Egyptians were so very superstitious, that they had almost as many Gods as Animals and Plants, whose Names they gave to their Cities. Some Authors attribute this great number of their false Divinities, to the Resolution they had taken of making and adoring the Fi∣gures of what had hindred them from fol∣lowing Pharaoh, when he was drown'd in the Red Sea. Egypt is commonly divided into four parts, Sahid, or High Egypt; Bechria, otherwise Deme∣sor, or Middle Egypt; Erriff, or Low Egypt; and the Coast of the Red Sea. Some make only two of it, the one High, and the other Low, according to the Course of the Nile, and say that the Hebrews inhabited the Higher; which they pretend to prove, by the coming of the Locusts from towards the East, for the punishment of Pharaoh, and by the way that Prince took when he pursued those same He∣brews. Some Ancients have divided Egypt into Libyca, or Africana; and into Arabica, or Asia∣tica; in regard of the same River. Amongst the Cities, Cairo is called Great, by reason of the advantages it has over all the other Cities of Africk. It is on the other side the place, where was the ancient Memphis, and three Leagues lower to the East of the Nile. Those who reckon in't sixty thousand Mosquees, com∣prehend in that number several heaps of stones:
They say also, there are above twenty four thousand Contradoes, or Quarters, and about seven Millions of Persons, whereof sixteen hundred thousand are Jews. 'Tis certain, there are full three and twenty thousand Mosquees, but some of 'em are not ten paces square. Its Castle, which stands upon a rising Hill, has the rarest Prospect and the best Air in the World: It is one of the finest and strongest that is seen, tho' it be much impair'd from its ancient splen∣dour. 'Tis not of marble, as some Relations averr; there are only several Mosaique Works. The Water of the Nile is convey'd thither by an Aqueduct of three hundred and fifty Arches. The People of Cairo must questionless be very numerous, since we are assur'd, that in three Months of the Year 1618, they buried there above six hundred thousand Persons that died of the Pestilence; and that this sickness is not perceivable, when it only sweeps away two hundred thousand in a year. In short, Cairo is said to have full two hundred thousand Houses, eighteen thousand considerable Streets, and twenty five or thirty Leagues in circumference. But I speak this comprehending therein the old and new Cairo, and the Boulac, which are near it; If new Cairo was only meant in this Ac∣count, its bigness does not equal that of Lon∣don. They ride thro' the Streets upon Asses, as People go here in Chairs and Coaches; not but that there are Horses in Egypt: but the Turks have introduced this Custom, that they may keep them for their own use. The Inhabi∣tants of Cairo make those excellent Tapistries, which we call Turky Carpets.
Besides the Pyramids, that are three Leagues, and the Mummys, which are six, from Caire, the curious Travellers go to see the Granaries and Pits of Joseph. (Now it's to be observ'd, that what ever is beautiful and good of the An∣cients in Egypt, is attributed to Joseph; and what is vilainous and infamous, to Pharaoh.) They go also to see Matarea, two Leagues from Cairo, which serv'd for a retreat to the Virgin, with the Fountain, which, with that of Caire, is the only Spring-Water in all the Countrey. Here is no longer to be seen the Plant of the true Balm, which was brought thither from the Holy Land, by the Cares of Cleopatra, and the permission of Anthony. Sahid, formerly Thebes, with an hundred Gates, was the abode of the Kings of Egypt, which was afterwards transferr'd to Alexandria, then to Memphis, and at last to Cairo; It gives its name to the Thebaid, which serv'd for a re∣treat to several Hermits. The most modern Relations call this City Gergio, and make it the Residence of a Bashaw. Alexandria, the Work of Alexander the Great, formerly the best Town of all Africa after Carthage was the abode of the Ptolomeys and Cleopatra. When it was subject to the Romans, it contributed more in one Month alone, than Jerusalem did in a whole Year. It had in its Neighbourhood the Tower of Pharos, one of the Seven Wonders of the World: It drives some trade, by means of its two Havens; It is the chief of a Patriar∣chate of the same Name. St. Mark hath made it renown'd in Holy History. The Desarts of Macaire, where were reckon'd above three
hundred Monasteries were on the West of it. Damietta is one of the Keys of the Countrey, by reason of its Scituation and its Haven upon the Mediterranean-Sea, which made the French King, Lewis, (entituled, the Saint) resolve, in his Expedition into the Holy Land, to make himself Master of it. Rosetta, a modern City, and pretty well built, is the resort of several Ships upon the most frequented Channel of the Nile. Sues, which has not much above two hun∣dred Houses, with a sorry Port, is neverthe∣less the Arsenal of the Turks, upon the Red Sea. The Governour keeps two small Gal∣leys, and some Ships, to make himself consi∣derable upon the Red Sea. The Merchandizes of the East-Indies, bound for Europe, came thither formerly; for which reason the Turks have, not without regret, seen the Establish∣ment of the Europeans in those Indies. But they still bring Spices, to truck with the Inhabitants for Corral. Cossir, formerly Berenice, was the Resort of the Commodities which the Romans fetch'd from the East-Indies, and which from thence were carried to the nearest part of the Nile, in the City of Coptos, now called Cana. Buge, in the most Southern part of Egypt, is a Kingdom tributary to the Abyssins, according to the Relations of 1657.
Biledulgerid, and Zaara. BIledulgerid is the Numidia of the Moderns, and more Southern than the ancient Nu∣midia. The Name of Biledulgerid, speaks a Land fruitful in Dates; A Fruit which the Numidians gather, tho' they be short-sighted, by reason of the Sand, which the Wind brings in their Eyes. This part of Africk extends from the West to the East, almost as far as Bar∣bary. Some Kings there are of the Mahome∣tan Religion, whose power is but very inconsi∣derable. The Arabians, under their Cheiques, or Chiefs, are strong in Cavalry, and capable of great Enterprizes, if they had not War amongst themselves. They sometimes assist the Turks, and at other times the Kings of Mo∣rocco and Fez; the changes of Soveraigns, and the diversity of Tongues, have often caus'd the Names of Cities to be changed. The Ara∣bians in these parts hunt after Ostriches, be∣cause they make great advantages of 'em: they sell their Feathers, eat their Flesh, and or∣der their Skins for their Baggage; they make their Witchcrafts and Incantations of the Heart, their Medicaments of the Fat, and their Ear-Pendants of the Horn or Beak. Suz, the best peopled Countrey of all Bile∣dulgerid, has the City of Tarudante, where the greatest Traffick is of Sugar, and where began the Dominion of the Cherifs. The River of Suz renders the Land fruitful by its inundation. The Sea-Towns are Cartguessem, of the Con∣quests
of Portugal, and Messa, with a Temple; near which the Inhabitants believe, that Jonas was cast up out of the Whales belly. They say, that all the Whales, approaching it, die immediately, and that from this Temple must come forth a great Pontif. The Cape of Guer, which is not very far distant from it, has near it the City of the Holy Cross, formerly called Agades and Darrumia. It was built by the Portugals, but the Moors have it in possession, and the Chri∣stians have nothing more remaining there, than some Magazines in its neighbourhood. Tesset is a Countrey of small product, and thinly in∣habited. Daru has some fortified Places, and amongst others, that of Tigumedet, the native Countrey of the Cherifs; who having first of all obtain'd from the King of Fez, a Drum and an Ensign, under pretext of making War against the Christians, dethron'd at length the King of the Countrey: which happen'd to∣wards the beginning of the last Age. Se∣gelmessa abounds in hurtful Animals. Tegora∣rina has plenty of Dates. Zeb wants Water; and those who inhabit it, in Summer yield their abode to the Scorpions. Biledulgerid communi∣cates its Name to all the Countrey. Fessen has a Town of the same Name. The Desart of Barca consists in Plains of Sand, where was for∣merly seen the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, no∣torious for its Oracles, for the Fountain of the Sun, for the loss of the Army of Cambyses King of Persia, and for the happy Journey of that of Alexander the Great. Bacchus, Perseus, and Hercules, are said to have been there before this Conquerour; and three High-ways are re∣ported to have led thither, the first from Mem∣phis,
the second from Paretonium, and the third from Cyrene. Mount Atlas advances several of its Branches into Biledulgerid. The Cap of Non, upon the Ocean, was for a long while the limit of the Navigations of the Portugueses, who call'd it in that manner, for that they at that time pass'd no farther. The Name of Zaara, signifies Desart, and that of Libya, which is also given to this Countrey, is a Greek word, which was first of all attributed to Africa. Little is to be seen in the Zaara, but Sand, Monsters, and Scorpions; for which reason the Inhabitants wear Boots, for a defence against the stings and bitings of those Creatures. The Air is healthful, and the sick of the neighbouring Countreys are brought thither for the Recovery of their health. The Arabians consider there three sorts of Coun∣treys; the Cehel, where is small Sand, without any Verdure; the Zaara, where is Gravel, and a little Verdure; and the Asgar, where are Marshes, Herbs, and Bushes. Travellers before∣hand make provision of all things necessary for the Life of Man: for the Houses and Wells are at such a distance from one another, that they go often a hundred Leagues without finding either Abode, or Water. A Merchant former∣ly endured there so much thirst, that he gave ten thousand Ducats for a Cup of Water; and yet he di'd, as well as the person, who receiv'd his Money for the giving him Drink. People are sometimes constrain'd to bury themselves in the Sand, to avoid meeting with Lyons, and other wild Beasts, which make a horrible noise every night. The Inhabitants are, for the most part, Shepherds, and the best Hunters in the World,
but very miserable. Some amongst 'em follow the Religion of Mahomet, and the greatest num∣ber lead a libertine kind of life. Several small Sovereigns receive the Tribute of the Caravans, which pass thro' their Dominions. Their other Revenues consist in Cattel; and when mention is made of their Riches, they ask how many Camels they have? Five principal Desarts are reckon'd, Zanhaga, Zuenziga, where are Salt-Pits, Targa, Lempta, and Berdoa. The Ghir, which is the greatest River of it, forms some pretty considerable Lakes, and loses its self in the Sand in several places of its course, and comes out again pre∣sently after the Rio Ouro, which is empty'd into the Ocean, and was so call'd by the Portuguese, by reason of the Gold they found there, when they made their first Voyages along that Coast. This River runs under the Tropick, thro' de∣sart Countreys, with ten or twelve fathom wa∣ter towards its entrance into the Sea. The Coast, as far as Cape Boiador, has high, white, and grey Hills, or Downs, with a desart Coun∣trey, o'rspred with Sand and wild Rushes. Nigritia. NIgritia is so called from its ancient People, the Nigritae, who reciprocally seem to have had their Name from their black Colour, or from that of their Land, which in some places is all burnt by the excessive heat, which
contributes to the blackning both the Sand and the Inhabitants. They who attribute this blackness to the Race of Cham, say, that people of other Countreys preserve their whiteness in Nigritia, and that the Asiaticks, and the Americans, who are in the same Zone with the Negroes, are not naturally black. The Niger does somewhat temper the Country, by means of its Waters, but the Rains which fall there, occasion several Diseases. As Commerce is now in high consideration amongst the Euro∣pean Nations, it is not improper to say some∣what of the Coast of Nigritia. Cap Blanc is a tongue of Land as hard as a Rock, ten or twelve fathom high, with a very spacious Ha∣ven, where Ships are safe against most Winds. Arguin, a Castle in a little Island, belongs to the Hollanders. The Barks may enter into the River of St. John, and treat with the Negroes for Ostridge-Feathers, Gums, Amber, and some small Gold. Senega, one of the principal Branches of the Niger, is not a League in breadth, at its disemboguing it self into the Sea. The Coast on the North of Senega is very low, and hardly to be kenn'd by those that are twelve Leagues distant at Sea. The Road of Cape-Verd, has twelve or thirteen fathom water, upon a bottom of grey Sand. The Island be∣longing to the Flemmings, called Gorea, has a Plat-form, flank'd by four Bastions of Earth, with a Dungeon of Bricks, which did not hin∣der it from being insulted in the late Wars. The entrance into it is on the West of the Island, where Ships of a hundred Tun may touch and ride. The Road is good, but no fresh water to be had. Rufisca is a retreat
commodious enough. Gambia is about five Leagues broad at its influx into the Sea, but it is not Navigable for Barks above sixty Leagues. 'Tis said, that the Portugals have remounted the Niger sometimes as far as the Kingdom of Benin, in the space of above eighteen hundred Leagues; that the Danes have formerly possess'd Cantozi, towards the place where the Niger divides it self; and that this Niger forms great Lakes, upon the Banks of which there are se∣veral good Cities, from whence go Caravans as far as Tripoli of Barbary. The English, in hopes of getting some of the Gold of the Countrey, had a design to go up the Senega with several light Ships; but the excessive heats, the insults of the Negroes accompanied with some Portugueses, made them lay aside the thoughts of their Enterprize. The Negroes are commonly simple and candid, Idolaters to∣wards the Sea, Mahometans in the inland Coun∣trey. They have three pretty considerable Kingdoms, Tombut, Borno, and Gaoga. Most of their Cities are not to be compared with our Towns, the Houses being only built of Wood, Chalk, and Straw; and often one of these Ci∣ties makes a Kingdom. The last Kings of Tom∣but, whom they call Tombouctou, have had the re∣putation of possessing a great quantity of Gold in Bars and Ingots. They are said to have this Gold from the Kingdom of Gago; and that from the Kingdoms of Morocco and Sus, there go often several Cafiles, or Caravans, for the bringing it thence. The Kingdom of Gualata produces Milet. That of Agades has a City indifferently well built. Borno, formerly the abode of the Garamantes, is inhabited by a
People who live in common; private persons there, acknowledge for their Children, those who resemble them, and the flattest nosed are the handsomest and greatest Beauties. Several Nations are between the branches of the Ni∣ger, where some Authors place the Gardens of the Hesperides. Those of Senega send abroad Slaves, Gold in dust, Hides, Gums and Civit Cats. The Negroes are very strong, and are more sought after, and bought up by the Europeans, than those of other Countreys. They of Gui∣ney are docible, for which reason they are com∣monly made domestick servants. Those of An∣gola are employed in cultivating of Land, by reason of their strength. 'Tis a saying, That he who expects to have any service from his Ne∣gro, must give him Food enough, a great deal of Work, and many Blows. On the South of the Niger are several other small Kingdoms that of Melli, with a City of six thousand Houses; Gago, rich in Gold, as we have said. Zegzeg, con∣siderable for its Commerce; Zanfara, fertile in Corn. The enumeration of the other places would be here as tedious, as it is unnecessary, since they are neither strong, nor well peopled, and but a very little trade is driven by 'em. The Portugals have yielded up to the English some Fortresses, which they had towards the Mouths of the Niger, which has given our Nation the means of trafficking here, and making Enter∣prizes, as do also the Hollanders.
Nubia. NƲbia, is three hundred and fifty Leagues in length, and two hundred in breadth. It retains some remnants of Christianity in its old Churches, and in the Ceremonies of Baptism, that is there administred. The Nubians obey a King, who commonly keeps Cavalry upon the Frontiers of his Dominions, because he hath potent Enemies, for his Neighbours, the Abissin, and the Turk. Histories affirm, That an Army of a hundred thousand Horse, was for∣merly Levyed, and led by a King of Nubia, a∣gainst the Governour of Aegypt. Gold, Civet, Sandal-Wood, Ivory, Arms, and Linnen, are Transported from this Country. The Com∣merce of the Nubians is, most especially, with those of Cairo, and the other Cities of Aegypt, They have a strong, subtle, and penetrating Poyson in this Countrey, the tenth part of a Grain of which, will kill a man in a quarter of an hour, and the Ounce, is valued at a hundred Ducats. One of the King's principal Reve∣nues, consists in the Receipt of the Right of Ex∣portation. 'Tis sold to Strangers, but upon condition of not making use of it, but out of the Kingdom. The Inhabitants have Sugar-Canes, but they know not how to improve them. They have amongst them Bereberes, of the Mahometan Religion, who go in Troops to Cairo, and return from thence, when they have gotten ten, or twelve Piasters. The capital Ci∣ties are, Nubia, and Dancala, near the Nile:
the others are but little known to us. A Rela∣tion of the Year 1657, affirms, That the King of Dancala, pays a Tribute in Cloths, to the King of the Abissins. Geography, in some sort is, in∣debted to this Countrey, since it presented the World with the Author of the famous Geogra∣phy of Nubia, the Cherif-Alderisi. Guiney. GƲiney is subject to such great Heats, that were it not for the Rains, and the coolness of the Night, it would be un∣inhabitable. It sends abroad Parrots, Apes, White-Salt, Ivory, Skins, Wax, Amber-Greece, Gold, and Slaves. Its Inhabitants have the repute of being presumptuous, thievish, Idola∣trous, and extreamly superstitious. Its best Town is St. George de la Mina, now in Possessi∣on of the Hollanders. The English have a∣mongst others, Cabo Corso, and the Danes, Fre∣dericksbourg. Most of the Portugals, who suc∣ceeded the French in that Colony, have been compelled by reason of their small numbers, to retire into the Inlands, during the Wars with Spain. The Castle of La Mina, having been so called from the Mines of Gold which are in its Neighbourhood; the name of St. George, was given it by John the Second, King of Portugal, who after having made the Conquest of it, con∣ceal'd the Commerce thereof, as long as he could. Benin is a particular Kingdom, with the best
City of all Nigritia. Ardre, towards the Coast, has its King, from whom there was an Ambas∣sadour to the French King at Paris, towards the latter end of the Year 1670, for the establish∣ment of Traffick in its Dominions. The Coast of Maleguetta, is so call'd from a kind of Pepper which it produces, and which is said to be better than that of the Indies. Apes do them great service in Guinca. Those that are called Barris, fetch Water, turn the Spit, and serve too at Table. Abissinia, or, Aethiopia. THis Countrey is otherwise call'd Abech, Abassia, Abassinia; the Empire of the Ne∣gus, the Kingdom of Prester John, the Middle-Indies, the Southern-Indies, the High, or Great Aethiopia. Those of the Countrey, give their King the Name of Belulgian, by reason of the Ring, which the Queen of Sheba received from Salomon, and which, since that time, has been Hereditary in that Royal Family. Those who call him Prester-John, do it upon this foundation, that he sometimes carries a Cross in his hand. The Popish Missionaries boast that some of the late Kings have been Catholicks: But since the Jesuits, who had been powerfully establisht in that Countrey, have been Banish'd thence; the Papists complain of the Persecution, their fol∣lowers have suffered in those parts. The Abis∣sins
have a great number of Churches, where Divine Service is performed much after the same manner it is here. This Land is tempe∣rate, unless in the Valleys, where it is very hot, and upon some Mountains, where it is cold. The Aethiopians, are the most ancient People in the World, and boast of having never been driven from their Countrey. They are dexte∣rous, active, blith, and perform better than o∣ther people in great Employments: The Ma∣hometans are used to Spirit away the Abissin Children, and go sell them to Indian Prin∣ces. They are so-so Souldiers for Africans; but they have not the Art of Building, nor of Grinding their Corn; and they often eat Cows flesh all raw, with Salt and Pepper, which they look upon as a peculiar Delicacy. They have Civet-Cats, and make use of Cloth, Stones, Salt; and little pieces of Iron, instead of money; for which purpose, they also use Gold, which they give by weight. They do not work in their Mines of Gold, and Silver of Narea, which has given occasion to say of their Prince, That he might, with his Treasures, purchase whole Worlds. The King of Abissinia, to whom is also given the title of Emperour, is Absolute in all the Territories of his Dominions; And this it is that makes his principal Revenue; He com∣monly keeps his Court in the open Field, some∣times in one place, sometimes an other: He has few Cities, but a great number of Villages. Several places upon the Frontier of the Galles, have been fortified, for the security of the In∣habitants, against the incursions of those peo∣ple, the capital Enemies of the Abissins. The Turks hold the City of Suaquem, upon the Red
Sea, whither the Vice-Roy of Barnagasse has commonly sent a Tribute of a thousand Ounces of Gold. There are several Relations of Ae∣thiopia, and for the most part fabulous: But the Jesuits pretend, that the late ones, they have published, to be the most certain. According to the Account of an Abissin Am∣bassadour, sent to the Grand Seignior in the Year 1657, Gonthar was the abode of the Em∣perour. Four Kings were tributary to him: The King of Sennar, which is a hot Country, paid him his Tribute in Horses; the King of Narea, paid it him in Gold; The Kings of Bugia, and Doncala, payed it him in Linnen and Cloth. These Dominions are not of so great an extent, nor of the same scituation, they have hitherto been shown us. The Galles on one side, have subdued several great Provinces in the Southern part, and the Moores have ren∣dred themselves Masters of several places all along upon the Red Sea, upon the Coast of A∣bex. According to the late Relations, the Sources of the Nile, are placed in the Province of the Agaux, at twelve Degrees of Northern Latitude, which shows in the Cart, the diffe∣rence of above thirty of those Degrees. That famous River goes first of all towards the North, and then towards the East, across the Lake of Bardambea: from thence towards the South, and towards the West, so to return to take its Course pretty near its Sources to∣wards the North, and to continue it thro' Aegypt. Twenty four small Kingdoms have been com∣monly accounted in Abissinia; that of Amara, has a Fortress upon a Mountain, called Amba
Guexem, where formerly were kept the Princes of the Royal Blood. Goyama, is almost envi∣roned with the Nile: Which has given some occasion to say, that it is the Island Meroe. There is in that of Tigermahon, the City of Caxumo, or Aceum, which is said to have been the Residence of the Queen of Sheba; several of the Abissin Kings, have held their Coronation in that Town. Dambea has the famous Lake, Bar-Dambea, and's not very far off the City of Gorgora, one of the last Residences of the Kings. The Coast of Abex upon the Red Sea, is full of Woods. The tongue of the ancient Troglodites, who inhabited it, had this peculiarity, that it re∣sembled whistling. Some have endeavoured to persuade the World, that the King of the Abis∣sins might very much incommode the Grand Seig∣nior, if he diverted the Waters of the Nile in∣to the Red Sea, and so render Aegypt dry: This proposition has rendred them ridiculous, because there are Mountains, that must of neces∣sity be cut through, for the bringing this a∣bout, and that these Mountains, which have the Sources of several great Rivers, make Aethiopia one of the highest Countreys of all Africa. Albuquerque Vice-Roy of the East-In∣dies, for the King of Portugal, seems to have had the same design, but he did not pursue the put∣ting it into execution. He it was, who would have caused the Body of Mahomet to be stollen away, and have pillaged Mocha with three hundred Horse, which he had sent from Or∣mus, upon Ships made on purpose for this De∣sign.
Congo. COngo is a temperate Countrey; the Rains, and Winds, moderating the Heat, which is insupportable in the adjacent parts. Afri∣ca has no Regions, that abound more in Rivers. The Zaire, which is the principal one of this Countrey, is considerable for its rapidity, and for the abundance of its Waters. The Con∣golans know not how to make use of the Com∣modities of their Land, and though they have Mines of Gold, they have none but shells for Money. Several amongst them, have been con∣verted to Christianity, after the example of some of their Kings. The Portugueses bring from thence Ivory, and Slaves: They have their establishment in the Royal City, called San-Salvador, and in that of St. Paul, in the small Island of Loanda, where they get fresh Water, out of the holes they make in the sand. They keep a Garrison in the Forts of Mas∣sagan, and Cambambo, in the Kingdom of Angola, for the security of their Silver-Mines, in which they work, and here it is, they as∣semble their Negroes, appointed for Brasile. The Males alone, have Right of succeeding in this Kingdom, and all Lands belong to the King, who is called Mani. The Inhabitants have Horses of Wood, the use of which is mighty pleasant; They lay a piece of an Oxes Hide, of the bigness of a Saddle, upon a Post near twelve inches thick, and he who travels, is seated thereon, with his leggs on each side;
all this is carried by two strong men, who find others in the way to relieve them. Learning is amongst them in so little estimation, that when Emanuel, King of Portugal, had sent to their King all the excellent Books of Law, that he could meet with, with a considerable num∣ber of Civilians: This Prince sent the Do∣ctors back, and caused the Books to be burnt, saying, They would but puzzle the Brains of his Subjects, who stood in need of nothing but honest, reasonable old fashion'd Thinking, and common Sense. That nevertheless, he should be no less a friend of the King of Portugal. They still reckon under the notion of Congo, the Kingdoms of Angola, Cacongo, and Malem∣ba. The Ansicain people who have the Quali∣ties of the Basques in France; And lastly, the Bramas, and Loanghi. Those Kingdoms and People no longer acknowledge the Soveraign∣ty of the King of Congo, as they did formerly. The King of Angola, calls himself the Soba. His Subjects love Doggs flesh to that degree, that they bring up whole Herds, or Packs of them, and one Dogg alone well sed, is some∣times sold amongst them for above two hundred Crowns. They have nothing recommendable but their Dexterity in shooting with the Bow: They will let fly a dozen Arrows, before the first be fallen upon the ground. They say, the Sun is a Man, the Moon a Woman, and the Stars, the Children of that Man and that Woman.
Cafreria, and Mono-Motapa. THe Land of Cafreria is the most Southern of all Africk; nay, of all our Continent, reach∣ing along the Aethiopick-Sea, with an extent of Coasts, for about twelve hundred Leagues, part in the Torrid, and part in the temperate Southern Zone. 'Tis full of Mountains, sub∣ject to great Colds, and under several petty Kings, who for the most part pay tribute to the Emperour of Mono-Motapa. The King of So∣fala pays it to the King of Portugal, who has a Garrison in the Castle of Sofala, and who, by the means of this Garrison, draws abundance of Gold from the Mines, which are in the in∣land Countrey. This Gold is accounted as good as any in the World; they gather it likewise in the Rivers, with Nets, after there has been Rain. Solomon might possibly have had his come from hence, which he employed in the building of the Temple. The Coast of Cafreria is low, and full of Woods: the Soyl produces Flowers of an grateful smell, and the Trees make a curious prospect. Three great Rivers discharge 'emselves into the Indian Seas, through Cafre∣ria, all three known in the beginning, under the name of Zambera, Cuama, Spirito Santo, les In∣fantes. The Cafres live without Law, so as their Name speaks them. They often furnish the Sea∣men, who come thither, with their Cattel: But the Mariners now cause the Oxen they buy to betied to great Posts, and shut up the Sheep
before they pay 'em, because the Cafres, after having sold 'em, were used to make 'em return home with the Call of a Whistle, which is wholly peculiar to 'em. We may say of 'em, in seeing their colour, that they resemble our Chimney-sweepers; Besides, that they have big Heads, flat Noses; whether they take care to break them in their infancy; or that this happens, because when they are little, their Mothers carry them continually upon the Back: Be it how it will, they look upon it as one of the Beauties of the Countrey, to have them in that manner. They have frizl'd Hair, Lips extraordinary big, the Chine of the Back stick∣ing out sharp, and very large Hips, insomuch, that nothing can be seen more terrible: So that we are not to wonder if Pirard calls 'em, those Devils of Cafres. The Cape of Good Hope, which lies toward the most Southern part of this Countrey, is by much the longest; the most famous and the most dangerous Cape in the World. 'Twas called so, in hopes of arriving suddenly at the East-Indies, when it was veered in the year 1498. Before, it had the Name of the Tempestuous Cape, from the storms that are fre∣quent thereabouts. Some have call'd it the Lyon of the Sea, others the Head of Africa: There are Signs by which the Sailers know when they are near it; fifty or sixty Leagues off they find the Bodies of great Reeds, called Trombes, floating on the Sea; and they see fly∣ing a number of white Birds, mark'd with black spots. They who return from the East-Indies, see Troops of Sea Wolves, made like Bears, and then they are continually sounding. This
Cape serves for bounds to the East and West-India-Companies: As they go to the East-Indies, and return from thence, they must of necessity come in ken of it. The Land enjovs a tem∣perate Air; several Valleys have Herbs and Flowers in abundance. There are Rivers full of Fish, and Woods full of Deer and Cattel. The Inhabitants, who make their Garments of Beasts-skins, are very good at running, but very villanous in their Diet, and when they speak, you'd think you heard Turkey-Cocks. Mono-Motapa, which is entirely in the Terra firma, is almost environ'd with Cafreria. It goes under the Name of its King, whereas Kings commonly go under the Names of the Countreys, that are subject to 'em. It is fer∣tile, abounding in Ivory, and so rich in Gold, that the King of it is called the Golden Emperour. The Inhabitants (who are very superstitious) have Pikes, Bows and Arrows, for their Arms; several of 'em are so swift o' foot, that they equal Horses in running. The Common People only wear Garments below their middle. A Relation, that was publish'd in the year 1631, tells us, That the King then reigning, was bap∣tiz'd, with all his Court, by the Jesuits. This Prince is commonly adorn'd with Chains and Jewels, like a Bride: He is said to have, for his usual Guard, a Regiment of Women, and ano∣ther of Doggs; and that in the Armies those Women do not less service than the Men. The Princes, who pay him Tribute, receive every Year firing from him, for a Mark of the Fealty they owe him; the City, which is the most considerable, has the same Name with the
Kingdom; Zimbaoe is a square Fortress, and the abode of the Court. Mono-Emugi is a State on the North of Mono-Motapa. The Giaques, otherwise called Galles and Chava, border upon it, and are illustrious for their Valour, and for their Conquests which they have made, in our time, over Abissinia, in the upper Aethiopia. Zanguebar. ZAnguebar of Barbary, is a great Coast in the Oriental part of Africa, along the Indian-Sea, on each side the Equinoctial. 'Tis a low, fenny, woody Countrey, which by the extremity of the moisture, causes the Air to be unhealthy and intemperate. The Inhabitants are Idolaters, and are swayed by several Sove∣raigns: they addict 'emfelves to trade, as well as the Arabians, and Mahometans, who are among 'em. What is towards the South, bears principally the Name of Zanguebar, wherein are the little Kingdoms of Mozambique, Quiloa, Mombaze, and Melinde. What is towards the North, is called Ayen, and sometimes New Arabia: It comprehends the Territories of Brava, Magadoxo, Adea, and Adel. There is in Mozambique the best Government, and the best Town, which the Portugals have in those parts. They have there a strong Castle, in the Island of the same Name, which is half a League in length. This is the place where their Ships wait for a fair Wind and Weather
in their East-India Voyages. The Inhabitants wou'd be much more numerous, if the Air was not so distemperate. Quiloa is in a Peninsula. Its King was the first amongst those of Zanguebar, who became a tributary of the Portuguese. There are very delicate Hens in and about Quiloa, tho' their Feathers, their Flesh, their Blood and their Bones be black. Mombaze is in an Island upon a Rock. The Portuguese go often thither to winter in the later season, because that Victuals are cheap and in great plenty in this Countrey: the entrance of the Haven is so narrow, and so full of Rocks, that in several places there is only passage for a Ship. Melinde does often give its Name to all the Coast; Where are found several Parks of above a League round, enclos'd with Elephants Teeth. Bra∣va is a small Republick, with a City, built after the manner of those of the Moors. The King, and Inhabitants of Magadoxo, are Mahometans. Adea has a good Harbour, cal∣led Barraboa. Adel, wherein is the City of Arat; it obeys a King, who is a great Enemy of the Christians. Barbora, and Zela, drive a great Trade, by reason of the conve∣niency of their Havens towards the entrance of the Red Sea.
The Tercera Islands. THese Islands were thus named from that which is particularly called Tercera. The great number of Autours, or Goss-hawks, that are seen there, has made them go under the name of Azores. They have that of the Flem∣ming Islands, because they were discovered by a Flemming. They are called High, as more Northerly, in respect of the Canaries. The Portuguese, who are Masters of 'em, export from thence Corn, Wine, Garden-Woad, Skins, and other Commodities. There are seven that are the principal, without reckoning those of Coreo and of Flores, where several have placed the First Meridian. Angra, the capital City, and the abode of a Bishop, is in Tercera. The other Islands are Gratiosa, St. George, Fayal, Pico, St. Michael, and Santa-Maria. The Canary Islands. THe first discovery of these Islands, was made by one Bethen-Court, a French Gentleman, who had the title of King of the Canaries, and facilitated the Conquest of 'em to the Spaniards, whom they now obey. The Name of Canary, came from the Doggs, which those Islands
had formerly, and not from the Canes of Sugar, which were not planted there, till after they had this Name. The common opinion is, that they are the Fortunate Islands of the Ancients. They furnish excellent Wines, Sugar abun∣dantly, and small Birds, that are called Canary-Birds. They are reckon'd seven in number. They are all exempt from venomous Animals, and nevertheless subject to excessive heats. The principal Canary has a City and Bishoprick of the same Name. The Isle of Fierro is known for its Tree, which distils Water to its Inha∣bitants, and by the Position, that in France is made there, of the first Meridian. The Island of Teneriffe is the greatest of all these Islands; it has the Mountain of Pico, always covered with Snows; Seamen esteem it the highest and the streightest in the World; and indeed it requires three days time to mount to the top of it. 'Tis seen fifty Leagues off; It's us'd as a Pharos, by those who are at Sea, and some place there the first Meridian: It is said to yield, eve∣ry Year, above twenty thousand Tuns of the most excellent Wines that the Earth produces. The other Canary Islands are la Gomera, Palma, Fortaventura, and Lancelotta. These Islands serve often for Rendezouz to the Spanish Fleets, which come from the West-Indies, and which there receive order to what place of the King∣dom of Spain they must go and dis-embark their Riches. At la Palma our Ships touch, to refresh themselves in their Voyage towards America. The makers of Romances have taken occasion to sham us with many things, upon occasion of the Canaries.
The Islands of Cap-Verd. THe Islands, which are in parallel with Cap-Verd, are in number ten, and go un∣der the Name of that Cape, which is in the most Western part of Africk. The Ancients called them Hesperides and Gorgades. Poetry has plac'd those fine Gardens therein, which it feigned to be kept by a Dragon. Christopher Columbus says, they are ill named, because that in his third Voyage, he found they were dry and barren. They belong, for the most part, to the Portugueses, who transport from thence Salt and Goats-skins. Salt is made naturally there, in Ditches along the Sea. There is so great abundance of it, principally in the Isle of May, that the Flemmings call all these Islands, the Isles of Salt. The chief one is that of St. James, with a small Town of the same Name; the others are St. Anthony, St. Vincent, St. Lucy's, St. Nicholas, Insula Salis, Buen avi∣sta, del Fogo, and de Brave; there are some of these who have no Inhabitants, unless some Goatherds. The Ocean, which is near it, bears the Name of the Green Sea, by reason of the great abundance of an Herb, that is found there of a Green and Yellowish Colour, which makes it resemble a Meadow, in the double Latin sense of Aequor.
The Isle of Madagascar. THe Isle Madagascar, in the Eastern, which we call the Indian Sea, is the greatest of the Islands that are attributed to Africa. It is distant from it a hundred or a hundred and twenty Leagues, and there is hardly an Island in the World of so vast an extent. 'Tis in length above a thousand English Miles, and near three hundred in breadth. The Natives of the Coun∣trey call it, Madecase; the Portuguese, St. Law∣rence; and the French, the Isle Dauphine: The Ancients call'd it Menuthias, and the Kernel of Aethiopia. According to our Relations, the Air is temperate, the Soil proper for all manner of Grains and Trees, Rice, Skins, Wax, Gums, Cristals, Steels, Copper, Ebony, and Woods of several sorts, are transported from thence. The Inhabitants consist both of Whites and Blacks, who are almost all Idolaters, there being very few Mahometans among 'em. The Portugals, English, and Hollanders, have sometimes touch'd there: the Portugals, in the Ance of Galion; the English, in the Bay of St. Au∣gustin; and the Hollanders, in that of Antongil. The French, since they have built the Fort Dau∣phin, have made pretty exact Discoveries of all the Eastern and Southern Coast of the Island. The Isle of Bourbon, called formerly Mascha∣renhe, five and twenty Leagues in length, and fourteen in breadth, is in possession of the French. It has a Vulcano, that is to say, a
Mountain that spits and casts forth fire; the rest of its Land is by much the best and finest Countrey in the World; the Waters are very healthful, and it has most of the Commodities, that are in the Isle of Madagascar. The Isle of Maltha. MAltha, about the midst of the Mediterra∣nean-Sea, was formerly call'd Melita, by reason of its Honey. 'Tis attributed to Africk, because nearer it than the firm Land of Europe, and because the Maltheses have great conformi∣ty with the Africans in point of manners. Its Land and its Stones have Vertues altogether sin∣gular: if there be Serpents, they have no ve∣nome. Some appropriate to this Island, the particulars of the Shipwrack of St. Paul, and those of the little Dogs, which others affirm to have been in the Isle of Melada, in the Gulph of Venice. The Isle of Maltha has often had the same Soveraigns with Sicily: at present it is the abode of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, under a Prince, whom they call the Great Ma∣ster. The Patron of the Order is St. John Baptist, and, nevertheless, the Name of St. John was given it, upon occasion of the place, where that Order was first of all establish'd, and by reason of a St. John, Bishop of Alexandria, cele∣brated for his great and bountiful Alms. The Emperour, Charles the Fifth, gave it to the
Knights, who had no setled abode, since the loss of Rhodes, and who before had resided at Jerusa∣lem, at Margat, Acre, and Limisso, in the Isle of Cyprus. The Order is compos'd of eight Tongues, which are as many principal Nations; Provence, Auvergne, France, Italy, Aragon, England, Germany, and Castile. To each of 'em belong some considerable Dignities, Priories, and Com∣manderies. The three Tongues of France have full three hundred Commanderies, and the five others together have not many more. The Name of Knight was not in use in the be∣ginning of the institution of the Order. The Religious were then called Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem. One of the Sta∣tutes of the Order, bears, That the Knights ought rather to lose their Lives, than yield up the Places that are confided to their keep∣ing. The Island produces several good Fruits; as it has little Corn and Wine to nourish seventy five or eighty thousand persons: Si∣cily does commonly supply that want. They make account there of fifteen thousand Men, fit for service; and they now keep there eight good Galleys. It is but ten Leagues in length, and five in breadth, with several Harbours and Roads, that are called Calles and Marsa. It is the best fortified of the World, as being the principal Rampart and Bulwark of Christen∣dom, and its Fortresses have above three hun∣dred pieces of Canon. By reason of its strength, and the valour of its Knights, they say, Maltha fior del Mondo. There are four Towns; the City, which is about the midst of the Island; Valetta, a new City; the victorious Burg
City, which repulsed the Turks in the Year 1565; and St. Michael, which is now called the Isle de la Sangle: the three last are near one another, and seem to make but one. La Goza, a small Island near that of Maltha, affords good Hawks; the Great Master styles himself the Prince of it. They call those young Knights, whom they mean to droll upon for their Bravading, by the Title of Prince of Forfola, which is a Rock near the Coast. Of some other Islands of Africa. MAdera, eighteen Leagues in compass, in the Atlantick, and on the North of the Canaries, belongs to the Crown of Portugal. It enjoys a pleasant Air, is not subject to ex∣cessive Heats, but never feels any Cold. Seven or eight small Rivers contribute much to its temperature. It is call'd the Queen of Islands, by reason of its Beauty, and the fertility of its Soil, which produces excellent Wine. Here grow also delicate Fruits, and they make the best Sugar in the World, which furnishes the means of preparing Marmalade, Codinniack, and other such like Preserves. It has three Towns; the principal is Funchal, the Residence of the Governour and the Bishop: 'Tis at the foot of a Mountain, which is full five Quarts of a League high, with three Fortresses, and an
Harbour in form of a Crescent, where Ships may come and lye at Anchor within Pistol-shot of the Town. St. Thomas, under the Equinoctial, is rich in Sugar; the Air bad for those Foreigners, who go to dwell there; they never grow bigger than they were at their first arrival there. The Portuguese were the first who subdued it. Its best Town is Pavoasan, of about seven hundred Families, with a Fortress in the Eastern part of the Island, at present belonging to the Hollan∣ders. It has several Trees like to that of the Island of Fierro; they have the same circum∣stance of distilling Water continually, for the use of the Inhabitants. Their Swines-flesh is more pleasant and more healthful than that of Fowl, by reason that Creature is fed with Canes that produce Sugar. The Prince's Island has had this Name, since that its Revenue was set apart for the main∣tenance of the Prince of Portugal. Annabon was so called, having been first disco∣vered on the first day of the Year. The Portuguese have an Habitation there in its Northern part. St. Helena, of sixteen Leagues in compass, is in the Ethiopick. There is not an Island, in the World, farther distant from the Terra firma. They call it the Sea's Inn, because it has fresh Water in abundance, and that those who come from the East-Indies are us'd to touch there, to take it in. It's high and full of Mountains, with a very clear Coast without Rocks, where is, even near the Rocks, above ten fathom Water. The English have found such great accommoda∣tion here, that they have built a Fort in the Island.
Zocotora and Bebelmendel are towards the Red Sea; this last in the Streight which re∣ceives its Name, where the passage is most com∣modious on the side of Africa. Zocotora, near the Cap Guadarfu, five and twenty Leagues in length, and ten in breadth, obeys a King that is an Arabian. It has a good Road, and Bays very commodious, where Ships may ride safe at Anchor, even near the Rocks. Ships may Winter there more conveniently than at Mozambique, or Mombaze; the Air being healthful, the Entrance of the Bar without danger, and the Cattel in great plenty.
Asía, THis part of the World, which is cal∣led the Levant, by reason of its sci∣tuation on the East of Europe, and of Africa, is the greatest of the three, which compose our Continent. Its Length from the West to the East, is full two thousand, five hundred French Leagues from the Western parts of Natolia, to the most Ea∣stern parts of China. If we include herein the Territories of Tartary, as far as the Chan∣nel of Piecko, and the Streight of Ʋries, which separate it from the Land of Jesso, this length would contain above thirty Degrees of Longi∣tude more. The Breadth of Asia, without comprehending therein the Islands, is seventy two Degrees, which make above eighteen hundred of the forementioned Leagues, and all this in the Northern Temperate Zone, except some Peninsula's, which are in the Torrid Zone. Several do believe that the Terrestrial Pa∣radice was in Asia, and so that Adam was Created there. Asia was the Lot of Sem, the Eldest of Noah's Sons. God has wrought herein the principal Mysteries of the ancient
and new Law, and therein Jesus Christ was born. 'Twas in Asia, that Man did first breath. From Asia came the Customs, Religi∣ons, Manners, Laws, and Learning, which af∣ter the Universal Deluge, spread themselves in∣to other parts of the Earth. Asia is famous for the Monarchies of the Assyrians, Medes, Baby∣lonians, Persians, and Califfs; for the Phoenician People, who first taught the Greeks, and other Nations, a good part of the Arts and Scien∣ces. The four principal Religions are followed there: The Jewish, the Mahometan, and Idola∣trous, more than the Christian: Idolatry began there among the Assyrians; Judaism amongst the Hebrews; Christianity in the Holy Land; and Mahometism in Arabia. Several Missions have been established there by Christian Princes, those of Turkey, under the Protection of France; those of the Indies, under the Protection of Portugal; those of the Philippines, under the Protection of Ca∣stile. There are four Archbishopricks, and se∣ven Bishopricks, in the East-Indies, where like∣wise the Jesuits have three Provinces, that of Goa, that of Malabar, and that of Japan. Since the Peace of the Year 1659, France sent thither the Bishops of Heliopolis, Metellopolis, Berite, and Caesarea, with design of setling Christiani∣ty, and of carrying it as far as into China. They have made considerable progresses, not∣withstanding the impositions of the Spaniards, who would have impos'd on the Bishop of Heliopolis, Intreagues of affairs of State, and made him take a turn round the World with∣out his desiring it. Mahometism is receiv'd
by the four principal Nations of Asia, by the Turks, Arabians, Persians, and Tartars. The Turks in matters of Religion, are the freest, the Arabians, the most superstitious, the Persians, the most rational, and the Tartars, the most simple. Some make up the number of seven∣ty two Sects of them, which are commonly re∣duced to two, to that of the Turks, following the Doctrin of Homar, and to that of the Persians, ac∣cording to the Doctrin of Hali. These last have their Patriarch at Ispahan; the Turks have theirs at Bagdad. The Greeks have theirs, who bear the names of Antioch, and Jerusalem. There be still other Schismaticks, Jacobites, who have their Patriarch at Caramit; Nestorians, Cophites, Georgiens; Syrians, who bear the name of their Chief, and not of Syria; And Armenians. These last have two Patriarcks, the one at Nas∣sivan in Media, the other at Ciz in Cilicia. The Maronites have theirs at Canobin in Mount Libanus. The Papists boast of having brought over several to their Church, within a few years past. Asia towards the West, is separated from Africa, by the Red Sea, and by the Isthmus of Sues: It is divided from Europe, by several Seas, and Streights, which I shall enumerate in the Article upon Europe. Towards the other Regions of the World, Asia is environ'd with the Ocean, known under the Name of Tartary, towards the North; under that of Chi∣na, towards the East; and under that of the Indies, towards the South. Some have endea∣voured to persuade us, that the Hollanders have of late traded into Japan, by the Sea of Tarta∣ry; if this be true, those people keep that Voy∣age
very secret, and are much afraid that other Nations should have any knowledge thereof. The principal Seas within the Inland Country, are the Caspian, which now receives other Names from the Provinces, and Cities which are near it. It has salt Waters, tho' it has the Fish of Fresh Waters: This made the Ancients believe, in that it communicated with the Oce∣an, it may well communicate with some Sea, by the subterraneous Meatus: It receives seve∣ral great Rivers, and nevertheless does not swell. The Sea El-Catif, is that of Persia. The Dead Sea is small in respect of others, yet it is famous by reason of the Holy Land, where it is; It has this name of the Dead Sea given it, because its Waters have no Motion. The principal Rivers of Asia are, the Eu∣phrates, Tigris, Indus, Ganges, Quiam, and Obi. Caucasus, and Taurus, so celebrated by the Ancients, are the highest Mountains in this part of the World; The Inhabitants of the Country have them under other Names. The Air, almost of all Asia, is found to be tem∣perate. If we consider its Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Drugs, Spices, Silk, Stuffs; we must own, that it is the richest, as well as the most temperate, part of the World. The fishing for Pearls is in three principal places, at the Isle Ba∣harem in the Persian Sea, the Island Manar upon the Coast of the Indus, and that of Ainan near China. Amongst the Products of Asia, they esteem the Diamonds of Golconda and Narsina, the Pepper and Ginger of Malabar, the Stuffs of Bengala, the Rubies and Lacca of Pegu, the Dainties and Knacks of China; the Cinnamon
of Ceilan, the Gold of Sumatra, the Camphire of Borneo, the Cloves of the Molucco's, the Nutmegs of Banda, the Sanders of Timor. Four of the seven Wonders of the World, were in Asia; the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, the Walls of Babylon, the Colossus at Rhodes; the Statue of Jupiter Olympicus, was in Europe, the Pharos, and the Pyramids, in Africa. The Asiaticks have ever been a people addi∣cted to pleasures, except some Tartars, who by their incursions incommode their Neigh∣bours continually; they love fish more than flesh, wherefore Priests, in their Fasts and Lents, eat only flesh. Asia is under the Dominion of Potent Mo∣narchs, who can easily bring great Armies on foot; of whom those of the Turks are the best Disciplin'd. The most considerable of those Sovereigns, are the Grand Segnior, who resides in Europe; the King of Persia; the Great Cham of Tartary, at present, King of China in part; and the great Mogul. Several other great Princes are in Georgia, Arabia, Tar∣tary, in the Indies, and in most of the Islands. Divers people maintain their liberty in the Mountains. The principal place of the Con∣quests of Portugal, is Goa, that of the Hollan∣dens, Jacatra, otherwise Batavia, in the Isle of Java. The English and the French, have their chief place of Traffick at Surat. The Spani∣ards possess the Philippine Islands, the Mos∣covites sway the best part of the Desart of Tartary, which commonly be attributed to Asia.
In the division of this part of the World, some Authors make it to be Inferior, and Ex∣terior, in respect of Mount Taurus. By this same Mountain the Greeks have made it a Citerior, or Northorn, and Ʋlterior, or Sou∣thern in respect of them; we divide it in∣to Terra-firma and Islands. The Countrys of the Terra, firma, are towards the West, the Asian Turky, Georgia, and Arabia; to∣wards the middle Persia; towards the North Tartary; towards the East China; towards the South India, divided into Terra-firma, which is the Empire of the Mogul, and into two Pe∣ninsula's, the one on this, and the other on that, side the Ganges. The Islands are in the Eastern Sea, that is, that of the Indies, where are found to be the greatest Riches, and per∣haps in greater number, than in all the rest of the Universe. These Islands are the Maldives, Ceilan, those of the Sound, and Japan, the Philippins, and the Moluccoes. There are some Islands of Asia in the Mediterranean Sea, Cyprus, Rhodes, and others in the Archi∣pelago.
Turkey in Asia. WHat belongs to the Turk in Asia, com∣prehends much about the same Pro∣vinces, which the ancient Romans had in that part of the World; and besides that, those of Armenia, and Assyria. 'Twas formerly adorn∣ed with a great number of brave Cities; The conduct of the Turks, and the laziness of the Inhabitants, have quite ruined most of them. One wou'd think this Countrey ought to be very populous, by reason of the freedom which Men enjoy there, of having several Wives; yet it's certain, it has very few people, if we con∣sider its large extent. There seldom pass five or six years together, without several thousands of persons being swept away by the Plague. What is considerable is, that along the Coasts, where the Echelles, that is to say, places of Trade, inrich themselves by the transportation of the Levantine Merchandizes, which consist in Skins, Cotton, Tapistry, Cam∣lets, and other like Stuffs: These Echelles have this in particular, that they have Consuls for the Nations of Europe: And in consideration of the Christian Princes, the Knights of Maltha, do not commonly form any enterprizes there∣abouts. The Merchants, who dwell there, send and receive their Letters by a sort of Pige∣ons called Carriers, which they keep, and which they send for that purpose to the places, where they have been brought up. The Grand Seig∣niour, has his Bashaws there, who keep the people
under extream subjection. The Mahometan Religion is received in most places. Where are also to be seen Jews, and Christians of the Greek Church. As for manners, a Cadi, or Judge, has judiciously observ'd, That amongst the Nations, who inhabit this Region, the Turks were blameable for their Whoring, the Jews for their Superstition, and the Christians for their Litigiousness. This Turkey is certainly in a choice scituati∣on; in the midst of our Continent, and in the Temperate Zone; it has the Course of the Eu∣phrates, and Tigris, with the conveniency of four Seas, the Mediterranean, the Black Sea, the Caspian, and that of El-Catif, which open to it the Commerce of the principal Regions of the World, and particularly, that of the East-Indies. The Euphrates having pass'd near the ruins of the ancient Babylon, joins it self to the Tigris below Bagdad. Its Channel is inconsi∣derable in those parts by reason of the many Islets that are made there. It has this ad∣vantage, that it joins the Traffick of the Black Sea, which is not far distant from its Sources, with that of the East-Indies. The Tigris forms several Lakes, sometimes going under the Earth, and after having passed by Bagdad, mix∣ing with Euphrates. The Waters of these two Rivers, fall into the Sea El-Catif; formerly un∣der the name of Euphrates, now under that of Tigris, or rather under that of Chat, which is called the Arabick River. The Countrey, which they Water; is so beautiful, and so fertil, that several place therein the Terrestrial Para∣dice. There are hardly any Stone Bridges upon the Tigris; and by reason of its inun∣dations,
they commonly make their Bridges of Boats. Four great Provinces are in this Turkey Natolia, Turcomania, Dierbech, and Souria. Natolia, formerly Asia Minor, is a Peninsu∣la much more long than broad, between the Black Sea, the Archipelago, the Mediterranean, and the River of Euphrates. The ancient Greeks sent thither several Colonies: Cyrus the Great thought his Empire would not be considerable, unless he had Asia Minor. Mighty Battails have often been fought for the preserving this Province, and for the Conquering it. There are reckoned four Beglerbeyats, or general Go∣vernments; that of Natolia at Chioutaye; Ca∣ramania at Cogni, Amasi at Tocat, and Aladuli at Maraz. The City of Burse, has been succes∣sively the Residence of the Kings of Bithynia, and of some Greek Emperours, and Turkish ones too, before they passed into Europe. The first Ottomans have their Tombs there: Soliman the First, would needs be buryed at the neck of the Dardanelles near Gallipoli: Burse yields little but to Conscantinople, for its Riches, and its multi∣tudes of people. Nice is known for the holding the first General Council, and for the Residence of the Greek Emperours, after that the French had taken Constantinople in the Year 1201. An∣goure is famous for the Victory of Tamberlane over Bajazet Emperour of the Turks, and before, for that of Pompey over Mithridates. Tocat is the Appennage of the Sultan-Mothers. The Coun∣trey round about it produces Saffron. Troy, Pergamus, Sardis, have been Royal Cities. Troy, famous by reason of its being taken by the Greeks after a Siege often Years, or rather
for Homer's immortal Banter, has its ruins mingled with the decays of some Modern works. It was called Dardania, upon the ac∣count of Dardanus its first King, Ilium, by rea∣son of its Castle of Priam. The City of Per∣gamos, is highly renowned for the riches of King Attalus, and the invention of Parch∣ment. Sardis, for the Residence of the anci∣ent Kings of Lydia. Dinobi upon the Black Sea, has Copper Mines in its Neighbourhood, which are perhaps the only ones in Asia. It has been the abode of Mithridates, the most formidable Enemy of the Romans; who not∣withstanding his defeat, had the thought of traversing Lacholcide, Soythia, and Illyria, to come and attack Italy. Chalcedon is the place, where was held the Fourth General Council. As its ancient Inhabitants were cracking, that their City was built before Bizantium; a Persian told them judiciously, that its Founders had been blind, to choose so incommodious a scituation, in respect of that of Bizantium. Avido one of the Castles, that are called Dardanelles upon the Hellespont, has seen the swimming Amours of Hero and Leander, as also the passage of that prodigious Army of Xerxes King of Persia, up∣on a Bridge of six hundred and seventy four Galleys. Fogia, Smyrna, Ephesus, Milazo, and Halicarnassus, are upon the Coast of the Archi∣pelago. Fogia, formerly Phocee, the Mother of Marscilles, is the first City that was taken in a form'd Siege, and the taking of it was Har∣pagus his Act, General under Cyrus the great. Smyrna, which is often called the Smirnes, and which contains above ninety thousand Souls, is in a fertile ground, and drives one of the
greatest Commerces in the Mediteranean-Sea: The English, French and Venetians, have their respective Consuls there. Alexander the great did in vain endeavour to ditch the Peninsula that is near it; this is said to be the only Enterprize which that Heroe was unable to bring about. Ephesus has had the Temple of Diana. Melazo, formerly Miletum, has establish'd several Colonies in di∣verse places, and held out a long while against the Kings of Lydia. It was near some neigh∣bouring Islands of the City of Miletum, that Julius Caesar was taken by Pyrates. Halicar∣nassus boasts of having had the Mausoleum built by Queen Artemisa, in memory of King Mauso∣lus, her Husband. Santhe prides it self in the brave resistance of its ancient Citizens, who suffered all the Extremities imaginable, in the sieges they held out, at several times, against Harpagus, Alexander the Great, and against Brutus. Sattalia, otherwise Antali, gives its Name to a neighbouring Gulph. Tarsus was the place of St. Paul's Education. Tiagna is the native Countrey of the learned Apollonius; Ama∣sia, that of Mithridates and Strabo. Zela, which is not far off, is renowned for the Victory of Julius Caesar, over Pharnaces. Trebizond has been the capital City of an Empire of short continuance: This Empire having been esta∣blished by Isaac Comnone, who having retir'd from Constantinople, was destroyed by Mahomet the Second, Emperour of the Turks; the same who rendred himself Master of the Empire of the Greeks. Laiazza is near the passage of Ci∣licia, where several Battels have been fought. The modern History sets down that of the Sul∣tan of Aegypt against Bajazet the Second,
Emperour of the Turks, wherein the latter was defeated: Alexander the Great, gained here a memorable Victory, over Darius, in person. Ventidius Bassus, the Roman, vanquished the Parthians here; and the Emperour Severus dis∣comfited Pescenninus Niger, his Rival to the Empire. Near this Place we are shown the an∣cient City of Anchialus, which is said to have been built in a day by Sardanapalus: Perhaps the Workmen of that Age were as dexterous as the modern Muscovites, who in the Market sell Houses whole, and ready made to be set up. Amongst the Rivers of Asia Minor, Thermodoon, now Pormon, has had the Amazons in its neigh∣bourhood. Lalli serv'd for bounds to the Do∣minions of Cirus and Croesus; Granique towards the Hellespont, has been witness of the first Vi∣ctory of Alexander the Great over the Persians; Pactolus, near Sardis, has been famous for its golden Sand, which gave occasion to the great Riches of the Kings of Lydia: the Meander for its fine Swans, and its Sinuosities. The Cidne, near Tarsus, has its Waters so cold, that they killed the Emperour Barbarossa, who bathed himself therein: Alexander the Great, having done the like, was abandoned by most of his Physicians, and was only cured by the Remedy of Philip, who ordered a Potion pretty like the modern Emetic Wine. The most renowned Mountains of Asia Minor, are Taurus, Ida, and Micale. Taurus divides all Asia into two parts, as we have already said. It is the most famous in the World for its length, for its heighth, and its branches, Caucasus and Imaus are parts of it. Ida, near Troy, is famous for the judg∣ment of Paris; Micale, near Ephesus, for the
Sea Engagement, which the Greeks won over the Persians, the same day that these were van∣quish'd at Platees in Boeotia. Turcomania is the Countrey of the Armenians, whose Tongue and Religion are received in most places of the Levant. Those People, who had their peculiar Kings before that the Turks subdued them, pretend, that they cannot be made Slaves, by reason of a Priviledge, which their Predecessours obtain'd from Mahomet, when that they assisted him to his establishment. This consideration has made most of the Merchants of Turkey, go under the name of Armenians. There are still at this day, in Armonia, Curdes, who defend their Liberty. The King of Persia has also some part of it. He is in possession of Erevan, which has in its neighbourhood the three Churches, the abode of the Patriarch of the Armenians. The Persians draw from thence a considerable Tribute, for the passage of the Caravans: For the better subjecting to them∣selves, what they stand possess'd of, they have carried thence whole Colonies, who inhabit the City of Giulfa, near Ispaham. Cha Abas used a very rigorous Policy towards these poor Wretches; he took away their Wives, to give them to Mahometans of his Kingdom, and gave them the Wives of those Mahometans. 'Tis held to be upon the Mountains of Armenia, and chiefly upon Ararat, that the Ark of Noah rested, and there we place the terrestrial Para∣dice: Not improbably it is the middle and the highest place of the World: Sem, Ham, and Japhet, set down there the bounds of their Di∣vidend; there is to be seen the Sources of four famous Rivers, the Euphrates, Tigris, Faze,
and Arais. The three first have Names con∣formable to those mentioned in Holy Writ. Arais may well be the Gehun, since Gehun in the Chaldaick Tongue, signifies a River; and Aras∣ses in Persian, signifies the same thing; Besides, the Etopian people are placed near its Bed. This Arais joyns to Kur, before it falls into the Caspian-Sea: it is the only River of the Coun∣trey, that bears Boats, and the Araxes of the Ancients, which has served for bounds to the Kingdoms of Media, and Armenia, where Justin has set down the Defeat of Cyrus the Great, by Tomiris, Queen of the Sci∣thians. Diarbech is the Assyria, where the Romans have often fought unhappily against the Par∣thians, and where the Turks and Persians have their greatest Disputes. Two Cities now ruin'd, have been very considerable there, Ni∣niveh, and Babilon. Niniveh, opposite to and on the East of Mosul and beyond the Euphrates, was the abode of the Kings of Assyria, with twenty four of our Leagues in compass: The voluntary Death of Sardanapalus, and the re∣pentance of its Inhabitants, have made it the labour of History. Babilon, a small days jour∣ney from Bagdad, which is upon the Tigris, has nothing more than ruins in a place called Fe∣lougia. In the neighbourhood is shown the place where was the Tower of Babel, famous for the confusion of Tongues. This Babilon was built by Nimrod, who is said to be the same with Belus; Queen Semiramis, as also Nebuchad∣nezzar, did much augment it: This Princess having caused Walls to be raised there, which have made it pass for one of the Seven Won∣ders
of the World, and its fine Gardens in Terrace have given admiration to several persons. As it hath been the object of the greatest Conquerours of the East, it has been taken by Cirus, by Darius, by Alexander the Great, who died there at his return from his Conquests, and by Seleucus. The Children of Israel were there in captivity, for the space of seventy years: the Countrey round about produces two sorts of Pitch, the one dry, which is made use of in Buildings, the other liquid and very suceptible of fire, having this particular, of not being to be extinguish'd, but with Dirt, Vinegar, Alom, and Glew. The Power and Riches of Babilon have been so great, that it alone contributed more to King Cirus, than did the third part of his Dominions. After Babilon, Seleucia has been considerable in Assiria, Ctesi∣phon, Vologe-socerta, and lastly, Bagdad, which is in the place of Ctesiphon. Bagdad, which some call Baldac, and which is vulgarly called Babilon, is not only resorted to by Merchants of several Nations, but also by Mahometans, who go thither from all parts of Asia, to visit, in its neighbourhood, the Sepulchres of Omar, Ali, and other Disciples of Mahomet. It was for a long while the Residence of the Caliphs: one of whom, named Ʋlit, has had the glory of being Master of the greatest Monarchy that has ever been in the World: It extended from the most Western parts of Barbary, to the Indus. 'Tis observ'd of another Caliph, of this same City, that he left, at his death, eight Sons, eight Daughters, eight Millions of Gold, eight thousand Slaves, and his Dominions aug∣mented by eight Kingdoms. In the Year 1638,
when the Grand Seignior, Amurath the Fourth recover'd this strong and important City of Bagdad from the Persians; he caus'd three Men of each Company of his Army to be cast into the Ditch, and upon them a number of Faggots, and Sacks of Wool, for the making the Assault with the more facility. Kufa is a Town, which the Inhabitants have in peculiar veneration, by reason of the Sepulcher of Ali. They keep there a Horse always ready to mount him, whom they say is to come and convert the whole World to their Law. Bassora is a Town near the mouth of the Tigris, called Chat by those of the Countrey. 'Tis spacious and pleasant, by reason of its Palm-Trees. By the means of its Harbour, it furnishes the Indies and Persia with Dates, which serve for Bread and Wine, to those who know how to prepare them. Its great Commerce of Horses, makes it often called by the Name of Mer-El-Catif. They were used to Voyage, upon this Sea or Gulph, along the shoar, and with the lead in hand. The Barks that are made use of there, are sewed with little Cords of Coco; insomuch, that not any Nails are to be perceived in 'em. Some few years ago, Bassora belong'd to Ali Bashaw, who called himself King of it, and who had this state from Father to Son, and was the Dominus fac-totum, paying only a small tribute to the Grand Seignior, who did not press him, for fear he should take the Persians side. Souria is divided into Souria, Phoenicia, and the Holy Land. Souria proper to the City of Aleppo, which is reckoned for the best of all the Levant, and contains above two hundred and
fifty thousand Persons. It is really the third of the Ottoman Empire, if we consider the re∣sort thither of the Caravans, the Rendezvouz of the Turkish Armies in the Wars of Persia, and all its other advantages. The Jewels, Spi∣ces, Silks, and other precious Commodities, arrive here from the East by Sea, and by Land: They send them afterwards into Barbary, by means of the Port of Alexandretta, upon the Mediterranean Sea. They there make use of Camels, for the going to Bir, where they might have the conveniency of the Euphrates, as far as the Neighbourhood of Bagdad; but several Mills there hinder the Navigation. It's fine to see upon that River, the Peasants going down the stream upon Goats-skins, which they fill with Wind, and let out again, when they have made use of them. Antioch which, for excellency, has the Denomination of Great, was the abode of some Roman Emperours, and the Cradle of Christianity, St. Paul having established here the first Patriarchate of the Church. It has had formerly a Suburb called Daphne, which passed for one of the most deli∣cious places in the World. Damas, the Metro∣polis of Phoenicia, sends us sweet smelling Wa∣ters, Wines, pleasurable Fruits, Prunes, Rai∣sins, Cutlasses, Sword Blades; and other works, which keep the Name of it. They say, that after the Battel of Issus, Alexander the Great, found in Damascus, two hundred thou∣sand six hundred Talents of Coined Money. This City is in so fertile, and so agreeable a sci∣tuation, that some have called it the Paradice of the World. Sayd (otherwise Sidon) has a French Consul, for Trade. Sur, or Sour, from
whence came the Name of Souria, is the ancient Tyre; renowned for its fine Scarlet, for its good Mariners; for its Colonies; and for the Siege of seven Months, which it held out against Alexander the Great, before he could take it. In its Neighbourhood, is to be seen the Castle of Tygade, the ancient obode of Old de la Mon∣tagne, Prince of the Assassins, who executed blindly all the Orders of their Sovereign. Saint John de Aere, otherwise Ptolemaida, formerly the Residence of the Knights of St. John of Je∣rusalem, is accompanied with a Sea-Haven. Mount Libanus, is remarkable for its height, for its fertility, for the ancient Cedars, which have been found there, since the Creation of the World. It has full sixty Leagues in compass, and forty Villages of the Maronites. Those people who are Catholicks, receive their Name from the Monastery of Saint-Maron: They are in possession of four hundred Villages, and can bring fifteen thousand Men in Arms. Canobin is the Residence of their Patriarch, who bears the Title of that of Antioch. Besides the Ma∣ronites in this Mount Libanus, are Emirs, or Prin∣ces, and the Nations of the Druses, Nassarians, Kelbins, who maintain there their liberty. The Holy Land, where the principal Myste∣ries of our Salvation were wrought; is (as it were) in the midst of our Continent. It was first of all named the Land of Canaan, the Land of the Promise, the Land of the Hebrews, the Land of Israelites; and afterwards Judea, Palestine; and finally the Holy Land; by reason of the Birth, and Death of the Saviour of the World, and in consideration of the abode of the Prophets. Its principal and first Divisions
have been into eleven people, who bore the Names of the Children of Canaan; into fifty two Kingdoms, and five Satrapies: into twelve Tribes, who went under the Names of the Children of Jacob. 'Tis however to be observ∣ed, that Manasses, and Ephraim, are the Names of the Children of Joseph, who died before the Division; and that the Tribes, who had the Lands on the East of Jordan, had them upon condition of engaging first in the most dange∣rous Actions. The other Divisions of the Ho∣ly Land, have been into twelve Governments under Solomon: Into two Kingdoms, Israel and Judah: Into six Provinces, after the Captivity of Babylon: Into three Roman Provinces: Into five Tribunals or Audiences, by Gabinius: And lastly, Into three Ecclesiastical Provinces. The Holy-Land has hardly, at present, any place of Remark; and the Turks only preserve the Towns they have there, by reason of the Mo∣ney which they exact from the Pilgrims. It had formerly Cities so rich, so powerful, and in such great numbers, that no Countrey in the World was there that could be compared to't, for that reason: there having been reckoned above five hundred and seventy. Its extent from the South to the North, is about seventy Leagues; Its breadth thirty, somewhere more, somewhere less, according as it is bounded, either by the Mountains of Arabia, or by Jordan. What is there call'd the Desart, is so stiled, in that it has not all the fertility, that is found in the Countreys which are near it. Its modern Division is into three Principalities, Sayd, Cossaria, and Gaza. Two Governments are under the Bashaw of Damascus, Jerusalem,
and Naplouse. Jerusalem, tho' fallen from its ancient Lustre, still preserves those places, which Jesus Christ was pleas'd to honour with his presence. It has been famous for the big∣ness, beauty, and riches of its Temple; for its Kings; for its High-Priests; and for other particularities. It was ruined by Nebuchad∣nezzar, by Vespasian, and Titus; These two last saw the Death of Eleven hundred thousand Persons. There are eight Nations of Christi∣ans, who are rank'd in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. The Roman Catholicks, the Maro∣nites; the Greeks, the Armenians, the Syrians, or Jacobites, the Copties, or Aegyptians, and the Georgians. One of the Gates of the City, called the Eye of a Needle, has given occasion to the Proverb, that a Camel may as soon pass through the Eye of a Needle, as a Rich man enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Nazareth is the place, where the Saviour of the World was conceived; Bethlem that where he was born. There are an infinite number of rare things to be remark'd upon these Cities of the Holy Land: The misfortune is, that they are hard∣ly any longer to be known. Some Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, be∣long to the Turks, whereof that of Cyprus is the greatest; It has the Title of a Kingdom, and formerly contained nine. Nicosia is the Ca∣pital City of the Island. Famagusta the Prin∣cipal Sea-Port. This Famagusta was the last place, which the Venetians defended there against the Turks, who took it at last after a Siege of seventy dayes, and above a hundred and forty thousand Shot made against the Town. The Grotto of the seven Sleepers, is near
the City of Baffo. In an Abbey near Limisso, they keep Cats, brought up to the hunting of Serpents, after which they return back thither at the ringing of a Bell. The Isle of Rhodes is famous for the ancient abode of the Knights of the same Name, who were constrained to yield it to the Turk in the Year 1522: For the Colos∣sus of the Sun, which was so prodigious, that few persons could embrace the thumb of it: Great Ships passed easily with full Sails be∣tween its Leggs: When the Sarazens caused the Copper of it to be carried into Aegypt, they found it to load above nine hundred Camels. The Isles of Chio, and Metilin, are in the Ar∣chipelago. Chio one of the most fertile and most delicious in the World, produces excellent Fruits, Malmsy Wine, and particularly Ma∣stick. It has the High and Low Town, and in both are reckoned above twenty thousand Mor∣tals: They are almost all Christians, Greeks, and Latins; and there is not a place under the Turk, where the Christians have more freedom. Metelin affords excellent Wines: And the Nightingales are said to sing more melodiously there, than elsewhere. Its ancient Inhabitants have had the reputation of being very expert Mariners. In the last Age, the famous Barbe∣rossa, who is said to have been a Native of this Island, rendred himself formidable to all Chri∣stendom. Patmos, or Palmosa, is known for the Exile, and the Grotto of St. John the Evan∣gelist. The Isle of Lango, under the Name of Cos, has passed for the native Countrey of Hippocrates, and Appelles. The enviers of Hip∣pocrates, attribute all his knowledge to Medici∣nal Receipts, which were brought into the
Temple of Aesculapius. Apelles observ'd pro∣portion in his Pictures, whereas Zeuxis made them greater than Nature for the giving them Majesty. The Inhabitants of Lango, are said to have found out the first use of Silk-Worms. Not far from thence, there is a little Island called Caloiero, which is almost impregnable: It is only a steep Rock, where the Monks, and those who inhabit it, draw up their Boats after them with Ropes.
Georgia. UNder the Name of Georgia, we bring Min∣grelia, Gurgistan, Zuiria, and Circassia. Provinces where the ancient Romans were not able to establish their Empire, by reason of the sharpness of the Mountains, known by the An∣cients under the Name of Caucasus, celebrated in the fable of Prometheus. All these Provinces lie between the Black and Caspian Seas, which are thought to communicate with one another, because they have Fish of the same kinds, and that those Territories, which lie between both, seem to have a superficies of but little depth, principally, when they go on Horse-back there. From thence they transport Silk, Stuffs, Wax, Honey: Little Money is made use of, most of the Georgians being so poor, that they often sell their Children to have wherewith to subsist on. An Inhabitant has been known there to exchange his Mother for a Turkish Horse, that was to his mind. There are in Georgia several Christians, and some Mahometans. The true Natives have a peculiar tongue. Several a∣mongst them are free, some have their Kings, others acknowledge either the Turk, or the Persian, according to the necessity of their af∣fairs. Those who obey the Turk, have great Priviledges in his Dominions; they pay him but a very inconsiderable Tribute, may enter armed and with displayed Ensigns into Jerusalem. Teflis has a particular King, who owns Allegi∣giance
to him of Persia. Derbent often disputed by the Turks, and the Persians, is in the Pas∣sage that is called the Port of Iron, these are the Remnants of the Caspian Ports, that are seen upon Mount Barmach, with some Springs of Medicinal Oyl. The Tartars of Dagestan, who are near it, are commanded by the Schem∣kal, a Prince, whose Dignity depends on fate; when he is dead, those who pretend to have his Place, assemble around, and a Priest cafts a Golden Apple in the midst of them, which makes him Prince it touches; for they don't scramble for Sovereignty. Mingrelia, otherwise Imereti, and Basciaci∣uch, lies near the Black Sea, at the place where that Sea receives the Faze, which contrary to other Rivers, has fresh waters above, and salt below. In the Countrey about Faze, Pheasants were first of all had. There are caught several other sorts of Birds, especially Crows, and Jackdaws. In the Year 1642, those Birds eat a prodigious quantity of Herrings, which the Sea had cast upon the Coast; to the height of a foot and half. There are White Bears, which prove that those Creatures form a particular sort of Bears. Mingrelia upon the Eastern part of the Black Sea, is the ancient Colches, fa∣mous for the Amour of Jason and Medea, and the coming thither of the Argonautes, to sharpe the Golden Fleece. This Fleece, when the Me∣taphor is shorn off, is thought by the wise to have consisted in the Mines of Gold, or else in the Commerce of Furs or Skins, which turn∣ed to great profit. Appian says, they were Skins, that remain'd guilt, when the Peasants
made use of them to stop the Golden Sand, which they took in the Rivers, and which they cast against those Fleeces. There are still at this day Mines of Gold and Silver; but the In∣habitants of the Countrey keep them very se∣cret, and moreover endeavour to show the En∣voys of the Turks, that the Countrey is very poor. Iron is there in so great abundance, that the most part of Turkey is furnished thence with that Metal. Sena, Scammony, black Helle∣bore, and other Herbs and Plants grow there; but the natural Inhabitants of the Countrey are so ignorant of Simples, and the art of Phy∣sick, that a Confection of Wormwood having been prescribed some time since by an European, for the Cure of a Princess, a Mingrelian caused the Powder of a Stone of that Name, to be dis∣solved in Water. These Natives call them∣selves Odischi, or Guriel, from the Name of their Prince, and pay some Tribute to the Turk, They have amongst them several Bi∣shops, and Ecclesiasticks, who make no scruple of following their Prince to the War, arm'd with a Head-piece, and a Cimiter on their sides, as well as several Bishops of the Empire of Ger∣many. What is particularly Imereti, is free, the Town of Cotatis, formerly Cotyaeum, was the Countrey of Aetes, farther of Medea. In the Year 1578, Amurath the Grand Seignior, had caused a Fort to be made in the Island, which is in the Mouth of the Faze: Since that, this Fort has been demolished by the Inhabitants of the Countrey. There was in Odischi, Savatopo∣li, now ruined by the Floods, and formerly, as History says, frequented by above three
hundred Nations of several Tongues, upon the account of its Commerce of Wool and Skins. There are above fifty Palaces seen in Mingre∣lia, whereof the best is Zugdidi. Scalingia is the place of the Royal Sepulture. That which we call properly Guriel has the Towns of Var∣thiet, and Cultiche. Gurgistan, known by the Ancients by the Name of Iberia, is in the midst of the Moun∣tains, where is great plenty of Mulberry-Trees: There are three parts of it; Kacheti, towards the lower-end, with the City of Za∣gan: Carduel, towards the middle, with the City of Teflis: And Baratralu, towards the upper part, with the City of Cori, or Go∣rede. Zuiria was formerly called Albania, by rea∣son that its Children were born into the World with white Hair: It is temperate, because it has several Rivers, which empty themselves into the Caspian-Sea. The City of Tersis belongs to the great Duke of Moscovy. Circassia makes part of the Afiatick Sarinatia, in the midst of the Dom. Some will have it reach from Theman, near the Cimmerian Bospho∣rus, to Derbent, upon the Caspian Sea. It passes also under the Name of Comania. It has been the dwelling-place of the Amazons; and since that of the Mamalucks, who have been the Ma∣sters of Egypt. The Turks are said to come from one of its Countreys, called Tzurkia, which signifies Shepherd. The Circassians live much after the same manner as the Switzers; they preserve their Liberty in the Mountains, and Woods, amidst the Turks, Persians, Musco∣vites,
and Tartars. They choose those places of the Woods as are the strongest, and there they intrench themselves, for their security, against the incursions of the Tartarian Horse; One Circassian alone in the Woods, makes head against twenty Tartars. They turn now for the most part Mahometans, tho' they were generally Christians. Robbery is not forbidden amongst them. They trade in Slaves, Skins, Furrs, and Wax; they till their Land, and are said to receive strangers after a civil manner. They are warlike, very ingenious, and as there is not in the World a more comely and handsome People, the Slaves of that Nation are in very great esteem. The Turks have there the City of Azof, otherwise Azac, at the disemboguing of the Dom into the Palus Meotis: It is a trading Town, and one of the most important of all the Ottoman Empire, by reason of its sci∣tuation; It preserves the Alliance of the lesser Tartary, and puts a stop to the Designs of the great Duke of Muscovy in those parts. The Abassan People, or Abcasses, are formidable to their neighbours. They have the best Falcons in the East. Hunting and Hawking are their principal Exercises.
Arabia. THe Arabians have been first of all called Ismaelites, from Ismael, and afterwards Saracens: some derive this last Name from Saara, which signifies Desart; others from Sarake, which imports Pilfering and Robbing: those, who make the Etymology come from Sarah Abraham's Wife, say, that these Sara∣cens, who were begun to be called Hagarens, chose rather to go under the Name of the Mi∣stress, than that of the Maid. The Arabians, who inhabit Towns and Cities, are known un∣der the Name of Moors: those in the Desarts, are divided into Tribes, and each Tribe into Families, which have each a peculiar Cheique, under the Cheique-General of the Tribe, called Sceikel-Kebir, that is to say, the Grand Cheique. These vagabond Arabians boast themselves to be the most noble People in the World; where∣fore they do not ally themselves with any other Nations, than their own. They could never be subdued, either by the Egyptians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, or Turks. They have esta∣blish'd themselves in several parts of Africa, where they possess great Dominions. They thus stray and wander for the better finding wherewith to feed their Cattel, and to exempt themselves from the oppression of the Turks. The Grand Seignior's Bashaws, who are neigh∣bours to 'em, and the Caravans, who pass through their Territories, give some Money to the
Grand Cheiques, that they may not be mo∣lested. Under Ʋlit, one of the Caliphs or Ara∣bian Princes, their Empire extended in aright line from Messa, upon the Atlantick-Sea, to the River Indus; this length was the bigness of all Persia, greater than the Roman Empire. The Arabick Tongue is receiv'd in the greatest part of Asia, because that the Alcoran, the Bible of Mahometism, was first of all written in that Lan∣guage. The continual abode which the Ara∣bians make in the open field, has made them the best acquainted with Astrology and Physick. The Beduins, and Bengebres, who are the People the most known, are so inclin'd to Robbery, that they make their principal Revenue consist in stealing from Travellers; and say, that they have right to repeat the legitimas of their Pre∣decessour Ismael, upon the Descendants of Isaac. They say also, that their Prophet Mahomet, has particularly left and recommended to 'em, the figure of the hand: for which reason other Nations come only among 'em in Caravans; that is to say, in great companies. Their dexteri∣ty is wonderful in managing a Horse, a Bow, and a Zagay, which is a Half-Pike: thirty Turks with Muskets, make a difficulty of attack∣ing ten of these Arabians arm'd after their usual manner. Their Riches consist in Flocks, Herds, and Horses, which are capable of going great Journeys. They set so great a value upon them, that they keep Registers of their Race, which are from time to time approv'd of by the Judges. Horses of the most noble, and com∣monly Mares, are sometimes sold for three or four thousand Piasters. The Arabians eat their
Meals crouching upon their Heels, whereas the Turks eat upon Cushions cross-legg'd: the oldest among 'em wear the finest Cloaths, and the gaudiest Colours. Their Predecessours prohibited Buildings, and the tilling of Lands; for that those who stood possess'd of great stocks, if they meant to enjoy 'em, were easily constrain'd to obey them, who aim'd at subdu∣ing 'em. They made also that Member of the Noble Race, Successour of the Kingdom, who came first into the World, after the proclaim∣ing of the King. In the comparison of the Manners and Maximes of the Levantine Nations, with those of Europe, the Arabians are made to resemble the Italians; the Persians, the French; the Turks, the Spaniards. Arabia in general, is subject to such great heats, that they are constrain'd to keep the Markets by night. There is a great number of Mountains, and few Rivers. It is divided into three parts, Petraea, Deserta, and Foelix: the two former is almost wholly in the possession of the Turks; Arabia Foelix has several petty Sove∣reigns. Arabia Petraea was inhabited by the Madia∣nites, Moabites, Amalekites, and Idumeans; Nations of whom mention is often made in the Holy Oracles. Its Inhabitants pay Tribute to the Bashaw of Cairo. Crac, otherwise Mon∣treal, formerly call'd Petra, has communicated to it its Name: Busseret is the Countrey of Phi∣lip the Roman Emperour, who is said to have embrac'd Christianity. Tor, upon the Red-Sea, is a Port defended by a four-square Castle. There are in the places adjacent found petrified
Mushrooms, white Corral, Chagrin, small Oysters, and sometimes Sea-men, or such people as are bred and live in the Sea. 'Tis said, the Red-Sea is but three Leagues broad in that place, and that the Children of Israel pass'd it over there dry-shod, when they came out of Aegypt; that it was one of the Ports, from whence Solomon sent his Fleets into Ophir, to fetch Gold. Pegs of Wood are put into the Ships of the Places, that belong to this Sea, because little Iron is to be found there. Those, who have a mind to impose, Talk as that, if they made use of Iron Nails, instead of Pegs, the Ships would be attacked and stopp'd by the Loadstone, that is found in the neighbouring Mountains. Mount Oreb is famous in the Holy Writ, for the burning Bush wherein God ap∣pear'd to Moses. Sinai is illustrious for the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, which this Prophet receiv'd: It is extraordinary high, and nevertheless the Mount St. Catherine, which is near it, is much higher. Arabia Deserta is a Countrey, where they often want good Water; tho' there be some Wells, the Water, for the most part, is hardly worth any thing. Ana, upon the Euphrates, has an Arabian Emir. There is a King in this Arabia, who has a moving and portative City, which consists in Tents, and he causes it to be carried whither he pleaseth. He takes this course, to avoid being surpriz'd by the Turks. Sumiscasac is esteem'd the ancient Saba, from whence departed the three Kings, (or rather wise Men) to come and adore the Saviour of the World in Bethlehem.
Arabia Faelix goes under that Name, as being a good Countrey. It has Horses very much esteem'd, Manna, Cinnamon, Myrrh, Balm, Benjamin, Incense, and other Perfumes. There is so great a quantity of Incense, that from the Port of Dolfar, the Inhabitants furnish the principal parts of the World. Aden is a City of great trade, in a small Peninsula, at the foot of a Mountain, with two Castles towards the North, and a small Fortress at the entrance of the Harbour. The Portugals, at the time of their establishment in the East Indies, had Or∣ders to make themselves Masters of Aden, Or∣mus, and Malaca, by reason of their important situations. The Turks prevented them at Aden, whose King they caused to be hang'd on the Mast of their Captain's Galley. Since that time, there have been some Revolutions, those of the Countrey having dispossess'd the Turks. Ormus and Malaca have been in the power of the Por∣tuguese: the Persians have taken from them Or∣mus, by the help of the English; and the Hollan∣ders, Malaca, Mecha and Medina are famous for the Pilgrimages of the Mahometans, who are in great esteem after such a Journey: they go par∣ticularly to Mecha, to pay their devotion to Kiaabee, the four-square House, which they call the House of God, as having been built by Abraham. This City, about as big as York, as containing about six thousand Houses, is a days journey distant from the Red-Sea; the place of the Birth of Mahomet, whose body was, as some Authors say, transferred to Me∣dina, when Albaquerque, the Portuguese, would have surpriz'd the Port of Ziden, otherwise
called Gidde, with design to go with Cavalry, and fetch away that Mahometan Relick. The Countrey about Mecha, produces in abundance that sort of Berry, which serves to make the Drink, called Coffee, so much us'd in the Levant, by reason of its virtue, to fortifie the Stomach, and facilitate Digestion. Medina, three days journey from the Red-Sea, is the place where that pretended Prophet lyes buryed. Endea∣vours have been used to make his Tomb pass for a Wonder, as if it was suspended in the Air, by the means of the Load-stone; this is not only found to be a fallacy, but Anti∣quity shews us such like things: Democritus, the Athenian, by order of Ptolomey, King of Aegypt, undertook to make the Statue of Ar∣sinoe all of Iron, for to dispose it after the like manner; and in the Temple of Serapis in Alex∣andria; they formerly hung up, the same way, a Sun made of a very delicate Iron. The Prince of Mecha, called Sultan Scherif, is one of the most Potent of all Arabia: His most usual Residence is in Almacharana: The Grand Seig∣nior makes him often Presents, and causes part of the Revenue of Aegypt to be given him, by reason that he's of the Race of Mahomet; and to oblige him to defend the Turkish Pilgrims. The Arabians call Scherifs, the Relations of Mahomet, the Turks call them Emirs. Fartach, Caxem, Gubel-haman, Alibinali, Amanzirifdin, Masfa, Mascalat; Jemen, are as many Sultanies, or small Kingdoms in Arabia-Felix. Mascate formerly belonging to the Portugals, has for a long while carried on the trade from the Indies, to the Mecha, by the means of the Cities El-Catif
and Lehsa. Sohar in the Eastern part drove the Commerce, which has since been to Ormus, and to Gombru. Mocha upon the Red Sea, is an open Town with a small Castle. By reason of the goodness of its Haven, there re∣sort thither Ships from all parts of the East-Indies with Merchandizes, to take in those of Europe, which are in like manner brought thi∣ther. There are Jews, Persians, Armenians, Indians, Banians. It is the place, where the Pilgrims disembark, who go from the Indies to Mecha. 'Tis much augmented, since the Ships which were bound from Sues to Aden, unload there, for the avoiding the dangerous Passages of the Streight of Bebel-Mandel. Persia. PErsia bears the Name of one of its ancient Provinces, that is now called Fars. It's one of the most considerable Kingdoms of Asia, by reason of the Riches of its principal Towns, and the Union of its Forces; it is more fertil and populous than Turkey; its Inhabitants the most civil, and the best polished of all the Ma∣hometans. There is more politickness, and more refined Wits than in Turkey. They love good order, and justice, and favour Strangers. Its Rivers, which have this particular of ha∣ving
neither Pike nor Eel, are not Navigable: They commonly go under the Name either of their Cities, or their Colours: They furnish the conveniency for the making of Channels, for the watering the Lands; they become smal∣ler the nearer they come to the Sea, and some∣times are entirely dryed up by the Diversions, that are made of them. The Neighbourhood of the Sea of Bassera, and that of the Caspian, is more fertil, and more temperate, than the Inland Countreys which have Desarts, and Mountains, where it seldom rains, for which cause the Fruit-trees receive no Water but at the Foot, and Root. This Kingdom is one of the most Ancient Monarchies of the World; the Assyrians, Medes, Persians, and Parthians, have begun their Empires here. The Policy of this Kingdom is in great esteem, the Govern∣ment easie, supportable to the Persians, and to Strangers. There is no talk of Robbers; the Rights of Hospitality are so regularly observ'd, that the King will have all Foreigners to be re∣puted as his Guests. The Name of Scha, is be∣stow'd on the Kings of Persia; the Vulgar at∣tribute to them that of Sophi; which is a pro∣per Name. They were formerly call'd Great Kings, and Kings of kings; principally when they had Vanquished the Grecians. The Name of Sultan, which in Turkey signifies King; in Persia, only signifies the Governour of a Town. The Persians have alwayes had their Sovereign in great estimation: Still at this day they think to confirm a thing much more strongly by the name of their King, than by that of God; perhaps after the Mode of those of Achem in the
Isle of Sumatra, who say, that God is afar off, and the King near at hand. The Riches of the ancient Persian Kings have been immense, as may be seen by the Treasures, which Alexander the Great found in the Coffers of Darius. Scha-Sefi, one of the late Monarchs, had for com∣mon service 7200 Marks in Vessels of Gold. Herbert says, that in his time, there has been seen in Asharat, for the service of Scha-Abbas, Vessels of Gold and others, to the value of 260 Millions of Livers. The Persians are well proportion'd: have little experience in the Art of Navigation, tho' they be near the Sea. When the Portugals would have drove them from Ormus, they had recourse to the Ships of the English. Their Women are in great esteem, through all Asia, for their Beauty; their Horses for their agility, their Camels for strength. In the Countrey they have a saying, Bread of Yesde-Kast, Wine of Schiras, Women of Yesde. Their Religion is Mahometan, of the Sect of Hali; the King allows, that the Carmelites, the Augustins, the Capuchins, the Jesuits, have their Houses and Churches in this capital City Ispahan, where the Superiours of those Houses perform the Function of Ambassadours for Christian Princes of the Roman Communion. The Persian Tongue is so sweet and soft, that it is in little use, but amongst the Women and Poets; the King, and Persons of Condition, commonly make use of the Turkish Language. Persia is as a Go-between to the Turks and Europeans, for the Commerce of the Indies. It furnishes the finest Silk-stuffs, and the best Tapestries that are seen, Cloaths of Gold, Bezoar, Manna, Rhubarb, Rose-Water,
Turquoises, which are taken at the Mountain of Phirouskou, four Leagues from Meschet, a City renowned for the Pilgrimages of the Mahometans of Persia. The Silk of Cho∣rasan is very fine, that of Kilan somewhat courser. There are Fields of Salt, some Mines of Copper, Iron, and Steel in Chorasan, of Lead in Kirman: Gold and Silver is imported from abroad, as well as Wood. The greatest Trade is droven to Bagdad, for Turkey; to Gombru, for the Indies. The Kings of Persia do allow of Commerce upon their Coasts, but suffer not any Fortresses to be made there: the Mogul, the Emperour of China, and other Ea∣stern Kings, take the same course in their Do∣minions. They have powerful Neighbours of the Turk and the Mogul. The strength of their State consists principally in its situation, there being high Mountains and great Desarts in its neighbourhood. Ismael Sophi had three hun∣dred thousand Men in Arms, against Selim, Em∣perour of the Turks; the ancient Kings had sometimes Armies of seven or eight hundred thousand Men. The usual Armies now-a-days are of fifty or sixty thousand Horse, besides thirty thousand, that are kept upon the Fron∣tiers: this number would be much greater, if we reckon'd all those who go to the Army. The Persians wear the Red Turbant, wherefore they are called Keselbas: the Tartars of Giagatay wear it green; that of the Turks is white, and that of the Grecians blew. Their Soldiers are of four sorts, Fuzeliers, Slaves, Keselbas, Life∣guard-men, all Troopers. There is a great an∣tipathy between the Persians and Turks: Those who observe that antipathy amongst the Na∣tions
of the World, say, that it is between the Chineses and Japoneses, betwixt the Arme∣nians and Nestorians, between the Arabians and Abyssins, between the French and Spaniards, be∣twixt the Italians and Greeks, between the Ger∣mans and Polanders, between the Danes and Swedes, between the Muscovites and Tartars, between the English and Scotch, between the Irish and Welch, betwixt the Hurons and Iroquins Nations of Canada. Here follows the enumeration of the Pro∣vinces of Persia, according to the most receiv'd Relations, Arak, Fars, Chusistan, Adherbeit∣zan, Iran or Karabach, Schirwan, Kilan, Te∣berestan or Mesanderan, Chorasan, Sablestan, Sirestan, Kirman, Tzisire, and Diarbeck. These two last are between the Euphrates, and Tigris, and belong to the Turk. The Governours are called Chans or Cans, sometimes Sultans. The City of Ispaham, the abode of the King of Persia, is one of the greatest of all Asia, compos'd of four Cities; it is likewise one of the finest, if we consider its stately Palaces, delicious Gardens, spacious Market-place, rich Bazars, Exchanges or publick places, which make the Inhabitants call it the half of the World. The Arabians, who have no P in their Alphabet, call it Isfaham. There is a remarkable Tower upon the King's Stables, all built with Goats heads, and other wild Animals, which were taken in one Royal Match of Hunt∣ing. Caswin, or Casbin, is esteemed the an∣cient Ecbatana, where the King of Media dwelt, where Parmenio was killed, and Ephestion died, whose Funerals cost above twelve thousand Talents; that is, twelve thousand times six
hundred Crowns. Schiras is near the Ruins of the ancient Persepolis, which was burnt by order of Alexander the Great, at the end of a Feast; It has still full ten thousand Houses: a Proverb of the Countrey goes thus, That if Schiras, was Schiras, that is to say, what it was for∣merly, Grand Cairo would pass but for its Suburbs. The Ruins of this Persepolis are called Chilminar, i. e. Forty Columns; which seem to be the remains of the Palace of Cyrus the Great, the most beautiful of all the East. The Neigh∣bours of those Ruins endeavour to destroy 'em entirely to free themselves from the importu∣nities of strangers, who go to see them upon that account. What remains of 'em, shews a great antiquity of habits for Personages, and an extraordinary magnificence in the stones of the building. Those who have seen them say, that they surpass the Antiquities of Rome, and the Wonders of Aegypt. The abode of Schiras is so agreeable, that Mahomet, according to what the Persians say, would not go thither, for fear of being charm'd with the Beauty of the La∣dies: and that if he had tasted the delights of that Town, he would have made it his request to God, never to have died▪ The Government of Schiras, is the most considerable of all Persia; it affords excellent Wines, and that Mummy, or Counter-poyson, which serves for Medica∣ment to all manner of Wounds. Susa was the Court of Ahasucrus, and some other Kings. Alexander the Great married Statira there; He gave ten thousand Talents for the acquitting the Debts of those, who had a mind to return into Greece, and receiv'd there thirty thousand young Men of Recruits for his Army. This is
also the place where the fair Esther obtain'd fa∣vour for the Jews, and where Mordecai was put into the place of Haman, who was hanged after that he would have caus'd Mordecai to have undergone his own Fate. The Palace of Susa, built by Darius, is said to have been en∣rich'd by Memnon, with the Spoils of the great Thebes in Aegypt; and 'tis famed, that the stones were cemented with Gold. After Persepolis, it is reckoned amongst the magnificent Works of the Kings of Persia, as well as the delicious Gardens of Cyrus the younger in Lydia. Congue, Bender Congo, is a City upon the Gulph of Bas∣sora, much like that of Thoulon in Provence: 'Tis much augmented, since the ruine of Ormus, as well as Gombru; It has a Demesne, which the Persians and the Portugals have the Revenue of by halves. Lar communicates its Name to a sort of silver Money that is coin'd there; five of those Larins make but one Piaster: the City has full four thousand Houses, and a small Cittadel. Some believe it the ancient Passa∣garde, where the grand Cyrus, having over∣come Astiages, transferred the Empire of the Medes to the Persians. Calanus, the Indian Philosopher, did voluntarily suffer death there, in the sight of all the Macedonian Army; It has several very learn'd Inhabitants; the Earth∣quakes, which are frequent in these parts, ren∣der it the less populous. The Frontiers of Persia, towards Turkey, have a warlike People, called Curdes, whose Countrey had been the field of several Battels: Alexander the great overcame Darius at Arbela, and they would per∣suade us, that there were four hundred thou∣sand Persians killed, and only three hundred
Macedonians; the Caliphs won there the Battel of Moraga, which made them Masters of Persia. Near Chuy, Selim defeated Ismael Sophi, who before had always been his Conquerour. Tabris, or Tauris, drives an extraordinary Trade, and the first of Persia; it has Walls and Towers of cut stone of a vast heighth. Ardebil is the staple of the Silks of the Countrey, and the place of burial of several Kings of Persia, amongst others of Cha-Sefi, who has a magnifi∣cent Tomb there. Bakuie gives sometimes its Name to the Caspian-Sea; It has in its neigh∣bourhood a source of Oyl, which serves to burn throughout all Persia. Kirman, towards the Ocean, yields Wools, and very fine Steel, whereof Arms are made that are in great vogue; a Cymeter of that steel does easily cut a Hel∣met through, without striking hard. Mogho∣stan is a Countrey which contains the Amadizes and the Gauls, very warlike Nations, who have perhaps furnish'd Matter to make the Fables of Amadis de Gaule. Ormus has had the Title of a Kingdom: the Soyl of this Island is subject to great heats, and produces only Salt: it has not a drop of fresh Water, but what it bor∣rows. The Portuguese being Masters of it, had caus'd a Fort to be made in the Isle of Kesem, for the having this conveniency. The excel∣lent scituation of Ormus, gave occasion former∣ly to this saying, That if the World was a Ring, Ormus was the precious Stone in it. In the year 1622, the King Scha-Abbas, took it by help of the English, and after having caused the For∣tress of it to be razed, transferred the Com∣merce to Gombru, which he caus'd to be called by his own Name, Bender-Abassi. The Portu∣guese
lost, by the taking of that Town, to the value of seven or eight Millions: Thus Gombru grew great, from the ruins of Or∣mus. The Castles, which defend Gombru, are fortified after the ancient manner. The Road is commodious, riding safe at anchor in five or six fathom Water. All Nations, who trade upon the Indian-Seas, except the Portuguese, carry their Commodities thither, and bring Velvet, Taffaties, raw Silks, and other Commodities from Persia. The English have half of the Customs, and the right of exporting some Horses, which the Persians have granted them, in acknowledgment of the Men and Ships, wherewith they assisted them for the taking of Ormus. Bahrem, upon the Coast of Arabia, and of the Dependances of Persia, is an Island known for the Springs of fresh Water, which it has at the bottom of the Sea, and for the Pearls, that are fished there, which are the best, the greatest, and the roundest of all the East. Giask, upon that Coast, is a place where is droven the greatest Commerce for Silk. Candahar, upon the Confines of the Mogul, is a Conquest of the late Kings of Persia.
Tartary. THis is the vastest Region of our Continent; Equals in bigness all Europe, and possesses all the Northern part of Asia. The Name of Tartary, which has succeeded that of Scythia, is come from the River Tatar, which the Chineses name Tata, because they do not make use of the Letter R. The Tartars are a warlike People, the best Archers of the World, but cruel and barbarous: they make War almost ever to the disadvantage of those they visit, and to the confusion of those who attack them. Cyrus at the passage of the Araxes; Darius Histaspes in his march against the Scythians of Europe; Alexander the great, when he was beyond the Oxus, have been constrain'd to yield to the Tartars: In our time, the great Kingdom of China has been forc'd to own them its Masters. Their Cavalry does most execution in their Battels, on the contrary to what is practised in Europe, it is it which first attacks places. The most peaceable of the Tartars inhabit Tents of Pelts, and do nothing else than look to their Cattel. Their Countrey has in all times been a Nursery of Men, who under divers Names have made Conquests, and establish'd Colonies in several places: That great Wall which the Chineses had rais'd for the putting a stop to their incursions, has not been capable of effecting that purpose. They aaknowledge several Princes, whom they call Cans. They have sundry Hurdes, that may be called Can∣tons,
Camps, Tribes, or Assemblies of Fami∣lies. The little knowledge we have of them, is the reason we call them all under the general Name of Tartars. They have the Owl in great veneration, since that Cingis, one of their So∣vereigns, was saved by the means of that Bird. They will not suffer they should be buried; some amongst 'em make choice of a Tree, and give order for their being hang'd up upon it after their death. There be still among 'em Idolaters, but they are for the most part Maho∣metans: It has been observ'd, that those who have conquered China, have hardly any parti∣cular Religion, tho' they practice several Moral Vertues. Five great parts are commonly reckon'd in Asian Tartary; Tartaria Deserta, Giagathi, Turquestan, Northern Tartary, and the Tartary of Kin. Desort Tartary is so called, because that most of the Lands there are uncultivated: It is for the most part subject to the Czars of Muscovy; who draw fine and rich Furrs from thence, and who, with ease, subdued the Inhabitants of it, they being only Shepherds. Its Gities of Casan and Astracan, are near the Wolga, which empties it self into the Caspian-Sea by seventy Mouths; the Obi, which in the same Countrey empties it self into the Ocean, has six. Astracan drives a great trade in Salt, which the Inhabitants find in a neighbouring Mountain. The Calmack People are Idolaters, much like to the ancient Scythians, by reason of their incursions, their cruelty, and their other ways of living. Giagathai, and Mawaralnahr, have peculiar Chams. The City of Samarchand, is that where Tamerlane the great, a Native of la Casta, a
day's journey from thence, establish'd a famous University: There is also one at Bockora, which passes for the Countrey of Avicenna, a famous Philosopher and Physician; another at Orcange, near the Caspian-Sea. Alexandria, of Sogdiana, was formerly famous for the death of the Philo∣sopher Calisthenes. The Tribe of the Mogul, is known by the rise of the Prince of the same Name, whose Successours command a good part of India. The Inhabitants of these Parts hunt wild Horses with Faulcons; in some of these Countries, they have such a disposition for Mu∣sick, that their little Children sing, instead of crying. Those of Giagathai and Yousbeg do not call themselves Tartars, being of the Mahometan Religion. Turquestan is the Country, from whence some make the Turks to come. Thibet which is part of it, has Musk, Cinnamon, Coral which serve for Money to it's Inhabitants. The Tartars of Kin, which some call Cathai, is the most Potent State of all Tartary, very Po∣pulous, Rich, and full of Great Cities, Camba∣lu, or rather Muoncheu is the Capital thereof: Several Authors have told Wonders of this Ci∣ty, making it known under the Names of Quin∣zai, Xantum, Suntien, and Peguim. Amongst o∣ther things, they say that in the Palace Royal there are twenty four Pillars of fine Gold, and another much greater of the same Metal, with a Pine Apple beset with Jewels, that are worth four Great Cities. The Voyage of Cathai has been undertaken by several ways, in hopes of finding Gold, Musk, Rhubarb, and other Rich Commodities there; several have gone thither by the Terra-firma, others by the Northern Sea,
some by going up the Ganges. The Tartars of this Country invaded China in our Time; the King of Niuche called Xunchi, is the same, who made the Conquest of it, at the Age of twelve years, assisted with the good and faithful Coun∣cels of two of his Uncles. Besides a continu∣al success and happyness, a great Moderation has been observ'd in this young Conquerour, who has treated a Nation newly subdued with all the Lenity imaginable. The old or true Tartary, which the Ara∣bians call after a different manner, is to∣wards the North, and but very little known: Salmanasar, King of Assyria, is said to have transported thither the Tribes, which he carryed away Captive from the Holy Land, and there are also said to be still at this day Hords of them, who keep up their Names, and follow their Manners. It has Imaus, one of greatest Mountains in the World. China. CHina, which receiv'd almost as many Names as it has had Royal Families, has ever pass'd for one of the most Considerable Kingdoms in the World, by reason of it's big∣ness, the Beauty of it's Cities, the great num∣ber, Politeness, and Maximes of it's Inhabitants, Printing, the Manufacture of Silks, Artillery, Gunpowder, and Chairs or Sedans, are said to
have been in use with them, sooner than with us. Besides what is necessary to the Life of Man, China produces the most precious com∣modities of the East. It seems as if Nature had bestow'd upon each of it's Provinces some pecu∣liar Gift: those who have dwelt in this Coun∣try do aver, that all that is thought fine, dispers'd in the rest of the World, is collected in China. That there is likewise a vast number of things, which would be in vain sought for else-where. So that it is no wonder, if the Tartars found it so easy a matter to subdue a Nation, subdued in delights before, who having forgot to wear the sabre, contented themselves with fighting at fisti∣cuffs, and with their Nails, which they expres∣ly let grow for that purpose, and for tearing a∣way their Flabels and their hair, which was their Principal Ornament. This oblig'd their Conque∣rours to call the Chineses, the soft and easy, and to make them enjoy the Pleasures of the Campagne, which they had never done before that Conquest. China is almost Quadrangular; so Populous, that there has been sometimes rec∣koned above Sixty Thousand Millions of Persons, of those who might be assessed and pay Taxes. It's Rivers are so covered with Boats, that there are held to be as many as in all the other Rivers of the World. The Annual Revenue of it's King has ever been esteem'd, a Hundred and Fifty Millions of Gold, according to others, Four Hundred Millions of Ducats; The Chineses laugh'd at our Maps, which plac'd their King∣dom at one of the ends of the World; they say they are in the mid'st, (the Jews have pretended the same thing for Jerusalem, the Greeks for Del∣phos, the Moors for Granada.) They say also,
that they have two Eyes, that the Europeans have but one, and other People none at all. Learned Men are oblig'd to them, for that they have com∣piled their History, which was brought into Europe by Martini the Jesuit: It is esteemed so much the more faithful, in that they made it but of their own Country, and only for them∣selves. They have always been so Jealous of the secrets of their Policy, and of their other af∣fairs, that they did not willingly allow Stran∣gers entrance into their Country. The great Wall, or rather the Intrenchment of above four hundred Leagues, which they caused formerly to be made, is a Work, that has had more Re∣nown than Effect; the Tartars have often over∣run China, notwithstanding this Obstacle. Those who have said that China is but one City, by reason of the Numerousness of it's People, have likewise said, that a no less considerable Wall was requir'd to be proportionable to the Gran∣deur of such a Town. 'Tis hardly credible that in this Fortification the Stones be seven Fathom high, and five broad, as they are said to be by the Chineses. If we may believe their History, the Hostilities of the Tartars have been exer∣cised for above four thousand years; the Chi∣nese Horses cannot endure the sight of those of Tartary. The late years have caused strange Revolutions in this Kingdome: After that the Rebels had acted as Soveraigns, the Tartars un∣der their Emperour Xunchi, have conquer'd all their Country, in less then seven years Time, and that since the year 1643, the Militia was not very considerable, Men of Learning domi∣neer'd over Men of the Sword: From whence it came, that the State only subsisted by Policy,
by numerous Armys, and not by the valour of it's People. The principal Chiefs, were called Mandarins; at present the Tartar has Tartarian Officers, and Chinese Officers below his Vice-Roys, of whom some are for Arms, and others for Learning. This change has the Sword wrought over the Gown, and the poor Mandarins are no longer in a state to do Justice, with so much Pomp and Pride as they formerly did. Paga∣nisme is there generally received, nevertheless Vertue amongst them is in an high esteem. The Publick is more Rich proportionably, as parti∣cular Persons are: Writing is managed from the top to the bottom: It has above sixty thousand Letters, and has not three hundred thousand Words, which are almost all Monosyllables; whereas the Europeans have many Words & few Letters, the Chineses have many Letters and few VVords, which they pronounce with divers Tones, according to their signification: So as we may say, their Speech is only singing. It's Great Cities are called Fu, the lesser Cu. The Chineses love their Hair to that Degree, that several amongst them, choose rather to dye, than to be shav'd conformably to the Tartars commands. Swines Flesh is with them a most exquisite Dish. Before the coming of the Tartars Yellow was the Kings, and Black the Peoples u∣sual wear. All China is divided into sixteen Provinces, each of which are worth more than large King∣doms. Ten of 'em lye towards the South; Yunnan, Quansi, Canton, Fuquiem, Chequiam, Nanxin, Kiamsi, Huquam, Suscuem and Qui∣cheu. The six towards the North are Xensi, Sciansi, Honan, Xantung, Pekin and Leaorung,
which several have called Cathai, whereas they give the name of Mangi to the Southern Pro∣vinces. Canton has a Town of the greatest Trade and Riches of all the Kingdom; from thence are transported Rice, Sugar, Varnish, which is drawn from the Rinds of Trees, and Pearls that are fish'd near the Isle of Ainaon. Macao, in an Island of the same Name, sur∣rounded with several other small Islands and Rocks, is peopled with Portugals, who have fortified it after an extraordinary manner, since they were attack'd by the Hollanders, in the Year 1622. This City entertains a great Com∣merce between China and Europe; this Com∣merce is much diminish't; they have no longer two hundred, for a hundred profit, as they had formerly; and now the Hollanders have got footing in the Kingdom, whereas they were formerly excluded from thence, because the Chineses had a Prophesie, that they should be subdued by people who have blue Eyes: This has been verified by the coming of the Tartars. The Right alone, for the Trade of Salt, is worth every Year above fifteen hundred thou∣sand Livers to the King of China. The small Isle of Sanchoan is known for the death of the Popish Saint Xavier. Fuquiem produces pure Gold, Pepper, Sugar, and Calamint. The Gold and Silver of China, is not so good as that we have: they esteem the Pistols and Rials of Spain. The Island Formosa has a Mine of Gold, which the Hollanders had in possession for a long while. In the Year 1661, they were drove thence by a Chinese, called Coceinga, a Taylor's Son. The Isle of Tayouan, half a League from Formosa,
is an Island, whither People resort in all Seasons of the Year, without being oblig'd to wait for the Monzoon: In the Year 1632, the Hollan∣ders made a Fort there of four Bastions, faced with hew'd stone; which serv'd them to take the Isle of Formosa. Chequiam has Temples, wherein are rich Idols. Nankin has a Town of the same Name, formerly the abode of the Court, the most esteemed of China, upon the account of its Beauty, the fertility of its Soyl, its fine Edi∣fices, its great Commerce, the River Kiang, which we call the River Blew, and the Chinese, the Son of the Sea, because that its common breadth exceeds two of our Leagues. With the River Jaune, and the Royal Channel, it affords the means of going to Pekin by Boat, and of trading to Pekin by Rivers, disembarking only at the Mountain Muilin. There is near Nankin, a Tower of Porcelain nine Stories, or Vaults, above one another, with a hundred and four∣score and four steps. Schanchay is the most usual station of the King's Fleets. Kiamzi passes for the most populous Province; It alone has Wa∣ter proper for the perfection of Porcelain, when they apply to it the Tincture of Azure, Vermilion, or Yellow. The late Voyages, that have been made into the Inlands of China, have inform'd us, that Porcelain-Ware is not made of the shells of the Sea, nor of Egg-shells pounded, as several have believed; it is made by the means of Sand or Earth, peculiar to certain Cantons of the Countrey, where it is found in Rocks; for the making it, 'tis not necessary, that this Earth remain buried an Age, as some have thought fit to affirm. The Chineses knead this
Sand, and make Cups of it, which they set a baking in Ovens, for the space of fifteen days, and give them several Figures. The application of Colours is one of the principal Secrets which the Chineses have thought fit to keep con∣ceal'd from strangers. Huquam yields so much Rice and Oyl, that the Chineses have it in a Proverb, That they draw but one Collation from each of the other Provinces of China, but from Huquam they have wherewith to live on a whole Year. Xensi does particularly furnish Musk; Its City of Cancheu has a great confluence of Caravans. Siganfu has very ancient Rem∣nants of Christianity. Sciansi hath Vineyards, from whence the Jesuits had the Wine they stood in need of, for the celebrating the Mass, before they were driven thence, in the Year 1665. Honan produces the best Fruits in the World, and in great quantity. Pekin, other∣wise Peguin, has a City of the same Name, the Capital of all the State, with a Castle-Royal. It is probably the City, which several Authors call Cambalu; what those Authors call Cathai, is nothing else than Northern China. In the Year 1644. This City was surpriz'd, and pil∣lag'd, by a Rebel, who dissipated, in a few days, all the Riches which sixteen Kings had heaped up, during two hundred and fourscore Years. Since that, the Tartars of Niuche, whom they call Kin, have rendred themselves Masters of it; and by the taking of Nakin, and Canton, have setled their Conquests in the great Kingdom of China.
India. THe Name of India, and that of Indo∣stan, is given to the Empire of the Mogul, and has two great Peninsula's on this, and on the other side the Ganges. They call by the Name of Indies, the Islands of the Oriental Sea, the Coasts of Persia, and Ara∣bia, and those of Africa towards the East: The Coasts of Africa, upon the Ocean, on this side the Cape of Good Hope, and of America, are known under Name of the West-Indies, by those who frequent the Sea. The principal Tongues, that have any vogue in the East-Indies, are the Canarine in and about Goa; the Malabar, in the Countrey of the same Name; the Guzerate in Cambaia, Coro∣mondel, Bisnagar, and Bengala; the Malaize in Malucca, Sumatra, the Java's, and the Moluccoes; that of the Maldive Isles is wholly peculiar: Arabick is employed only for Re∣ligion and the Sciences, just as Latin is in Europe. Portuguese is spoken in all the places, which were first conquered by the Crown of Portugal, tho' some of those places be at pre∣sent possess'd by other Nations of Europe.
The Empire of the Mogul. THis Empire comprehends the greatest part of the firm land of India between Persia, Tartary and China. The Mogul is the Sovereign thereof; He has his Name and his Rise from a Tribe come from Giagathai, a Countrey of Great Tartary: He passes for the richest Prince in the World, as to Jewels; besides those of his Crown, he has those of several Princes, his Neighbours, whose Predecessours had for a long while lived in and entertain'd the curio∣sity of having 'em: Besides, he inherits the Jewels of the Grandees of his Court. He is Universal Heir to those he gives Pensions to: all Houses before which he passes, owe him a Present; the Lands belong to him; his Will serves for Law in the decision of Matters. In this State, People go under the Name of the Employment they possess, and not of the Lands they enjoy. Some Relations assert, that this Mo∣narch is every day shewn part of his Treasures; sometimes his Elephants, sometimes his Jewels, another day somewhat else; and that he com∣monly sees every thing but once a Year, all the Treasure being divided into as many parts, as there are days in the Year. The day of his birth he is weighed, and the feasting upon that occasion lasts five days; then he receives some∣times the value of above thirty Millions, and al∣ways something very rare. The Civil War, which arose between the four Sons of Scha-Jehan, did not allow Aureng-zebe, who rendred
himself Master of 'em all, to observe punctually these Diversions. One of the Temples of this State is pav'd and imbowed with Plates of pure Gold. In the Palace of Agra, there are two Towers cover'd with sheets of massy Gold, and a Throne enrich'd with Jewels, with four Lyons of silver Vermilion guilt, supporting a Canopy of massy Gold. People talk at a much higher rate: He is said to have two Bushels of Car∣buncles, five Bushels of Emeralds, twelve Bushels of diverse sorts of Precious Stones, twelve hundred Cutlasses, whose Scabbards are of Gold, and covered with Jewels. They say, moreover, that the Treasure of Scha-Choram, one of the late Moguls, was of fifteen hundred Millions of Crowns. What is certain, is, that Scha-Jehan, who reign'd near forty Years, left above five Millions of Crowns; that the Throne, which he caus'd to be made in his City of Jehan-Abad, which is that of Delli, came to above sixty Millions of Livers. There are seven mag∣nificent Thrones, whereof the greatest was begun by Tamerlain. The Money of this State is of good alloy; great Justice is done; the Europeans are in great consideration, being by them call'd Francs. They reckon the ways by Cosses, each of which is a Mile and a half. No Oats are allowed their Horses; they give 'em Pease, and a sort of Paste made of Sugar, Flour, and Butter. They bathe themselves in Cysterns, which they call Tanques; in the Rivers there are Tuberons, which eat Men. The Mogul; upon occasion, can arm two hundred thousand Horse; He has but little Infantry, and that too but bad. He has a considerable number of Ele∣phants; of which Creatures he commonly
keeps five or six hundred. He draws great Ser∣vices from these Creatures; they are sure∣footed, rise and lye down easily, tho' there be of 'em thirteen and fifteen foot high. This Prince is of the Mahometan Religion, of the Turkish Sect: Most of his Vassals are Pagans. The Gymnosophists, and the Brachmans, have formerly been esteem'd for Wisdom in India, just as are the Bramins at this day: The former were very cruel, they caused old people, and the diseased, to be killed, out of an opinion, that they did them good service. The Bramins exercise surprising Abstinences, and Mortifica∣tions; some amongst 'em will remain standing with their Arms up for ten or twelve Years. They are as the Priests of the Countrey. The Troopers and Soldiers are called Rezbutes. There are several Mahometans in the Empire of the Mogul; Above two thirds there are Gen∣tiles, or Banians, or Persces. The Banians are almost all Merchants, sharp, cunning, and as sagacious as possible, Hucksters, by reason of their acquaintance in the Country, where they live amongst the Mahometans, as the Jews do among the Christians; they make profession of doing no hurt to any Creature living; of par∣doning the injuries that are done them; they believe the transmigration of Souls; have Hospitals for Brutes more than for Men. One amongst 'em, spent in one day above twelve thousand Ducats, for the making the Nuptials of his Friend's Bull: They have a Cow in great veneration. They dare not eat of any thing that has had life, not so much as Radishes, for fear of eating the Soul of some of their Friends. They do not willingly light Candles, for the
preventing the Gnats from burning themselves in 'em: When the Portugueses, who dwell there, have no Money, they endeavour to catch some Bird, which they shew in the Streets, saying, they are going to have it roasted for their Sup∣per: and immediately the Banians do not fail to give them Money, to redeem it out of their hands. Marriage is with them in such conside∣ration, that when a young man is dead, with∣out having been married, they cause some Maiden or other to lye with the Body, to whom they give for that purpose a Dowry, or Por∣tion. The Persees are descended from the an∣cient Persians, who retired into those parts: Never any of 'em are Farriers, or Locksmiths, for fear of being sometimes obliged to put out the Fire, which they esteem their God; They have such a reverence for Wood, as the Fewel and Nourishment of that God, that, not to prophane it by touching of the dead, they make their Coffins of Iron. The Indians in general are tawny, Olive-colour'd, with lank, black Hair; If there be any Whites, their whiteness is a mark of Leprosie. They drink from on high, or pour it in without touching the Cup with their lips: they affect white in their Buildings; they ride on Oxen, instead of Horses: Persons of quality, who travel in these Countreys, cause a kind of Cornet, or Ensign, to be carried before them. Their way of salutation, is to take one another by the Beard. If they be distant from Court, they suffer their hair to grow, as a token of their discontent, in that they are deprived of the happiness of seeing their Prince.
India is very fertile and populous in those parts, that confine upon its great Rivers; It has some Countreys, where you must go in good company, if you mean to save your self from Robbers, whom they call Koulis. It is fine to see the High-ways of two hundred Leagues in length, which resemble Walks or Alleys; they are planted with Cocoes, Dates, and Palm∣trees. This Countrey ministers excellent Bread, there being Corn and Rice in abundance. Vi∣ctuals in general are mighty cheap in these parts, and nevertheless the Inhabitants are na∣turally very sober. The neighbourhood of Tartary is full of Mountains and Forests, where the Moguldoes often take the divertisement of Hunting: there is a great number of wild Beasts, and Rats too, who attack Men in their Beds. Here it was, that Alexander made Timber to be cut for the building of Ships, which he caused to descend down the Indus, and upon the Ocean, whose ebbing and flowing did extraordinarily surprise his Pilots. As for the remains of Anti∣quity in this State, there are very few, the Mo∣guls having made it their bus'ness to ruin the ancient Towns. The Indus is navigable from the Lahor, as far as Sind. The People of the Countrey call it Pang-ab, by reason of the five Rivers, which assemble in the highest part of its course. The Ganges, which is small and low, when there is no Rain, was formerly fa∣mous for its Gold; it is so at present for its Water, which is very light. The Natives of the Countrey say, that this Water sanctifies them, whether they drink of it, or wash in't; they go in Pilgrimage to the places where it passes: the Moguls always cause some of it to
be carried with them. It is fine to see some∣times four or five hundred thousand Indians in one and the same season round this Ganges, wherein several go to cast Gold and Silver. The Custom of some is to hide it under ground, in the opinion they have, it may serve them after their death. There are full forty Kingdoms in this Em∣pire, whereof all the Names are almost the same with those of the capital Cities. Like∣wise some small Territories there are, whose Lords, who call themselves Rajas, are of a very ancient Race, and maintain themselves in Fortresses and Mountains inaccessible. The greatest mischief they do, is to rob and make incursions upon the Mogul's Subjects: The Names of some Cities, terminating in Pore, seem to shew, that they still preserve the Memory of Porus; as well as others in Scander, that of Alexander. The Dominions of the Mogul are much larger than those of the Persian, and equal those of the Turk. The Mogul prevails by the number of his Subjects, by the vastness of his Riches, by the extent of his Empire: His Revenue exceeds those both of the Grand Seignior and Sophi together. The Sophi surpasses him in Arms, in Horses, and Soldiers. The Mogul keeps good correspondence with the Turk, in consideration both of State and Reli∣gion. Guzaratta yields every year about eight Millions of Gold, and its Merchants pass for the ablest and most sagacious of all India. This Province has three stately Cities, Amad-abad, Cambaya, and Surat, with thirty other conside∣rable Towns. Amad-abad, the Capital, is esteem∣ed by the English, as much as London. Cambaia
was called the Cairo of the Indies, by reason of its bigness, which is two Leagues in circuit; by reason of its Commerce, and the fertility of its Soyl, which furnishes, amongst other things, Cotton, Anir, Opium, Agates, whereof there is a Mine at Baroche: Since the losses of the Portugals, Cambaya is much decayed; besides, that its Haven is very bad. Surat, forty six days journey from the Royal City of Agra, is one of the Asiatic Cities, which drives the greatest Trade, tho' the coming to it be dan∣gerous, the Houses low, and cover'd with Palm-trees. Its River abates much, which is four Leagues below the Town, can hardly carry Vessels of seventy or eighty Ton; they being oblig'd to unlade the Merchandizes at Sohali: This is the principal Scene of the English Com∣merce in the East-Indies: the French have setled a Consul there for the same purpose. It is now about thirteen years ago, that this City was plunder'd by a Raja of the Countrey, a Rebel of the Mogul, called Siva-Gi, the loss arising to above thirty-Millions. This Siva-Gi has, since that, taken several Towns to the South of Surat. Diu is a Fortress in an Island, which the Portugals have been forced to abandon, after having gloriously defended it in the years 1539, and 1546. One of their Soldiers is said to have shewn such bravery there, that wanting Lead, he pull'd out his great Teeth for the charging his Musket: on the other side, an Indian being struck with the Pike of a Portu∣guese, advanc'd and thrust it on so far into his own body, until that he came up to his enemy, and slash'd his hamms for him with his short Sword. There is mention made, in the War
of Flanders, of somewhat the like bravery: A Soldier, hidden in a Boats of Turffs, for the surprising of Breda, having receiv'd a Wound from the Pike of those who search'd it, had the resolution and cunning, to wipe the Iron and end of the Pike, for fear his blood should discover the Enterprize. Cabul, with a Town of the same Name, is fruitful in Myrobalan Plums. Candahar was conquer'd and taken from the Persian, but restored to him in the year 1650, and the Moguls have not been able to retake it. Agra has the capital City of all the Dominions, where might be raised, upon occasion, two hundred thousand Men, capable of bearing Arms: it is likewise the greatest City of the Indies. The Prince draws a great Revenue, from eight hundred Stoves that are there. 'Tis twice as large as Ispahan, but ill built, and without Walls; It's much augmented since the year 1566: That Ecbar made it his Residence, after having caus'd there a stately Castle to be raised. Delli was the abode of the Mogul, before Agra, and is so still, since that Cha-Jean has built the City of Jean-Abad in its neighbourhood. Gualeor is a Fortress, where the Mogul confines such of the Princes of his Blood, as give him any umbrage. Lahor, re∣sorted to by the Caravans, is the ancient Buce∣phalea, and is said to be twenty four Leagues in compass. Naugracut has a famous Idol; those who go thither, out of devotion, cut a piece of their Tongue off. Kachmire, other∣wise Cassimere, is esteemed the little Paradise of India, upon the account of its beauty. Chitor, a ruin'd City, was the Capital of Ruana, the Successour of Porus. Bengala is renowned for
the temprature of its Air, its fruitful Soyl, the abundance of its Rice, which most parts of the In∣dies furnish themselves with, for its fine Canes or Reeds, its Silks, & its excellent Wood of Calamba, the rarest and of the most agreeable scent in the World. It likewise gives name to the greatest and most famous Gulph of Asia. One of the late Histories of the Indies, does affirm, that a Man of Bengala has lived three hundred and five years. The capital City is Bengala, other∣wise Satigan. The Peninsula of India, intra Gangem. THis Peninsula is the Countrey which is particularly call'd India. It has two Parts, separated by the Mountains of Guate, which ad∣vance from the North to the South, with seve∣ral delicate Plains on their top, and which cause divers Seasons at the same time towards the East and West; Summer being on the one side, and Winter on the other. It has above fifty Kings, the most powerful of whom, do, by little and little, encroach upon the Domi∣nions of the others. The Portugals, English, and particularly the Hollanders, have Towns near the Sea, with Fortresses, for the security of Trade, which is commonly of Spices, Jewels, Pearls, and Cotton-Cloth. It has the conve∣niency of several Woods for the building of
Ships: the Portugals, making use of this ad∣vantage, cause several Carracks to be made at Bazaim. The Towns of the Europeans are upon the Sea; farther in the Land there are others of the same Name, which belong to the Natives of the Countrey, and are only distin∣guish'd from one another by their high scitua∣tion. The Fig-tree Leaves are in those parts so great, that they serve those of the Countrey for Coverlets and Table-Cloths. Amongst the several Religions, there is that of certain Christians, whose Predecessours were instructed by St. Thomas. Decan has Visapor for its Capital, five Leagues in circuit, the abode of Idalcan, or Idal-Schach, a Mahometan King. He still defends himself against the Mogul, who had taken from him several places, and no longer pays him any Tri∣bute. Goa is the Residence of the Portugal Vice-Roy, and the Arsenal of that Crown for the East-Indies. Some esteem the Hospital of Goa, finer, richer, and better served, than that of the Holy Ghost at Rome, or the Infirmery of Maltha. It is a spacious City, but the excessive heats are mortal to many persons: those who are bound hither, touch at two small Islands, five Leagues from the Town, and there they take in Pilots, who commonly bring them into the Port of Mormogan, one of the best of Asia. Malabar is a very level Countrey, with a good pleasant Coast, and inhabited by people, who know no other Trade, than that of Pira∣cy. There blows, in Winter, a Wind which so moves the neighbouring Sea, that it rouls a vast quantity of the Sand into the Entrance of
the Harbours, so as then small Barks cannot come in: In Summer, another Wind, quite con∣trary, is so violent, that it carries away the Sand clearly, and lays open the Navigation. The great number of Rivers there, renders Horses of little use, principally for War. Those Rivers fatten the Land, nourish Crocodiles, whose flesh is good to eat, and serve for the transportation of Victuals and Spiceries. The Malabarians pass a whole day without eating, by taking two Grains of a Paste, called Anfian, which they have come from Cambaia: they are oblig'd to continue this nourishment, and if they once left it off, they could not live four days to an end. The Children in this Coun∣trey do not succeed their Fathers; those of their Sisters inherit, as being certainly the next of Blood. The Wives burn themselves after the death of their Husbands, to shew, that they will not survive them. A few years ago, two hundred of these Women took this course, after the death of the Naique of Madura, a small Territory bordering upon Malabar; since which, that Law has been moderated, in favour of the Widows. The greatest Ears are the most beautiful, because they have room to fasten more Jewels than the small. Calecut is a trading Town, whither the Portuguese resorted with a less favourable success than at Cochim, where they obtained leave for the making a Cittadel, the first Fortress they had in the East-Indies. The Hollanders took it from them in the Year 1662. The Prince of Calecut calls himself Zamorin: He pretends a Tribute from the Kings of Malabar. Besides this Prince, there are in this Countrey the Kings of Cananor,
of Tanor, of Cranganor, of Cochim, of Coulan, of Travancor, and ten or twelve others of small consideration. Tamul gives its name to a par∣ticular Language; besides the Malaize Tongue, there are others, which they call the Bagadan and the Grandonique. Cochim, which comes near the bigness of Goa, pays a Tribute to the Hollanders, who stand possess'd of its Fortress, as we have already said: The Haven of it is not good by reason of the Rocks and Shelves which are at its entrance. Coulan is now neither so rich nor so populous, as it was when it had above a hundred thousand Inhabitants. Zamo∣rin consider'd it for its Situation, its Harbour, and Loyalty. The Sand of the Sea having stop∣ped up its Haven, Goa and Calecut have taken from it all its Commerce. Onor has Pepper ve∣ry heavy, and black Rice, which is better than the White. After Malabar, and towards the East, is the Coast of Fishing, otherwise called Manar, where they Fish for Pearls, where the Market is held at Tuticorin. This Country, wherein are about thirty small Cities, is dry and burnt. It obeys, for the most part, a Naique of Madura; the Hollanders stand possess'd of the small Island of the Kings with some Fortresses, which render them Masters of the Passages of the Banks of Manar. They gather Amber-grease on this Coast; near Cape Comorrin was formerly found a piece of Amber-grease, which is said to have weighed thirty Quintals. Coromandel, or Corobander, is so called from the Rice, which it produces in abundance: It has the Havens of Meliapour and St. Thomas, where that Apostle fore-told, that White People
would arrive in their Country, which was verified by the coming of the Portugals. By some it is observed, in the Descendents of those who put that Holy Apostle to death, that they have one Leg much greater than the other. The Sea being here high and rough at all times, the small Vessels chuse rather to retire to Pallecate, and the great to Negapatan. Narsinga and Bisnagar, otherwise Karnatek, have Amethists, Saphirs, and other precious Stones. The King of Narsinga, who is the Raja of Velou, whose Territories advance towards Cape Comorin, stiles himself the King of Kings, and the Husband of a thousand Wives. The City of Bisnagar is upon a Mountain with a Cit∣tadel. There are on this Coast the Naiques or Princes of Madura, Tanaior, and Gingi; and, in their Dominions, Inhabitants, who have pleasant Imaginations: they make the number of their Gods mount to thirty three Millions. They say, that the Globe of the Earth is suppor∣ted with a Serpent, arm'd with a thousand Heads, on which all the World is pois'd; that this Serpent is born by eight Elephants, who stand upon the Back-bone of a Tortoise, which of its self remains firm and motionless even with the Water. They also multiply the Seas, and make seven different ones of them; the one of Water, the other of Milk, the third of Cream, the fourth of Butter, the fifth of Salt, the sixth of Sugar, and the seventh of Wine. These small States have rose out of the ruins of that of Narsinga. The late Relations make menti∣on of the Kingdom of Messur, bordering upon that of Madura, of the Moravan People being very Warlike, and of the Land of Thieves.
There are several Apes in the Woods of this Country, where People take the Diversion of making them fight to get Rice. Golconda belongs to a Mahometan King, of the Sect of the Persiaens; there is a Mine of Dia∣monds, so abounding, that in the Year 1622. the King caused it to be stopped up for some time, for fear that the too great quantity would render them common, or that the Mogul might have a desire to possess it. This Mine is at the foot of a Mountain, where are sometimes a hun∣dred thousand Workmen. There are also Mines of Iron and Steel, the Steel that is drawn from thence passes for the best of all the Levant. The Inhabitants of this Countrey are very much addicted to Traffick; though the Countrey be Mountainous and Sandy, yet it produces great plenty of Rice. The King has so many Cu∣stoms and Imposts, that there accrue to him from thence above twenty Millions. They speak Talenga in this Kingdom, and reckon by Gauts, each of which comes to six thousand pa∣ces. The City of Golconda is one of the most beau∣tiful and strongest of all India; it is also one of the greatest, being divided into three Citites. Badnaguar, otherwise Hidraband, where is the King's Palace, though it be without Walls; Golconda, where is the Cittadel; Emanjour, upon a River which separates it from the former. The King's Palace is the most magnificent of all those of India, it is twelve Miles compass: Gold is there employed to such uses as we em∣ploy Iron for. Mazalpatan, an unwalled Town, has narrow Streets and low Houses; it is strong by Situation, in a marshy place, where it has a Bridg of fifteen thousand paces in
length. Its Harbour or Road is half a League from the City, commodious for all sorts of Ships: most Europeans have their Factors here. The Inhabitants of the Town drive a great Trade in Stained or Painted Cloaths, and other Works of Cotton, so delicately wrought, and with such lively Colours, that they are more esteemed than those of Silk. The Fortress of Condapoli has six Fortifications one upon ano∣ther, each with its conveniency, and Lands ca∣pable of nourishing its Garrison. There are sixty other places of defence in the Kingdom of Gol∣conda. The Peninsula of India, extra Gangem. IN this part of India is a great number of good and great Rivers, which render it fer∣tile by their Inundations, and which afford the means of Transporting thence the same Mer∣chandizes as from the Neighbouring Countries. The Elephants do great service, principally when Fire has seized on any place, for then they pull down, with a wonderful dispatch and dex∣terity, the Houses neighbouring on those which are burning; upon a certain signal from him who governs them, they take away with their Trunk the Roof of the House that is shew'd them, and Butt down the Walls that remain, without going beyond the Order that is given
them. The Inhabitants of these Countries are for the most part Pagans, and live in a state of War under divers Kings, in whose Dominions are daily wrought some Changes or other, the most powerful still becoming Masters of the weakest. Aracan is fertile in Grains and Silver-Mines. Pegu was very considerable, when it compre∣hended two Emperors and twenty six King∣doms: It is much decayed and fallen from its grandeur, through the Wars it sustain'd against the King of Siam, for the maintaining itself in the possession of a White Elephant. This Ele∣phant was in so much the greater esteem amongst the Indians, in that they firmly be∣lieved, that their Xaca, or Prophet, was Me∣tamorphosed into such an Animal. In the Year 1661. the Tartar, Victorious over China, push'd on his Conquests thither, in pursuing Constantin the last King of the Chineses. The Glasses of the Pagods, which are the Churches of the City of Pegu, are of Tortoise-shells, so as those of Goa are of Mother of Pearl. The City of Siam (which is otherwise called Odia, or India) is twenty Leagues from the Sea, upon the Menan River, which overflows every six Months; the Indians call it in this manner, as if it was the Mother of Waters. This River has three Mouths, whereof the most Eastern is the most commodious. Several Ships come to the City of Bankok, six Leagues from the Sea; from thence their Boats and Pinnaces go twenty Leagues, as far as the City of Siam. The King of Siam has been very absolute; has had several small Tributary Princes; but has since own'd Homage to the Tartar, Master of
China. He is an Idolater, and nevertheless al∣lows of the Building of some Christian Churches in his Capital Cities; nay, he himself has cau∣sed some to be Built at his own cost. He himself Trades; out of his Dominons are Transport∣ed Buck-skins, Benjamin, and all other precious Merchandises of India. The Siamois, contrary to other Orientals, dispose their Writing after the same manner as do the other Orientals. Tanacerin near an Isthmus, Ligor and Patane drive a great Trade. This Country is fertile, tem∣perate, and brings forth Fruits every Month of the Year. Hens, Geese and Ducks, lay often their Eggs twice a day; insomuch, that Victu∣als are in abundance, and at easie rates. Malaca, with a strong Castle, is as the Centre of the East-Indies, where you may wait for Winds, fair for the Navigation you intend to make. Barks may enter into it by the River, but great Ships cast anchor between the two Islands that are in the mouth of the River. The City ows its rise to Fishermen of Pegu, Siam, and Bengala, who frequented it, establishing there, at the same time, a new Tongue, which is at present receiv'd in several parts of India. The Portugals gave out, that the Air hereof was unwholsome; which was to prevent all desire in other Nations of setling themselves here. In the Year 1641, the Hollanders made themselves Masters of it. People observe there, for a rarity, the doleful Tree, whose Flowers only come by Night, and fall at the sight of the Sun. Ihor in the most Southern part of India, is built upon Posts, near a River, which divides it into two Ports.
Cambodia, whose King is a Vassal of that of China, drives a great Trade: The City of the same Name, is sixty Leagues from the Sea, built in length, upon a rising ground, to exempt it self from the Inundation of its River. The Mecon, which passes by it, has two principal Mouths, which separate themselves afterwards into two others. It is Navigable; In the Year 1644, four Holland Ships entred it, and got out again, notwithstanding the endeavours and oppositions of the King of that Coun∣trey, who would have hindred them from so doing. Cochinchina is one of the best Kingdoms of all India: A great number of Galleys are kept there, where the Office of Rower is more sought after than in Europe; the French Bishops have been busie there to promote the Catholick Religion. Tunquim, or Tonkin, has its peculiar King, as well as Cochinchina and Cambodia. Upon the Confines of China and India there are People called Maug, Timocoves, Gueyes, and others. The Tunquiners are the best Fire arms-men of all Asia; instead of Purses, they have little Strings, whereon they file their Copper Money, which are round pieces, pierced thro' the middle, distinguish'd from sixty to sixty, by certain marks; they carry them upon their shoulders, or else around their arms. The Country of Tunquim is boggish, watry, and in∣terlaced with above thirty Rivers, which fall into the Sea: the Air is nevertheless very pure. They recko they have aobut twenty thousand Villages, and six great Provinces, wherein are said to be two hundred thousand Christians.
The capital City is esteemed twenty Miles in circuit, wherein it contains above a Million of Persons. There are upon the Frontiers, Forests full of Apes, who go sometimes to the number of three or four hundred, and ravage the fields; from whence they carry a prodigious quantity of Rice, which they fasten between their skin, and a girdle of straw, which they make for that pur∣pose. This Country has no wall'd Towns or For∣tresses. The King of Tunquim has above fifty thou∣sand Soldiers for this guard; and keeps above sixty thousand upon the Frontiers of Cachinchina, with whose Prince he is often at Dagger's draw∣ing. He is said to have above five hundred Elephants, about as many Galleys, most of em well fitted, and finely guilt. It is by the means of the Elephants, that the Tunquiners have main∣tain'd themselves against the Chineses, who did domineer over 'em, for somewhile. The most mo∣dern Relations make seven Kingdoms pass under the Name of Tunquim, Tunquim, Cochinchina, Ciu∣canghe, or Caubang, the small Bao, the little Lao, and the Mountains of Rumoy, or Kemois, where there is a little King of Fire, and another of Water. They likewise make mention of the great Kingdom of Lao, which extends from fourteen Degrees, to two and twenty and a half of Northern Latitude, upon a breadth of fifty Miles, along a River of same Name; where Langione, at eighteen Degrees of Latitude, is the capital City. They likewise mention, that its King has for Tributaries, those of Bao, Cio∣cangue, Ava; and that there are full five hun∣dred thousand Men capable of Service in his Dominions.
The Maldive Islands. THe Maldive's Islands, situate on the South of India, both on this and the other side the Equinoctial, have this Name from their City, called Male, and from Dive, which signi∣fies Island, in the Language of the Country. They are said to be twelve thousand in all; which is spoke at hazard, and an uncertain num∣ber is taken for a certain. These Islands are dispers'd from the North-East, to the South-East, into thirteen Provinces, which the Inha∣bitants call Atollons, whereof each has a Bank for its Ramparts. Some of 'em are only Rocks, or heaps of Sand, and all are very small. That of Male, which is the Principal, is not a League in compass. They are interlaced with several Arms of the Sea, environed with Rocks, which render 'em of very difficult access. It has been the good pleasure of Divine Providence, that there are four Ports, or four Openings to the Issues of each Atollon, that, those Ports corre∣sponding to one another, the Inhabitants might communicate together: Without this help, the Ships would be hurried away, by the great Cur∣rents of the Sea, for above seven or eight hun∣dred Leagues from the Maldives: These Cur∣rents go six Months towards the East, six Months towards the West, sometimes more, sometimes less. The Chanels, through which the Ships may pass most easily, are, those of Malos-Madou, of Adou, and Sovadou, this is twenty Leagues broad. As the Sea is but shallow in these parts, and there are commonly high
Winds, and few Commodities, few Europeans resort to these Islands. The King of Maldives is called Rascan; His Revenue consists in the Misfortunes of others; that is to say, it ac∣crews from the Shipwracks of Vessels, that are cast away in those parts: Certain it is, there is no trust to be put in the Pilots of those Islands: they often cause the Ships to be cast away, that are left to their conduct, that so the profit thereof may redound to their King. This Prince has a Custom to Caress strangers, and invite them into his Island, that so by their dwelling there for some while, they may die of the Disease, that reigns in those parts. The Insularies are of a low Stature, of a tawny Complexion, of the Mahometan Religion, sub∣ject to several Evils, by reason of the excessive heats, which reign there, and Feavers, which seldom abandon their Islands. They shave themselves with cold water; catch Fish by swim∣ming; go easily to the bottom of the Sea; choose a convenient place for the Anchors of their Ships; will, with an incredible facility, weigh up from thence burdens of a hundred thousand pounds weight, by the means of a Cable, and some pieces of their Woods of Condou. Their Cocoes furnish them with great Conveniencies; they make of 'em Wine, Honey, Sugar, Milk, and Butter: they eat Almonds, instead of Bread, with all sorts of Meats: they place each Trade in a particular Island; Now, to exempt 'emselves from the Vermin, which might spoil and destroy their Commodi∣ties, they have their Ware houses and Magazines set up in the Sea, upon Posts and Pillars, at two or three hundred Paces from their Islands.
The Isle of Ceylan. CEylan is said, by the Insularies, to have been much greater formerly than it is at this day; of four hundred Miles, which it was then in compass, it is not now above three hun∣dred. 'Tis made to resemble a Pearl, and seve∣ral do believe that it is the Taprobana of the Ancients. Its Air is the purest and most health∣ful that is in all India: Some call it the Land of Delights; and say, that it is the place where was the Terrestrial Paradise; that the Pico of Adam, whither the Pagan Priests go in Devo∣tion, is a Testimony thereof, as well as the Crystal Mountains, the Forests of Cinnamon, and the Rivers of precious Stones, which are all to be found there, except the Diamond. Doubtless, the Cinnamon which is gather'd in this Island, is by much the best in the World. It affords excellent Ivory: The fishing for Pearls is perform'd in its neighbourhood, upon the Coast of the Isle of Manar. This Island abounds so with Rice, that they give it their Horses, instead of Oats. The Pike of Adam, afore-mention'd, is a high, sharp Mountain: The Fables of the Countrey say, that Adam was there bred and buried; that the Lake of Salt Water, which is at the top of it, is a Flood of the Tears Eve shed during a hundred years, for the death of her Son Abel. The Inhabitants of Ceylan, are of divers Religions; active, well shap'd, black and very ugly. Their Forces consist in Elephants, which are reckon'd the
most couragious and docible of all India, from whence it comes they are called Noble. They say, moreover, that the Elephants of other Countreys, seeing them, do them Reverence, and that the Ivory of their Teeth does never turn yellow. There was formerly a white Ape in Ceylan, in such veneration amongst the Inha∣bitants, that this Ape falling into the hands of the Portugals, they offer'd to the King of Portu∣gal, tho' in vain, three hundred thousand Crowns, to purchase him again. The Bannians, who reckon, amongst their false Divinities, Ramo one of their Heroes, say, amongst other follies, that he desiring to pass, from the Western Peninsula of India, into this Island, all the Scale-fish join'd together, upon the surface of the Sea, to make him a Bridge. The Streight of Manar is but a Musket-shot broad, by reason of the small Islands which are daily made, by the stones that are cast in there, that they may approach the nearer to a Pagod, or Temple of Idolaters, which is in the Terra firma of India, upon the Coast of the Fishery. There are none but small Vessels, which can pass through this Streight: So narrow a space of Sea, makes it believ'd, that the Island was for∣merly joined to the firm Continent. The Por∣tugals have nothing more in Ceylan; the Hol∣landers stand now possess'd of most of the Places upon the Sea. There are in this Island several Cities, with the Title of Kingdom, Candea, Das sette-Corolas, Ceitavaca, Galle, Colombo, Chialo, Jaffanatapan, Trinquilemale, Baticala, Jala. The King of Candea is the most powerful of the Countrey, and a sworn Enemy of the Hollanders. He commonly causes
his Blacks to burn the Cinnamon, that he may render it useless to his Enemies. The best Town of Ceylan is Candea, towards the midst of the Island. The Islands of Sunda. THe Streight of Sunda gives it Name to the Isles of Sumatra, and Borneo: It is the common passage of the Ships which go to China, and in the most Oriental Seas. The Air of these three Islands is unwholsome, and they do not furnish those Provisions for the Mouth, that are to be got in the Terra firma of India. Their Inhabitants are Pagans in the Inland-Countrey, Mahometans upon the Sea-Coasts. They have several Kings, who, besides their Armies by Land, have considerable Forces by Sea. They furnish rich Merchandizes, and chiefly Spice∣ries, which the English, Portugals, Hollan∣ders, and most other Nations fetch from thence. Sumatra is the most renown'd Island of the East, by reason of its spaciousness and riches; It is seven hundred Miles in length, and two hundred in breadth, with several Mines of Gold. It is ten Leagues distant from the Terra firma; the Ancients thought it a Peninsula, by reason of the great number of small Islands, which seem'd to join it to the Continent. It has five or six Kings, of whom that of Achem is best known to us: the others remain at Camper,
Jambi, Menancabo, and Palimban. They have maintain'd themselves so well in their Islands, that the Europeans have not yet been able to hold there any Fortresses. There is a Mountain which casts forth fire and flames, in like manner with Mount Gibel in Sicily. The Pepper, which grows in this Island, is better than that of the Coast of Malabar, because the Soyl is here more humid. The Gold is gathered in grain and small pieces, in little Ditches, by the means of floods of Water. In the Inlands of this Isle there are still barbarous Inhabitants, who make no difficulty of eating the raw flesh of their Ene∣mies with Salt and Pepper, which they always carry about them for that purpose. The City of Achem, the most considerable of all the Island, was much better than it is at this day. It is half a League from the Sea, in a Plain, with a Fortress upon the Banks of a River, which is as broad as the Thames, but so shallow, that it cannot bear ordinary Vessels. Java has several small Kings, each City ha∣ving often its own; the knowledge of whom is of no great use to us. There are, amongst others, those of Japara, Tuban, Jortan, Pa∣narvan, Panarucan, and Palambuam. Several are Pagans, some Mahometans; Most own homage to the Grand Materau, who resides either at Materau, or Japara, and who formerly pre∣tended to the Sovereignty of the whole Island. There are Oysters taken upon this Coast, some of which are said to weigh full three hundred pounds. The Island produces such large Reeds, that one of these Reeds alone is sufficient to make a small Boat. It likewise furnishes excel∣lent
Calamba, which is the Wood of the Aigle, or Aloes, Salt, which is taken near Jortan; Gold and Silver in abundance. Its Southern Coast is not yet known. Java is one of the greatest Islands of Asia, and, by reason of its abundance, some call it the Compendium of the whole World. Its City of Bantam is at the foot of a Hill, environ'd with two Hills, and cut through by a third. The Walls of the City are of Brick, flanck'd with several Cannons, without full Earth, only three foot thick: Its Haven is the most spacious, and most frequented, that is in all the Islands of Sonde: There is all manner of Spices, Gums, and other Commodities of the East-Indies. It is the Staple of the English, tho' our last advice from thence tell us of great changes, and that the King of Bantam's Son, assisted by the Hollanders, had drove both the Right King and English from thence. The French have, of late years, drove some small Trade in this Town. Some Spaniards call Ban∣tam, the Geneva of the East. Jacatra, or Bata∣via, has, since the Year 1669. been the Resi∣dence of the Councel of the Hollander's East-India Company, and the Magazine General of all the rich Merchandises, which they draw from the Countries of the East, to send into Europe. It has a good Cittadel, with four regular Basti∣ons, Half-Moons, and other Works. It is in a Bay, which being covered by some Islands to∣ward the Sea, forms the best Road in all the Indies. After this, Jortam is one of the best and most frequented Havens of the Isle of Java. Borneo is the greatest Island of all Asia, fer∣tile in Merabolans and Camphire. It has several
good Roads, but few good Towns. Some say, it is the Java Major of Marc-Pol of Venice, and Java Minor is that we have just before made mention of. The City of Borneo is built upon Posts in the Sea, at the Mouth of a River, where is a Great and Commodious Haven. It has its particular King as well as Bender-Massin. Sabas is the Capital of a Kingdom which affords Dia∣monds. The Isles of Japan. THere be several Islands known under this name. The three most considerable, are Niphon, Ximo and Xicoco. Niphon, much larger than the rest, is separated from the firm Land, by an Arm of the Sea, about ten Leagues in breadth; some say, that it is joyn'd to it, but that, by the difficulties of the ways, the Japans chuse rather to go thither by Sea. All these Islands have a temperate Air; abound in Rice, Pearls, and Mines of Silver, very much esteemed. Their Pearls are large, but are found to have too much of Red in them. In this Country is a very extraordinary Tree; it becomes dry when they wet it, and to nou∣rish it, they must put into a hole they make in it, filings of Iron, with Sand very dry: and to make its Branches green, and gain and ex∣ert its Leaves, they are to be fastened with a Nail.
The Japaneses are Idolaters, good Soldiers, and very patient: Notwithstanding the dangers of the neighbouring Sea, they have sometimes taken the Peninsula of Corca from the Chineses. They have the most happy memories in the World, and a very abounding Tongue; for each thing they have several names, some for Con∣tempt, others of Honour: some for the Prin∣ces, others for the People. Their Customs and Manners are wholly contrary to ours: They drink Warm water, and they give this reason for their so doing, that the Cold is binding, provokes Coughing, and the Distempers of the Stomach; but that the Warm nourishes the Natural heat of the Body, that the passages are opened by it, and that the thirst is the more easily quenched. They give such Potions to the Sick, as are very sweet and odoriferous: They never let Blood, because they would spare their Blood as the Vehicle of Life: They esteem black Teeth the finest: They mount on Horse∣back on the right side: Salute by a shaking of the Feet. To treat the King of Japan, who calls himself Cube or Caesar, three Years are said to be required for Preparations, and that the Feasts last full three Months. The Jesuites, Cordeliers, Jacobites and Augu∣stines, have been very busie here, and are said to have considerably promoted their Religion; In the Year 1596. there were reckoned to be six hundred thousand Christians: since the Year 1614. they have been extraordinarily persecu∣ted, and none dare make Profession of Christi∣anity, now there, but in private. In the Year 1636. the Jesuites, the Spaniards and Portugals, were entirely driven thence; where the Hol∣landers
alone have had the Liberty of Com∣merce, because, when they came into those Parts, they forbid their Men, above all things, speak∣ing of Religion. They have several particular Tones, or Princes, the most part of whom, confine their Power within the Circle of a Town. This Custom is generally receiv'd, that when one of those Tones loses his Dominions, his Subjects lose likewise their Estates. The Capital City is Meaco, which is said to contain sixty thousand Housholds. Yendo is a Royal Castle, Sazay a famous Sea-Port. In the Year 1658. a Fire happened at Yendo, which occasioned the loss of above forty eight Millions of Gold. The Spaniards Sail along these Islands, when they return from the Philippines to Mexico and Peru. The Hollan∣ders are said to go now to Japan by the North, passing West of the Land of Jeso. The Philippine Islands. THe King of Spain, Philip the Second, has given his Name to these Islands, which are to the number of forty or fifty: this is to be understood of the greatest, for if we reckon'd all the small ones, they would be found to be above eleven thousand. Most of these Isles are fruitful; furnish Gold, wherewith the Inhabitants pay their Tribute. The Council of Spain, for the Indies, has often propos'd to abandon them, by reason of the too great
expence of the Garrisons, that are necessary to be kept there: because they contribute to the Commerce that is driven with China and the Molucco's, his Catholick Majesty has thought fit to keep them. The Islanders are valiant, and defend their Freedoms in several places. Lusson (otherwise New Castile) is the greatest of all the Philippine Islands. The City of Ma∣nilhe, which gives its Name to the whole body of these Islands, is the abode of a Governour and an Archbishop. 'Tis small, but beautiful, and well fortified; the two thirds of its com∣pass are along a River, which carries Barks, and the third part towards the Sea. Besides the Spaniards and Indians, it has many Chineses, who have taken refuge there, as in a Town where is the Magazine of one of the richest Commerces in the World. Cavite, two Leagues from the Town, is the principal Haven, secure from great winds, and defended by two Forts: The Bay is forty Leagues in compass; where they have the conveniency of building great Galeons, but it is beaten by the Northern Winds; the bottom is bad, and the entrance difficult. Here did the Spaniards detain a French Bishop, Titular of Heliopolis, to make him afterwards take a turn round the World, before that he return'd into Europe: from whence that Prelate is departed for the third time with the Apostolical Missions of the See of Rome. The Isle of Mindanao, was not sub∣dued by the Spaniards, till a long while after that of Lusson: that of Paragoya obeys still their own Kings; that of Tendaye, bears the Name of Philippine, as having been first disco∣ver'd; Cebu and Matan are known, the first for
Magellan's arrival there, in the Year 1520; the last, for the death of the said Magellan. This was the first time, that the Voyage had been perform'd round the World; which was done in the Ship of this Captain, who had put him∣self into the Service of the King of Castile; for that the King of Portugal, whose Subject he was, had refus'd half a Ducate a Month, above his constant Pay. The Spaniards, who sail to the Philippines, do not go through our He∣misphere: They go thither by Mexico, and the South-Sea: For which reason they would fain comprehend these Islands, as well as the Moluc∣coes, in the bounds of their West-Indies, which they extend for that reason as far as Ma∣lacca. The Moluccoe Islands. THere are five of these Isles, with the par∣ticular Name of the Moluccoes, in the head of several others, much greater, which receive from them their Name. These five Isles are very small, and in a situation near the Equi∣noctial Line, where it is unwholsom living, for those who go to settle themselves there. They have several peculiar Kings; the Hollanders have some Fortresses. In the last Age, Charles the Fifth, Emperour, sent Magellan to disco∣ver 'em; who, to arrive there, steer'd the Western Course, quite contrary to that which the Kings of Portugal had caus'd to be taken.
since they were engaged to the Portugals, who laid claim to 'em, as having been there by the common way, which was that of the East. The Government of these Islands, after that, was join'd to the Manilhes, and the Commerce of 'em was left to the Portugals. From hence are transported Nutmegs, Cloves, and Ginger. Ternate, the greatest of the five small Islands, is eight Leagues in circuit, and has a Mountain which casts forth fire: the others are Tider, very considerable, Motir, Machian, and Ba∣chian. The Moluccoes are good Soldiers, common∣ly of the Mahometan Religion. Besides the Kings of Ternate, Tidor, and Bachian, there are several others in the Celebes Islands, and in Gilolo. The King of Macassar, in the Celebes, has lately caused his City to be fortified. He has always given free entrance in his Ports to the Ships of strangers. In the Year 1661, he treated with the Hollanders East-India Compa∣ny, and abandoned the Portugals. In the Year 1668, the Hollanders oblig'd him to trade with none but them, with exclusion to other Na∣tions. The state of this Prince would be pretty temperate, if the heats were not insupportable in the day time. Formerly the Inhabitants of Macassar are humane flesh; for which reason the Kings of the Moluccoes, and others of their neighbourhood, sent their Criminals thither. Celebes fertil in Rice, and the Land of Papous affords Gold, Ambergreese, and the Birds of Paradise. Banda, the only Island in the World, which produces Nutmegs and Mace, is an Island to∣wards the South of the Moluccoes, on the East
of that of Amboyna, with five or six other smaller Islands. It has a Volcan, or Mountain, which casts forth flames; which, in the Year 1615, spoil'd all the Artillery in the Island. Amboyna, fruitful in Cloves, likewise on the South of the Moluccoes, gives it Name to some other small neighbouring Islands. It was taken in the Year 1603, from the Portugals, by the Hollanders, who have at this day several For∣tresses there. It's their best Establishment, next that of Batavia: They have treated with the Inhabitants of the Island, so as these last are oblig'd to receive no Commerce, but with the Hollanders.
Europe, EƲROPE, one of the four great Parts of the World, is also one of the most considerable, if we respect either the Potency of its States, the great Num∣ber, Beauty, and excellent Polity of its Cities; its great Commerce, the goodness of its Air, and its prodigious Fertility. 'Twas Europe, that gave Alexanders and Caesars to the Uni∣verse; that has had within its Boundaries, the principal part of the Roman and Grecian Mo∣narchies, and which at this day does send Co∣lonies into other parts of the World. For this reason, it seems to be represented with a Crown on its Head, when it is shewn under the form of a Woman. It lies in the North-West of our Continent, all in the Northern tem∣perate Zone: This exempts it from the insup∣portable heats, which reign in Africk, and which the most Southern parts of Asia undergo. Its Air is equally mild, unless it be in its most Northern Countreys. The Ground affords all manner of Grains and Fruits. Its length, to take it from the Cape St. Vincent, towards the West of Spain, unto the Parts of Muscovy, bordering upon the Mouths of the River Obi,
exceeds twelve hundred Leagues, or is about 3800 Miles. Its Breadth, that is to say, its Extent from the South to the North, from Cape Mapatan, in Morea, to the most Northern Promontory of Norway, is full eight hun∣dred. Toward the North, Europe has the Northern Ocean, call'd Frozen, by reason of its Ice; the Western, or Atlantick Ocean, towards the West; the Mediterranean Sea, towards the South; and beyond that Sea, Africa. Now the Bounds, which towards the Levant separate it from Asia, in remounting the Mediterranean-Sea, towards the North, are as follows: 1. The Archipelago, or the White, otherwise Aegean Sea. 2. The Streight of Gallipoli, call'd the Dardanelloes, and an Arm of St. George, otherwise nam'd the Hellespont, two Miles broad. 3. The Sea of Marmora, otherwise Propontis. 4. The Streight of Constantinople, or the Chanel of the greater Sea, otherwise the Thracian-Bosphorus. 5. The Black or Ma∣jor Sea, otherwise Euxinus. 6. The Streight of Caffa, or Vospero, otherwise the Mouth of St. John, formerly the Cimmerian Bosphorus. 7. The Limen, or the Sea of Zabaca and Tana, formerly Palus Mcotides. 8. The River of Dom, or Tana, formerly Tanais. 9. A Line drawn from the most Eastern winding of the Dom, unto the Northern Ocean, near Obi. Some draw this Line more towards the West, from the Sources of the Dom, unto the White Sea, which is in Muscovy, and make Europe very small: Others contain the Conquests of the Great Duke of Muscovy, which he made in the Asiatick Tartary. Not to confound the true Li∣mits
of Asia and Europe together, we may say, that both the Czar, and the Grand Seignior, have Territories in each of those Great Parts of the World. Europe is to be considered both in Terra firma, and in Islands, if we make the Numeration of its Parts according to their situation, 1. We find, towards the West, France, Spain, Portu∣gal, three Hereditary Kingdoms. 2. Towards the South, three Regions belonging to divers Sovereigns; the first comprehends the Coun∣treys bordering upon France, which were almost all formerly part of Gaule, and whereof the greatest part has been reunited in our time in France, the Low-Countreys, that is to say, Hol∣land and Flanders, La Franche Compte, Suisser∣land, and Savoy: The second of these Regions is Italy, and the third Germany. 3. Towards the North of Europe, there is Denmark and Sueden, Hereditary Kingdoms: Norway is added to the Crown of Denmark, as belonging to the same King. 4. Towards the East, are Poland, Muscovy, Turkey, three the Greatest States of Europe. Under the Name of European Turkey, is comprehended Turkey, properly so taken, Greece, Hungary, Transylvania, Walachia, Mol∣davia, lesser Tartary, the Republick of Ragusa. The Isles of Europe are in the Ocean, in the Mediterranean, in the Baltick-Sea. The Isles of the Ocean are Great Britain, which compre∣hends England and Scotland, Ireland and other that are smaller, all under the Name Britanick, Sicily, Sardaigna, Corsica, and Candia, are the greatest of the Mediterranean-Sea. The Isles of the Baltick are not considerable, in respect of us.
The most renowned Mountains of Europe, are the Pyrenees and the Alpes towards the Confines, the Cevennes about the midst of France; Sierra-Morena in Spain, the Apennine in Italy, Parnas∣sus in Greece, Crapax between Poland and Hun∣gary, the Riphees in Moscovy, Mount-Gibel, other∣wise call'd Aetna, in Sicily. Amongst the most considerable Rivers, there are the Tage, the Guadiana, the Guadalquivir, the Eber in Spain: The Po, the Tyber in Italy: The Seine, Loire, Ga∣rone, Rhosne in France: The Danube, Rhine, Elbe, Oder in Germany: The Vistule and Nieper in Po∣land: The Volga and Dom in Moscovy. The Thames, Trent, Severn in England: The Tay in Scotland: The Shennon in Ireland. We may consider the State of Europe accor∣ding to their Titles, without having regard to their Rank; and say, that there is the Patri∣mony of the Church: Two Empires, Germany and Turkey: Seven Kingdoms, each with its King, who acknowledged yet no Superiors, England, France, Spain, Portugal, Suedeland, Denmark, Poland, this Elective: Eight Electorates, May∣ence, Treves, Cologne, Bohemia, Bavaria, Saxony, Brandenbourg, the Palatinate: One Arch-Dutchy, which is Austria: Two Great Dutchies, Mosco∣vy, Tuscany: Six Dutchies, besides those in the Empire, Lorrain, Savoy, Mantua, Modena, Par∣ma, Courland: Four Principalities, which pay Homage to the Turks, Transylvania, Walachia, Moldavia, lesser Tartary: Seven Republicks, Holland, Suisserland, Venice, Genoa, Lucca, St. Ma∣rin, Ragusa. A great number of Principalities, and Imperial Cities in Germany, enjoy Sove∣reignty in their States, but owe Fealty to the Emperor.
The Christian Religion is the most received in Europe; for which reason, some give it the Name of Christendom. By the Cares of the Europeans, the Faith has been Preached and Esta∣blished in America, Africa and Asia. Besides the Roman Catholicks, the Protestants, and the Re∣formed, there are in Europe several Sectaries, Mahometans, and Idolaters in some Countries of the North. The Roman Catholick Religion is, for the most part, where is us'd the Latin Tongue. The Schisms, where they speak the Sclavonian. Protestanism, where the Teutonick is in use. Judaism, wandring in most parts of the World, is tolerated in some Cities: It has been particularly banish'd out of France, Spain and Portugal. Some who have undertaken to make the supputation of the Parts of the Earth Discover'd, according to the Religions that are receiv'd up and down, have said, that if those Parts were divided into thirty, Christianity would have five of them, Mahometism six, and Paganism nineteen. In Europe are reckon'd four Principal Tongues, the Teutonick, the Latin, the Greek, and the Sclavonian. The Teutonick is of three sorts, German, in Germany; Saxon, in England and Scotland; Danish, in Denmark, in Sueden, Nor∣way and Ireland. The Latin Tongue is receiv'd in Italy, France and Spain. The Greek was for∣merly of four sorts, Attick, Ionick, Dorick, Aeolick. The Sclavonian is currant amongst the Sclavoni∣ans, Bohemians, Polanders, Moscovites. There are seven other less considerable Tongues, the Albanese, Cossack, Hungarian, Finlandish, Irish, British and Bask. The Cossack has affinity with that of the lesser Tartary; the Finlandish is re∣ceiv'd
in Finland and Lapland; the Brittish in the Principality of Wales, and in Brittany of France. Amongst the Ancient People of Europe, the Greeks have won the Prize for Sciences, and the Roman for Arms: In the last Ages, its Western Nations have excell'd in Navigation. The Present State of the Countries, Fortresses and other Places, which the Europeans stand Possess'd of in the East and West-Indies. EƲrope at first had but two Nations, who in the last Age, and towards the end of the Age before, undertook, with success, Voyages of a long course, and who afterwards sent Co∣lonies into those Lands they had Discover'd, the Spaniards towards the West, the Portugals towards the East. They obtained from Pope Alexander VI. a Donative of all the undisco∣ver'd Lands. The other Europeans were not sa∣tisfied with the over-Prodigal Liberality of this Sovereign Pontiff; the English share therein; the French and Hollanders were willing to have their share therein: Since which, there have been divers changes in several places of those Countries; the rigour, which the Spaniards and Portugals have used to exclude other Nations, having only promoted their own Destruction.
The French have in Canada, 1. Mont-real, the three Rivers, Quebec, Tadousac, upon the Great River of St. Laurence: Accadia, Port-Royal, St. John, Pemtagoet, near the Sea; the Isle of Cap-Breton in the Isle of Terra-Nova, Plaisance, the Bay of little Niort. 2. In the Antilles Islands, St. Christopher's in part, (the other part belonging to the English, St. Bar∣tholomew, St. Croix, St. Martin, Guadaloupe, la Desirce, Mary-Galant, the Saints; Martinick, St. Alousie, Grenade, the Grenadins: The Tortuse and several Colonies in the Western Part of the Islands of Hispaniola, called San-Domingo. 3. In the Terra-firma of Southern America upon the Coast of Guayana, the Isle of Cayene: The Co∣lony of Corou, Coonama, Comaribo. 4. The Commerce of the Coast of Africa upon the Ri∣vers of Senega, of Gambia, at Rufisque near Cap∣Verd, at Grand-Sestre, at Ardre, in several pla∣ces of Guinea. 5. The Fort Dauphin in the Isle of Madagascar. The Isles of St. Mary; of Bour∣bon, of Diege-Rois. Countoirs or Staples at Suratte, at Souali, and other Places of the Mo∣gul; Near Nazul-Patan, at Rezapour, at Siam, in the Kingdom of Tunquim; at Bantam in the Isle of Java and other Places. The Spaniards possess the greatest and best part of America, where they have a great num∣ber of Towns. 1. In the Northern America, New-Spain, the Isles of Cuba, Hispaniola, (the French have setled themselves in the Western part of Hispaniola) Porto-rico: St. Augustin, St. Mat∣thew in Florida, a part of new Mexico. 2. In Southern America, la Castille d'or, otherwise called Terra-firma, Peru, Chili, Paraguay, which comprehends the Countries of Tucuman and la
Plata: The Isles of. Salomon in the South Sea. 3. In the Coast of Africa upon the Ocean, La∣rache, the Canary Islands. 4. Towards the East, most of the Philippine Island, called Manilhes. They have a part of the Molucco Islands; which they have abandoned, and the Hollanders have not failed to make advantage of their so do∣ing. The Portuguese have, 1. All the Coasts of Brasile, in Southern America, where are the Ca∣pitanias of Peru, Maranhaon, Ciara, Riogrande, Paraibe, Tamaraca, Pernambuco, Seregippe, Baia de Todos-os-Santos, los-Isleos, Porto-Seguro, Spiritu-Santo, Rio-Janeiro, and San-Vincente: Towards the Mouth of the Amazon, the Places of Estero, Corduba, Cogemine. 2. In Africa, Mazagan up∣on the Coast of the Kingdom of Morocca: Some Forts upon the River St. Dominick, a Branch of the Niger, upon the Coasts of Guinea, of Congo, of Angola; Habitations in the Isle of St. Tho∣mas: The Isles Terceres, Madera, Porto-Santo, Cap-Verd, of the Prince, of Fernando Pao, of Annabon. 3. Several Places in the East-Indies; in Cafreria, the Castle of Cofala, the Village of Sena, a Factory with a small Fort at the Cape of Corientes, strong Houses of Cuama, and on the Rivers of the Coast. In Zanguchar, the City and Castle of Mozambick, with the Fort of St. Mark: Factories and small Forts of Angoxa and Quilimane. The Castle of Quiloa, a Facto∣ry in the Isle Monfia. The Town and Castle of Mombaze, the Castle of Melinde, with the Vil∣lages and Factories of Pata and Ampaze. The Traffick in all the Coast of Africk, from the Cape of Good-Hope to the Red-Sea; in the Isle Zoeotora: at Aden, at Fartach, at Bassora. In
Persia, half of the Revenue of the Isle of Baha∣rem, of Congue, the Traffick to Bender-Rich, to the Cape de Jasques. In the India of the Mo∣gul, Damaon with the Forts of St. Jeronimo, St. John, Kielme, Mahi, Tarampor: Bazaim with the Isle Salsete, the Fort Bandera, called Manora, the Village of Tana Fortified with three Bastions, the Rock of Asserim. Ougeli-bourg, upon the Ganges: the Traffick to Agra, Ame∣dabat, Cambaya, Suratte, Baroche, in Bengala. They have in Decan Chaul, the Forts of Morro, of Caranga, the Village of Massagan. Goa with its Fortresses and Dependencies in the Land of the Bardes, and in the Isle Salsete. Upon the Coast of China, Macao. In the Isle of Solor, the Village and Fort of Larentock. The Traffick into Persia, Golconda, Aracan, Pegu; at Tana∣zerin, Ligor, Odia, Cambodia; in the Isle of Timor. The English have extraordinarily augmented their Dominions in America; they have in Northern America, New-England, Trinity-Bay, Chinchet, little Plaisance, in the Isle of Terra-Nova: Virginia, the Bermudoes Island; New-York; the Fort of Orange. Some Colonies in Florida, at Cap-faire; la Ciguatee, and other Lucca-Islands. At the Antilles Isles, the Bar∣badoes, which are Barbada, Barboudu, Anguille, St. Christophers in part, (the other part belong∣ing to the French) Montserrat, Nieves, otherwise Meuvis, Antego, la Dominique, St. Vincent in part; the Isle of St. Catharine, called Provi∣dence: the Isle of Jamaica, that of Trinity; St. Pointe, and other Colonies at Surinam, at Maroni, at Sinamari, with some Forts upon the Coast of Guayana. In Africa, Tangier, near
the Streights; the Fort of S. Andre, in the Ri∣ver of Gambia; San-Felippe, towards the River St. Dominique; Tagrin, Madrebomba, Takorari, Cabo-Corso, Eniacham, or Naschange, and other Places of Guinea. A Fort in the Isle of St. He∣lena; Maderaspatan, upon the Coast of Coro∣mondel; the Isles Bambain, Angedive, Pouleron: A Hall, or Lodge, wherein they have a Presi∣dent at Suratte, at Bantam. Factories at Ispa∣ham, at Gombru, where they have half the Re∣venue; At Agra, at Amedabat, at Cambaya, at Brodra, at Baroche, at Surat, at Dabul, at Pettapoli, at Masulipatan, at Balazor in Bengala, at Ougeli: In Siam, at Camboia; at Tunkin, in the Island Formosa. The Hollanders have been dispossess'd of their New-Holland in America, where they have still the Isles of St. Eustache, of Saba, of Curasao, of Tobago; the City of Coro, in Terra firma; the Colonies of Boron, Esquib, Brebice, Aper∣waqul, and others upon the Coast of Guayana. In Africa, Arquin, Gorea towards Cap-Verde, where they have a Fort, with Factories at Ru∣fifque, at Porto-d' Ale, at Joal: St. George de la Mine, the Fort of Nassau, or Moure, Cormen∣tin, Axime, Botrou, in Guinea, upon the Gol∣den Coast: several Forts in Congo. Near the Cape of Good Hope, at Tafel-bay, or Table-bay, two Forts. On the East of the Isle of Mada∣gascar, the Island Mauritius. In the Coast of Malabar, Onor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochin, Coulan. In the Coast of Coromandel, Tuticorin, Negapatan, Karkalle, Guelderland, near Pallecate. In the Peninsula of India Extra Gangem, Malacca, with the Ports, the Isles, and Fortresses, which depend on it.
In the Isle of Ceylan, Negombo, Colombo, Galle, Baticale, Trinquilemale, Jaffanatapan; a For∣tress in the Isle of Manar. In the Isle Java, Jacatra, call'd Batavia, with its Dependences: the Island Bima; part of the Moluccoe Islands; namely, in Ternate, Tacomma, Talucco, Ma∣laya: In Motir, the Fort of Nassau: In Ma∣chan, Taffaso, Tabillola, Naffaquia, otherwise Nahaca, Maurice; In Bachian, Grammadoure, Loboua: In Gilolo, Sabou, Coma: In the Isle of Amboina, Coubella, Lovio: In the Isles of Ban∣da, Nassau; Belgique, in that of Nera: Revenge, in that of Powleway. In the Isle of Solor, the Fort Henry, the Fort Joupandam, otherwise called Rotterdam, in the City of Macassar: The Isles Savo and Boton, near Macassar: A Fort in that of Timor. Part of the Terra Australis, which they have called New Holland, where are the Carpentaria, the Lands of Arnems, of Witz, of Endracht, otherwise called Concord, of Edels, Leuvin, of Nuitz. Several Facto∣ries in Persia, at Gombru, at Congue, at Ispaham; in the Dominions of the Mogul, at Agra, Ame∣dabat, Cambaia, Bache, Surate, Ougeli, Cay∣umbasar, Deca, Patena, Pipilipatan. In Decan, at Fingerla. In Coromondel, at Tenegapatan. In Golconda, at Golconda, Mazulipatan, Palicot, Datscheron, and Bincola-patan. In Pegu, at Ava, and Siriam. In Siam, at Odia. In the Isle of Sumatra, at Ticou, Piaman, Indapour, Cellebar, Jambi, and Palimbam. In the Isle of Java, at Bantam, and Japara; In the Isle of Celebes, at Manado: At Macasar. The Traffick in the Isle Zocotora. On the Coast of Arabia, at Mocha, Aden, and Fortach. In the Isles of Larck, of Kesem near Ormus. At Porca, and
in most of the places of Malabar. In Bisnagar, at Ornixa; in Aracan; in Pegu: at Tanasserim, Pera, Ihor, Paham, Patane, Singora, Bordelong, and Ligor; in Tunquim, at Chincheo, and other places of China; at Rima, in the Isle of Bor∣neo. To the exclusion of other Nations, they pretend to the Traffick on the Eastern Coast of Sumatra, of Japan, in the Isles of Amboina, and Balli, and Bima in the Isle Camboua. They stand no longer possess'd of the Island of For∣mosa, which favour'd them in their Commerce of Japan; the Chineses having expell'd them thence. The Suedes have establish'd in Northern Ame∣rica, Colonies under the Name of New-Sueden, Christiana, Gothembourg, Ensim∣bourg. The Danes have some Territories in each of the Indies. They have New-Denmark, towards the North of America; the Fortress of Frede∣ricksbourg, of three Bastions, which Commands at Cabo-Corso, and the Castle of Christiansbourg, in Guinea. Krankebar, called Trango-bay, and Dansbourg, on the Coast of Coromondel.
The Courses the Europeans steer towards the West-Indies. MAriners, that sail upon the Ocean, teach us, that the Winds, which commonly blow in the Torrid Zone, are called Brizes, and General Winds; that those Winds are from the East to the West, according to the Motion of the Primum Mobile, which (as some are pleas'd to say) makes the Sea to move after the same manner. The Winds they have com∣monly, from thirty Degrees of Northern Lati∣tude, are Winds from West South-West to East. Upon the Seas, towards the Poles, the Winds are not regular. It is the bus'ness of Pilots, to choose Seasons fit for Navigation; to know, by Experience, the Flats, the Cur∣rents, or Ledges, of the Places where they are to go; to know the Quality and the Con∣dition of their Ships; to observe the Wind well, that they may shorten their Course, when they point their Chart; finally, to have re∣gard to the Variation of the Compass, which is not always the same in one and the same place. We call America the West-Indies; the Spa∣niards have made the most Voyages thither. Their ancient Course was to go first of all into Great Canary, or into Gomera; to sail towards the South or the South-East, there to take ad∣vantage of Monzoons, or General Winds of the Torrid Zone, which carried them to Gua∣daloupe, where they met with good Water.
Now adays, because they have two Fleets, the one for New Spain, the other, which is call'd the Gallions, for the Terra firma, after having steered much the same Course, these Fleets di∣vide themselves at their departure from the most Eastern of the Antille's Islands: that of New-Spain makes for the Cape St. Anthony, in the Western part of the Isle of Cuba, and then gets to the Port of Vera Cruz, by a Northern∣ly Course in Winter, by a Southern Course in Summer. From thence the Merchants go by Land to the City de los Angelos, and to Mexico. The Port of Vera Cruz is defended by a For∣tress, it is much more so by the Flats and Rocks which are at its entrance. About three Months time is spent in the way from Spain to Vera Cruz. The Ships, which are bound for the Honduras and Guatimala, after having sail'd South of the Isle of Hispaniola, steer to the North of Jamaica, and disembark at Truxillo, or at the Golfo Dulce, which are places of the Province of Honduras. Those who go to the Manilhes, after being arriv'd in the City of Mexico, go and embark at the Port of Acapulco, or in that of Natividad, both upon the South-Sea. They bring from the Manilhes much Riches, and far more precious Merchandizes, than those which are carried from Europe to Mexico. The Port of Acapulco is spacious, sheltered from Winds, defended with a Castle, and about fourscore Leagues distant from the City of Mexico, which sends its Merchandizes upon Mules. The Fleet of Cartagena, after having pass'd in fight of the Islands, steers it Course towards Cartagena, where it disembarks for the new
Kingdom of Granada. The Ships destin'd for Peru, go to Porto Belo, where they discharge the Merchandizes of Europe, that are carried by land to Panama; or else, for a good space of the way, by the River of Charge, which lies in the Isthmus of the two America's. At Panama those Merchandizes are embark'd for Lima, or Arica, the nearest Sea Port to Potosi. This rich Commerce has been much endammaged for these late years by the Free-booters and Boucaniers, Corsairs of the American Islands. To return into Europe, these Fleets assemble all at the Havana, in the Isle of Cuba, the best Harbour of the West-Indies: 'Tis very Com∣modious, and defended with three Castles. From thence they steer along the Chanel of Bahama, and after, having ranged the Coasts, they pass by the South of the Tercera's in Win∣ter, by the North of the same Islands in Sum∣mer, for the kenning either the Cape of Finis∣terre, or that of St. Vincent, and after that, make for the Port of Cadiz, or that of St. Mary, as they did formerly to that of St. Lucar. The ancient way they took in their return was, at the departure from Cartagena, and from St. Martha, to pass to the West of the Isle Hispaniola, to the East of Jamaica and Cuba, to get loose from all the Antilles, by the Cha∣nel between Mayaguana and the Caiques, for the getting into the main Ocean, and have there the conveniency of the East Winds. The Spaniards can no longer, with safety, steer this Course; the English remaining Masters of Ja∣maica, the French of Tortue, and several Colo∣nies in the Western part of Hispaniola.
The French, who are bound for the West-Indies, steer their Course either towards Ca∣nada, or towards the Antilles, or towards Cayene and the Terra firma, which is near it. When they go to Canada, they make a Traverse of about seven hundred Leagues through the Ocean, pass to the North, or to the South, of New-found-land, and so to the great River. If they go to the Antilles, or to Cayene, they go and ken the Canaries, and then steer their way Southwards, until that in the Torrid Zone they have the conveniency of the Eastern Winds, which they fail not to meet with there. The Courses which the Euro∣peans Steer in their Way to the East-Indies. UNder the Name of the East-Indies, we understand the Coasts of Africa and Asia, with all the Islands and Peninsula's of our He∣misphere, which are in the Indian-Sea, beyond the Cape of Good Hope. The several Com∣panies of Europe, establish'd for Commerce, have extended or drawn back, suitably to their interest, the Lines of the Meridians, which in∣clude the Lands contain'd in that space, and have, for that purpose, Charts to their advan∣tage, enlarging thereby the Countrys which fell to their share.
Most of the Countreys of the East-Indies are the finest, the most delicious, and, without contradiction, the richest of the whole World. The Europeans, who go by Sea, have sought out all imaginable ways to get thither with ease, which the Portugals happily effected in the foregoing Age: the Hollanders have ren∣dred themselves so powerful in those Parts, in our time, that they would fain play there the Masters of Commerce: But the English thought fitting to share with 'em in it: And the French have shewn, what a willing mind they have that way, if they had but all the Qualities necessary for such like Enterprizes. The Portugal Tongue is in use upon the Coasts of the East-Indies: When that People return into the East-Indies, through the Domi∣nions of the Turk, they lay aside that Tongue at Bagdad, to make use of Lingua Franca, which is Turkish, and a corrupted Italian. The French, at their going out of the Ports of France, steer towards the South-East, unto the heighth of Cape Finisterre in Spain. Thence they go Southerly, passing into the East, and in sight of the Isle of Madera, or much rather to the East of that of Porto-Santo. They come in ken of the Isle of Palma, one of the Canaries, when they are about ten Leagues Westward. They pass also sometimes between Teneriff, and the great Canary; then they must carefully avoid the Flat of the Savages, to the South of Porto-Santo: there are several small Islands considered as a Bank, because they are environ'd with Rocks. Afterwards they still steer their Course towards the South, and pass between the Isles of Cap-Verd, and the Terra
firma of Africk, about thirty or forty Leagues East of those Islands. They do not approach nearer than a hundred Leagues to the Coast of Guinea, by reason the Currents of the Sea bear thither, and that there are troublesom Calms; nor do they come nearer the Coast of Brasil, than they do that of Guinea, for the avoiding the Abrolhes, which begin towards the Isle St. Catherina; if they did otherwise, they would find themselves obliged to return into Europe. They steer a middle Course between the Isle of Ascension, and that of Trinity, which are at twenty Degrees of Southern Latitude. After which, they go towards the South-East, until that in thirty two Degrees of the same Southern Latitude, they be on the North of the Isles of Tristan de Cunha, which they dare not come near, because the Sea is commonly very high there: these Islands are seven in number, and one of 'em is much greater than the rest. By steering after that, East South-East, they meet with the signs of the Cape of Good Hope, which are of a green Herb, called Sargass, and of Trombes, which are pieces of Reeds, of three or four Foot in length, as thick as a Man's arm, lying upon the Water with their Roots. They are used to pass to such a di∣stance to the Cape des Aiguilles, that they can sound the Bank, which is in the South of it. From thence they go Eastward, and then North-East, to arrive at Madagascar. In the above∣mentioned Course, they stay some time at the Canary Islands, or in those of Cape Verd; for∣merly at Cape Blanck, Rufisque, in the Isles of the Idols, at Tagrin, or in the Bay of Saldaign, upon the Coast of Africk, according to their
Occasions and Occurrences. The Bay of Sal∣daigna, which is seven or eight Leagues in length, and two or three in breadth, has good anchorage; it looks like a Lake, and it has good shelter about, from five or six small Islands which are there. The return into France, is performed after another manner than the way they go from thence, by reason of the General Winds which reign from the East West-wardly in the Torrid Zone, as we have said. After having doubled the Cape of Good-Hope, and been some hundred Leagues to the East, they pursue the Course North North-East, unto the sixteenth Degree of Southern Latitude; from whence, they go directly West to ken the Island of St. Helena, where they are used to refresh themselves: the English have made there a Fort some few years since. From the Isle of St. Helena, they go to the Isle of Ascension, where they have the con∣veniency of Fishing for Tortoise; and then still towards the North-East, until they come to the height of France. In their return, when they are somewhat on this side the Line, they leave the Panedo of St. Peter on the left: After that, they leave the Isles of Cape-Verd on the right, as well as the Tercera's, and are very cautious of approaching the Abrolhes, which lye on the West of those Islands. The Portugals go to the East-Indies, by the South of the Cape of Good-Hope; their Naviga∣tion into the Indian Sea is regulated by certain Seasons, and the Winds they call Muessons. After having doubled that famous Cape, they bend their Course for Goa, between the firm Land of Africa, and the Island Madagascar, to
the East or to the West of the Shores of India. They go to refresh themselves at Mozambick, and pass between the Isles Comorro, and Juan-Miz; then, still to the North-East, unto the sixteenth Degree of Northern Latitude, in the distance of about a hundred Leagues from the Desart Coast. At length they steer directly East for Goa. When they go from Goa to Macao, they they make Sail along Malabar towards the Cape of Comorin; South of Ceilan, and of all the Sou∣thern Islands: They pass through the Streights which are near the Island Galli, and Sail along Macasar and the Manilhes, unto Macao. This they do not without great inconveniencies; and they take that great Circuit, because the Hollanders hinder them from passing between the Streights of Malacca and Sunda, nay, and often scout 'em towards Cochim, and at the Point of Galle upon the Coast of the Isle of Ceilan. The Navigation from Macao to Japan is about twen∣ty days. In their return, at their departure from Goa, they pass by the Cape to the West, about a hundred and fifty Leagues, and come in ken of the Desart Coast of Africa, and in sight of Land, and get to Mozambick, making Sail be∣tween the Isle of Madagascar and the Shores of India: they Coast along the Land of Natal, where the Currents are commonly from the North-East to the South-West, and where the Navigation is very dangerous. After which, they return into Portugal by the Cape of Good-Hope, following the above-mention'd Course.
The Course the Hollanders often take to the East-Indies is by the South of the Cape of Good-Hope. They go thither sometimes through the Streights of le Maire and Brovers. They take that way by reason of the Winds motion of the Water, which they have then favoura∣ble in Sayling towards the West, and because commonly they spend less time, and lose fewer Men in this than in the other way. When by the South of Africa, they go and double the Cape of Good-Hope, they after touch at the Bay they call Tafel-Bay. This Bay is a commodious Retreat for Ships, they can Anchor there, with all safe∣ty, at six or eight Fathom Water, and shelter themselves from the Storms, which are very frequent in those parts. The Air is healthful; they find all sorts of refreshments, excellent Water; the access to it is so easie, that they can take in fresh Water without any trouble. For these considerations, the Hollanders made an Establishment there some years since, and no longer content themselves, as they formerly did, with leaving Letters there for their Coun∣try-men, that might come to pass that way. The Mountain of Tafel-Bay is esteemed thir∣teen hundred and fifty Foot high. Those Hol∣landers, who do not stop at Tafel-Bay, make for Mauritius-Island, otherwise Swan-Island. This Island has, in its Southern part, a Port between the Flats, wherein above fifty great Ships may ride safe under the shelter of a Fort built in the Year 1640. From thence, between divers Flats, they make for the Chanel of Mamale, or that of Malique; and in this last Course, they have favourable Currents.
For their way towards Malacca; whether that they go from Mauritius Island, or from Cochim, they pass by the Islands of Nicubar, North of the Isle of Sumatra, and leave the Isle of Pulo-Lada on the left, otherwise called the Isle of Pepper, of about twenty Leagues in com∣pass. They return into Holland after the same manner as do other Europeans. Other Tracts and Ways to the East-Indies. THE People, who inhabit along the Medi∣terranean Sea, designing for the East-Indies, go to Alexandretta, to Aleppo and Bir, which is four small days Journey from thence. There are Caravans from Aleppo to Erzerum, to Erivan, to Tauris. At Bir, they Embark upon the Euphrates to go in ten days to Rousvania, from thence, by Camels, to Bagdad, and then by the Tigris to Bassora. They may go by Wa∣ter from Rousvania to Bassora in small Barks, from Bassora to El-Catif in eight days: the Na∣vigation is not very commodious upon the Eu∣phrates and the Tigris, by reason of the numbers of Mills they meet with upon those Rivers. Sometimes they go through the Desart to go to those two Cities, from whence they go to Is∣paham and to Agra by Caravans; or else, after being Embark'd upon the Tigris, they go to Congue and Gombru near Ormus, by the Sea El-Catif; and into the East-Indies by the Ocean.
The Customs of the Turk and Persian gain very much by the Merchandizes, which take this way. The Carriage from Bagdad to Bassora is very easie and pleasant; in the Barks, which go that way, they sometimes make use of Sails, and sometimes Oars; often do they let them∣selves be carried along by the Current and Stream of the Water, so as they only Steer. The River, which the Arabians of the Neigh∣bourhood call Chat or Xat, as they do the other Great Rivers, is two Miles in breadth, and about six Fathom deep. It is something like the Rhosne in France, less rapid, and more abound∣ing in Fish; its Water, tho' somewhat brackish, is nevertheless mighty good to drink: It forms several Branches, because that the Land is low there, and sandy. In the Way they take to China, through the Territories of the Levant, they are to be at Aleppo towards the end of the Month August, for to take there, in September, the conveniency of the Caravans, which bring them, in November, to Bagdad. From Bagdad they are ten days in going to Bassora: twelve in going from Bassora to Gombru, where they almost daily meet with conveniencies in Barks called Tranquins. In Ja∣nuary and February the Muesson stands right for Surat, where they commonly Embark upon Eng∣lish Ships or Moorish Vessels, which go that Voy∣age in five and twenty days. This way is look'd upon as much the same with that from Marseilles to Alexandretta. At Surat they take their Way by Land, spend therein forty small days Journies, as far as Mazulpatan, a City up∣on the Gulph of Bengala, and this about the Month of March. From Mazulpatan they go
to Tanazarin by Sea: from thence to Sian, from Sian to China in all Seasons. This way did the three French Bishops go, who were Missionaries into China. They make mention of another way to China, thro' Candahar, Agra, Pathna, Niepal, Pitan, &c. this way is gone by Land; no Inn to be found, few Villages, great Desarts, hideous Mountains, where they make use of great Goats to carry their things. There are also some of those Mountains so steep, that to pass them, they are forc'd to wrap themselves up in Carpets, and put themselves into the hands of certain People, who lay you upon their Shoulders to carry you through those difficult places. Those, who dwell upon the Shore of the Black-Sea, remount the Faze, get to Arais, the Caspian-Sea, Albiamu; from whence they go by Land to the Indus, or the Ganges: those Rivers carry them to the Ocean. Nicanor, King of Syria, had projected to joyn Pontus Euxinus and the Caspian-Sea. The Genoueses have, a long while, held the City of Caffa for the maintaining this Commerce. There is, for those of those parts, another way by Trebrizond, Er∣zerum and the Euphrates, which lead to Bir; from thence, as we have said, into the Sea of the Indies. The Moscovites have the conveni∣ency of the Volga, the Caspian-Sea, Albiamu, and the Indies: For to return into the City of Mosco, they go up the Volga, Ocea, and the Mosca. These are the common ways, that are taken for the going to the East-Indies, and which now render that Country as famous, as did formerly the Military Expeditions of Bacchus and Alex∣ander
the Great. Now follow those which have since, with great care, been sought out for the same design. The Romans went to Alexandria of Egypt, ascended the Nile as far as Coptos, now Cana; and by Land went to Berenice, which is Cossir, where they had the conveniency of the Red-Sea and the Ocean. Under the Soldans of Egypt, Sues and Arden, were the Magazines of the Indi∣an Merchandizes, which were Transported to Cairo by means of the Nile; then they had in Europe fresher Spices than they have now, the Venetians and Genoueses brought them thither by the Mediterranean-Sea. France. TThe Kingdom of France is, at this day, one of the most flourishing States of Christen∣dom, in the midst of the Northern temperate Zone, where its People breath a very favoura∣ble Air. The French call it the Eye and Pearl of the World; and say, that it is to Europe what Europe is to other parts of the Earth: it is Rich, Fertile, very Populous, there being reckoned above four thousand good Towns in it. It's above two hundred and twenty Leagues in length, and full as many in breadth. The French-men value most of their Towns to be worth Provinces, their Provinces to be worth Kingdoms. Their Corn, Wine, Salt and Lin∣nen, do very much enrich the Inhabitants. France was formerly known under the name
of Gaul, which was carried into several places of Europe, nay, into Asia, when the Gauls made War in that part of the World. The extent of Gaul hath been divers. The French may well boast, that this King's Conquests have not been bounded neither by the Rhine, nor the Ocean, nor the Pyrenees, nor the Alps. The Crown is Hereditary; and, according to the Salick Law, the Female never succeeds upon the Throne. The French King's eldest Son is called Dauphin. This Monarchy is said to have subsisted since the Year 420. The three Royal Races of Merovers, Charlemaigne, Hugh Capet, have furnished it with sixty five Kings. Amongst other Titles, its Princes take upon them that of Most Christian, and Eldest Son of the Church. They pretend to Precedence before all other Kings, upon a pretext of being the most Noble and the Most Ancient of Europe. Their Arms are Azure, with three Flower-de-luces d' Or, since Charles the Ninth. The Kingdom is composed of three Orders or States, the Clergy, the Nobility, and the third Estate. There are reckoned seventeen Arch-Bishopricks, a hundred and six Bishopricks, besides the Arch-Bishopricks of Cambray, Be∣sanzon, the Bishopricks of Arras, St. Omar, Tournay, Ipres, Perpignan; sixteen Abbayes, Heads of the Order, or of the Congregation: about fifty thousand Curates, besides other Ecclesia∣stical Dignities: several General and Particular Governments: Thirty two great Provinces: Twelve ancient Peerages, several of new Crea∣tion. A great number of Principalities, Dutchies, Marquisates, Counties, Baronies, and other Lordships; Eleven Parliaments, besides those
of the Conquer'd Countrys, eight Chambers of Accounts, twenty two Generalities. There are four Principal Rivers, the Seine, whose Water is esteem'd the strongest in the World, and more healthful to drink than that of Fountains; the Loire, the King of the French Rivers; la Garonne, the most Navigable; the Rhosne, the most Rapid. Several Divisions are made of France, which regard the Church, the Nobility, the Justice, and the Finances. It is sufficient to say here, that the States-General of the Kingdom were held in the Year 1614. that then all the Provin∣ces appear'd under twelve Great Governments; four of those Governments are towards the North, the Seine, and the Rivers which fall into it, Picardy, Normandy, the Isle of France and Champaign. Four towards the midst, near the Loire, Brittany, Orleanois, Burgundy, and Lyonnois. The four others, towards the South, and near the Garonne or the Rosne, Guyenne, Lan∣guedoc, Dauphine, Provence. With Orleanois they then conjoyned le Mains, le Perche, la Beauce, on this side the River of Loire; Nivernois, Tou∣rain, Anjoy, above the said River; beyond it, Poictou, Angoumois, Berri. Burgundy had la Bresse, as it has still at present. Under Lyon∣nois, were Lyonnois, Avergne, Bourbonnois, la Marche. In Guyenne was Bearne, Gascogne, true Guyenne beyond the Garonne; and on this side Saintogne, Perigort, Limosin, Querci, Rouergue. Then, as well as now, Languedoc comprehended Cevenes. The other great Go∣vernments are not subdivided into great Pro∣vinces. Now follow the capital Cities, ac∣cording to that distribution, Amiens, Rouen,
Paris, Troyes, Rennes, Mans, No-gent-le-Retrou, Orleans, Nevers, Tours, Angers, Poi∣ctiers, Angoulesme, Bourges, Dijon, Bourg-en-Bresse, Lyon, Clermont, Moulins, Gueret, Pau, Auch, Bourdeaux, Saintes, Perigueux, Limoges, Cahors, Rodes, Toulouse, Viviers, Grenoble, and Aix. Spain. SPain is a Great Peninsula, two hundred Leagues in length, and the same in breadth, in the most Western part of Europe, betwixt the ninth and twenty fourth Degree of Lon∣gitude, and between thirty five Degrees and a half, and forty Degrees and a half of Northern Latitude. This Peninsula is upon the Ocean, and upon the Mediterranean-Sea; towards the North-East, it borders upon France, for the space of above a hundred Leagues, the Pyrenean Mountains between both. Several things concur to the making Spain thinly inhabited; its Fertility, Mountains, the barrenness of its Women, the banishment of the Moors, of whom above eight hundred thousand were constrain'd to depart thence, in the Year 1610, the great number of persons that are sent to Colonies, and the Wars abroad. From whence it proceeds, that never above seven thousand natural Spaniards were ever seen together in any Army. The Heat reigns there more than the Cold; those Provinces which
lye South-East, are more fertile than the rest. The Mountains without Trees, and the mighty Rocks are there called Sierra. This Country has but scarcity of Corn, but abounds with the strongest Wines, the most delicious Fruits, and the sweetest Oyls of Europe. The Gold and Silver, which is brought into Spain from America, is very capable of purchasing it all the other Conveniencies of Life. In the Year 1618. it was verified, that since the first discovery of this New World by Columbus, the Spaniards had drawn from thence above fifteen hundred thirty six Millions of Gold. These are immense Sums, but, as the Traders of Europe have the best share in them, they have not enrich'd Spain, proportionably to what it has been weakned by the Colonies, that have been sent thither. Moreover, the neces∣sity of having foreign Commodities drains and exhausts the better part of those Riches. This made Henry the Fourth of France say, That the Spanish Pistolls spoke their Riches in their own Dominions, but, carried elsewhere, did but shew their Poverty. Mines there are of Copper, Quick-silver, Lead, Iron, and Salt, in Spain: those of Gold and Silver have been spared, since they have had the conveniency of those of America. The Horses of this Region are ge∣nerally in esteem, those of Andalousia above all others; yet they travel commonly in this Countrey upon Mules and Asses, by reason of the Mountains. No Prince whatsoever has so much Land, as the King of Spain: He may, with justice, style himself the greatest Territorian of the Uni∣verse, if I may use that Term. True it is,
that his Dominions lye separated from one another, and dispers'd in the four parts of the World. Some of his Predecessours have boasted, that the Sun never set in their Dominions, and that the extent of their Territories was only to be measured by the Course of that Planet. In some Letters, which the Kings of Persia have address'd to them in the foregoing Age, there is, To the King, who has the Sun for a Hat. Among other Titles, they wear that of Ca∣tholick, particularly since Ferdinand the Fifth, and that of the King of Spains; they have taken up this last but of late years. These following are those which Philip the Fourth took in the Pleinpouvoir, which he gave in the Year 1659, to Don Lewis de Haro, for the treat∣ing of a Peace between France and Spain. Dom Philip, by the Grace of God, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, the two Sicilies, Jeru∣salem, Portugal, (this Title was left out in the Plein-pouvoirs, of the Peace of Nimmeghen) Na∣varre, Grenada, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia, Maillorca, Seville, Sardaigna, Cordova, Corsica, Murcia, Jaen, the Algarbes, Algezire, Gibral∣tar, the Canary Islands, the East and West-Indies, the Islands and Terra firma of the Ocean-Sea, Arch-Duke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy, (which is no longer allow'd him by the French King, since the Cession of the Franche Compte) Brabant, Milan, Count of Hapsbourg, Flanders, Tirol, Barcellonna, Lord of Biscay, and Ma∣lines. The principal Order of Knighthood, in Spain, is that of the Golden Fleece, the others are those of St. James, of Calatrava, of Al∣cantara, and Montese: the Kings of Spain have
attributed to themselves great Masterships and Jurisdictions of 'em, under the Name of Per∣petual Administrators. There are, more∣over, above fourscore Grandees, who are much the same with the Dukes and Peers of England; this Dignity of Grandee is setled upon Lands, and falls to Females. The Spaniards esteem Arts as disnonourable; upon which account most of their Artificers are strangers. They have always maintain'd the reputation, of being Faithful and Loyal to their Prince; they are slow in their Resolu∣tions, and their Tediousness and Procrastina∣tion makes them often lose good Occasions. Some of 'em have the vanity to say, That their Country furnishes the World with Generals of Armies; That God spoke to Moses, upon Mount Sinai, in the Castillian Tongue; That the Lord of the Universe must be a Spaniard born, and other such great Words. Spain, sometimes called Iberia, Hesperia, Mus-Arabia, was subject to strangers during a long while: the Celtae, Rhodiots, Phenicians, Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals, Swabians, Goths, and the Moors, have commanded and domineer'd there, over all, or in some parts. Its first Division was into two parts; the one on this side, the other on that side the Ebre, which then bounded the Empires of Rome and Carthage; since, what has been called Ʋlterior Hispania has only comprehended Betica and Lusitania. In each part the Romans establish'd fourteen Convents or Benches of Justice. Du∣ring the decay and fall of the Domination of the Moors, there arose five Kingdoms, Leon with Castile, Aragon, Navarre, Portugal, and
Grenada. After which, the whole Country fell under the sway of the King of Castile, the King of Portugal, and the King of Arragon. It is principally by these three Titles, that the King of Spain has possess'd all his States, where∣in are eight Vice-Roy-ships. In our time the King of Castile has been a peaceable Possessour of all these Kingdoms, tho', that since Pelagius, the Succession of these Kingdoms has fallen ten times upon Females: In the Year 1640, Portugal proclaim'd the Duke of Braganza King. The principal Rivers of Spain, are the Douere, abounding in Fish; the Tagus, renowned for its golden Sands; Guadiana, which is said to run under Ground; Guadalquiber is the deepest; Iberus, famous for its Name: All of them have their Source in Castile, and are not Navigable, like many Rivers in other Coun∣treys. Guadiana has given the Spaniards occa∣sion to say, That their Land affords the richest Bridge upon Earth; that it daily feeds above ten thousand Cattel, and that a great Army may march over it in Battalia: the An∣cients seem to have admirably well called this River Anas, by reason that it enters and rises out of the Earth, as a Duck does in the water. Some Moderns say, this River is hidden by the Mountains; others do assure us, that these are Breakings up of the Ground, which are made for the watering the neighbouring Lands, that are very lean and hungry: Certain it is, that this happens towards the Sources of Guadiana, and not towards Merida, as the old Carts re∣present it. This is one of the Wonders of Spain; the two others are, a City incircled
with Fire by Walls of Flint, which is Madrid; a Bridge, over which Water is seen to run; which is the Aqueduct of Segovia. One may say of the Cities of this State, that they have some appellation for Excellence; Sevil the tra∣ding, Grenada the great, Valencia the fair, Bar∣cellonna the rich, Saragossa the satisfied, Valle do∣lid the Genteel, Toledo the ancient, Madrid the Royal City. There are eight Arch-Bishop∣ricks, forty five Bishopricks: the Arch-Bishop∣ricks are Toledo, Burgos, Compostella, Sevil, Grenada, Valencia, Saragossa, and Taragonna. King Richard the First establish'd there the Ro∣man Catholick Religion, which is the only one allowed of in the Kingdoms, the Inquisition having been introduced against all other Be∣liefs. Some Churches are at Toledo, where they still perform the Mus-Arabick Office, which is that which the Christians, who liv'd amongst the Arabians, used. Several of their Sea-Ports are very considerable, the Passage, Saint Andre, la Corune, Cadiz, Cartagena, Alicant, &c. There are reckoned in Spain fifteen great Parts, most of which had the Title of King∣doms in the times of the Moors: Five upon the Ocean, Biscaya, Asturia, Galicia, Portugal, that hath its King, Andalousia: Five upon the Me∣diterranean-Sea, Granada, Murcia, Valencia, Cata∣lonia, the Isles of Majorca and Minorca; Five within the Inland of the Country, Aragon, Navarre, the two Castiles, Leon. Biscay has Woods which furnish it with the conveniency of building Ships. It has so great a quantity of Mines, and Iron-Forges, that the Spaniards call it the Defence of Castile. It is separated from France by the small River of
Bidassoa, which forms a little Island, Celebra∣ted for the conclusion of the Peace in the Year 1659. between the Crown of Spain and France. The Biscayans, who are the ancient Cantabrians, have great Priviledges, and boast of never ha∣ving been subdued. The Land (as well as in the Kingdom of Navarre) is well Cultivated, because there is neither Tax, nor Tythes, nor Right of Importation. Its Capital Cities are Bilbao, St. Sebastian, both driving a great Trade, especially in Wooll: Great Ships cannot come up to Bilbao but at High-Water. The Port of Saint Sebastian is of easie access, its entrance is defended with two Castles, that of the East upon a Height, that of the West on a Level upon a Rock. Saint Andero, and le Passage, are two excellent Sea-Ports in this Country, Fonte∣rabia the strongest place, Guatari the Country of Sebastian Can, he who first went round the World in the Ship called the Victory. Asturia breeds Horses much esteemed for their strength; it is the Title of the Prince of Spain, whose younger Brothers are called In∣fants since the Reign of King John the First. It has serv'd for a retreat to the Gothick Kings, and to several Bishops, during the irruption of the Moors, wherefore Oviedo, its Capital City, is called the City of Kings and Bishops. Galicia is more Populous than Fertile; Com∣postella is known for the Pilgrimages of those who go thither to visit the Relick of Saint James, the Patron of the Spaniards; la Corune for the goodness and spaciousness of its Har∣bour. The Silver Fleet, rich above thirty Mil∣lions, arrived there in the Year 1661. to avoid meeting with the English, who, for the sur∣prizing
it, lay at watch upon all the Avenues of Cadiz. They reckon in this Country above forty other Havens, whereof that of Vigo is the most considerable. Andalousia is so beautiful, so abounding in Wines, Corn, Olives, that it passes for the Granary and Store-house-of the Kingdom. Se∣vil is the Magazine of the Riches of the New-World: 'Tis a Town so well Built, that there is a Spanish Proverb which runs, Qui en no ha visto Sevilla, no ha visto maravilla. It still keeps the remains of the City Italica, the Native Town of Adrian. Corduba, which gave Lucan and the two Se∣neca's to Antiquity, was much more considera∣ble under the Moors than it is at present. Its principal Church was formerly the greatest Mosque of the Mahometans after that of Mecca. San-Lucar, at the Mouth of Guadalquivir, is a Town of great Trade. The Ships, which bring Gold and Silver from the West-Indies, have sometimes cast Anchor near the Tower of the Port, which is sometimes call'd the Tower of Gold: This casting Anchor is more commonly performed at Cadiz, and the Port Saint Mary, which is near it. Xeres de la Fontera is in the Neighbourhood of the Place where the Moors entirely defeated the Goths, in the Year 712. After which, they had the means of Ravaging all Spain as they did. The Spaniards have been observ'd to have made no scruple of having Alliance with those Infidels, because some of their Divines have maintain'd, that they might be made use of as of Horses and Elephants. Gibraltar gives its Name to the famous Streight, which communicates the Ocean and Mediter∣ranean-Seas,
and which separates Europe from Africa. Palos is the Haven, where Columbus em∣barked for the first Discovery of the New-World; Cadiz, as we have said, is the most usual place of Resort for the Fleets, which come from the West-Indies, by reason of the conveni∣ency of its Harbour. It is of such importance, that the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, recom∣mended the preservation of it above all things to his Son, Philip the Second, with that of Flushing and la Goulete. Antiquity shews here a Temple, dedicated to Hercules, with two Pil∣lars, either of Brass or Silver, which are said to be the Pillars of that Hero, as well as the two Mountains of the Streights of Gibraltar. Julius Caesar is said to have wept in this Temple, at the remembrance of the Prodigious Con∣quests, which Alexander the Great had made at the Age of thirty three Years, and whereof the consideration carried him to such high Enter∣prises, as that of Xenophon's Cyrus had done Scipio. The Name of Andalusians was given to the Moriscoes, who were driven out of Anda∣lousia and Granada; that of Tagarins to those of Aragon and Catalonia. The Kingdom of Granada under its last Moo∣rish Kings, who lost it in the Year 1421. was much Richer, and more Populous, than it is at present; it was also much more fertile: The Moors had a thousand Inventions to Water their Lands with Rivulets and Trenches, by causing Water to be brought thither from great Ponds, which they made in the Mountain which are at the foot of la Sierra-Navada. The Situation of this Kingdom, and the Disposition of its Towns, are conformable to the Description
Julius Caesar gives thereof. The City of the same Name is the greatest of Spain: The abode in it is so pleasant, by reason of the pureness of its Air, and its admirable Fountains, that the Moors placed Paradise in that part part of Heaven which is upon its Zenith. Malgus is known for the excellent Wines which it fur∣nishes the World withal. Almeria for its Com∣merce and its Harbour. Monde for the Victory of Julius Caesar over Pompey's Sons: He killed upon the place thirty thousand of his Enemies, and afterwards made the Circumvallation of the Town, with the Arms and Bodies of the Dead. Murcia is called the Garden of Spain, by rea∣son of its excellent Fruits. Its Town of the same Name drives a great Trade in Silk. Car∣thagena is a good Sea-Port. Valentia is the most agreeable Country of all Spain. The City of the same Name has also those of Beautiful, Great, of Valencia del-Cid, since its being taken by Rodrigo from the Moors. Alicant is known for the Transportation of its good Wines. Upon the Coast are seen, in a place called Morvedre, the Ruins of the ancient Sagonte, the destruction whereof, by Hannibal, gave occasion to the second Punick War. The Principality of Catalonia, the most im∣portant Province of Spain, produces Wine, Oyl, Corn, and Fruits in abundance. The Neigh∣bourhood of the Pyrenees furnish it with very fine Marble, Jaspar and Azure. Those who make Spain the Head of the Catholick King's
Dominions, say, Catalonia is one of its Ears, and Portugal the other. Ten Cities are reckon∣ed in this Province, seventeen Vigueries, or great Baily-wicks, with above a hundred Wal∣led Towns, whereof the most part were taken and re-taken in the late Wars. Barcelona, the Capital City, has good Edifices, by reason of the conveniency it has of being furnished with Stone from Mount-Juy. Tarragona, whereof the greatest part of Spain has born formerly the Name, is more Ancient and Strong than it is Beautiful. Tortosa upon the end of the Ebre. The French gained, near this Town, a famous Victory over the Sarazens in the time of Char∣lemain. Larida has susteined several Sieges, and seen several Battels fought in our time; Caesar formerly defeated, near this place, Afra∣mius and Petreius of Pompey's Party. Gironne is a Principality, whereof the Eldest Sons of the Kings of Aragon bore the Title. Cordene, a famous Dutchy, has a Mountain of Salt, which seems of all sorts of Colours, but becomes white when it is pounded. Problet, a rich Monastery, was the Sepulchre of the King's of Aragon: That of our Lady, at Montferrat, is known for its great Solitude, for its Pilgrimages, and the Presents that are made there. Roses, the strongest and most important of the Sea-Towns. The Isles of Majorca and Minorca, are the ancient Baleares, where the Inhabitants were heretofore as good Slingers, and great Pyrats, as it this day. They obliged their Children to fight for their Break-fast with their Slings; notwithstanding their activity, they were con∣strain'd to demand help of Augustus against the
Rabbets, which harassed their Country. The Books of Raymundus Lullius are read and studied in the University of Majorca, as Aristotle's, Des-Cartes's are in other places. The Isle of Minor∣ca has good Havens, whereof the most conside∣rable is that of Mahon, with Avenues, well For∣tified. The Territory of Yvica has this parti∣cularity of killing Serpents, which are in great numbers in the Isle Formentera. Aragon has no good Towns but Saragossa. Ainsa and Benavari have been the Capitas of two small Kingdoms, Sobrarbe and Ribagorce: Monzon is a place where the States of Aragon did formerly assemble. Navarre consists in six Merindades or Govern∣ments, whereof the Capital is Pamplune. There is, on this side the Pyrenees, one of those Go∣vernments, which is call'd of Low-Navarre, in the hands of the French King. The French say, That the Genealogy-Table shews the Rights, which his most Christian Majesty has over the Kingdom of Navarre, which was Usurp'd from his Predecessors about the Year 1512. without any other ground than that of Vis & Arma. Old-Castile has receiv'd its Name from a Ca∣stle, whose Figure is seen in the first Quar∣ter of the Arms of the King of Spain. Bur∣gos is the Metropolitan City thereof, with a strong Castle and a fine Church. Valladolid has been the abode of the Kings: the Ruins of the ancient Numantia are still seen towards the Sources of the Donere near Soria, where is kept the Great Standard of the Kingdom. The In∣habitants of Calahorre were formerly in such esteem for their Fidelity and Loyalty, that the Emperor Augustus Caesar chose his Life-Guard
out of those People. Both Castiles, as well as all the other Inland Provinces, are extraordi∣nary full of Mountains. New-Castile has the Capital Cities of the Kingdom, Madrid and Toledo. Madrid is adorn'd with beautiful Fabricks, as being the most usual Seat of the King. Toledo is very an∣cient, in the midst of Spain, where some Gothick Kings had then their abode. Its Clergy is reck∣oned the richest of Christendom; the Sword∣blades which are made in this Town are in very great esteem. The Escurial, standing seven or eight Leagues from Madrid, passes, amongst the Spaniards, for an eighth Wonder of the World; it costing, King Philip the Second, above twenty Millions of Gold; but 'tis true, that this expence was not extraordinay for a Prince, who is said to have spent above seven hundred Millions of Gold during his Reign. In the Year 1671. this admirable House was very much endamaged by a Fire. Badajox is upon the Frontier of Portugal in Estramadura. The small Territory of la Manche is made the Native Country of Don Quixot. The Kingdom of Leon was the first, which the Christians did establish after the Invasion of the Moors. Its Town, of the same Name, has a Ca∣thedral Church renowned for its Beauty: That of Toledo is esteemed for its Riches, of Sevil for its Bigness, of Salamanca for its Strength. The City of Salamanca has a Celebrated University, which has the Priviledg of Teaching the He∣brew, Greek, Arabick and Chaldean Tongues. Mention is made of the Vallies of Vatuegas, In∣habited by a kind of Patoacas, or Savage People, never heard of in Spain before the late discove∣ry
of 'em in the Mountains of the Kingdom of Leon. The occasion this: An Hawk of the Duke of Alva's, which he very much valued, flew over those Mountains, and his Man not be∣ing able to find her at first, they were sent back by the Duke to seek her. Clambring from one Hill to another, they hapned, at last, upon a large and pleasant Valley, where they spied a Company of Naked, Savage People, hemm'd about amongst many Craggy Rocks; the Sava∣ges, gazing a while upon them, ran into their Caves, made in the hollows of the Rocks, the best Houses they had; which being observed by the Falconers, they return again to their Lord, telling him, that instead of a Falcon, they had brought him news of a new World in the midst of Spain, and of a Race of People which came in with Tubal, so strongly affirming what they said, that they obtained belief. And the Duke, shortly after, went with a parcel of Musketeers, and subdued them easily, they having no offen∣sive Weapons but only Slings. They Worship∣ed the Son and Moon, fed upon nothing that had life, but had good store of excellent Fruits, Roots, and Springs of Water, wherewith Na∣ture was well contented. And though their Language was not altogether understood, yet many of their Words were purely Basquish. Reduced in this Discovery to Christianity, but easily discernable from all other Spaniards, by their tawny Complexions, occasioned by the reverberation of the Sun-beams from the Rocky Mountains, wherewith on all sides they are en∣compassed. The People must necessarily have been some remnant of the ancient Spaniards, who hid themselves amongst the Mountains for
fear of the Romans: Their Language and Ido∣latry speak them to be such. For had they either fled from the Goths or Moors, there had been found some Cross, or other Monument of Chri∣stianity, as in other places; or some such mix∣ture in their Speech, as would have savoured somewhat of the ancient Romans. The Duke of Alva, by whose means this Valley was disco∣ver'd, was the same, who, out of Vanity, had himself call'd an whole Army, composed of one sole Person. The other States of the King of Spain are near France, part of Flanders. In Italy, the Dutchy of Milan, Final, Orbitelle, the prote∣ction of Piombin, of Portolongon: The King∣doms of Naples, of Sicily, of Sardinia: Oran, Marsalquivir, Melille, Pennon de Velez, Ceuta, along the Coasts of Barbary upon the Mediter∣ranean, the Isle of Pantaralee. The greatest part of America: Several Islands and Places in the East and West-Indies. Portugal. POrtugal is a Kingdom, ancient for above five hundred years in the Western part of Spain, where was formerly Lusitania. In all probabi∣lity, this Name of Portugal came from that of Porto, a Town considerable for its Commerce, and from that of Cale a small Place near it. It is, from the South to the North, about a hun∣dred and twenty Leagues in length; in breadth
five and twenty, thirty, and sometimes fifty. Its Situation upon the Ocean, and the experi∣ence of its Inhabitants in point of Navigation, has given occasion to them to make Conquests in the four parts of the World, and principal∣ly in the East-Indies. Their Conquests have been in above five thousand Leagues of Coast, in Brasil, in Africa and Asia: All their Places were near the Sea, for they had no other design than that of rendring themselves Masters of Commerce. True it is, that, during the War, they were oblig'd to sustain against Spain for eight and twenty years together, and by reason of the great Garrisons they were oblig'd to keep, in those parts against the Hollanders, whom they have nevertheless drove entirely out of Brasil, they made but small profit, and this mo∣ved them to give some places to the English, by the Marriage of the Infanta of Portugal with Charles the Second, King of England. The Portugal Provinces have all their peculiar Commodities: they afford, among other things, Lemons, and excellent Oranges. They have Mines; the Greeks and Romans went to seek in Portugal, the Gold which the Portuguese go to seek in the Indies. They are so populous, prin∣cipally towards the Sea, as that there are reckoned above six hundred Cities, or privi∣ledged Burroughs, and above four thousand Pa∣rishes. The Roman Catholick Religion is only receiv'd in this Kingdom; those, who are of the Jewish Race, have been constrained to be bap∣tized, and are now known under the Name of New Christians. There are three Arch-bishop∣ricks, Lisbon, Braga, and Evora; ten Bishop∣ricks. The Arch-bishopricks of Lisbon, and
Evora, have each of 'em full two hundred thou∣sand Livers yearly Income. Inquisitions are at Lisbon, at Coimbre, at Evora; the Assembly of the Cortes, or Parliaments, at Lisbon, at Porto. Twenty seven Places have Generalities, which they call Comarques, and Almoxarifats. The Order of Christ, which resides at Tomar, is the most considerable of the Kingdom: the Kings are the Masters and Heads of it; for on this Order depend all the Foreign Con∣quests: Its Knights wear the Red and White Cross in the Middle, whereas those of Avis wear it green, those of St. James red. These have their Residence at Palmella, near Setuval. The Revenue of the Kingdom, without reckon∣ing that of the Indies, is said to exceed ten Millions of Livers: I can hardly believe what the Portugals say, that their King, Don Sebastian, was at the Charge of a Million of Gold upon the Harness of a Horse; that the Trappings of the European Ladies, were only the remains of those of Portugal. In the Year 1640. this Kingdom withdrew it self from its Obedience to the King of Spain: Then was admired the Great Secresie that was kept in that Affair, among above two hundred persons, for above a Year together. The principal Motives of this Resolution, were, the Permission which his Ca∣tholick Majesty gave to others, than to the Por∣tugals, of trading to the East-Indies; the Tri∣bute of the fifth, that was proclaim'd in the Year 1636. by which the Government exacted five in the hundred, of all the Revenues and Merchandizes in the Kingdom. The Duke of Braganza was proclaimed King, under the Name of John the Fourth. This Prince reigned
sixteen Years, and had for his Successour, Al∣phonso the Sixth; who was deposed in 1667. His Marriage having been declared null, Pedro, his Brother, married the Queen, was made Regent of the Kingdom, and made Peace with Spain. The Conspiracy, in the Year 1673. against this Prince, obliged him to have the King fetch'd back from the Terzera, and put into the Fortress of Sintra, near Lisbon: About two Years since, a Marriage was concerted be∣twixt the Infanta, and Victor Ame, Duke of Savoy; but that Match is now wholly broke off, and a new Treaty now on foot, for the same purpose, with the Prince of Tuscany. This Kingdom contains six Provinces, which are as many general Governments. Entre Doaro and Minho, Tralos-Montes, Beyra, Estremadura, Alen-Teyo and Algarve. Entre Douro and Minho, is the most delicious, and so populous, that in the space of eighteen Leagues in length, and twelve in breadth, it has above a hundred and thirty Monasteries, well rented; fourteen hun∣dred and sixteen Parishes; five thousand Foun∣tains of Spring-Water; two hundred Bridges of Stone, and six Sea-Ports. Some call it the Marrow and the Delight of Spain. Porto, a City of four thousand Housholds, drives a great Trade; Bragra is renowned for the holding of several Councils, by the Pretension of its Arch∣bishop, who styles himself Primate of the Spains. Tralos-Montes has Minerals, with the City of Braganza, the Capital of a Dutchy of forty thousand Ducates Revenue, wherein there are full fifty small Cities, and other Lands, which make the Duke of Braganza thrice Marquis, seven times a Count, and several
times a Lord. The Princes of that Name, now in possession of the Crown, remain'd commonly at Villa Viciosa, and had the Prero∣gative, to the Exclusion of the Grandees of Spain, to sit in publick, under the Royal Cano∣py of the King of Spain. Beira is fertile in Rye, Millet, Apples, and Chestnuts. Its City of Coimbra, formerly the abode of Alphonso, the first King of Portugal, is famous for its University, for its Bishoprick, which is said to be worth above a hundred and fifty thousand Livres yearly Rent. Estremadura, another than that of Ca∣stile, produces Wine, Oyl, Salt, Honey, which the Bees make there of the Flowers of Lem∣mons and of Roses. Its City of Lisbon is the Capital of all the Kingdom, one of the richest, greatest, most beautiful, and most populous Towns of all Europe: It has above thirty thou∣sand Houses, and an admirable Port, with the conveniency of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea: It particularly drives the trade of Brasile, and of the East-Indies. The small City of Belem, which is near it, is the Mausoleum, or the place of burial of several Kings of Portugal. Santaren has so great a number of Olive-Trees in its Dependencies, that the Inhabitants boast of being able to make of their Oyl, a River as great as the Tagus. Setuval, which the Flemmings call St. Hubes, is well situated, well built, and of great trade: It has the best Harbour in all the Kingdom, thirty Miles in length, three in breadth. Its Salt-Pits and Fishery, according to what the Portuguese say, raise a greater Revenue to their King, than all Arragon does to the King of Spain. Alen-Teyo, by reason of its Corn, is reckon'd for the Gra∣nary
of Portugal: Its City of Evora pretends to the first rank after Lisbon. In the Year 1663. the Portuguese gain'd a famous Battel over the Spaniards in its neighbourhood. Elvas is known for its excellent Oyls; for the Sieges which it has happily sustain'd against the Castillians. Ourques, in the Year 1139. saw that famous Bat∣tel fought, which gave occasion to the proclaim∣ing the first King of Portugal. Algarve, tho' of small extent, has the Title of a Kingdom; It was reunited to the Crown, by the Marriage of Alphonso the Third, with Beatrix of Castile. it affords Figs, Olives, Almonds, and Wines very much esteemed: the Name of Algerbia, in the Moorish Tongue, signifies a fertile field. The Seventeen Provinces of the Low-Countries. THese Provinces are made to pass under the number of Seventeen, because that for∣merly, tho' at divers times, they have each had their peculiar Lord. The Name of the Low-Countries is given them, as a Country situa∣ted in the lower part of the Rhine. The situa∣tion of the Low Countries is so much the more considerable, as that it lies between England, France and Germany. These Seventeen Pro∣vinces touch France and Germany, and are sepa∣rated from England by the Sea. There are four
Dutchies, Brabant, Limbourg, Luxembourg, Guelderland: Seven Counties, Holland, Zea∣land, Zutphen, Flanders, Artois, Hainault, Na∣mur; a Marquisate of the Holy Empire, which has only the City of Antwerp; five Lordships, Malines, Ʋtrecht, Over-Issel or Trans-Isalane, Friesland, Groninghen. This Region is small, but one of the richest and most populous in the World. Its Air is temperate; its Winter is more long than cold; its Summer resembles the Spring of the Southern Provinces of France. Its Soyl is generally fertile, full of good Pasturages, which furnish Cattel, Milk, Butter, Cheese, and other Commodities abundantly. Its prin∣cipal Rivers are the Rhine, Maes, Scheld. The Rhine has its Sources in Suisserland, most of its Course in Germany: after having divided it self upon its entrance into the low Countrys at Skinckensckons, it communicates most of its Waters to other Rivers; those it keeps, lose their Name in the Sand, a little below Leyden in Holland. The Maes, which comes from France and from Lorrain, has this advantage over the Rhine, that it carries its Name and Waters to the very Ocean, wherein it forms several good Harbours. The Scheld serv'd for bounds to France, and to the Empire, in the time of the Emperour Charles the Bold. It receives, at Gaunt, the Lis, or Ley, a navigable River: and before it entirely loses its Name, it makes two principal Branches, the left, called Hont; the right, whose Chanel passes by Tolen, falls into the Meuse. Besides these Ri∣vers, and those which fall into them, there are Canals; great store of Lakes, Pools, and
Marshes, which fortifie the Country, provide it with Fish, and afford the convenience of pas∣sage and the more easie transport of their Com∣modities. The Emperour, Charles the Fifth, saw him∣self Master of all these Provinces: In the Year 1581. they reus'd, for the most part, Obedience to King Philip his Son, taking for a Pretext of their Revolt, the cruel Treat∣ments of their Governours, the Infraction of their Priviledges, the Introduction of the Council of Trent, and the Imposition of the Tenth Penny upon all the Commodities that were sold in that Country. We may say, that the two Real Causes of this Revolution, were, the Change of Religion, and the Ambition of some Lords, joyn'd to the Aversion of the People, to a foreign Government. Two Years before, these Revolted Provinces had made the Union at Ʋtrecht, for which reason the Duke of Alva, who made War in those Provinces for the King of Spain, did maintain, that he ought not to treat them as the Patrimony of his Master, but as his own Conquest. There are in the Low-Countries two States, very dif∣ferent from one another; the one is a Repub∣lick, or rather several Republicks, and is called for that reason the Ʋnited Provinces, otherwise Holland; the other belongs, in part, to the King of Spain, and goes under the Name of the Catbolick Provinces, or that of Flanders. The Christian King has Conquered the best of these Provinces, and the strongest Towns, which have been confirm'd to him by the Trea∣ties of the Pyrenees, of Aix la Chapelle, and of Nimeghen, or else possess'd by him, under co∣lour
of Dependencies. The Hague is the Re∣sidence of the Council of the States-General of the Ʋnited Provinces; Bruxels, that of the Prin∣ces, or of the Governours established by the King of Spain: Lisle, Tournay, Doway, Ypres, Dunkirk, Ar∣ras, St. Omar, Cambray, Valenciennes, Luxembourg, are Cities the most considerable of the Acqui∣sition of France. The Roman Catholick Reli∣gion is only receiv'd in Flanders. All sorts of Sects are tolerated in Holland. Each person is allowed to follow his own Opinion, tho' not Preach it in Publick: The Sect of Calvin is there principally exercised. The National Synod, held at Dort, in the Year 1619. has regulated the principal Points of that Reli∣gion. The Humours of the People of Flanders, and Holland, are as different from one another, as are their Governments and Religions: The Flemmings do much affect those fine Titles of Honour, which the Kings of Spain have not been sparing of to them. The Emperour, Charles the Fifth, had a design of making a Kingdom of this State, so as would have done before him Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgun∣dy, who meant to have it called, the Kingdom of the Lyon. The Hollanders are more popular than the Flemmings; wedded to Commerce, to Manufacture, and Navigation: Both People are industrious in making Handy-craft-Works. They have two sorts of Tongues; the Walloon, which is a corrupted French, and which be∣comes purer, since the French King's Conquests; and the Flemming, or Low Dutch: The first is particularly in Artois, in French-Flanders, and in Haynault.
The Ʋnited Provinces, and the Provinces of the King of Spain, were in War until the Year 1609. when they made a Truce of Twelve Years. His Catholick Majesty did then treat with the States General of the Ʋnited Provinces, in quality, and as holding them for Free-Countrys, Provinces, and States, to whom he had no Pretension. In the Year 1648. the Peace was made there, before that of the Em∣pire, which was concluded at Munster, in the same Year. And since, the Spaniards of Flan∣ders, and the Hollanders, have thought fit to live neighbourly and in good intelligence, nay, to confederate together for their mutual defence. The War having been declared by the French King, upon the Hollanders, in the Year 1672. the Spaniards fail'd not to take part in it, for the traversing the Conquests of his Christian Majesty, which cost them very considerable Cities and Provinces, whereas the Hollanders recover'd what they had lost. The Princes of Orange, of the House of Nassau, have al∣most ever had the Military and Civil Govern∣ment in the Ʋnited Provinces.
The Ʋnited Provinces of the Low-Countries. THe Ʋnited Provinces are so call'd, from their Union at Ʋtrecht, in the Year 1579. They are commonly called Holland, that being the richest & most populous Province of 'em all. Their situation is towards the end of the Rivers Rhine and Meuse, in the Northern part of the Low Countries, between the Dominions of the King of Spain in Flanders, England, which is separated from 'em by the Sea, and several Principalities of the Empire. The Princes of the Empire, who are their Neighbours, are the Duke of Newbourg, in his Dutchy of Juliers, and his Barony of Ravestein; the Elector of Brandenbourg, in his Dutchy of Cleves; the Elector of Cologn, the Bishop of Munster, the Count de Bentheim, the Prince of East-Friesland, in the Territories of the same Name. The Ʋnited Provinces, which before owed subjection to the King of Spain, have since been indepen∣dent of one another, or to say rather, as many Republicks; which, altogether, make now but one, under the Name of the States General of the Ʋnited Provinces of the Low Countries. The Dignity of this State residing in the States General, the Absolute authority over things re∣served by reason of the alliance, has remained in the States of each Province. The Seal of the Republick, is a Lion, holding a Bundle of Seven bound Arrows, with allusion to as many
confederated Provinces; these Provinces, as the Politicians say, have not always been so well united, but that they resembled a Body, which has several Heads, some of which would draw it on one side, while the others endeavour to tug it on the other. There is no State in the World of so small an Extent, which has so great a number of Fortresses, and which seems better defended by the Nature of the Places than this: It has the See, and several Rivers, which defend it; the Rhine, the Meuse, the Waal, the Issel. Notwithstanding all these Defences, the French King made surprising Conquests in the Year 1672. by the redu∣ction of three Provinces, and sixty considerable Towns, which proceeded from raw, unexpert, meer Citizens sons, being imploid in the Soldiery. Besides the Ʋnited Previnces, and the Places that are in them, the States General have in Flanders, the Cities of Sluyce, Middlebourg, Ardembourg, Sasvan Gaunt, Axel, Hulst: in Brabant, Lisle, Bergen-ap-Zoom, Breda, Bois∣leduc, Grave: and they have Maestricht in the Bishoprick of Liege; Dalem, Fauquemont, Bol∣duc, in the Land of Outre Meuse. These Places were taken by the French King, but restor'd to them by his Majesty, in consideration of the Peace of 1678. In Germany, they had upon the Rhine, Orsoy, Wesel, Reez, Emerik, Genep, in the Dutchy of Cleves; Rhineberg in the Ele∣ctorate of Cologn; these are return'd into the hands of its true Masters, in consideration of the aforesaid Peace. Towards Westphalia, the States General have Garrisons in the City of Embden, in the Forts of Eideler and Leer-ort, which belong to the Prince of East-Friesland.
There are in Holland two Companies of Mer∣chants, the one for the East-Indies, the other for the West. The first of these Companies seems it self to be a Potent Republick: It boasts of having subdued more Leagues of Country, than there are Acres of Land in all Holland: Of having fourteen or fifteen thousand Soldiers, and a Number of Ships in its Service: Of em∣ploying commonly above fourscore thousand Men. It had long since above twenty very con∣siderable Fortresses, as many Magazines upon the Coasts of the Indian-Sea, where it has endea∣vour'd to constrain several Petty Kings, not to receive, into their States, any other Nations of Europe than their own. The West-India Company is weak and feeble in respect of the other, whether that the Portugals have had more right and more strength than the Hollanders in Brazil: Or the term of the Con∣cession of Priviledg, obtained by these from their Sovereign, be expired: Or, in short, that the Company of the East-Indies has us'd all its efforts to ruin the other. The Hollanders have hitherto been Powerful at Sea, have often beaten the French, the Spanish Fleets; nay, made Head against the English, who are Sove∣reigns of the Sea: The Number of their Ships is so great, that, if we may believe their Par∣tizans, it equals that of the rest of Europe. They have always, in their own Country, wherewith to Equip a great Number, tho' their Land neither produces Wood nor other things necessary for that purpose: They are able to Arm out above a hundred to Sea, if they had but the Mariners and Soldiers they had former∣ly. At their first Establishment, they only pre∣tended
to Fishing, and Trading from Port to Port; since they have drove the richest Com∣merce that is carried on at Sea. Amongst the Ʋnited-Provinces, there are four towards the West; Holland, Zealand, Ʋtrecht, Guelderland: Four towards the East, Zutphen, Over-Yssel, or Trans-Isalane, Friesland, Gronin∣ghen. Those who reckon but seven, make but one of that of Guelderland and Zutphen. In the Assemblies, these Provinces have ever given their Votes in the following Order, Guelderland with Zutphen first of all; then Holland, Zealand, Ʋtrecht, Friesland, Over-Yssel; finally, Gronin∣ghen with the Ommelands. Each of 'em sends its Deputies to the Hague, where are form'd three Colledges or Assemblies of them, the States-General, the Council of State, and the Chamber of Accounts. In the Assembly of the States-General, all the Provinces above-menti∣on'd must consent, in General and in Particu∣lar, to the Resolutions that are taken therein, and do not follow the plurality of Voices. Each Province may send thither one, two, three, four or five Deputies; but all these Deputies have, together, but one Voice, and have right to Pre∣side therein but one Week: That of Guelder∣land begins, because it is the most Ancient, and its Plenipotentiaries were the first who pro∣pos'd the Union. It is the same Province, which, in the Year 1674. had offer'd the Sovereignty to the Prince of Orange. The Admiralty has five Sessions, and as many Magazines, which are those of Rotterdam, Amsterdam, Horn or Enkuy∣san, Middlebourg, Harlingen; the three former in Holland, the fourth in Zealand, the fifth in Friesland. As touching Religion, all sorts of
Sects are tolerated in this State, as we have said, but Calvinism is principally followed. The Province of Holland, taken by it self, is a great Peninsula, which maintains it self against the Assaults of the Sea by the means of its Dikes, where a careful Watch is kept both Day and Night. It alone has always Contributed more than all the other Provinces have done toge∣ther: Of a hundred Livres, it furnishes fifty nine and a half. It has still some Nobility, the Brederodes, the Wassenaers, the Egmonts; this Nobility has ever Voted there the first, tho' it has but one Voice together, whereas, that eigh∣teen Cities of the same Provinces had there each their own, with the Sovereignty bound by Al∣liance. Most of the Towns, in this Province, are beautiful and pleasant, as having been built in the last Age. Six of them are reckoned Prin∣cipal, that are called Great, Dort, Haerlem, Delf, Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude. Dort, whose Situation is upon four Rivers, has the first Voice, as that where the Counts of Holland, and their Subjects, gave recipro∣cally the Oath to one another: It is the Place where Mony is Coined, its Inhabitants have the Priviledg of Marching with Guards. In the Year 1421. of a Town upon the Continent, it became an Island by a terrible Inundation, which drown'd above ten thousand Persons and twelve Villages. Haerlem is the Place where the finest and whitest Linnen is made of the Province. Delf is the Place of the Sepulchre of the Princes of Orange, and where Porcelain Ware is made. Leyden is the Eye, or, according to others, the Garden of Holland, by reason of the Cleanness of its Streets, and the Beauty of
its Houses: 'Tis Celebrated for its Antiquity, for its University and its excellent Impressions, for the Rhine's losing it self in the Sand, where en∣deavours have been, to no purpose, used to make a Sea-Port, in a word, for an entire Defeat of the Spanish Army in the last Age, after that the Hollanders had broken all the Neighbouring Dikes. A Native of this Town was the Tay∣lor, who, to his own bane, made himself King of the Anabaptists in Munster. Amsterdam Vyes with the best Cities of the World, in the great Number of its Ships, and the conveniency it has of sitting them out; it now drives the greatest part of the Commerce that was formerly carried on by Antwerp, Sevil and Lisbon: It alone Contributes as much, or more, than all the other Cities of the Province. The Inhabitants of the Country call it the Market and the Shop of the Rarities of the Universe, by reason of the various Merchandizes where∣with it is filled, and say, it has so much Gold and Silver, that there are sometimes found several Millions of Tuns of Gold in its Banck, each of those Tuns being esteemed at near ten thousand Pounds, the Expence for its Stadt-House, or Town-House, was Prodigious; finally, Amster∣dam contains so many Riches, that they have been constrained to enlarge the Circuit of it. Gouda has this advantage, as being in a Place where the Waters are running, and where In∣habitants enjoy the purest Ait that is in all Hol∣land. Rotterdam, the Birth-place of Erasmus, is the best of the twelve Cities they call petty, by reason of its great Traffick with England, and upon the Meuse. The Hague is the Resi∣dence of the Council of the States-General, but
a Town the best Built, and the most Delicious in all Europe, where the Embassadors of the Neighbouring Princes make their usual Resi∣dence. The Texel is a Harbour towards the North, famous for a Retreat of Ships. The Brill has the same advantage towards the South; the rest of the Coast is full of Downs or Hills of Sands, with some Retreats for Fisher Boats and Busses. Zealand is the Province, which first of all set it self at Liberty, and consented last to the Peace with Spain; the Prince of Orange pos∣sesses most of its particular Lordships and Ba∣ronies: those who compare the States-General to a Ship, say, that Zealand is the Pinnace. It consists of eight Principal Islands, whereof there are four great ones: that of Walcheren is the most beautiful of all those of the Low-Countries, with the Cities of Middlebourg and Flushing, both well fortified. Middlebourg, the chief of the Province, is the general Staple of the Country for Wines, Flushing a commodious Harbour for many Ships; the Duke of Alva had a design of causing a Cittadel to be built there, as well as at Antwerp. The small Isle of Duveland is known in the History of 1575. for the bold and hardy passage of the Spaniards, a∣cross the Sea under Mondragon. The Barony of Ʋtrecht has a Capital City of the same Name, where dwell most of the No∣bility of the Country: They reckon above fifty six Cities, to which one may go by Boat from Ʋtrecht in less than a day. Guelderland has four Quarters; that of the same Name, which is toward the South, called the High-Quarter of Guelderland, belongs to the
Spaniards, who, in the Year 1627. did [to no purpose at all] endeavour to bring the Rhine to the City of Gueldres, and into the Meuse, for the depriving the Ʋnited-Provinces of its Commerce with Germany. Nimmeghen, famous for the Conclusions of the Treaties of Peace, in the the Years 1678, and 1679. is the Capital of Holland's Guelderland, in the Quarter of the Betuve, the abode of the ancient Batavians. Arnheim is in that of the Veluve. The Province of Zutphen bears the same Name with its Capital City, and passes some∣times for a fourth Quarter of the Dutchy of Guelderland, having no Vote in the Assemblies of the States-General, but conjoyntly with this Dutchy; besides this Capital, at the Siege thereof, ell that Ornament of our Nation, Sir Philip Sidney, as great a Wit, Courtier, Soldier and Statesman, perhaps, as ever was: There is in this Province Groll, and eight or nine small Cities. Over-Yssel, otherwise Trans-Isaline, is so cal∣led from its Situation beyond the Yssel, where the Rhine communicates part of its Wa∣ters, by the means of a Trench or Chanel, which Drusus caused formerly to be made: There are three Countries, Salande, Tuvente, Drente, where, they would persuade us, were formerly the Salians, Tubantes and Tencterians. Saland has Deventer the Capital of the Province, a famous passage over the Yssel, Drente has Coeworden, one of the most regular Pentagones of Europe. Friesland affords special strong Horses, and Beeves of an excessive bigness. It has had, at divers times, Princes, Dukes, and [according
to some] Kings, who have resided at Stave∣ren. Leuvarden has the States or Parliament: Dokum the Admiralty of the Province. Schelling is an Island upon the Coast, where are some Towns which serve to give signal to the Ships They Hunt the Sea-Dogs there after a pleasing manner: The Men, who mean to take them, disguise themselves like Drummers, and, with a thousand Apish Tricks, do insensibly attract, towards the midst of the Island, those poor Creatures who are over-joy'd to see them; but, in the mean while, Nets are laid, which hinder their returning to the Sea. The Passage be∣tween this Island and that of the Ʋlie is much frequented; out there go thence Ships, which are bound for the North and the Baltick-Sea. Groninghen, which has the last Voice in the Assemblies of the States-General, has but two Cities, Groninghen and Dam. Groninghen is in so important a Situation, by reason of the Fron∣tier, that the Duke of Alva projected the. making a Cittadel there. In the Year 1672 after the taking of several Places, the Bishop of Munster had the displeasure of not being able to compass his Design upon this. The Province has Pasturages, wherein Turfs are made, which serve for Fewel. It has several Navigable Chanels, the Key whereof seems to be contain'd in the Fortress of Delfzil at the Mouth of the Ems. The Ommelands, which make a part of it towards the East, have frequent Disputes with this Province, and would willingly pretend to make the eighth of the Ʋnited-Provinces.
The Provinces of the Spanish-Netherlands. THese Provinces are called Catholick, because the Roman-Catholick Religion only is exer∣cised therein. They have often the Name of Flanders given them, which is the most Beauti∣ful, the Richest, and most Populous part of 'em: Those People have been called Walloons, who border upon France. The Provinces which these People Inhabit, being, at present, pos∣sess'd by the most Christian King, the French call 'em the New-Conquests. Amongst the Catholick Provinces, there are four Frontiers of France; the Counties of Flanders, Artois, Hainault, the Dutchy of Luxembourg: Five within the Lands, the Dutchy of Brabant, the Marquisate of the Holy-Empire round about Antwerp, the Barony of Mechelen, the County of Namur, the Dutchy of Limbourg: There is also the Bishoprick of Liege, which is of the Empire, and Cambresis. The French King, and the King of Spain, are, at present, Masters of these Provinces, for the preservation of which, the Spaniards have em∣ploy'd a good part of the Gold and Silver of their Indies: The Hollanders possess also some Towns in 'em. The County of Flanders is so full of People, that we may say, it is but one City, and the finest County of Christendom. Its Coast has Downs of Sand, which cover the rich Plains. Formerly Flanders was divided into Gallican,
Flemming, and Imperial; now into three parts, one French, one Spanish, and the other Holland, which is of small extent. The principal Towns of all the Country, are Gaunt, Bruges, Ypres, Lille; the two former belonging to Spain, and the two others possess'd by France, as well as Tournay, Doway, and Dunkirk Gaunt is one of the greatest Cities of Europe; tho' it has several Rivers, which still maintain its Com∣merce, it has not now the thirty five thousand Houses, which it had when it was able to have put fourscore thousand Men in Arms. The French King, who had possess'd himself of it, was oblig'd to restore it, in consideration of the Peace. The Spaniards, who saw the Chanel of this Town stopp'd up, by the taking of Sluce, have made there a new one, which can receive stopp'd Ships, after they are come to Ostend, a Town whose Port could not be stopt up, when when it was the stage of War, and that it su∣stain'd a Siege of above three Years together. Ypres has several Chanels and Conduits of Wa∣ter under Earth. Lille is one of the best of the Low Countries, both for its Commerce and its Riches. In the Year 1667. the French King made it his Principal Conquest; since which, he has caus'd a strong Cittadel to be made in it. All the other Places of Flanders are generally considerable, either for their Beauty, or their Fortresses, or the Sieges and Battels. Tournay is very ancient, beautiful, spacious, strong, rich, and populous. It is the first City of the Low Countries, which in the Year 1667. submit∣ted to the French Monarch. His Majesty esta∣blish'd a Parliament there, and caused a Citta∣del to be made. It is observ'd of Tournay, that
it was taken four several times, on the very day of St. Andrew: 1. By Henry the Seventh, King of England. 2. By the Emperour Maximilian. 3. By the Emperour Charles the Fifth: And 4. By the Duke of Parma. Doway, upon the Scharp on the Confines of Artois and Haynault, is meanly fortified. The Church of Our Lady is there twelve hundred Years old. There is a Staple of Corn, an University, and lately Na∣vigation, by sailing up the Scharp as far as Arras. Dunkrk, a very trading Town by reason of its Haven, is one of the most consi∣derable Possessions of France. Graveling is an extraordinary strong place. Furnes was the abode of the French King, Lewis the Ele∣venth, during his retreat to the Duke of Bur∣gundy. Artois, now reunited to the Crown of France, from which, the French say, it was dismembred, is a Province extraordinary fertile in Corn. Arras, its Metropolis, is compos'd of a high and low Town, both well fortified. Hesdin is a regular Hexagone, and its River has been lately rendred Navigable, as far as Montreuil. Bapaume is an advantagious situation. Lens is known for the Victory of the French, in the Year 1648. Bethune for its good Cheeses; Terouenne for its Ruins. St. Omar is environ'd with Marshes, where are floating Islands. Aire is important for the Navigation of the Lys. Hainault, according to the Archives of the Province, owns none but God and the Sun for ruling Lords. Nevertheless it has two other Masters, the Kings of France and Spain. Mons, the capital City, defended by three good
Ditches, has a Soveraign Council indepen∣dent of that of the Parliament of Mechelin; It has also Chanoinesses, who make proof of Nobility of Eight Races, and who have the liberty to Marry. Valenciennes is large, sum∣ptuous, well fortified upon the Scheld: It was taken by force, in the Year 1677. by the French King's Army, commanded in person by that Prince. Quesnoy, Landrecy, Avesne, Philippe∣ville, Mariembourg, Conde, Bouchain, are strong places, in the hands of the French King. Luxembourg has its capital City of the same Name. Thionville, Montmedi, Damvilliers, are possess'd by the French. Some Lands there are, in the Forest of Ardennes, belonging to the Bi∣shoprick of Liege; Bouillon, with the Title of a Dutchy, and a strong Castle upon the Rock St. Hubert, where the Hunters have a peculiar Devotion; Rochefort, which saw the Battel of Avein, in the Year 1675. between the Spa∣niards and French. By the Peace of Nimmeghen, the Dutchy of Bouillon was restor'd to France, who has put the Prince of that Name into pos∣sesion of it. Brabant, which is about the midst of the Low Countries, has four Cities, the Capitals of as many Quarters; Bruxels, Louvain, Bre∣da, Boisleduc. Bruxels is very populous, the abode of a Prince or Governour, whose Palace is very spacious: Its Chanel, which leads to Antwerp, is one of the finest Works of the Country, with prodigious Sluces which have cost immens Sums. As well as at Avignon, some of its Publick Edifices are to the number of seven. The Church of St. Gudule, is one of the finest of the Country.
The Neighbourhood of the Forest of Soignes furnishes its Inhabitants with Game for hunt∣ing. Louvain, which some make to pass for the Capital of Brabant, is one of the greatest Cities of Europe, with a famous University, which gives occasion to the By-word, That it is a City of Scholars, as Bruxels is a City of Cour∣tiers, Antwerp a City of Merchants, Mechelin a City of Advocates and Lawyers, by reason of its Parliament. Tillemont was taken by force, in the Year 1655. by the French and Hollanders. Breda belongs to the Prince of Orange, and Hertoghen-Bosch, or Bois-le-Duc, to the States General of the Ʋnited Provinces, as do also Berghen-op-Zoom, and the Grave. All these Places are well fortified; Bois-le-Duc is so ex∣traordinary strong, by reason of its Marshes, that it pass'd for Impregnable, before it was taken; upon which account, they were us'd to say in Holland out of Raillery; I will pay you, when Bois-le-Duc is became a Beggar; that is to say, never. The Brabanzon pretends the Priviledge of deliberating nothing out of the Limits of their Country. The Marquisate of the Holy Empire has this Name from its Site, upon the ancient bounds of France and the Empire; whither the Em∣perour sent Governours, who were call'd Mar∣quesses. There is only the City of Antwerp, one of the best and most pleasant of the Nether∣lands; the Emperour, Charles the Fifth, call'd it his Sunday, or Holy-day Town: the im∣portance of its Situation has occasioned the making sumptuous Fortifications, which consist of ten great Bastions, and one of the strongest Cittadels of Europe, flank'd with five regular
Bastions, fac'd with Brick and hewed Stones. This Cittadel was built towards the higher part of the River, rather than towards the lower, that it might command the Town, and receive Succours from the Country subject to its Prince: the Duke of Alva, who had made it, plac'd his Statue therein, which has since been taken away. The Jesuits in Antwerp have a Church all of Marble, look'd upon as one of the finest in the World. Formerly above two hundred thousand persons were reckoned in this Town, and about two thou∣sand five hundred Ships upon the Scheld: But the Inhabitants of this place do not now drive that great Trade they did, since the Hollan∣ders have seiz'd upon the Avenues of their River. The City of Mechelin is the Residence of the States, or Parliament of the Catholick Provinces of the King of Spain. Its Barony is very small; the Women of Mechlin, being ready to lye in, are said to cause themselves to be carried upon the Lands of Brabant, that so their Children may enjoy the Priviledge of the Brabantins. Namur is a Town of importance, by reason of its passage over the Meuse, at the place where it receives the Sambre: from hence they tran∣sport Marble, Ardoise, Pit-Coal. Charle-Roy, upon the Sambre, is one of the best Fortresses in the Netherlands. Limbourg has only the Town of the same Name which is in any consideration, with a strong Castle upon a Rock. The French King made the Conquest of it in the Year 1675. but was bound to restore it to the King of Spain, by the Peace of Nimmeghen.
The Bishoprick of Liege owes subjection to its Bishop, as well in Spirituals as Temporals: the Inhabitants gave it formerly the Name of Grace. He is Elected by the Chapter; his Re∣sidence was formerly at Tongres and Mastricht. This Country is of a great Extent, with several places lying within the Marches of the neigh∣bouring Provinces. Liege is a trading Town, and, as they say, the Paradise of the Ecclesia∣sticks. It was observ'd, in the Year 1131. that there were, amongst the Canons of its Cathe∣dral Church, nine Sons of Kings, fourteen Sons of Dukes, nine and twenty Sons of Counts, and seven Sons of Barons. 'Tis very populous, notwithstanding it was ruin'd by the last Duke of Burgundy. When the ancient Priviledges subsisted there, it had thirty two Trades, and a Body of two and twenty Bur∣gesses, composed of Ecclesiasticks, of Nobles, and of the third Estate, or Commonalty; these twenty two were call'd most Honoured Lords, and had the principal direction of Affairs. The Elector of Cologn, its Prince, caus'd a Cittadel to be built here, which was demolish'd by the French, in the time of the late Wars. The Town of Spa is known to us for its Medicinal Water; Mastricht for its Fortifications, and for the famous Sieges it has sustain'd. It is made up of two Towns; Mastricht, reckoned to belong to the Duke of Brabant; Wick, of the Appurtenances to the Bishoprick of Liege. The Peace of Nimmeghen has resetled the Hol∣landers in possession of Mastricht. Cambresis is near France. The City of Cam∣bray has a good Cittadel, the guard whereof was only confided to natural Spaniards, when
their King was Master thereof. It has a Clock singularly wrought by the hand of a Shepherd, and furnishes extraordinary fine Linnen, or Cambrick. Since the Year 1595. the Kings of Spain have attributed to themselves the Tempo∣poral Jurisdiction of Cambray; the Emperours did not contradict them in this matter, be∣cause they are of the same Family, and the Arch-bishops had, to no purpose, solicited the re-establishment of their Right: those Pre∣lates style themselves Arch bishops and Dukes of Cambray, Counts of Cambresis, Princes of the Holy Empire, tho' commonly they have neither Session nor Voice in the Diets. In the Year 1677. the French King, commanding his Army in person, made himself Master of the Town and Cittadel of Cambray, which were confirm'd to him by the Peace of Nimme∣ghen. Lorrain. LOrrain is a Country, with the Title of Dut∣chy, considerable for several advantages, particularly for its situation between Cham∣pagne, French-Luxembourg, the Palatinate of the Rhine, Franche-Comte: all these Provinces are possess'd by the French, except the Palatinate. It brings forth plentifully all the Conveniencies of Life, unless it be Oyl: It has Jasper, and stuff for the making of Drinking and Looking∣glasses. The Lorrainers are bigotted Catho∣licks.
There are reckoned three Bailiwicks, that of Nancy, Vaudrevange, and Vauge, where is Mirecourt. Under the general Name of Lorrain, may be comprehended the Dutchy of Bar, which is of a double kind; there is Bar∣rois Royal, on this side the Meuse; and Barrois Ducal, beyond the same River: several Terri∣tories adjacent: the Bishopricks of Metz, Toul, Verdun, formerly Principalities of the Empire; Imperial Towns of the same Name, which, since the Reign of French Henry the Second, have own'd Subjection to the Crown of France. It is to be noted, that these Bishops are only Temporal Princes, and that the Diocesses of the same Name, which acknowledge their Bishop for Spirituals, have very different bounds. In the Year 1680. several places depending on these Bishopricks, and which had been dismembred from 'em at diverse times, have been adjoyned to the Crown of France. The Rivers of Meuse, Moselle, Saone, and Sare, have their beginning in Lorrain. Under the Emperour Nero, they had a design of communicating the Ocean and the Mediterranean-Sea, by a Chanel drawn from the Moselle into the Soan, which is but very little distant from it, and which falls into the Rhosne. The Sare is navigable, and gives its Name to several places by and through which it passes. The French King has caused Sar-Louis, and other Fortresses, to be built there, for the securing the Frontiers of his Do∣minions. Nancy, the Capital of the whole Dutchy, has had the best Fortifications and Works that were ever seen in Europe. With∣out all these Defences, it did gloriously resist Charles, Duke of Burgundy, who lost the Bat∣tel
and his Life near the Walls, in the Year 1477. In the Battel of Morat, in the Year 1476. which followed that of Granson, and preceded that of Nancy, the Diamond of this warlike and unfortunate Prince, fell into the hands of a Suiss, who thought himself well payed, in having for it a Florin of Gold, tho' this Dia∣mond was one of the finest things of the kind in Europe. Another Suiss was so lucky in the same Battel, as to find the Collar of the Golden Fleece, of an inestimable value, which the Duke of Burgundy was wont to wear, and con∣tented himself with two Crowns, that were given him for it in Milan, whither he went to sell it at the dearest rate he could. Now Nancy is in possession of the French King, who offers to yield up Toul to the Duke of Lorrain, in case he will sign the Treaty of Nimmeghen. The Burrough of St. Nicholas keeps the Relick of its Patron, which occasions a great concourse of people to that Town, as well as its Fair. Rozieres and Dieuse have Salt-Pits of a great Revenue, as have also Marsal, Chasteau-Salins, and Moyenvik. The Annual Revenue of the Salt-Pits of Marsal has commonly been three hundred thousand Livres. Luneville has a fine House, Remiremont a famous Abby of Ladies, Plombieres, which is not wall'd, is known for its Baths. The Dutchy of Barr has the Cities of Barleduc, St. Mihel, and Pont-a-Mousson. Vau∣couleurs, one of the adjacent Territories, is noted for the Birth of the Maid of Orleans, in a neighbouring Burrough, called Arques. Mets, Toul, and Verdun, have been more strictly uni∣ted to the Crown of France, by the Treaty of Munster, by that of the Pyrences, and by good
Cittadels. Metz had formerly the Title of a Kingdom, which was that of Austrasia, with the right of coining Money: it is now the Re∣sidence of a Parliament. 'Tis of a large cir∣cuit, and nevertheless in the Year 1552. it gloriously repuls'd the Emperour Charles the Fifth, who besieg'd it with an Army of a hun∣dred thousand men: from thence came the Pro∣verb amongst those of the Country, when any one undertakes any difficult matter, they say, He will do e'en as much as the Emperour before Metz. This Disgrace stuck so sensibly close to that glorious Prince's heart, that there happen∣ing presently after the insult he receiv'd from Duke Maurice of Saxony; it's said to have ob∣liged him to resign his Dominions to his Son and his Brother, and make the retreat he did in the Monastery of St. Just, in Castille, to the amazement of the whole World. The Dukes of Lorrain have hitherto styled themselves Princes of the Empire, and the Em∣pire has pretended Right of Sovereignty over their Dutchy of Lorrain. Nevertheless, they pretend to be exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Imperial Chamber of Spire, and from all the Contributions by the Empire. They have neglected to assist at the Dyets of the Empire, that so they might not be bound to give place to such Princes, as they esteemed less than them∣selves. The Dutchy of Barr is a Fief depen∣ding on the Crown of France, and chiefly what is on this side the Meuse; as for what is beyond it, he pretends its dependence on him, under the Title of Marquisate of Pont, or Ponta-Mousson. From whence it comes, that the In∣habitants Barrois are esteemed Natural French∣men.
Anthony, Francis, Charles the Third, Dukes of Lorrain, did Homage for it to the French Kings. The War of Lorrain, which followed that of Italy, was made upon the ac∣count of this Homage not being paid: The Dutchy of Barr was afterwards united to the Crown of France. Since which, there have been several Treaties between the French Kings and the Dukes of Lorrain. The Franche-County. THis Country, which made part of Great-Burgundy, is known under the Name of High-Burgundy, by reason of the Course of its Ri∣vers; and under that of Franche-Comte, by reason its Inhabitants have pretended several exempti∣ons, and that in possessing those Lands, they might dispose of them, without having any re∣gard to Wife, Children, or any other Relati∣ions. It is a Province very Populous, and wholly Roman-Catholick, whereof most of the Inhabitants are very rich by reason of Corn, Wine, and particularly by Salt, which made them formely be called, The Salted or Pickled Burgundians. The Woods raise 'em also a good Revenue, and we may say, That their Land is no less good now, than in the time of Julius Caesar. In the Year 1668. the French King, pretending the Right of the Queen his Wife, made the Conquest with a surprizing Success, it being then under the Protection of the
Crown of Spain, but was bound to restore this Province, in consideration of the Peace of Aix la Chapelle. The Spaniards kept it until the Year 1674. when having declar'd War upon France, the French rendred themselves Masters of it again, and were confirm'd in their possession of it by the Peace of Nimmeghen. This Province is divided into three parts, the High-County of Amont, the Middle one of Dole, and the Lower one of Aval; Grey is in the Up∣per part, Dole or Besanzon is in the Middle, Salins in the Nether. Grey is very strong upon the River Saon. Dole was the Capital of all the County, the Seat of a Parliament, wherefore the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, made it be Fortified with seven Bastions. Besanzon is both ancient and strong, now with a Cittadel: The Fertility of the Lands about it have given oc∣casion to the calling it the Granary of the Coun∣try. Its Archbishop styles himself a Prince of the Holy-Empire, but the Germans do not grant him Session in the Imperial Diets. The City was Imperial unto the Year 1652. when it be∣came Spanish, in exchange for the City of Fran∣kendael, which the Spaniards restored in execu∣ting the Treaty of Munster: the French King has caused the Parliament of the Province to be transferred thither. Salins, so called from its Salt-Pits, is defended by two Castles: Its Salt-Garner is a very remarkable Building. Amongst other Towns of the Province, Chastel-Challon has the Title of Principality; Arley has some∣times serv'd for an abode to the Duke of Bur∣gundy: Luxeul has Medicinal Waters, and Ala∣baster: Bleterans, the Castle of Joux, and and of Saint Anne, have been considerable
for their Situation. Arbois affords delicious Wines, and which keep a long time. Saint Claud is visited by those who bear a Devotion to that Saint. Noseret has fine Fairs, and a Castle whose Terrasses are Leaded. Near this Province, and upon the German Confines, are two Seigniories, the County of Monbelliard and the Abbey of Lure, with Towns of the same Name. Monbelliard, which is de∣fended by a strong Cittadel, belongs to a Prince of the House of Wirtembourg, which depend thereupon. The French King is now the Chief Sovereign of it. Suisserland. SƲisserland had its Name from Switz, one of its most ancient Cantons, whether this Can∣ton was the most considerable of the three, who began the Alliance in the Year 1308. or that in the Year 1315. they first of all fought then for the Liberty of the Country, in the Battel of Morgarten, wherein fifty of the Switzers defea∣ted an Army of twenty thousand Austrians. When Suisserland made a part of Gaul, it was divided into four Quarters, which seem to cor∣respond with the modern Countries of Zurich∣gow, Argow, Turgow, Wiflispurgergow. Since it has had two parts separated by the River of Russ, the one belonging to the Germans, the other to the Burgundians, who called it their Lesser-Burgundy, or Burgundia Trans-Jurana,
as being beyond Mount-Jura. The Rhine, Rhosne, Aar, Russ, Inn, Tesin, and other Rivers, have their Sources in Suisserland, for which reason this Country is esteemed the highest of Europe. The Tesin and Russ furnish them with the con∣veniency of Trading into Germany and Italy. Several Lakes there are, the most considerable of which, are those of Geneva and Constance. All these Waters produce Fish in abundance, and the Mountains in this Tract afford the means of Hunting Bucks, Shamoies, or Wild-Goats and Boors. The Switzers are well shap'd and proportioned, and very strong and robust for the most part. Their best Revenue comes from the Pensions they receive from the French King, and the King of Spain: Their Cattel af∣ford them Butter, Cheese and Milk: Their Interest is to maintain Peace, and to remain united among themselves. They speak both French and German in this Country, but have corrupted several terms of both Tongues. 'Tis held, that, upon occasion, they are able to bring into the Field sixty thousand fighting Men; the Canton of Bearn alone being capable of raising eighteen thousand. It is an Infantry which renders good service to the Prince who imploys it, as numerous as it was in the time of Julius Caesar. It seems to pawn its own Liber∣ty by engaging it self under the pay of others; but by so doing, it preserves the freedom of its Country. The Valour and Fidelity of the Switzers have invited the French Kings, the Popes of Rome, and the Dukes of Genoa, to conside in them for the Guard of their proper Persons, and the greatest Families of Europe do not dis∣dain their Alliance. True it is, they have not
so many Nobles as formerly; but those they have are very considerable, and a mistake it is to believe that they were wholly extermina∣ted. Several Castles were there razed, when they cast off the Yoke of the House of Au∣stria, by reason of the ill treatments of its Lieu∣tenants. Under the Name of Suisserland are known thirteen Cantons of the Country, which are subject to them, and of their Allies. The Can∣tons, as well as the Allies, are as many Repub∣licks govern'd by their Magistrates, whom they call Burgher-Masters, or Avoyers, or Landames. This Name is given to the chief of the Can∣tons, where are no Cities. The Cantons and the Allies have Ordinances independent on one another; nevertheless they Govern sometimes several Provinces together, and they have Laws almost a-like with a strict Union, they have often given them the Name of the Republick of the Switzers, or of the Lords of the Leagues. In this Commonwealth are two sorts of Religion the Protestant and Roman-Catholick. When menti∣on is made of the Catholick Cantons, they reckon either five or seven of them: The five are Ʋri, Switz, Ʋndervald, Lucerne, Zug: The two others, Fribourg and Soleurre. Zurich, Bern, Basle, Schafouse are Protestants: Glaris and Appenzel have both Papists and Protestants. This di∣versity of Religion does often cause their affairs to be embroil'd, and sometimes occasions their Assembling separately. Commonly the five Po∣pish Cantons hold their Assembly at Lucerne, the four Protestant Cities at Aran. The Gene∣ral Assemblies are held every Year at Baden, so called from its Baths. Each Canton is free to
engage it self with whom it thinks convenient, so that the Switzers are found in different Par∣ties; nevertheless the Switzers sharing in almost all the Wars that are made in Europe, have none themselves, and live in Peace in their own Country. As concerning succours, the Can∣tons have certain Treaties, they can call and summon one another: Some have no right but of calling three or five, but those who sum∣mon succours, may also cause others to come, who are allied to them; thus most commonly they all joyn therein, each according to its Forces. They have not all an equal Authority over their subject Countries, they have it only according to the Associations which they have made in divers times: And those who entred last into the Leagues have not any Right over the Countries, which have been subjected before the times of their Leagues. Amongst all these Cantons, Zurich has the Presidence: Bern is the most powerful; Basle has the finest City, the abode and the Rendezvous of several Learned Men: The Canton of Schafouse, has its City of great Trade: Soleurre has one too of the same Name, where Resides the French Em∣bassador. Ʋri, Swits, Ʋnderwald, Glaris, Ap∣penzel have only Burroughs. Hence follows the order of the thirteen Cantons, according to their Ranks. Zurich, Bern, Ʋri, Switz, Ʋnder∣wald, Zug, Glaris, Fribourg, Soleurre, Schafouse, Appenzel. The Countries, subjected to the Cantons, have either been Conquered by Arms, or submitted voluntarily. There is about a score of them, which, for the most part, have the Title of Bailywicks, as Baden and those which lie in Italy.
Among the Allies of the Cantons, the Grisons are the most powerful. They are so called from one of their Ligues, whose Inhabitants were used to wear Grey Scarfes. Their City of Coire is the Place whither are brought the Merchandizes of Italy and Germany, by reason of the conveniency of the Rhine, which begins to bear Boats thereabouts. One of their Coun∣tries is the Valtoline, the most Beautiful and Im∣portant Valley of Europe. Wallais lies along the Rhosne. There are moreover, in the num∣ber of the Allies, four Bishops, that of Sion at Saint Maurice, Basle at Porentru, Constance at Mersbourg, and Coire at Marsoila. There is likewise the Abbot of Saint Gall, who dwells at Weil; seven Cities, Saint Gall, Neuchatel, Wal∣langery, Biel, Geneva, Mulhausen, Rotweil. The six first Protestants, and Rotweil Catholick. Gene∣va is the best Fortified of all, the Burghers, or Citizens, keep a very exact Guard for the pre∣servation of their Liberty, and that of Religi∣on, which is Reformed. In the Year 1663. the French King obtain'd freedom for the Catholicks to say Mass in that Town, where it had not been Celebrated in this Age. The Lake of Geneva is crossed by the Rhosne, which mixeth not with its Waters; there sometimes arise Tempests even in clear fair Weather, because it abutts at the foot of the Mountains. In the Country its said, that Julius Caesar caused his Treasures to be cast into this Lake, when he was pursued by the Switzers; hitherto they have been sought for to no purpose.
Savoy. THis Country, formerly the abode of the Allobroges, is said to have been called Sa∣voy, after one of its Princes had drove away the Robbers. It is full of Mountains, which we generally call the Alpes, tho' several Branches there have their peculiar Names. Mount Cenis, and the lesser St. Bernard, make the two prin∣cipal Passages for Italy. 'Tis very cold in these parts; the Inhabitants, by reason of their drinking the Snow-water, are subject to the Goitre, which is a swelling of the Throat, pro∣ceeding from the crudity of that Water. Ne∣vertheless there are several Places in this Coun∣try both very pleasant and very fertile. The Mountains have Marmotes, which are seldom seen elsewhere: they are great Rats, who have short Legs, rugged Hair, the Mouth and Ears of a Squirrel, four Teeth long and cut∣ting; they sleep full six Months of the Year, without taking in any Food or Nourish∣ment. Savoy is reckon'd for the Principal and most Noble Dutchy of Christendom; It's certain, that its Dukes have had Alliances with all that's Royal in Europe. After the Houses of England and France, that of Savoy is one of the most ancient: Ame the eighth had reason to say, that he had Princes to his Vassals: Most of the Gentlemen of his Dominions come from the Emperours of the East and West, from the Kings of Italy, from the Princes of Morea,
from the Counts of Geneva. The Power of the Dukes of Savoy is so much the more conside∣rable, in that they are Masters of several Pas∣sages from France into Italy, by the possession of Piedmont, of the County of Niece, and other Seigneuries. Under Savoy is comprehended Genevois, Cho∣blais, Faussigni, Tarentaise, Maurienne, part of Bugey. Chambri is the Capital of the Dut∣chy and the Seat of a Parliament. Montmelion is the strongest in it, with a Cittadel, which covers the head of almost an inaccessible Moun∣tain, where the Keys of Savoy are said to be kept. Anneci is the Residence of the Bishop of Geneva. Ripaille was the retreat of Felix the Fourth, before and after his Pontificate. This Prince liv'd there with his Friends in such a disapplication from Affairs, that since People say Faire Ripaille, when they are merry, and without disquiet. Italy. AMong the Authors, who have written con∣cerning Italy, few there are but represent it as the most beautiful, best and most delicious Country in the World. Its situation, towards the midst of the temperate Zone, affords it all these advantages. It is commonly compared to a Boot, the figure whereof it does really re∣semble, lying between the Mediterranean-Sea and the Gulph of Venice. The Alpes, which
Livy calls the Walls of Italy and Rome, are at those places where it touches France, Savoy, Suisserland, Germany; the Appennine Mountain runs quite through it. The Po, Adige, Tiber, and Arne, are the greatest Rivers of this Coun∣try. There is not one in the World observ'd, in so short a course, to have so much en∣crease as the Po, and which is so inconve∣nient by its over-flowings, notwithstand∣ing the Dikes that have been raised for pre∣vention. The People of Italy are polite, dextrous, subtile, and prudent; extream in their Man∣ners: they were formerly Masters of the most considerable Empire, that has been seen since the Creation of the World; And now stand possess'd of the chiefest Dignity of the Roman-Catholick Church. They obey divers Princes, who are all Papists, but very different in Power and Interests. We are oblig'd to the Italians for the Discovery of the New World; Co∣lumbus was a Genouese, Americus Vespucius a Florentine. The Cities of Italy are so much the more beautiful and better built, in that the Nobility have commonly their abode in 'em. Their Churches and other Edifices are adorned with excellent Pictures; for which reason the Men and Houses are said to be all painted. The Italian Tongue is deriv'd from the Latin: Tuscan is received in the Court of Rome, and amongst the well-bred people. Their way, of reckoning the Hours, is very different from ours; they regulating it ac∣cording to the Sun's setting; then they count four and twenty Hours; and at the entrance of the Night, they begin to reckon the Hours
of a New Day: Insomuch that the number of the Hours at Noon rises and falls, according to the Seasons, tho' there are always four and twenty Hours for the Civil Day, that is, for the Day and Night together. For Example: On the twelfth day of August at Noon, which we reckon twelve a Clock, the Italians reckon seventeen; and so what remains, to finish the Civil Day of four and twenty Hours, compre∣hends seven Hours, which make up just the time which the Sun employs that day, the twelfth of August, since the Hour of Noon unto its setting. The Sovereign Princes of Italy are the Pope, the King of Spain, who possess almost half of it, the Duke of Savoy, the great Duke of Flo∣rence, the Republick of Genoa, the Duke of Mantua, the Duke of Modena, the Duke of Parma, the Bishop of Trent, the Republick of Lucca. The other Princes are call'd Petty, by reason of the small extent of their Dominions. The Republick of Venice is independent; most of the other States depend either on the Church, or the Empire, for some Fiefs. The Quality of Duke is in Italy more considerable than of Prince, bating in the Territories of the King of Spain. There are so many Arch∣bishopricks and Bishopricks, that the King∣dom of Naples alone has more than all France hath; the truth is, most of 'em have not so good a Revenue, as our Country Cu∣rates. Italy is divided into three great parts; the High, which may be called Lombardy; the Middle, and the Low: According to this divi∣sion, there is found in the High, Piemont, Mont∣ferrat,
Milantz, the Coast of Genoa, Parme∣zan, Modenois, Mantouan, the Domain of Venice, Trentin: The State of the Church, Tuscany, Lucquois, are in the Middle; the Kingdom of Naples possesses the rest. There is a fourth part, if we may add the Isles thereto. Piemont, according to the saying of a Pie∣montin, is a City of three hundred Miles in compass: One and the same Land produces Corn, Wine, and Fruits. Turin, the abode of the Dukes of Savoy, is a lovely Town, ac∣companied with a strong Cittadel. It keeps in its Metropolitan Church, call'd the Dome, the Relick of St. Suaire, wherein the Face of our Lord is imprinted, with most of his Body; It boasts of having, of all the Cities of Italy, brought the Press into use. Nice, near the Sea, has several Roman Antiquities, and a Cit∣tadel, which seems inaccessible by reason of its situation upon a Rock. Montferrat has most of its Towns upon Hills, very fertile in Corn and Wine. By the Peace of Quieras, a part of that Country was yielded to the Duke of Savoy, the other re∣maining the Duke of Mantua's, who possesses Casal, near the Po. This Town is fortified with several Bulwarks and Half-moons, with a Castle and a strong Cittadel, composed of six great Bastions. The Land of Milan is the most beautiful Country of all Lombardy, and the finest Dutchy of Christendom, now possess'd by the King of Spain. The Ways are pleasant, almost all in a direct line, with Chanels of Spring-Water on both sides, and rows and plantations of Trees,
which make them resemble Alleys and Walks. The Champain of Milan is so fertile, that there is not an Inch of Land, but brings forth twice a Year. The Nobility, as well as in the King∣dom of Naples, does not meddle with Com∣merce, as does that of the other neighbouring States. The City of Milan is called Great, be∣cause it is full ten Miles in compass, where∣in it contains above two hundred and thirty Churches, ninety six Parishes, as many Con∣vents, and above a hundred Fraternities. It is a general Mart of the Merchandizes of France, of Spain, of Italy, of Germany; so great a number of Artizans it has of all sorts, that the Italians have it for a Proverb, That Milan must be ruin'd, if they would accommodate Italy with them. It has ever passed for a second Rome, tho' it has been besieged forty times, and taken two and twenty: Its strength consists rather in its Men, than in its Walls, it being reckoned to contain above three hundred thousand per∣sons. Its Castle is one of the finest Fortresses of Europe, of six great Bastions Royal, invested with Brick, with Grafts and Ditches full of running Water. The Coast of Genoa, formerly called Liguria, produces Muscate-Wines, Olives in abundance, all manner of good Fruits; the Western part particularly is full of Lemmon, Orange, Fig, Palm, and Cedar-trees: the Inland of the Country is mountainous, full of Woods, which furnish Materials for the making of Ships and Galleys. The Situation of Genoa is upon the Sea-shore, part in Plains, part in Hills. The City is full five Miles round, and has Fortifica∣tions, which are yet much greater in circuit;
for which reason, it is the greatest, the most trading, and the most important of all Italy, towards the West. The Buildings and Stru∣ctures of this Town are so magnificent and so beautiful, that it is called the Stately, tho' very much endamag'd by the late Batteries of the French. One of the principal Revenues of its Inhabitants consists in the transportation of Silk-stuffs. Parma, the Capital of Parmezan, is the common abode of the Duke of that Name, of the House of the Farnezes, a Feudatory of the Church. It has a Cittadel, whereon Money has not been sparing, for the rendring it good and a fair Palace for its Princes dwelling. Modena is the Capital of the Dutchy of the same Name, fortified with Bulwarks, after the ancient manner, inhabited by above thirty five thousand Souls. In Modena it was, that Brutus was in vain besieged by Mark Anthony, after the Murder of Julius Caesar, Octavius having hap∣pily defeated the Army of him, who would by this Siege have renewed the Civil Wars. Mantua is seated in the Waters of a Lake of twenty Miles in circuit, which only affords en∣trance by Causeys into the Town. Its Mills do raise a good Revenue to this Duke; the Jews, who are there very numerous, pay him a great Tribute. The Ducal Palace is one of the finest and best furnish'd in all Italy. The Demesn of Venice has so many Rivers, Canals, and Navigable Lakes, that Merchan∣dizes are easily conveyed into all its places. The Republick is independent, above twelve hundred Years standing, the Bulwark of Chri∣stendom against the Turks. The City of Venice is
one of the greatest of Europe; so populous, that there are reckoned above three hundred thousand persons. Those who have seen it, may boast of having seen one of the Wonders of the World. Its Arcenal is the finest, the greatest, and the best furnished upon Earth. The Isles, whereof the City is composed, are separated from one another by Chanels, where∣in there be above fifteen thousand Boats, which they call Gondoles. The Church and Palace of St. Mark are very fine Structures; the Trea∣sury of St. Mark contains immense Riches. The Bishoprick of Trent, which belongs to its Bishop, is under the Protection of the House of Austria. The City of Trent is ancient, in∣habited both by Italians and Germans, re∣nowned for-holding the last General Council. The state of the Church is look'd upon as so much the more considerable, in that the Pope, who is the Temporal and Spiritual Prince of it, pretends to be the Chief and Soveraign Pontife of all Christendom, the Patriarch of Rome, and of the West; Primate and Exarch of Italy, Metropolitan of the Suffragan Bi∣shops of Rome, Bishop of St. John de Lateran. Rome, formerly the Capital of the finest, greatest, and most considerable Empire of the Universe, was once the Mistress of the better part of the World, famous for excellent Men, who have surpassed others in Valour, in Piety, in Justice and Temperance. It has had in its beginning Kings, Consuls and Emperours: the Papists call it Rome the Holy, by reason of the Residence of the Popes. We may say, it has few Equals, if we consider its Antiquities, Churches, Palaces, and Curiosities.
Tuscany has three principal Cities, Florence; Siena, Pisa, formerly as many Republicks. Florence, the Capital of this State, renowned upon the account of its Beauty, is large and very populous. The Palace of the Great Duke has fine Pictures, Jewels of great value, several Rarities. Lucca, fortified with eleven regular Ba∣stions, is famous for its Silks and Olives. The Head of this Republick is a Gonfalonier, or Chief-Standard-Bearer, whose Charge lasts but two Months. The Kingdom of Naples is the greatest State of Italy, it belongs to the King of Spain, who pays for it, every Year, a white Hobbey to the Pope, with seven thousand Ducats. The Spring is there so long, and so full of Flowers, the Autumn so loaded with Fruits, that it is esteemed a Paradise. The City of Naples is the abode of several Gentle∣men, which makes it be called the Gentile. It is situated so advantagiously, that it seems an abridgment of all the Beauties of Italy. There are few Cities in Europe, who have so many Churches, and so many Cittadels, as has Naples.
Germany. GErmany has very fertile Provinces, and a great number of fine Cities. The Corn, Fruits, Salt, and other Commodities, afford a very considerable Revenue. It is now an Ele∣ctive Empire, wherein is a vast number of So∣vereign States, of which the Emperour is the chief. The Laws of this Empire do allow of three Religions, the Roman Catholick, the Lu∣theran and Evangelical, and the Calvinist or Reformed. Nevertheless, there be several other Sects, tho' the Germans do almost all fol∣low the belief of their Princes. Germany has this advantage, that it is in the midst of Europe, and serves for the Seat of the Empire: the Emperor governs it by the means of Diets, which are much like Parlia∣ments. The principal Articles of the Govern∣ment are contained in the Golden Bull, which treats of the Election of the King of the Ro∣mans, of the Duty of Electors, of their Pri∣viledges, of the Authority of the Emperor, of the means of preserving the Repose and Peace in the Empire. This Bull is a small Book, whose Original, written in Parchment, con∣tains four and twenty Leaves, and thirty Chapters. It has a great round Seal of pure Gold, fasten'd to strings of yellow and red Silk. It has on the one side the Portrait of Charles the Fourth, on the other a Castle with two Towers, with these Words, Aurea Roma. The Election of the Emperor ought to be made
at Francfort upon the Mein, but this was not observed in the late Elections. Besides the Assemblies which concern the Affairs of the Empire in general, there be three sorts of 'em, those of the Electors for the chusing of the Emperor; those of the Deputies, whereto the Emperor sends his Commissioner; those of the Circles, like to the Assemblies of the States of our great Provinces. There be ten Circles in the Empire, those of Austria, of Bavaria, of Suabia, of Alsatia, or of the High Rhine, the Electoral, or of the Low Rhine, of Westphalia, of High Saxony, of Low Saxony, of Franconia, of Burgundy; this last is no longer Convened. Each Circle has an Ecclesiastick and a Secular Director, who preside together in the Assem∣blies: two or three Circles may assemble, when one of 'em is attacked from abroad, or disturbed with intestine troubles. The Empire is much the same with that of the Romans, tho' it does not comprehend so great an extent of Land: the Princes or States, whereof it is composed, are of five forts, the Emperor, now of the House of Austria, the Electors, the Ecclesiastick Princes, the Secular Princes, and the Free Towns. In the General Dyets, there be three Bodies, that of the Ele∣ctors, that of the Princes, that of the Imperial Cities. There are reckoned to be above three hundred Sovereignties in Germany, who ac∣knowledge the Emperor no farther than ho∣mage, and in Resort. The Dominions of the House of Austria be of three sorts, those of Austria which are Hereditary to it; those of Bohemia, where it has the same Right; those of Hungary, which it
has by Election. The Emperor does common∣ly obtain either his Son, or his Brother, or his nearest Relation, to be chosen King of Hunga∣ry in his Life-time; afterwards has him Crown∣ed King of Bohemia; and, if he finds any dispo∣sition, has him Elected King of the Romans, that is to say, his perpetual Vicar and presump∣tive Successor to the Empire. Without the Revenue of his Hereditary Countries, the Em∣peror would not have wherewith to maintain a very considerable Train; he does not possess any Land under the Title of Imperial Majesty. His Principal Rights are the Erection and Inve∣stiture of Fiefs, the granting of Priviledges, the Right of Legitimation: He may make Laws, give Safe-Guards, establish Posts, make Parliaments, compose Universities, erect Bur∣roughs into Cities, create Offices, puts Towns into the Ban of the Empire: In short, he may make Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, and has the Superiority over all the Princes of the Empire, who, upon this account, pay him a great re∣spect. The Electors are to the number of eight, the Arch-Bishop of Mayence, the Arch-Bishop of Treves, the Arch-Bishop of Cologne, the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Bavaria, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenbourg, the Prince Palatine. These Electors Chuse and Crown the Emperor; the Pope confirms this Election and Coronation. Four Voices are suf∣ficient to raise any one to the Imperial Dignity, and at present the King of Bohemia has only his Session in the Election. The Secular Electors may nominate themselves: The Lands or their Electorates cannot be dismembred: In the
House of Saxony, the Electorate is for the eldest alone, who shares the other Seigniories with his Brothers. The Elector of Brandenboug is the most Potent, and possesses the most Land of all those Princes; his States are above two hun∣dred German Leagues in length, for the most part separated from one another, yet a Courier may go from one end to another, and always lye upon this Electors Land. The Ecclesiastick Princes are of several sorts, the Arch-Bishop of Salzbourg, the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order, several Bishops and other great Prelates; Abbots, Abbesses, who have no Voice but in Body. These Princes are al∣most all absolute over the Temporality of their Benefices, and Christendom has no Prelates so Potent as they are. The Election of most of their Dignities belongs to the Chapters, with∣out the Popes or Emperors being to concern themselves therein. As Germany is divided for Religion, there remain some Lutheran Bishops, who have the Title of Bishops, until that they have Contracted Marriage; and when they are Married, they are called Administrators. Among the secular Princes, are the Arch-Duke of Austria, the Princes of the Electoral Houses, some Dukes, Marquesses and Land-Graves. There be also Counts and Barons, who differ little but in Name, and who have immediate Dependency on the Empire. They have Session in Body, which has four Voices in the States of the Empire; they have each their own in their particular Assemblies; several amongst them Coin Monies. Nobles there be in Suevia or Schwaben in Franconia, in the Land of the Rhine, who are absolute over their Lands, as the great∣est
Lords of the Empire are over theirs. Seve∣ral Principalities of Germany are often possess'd by one sole Prince; and sometimes one Princi∣pality alone belongs there to several. The youngest Brothers have almost the same Titles with the eldest. The Free Towns, which are as many small Republicks, be principally of two sorts, Impe∣rial and Anseatick. The Imperial have the Ea∣gle of the Empire in their Arms, either whole or divided; have Right to send to the Diet, where their Body has two Voices, they are con∣sidered upon the Bank of Suevia and upon the Bank of the Rhine: Thus are they divided, by reason of the Benches where the Deputies of those Cities have their Seats: The Deputy of the City of Cologne holds the first Rank of the Bench of the Rhine, that of Ratisbon has the first place of that of Suevia. Some have Noble Families, by which they are Governed, others have a Popular Government. The Hans-Towns are Confederated together for the mutually succouring one another, upon occasion, against their Enemies, for maintaining the Liberty of the Commerce, for the not being burthened with any Impositions by Foreign Princes; the consideration of this League is now of little use to several of those Towns, each of them endeavouring to do its own busi∣ness by it self. They were reckoned to be sixty six. Lubeck, Cologne, Brunswick, Dantzick are the Capitals of them, with as many Col∣ledges. Lubeck may Convene all the rest, with the advice of five of those Towns, which are nearest it.
The most renowned Rivers of Germany, are the Rhine, the Danube, the Elbe, the Oder, the Weser: The Rhine, the greatest of Rivers which goes towards the Ocean, has its Source in Suisserland, and its end in Holland, where it lo∣ses its Name in the Sand: It is so broad below Strasbourg, that Bridges cannot be made over it. There is not one in the World, that Waters so many Sovereign States. The finest Cities, by which it passes, are on this side its Bed or Cha∣nel, most of 'em built by the Romans, who made it the bound of their Empire. It former∣ly separated Gaul from Germany; during the first Race of the French Kings, it passed through some part of their Territories. The Danube, which begins in Suevia, has a Course of above seven hundred Leagues. The most easie Division of Germany is, that which has made it into two parts, the one High, and the other Low, according to the Course of the Rhine, of the Elbe, and of the Oder. Each of those parts has several Provinces: The High has four towards the West, Alsatia, the Pala∣tinate of the Rhine, Franconia, Suevia: And four great States towards the East, Tirol, Bavaria, which is of two sorts, Dutchy and Palatinate; Bohemia, which also comprehends Silesia with Moravia; and Austria, which has other Here∣reditary Lands, namely, Carinthia, Carniola and Stiria. Low-Germany has as many parts as the High, four towards the West, the Electo∣ral Arch-Bishopricks, the Succession of Cleves and of Juliers, Westphalia and Hesse: Four to∣wards the East, known under the Name of Sax∣ony, Saxony Electoral, which comprehends Tu∣ringia, Misnia, Lusacia, High-Saxony upon the
Elbe; Saxony has other Princes, wherein we reckon Brunswick, Low-Saxony upon the Elbe, Meckelbourg; Brandenbourg and Pomerania, which for the most part belongs to the Crown of Sueden, with some other Seigniories. Alsatia is indeed small, but the most fertile of all Germany in Corn and in Wines; Stras∣bourg there is rich, strong, and very populous by reason of its Commerce: Its Arcenal, the Tower, and the Clock of the Church, deserves to be seen by those who Travel. Heidelberg is the Capital of the Palatinate of the Rhine: Its fine Library was Transported to Rome, after that the Town had been taken in the Year 1622. by Tilly the Emperors General. Franconia was the abode of the ancient French, who called it Eastern France, after that they had carried their Name and setled their abode in Gaul. Franc∣fort, upon the Mein, is known for its Fairs, and for the Elections of Emperors which have been made in that Town. Nuremberg has fine Manufactures, and furnishes Europe with abun∣dance of Gew-gaws. Suevia has so many Sove∣reignties, that there's not a Country that has so great a number; its two best Cities are Augsbourg and Ʋlm: The first Celebrated by the Confession of the Faith of the Protestants in the Year 1530. by the Enemies it has raised against the King of Spain, and by its Goldsmiths Work: Its Town-House is one of the finest Fabricks of Germany: The Catholicks and Lu∣therans are received Magistrates indifferently in this Place. Ʋlm is one of the best fortified, and the richest of the Empire in Land; the Danube begins to carry Boats there. The Dutchy of Bavaria is not to be dismembred as
are some other States; the youngest Brothers there do ever reverence the eldest: Munich, the Residence of the Elector, is a fine Town, ac∣companied with a stately Castle, wherein there is a Library full of curious Manuscripts. Ratis∣bon, renowned for its Diets, has five Principa∣lities of the Empire, the Bishoprick, the City, three Abbies, with the finest Bridges in Germany. Bohemia is esteemed one of the Highest Coun∣tries in Europe, by reason there enters no Ri∣vers therein, and several go out from thence. It has its particular States, its Customs and its Tongue, different from those of the Neigh∣bourhood, tho' its King be one of the Electors of the Empire. The Inheritance of this Cu∣stom has been confirmed to the House of Austria by the Peace of Munster. Prague, the Capital, is composed of three Cities, and so populous, that under the Emperor Charles the Fourth, there are said to have gone from thence above forty thousand Foreign Scholars, for that their Priviledges were retrenched: The great Bat∣tel in the Year 1620. which was fought near its Walls, decided, in less than an Hours time, the Quarrels of the Kingdom, in favour of the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, against Frede∣rick Elector Palatine. Austria, the only Arch-Dutchy in the World, is not subject to the Ju∣stice of the Empire, and does not Contribute to its necessity. The Piety of that Family, and the Situation of its great Dominions near those of the Infidels, have made the Germans conti∣nue the Empire in that Family for some time past. Vienna, the Residence of the Empire, is the best Fortified of Germany: In the Year 1529. it sustained generously twenty Assaults, against
the Great Turk Soliman the Second, who Besieged it in vain with three hundred Thousand Men. Cologne, an Imperial City, one of the four Hans-Towns, is called the Rome of Germany, by reason of its bigness, and the beauty of its Benefices: The Papists call it Holy, because it has in keeping several Bodies of their Saints, has three hundred sixty five Churches, and that amongst the free Cities, it alone is exemped from Heresie. Westphalia furnishes Gammons and Hams. Munster is the place where the General-Peace of the Empire was concluded, in the Year 1648. It was known in the Year 1535. for the Rebellion of the Anabaptists, whose pretended King John of Leyden was there punished according to his merit. In the Year 1661. its Bishop caused a Cittadel to be there made, for the maintaining his Authority against the pretensions of the Citizens. Hosse is the Province where hitherto most care has been taken to instruct the Inhabitants in the Trade of War. The Name of Saxony was more famous when its People Conquered the better part of England. The House of Saxony is one of the most ancient of Europe. Erfort, in Turingia, is esteemed the greatest City of Germany. Dresden, the Residence of the Elector of Saxony, has sine Fortifications, and an Arcenal well provided. Low-Saxony has several good Cities, Brunswick, Lubeck, Hambourg, Vismar, Bremen. Hambourg is spacious, rich, strong, besides its being able to put fifteen thousand Citizens in Arms: Its Situation facilitates to it the Commerce of the Ocean and of the Baltick-Sea. Brandenbourg is the only Marquisate of all the Empire, with that of Baden: Berlin is there the Residence of the Ele∣ctor. Stetin is the most considerable of Pomerania possessed by the Crown of Sueden.
Of Denmark. THE Danes make the Name of their Coun∣try come from Dan, one of the Successors of Noah. They make all their Kings to descend from him to Christian the Fifth, now Reigning, Grandson of Christian the Fourth, who had the happiness to sway the Scepter above sixty Years. The King of Denmark commands Countries of vast extent, which for the most part are cold, by reason of their Situation towards the North, full of Mountains and Woods, and Ice and Snow. Of this Number are the Kingdom of Norway, Greenland, the Isles of Island and of Fero. Towards the North of America, there be some Lands which bear the Name of New-Denmark: Some Fortresses in Guinea, Kranke∣bar in Coromandel, in the East-Indies, acknow∣ledg subjection to his Majesty of Denmark. What is particularly comprehended under the Name of Denmark, is the best inhabited, the finest and the most fertile. It is an Hereditary Kingdom since the Year 1660. before, it was Elective; the Nobility being now stript of the Prerogative it formerly possessed. The King of Denmark styles himself Count of Oldembourg and Delmenhorst, as the Eighth King of that Fa∣mily, into which the Crown of Denmark came in the Year 1448. by the Election of Christian I. He is now in possession of it, and caused to be built there, in the Year 1681. a new City, with a Sea-Port, under the Name of Christiana. The Opinion of Luther is followed in Denmark since the Reign of King Frederiek, Elected in the Year 1523. There is no great Trade drove
in Denmark, but there is a fine Revenue arising from the Customs which the Merchandizes pay, that pass through the Streight of the Sound, the Key of the Baltick-Sea. This Streight is a Mile in breadth, and the Course which the Ships there steer, with the most safety and conve∣niency, is nearer Cronembourg, than Elsen∣bourg, which belongs to the Crown of Sueden. This Revenue is no longer so considerable, since the Suedes do not pay there now what they did formerly: and it would be less, if the design was brought about, that has been entertain'd, of joyning the Baltick Sea to the Elve, by the Lake of Swerin, if the transportation of Com∣modities be continued by Land from Hambourg to Lubeck, and if the Elector of Brandenbourg brings to perfection the Chanel, which he has begun at Mulras, for the transporting the Mer∣chandizes of Poland and Silesia, from the Oder into the Elve. Ships of ordinary Bulk, which take their way through the Streight of the Belt, cast Anchor before Nibourg, and there pay the Impost. This Streight is broader, but not so deep as that of the Sound, by which means the Sea is there very rough: the great Ships meet with several Islands there, and do not willingly steer their Course that way, which they take more directly and more conveniently through the Sound. The King of Denmark raises also a great Revenue from the Cattel of his Dominions, which afford 'em both very fat and in great plenty. The Germans carry away from thence every Year above fifty thousand Oxen into their own Country; Other Fo∣reigners go into Denmark to buy Horses. Such abundance is there of Deer, that three or four
hundred are sometimes killed, in one Chace alone; the Danes are us'd to salt and barrel 'em up, for the victualling, as they say, the King's Ships: the hunting of those Creatures is com∣monly perform'd in Chariots, or a sort of run∣ning Waggons, by reason these Machines do not fright away the Deer. The Ports of Denmark are the Peninsula of Jutland, and the Islands near the Streight of the Belt: Schonen was yielded up to the Crown of Sueden by the late Treaties of Peace. Jut∣land was the abode of Cimbres, who have made Conquest in most of the Regions of Europe, and who, before they were defeated by Marius, gave furious Alarums to the Romans. There is somewhat Martial found at this day in the Da∣nish Ladies; they love Hunting, and receive at Table, rather than in their Chambers, those persons who make 'em visits. In Jutland there be four Diocesses towards the North, Ripen, Arhusen, Alborg, Viborg; two Dutchies towards the South, Sleswick and Holstein. Those who inhabit near the Coast are at small Charges in making their Houses, for that the Wind does often carry there such drifts of Sand, as to constrain 'em to get out at the top of their Houses. Kolding is the place of Custom for the Cattel: Frederic-Ode, which is now called Frederic, for the rendring the termination of it the more different from that of Frederick-Ohrt in Holstein, is in so im∣portant a situation, that Charles Gustavus, King of Sueden, having taken it in the late Wars, had then the means of making his Army pass over the Ice, into all the Neighbouring Islands, and go give the Alarum to Copenhagen; which
was an Action as bold as that never the like was heard of; this Prince made the Cavalry march and lead the Artillery over great Arms of the Sea, where before a Man on foot would have been afraid of venturing himself: True it is, that formerly some Battels have been fought there upon the Ice, but commonly the War was made, in those Parts, by Land in Winter, and by Sea in Summer. The Dutchy of Sleswick was the ancient abode of the English: It belongs to the Duke of Holstein, who has his Residence at Gottorp, and holds of the Crown of Denmark. The City of Sleswick has the remains of the Re-in∣trenchments which were made there, at divers times, to hinder entrance into the Peninsula. One of the late Dukes of Holstein, caused Fre∣derickstadt to be built upon the Eider, with de∣sign of setling there the Guild-Trade: He sent, in the Year 1633. for that purpose, a signal Embassie into Russia and Persia; whereof we have both a fine and an exact Relation, drawn up by Olearius, Secretary of the Embassie. Hol∣stein, otherwise Holsatia, belongs to the King of Denmark, and to the Duke of Holstein, who have hitherto done Homage for it to the Empe∣ror, as Fief of the Empire, and have had alter∣nately the administration of Justice, the Session in the Assemblies of the Empire, and in all the Rights of Regality. By the Peace of the Em∣pire with Sueden, Protection is granted the Duke against the King of Denmark, which was of no use to him in the late Wars; and he was only re-established in his Dominions by the Peace of Nimmighen. His Riches consist in the Fishery, and in the Transportation of Swine,
which are fatned in the Woods. Some Lands, in this Country, bring forth for three years together, the three years following they are covered with Water, by the means of Ponds that are made to overflow: The Principal Town is Riel, which is near the Port of Christianpreis, which was Fortified, and, near which, has lately been built the Fortress of Frederick-Ohrt. The greatest Isles of Denmark are Zealand and Fionia. Copenhagen, in Zealand, is a Town of great Commerce, the usual abode of the King. It has a fine Castle-Royal, good Fortifications, which afforded its Inhabitants the means of re∣pulsing the Suedes in the late Wars. It has also one of the finest Arsenals of Europe, wherein is kept a Celestial Globe, of six foot Diameter, made by Tycho-Brahe, the famous Mathematici∣an, who made curious observations in the Castle of Ʋranibourg, in the Isle of Vren. Ʋranibourg is really the pleasantest Situated in the World. Besides the Prospect they have from thence, of the Royal-City, of the two Coasts of Zealand, and of Schonen, they have a full view of all the Ships which pass and repass the Sound from the one Sea to the other. Roskild is the Mausoleum of the Kings. Elsenour is near the strong Castle of Cronembourg, whose Fortifications have lately been augmented. The Isle of Fionia is the Appennage of the Prince of Denmark. Its City of Ottensec was the place of holding the General Assemblies of the Kingdom, which, since the Year 1660. are to be held at Copenhagen. The Isle of Bornholm was yielded to the Crown of Sueden by the last Treaty of Peace; since which, the Danes have given, in Exchange
of that Island, an equivalent, by the Propriety of several Lords in Schonen. Norway possesses the Western part of the great Peninsula of Scandinovia, whereof Sueden makes the Eastern: A long ledg of Hills, which divide 'em into two, leaving Norway towards the Oce∣an, Sueden towards the Baltick-Sea. From hence they Transport Whale-Oyl, dry'd Fish, called Stock-Fish, abundance of Timber for the building of Ships, for the making of Masts and Sail-Yards. Its Coast, though of a vast extent, has few good Harbours, by reason of the small Islands, Rocks and Shelves, wherewith they are environed. The Gulph of Maclstroon is also said to swallow up the Ships which approach it. What is towards the Pole, is full of Forests and of Mountains, which have some Mines of Iron and of Copper. In the Year 1646. near Opslo, was a Mine of Gold discovered, which gave the Inhabitants occasion to Publish abroad, That they had the Northern-Indies; this advantage lasted but as long as the Mine, which was afterwards quickly at an end, by over-much working. This Kingdom has five Governments, with as many Castles, Bahus, Aggerhus, Barghenhus, Dron∣them, Vardhus. That of Bahus, with a Castle of the same Name, upon a Rock, was yielded to the Suedes by the late Peace. Berghen is the best City, the Residence of the Vice-roy, with the new For∣tress Bourg, and a Sea-Port, where the Ships do easily touch, and are safe from all Winds, by the means of high Mountains wherewith it is sur∣rounded. The Merchants of the Anseatick Towns have their Magazines. Dronthem, the abode of the ancient Kings of Norway, is very much de∣cayed: It has still the Title of an Arch-Bisho p∣rick,
with the remains of one of the Finest and most Magnificent Churches in the North. Ships are secure in that Harbour, but have occasion for good Pilots to bring 'em in. The other Prin∣cipal Havens, of this Kingdom, are in the We∣stern part. In some Countries of this Region, is Bread made of the flower of Barley and Oats, which they bake between two hollow Flints; this Bread will keep, as they say, thirty or forty years. The Norwegians are little sub∣ject to discourses, of such a constitution, that when they are in a Feaver, a slice of a Gammon of Bacon does 'em more good than a new-laid Egg; the inclination of several of them to Sor∣cery, makes 'em have the reputation of selling Winds to Saylors. Finmarck, which makes part of Lapland, ad∣vances into the cold Zone, so as the day and night last there seven Months together: The In∣habitants of this Country have nothing in pro∣perty, they accomodate themselves with the first place they like, now in one place, to morrow in another. They live on their Fishing and their Hunting, and only pay the Tribute of some Skins to the King of Denmark; they carry their Fish to sell at Berg. The Castle of Wardhus, with a Burough of three hundred Houses, the most Northern of all our Continent, is in the midst of a small Island, where it serves to exact some Customs, from those who go to Trade by the Ocean, at Arch-Angel in Muscovy. Its Port is in the Western part of the Island, which is se∣parated from the Continent by a Streight of a quarter of a League in breadth, where there is passage for Ships. Its Neighbourhood is not sub∣ject to Ice, so as are the other parts of that Sea.
Of Sueden. THe Monarchy of Sueden is the most anci∣ent of Europe, if it be true that it has had above a hundred and fifty Kings; and that the first of 'em was the Son of Japhet, one of the Sons of Noah. Upon this foundation perhaps it was, that in the Council of Basle, a Bish∣op of Sueden demanded of the Presidents of the Assembly, the Precedence for his King over other Christian Princes. The most authentick Historians begin the enumera∣tion of the Kings of Sueden at Biorno, who was Crowned towards the year eight hundred; and shew, that the Kingdome was Elective til the Reign of Gustavus de Vaga, who ren∣dred it Hereditary in his Family in the year 1544. and who at the same time abolished there the Roman Catholick Religion to follow the Sect of Luther. This pretext of Religion did likewise very much serve his Son Charles the 9th. called of Sudermania, when he deprived his Nephew Sigismond of the Crown, who had been Elected King of Poland the third of that name; and whose Successors un∣to Casimir the third, did keep the Title of Sueden. The King of Sueden stiles himself King of the Suedes, of the Goths and Vandals, Great Prince of Finland, Duke of Schonen, Estonia, Livonia, Carelia, Bremen, Verden, Stein, Pomerania, Gassubia, Vandalia, Prince, and Lord of Ingria. He bears in his Arms three Crowns, which sometimes have been Conte∣sted with him by the Kings of Denmark; the
present King is Charles the 11th. of the Palatine, House of Deux Ponts, or Twee-brugge. The Goths and Vandales are noted in History for their Conquests; the modern Suedes for the Valour of their late Kings, and for their ac∣quisitions over their Neighbours, which render 'em very Potent on the Baltick Sea; where they have more Coasts than all the Princes to∣gether who confine upon it. The Peace of Bromsbroo in the year 1645. obliges the King of Denmark to restore Jemp∣terland and Herendal to Sueden; to yield to it the Isles of Gotland and of Oeland to perpetuity, with the Province of Halland for thirty years. The Peace of Rotschil in the year 1658. does entirely cede to Sueden, Halland, Schonen, wherein Landscroon is become a very conside∣rable Town, Bleking, wherein is the new Port of Carlscroon, the Isle of Bornholme, which is since returned to Denmark by the exchange of other Lands, the Fortress of Bahus, and the Bayliwick of Dronthem. That of Copenhagen in the year 1660. con∣firms the Treaty of Roschild with reserve of the Bayliwick of Drontheim, and purchases the Isle of Ween. The acquisitions of Sueden over the Empire by the Peace of Osnabrug are, the Dutchy of Pomerania Citerior: and in the Ulterior Stetin, Gartz, Dam, Golnau. The Isle and Princi∣pality of Rugen; the Isles and the Mouths of the Oder; the Dutchies of Bremen and of Ver∣den; the City, the Seigniory and the Port of Wismar; Wildhusen in Westphalia; certain Customs in the Rest of Pomerania, and in the new Marquisate of Brandenbourg. The
War declared in the year 1675, by the King of Denmark, and several Princes of the Em∣pire, deprived Sueden of many of these acqui∣sitions; which it was restored to by the Peace of Nimeguen in the year 1679. The Treaty of Oliva in the year 1660. was so advantageous to Sueden, that the King of Poland did there make renunciation of the Title of King of Sueden for the future, re∣serving only to himself the Title during his life to other Princes; and likewise consented that Lifeland should henceforward be Hereditary to the Crown of Sueden. This is to be un∣derstood of Lifeland on the North of the Duna, where the only place of Dunembourg was reserved to the Crown of Poland, con∣formable to the Truce made at Stumsdorf for twenty six years, in the year 1635. The Peace with the Muscovites procured restitution to Sueden of all the Grand Duke or Zar had taken in Lifeland. The King of Sueden has lately very much augmented his Revenue, by the re-union to his Demesne of several Lands which had been Alienated from it. He pretends to the Suc∣cession of Gleves, and of Juliers, by the means of his great Grandfather John, Duke of Deux-Ponts, who married Magdelain the third Sister of the Duke of John William. In the States of the Kingdom the Peasants make a Body, as well as the other Orders. Sueden possesses part of Scandinavia, which is the best of it, as being towards the East. The Cold is somewhat long in this Country, often very sharp; to provide themselves against it, the Inhabitants do not make use of Furres
as they do in Germany: they have only Night-Caps, Gloves of Wool, Waist-Coats, and make great Fires of the Fewel they have plenty of. They have so few sick People in their Countrey, that the Physitians and Apotheca∣ries have hardly practice among 'em, whereas Barbers are there in great request. The Mini∣sters and Officers of Justice do there keep Inns. The Inhabitants of this Province are all equally rich; their greatest Revenues consist in Mines of Copper, from whence most of the Europe∣ans are furnish'd wherewith to make money, their Canons, and their Bells. The City of Stockholme alone has in its Castle above a hun∣dred pieces of great Artillery; and there are held to be above eight Thousand in the King∣dom. In the review of the Militia which was made in the year 1661. there were reckoned above Fourscore Thousand Men in Arms. This Countrey, being full of Woods and Mountains, affords very little Corn; in time of scarcity, the Poor eat often very bad Bread. It furnishes Butter, Suet, Hides, Skins, Pitch, Rosin, Masts, Posts and Planks. The Towns are subject to Fire, the Houses being only built of Wood. The Lakes and Gulphs are there more considerable than the Rivers. Trade be∣ing only drove upon the Coasts; neither dare the Ships venture upon that without a Pylot, by reason of the number of Rockswith which it is beset. The Ice is here so strong and firm in Winter, that when it is but two Inches thick, it is said to be able to bear a Man on Foot: Waggons go on it with safety when it is half a foot thick. The Snow does there afford the means of travelling in Sledges. The Horses
in this Countrey are proper for War; they are very easily reared and rarely sick; they see as well almost by night as by day, they carry their man swimming, with ease they leap great Ditches; they have so much courage and agility, that they attack with their Feet and Teeth the Enemies of those who mount them. Six great Regions are principally known un∣der the name of Sueden; Gotia, Sueden, Lap∣land, Finland, Ingria, Lifeland; the three former towards the West, the three other to∣wards the East, the Gulph of Finland between both, and besides these the modern acquisitions before specified. Gotia is divided into Ostro-Gotia and Westro-Gotia, this last towards the Ocean, the former upon the Baltick Sea. According to the like division, the Goths who subdued Italy, were called Ostro-Goths, and those who rendred themselves Masters of Spain, Visi-Goths. Calmar is a strong Town, and the place where the Suedes until now, did embark for Germany. Its Cittadel was esteemed in the Northern Countreys as much as that of Milan in Italy; Norkoping has works and forges of Copper which afford the Europeans the conveniency of coming to load Cannon there. Lindkoping the Coun∣trey of the Historian Olaus-Magnus is remark∣able for the Victory of Charles of Sudermania, since King of Sueden. There be several Cities in these parts whose names be thus terminated in Koping, which signifies the places where the market is kept. Gottembourg a new Town, and has its Sea-Port upon the Ocean.
Sueden properly taken communicates its name to the other Provinces of this State. Stockholme is the Capital City of all the Kingdom, accompanied with a Royal Castle and a Sea-Port at the disgorging of the Lake of Meler, whereof was formerly the conjunction proposed with that of Wener, for the commu∣nicating the Ocean and Baltick Seas, and thus be exempted from the passage of the Sound. This Town is now better built, and much richer than it was before the War of the Suedes in Germany. In the year 1641. they began to make the Streets in Right Lines, and to build their Houses of one and the same Structure. It is a safe Harbour for Ships, which may ride there in security without Anchor. There be three Channels which lead thither between several Isles and Rocks. The Kings Ships remain at Elsnappen. The Country round about is beau∣tify'd with several fine Houses, which the Sove∣raigns and most of the Senators have caus'd to be built. Upsal, accompanied with a great Castle, is the Metropolitan, and formerly the place of the Coronation of their Kings, whose abode it formerly was. When in Sueden were several Kingdoms, that of Upsal was ever the most considerable of 'em This City has an Uni∣versity, and the most renowned Fairs of all those parts. Its principall Church was a stately Building and is said to have been embelish'd and wainsco∣ted with Gold, now it is covered with Copper. Lapland has no Towns, only some Habita∣tions divided into five Countries, which bear the name of their Rivers. The Laplanders are very low of Stature, the tallest among them not exceeding four Foot in height. They have no
other Cloaths than of Skins; and when they are young, they are so hardned to the cold, that they afterwards undergo it with ease, when without habilliments. They have nei∣ther Wool, nor Flax, nor Hemp; they have blades of Copper which they call Cipons, which they exchange for what they stand in need of: they have neither Bread, nor Corn, nor Fruits, nor Herbs, nor Wines, nor Beer, nor Cattle, nor Eggs, nor Milk, nor any other Commodity; but they do not want Water: and they have Rain-Deers; which are a kind of a Stag extraor∣dinary swift, whose flesh is their Food: and whom they also make use of in their Travels. The great and swift Journies they go by their means, having given occasion to the believing them Witches. But to proceed, there is one part of Lapland belonging to the Crown of Denmark, and another to the Muscovite. Mount Enarby has three Lodges for the De∣puties of the three Nations, and there the Suedes administer Instice. Finland is a Dutchy which some Kings of Sueden have given for Appanage for their Brothers. The principal Towns are Abbo and Nibourg. There is in this Province a place near Ratzebourg, where Needles toucht with the Loadstone are said to turn continually. Ingria was taken from the Muscovites by a Treaty in the Year 1617. It is small, but considerable for the hunting of Elks and for the Scituation of the Fortress of Notebourg in the midst of a great River, and at the dis∣gorging of the Lake Ladoga. This Fortress was taken miraculously by the Suede, all the Muscovite Garrison, except two Persons, ha∣ving
been swept away by a Disease which took them in the Mouth, and hindred them from eating. Lifeland was ceded entirely by Poland, as we have said, except Dunembourg. It was formerly the order of the Knights Sword-Bearers; but under Pope Gregory the 9th this Order was united to that of the Teutons, or Cross-Bearers. The Polanders and Muscovites had it afterwards in possession. The Dutchy of Courland, has its Duke of the Family of Ketler, who does Homage to Poland. It is a remnant of the great Mastership of the above mentioned order. Riga is the Capital Town of Lifeland. The Germans, English and Hol∣landers, trade much to that Town in Summer-time, while the Sea is navigable. In the Win∣ter its Inhabitants traffick into Muscovy by means of their taineaux. It is in a Plain upon the River de Dune, which in that place is a quarter of a League in breadth: Its Fortifi∣cations consist in six regular Bastions, in seve∣ral half Moons freezed, and in Counterscarps pallisadoed. The Dune has so rapid a Stream and often whirles along so much Ice, that it sometimes changes its course from Riga as far as Dunemund. In the Year 1656. I saw an Ar∣my of an hundred thousand Muscovites wast and moulder away before that Town, which glori∣ously repulsed their efforts. Revel has the Dire∣ction of the Commerce from Lifeland unto Muscovy. Nerva is a strong place which bestows its Name upon a neighbouring River, wherein the brave Pontus de la Gardie was drowned, after Sueden was obliged to him for many of its best Conquests. By the late Treaties between
the Crowns of Sueden and of Poland, the ex∣ercise of both the Catholique and Protestant Religion is allowed of in Lifeland, as well as in Curland and Prussia. The Isle of Gotland, the greatest of the Isles of the Baltick Sea, accompanied with five or six Havens, belongs to the Crown of Sueden. Several of its Rocks have ancient Gothick Cha∣racters. Its City of Wisby still preserves Marbles and Houses which have Doors of Iron and Brass, either washt with Silver, or guilt with Gold; which speaks its ancient Grandure. This Town did formerly establish Laws for the Navigation of the Baltick Sea, and gave beginning to Sea Maps. Of Poland. POland, which was formerly but a part of Sarmatia, is now the Kingdom of Europe, of the greatest extent. It is in length, compre∣hending therein Lithuania, above three hun∣dred Leagues; and almost as large in breadth. It is fertile in Rye, Wax and Honey, rich in Furrs, whereof the finest are brought thither from Hungary. They digg salt near Cracow in famous salt-Pits, which form under ground a kind of City. They bake it in little Russia, and the Sun makes it in Podolia. This King∣dom has the conveniency both of the Baltick and Black Sea; but the neighbouring Princes hinder the Polanders from making use of them to any great purpose. The Rivers of Vistula, Niemen and Dune fall into the Baltick Sea; the
Boristenes, the Bog, the Niester into the Black Sea. The Vistula passes by the noblest City of this Kingdom. The Mouths of the Boristhenes are possessed by the Turk, who in the Year 1672 received the Ukrain into his protection, after having subdued Podolia by the sacking of Caminiec. The Kingdom of Poland is Ele∣ctive the only one of Europe, where the Inhabi∣tants have kept the right of choosing a Prince. The government is that of an Aristocratical Monarchy, wherein the Senators have so much Authority, that when they mention the State, they say the Kingdom and Republick of Poland. The Senate is composed of Arch∣bishhops, Bishops, Pallatines, Principal Castel∣lins, and the great Officers of the Kingdom. The King, like that of Bees, can do no mis∣chief to his Subjects; that is to say, he cannot in any wise act against any of the Nobility without the consent of the Senators, and he can do 'em a great deal of good on his own part; by bestowing on them vacant places. His Person and his Dignity are so considered, that it has not been known that ever any at∣tempt was made upon any Kings Life of his Predecessors. Before the Emperor Otho the 3d. there were only Princes in this State, that Em∣perour recalled the Tribute which Poland paid the Empire. Warsaw is the usual place of ele∣ction, and of the general Dyets; Cracow that of the Coronation of the Kings. The Archbishop of Gnesne Primate of the Kingdom, performs this Coronation, and has almost the whole Authority during the Interregnum; for then he presides in the Senate, and gives Audience to Embassadors. He contests the Presidence
with Cardinals; for which reason there are three Orders; the Church, the Nobility, and the third Estate, which comprehends all those which are not Noble. The Nobility is so numerous in this Realm, that Poland is cal∣led the Kingdom of the Nobles. In the Dyets the Nuncio's, who are the Deputies of the lesser Nobility, or Gentry of the Provinces, do often oversway the rest of the Dyet. But one amongst 'em has sometimes the Authority to cause a whole general Dyet to be broke up by a Protestation. As the Catholick Religi∣on is observed in this Realm, so the Bishops have the first rank after the King, then the Palatines and the Castellains. The Castellains of Cracow is above the Palaine of the same name, because that formerly the Chastellain behaved himself more valiantly than did the Palatine, in defence of the Kingdom: also does he wear a Royal Crown at the anointing of his Majesty; at which Ceremony he precedes all the other Secular Senators: The Palatine of Cracow carries the Scepter. The Archbishop of Gnesne and of Leopold, have under them six∣teen or seventeeen Bishops, as well with∣in as without the Kingdom. There be three other Schismaticks in black Russia, who first of all acknowledge him of Kiou, and then the Greek Patriarch of Constantinople. There is in this State several other Sects. Here Gentlemen are equall, the distinction, and pre∣cedence proceeding only from the publick Of∣fices they stand possess'd of: they serve at their own costs in time of Wars, but do not stay long in the Campagne. Their infantry is commonly compos'd of Forreigners. The
Garments of the Polanders are long, have their Beards shaved off their Chins, only one Tuff of Hair upon their Heads, upon the occasion of Casimir the first, one of their Kings, whom they took out of a Cloister he was in in France, to place him upon their Throne. They are almost all handsome, well shaped, well pro∣portioned, knowing for the most part the Latin Tongue. The use of Spices is very com∣mon, and with them in great request; they misuse their Peasants, in consequence, of the absolute Power they have over them; which certainly did occasion the revolt of the Cossa∣ques, and afterwards all the disorders of the Kingdom. Their Cavalary is so considerable, that if they were well united, they might bring into the Field a hundred thousand Horse: The confidence they have therein, and the fear of rendring a King or Citizens too powerful, have inclined them in all times to neglect their Fortresses. Their usual Arms are their Ci∣miter, the Sword, the Battel Ax, Carabine and Arrows. The Cossaques have ever formed a Militia, and not a particular Nation. At the first they were Volunteers, making incursions up∣on the Turks and the lesser Tartars; these last call them by the Name of Roux, because their Country makes a part of Russia. King Battori reduced them into a Body, and joyned there∣to two thousand Horse, to whom he appoin∣ted the fourth part of the Revenue of his Demesne, for which reasons they were called Quartians. They have power of choosing and of deposing their General, who takes an Oath of Fidelity to their King. Their number was first of all six thousand, afterwards forty thou∣full
sand, and now since twenty thousand. Their abode is in the lower parts of Volhinia, and of Podolia, which is called Ukrain, that is to say Frontier. This Country is by much the most fertile, and the best inhabited of all Poland; so many fortified Buroughs have been there made since the beginning of this Age, and so full is it of Inhabitants, that in the late Wars there were reckoned at the same time two hundred thousand Cossaques, besides a hundred and fourscore thousand Tartars, and as many Polanders in Arms. There be Cossaques who have their re∣treats in some Isles of the Boristhenes, which is not Navigable by reason of the Cataracts or falls, which they call Porowis. Their Custom was formerly to put to Sea with several light Ships, and to go plunder the Coasts of the Grand Seignior upon the Black Sea. Since they con∣federated with the lesser Tartars, and have likewise courted the Protection of the Mus∣covite, and that of the Grand Seignior, who gave them in his name a Prince for the Ukrain, insomuch that we may say that the Felony of the Cossaques, the Irruption of the Suedes under Carolus Gustavus, the Tumults and Irresolu∣on of the Muscovites, the continual harassings of the lesser Tartars, the Invasion of Ragotski Prince of Transilvania, the defection of several Provinces, the Insurrections of the whole Armies of Poland and Lithuania, the different Factions of the Kingdom, and the Caballs of the Neigh∣bouring Nations to have a King Elected, have given a rude shock to this Crown. And this was what really moved the Grand Seignior to make war upon this Realm after the taking of Candia.
Poland has ten great parts, four towards the West, upon the Vistula, Poland, Mazovia, Gu∣javia, Royal Prussia; six towards the East on the West of the Boristhenes, Lithuania, Samo∣gitia, Polachia, Lesser Russia, Volhinia, Podolia. These Provinces have been acquired for the most part either by Arms, or Allyances. They are divided into Palatinates, the Pala∣tinates into Chastellenies, the Chastellenies into Capitanies. The Government of the Places are called Starostyes. Besides these Provinces, there is a part of Muscovy which has been yielded to Poland in the year 1634. after that King La∣dislaus the 4th, being yet but Prince, had the year foregoing gloriously relieved the City of Smolensko, and reduced to extremity an Army of an hundred thousand Muscovites, who were all constrained to ask his pardon as their Prince, to save their Lives. This Treaty which is called of Viasma, acquired to Poland, Smolen∣sko, Novogrodeck, Sovierski, Gzernihou, and other places; and by that same Treaty the King of Poland renounced his pretensions upon Muscovy. The Truce of 13 years concluded on the 14th of February in the year 1667. left the Grand Duke of Muscovy in possession of Smolensko, until a certain term, as well as in part of the Ukrain on the East of the Boristhe∣nes, and procured the restoration of Dunem∣bourg, Polosk and Vitepski to the Crown of Poland. Poland, the most populous of all the Pro∣vinces, is divided into High and Low; In the former is Cracow, where the Coronations of the Kings and Queens are performed, and where is a great number of Germans, Italians
and Jews. Of Cracow was the Popish Bishop, St. Stanislaus, who was killed by order of King Bogislaus. Upon the Confines of Silesia, stands the City of Czentochow, with the Cloi∣ster of our Lady of Clermount, a place extraor∣dinary strong, which the Suedes did twice be∣siege in vain in the year 1655 and 1656. Low Poland, though much smaller than the Higher, is called Great, because it makes part of the Kingdom rather than the other. Its City of Gnesne is ancient, the abode of the first Princes. It was so called upon the account of an Eagles Nest that was there found when it was built; and which gave occasion to the Arms of Po∣land which art Gules, an Eagle-Argent Crow∣ned, beaked and Armed, Or, bound under the Wings with a Ribbon of the same. The Province of Mazovia alone has full thirty thousand Gentlemen. Narsan is the Capital thereof, and of all the Kingdom too, with a Castle, the Kings usual abode, Gujavia has the City of Uladislau, where the Houses are built of Brick, which is somewhat extraor∣dinary in Poland. It has also the Lake of Goblo, from whence issued the Rats that eat King Po∣piel. Prussia which is of two sorts, Regal and Ducal, has a great number of Cities, which were built by the Knights of the Teutonique Order. Its Lakes and Sea Coast furnish abun∣dance of Amber. Nariembourg is strong; Toren the Birthplace of the Copernicus, drives a great Trade, with a fine Bridge of Wood over the Vistule. Dantzick one of the four Capital Hanse-Towns, drives all the Trade of Poland, and has not its like upon all the Baltick Sea; It is free, and has right of sending to the States
of the Kingdom. The King of Poland has there some Rights. The City of Elbiens dis∣putes with it the Precedence in the States of Prussia. The generous resolution of its Citi∣zens to maintain the Authority of their King against the Suedes, without being prevail'd with to accept the Neutrality, was the cause of the preservation of the whole Realm under King Gasimir. Lithuania is the greatest Province of those which compose the States of the Crown of Poland. It has the title of the Great Dutchy, wherein there is still at this day as many Chief Officers, as in the Kingdom of Poland, and of three General Dyets of the States, one is to be held in Lithuania. This Countrey is so full of Marshes and of Boggs, that there is no travel∣ling there but in Winter, and that by means of the Ice. Vilna its Capital City contains so many sorts of Religions, that there is not a City in the World where God is praised in more several manners. There be reckoned three Sabbaths, that of ours, that of the Turks, which is Friday, that of the Jews which is Sa∣turday. Samogitia is a Country where the In∣habitants live very poorly. Polachia commu∣nicates its name to the Polanders, who call themselves Polaques, as being descended from Lechus their first Prince. Lesser Russia has se∣veral other names. It is called Black by reason of its Woods; Red by reason of the Colour of its Earth: Southern by reason of its scitua∣tion towards the South. Leopold which put a stop to the progresses of the Turks, is the prin∣cipal City thereof, Samoski the strongest. Volhinia has for its Capital Kiou, an ancient
City upon the Boristhenes, where the Cossaques have had often their Retreats. It is now in the hands of the Muscovite, who makes a scru∣ple of restoring it to the Polanders. Podolia has Gaminiec, a Fortress which formerly re∣sisted the Armies of the Turks, of the lesser Tartars, of the Transilvanians, of the Wala∣chians, and which at length submitted to the Armies of the Grand Seignior in the year 1672. Ducal Prussia, wherein stands Konigsberg, belongs to the Elector of Brandenburg, who now possesses its Soveraignty, and indepen∣dantly on Poland. This City is so much the greater, in that it contains two others in one and the same compass of Walls. Pilau and Memel are two Maritime Fortresses, the most important of this State. There it was the Elector caused Frigats four years ago to be fitted out, which have very much incommoded the Commerce of the Subjects of Spain. Gour∣land is a Dutchy whose Duke of the House of Ketler, does Homage to the Crown of Poland. His Residence is at Mitaw. Of Muscovy. THis is the vastest Country of all Europe, stiled formerly Sarmatia, now Muscovy. It is called Great and White Russia, from the name of the ancient Roxolan People, and upon the account of its great extent, and of the Snow, which so covers the Ground near two thirds of the year, that to Travel there at that
time, one would have occasion to veil ones Eyes with black Crape, so as formerly Xeno∣phon made his Souldiers do in the retreat of the ten thousand Greeks. The Soyl of Mus∣covy is cold, humid, full of Woods and Bogs, which make it little inhabited. What makes it believed that it is better populated than it really is, is that the Country People by express order, go to the avenues of the Citties, through which the Embassadours of forreign Princes pass. The cold there does often hinder the Corn from coming to its per∣fection. It is there sometimes so violent, that the Earth is wholly opened by it; the Inha∣bitants find it no extraordinary matter to see their Nose, Ears and Feet frozen; they only sow in them parts in the Month of June; the heats of July and of August do visi∣bly forward the Harvest. The Muscovites do not willingly afford the entrance of their Countrey to other Nations; they care not to know any other Tongues than their own; they only have their Children taught to write and read, that is sufficient to be a Doctor. They take for their Sirname the proper Name of their Father; they write upon Roles of Pa∣per cut into Welts and glued together, to the length of twenty or five and twenty Yards; they reckon the first day of the Month of Sep∣tember for the first of the Year: they wear long Garments, and put their Girdle below their Belly. Their Collations are performed with the Bread of Spices, of Brandy and of Honey. The Peasants have recourse to somewhat an extraordinary means for the securing them∣selves from the quartering of Souldiers; they
provoke and set upon them their Bees. The Office of Executioner is not dishonourable amongst the Muscovites. od, ir Armies are offten of a hundred and two hundred thousand Men. They are divided into five Bodies, as ours are into three. Boris Foederowits Great Duke of Muscovy, towards the beginning of this age, saw himself in the Head of an Army of three hundred thousand Men. Alexis Michaelowits after the defeat of Stepan Radzin, had no less considerable Army, when the Desiign was to hinder the Progress of the Turks. The Infantry is there in more esteem than the Ca∣valry; It sustains well a Siege, and suffers patient∣ly all imaginable hardship rather than yield; which it did in our time in the Castle of Vilna, and in the Fortress of Noteburg. As for be∣sieging of a Town, the Muscovites understand nothing at all of that Art, which they have made evident before Smolensko in 1633. be∣fore Riga in the year 1656. before Azac in the year 1673. Their Forts are commonly of Wood and of Earth upon the sinuosities of Rivers or else in Lakes. The greatest strength of the State consists in forreign Troops; and good pay and Pensions are given to the Officers when they have occasion for them. The Prince has the Title of the Great Duke, says he is discended from Augustus; stiles himself Grand Tzaar or Gzar, that is to say, Gaesar and Emperour. The Habiliments he is bound to wear, make him appear like a Prelate. When the Ministers of Forreign Princes are to treat with his Embassadours, they have all the pain imaginable to agree up∣on his Titles by reason of his extraordinary
Pretensions. In the year 1654. for the ma¦king war in Poland, and for supporting the Rebel Gosaques; thener at Duke took for Pre∣text, that some Polisheek ords had not given him his due Titles, and that they had caused to be printed in Poland Books to his disadvantage. One of the two present Zars Predecessours, was so cruel, as to cause an Italian Embassa∣dours Hat to be nailed to his Head, for that he had put it on in his Presence. His Govern∣ment is Despotick; the Muscovites call them∣selves Slaves, and he calls them out of con∣rempt, by a diminutive Name, little John, little Peter; his will alone is the Rule of his Subjects, who hold themselves certain that the will of God and of the Grand Duke, are im∣mutable. The Zarrs Treasures are said to be great, he shuts up the most he can of Gold and Sil∣ver in his Fortresses of Bioliczero and Vologde, and only makes his Presents and his Payments in Skins and Fish, or in giving some Hides or Cloaths of Gold. They have in esteem the Corn of Resan and of Volodimere, the Hides of Jaroslau, the Wax and Honey of Plescou, the Suet of Vologde, The Oyl of the Country about the Wolga, the Flax and Hemp of great Novogorod, the Pitch of Duvine, the Salt of Astracan, the Sables and other Furrs of Siberia, where the Hunters have the dexte∣rity to hit the Beast upon its Nose, for the ha∣ving the Spoils entire. The Country borde∣ring upon the lesser Tartars is wholly Desart by the incursions of those People who go thi∣ther to make Slaves to sell them in the Crim, from, whence they are led to Constantinople; as there are very handsom Women amongst
those slaves, they ever meet with Chapmen who take them off their hands. The Palisa∣do'd Hedges of Wood, and the Ditch that was made a hundred Leagues in length, have not been capable to stop those Incursions. They have treated the Russians with so many indignities in the foregoing ages, that besides the Tribute, the Prince of Muscovy was bound to light off his Horse before the Embas∣sadour of Tartary, to offer him a Dish of Milck, to lick up what by chance might fall upon the Horses Crest, to keep standing and bare headed, the Tartar being seated. The Religion of the Muscovite is little different from that of the Greeks, all their Images are in Board Pictures; St. Nicholas is the Protectour of their Nation, they have seldom any Festi∣vals but on the day of the Blessed Virgins An∣unciation; they have at Mosco a Patriarch the head of their Religion, three Archbishops and Metropolitans at Rosthou, at Susdal, and at Great Novogorode, Bishop of Wologda, Re∣san, Susdal, Tuvere, Tobelesca, Astracan, Casan, Plescou, Colomna and almost in all the Pro∣vinces of the Great Duke, where they are chosen out of the Body of the Monks. The Muscovites have this good property, as they do not constrain any body for Religion: they hate the Roman Catholicks, because of the ex∣cesses committed by the Polanders, when they rendred themselves Masters of Moscow in the year 1611. There be still some Idolaters to∣wards the North. Muscovy is divided into two parts Southern and Northern, the former towards the Wolga, the latter towares the Duvine, which Wolga
the greatest River of Europe, falls into the Caspian Sea, after having run a course of about seven hundred Leagues. The Duvine which waters the most trading Towns of Muscovy, empties it self by six or seven Mouths into the Gulph of St. Nicholas, which is called the White Sea, by reason of the Snow of the Country thereabouts. The Dom which sepe∣rates Europe from Asia has its beginning a hun∣dred Leagues from its end; its Course is about six hundred Leagues, first towards the East, afterwards towards the West; the con∣junction of these three Rivers was formerly proposed for the communication of the prin∣cipal Seas of our Continent, that is to say for the facillitating the Commerce of the Ocean, Mediterranean and Caspian Seas. But this design did not succeed by reason of the divers Interests of the Neighbouring Princes. The Rivers of Muscovy have this in particular, that they have not any Carps. There be few good Towns in all those Parts, they are not paved, some that are boarded with Wood, nor walled for the most part, the Lands being till'd and plow'd between the streets: the Houses below made of Wood and Mud; in the Mar∣kets their Houses are to be sold, wholly prepared, and ready to be set up. There often happen Fires by reason of that combustible mat∣ter, which is easily lighted and enflamed by the number of Candles that are lighted before the Images, and which the Muscovites, who are com∣monly drunk, do not take care to extinguish. Mosco the Capital City, and the Residence of the Great Duke seems rather a heap of several Boroughs, than a good City. It has had for∣ty
thousand Houses, but has less since, it has been pillaged at divers times by the lesser Tar∣tars, by the Polanders, and since the late burning down of most part of its Houses. Its two Castles were built by Italian Ingeniers after the Model of that of Milan. Volodimere the Residence of the Prince before that of Moscow, is in the most fertile part of all Muscovy, accompanied with a Castle. The Rivers of Moscow and of Occa furnish the Inhabitants of Moscow with the means of making their Merchandize descend upon the Volga. The lesser Novogorod is the last City of Europe towards the East. Ples∣cou is well fortifyed, as being a Bulwark against the Polanders and the Suedes. Great Novogorod was one of the four Magazines of the Hanse-Towns, and a Town so rich and puissant, that it was formerly a saying of its Citizens, that nothing could oppose God or great No∣vogorod. In the year 1577. the Great Duke took it, and is said to have carried away from thence three hundred Waggons loaded with Gold and Silver. It is still at this day a Town of great Commerce. Archangel or St. Michael the Arch∣angel is the staple of all Muscovy, by reason of its Sea-Port. The Customs there mount to above six hundred thousand Crowns a year. This place was both first discovered and first frequented by the English Ships, but have been followed by other Nations of Europe. Before, the Commerce of Muscovy was carryed on by passing through the Sound, and resorting to Nerva; the great Impositions laid upon Mer∣chandize by the Princes through whose Terri∣tories they were to pass, have made Merchants abandon that way. St. Nicholas drives also a
great Trade at the entrance of the Duvin these are the only good. Places of the Grea Duke upon the Ocean. Colmogorod is noted for the faires that are held there in Winter. The Duvine there receives great Ships. Ou∣stioug is in the Center of the Countrey, where its traffick is pretty considerable by means of its Scituation at the meeting of two Rivers. The Interest of the Great Duke of Muscovy would be to have a place upon the Baltick Sea, for the Cannons, Muskets and other ammuni∣tion of War which he has brought him from Hamburgh and Lubeck, are conveyed by the North of Norway with extraordinary pain and trouble. Besides, the White Sea has Banks and Rocks at its entrance; the Snow thaw'd and melted, and the Torrents which augment it in the Spring, carry its Waters with such impetuosity, that the Ships can hardly enter therein: true it is that abundance of Salmon are taken there. Kola and Pitzora in Lapland receive Merchants Ships. As concerning the Conquest of the Great Duke in Asiatick Tartary, there is principally Astracan and Casan with Titles of Kingdoms, and the Hurdes of Zavolha and Nagaia: Astracan towards the Mouth of the Wolga drives a great traffick upon the Caspian Sea. In this Country is the Plant Zoophite which resembles a Lamb; it eats the Herbs round about its Root, and if it be cut it casts forth a red Li∣quor like to bloud; the Wolves devour it with as much greediness and avidity as if it were a Sheep. Locomoria towards the Obi, has Inhabitants which be said to be frozen up six months of the year, because that during a
that time they dwell in Tents environed and covered with Snow, and do not stir out from thence until it be thaw'd and melted away. The Samoiedes are seldom above four foot tall: they are said to have a very broad Face, little Eyes, the head on one side is much greater than the proportion of the Body does require it, short Legs, extraordinary great Feet, because they seem so in the Skins of Animals they cloath themselves with, and the stuff whereof they make their shoes; they wear those Skins in such manner, that in Winter they turn the hairy side inwards, and wear it out∣wards in Summer: to sow them they have the bones of Fish, and the Nerves of Ani∣mals instead of Needles and thread; they have the best Archers in the World. The Tingo∣eses express their thoughts better with their Throats than with their Tongues. Those Peo∣ple inhabit Siberia a Province which furnishes the finest and richest Furrs; the Malefactours of Moscovy are transported thither, and such Noble Men as are out of Favour with the Prince. The River Pesida is the bound of it towards the East; they have not yet ventured to go beyond it, though they have seen there several Horses and other things, which make some believe that it is a Country as con∣siderable as Cathai, which cannot be very far distance from it.
Of the Empire of the Turks. ALl the Territories of the Emperour of the Turks, otherwise called the Grand-Seig∣nior, are generally known under the Name of Turkey. This Name is made to come from that of Turchestan one of the Regions of great Tartary, from whence they went out Shepherds, who setled themselves first of all in Natolia, and afterwards divided themselves into several Cantons under divers Chiefs. Ottoman one of those Chiefs govern'd so prudently, and was accompanyed with such success, that after the death of Aladin one of the Princes of the Country, he remained Master of Bithinia, of Cappadocia, and gave beginning to that great Em∣pire about the year 1300. His Successors have been to the number of twenty two, their Re∣sidence was first of all at Burse in Natolia, at Adrianople, and at last at Constantinople in Ro∣mania. They have caused to be built in those Cities their stately Pallaces, which they call Serraglios. Most of the Turkish Emperours hitherto have seldom stirred out from thence but to the Army, or on Progress; they com∣monly spend their dayes with Children, Women, Eunuchs, Mutes and Dwarfs: their finest Sultanesses are Captives, or those who proceed from the most Beautiful Persons which are kept at Constantinople as breeding Horses, after that the lesser Tartars, who are the Turks
Hunters have brought them thither. These Emperours make a Conscience of spending what they exact from the People otherwise than in War; they have a particular Treasury wherein they keep this Revenue; for the sub∣sistance of their Family several of them choose a Trade, which they actually work in. In less than three hundred years the Turks have made Conquests in Europe, Asia and Afri∣ca, as considerable as those of the Romans, which took them up about eight hundred years; they keep so well what they acquire, that it is hardly possible to dislodge them from thence. True it is their Provinces are not Populous like those of Christendom; War and Pestilence sweeping away a great number of their Men; their Lands do not afford such great Producti∣ons as formerly, the Turks being extraordinary lazy, and too presumptuous to cultivate it; their Custom is to ruine the Citys, and to keep only the most important Places of that Frontier: from whence it comes, that most of the Cities of Turkey are without Walls, and much smaller than their Suburbs The Turks have it for a Proverb, that their grows no more grass where there Horses have once fet footing. The Countrys of their Empire have their Qua∣lity very different, by reason of their diverse Scituations; those of Europe are the best and most Beautiful, though one may take whole days Journeys there without meeting with ei∣ther Burroughs or Villages; those of Asia are still more desart. What is in Africa is only inhabited towards the Coast, and near the great Cities. The Grand Seignior is so called by reason of the absolute Power he has
generally in all his Dominions, and over all His Subjects, and not upon the account of the extent of his Empire, for there be Soveraigns which possess much more Land than he does; their Lands pass from the Father to the Chil∣dren, these only enjoy them as usufructuaries and not as Proprietors. There be some Pro∣vinces, as Turcomania and Curdistan, where the Inhabitants have them in propriety. There be no other Gentlemen in Turkey than the Princes Officers, who are obeyed by the rest of the People. His Higness takes upon him very extraordinary Titles: Soliman the 2d. said, that one of his smallest Territories was the Em∣pire of Alexander the Great. The Religion of the Turks is that of Maho∣met, a Native of Mecca. There goes every year to that Town a great Number of Maho∣metans in Caravans, each of thirty or forty thousand Persons. The Places of their As∣semblies are Damascus, for those of Turkey in Asia, Cairo for those of Aegypt and of Constan∣tinople, Zibith, or Aden, or Mocca, for the In∣dians; Bagdad for the Persians. A fifth Ca∣ravan there is, which is that of Barbaresques and the Western of Fez and Morocco. Amongst other things which Mahomet setled by his Law, he prohibited those of his Sect Wine and gaming, for to take away all occasion of Du∣els and of quarrel which might have arose amongst them. Nevertheless, tho' during the encampments there be abstinence from Wine, yet amongst ten Turks there is seldom found one but who's a Drunkard. He would not that any Mahometans shoud be Slaves, for he who first received his Instructions was one of his Slaves cal∣led
Zeidin, whom he made a Freeman for that reason. He ordered that Prayers should be said five times in the day, and that for a Month should be kept a Lent called Ramedan; fasting is there observed all the day long by some Turks with so much scruple, that going along the streets they wear a Crape before their Fa∣ces, for fear that in breathing they should swal∣low a Fly or a drop of Rain, Water or Dust. They shut their Teeth on the same score, and dare not so much as swallow their Spittle; they take each day for divers intentions, Fri∣day for the Musulmans who are those of their Law, Saturday for the conversion of the Jews, Sunday for that of the Christians, Monday for the Prophets, Tuesday for the Priests and Chei∣ques, Wednesday for the Dead, for the sick, and for the Slaves, Thursday for all the World. There be Jews in Turkey and several other Sect a great number of Catholicks, of the Religious of several of the Roman Orders, who have there their establishment. The common liquor of the Turks is Sorbet, which is very delicious to drink; their Coffee warms and fortifies the Stomack: When they make their greatest Regale, they give Coffee, Sorbet and Perfumes. It is the custom of pre∣senting the Person they go to see, this custom is practised almost through all the Levant: their Zizi or Purses are each worth eight hun∣dred Piasters, The Grand Seignior takes a Pride in cloathing those who come near his Person, to whom they are led by holding them under the Arms, since the assassination of Amu∣rath the 1. The Arabick and Persian Tongues are there in esteem, though the Turks hold it
for an Honour to understand no other than their own. All Turkey contains thirty Beglierbyats, which are as many general Governments, on which depend several Sangiacats, or particular Go∣vernments, with several Castles. Natolea at Chioutaie, Caramania at Cogni, Diarbekir, Da∣maseus, Sivas at Amasie, Erzerum, Van, Te∣hilder, Scheherezul, Aleppo, Maras, Cyprus, Tripoli of Souria, Trebizonde, Kars, Mosul or Ninevah, Rika: all this in Asia. In Eu∣rope there is Rumeli at Sophia, that of the Sea at Gallipoli, Budah, Temesvar, Bosna, Caffa, Candia. Each Beglerbyat has its Revenue affe∣cted upon its Government. Those of Kairo, of Bagdat, of Lazac, of Yaman, or of Aden, of Abex, of Bassora have theirs out of the Grand Seigniors fund; those three last Governments have been taken from the Turks. Most of the Go∣vernours are called Bashaws, that is to say, Chiefs. They have Rank according to the ancientness of the Conquests, and of the places whereof they are Governours. A Beglier∣bey has three Tougs, a Toug is a Horses Tail at the end of a half Pike that is carryed be∣fore Him. A Bashaw has two, and a Sangiac has but one. Besides the Prime Visier who is all mighty, there be five Visiers or Chancellours of State, those of Natolia, of Bagdad, of Cairo, of Rumeli, and of Buda. The Grand Seignior gives no considerable Government to his eldest Son, for fear it should prove of ill consequence as it has done to some of his Predecessours. The coming of him to the Empire, is often the Sentence of Death to the other Brothers, who are in the mean time kept like poor Victims in
the Seraglio. It has been observed in this Fa∣mily of the Ottomans, that the youngest Bro∣thers have often attained to the Empire, to the exclusion of their Eldest; when the Grand Seignior means to humble any of his Bashaws, he makes him marry one of his Sisters, or some other of his Relations. The Court of the Prince is called the Port, because all must dance attendance at the door; the Rank of the left hand which is the side of the Sword, is in Turkey the most honourable, whether in Coun∣cel or in the march of Armies: Such Turks as are learned say that they imitate Grand Cyrus herein. I say the Learned Turks, for some of them are so little vers'd in Histories and Chro∣nology, that they say Job was the Judge of the Court of King Solomon, that Alexander the Great was General of the Armies of the same King. The People of the Law esteem the Right Side, which is willingly granted them by the Soldiers. The Forces of the Turks are great, but his Neighbours are puissant, and in possession of doing him a great deal of mischief. The House of Austria, the King of Poland, the Great Duke of Muscovy, the Republick of Venice, are the most considerable of them in Europe: The King of Persia in Asia. As the Interests of these Princes are divers, and that they have not any great Correspondence with one another, it comes to pass that the Grand Seignior enlarges the bounds of his Em∣pire to their cost. As concerning Forces by Sea, the Turks have none that are considerable, and they have a saying. that if the Sea be for the Christians, the Land is for them. The Turkish
Armies are well disciplin'd; the belief of Prede∣stination, besides the use of Opium, renders them capable of all manner of attempts. Their prin∣cipal Forces consist in the Janizaries, who compose the Infantry; the Horsemen are known under the Name of Spahis. These Spahis have Lands called Timars, and furnish as many men as their Revenue has six and twenty Livers a year. To avoid the hurry and trouble of Moveables; they eat on the ground on a Leathern Carpet: a piece of Tapi∣stry which they carry upon the Crupper of their Horse, serves them for quilt or mattress, for Bolster or for Cloak. They laugh at the Franks who are used to walk alone in Rooms, and go very fast in the Street. On the con∣trary to this, they repose in their Houses on Velvet Cusheons, and when they walk, they still keep up their gravity. The Officers and the Guards being in the Court of the Divan, which is the Councel, are such observers of Silence, that not so much as one word is to be heard, though there be often above eight thou∣sand together. When the Souldiers are pu∣nish'd for any Crimes, they give 'em several blows with a Cudgel; to the Janizaries upon their Buttocks, to the Spahies under the Sole of the Foot. The Principal Maxims of the Turks are to give Offices to Persons of Merit, not to consider their Birth; to ruine most of the Ci∣ties for the sparing the charge of a Garrison; and to keep only as long as they please Treaties made in other Tongues than their own; not to restore the good places they have once ta∣ken, no longer to make their Armies so nume∣rous that they may the better subsist, not to
allow of Gentlemen, nor suffer Mahometan to remain Slaves; to make use of the Tartars in their greatest expeditions for the better harassing and laying wast their Enemies Countryes, to render the Insularies responsible for the Turks, they give them for Governours: to give Military Offices to Children, who are born Christians, and those of the Law to natural Turks. Of Turkey in Europe. THis Turkey consists in three sorts of Countreys, those which the Grand-Seignior shares in with Christian Princes, Hun∣gary, Sclavonia, Croatia, Dalmatia: those which his Highness possesses entirely on the South of the Danube, Bosnia, Servia, Bulgaria, Roma∣nia: those which were formerly known under the name of Greece. Hungary is a considerable Kingdom, and likely to be the Stage of the greatest War that has been for some Ages, and has a peculiar dis∣course in the following Leaves Sclavonia pro∣perly taken is between the Drave and the Save; sometimes most of those Countreys are attri∣buted to it which are on the South of the Da∣nube. The Sclavonians have such a passion to be thought Warriours, that they beg of God in their Prayers to dye armed in War, and that their Enemies may dye in their Beds. Croatia is the Countrey of the Croats, where there be Horses of a mean size, but very fleet. Dabnatia is along the Gulph of Venice, where
the Turk possesses little besides some part of the Inlands of the Countrey: He possesses on∣ly Narenca upon the Coast, which place for∣merly pretended to the Dominion of the Neigh∣bouring Sea. Zara the best place of the Vene∣tians in those parts, is upon a Rock which buts out into the Sea, and is only joyned to the Terra Firma by the space of six and twenty paces. Spalato is there the Town of greatest Traffick since the late Peace. Fiume belong∣ing to the House of Austria, has in its Neigh∣bourhood the place called Tersacs, where the Papists say the Chappel of the Virgin was three years and some Months, before it was transported to Loretto in Italy. Bosnia has had the Title of a Kingdom. Servia has the City of Belgrade very consi∣derable, and as advantagiously scituated as any City of Turkey, near the place where the Da∣nube receives the Teyss and the Save. Bulga∣ria, whose ancient Inhabitants were formidable to some Roman Emperours, has Sophia for the Capital, a great passage from Hungary to Constantinople. This Province extends as far as the Black Sea, where the Ruines are to be seen of the wall which the Emperour of Con∣stantinople caused to be set up from Silistria upon the Danube as far as Tomi, noted in anti∣quity for the Banishment of Ovid. There dwell the Dobruck Tartars, which the Turks make use of in their greatest expeditions, be∣cause this Militia is no great charge to the Grand Seigniours; who by the ancient con∣ventions, only pay these Tartars at the end of the Campaign, a certain quantity of Cloaths and a Sultanin a Head; besides the Booty
they may have taken in their Enemies Coun∣trey: There is to be seen upon the Coast, the City of Varne, renowned for the Victory of Amurath the 2d. over the Hungarians: that of Nigeboli upon the Danube, where the Chri∣stians were also defeated by the Infidels under Bajazet the 1. in the year 1396. Romania has for principal Cities Constanti∣nople, Adrianople, Gallipoli. It was formerly Thrace; Constantine the great called it Romania, not to abolish entirely the Name of Rome, af∣ter having given his own to the City of Bi∣zance. Constantinople is the Head of the Turkish Empire, so as it was of the Eastern Empire, when it served for abode to the Roman and Greek Emperours. Its Scituation is the most curious imaginable, having the conveniency of one of the finest and best Harbours of Europe, which may receive a thousand or twelve hun∣dred great Ships; it is full thirteen Miles in compass. The Houses are low, whether that they are built after that manner to avoid the incoveniency of the Winds, or that the Turks think not fitting to raise them high as they do those of God and of their Princes, or that they have no design to build for others, since most commonly their Children do not succeed them in their Estates, which the Grand Seig∣nior gives to whom he thinks fitting. The Church of Saint Sophia is the most stately Buil∣ding of all that City, and has serv'd for a Mo∣del to most of the Turskish Moskees. Constan∣tinople is very subject to Fires, by reason that most of its Houses are built of Wood. In the year 452. besides a great number of Houses;
six and twenty thousand Volumes were burtn with the Gut of a Serpent, six and twenty foot in length, wherein the Iliads and Odysses of Homer were written in Letters of Gold. The Preservation of this City depends on that of Gallipoli, of the Castles of the Darda∣nelles, and of the Towers of the Black Sea; at the entrance of the Bosphorus, where for∣merly a chain was made use of to barr entrance to Enemies Ships: The Channel of Constanti∣nople is so narrow, that in some parts of the Town the Cocks may be heard, who crow on the nearest Shoar of Asia. This Channel has to Currents at the same time; that which is nearest Europe carries away the Ships towards the Black Sea, and that which is on the side of Asia carries them toward the Mediterranean Sea. The seven Towers make a Fortress, where Pri∣soners of State be confined. Galatia a small City beyond the Port wherein are the Franks. Above Galatia is the Burrough of Pera, the Residence of some Christian Embassadours. Formerly a Wall was raised two days Journey in length, from the Black Sea as far as Selivrea, to hinder the Incursions of the Scythians and of the Bulgarians. Osman had a design of trans∣ferring his Seat from Constantinople to Grand Cairo: Constantine left Rome for Bisance: Julius Caesar had also the Thoughts of making his abode at Troy, or in Alexandria. Adrianople is now one of the Principal Abodes of the Grand Seignior. Chiorlick a small Town where Ba∣jazet the 2d. vanquished his Son Selim, the same who boasted that he wore not a great Beard as his Father did, for fear the Janizaries should catch hold of it, and lead him where they pleas'd.
Asperosa seems to be the ancient Abdera, whose Inhabitants were looked upon as the most stu∣pid in the World; near this place stood the Stable of cruel Diomedes, who gave his Guests to his Horses instead of Oats. Greece was formerly the most famous Countrey of Europe; its inhabitants had for a long time the advantage of excellence of Wit, and Grandure of Courage, over other Nations; they have added to, and brought to perfecti∣on most of the Arts and Sciences; they build their Cities at some distance from the Shoar, for fear of being exposed to the plun∣der of Pyrates, who were very rife at that time; and that the the Civility of the Citi∣zens might not be corrupted by conversing with Terpawlins. They sent several Collonies into Italy, into Asia Minor, and left their Names in most of the Regions which be upon the Mediterranean Sea. Athens, Sparta, Argos, Go∣rinth, Thebes, Megalopoli were the most pow∣erful Cities of Greece. In some of these Towns the Soveraign Power was in the hands of the People, in others it was given to the most con∣spicuous. The principal People of Greece, who affected the Dominion of it, and who some∣times interessed others in their party, were the Athenians, the Lacedemonians, the Thebans, the Etolians, the Acheans, the Boeotians, the Phoce∣ans, Megara, Corinth, Sicion, Argos, Micoene, Elide, Arcadia, Messenia have also formed considerable States. Macedonia, Thessalia, Cy∣prus have had the Titles of Kingdoms. Most of the other States were Realms, then Com∣monwealths, and afterwards obeyed the Ma∣cedonians in part, the Romans some patticular Lords, and finally the Turks.
The Greeks are now almost all the Greek Church; their Countrey is much changed since in the hands of the Turks; almost all the Towns being ruined and without defence. If there be some considerable for their Strength, they are kept for the maintenance of Com∣merce, and for resisting the Christian Galleys. There be six Provinces in Greece, Macedonia, Albania, Epirus, Thessalia, Achaia, Peloponesus; these two last having particularly been called Greece. All these Names, except that of Al∣bania are ancient, and more known to us, than those which be given them by the Turks. Macedonia which Alexander the Great made one of the greatest Monarchies in the World, was a Kingdom which ended in Perseus; after whom the Romans swayed there, as did also some petty Kings unto Amurath the 2d. Empe∣rour of the Turks. Pella was the Birth∣place of that ancient Conquerour. Edissa the abode of King Philip his Father, who was there assassinated. Philippi is famous for the defeat of Cassius and Brutus. Monte-Santo otherwise Athos, for the great number of its Caloyers, religious Greeks, who chose it for the Place of their abiding, by reason of the goodness of the Air. Its shadow reaches to the Isle of Lemnos, which is seen from Mount Ida in Asia. Xerxes had the satisfaction to make it his Island. Stesicrates a Sculpturean, proposed to Alexander the Great to make of it a very extraordianry Statue; with one hand it should have poured a great River into the Sea, with the other it should have held a consi∣derable City. Thessalonica or Saloniki, has had Kings of its own. Albania is renowned
for its good Cavalry; where Valone is accompanyed with good harbour, from whence the passage is easie into Italy. Pyrrhus King of Epirus had a thought of making a Bridge of Boats from that Coast to Otranto in Italy. During the War against the Pyrates, Terentius Varro Pompeys Lievtenant, had the same design. Durazzo is noted for the encamp∣ments of Gaesar and of Pompey; Groye for be∣ing the brave Scanderbegs Native Place, that Flail of the Ottoman Empire, whose Armies he defeated in two and twenty set Battails. Scutari was a long while besieged by the Forces of Mahomet the 2d. who shot therein so many Arrows, that they furnished the Garrison with Wood sufficient to warm themselves with all the Winter. Epirus has had the Title of a Kingdom, Prevesa was the best Town; it was formerly Nicopolis built by order of Augustus in memory of the Naval Victory which he gained over Marc-Antony and Cleopatra near Actium. Larta is the ancient Ambracia which served for Residence to King Pyrrhus. Near that place dwells the Acarnanes, the best Sling∣ers of Greece, the only People which did not assist the Greeks in their Trojan War. The Epirots were the first People of Greece, who made War upon the Romans, and who made use of Elephants against them, unknown be∣fore to Italy. Thessalia has had several Tyrants, amongst others Jason of Pheres. There be the Cities of Larisse, the Native place of Achilles, where Mahomet the 4th. for some time made his Abode, during the last War of Candia; Ar∣mira, Volo, with their Sea Ports. Tricca the Episco∣pal Title of Heliodorus, who chose rather to lose
his Bishoprirk thandisown his Romance of Thea∣genes and Chariclea. Achaia has two Cities, Setines and Stives, the former was the most flourishing Republick of the World, the Abridgment of all Greece; the other, as we have said, has dared to aspire to the general Dominion of the Coun∣trey. Sparta is famous for the signal Victory of the Christians over the Turks in the year 1671. In that engagement a hundred and eighty nine Turkish Galleys were lost, five and twenty thou∣sand Turks killed, four thousand made Priso∣ners, twelve thousand Christians freed. This City is in the Countrey of the ancient Aetolians, who despised the orders of Alexander the Great, during his greatest Conquests. Negre∣pont formerly Euboae, is only seperated from Achaia by a Strait called otherwise Euripe. This Euripe has given a good deal of Exercise to Philosophers, who have sought out the cause of its ebbing and flowing; those who seem to have examined it best, say that it is regular towards the days of the New and Full Moon, that is to say, in twenty four or twenty five hours it has twice its ebbing and flowing as the Ocean, and that it is irregular towards the dayes of the first and last quarter of the Moon, that is to say, that in twenty four or in twenty five hours, it has 11, 12, 13 or 14 times Floud, and as often an Ebb. The Pelo∣ponesus, the most renowned Peninsula in the World, is joyned to the rest of Greece, by a Neck of Land of about six thousand paces in breadth, which several Kings and Emperors have in vain endeavored to dig through. It was a say∣ing fodere Isthmum, when they meant to express nenterprize which had no probability of be∣ing
effected. The Christians who called it Morea, upon the account of its Mulberries, have made there retrenchments in divers times against the Turks, who won them under Amurath the 2d. and under Mahomet the 2d. The midst of that Peninsula was formerly inhabited by the Arcadians, who had in their Countrey the finest Asses in the World; and who neglected to learn Astrology, when the other Greeks received it, because they estee∣med themselves more ancient than the Moon. Patras, where St. Andrew was put upon the Cross, is one of its best Towns. Modon the abode of the Sangiacbey or Governour of the Province. Maina gives its Name to a Petty Countrey, which has no longer the Li∣berty it a long time maintained against the Turks, by favour of the Sea, and the sharp∣ness and steepness of the Mountains. Napoli of Romania and Malvasia are peopled on the score of their Sea-Ports, where a great Trade is droven. Corinth now ruined, was formerly named the Rich; the conveniency of its Scituation made it be called the Market of Greece: Its Inhabitants invented the Greek Galleys; after that it was burnt by the Romans, there came a mixture of its melted Mettals, which has retained the Name of Co∣rinthian Brass. Philip King of Macedon estee∣med three places in Greece for strength, the Ca∣stle of Corinth, Demetrias and Calcis. The Castle of Corinth, named the Acrocorinth, and Ithoma near Messena, by reason of their Scituations, were called the two Horns of the Peloponesus. Me∣sitra is the ancient Sparta, otherwise called La∣cedemon, whose power was particularly upon
Land, whereas that of Athens was upon the Sea. Its most Noble Citizens were called Spartiates; the others, Lacedemonians, per∣haps with the same difference that is put be∣tween the Castillans and the Spaniards. The Government of this State consisted in few persons, they observed there a stile in speak∣ing and writing, which expressed much in few Words. Olympies was noted for the Temple, and Oracle and Statue of Jupiter the Olympian, one of the seven Wonders of the World; for the Olympyads, which were reckoned from four to four years after the celebration of the Olimpick Games. The Ceremonies where of were kept until the Countrey was subdued by the Romans. Sicion had its Kings almost as soon as the Assyri∣ans. The Ancients did affirm that the River Alpheus which passes in the Peloponesus, went under the Sea to the Fountain Arethusa in Sicily. Besides the Dominions of the Grand Seigni∣or, which we have mentioned in Africa, in Asia and Europe, His Highness possesses Suaquem upon the Red Sea, Teflis in Georgia, Asoph at the Mouth of the Dom. Themon and Temroch near the Palus Maeotides on the side of Asia, Arabia Petrea part of desart Arabia. The Kingdoms of Zibit and Ziden in Arabiafoelix, with the Towns of Dolfar and El-catif: In Europe Bessarabia, Ocziacou, Dassain towards the Mouths of the Nieper; Gaffa and other places in lesser Tartary. The Isle of Gandia, Waradin in Transilvania: The Scituations of these Countreys and places, is to be seen in the Map, to know the importance of them. Tran∣silvania, Valachia, Moldavia, lesser Tartary, the Republick of Ragusa, the Corsairs of Barbary and others hold of the Turks.
Of Hungary. Hungary seems to have been so called from the Huns, a People noted for the Devasta∣tions they have made in several Regions of Eu∣rope, principally under Attila one of their Kings. Most of the Towns of this Country have Names that have very little affinity one with another, because the Nations who gave them at their setling themselves there, had very dif∣ferent Tongues. Hungary is commonly divi∣ded into High and Low, the last towards the South is almost wholly in possession of the Turks, the former towards the North for the most part in the hands of the House of Austria, un∣less it be such places as have been lately seized or revolted with Count Teckley. Two parts of it have been sometimes made, separated from one another by the Danube, the one to the West, known under the Name of Panno∣nia, the other to the East making part of ancient Dacia. There be several Countreys, the enume∣ration whereof is not here very material. The House of Austria has there four General Ships, the Turks four Bachalics or great Governments. When the Realm of Hungary was in its Splen∣dour, it extended to the very Adriatick Sea, as far as Greece, and comprehended Transilva∣nia, Walachia and Moldavia; from whence it came that the Emperour, as King of Hungary pretends that the Princes of those three States be allowed of by him. The Grand Seignior has maintained his pretension better in that
point. The Soyl of Hungary is fertile, the Plains are beautiful and afford plenty of Corn, the Hills Wine, which is transported into Po∣land, and other places, where it is accounted ex∣cellent; that of Tokay is in most esteem. It also affords Salt, and other Conveniencies of Life. Several Great Rivers contribute to this abundance, the Danube, Drave, Save which have their Sources in Germany, the Teyss which is entirely Hungarian. The Danube leads its Waters from the West to the East through the midst of the Countrey, with less swiftnes towards Noon, than towards the Evening and the Morning: after a course of above six hun∣dred Leagues, it falls into the Black Sea by se∣veral Mouths. The Teyss can carry Boats four Leagues from its Source. It abounds so in Fish, that they are said to make the third part of its Bed; for which reason it often casts abundance of them upon the Neighbouring Plains; and that in the publick Markets of the Towns, those who retire into the Countrey have order to take them away. Formerly the Hungarians put the Figure of the above men∣tioned Rivers in their Ensigns or Colours, and since they have carryed the Cross therein, ha∣ving embrac'd Christianity under their Prince Esthienne, who for that consideration obtained of Pope Silvester the 2d. the Title of King, and was crowned in the year 1001. The highest Mountains of Hungary are towards Poland and Transilvania; the Richest between Buda and Strigonia. The Hungarians are Warlike, neither their Garments nor their Manners be very different from those of the Turks. Their Tongues is
almost wholly peculiar to themselves, and nevertheless the Latine, Sclavonian, German and Turkish, are in use among them. The Emperour Ferdinand the 2d. allowed the liberty of Religion in this Realm in the year 1622. The Revocation of that Toleration has occasioned perpetual Revolts, and is the source of that great War it is now the Scene of. This Realm has two Archbishopricks, Strigonia or Gran, and oloa with ten Bishopricks, the half of which is in the Infidels hands. Four orders of Persons have Sessions in the States, the Pre∣lates, the Barons, the Nobles and the Burgesses of Free and Royal Cities. The Dignity of Palatine is there the most considerable after that of King, who if he acts in any wise against their Priviledges, may be opposed by force, if the Palatine consent thereto. The Hungari∣ans will not suffer to have any Palatines but of their own Nation. The Archbishop of Stri∣gonia is Prince and perpetual Chancellour of the Kingdom; he Crowns the King after his ele∣ction. These two Officers have almost all the Authority. Hungary has had eight Kings of the House of Austria, from Ferdinand the . Brother of the Emperour Charles the 5th. un∣to Leopold-Ignace. Though the Hungarian Nobility do not love the Germans, yet they have not opposed this Election, for the shelte∣ring themselves against the oppression of the Turks, who respect a Peasant as much as they do a Gentleman. The greatest strength of the Countrey consists in light Horse; the Troopers be called Hussars, the Foot Soldiers Heidukes. Besides extraordinaries, the Emperour draws from what he possesses in Hungary about a mil∣lion
of Livers every year. He raises this Mo∣ney from the Mines, by an imposition on each Horse, and by the exportation of Cattle. The Grand Seignior has there his Caraz, which is four Livers a Head of those under his Sway: This is so small a matter for either of those Princes, that for the preservation of what they hold there, they are obliged to employ their other Revenues. The Turk pretends to all Hungary, and the States which depend thereon by virtue of a Cession, which was made there∣of to Soliman the 2d. by John Sigismond, Son of King John Count de Cepuse, and by the Queen his Mother. In Upper Hungary there be seve∣ral Free Towns, which form thirteen Com∣munities. The King of Poland holds half of Cepuse, with a dozen of Cities. Most of the Frontiers are untilled and overgrown with Shrubs and Weeds. Tho there be a Truce between the Austrians and the Ottomans, yet they fail not of making incursions upon one another. In the year 1642. the Truce was made between the two Empires for twenty-years. In the year 1664. after two years War it was renewed, the Turk remaining Master of the Fortress of Waradin and Newheusel; this last in the very middle of all Europe. The most considerable Cities of Hungary are Presbourg, Cassovia, Esperies, Buda, Agria, Temesvar, Kanise. Presbourg is the Capital of all the House of Austria possesses in this Realm. Since the loss of Albe Royale, it has been the place of Election and Coronation of their Kings. Cassovia is towards the Mountains, with the finest Arcenal of the Country. Espe∣ries has Fairs which render it very populous.
The strongest places of the House of Au∣stria are Javarin and Komorra, the Bulwarks of Christendom. Javarin is in a vast Plain, envi∣roned with the Danube and the Raab, which sometimes gives it its Name; defended with several Bastions faced with Brick, with Ravelins between both: Having formerly been taken by the Turks, it was petarded and retaken with as much happiness as boldness by a French Gentleman called Vaubecour. Komor∣ra has the Danube for its Moat or Ditch, and cannot be besieged but by three Bodies of Ar∣mies. The Isle of the same Name, otherwise called of Schut, where the Turks were routed by the Imperialists, in a late Action, to the loss of many of their Men; has above three hun∣dred Villages or Boroughs, above fifteen thou∣sand Inhabitants, with the convenience of hun∣ting and fishing, Leopolstad, Fillek, Tokay, Zat∣mar and Kalo have likewise been fortified by order from the Emperour. Buda is divided into High and Low Town, the Germans call it Offen, that is to say, Court, because it was the abode of the Kings, and the Capital of all the Kingdom; it has the most ho∣nourable Beglerbyat of all Turkey, though it be not the most gainful; its Bashaw has more Au∣thority than others: Its usual Garrison is of eight or ten thousand Men. Agria, Temesvar, Kanisa, have in like manner Bashaws, as being upon the Frontier. The Turks call Temesvar the in∣vincible. The Emperour Ferdinand the 2d. besieged Kanise, being then but Arch-Duke, and could not take it. Leopold-Ignace was not more happy in the year 1664. The Retreat from Kanise by the Duke of Mercoeur, is one of the
the finest Actions of our Age. People also esteem that from Mayence by the Cardinal de la Va∣lette, that from Torgow by the Suedish General Banier, that from Dundee by the Marquiss of Montross. Five Churches is the place where Solyman the Great dyed, during the Siege he laid to Zygeth in the year 1566. Mogacz is noted for the defeat of the Christians in the year 1526. The Bridge of Esseck for the ex∣ploit of Count Peter de Serin, who burnt it in sight of the Turks Armies. Of Transilvania, Walaciha and Moldavia. TRansilvania is so called because it is seated beyond the Woods which separate it from Hungary. It is sometimes called Seven∣burgen, because of the Cities which the Sax∣ons built therein, to the number of seven; Hermanstat, Cronstat, Nosenstat, Medwish, Sces∣purg, Clausembourg, Weissembourg. The People of this State are of three sorts, Cicules or Zec∣kels, Saxons, Hungarians, who give each dif∣ferent Names to each City of the Countrey. The Zeckels are come from Tartary, or rather are the remains of the Huns, who laid aside their Name, that they might not be odious to their Neighbours. They have setled themselves principally in seven places, at Sepsi, at Orbay, at Kisdi, at Czick, at Girgio, at Marcos, at Ara∣nias; their Capital City is Newmark. The Saxons are Originaries of Germany; the Hungarians
stile themselves the Nobles of the Country. Hermanstad, the residence of the Prince, is a strong Town. Waradin was fortifyed by the Turks, who usurped it in the year 1660. One of the Principal Revenues of Transilvania con∣sists in Salt, which is principally got at Torda; it is sent into Hungary by the River of Marish. There be Mines of Gold and Silver, and sometimes Pieces of pure Gold are found in the Rivers, which weigh above half a pound. So as the Hungarians being Masters of Tran∣silvania, called it their Treasure. There be several sorts of Religion: the Catholicks, Lu∣therans, Calvinists, have had there the free exercise of theirs, towards the beginning of this Age. The Families of Bathori and of Ra∣gotski have bestowed several Princes upon this Countrey, which was made a Soveraignty in the year 1512. for John Zapolia, upon condi∣tion of holding of Hungary. The last Ragot∣ski, who was killed in Battel against the Turks in the year 1659. was the fourteenth Prince thereof, he stiled himself, By the Grace of God Prince of the Kingdom of Transilvania, Lord of a part of Hungary, and Count of the Siculi. He paid the Grand Seignior annually a Tribute of fifty thou∣sand Livers; the Ministers of the Port have made it mount to a hundred thousand Rixdollers. The Emperour, as King of Hungary pretends to have right to the installation of the Prince of Transilvania; the Emperour Rodolphus II. having establisht there Botskai, upon condition of Return upon the Males failing. Walachia, which offers it self on the North East of Transilvania, along and on the North of the Danube, was called petty and Transalpina,
for the distinguishing it from Moldavia. It is watred with a great number of Rivers; some of its Mountains have great Mines of Gold; its Horses are by many accounted the best in Europe. Its Prince called Hospodar, sometimes Vaivode, that is to say, Head of the Troops, resides at Tergowis, and pays the Grand Seignior a hundred and twenty thousand Livers of annual Tribute. Moldavia has been sometimes known under the Name of Great Walachia, and of Walachia Cis-Alpina. It is rich in Wax and in Honey, out of which it raises every year about 2 hundred thou∣sand Crowns, only for the tenths of the Prince. There are several Heaps of Stones which are said to have been set up by order of Darius King of Persia, who made war upon the Sci∣thians. Its capital Cities are Yasi and Sockou. Choczin near the Niester, is the place where a Polish Army was defeated under King Sigis∣mond-Augustus; and where King John Sobieski a little before his election, gained over the Turks a Victory, the most memorable of our age. The Eastern part, called Bessarabia, butts upon the Black Sea, and belongs to the Grand Seig∣nior, who is Master of the Mouths of the Danube and of the Niester, and who takes all possible means to subdue those of the Nieper, and subject entirely the rich Province of the Ukrain. The Champaign of Budziac is twelve Leagues in length, ten in breadth, is possessed by the Dobruck Tartars, who are the greatest Robbers of all those parts. They are said to amount to above 15000. They inhabit the Coun∣try round about Bialigrod. About the year 1500. a Governour of Moldavia, called Estienne,
rendred himself the Soveraign thereof, and at several times vanquished the Turks, the Lesser Tartars, and the Polanders. His Successours have played there as it were, at Bo-peep, and several of them have been massacred by their Subjects, upon the account of their Cruelties. Of a score of its Princes, which be there called Wai∣vodes, not two of them succeeded their Fathers. They did for sometime hold of Poland, now of the Turk at disposal. The ordinary Tri∣bute was a hundred and fourscore thousand Li∣vers. The Port augments from time to time the Tribute of the Moldavians, as well as that of the Walachians, for the rendring them poor and obedient; if it protects in appearance their Princes, who are commonly of low Birth, it imitates those who defend Sheep, and suffer Bees to live, upon the account of the Wool and the Honey they afford. Of Lesser Tartary. LEsser Tartary, which lies in Europe, is so called for distinction sake from the Great, which makes part of Asia. It is also named Percopense and Crimee from its principal Cities scituated in the Peninsula, called formerly Tau∣rica. The Nogay Tartars may be there com∣prehended between the Tanais and the Boristhe∣nes, the Tartars of Ocziakou, between the Mouths of the Boristhenes and the Niester, and also the Tartars of Budziack above mentioned on the East of Moldavia, between the Mouths of the Niester and of the Danube: Be∣sides all these Tartars, there be those who
inhabit in Lithuania and the Ukrain. This Regi∣on with Commania, which is in Asia, made up the Kingdom of the Bosphorus, possessed by Mithridates. Lesser Tartary is a plain Country, very cold by reason of the Winds. Its Pe∣ninsula is so advantagiously scituated, that seve∣ral States had formerly a design of sending Collonies thither. Besides seven or eight good Cities, it has full fourscore thousand Koys, that is to say Wells or Villages. Its Neck is half a League broad, its Circumference se∣ven hundred Miles. There be some salt Mar∣shes, where any man takes as much salt as he has occasion for. The Inhabitants boast of ne∣ver having been subdued. Tho' they be des∣cended of the Great Tartars, they do not hold of them; they only assist the Turks in such ex∣peditions they think to get booty in. Their Tongue comes near the Turkish, but they gabble it out faster. It was their Predecessors, known under the name of Scythians, who sent former∣ly to Darius, who would have subdued them, a Rat, a Frog, a Bird and five Arrows, for to declare to him, that he would find it a hard matter to retire out of their Countrey, where∣in he had imprudently engaged himself. Yet they could not then draw any great advantage from their Cavalry, wherein now consists their principal strength, by reason of the bray∣ing of the Asses, which were in the Persian Army. The Lesser Tartars have in all times made incursions upon their Neighbours, for which reason all their Frontiers is a desart. After they have made a great number of Slaves, they go to sell them in the Sea-Ports, from whence
they are commonly transported to Constantino∣ple. Their Country is very populous; seve∣ral of the Inhabitants have often there each forty or fifty Children in a year: they go al∣most all to the War: principally the Nogays, from the age of seven years, that they go out of their Gantares, which are Huts or Portative Houses, they alwaies remain in the field. These Huts are of Ozier, of a round form, two Fathoms in Diameter, they put them upon Wheels, and use them in Summer more than in Winter. Few Houses in Lesser Tartary are built with Stone and Mortar, most of them are only of Wood, covered with Planks, up∣held with Posts fixed in the Earth, and interla∣ced with Branches of Trees. Robbery is there tolerated, and there needs no more for any ones justification upon that account, than to say they stood in need of what they stole. The Inhabitants do not much care for the Sciences, they learn what they know by common Sence; it is said of them, they have eaten their Books and carry them in their Stomacks. They have several Horses very swift, small, lean, who live commonly on Roots and Leaves of Trees; the greatest Lords have of them very good, they take so much care of their Horses, that it is become a Proverb amongst them, That to lose ones Horse is to lose ones Head. They make sometimes up a hundred thousand Horse, and go easily Marches of four Months without Bag∣gage; the Bow of their Saddle serves them for a Pillow, the Horse-Cloth which is of Pressed Wool or of Felt, serves them for a Coverlet, their Cloak for a Tent: each Trou∣per carries a Pickax; their Servants sleep in
the open air, let it be never so cold. The know no other Trade than that of War, th long experience they have had therein has taught them all the Secrets and Stratagems of that Art. Some of them pass, without any in∣conveniency, for three or four Days together without eating, after which they glut them∣selves like Hogs, to sleep as long as they have fasted. Their Provision is a little flower, stee∣ped in Water, the use of Bread goes against their Stomacks. When they regal and treat one another, they roast a whole Colt. They have so much of the Beast, that they are born blind, and do not see clear until five dayes end. Their eyes are but little open, ve∣ry black, with long lashes, and so piercing, that they always discover their Enemies soone than they are perceived by them; they are much shorter than tall, have large Members; they have a high and big Breast, a short Neck, huge Head and Cheeks, their Face almost round, a flat and Saddle Nose, a small Mouth, white Teeth, tawny Complexion, very black and harsh Hair, like the main of a Horse. When they are Children their Mothers take care to bath them once a day in Water, wherein Salt is dissolved, to harden their Skin, and render them less sensible of the cold, when in Winter they are obliged to pass Rivers by swimming. Each Tartar has a Whistle, a Gamelle, which is a Porrenger of Wood or of Copper, a Whip, a Knife, an Awl, Packthread, Thread, Points and little Cords of Leather, a Marriners com∣pass; every ten have a Chaldron and a little Drum. Their King is called Kan, and his Successour Galga. The Residence of the Kan
is at Baccassaraium, otherwise Boston-Seraglio, sometimes at Crim. Mancup is his strongest Town, and the place where his Treasures be kept. He says himself allyed to the Grand Seignior, who gives him a Pension, and de∣poses him when he thinks fitting, or rather when he has the Power so to do; and who for that purpose seizes often on the Kans Relati∣ons, for the having him elected of that Family who is most his Creature. The Confederacy between the Turks and the Lesser Tartars bears among other things, that the Race of the Ot∣tomans coming to fail, that of the Kans of the Lesser Tartars shall succed to the Turkish Empire. The Grand Seignior did this to engage those Princes to the maintaining their Dominions, as expecting to possess them one day themselves. The Turk is master of the City of Caffa, the best and most important of this State. His Predecessours took it from the Janizaries in the year 1475. The Lesser Tartars assisted the Polanders in some of their late Wars, but to the cost of their Guests; besides some Money those gave them annually, some Rouls or Sheep-skins to cloath themselves with. Though their Shape makes them resemble Apes when they are on Horseback with very short Stirrups, yet they fail not of having the advantage of their Ene∣mies in the Campaign. The Cossacks fight 'em when they can go in Tabort, that is to say when they can march between two rows of their Waggons, having eight or ten in the Front, and as many in the Rear, with Fuzils, Half Pikes, and long handed Scyths, while that the best mounted go round about with
Sentinels on all sides for a Quarter of a League distance. The Lesser Tartars are so cruel, that they give Axes and Knives to their little Chil∣dren for the killing those Prisoners outright, whom they mean not to carry away. They have themselves sometimes filled great Sacks with the ears of Christians, to show the great∣ness of their Victory. Of the State of Ragusa. THis is a small Republick, which has its Territories in Dalmatia, near those of the Turks, and upon the Gulph of Venice. It pays eighteen thousand Sequins of annual Tri∣bute to the Grand Seignior for liberty of Com∣merce in the Levant. The City which seems to have succeeded to the ancient Epidaure, is pretty well fortify'd, and very populous. It has the Title of an Archbishoprick; its Inha∣bitants, who addict themselves for the most part to trade, are Roman Catholicks. In the year 1667. it received a great loss by an Earth∣quake. Its Principal Harbour is that of St. Croix, which is three Leagues distant from it. Its Ships are pretty numerous, well known in the Seas of the Levant, as its Caravans be in the Dominions of the Turks in Europe. He who commands the Republick of Ragusa, is called Doge or Rectour; he is assisted with the Councel of a hundred Senators, his Govern∣ment lasts only a Month. The Governour of the Castle is changed every day, wherein one of the Nobles enters to command in his turn. Their
Gentlemen must marry Gentlewomen, if they mean their Children should be acknowledg∣ed to be of the Ragusian Nobility. The Re∣venue of the Republick is five and twenty thousand Crowns. The Country above the Town is not over fertile, full of Rocks and Stones; if it bring forth any thing, it is by the means of the Forreign Earth which they cause to be brought thither, which is done with such care and such success, that the Coast makes a Beautiful Prospect of Vineyards, Orange Trees, Lemon Trees and Pomegra∣nates. The Neighbouring Islands which are of the dependance of Ragusa, are also very plea∣sant. The Turks have some sort of inclination for the Ragusians, by reason they pay punctu∣ally their Tribute, and that by their means they are provided with all the Commodities of Europe, which they stand in need of. They give them Priveledges which they seldom grant to other Christians. Of the Brittish Islands. THese Islands consist in two great, and seve∣ral small ones. Great Brittain and Ire∣land are the two great; the small are all in the Neighbourhood of Great Brittain, the Hebrides, Orcades, Shetland which depends on the Crown of Denmark in the sea of Scotland; Man; An∣glesey, the Sorlingues in the Irish Sea, Wight, Guernsey, Jersey in the Channel. Formerly Great Brittain went under the Name of Albion, by reason of its Rocks all
along the Sea, which seem white. It now comprehends two Kingdoms, that of England, and that of Scotland, the union whereof gave occasion to King James to stile himself King of Great Brittain, and at the same time the design of stifling the partialities which were between the two Nations. The English were not very well satisfyed with this change, since thereby their Name became the less famous. The Brittish Islands had to the number of Nineteen King∣doms. England had seven of them, Wales three, Scotland two, Ireland five, the Isle of Man made one, the Isles near Scotland another. All this now is under the Crown of England. Several places and Islands in the East and West Indies are also subject to it, whereof we have made mention in the Article of Europe. Of England. ENgland was so called by the English, an an∣cient People, who dwelt on the confines of Germany and of Denmark; the Name of Sax∣ony Trans-marine was given it by the Saxons. Before, it was called Lhoegria, and then Scot∣land went under the Name of Albania, and Wales that of Cambria. During the decay of the Roman Empire, the Saxons and English in∣vaded Great Brittain with main force, and near Bedford gained a signal Victory over the Insu∣laries, who were constrained to abandon their Countrey. Several Brittons retired into Wales, others passed into Brittany in France, where they setled the British Tongues by the help of
their Country Men, whom the Romans had alrea∣dy lead thither to support their pretensions to the Empire. King Arthur, one of the last Brittish Kings, who dyed in the year 542. is the same whom so many Fables be told of, and to whom is attri∣buted the institution of the Knights of the round Table. The Victors, that is to say, the Saxons and the English, raised a Wall towards the West of England, to mark the Bounds of their Conquests, and at the same time made a Law, by which all the Brittons should have a hand cut off, who were found with a Sword on this side the Wall. In the year 450. and the following, there were formed seven Kingdoms, Kent, Sussex, Essex, West-Sex, East-Anglia, Mercia, North-Humbria. A little after that Charlemagne was acknowledged Em∣perour of the West, all these Monarchies were reduced into one by King Egbert, who dyed in the year 837. The Successours of this Egbert having been troubled by the Danes, the last of them declared his Heir William Duke of Nor∣mandy, to whom the Conquest of England brought the Name of Conquerour. Thus Eng∣land has had Soveraigns of six several Nations, of the Brittons, Romans, Saxons, English, Danes and Normans. These last have established there the Principal Laws, the King who now reigns is James the 2. England is a greater Kingdom, more fertile and populous than is either Scotland or Ireland. It is the most considerable of any State in the Ocean: It produces Corn and Fruits in abundance: the best Tin in the World is transported thence; Wool, Cloaths, Hides and other Commodities both excellent and in great plenty; neither is it wanting in ex∣cellent
Liquors. The English Horses, Dogs and Cocks are in high esteem all over the World. No Wolves have been seen there since the general hunting, which destroyed them al∣most all, by the means of permission Cri∣minals had of redeeming their Lives with the Heads of those Animals. Gunners and Dogs were for sometime kept upon Frontiers of Scotland, to hinder the Wolves' which were hunted out, from returning into Eng∣land. The great respect that is paid to Ladys in this Realm, has given occasion to the saying; that England is the Paradise of Wo∣men, the Purgatory of Servants, and the Hell of Horses. The English for the most part are well proportioned, and of a generous Nature. They have had so great an Antipathy to the Scots, that Edward the 1. the same who was prefer∣red before his Eldest Brother, by reason of the Beauty of his Body, recommended, that after his Death, they should boyl him until they parted his Flesh and his Bones, that they should bury his Flesh, and carry his Bones along to the War against the Scots. The English are own∣ed Soveraigns of the Ocean, and have made those States and Potentates to repent, who have dared to dispute their Right to that Title. Their Coun∣trey is compared to the Tortoise in the shell, who has all his Defences collected. The acquisition of some Places by the allyance with Portugal, has obliged them to extraordinary expences. The Spaniards have a Proverb, with all War, and Peace with England. The general Religi∣on of the English, is the reformed, the King of England is the Head of the Anglican Church, where of the Principal Members are the Bishops,
who compose the House of Lords with the other Peers. This Parliament is very diffe∣rent from those of France; besides the House of Lords, there is that of the Commons, cal∣led the Lower House. The principal Rivers of England are, the Thames, Severn and Hum∣ber, which do not encrease by the Rains, the neighbouring Lands being sandy. There be reckoned one and fifty Counties called Shires; each of those Counties is distributed into hun∣dreds, into Tithings or Tenths. They may be considered according to the four Regions of the World; and this division is much the same with that the Romans made, when they were Masters of the Country. The Southern part of England is along the Channel, where be the best Harbours of the Kingdom. Canterbury and Bristow be there considerable, the first upon the account of its Archbishopwrick and of its Primacy; the se∣cond for its Commerce, Ships arriving there at full Sail. Rochester is the usual Station of the Kings Ships, which are called men of War, Fri∣gats, Yachts. Salisbury has a Metropolitan Church, wherein are reckoned as many Doors as there be Months, and as many Windows as there be days in the year. Windsor is a Royal Castle near the Thames, where the Ceremonies of the order of the Garter are generally per∣formed. Dover is known for its strong Castle, for Peoples embarking there for Calice, Dun∣kirk and Ostend; for the Neighbourhood of the Downs, under whose shelter, the Ships that are bound towards the East and towards the South, may wait safely for Winds, fair for their Voyage. Hastings is a place
where in the year 1066. William the Conque∣rour gained a full Victory over Herald the 2d. the last Danish King, who was killed upon the spot with above sixty thousand of his Men. Portsmouth, Southampton, Plimouth have very good Ports. The Eastern part has this advantage, of ha∣ving London, the Capital of all the Realm, one of the Greatest, Richest and most Populous Cityes in the World, by the means of its greatest traffick. Its Scituation is upon the River of Thames, where it receives the noblest Ships of the Universe; its Bridge is three hundred and thirty Paces in length. The Pastures and Meads round about would make a most pleasant Pro∣spect and Landskip, if the Smoak of Coals which is commonly burnt there, did not raise a continual Cloud. Norwich is one of the best Cities, and most populous of all the Kingdom. Yarmouth sees the fishing of Herrings performed in its Neighbourhood, where at Michaelmas is held a fair for that purpose. Cambridge one of the most famous Universities in the World. Harwich a famous Port. The Countrey round about was the abode of the Icenians, whose Queen Bodicea put to Death a great number of Romans in the time of Nero, and preferred a glorious Death before an Ignominious Slave∣ry. Towards the midst of the Realm is Oxford, with one of the four most famous Universities of Europe, wherein there is thirty three Colledges, that of the University has a Library full of very curious Manuscripts; unless it be that of the Vatican, there be few in the World that have any so fine. Gloucester is commonly the appan∣age
of the third Son of the King of Great Brittain: It is near the Severn, near the Isle of Aldney, where was formerly fought a sin∣gular Combat between Edmond Ironside King of the English Saxons; and Canute the Dane, who at length divided the Kingdom between them, after having fought a long while without being able to have any advantage over one another. Chester is accompanyed with a Sea-Port, where People embark for Ireland. At Worcester was the Defeat of the Kings Army in the year 1651. by the Rebels. York in the Northern part is the second City of the Kingdom, and the Title of the Kings se∣cond Son. Lancaster is a County Palatin, fa∣mous for its ancient Family. The two Houses of York and Lancaster gave a great deal of trou∣ble to England, during above a hundred years, by the fatal Faction of the White and Red Rose. New-Castle and Hull have the conveniency of the Sea: The Country about New-Castle is full of Mines, which afford Coals, so necessary to the Inhabitants of the City of London, and the best Crayons of Europe. The refusal that was made at Hull of receiving King Charles the 1. was one of the Principal Motives of the War between his Majesty and the Parliamentaryes. Barwick and Carlisle have some Fortifications. Penrith keeps the round Terrass, which is said to have been King Arthurs Table. Between Hull and Newcastle there be the Ports of Brilington and Scarborough. The Principality of Wales is the Title of the Kings Eldest Son; it has few good Cities: Bangor was there formerly a famous Abby, where above twelve hundred Monks lived on
what they earn'd by working. Milford is recko∣ned one of the finest Havens of Europe, by rea∣son of its Sinuosities, which form as many good Ports. The Isle of Anglesey which is near it, was the abode of some Druids, and the re∣treat of those, who in Great Brittain would not submit to the Romans. It is called the Nursing Mother of Wales, by reason of its fer∣tility. Its City of Aberfrau served formerly for abode to the Kings of North-Wales. Of Scotland. THis Kingdom is the ancient Caledonia, which was called Scotland from the Scots, a People who made a sharp War upon the Ro∣mans, and obliged them to make entrench∣ments against their Incursions, principally under Adrian and under Severus. The Name of Albany has been sometimes given to all this Kingdom, whereas it is now peculiar to one of its Countys, which the Inhabitants call Broad Albiny. Some Scotch Authors, make the Name of Scotch come from the ancient Scythians, for the showing their Predecessours in the Higher Antiquity. Scotland is of a cold Temperature; its Gulphs, Lakes and Mountains hinder its Provinces from being over Fertile. The Inhabitants are of the reformed Religion, Popery having been there abolish'd under King James the 6th. But the many Scots which Sprung up with the Re∣formation, produced there many Troubles, and occasioned most of the disorders, which in our time we have seen in the Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland. There be still at this day Phanaticks, who call themselves the Sweet Singers of Israel, and are retire into the Mountains and into the Woods, though they be hardly able to subsist there. The Southern Scots live much after the same way as the English, the Northern are wedded to the ancient Cu∣stoms, and not over careful of neatness in their Repasts. The Scotch Nation has for a long while been in esteem for Valour and Fidelity; the most Christiam King St. Lewis, and his Successours the French Kings have trusted them with the Guard of their Royal Persons, and made allyance with Scotland. This Kingdom is now the most ancient in the World, it is said to have been above two thousand years hereditary, with a Succession of about a hundred and ten Kings. The Power and Revenues of the King of Scot∣land are rendred much more considerabbe since his Majesties Restauration, and his re-stablish∣ment in the Power of raising Forces by Sea and Land; of making Peace or War, with the command of the Castles, of the Cittadels and Garrisons of the Kingdom. The richness of the Countrey consists in Wool, in Cattle, and Salt-Fish. Its Land has several Mines of Lead, Iron, Sulphur, Azure, and Coal. Its principal Rivers have a prodigious Quantity of Salmon. All Scotland is divided into two great parts by the River of Tay, the one Northern, the other Southern. Northern Scotland, contained under the name of High-lands, is that where the Romans could not carry their Armies, and where in our times the English Parliamentaries had not all the Success they had promised to them∣selves.
It was the abode of the ancient Scots, whose Kings had their residence at Dunsta∣fag. The Robberies of the Inhabitants have been there formerly so frequent, principally in the Province of Albania, that if by the Law any one of the Province had committed a Robbery, he amongst them whom a man could seize of, was obliged to repair the loss, or to lose his Life. Aberdeen is the most con∣siderable City of this Country, by reason of its University, and of its Pearls which are found in its little River, and of the Salmons that are taken in its Neighbourhood, where three hundred are said to be sometimes taken at one Cast of the Net. The Southern part of Scotland, which is called Lower, is a better Country than the upper. There is to be seen Edenborough, the Capital of the Kingdom, the abode of the late Kings. St. Andrew and Glascow have the Title of Arch∣bishopricks. St. Andrew has also a famous University, I say, famous for such a Kingdom as that of Scotland, where Glascow passes for a Para∣dise. Abernethi was the abode of the King of the Picts. Duns upon the Marches of England, is the place of Birth of the subtil Doctor Scotus. Leith the Sea-port of Edinborough. St. Johns Town a new City, near the ruins of the an∣cient Perth, which the Sea has ruined. It is defended with good Walls, whereas most of the other Cities of the Kingdom have none at all. The Coronation of the Kings of Scotland is performed at Scone, near St. Johns-Town. There was in this Abby a Marble Chair, from which the Royalty of Scotland was esteemed inseparable; but the King of England, Edward the 4th having transferred it to London, it looks
as if King James the 6th. was as it were forced to go thither. That Chair had been before in the Country of Argyle. Dunbar is an old Castle, the Fortifications whereof have been destroyed The English Parliamentaries won a Battail there in the year 1650. Dunbarton is a Fortress upon a Rock near a Lake, where the Fish are said to have no bones. The Isles of May and Bass have Castles situated upon inaccessible Rocks. The Garrison of that of Bass receives great con∣veniencyes from the Geese, Sea Coots or Moor∣hens, which go there to make their Nests; these Fowls furnish abundance of Wood for Fewel. Among the Islands which depend on Scot∣land: The Hebrides are on the West, the Or∣cades on the North of that Kingdom. The Inhabitants of the Orcades keep carefully the Cup of St. Magnus, whom they name their Apostle. With this Cup they try their Bish∣ops, and hope for abundance of good from 'em, when those Prelates empty it quite. They are of so good a complexion, that they never take Physick. Towards the North of the Orcades, there be the Isles of Scetland, which we have said to depend on the Crown of Denmark. The Insularies there are so healthful and so vi∣gorous, that they make no scruple of marry∣ing when they are a hundred years old: Nay they go a fishing at the age of a hundred and thirty and a hundred and forty. Zeal, one of these Islands, suffers no Forreign Animals: they dye as soon as they come there.
Ireland. IReland formerly called Ivernia and Hibernia, is on the West of Great Brittain, from which it is separated by a Sea full of Shelves and Rocks, where there is a concourse of several Rivers, which fall in there with great Rapidity. There is little sayling there, but with Ships of a middle Bulk, yet Ireland has the finest Har∣bours, and the greatest number in the World. The Irish are tall and well proportioned; love Repose and Liberty; most of them are Catho∣licks. During the usurpation of the Royal Au∣thority in England, by the two Houses, and by Cromwel, most of the Papists were brought to condign Punishment, for their execrable Massacres and Bloudshed, and the Irish Nobi∣lity pen'd up in a corner of the Kingdom; be∣tween the River of Shennon and the Sea. The Physitians there are received by Succession. The Riches of this Realm consists in Butter, Suet, Wool, Hides, Frizes, Coverlets, Cheeses and Salmon. The English who reside there, drive almost all the Trade. Though this Island be full of Lakes, Ponds, Marshes, Mountains, it is nevertheless very healthful, and is said neither to produce or suffer any thing that's venemous. The Wood or Timber that's cut there engenders neither Worms nor Spiders. Of this Nature is the Timber Work of the Pallace of West∣minster, and that of the Town-House of the Hague, in Holland. Of late time several of its Marshes have been drained and dryed up, and
the Countrey which was formerly only Forrests is at present so disgarnished of Woods, that they are constrained to make use of Turfe instead of it, for Firing. All along the Coast is great plenty of those Fowl we call Soland-Geese they are produced of the Wood of the Ships which rot in the Sea. There be also Pearls which float in company, as Bees follow their King; but are not of a fine Water. Ireland is divided according to the Disposi∣tions of the Regions of the World, into four parts; Leinster, Ulster, Cannaught and Munster; formerly Meeth was reckoned for a fifth, but is now accounted a Member of Leinster. There is still another Division which divides all Ire∣land into two parts, whereof the one is the Province of the English, the other the Country of the true Irish, though the whole Country has been subdued, and there is almost every where English and Scotch Collonies. The Pro∣vince of the English has in like manner four Countreys, Lease, Meth, Dublin, Kildare-Monmouth is the best Country, with the finest Havens of the Kingdom. Leinster drives the greatest Trade, the two other Ports are not so considerable. Mead passes for the Granary of Ireland, by reason of its Corn. There be few good Towns. Armagh in Ul∣ster, which was formerly the principal in all the Island, has now nothing more than the Ruines, with the Title of the Primary, and the Archbish∣ops See. London-Derry is much more conside∣rable. Drogday is strong and trading: a Pro∣verb runs that Wexford was in vogue, that Dublin is so, and that Drogdah shall be. The Hole of St. Patrick has Circumstances
which have furnished matter to the making of Books. Amongst other Fables which be told thereof, is the descent of Souls into Purgatory, and into Hell through that Strait. Galloway in Connaught, the most considerable after Dublin, trafficks principally into Spain. Altone an important passage upon the Shennon, was fortified by Queen Elizabeth, who intended to have made it the Residence of her Lord Lieutenant. Waterford in Munster is esteemed the third in the Kingdom, near the meeting of the three Rivers, which are called the three Si∣sters Limerick and Cork are considerable. Dublin: in Leinster is the Capital of all Ire∣land, the Residence of the Lord Leiutenant and of the principal Officers of Justice, with an University, the only one of the Kingdom. Kilkenni is esteemed the finest of the Cities in the Inlands of the Countrey. Sicily. SIcily is the greatest and best of all the Islands of the Mediterranane Sea; its fertility oc∣casioned it formerly to be called the Granary of Rome. It was first of all inhabited by the Cyclops; afterwards, most of the Cities were swayed by some Princes or other, and the Republick of Syracuse was very considerable. The Cartha∣ginians, Greeks and Romans made War there, during a long while; these last made it their first Conquest, when they began to stir out of Italy. The Sarazins, Normans, Swabians, French and Spaniards, have been successively Masters of
it. It has bore the Name of Trinacria, by rea∣son of its triangular Figure, which makes three great Promontories at equal distance. From the most Western called Lilybee, may be disco∣vered Cap Bon in Africa, though it be a hundred Miles off. Mount Aetna, now called Mount Gibel, casts forth Fire and Flames continually in the midst of Snow, sometimes more, sometimes less, and some years since it vomited Water in a bundance. The Emperour Adrian had one day the curiosity to mount it, to see those Fires, and consider the Sun rising, which is said to appear from that Mountain like a Rain-Bow, painted with several colours. In Sicily did the Ancients place the Birth-place of Ceres, and the Rape of Proserpine. The whole Island is divided into three great Valleyes; Val di Demona, Val di Mazara, Val di Noto. The places which are not upon the Coast, are almost all built upon Mountains. Messina the greatest and richest of all, has had great Priviledges, and ever drove a great Trade of Corn and Silk. The Spaniards remem∣bring the ill Treatments they received there in 1674. have taken from it all the advantages which it had kept, during several Ages. It is near the Pharos, or Streight of the same Name, where the Ancients placed the two Mountains of Scyl∣la and Charybdis, the former in Italy, the latter near Sicily. The Fable runs that Charybdis was a Thief, who stole away Hercules his Heifers, and for that reason was changed into a Sea-Mon∣ster. The Port of Messina seem'd to have been made of the Compass. The Younger Pompey assembled there his Fleet; the Christians Fleet before the Battle of Lepanto, had there its
Rendezvouz. Palermo is the Capital of the Island, formerly the abode of the Kings, and the usual Residence of the Vice-Roy for the King of Spain, who does Homage to the Pope for his Kingdom. Augusta is considerable for its Scituation and for its Port; all defended by three Fortresses. Syragousa, or rather Saracousa, formerly Syracusa, one of the best Cities of the Roman Empire, is noted in History for its Wars, for its Tyrants, for its Fountain Arethusa, for the brave resistance which it made against the Romans under Marcellus, by the help of the Machines, which the famous Archimedes had raised there for the defence of his Countrey: It had before shewed its Puissance against the Athenians, who, at the Solicitation of the Segestains, had besieged it. The Tyranny of Phalaris, and the invention of the Brazen Bull by Perillus has made Gergenti renowned. Noto has in its Neighbourhood a River, where there are said to have been tame Fish, which eat out of Mens Hands. Comarana is near that ancient Moor or Lake, the draining whereof (contrary to the advice of the Oracle) brought upon its Inhabitants a Pestilence, and the Invasion of their Enemies. Trapano accompanyed with its Port, was noted by the Ancients for the Death of Anchises the Father of Aeneas; it is known by the Moderns for its Salt-Pits, for the fishing of Corail and of tunny-fishies, which is performed there. Mont-real an Archbishops See, has a fine Cathedral Church built by the Normans. Melazzo still preserves the first Monastery of the Fathers Minims, whom the Popish Saint Fran∣cis de Paula caused to be built. The Spaniards did particularly make use of this place for the
Reduction of Messina. Near Melazzo was Sextus Pompeius defeated by Augustus. On the North, or rather on the West of Sicily, are the Islands of Lapari, renowned for the Fable of Aeolus, for the first Naval Victory of the an∣cient Romans, and some Mountains which by their Fires and Flames gave Means to the In∣habitants to foretel Tempests. Towards the West are the ancient Aegades, where Catullus defeated the Carthaginians at Sea, during the first Punique War. Sardinia as well as Sicily belongs to the King of Spain, it lies in the same Sea, which is the Mediterranean, but more towards the West. Its Capital City is Gallari, the Residence of a Vice-Roy and an Archbishops See, and there is gathered that Sardonique Herb, which makes People dye laughing, because that it contracts the Nerves and Muscles, particularly those of the Mouth. When the Ionians were subdued by the Persians, Bias one of the seven Sages of Greece proposed to them the Inhabiting of Sar∣dinia, because of the Convenience of its Si∣tuation. The Isle of Corsica is on the South of the Seigneury of Genoa, the Mistress of it. An Italian Proverb runs, that a Corsican is not to be trusted alive or dead. The Corsicans, as their Enemies say, have so great an inclination to thievery, that if they do not steal in their life∣time, they willingly rise out of their Tombs to steal after their death; they also say that their ancient Pyracies did occasion the name of Corsaires to Pyrates and Sea-Robbers. In this Island is found the Stone Catochite, which sticks to Peoples hands like glue, when they touch it.
The City of Bastia is the abode of the Gover∣nour, whom the Genoeses call Vice-Roy. The Ancients reckoned in this Island above thirty good Cities, which have been for the most part ruined. Boniface is now the most commodious Haven with a Fortress, estee∣med one of the best of Europe, by reason of its advantageous Situation in the Peninsula. The Isle of Candia. CAndia formerly Crete, is one of the greatest Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, with the Title of Kingdom, at the entrance of the Ar∣chipelago, in the sight of Europe, of Asia and Africa: Upon the consideration of so advan∣tageous a Situation, Aristotle was perswaded that it might be made the Seat of the universal Empire. It is above two hundred Miles in length, about forty five or fifty in breadth: It has had full a hundred Cities, tho' it has now more than four, which be any thing eminent. It was renowned in antiquity for its excellent Archers, for the Ship called the Bull, which served to carry away the Beautiful Europa, for the Amours of Pasiphae, for those of Ariadne, for the Cruelty of the Minotaur, for the Birth, Abode and Funeral of Jupiter, for the Judge∣ments of Minos, for the Labyrinth, whereof the invention is attributed to Daedalus. Its anci∣ent Inhabitants said, that most of the Gods were born in their Countrey: But little Cre∣dit is to be giv'n to people who have always pas∣sed for great Lyars. Except the Sfaciotes, who pass
for Bravos, the Candiots have the reputation of flying from Toyl, of trustiing in the goodness of their Soyl, which furnishes them with Malm∣sies, Wine, several good Fruits and other Commodities. Mount Ida is its highest Moun∣tain, from its peak or top both Seas may easily be seen. Several Plains and Valleys are fertile in Candy; but few are watred otherwise than with Torrents. The Cretes were so succesful in Navigation, that they rendred themselves Masters of the Seas under Minos one of their Kings. This Prince made Laws for them, and that they might be the better established, feign∣ed he had concerted them, during the space of nine years, with Jupiter. Afterwards this Island was governed by a Republick, and to∣wards the time of Pompey the Great was sub∣dued by the Romans. The Emperours of Con∣stantinople were also Masters of it; after which it was given to Boniface, Prince of Monferrat, who sold it to the Venetians in the year 1194. The Turks seeing this Island in the midst of their Dominions, thought it was for their con∣veniency to dislodge the Venetians from thence; which they accordingly did in the year 1669. after a War of four and twenty years. This Island is divided into four Territories, which bear the Names of so many principal Cities. Candia which is Capital thereof, and the Metropolitan, Canea, Rettimo and Sittia. The principal Fortresses of the Island are upon the Coast, either in Islands or Peninsula's, the Grabuses, Suda and Spinalonga which remai∣ned to the Venetians by the last peace between the Republick and the Port.
The City of Candia is in the Northern part of the Island, in an advantageous Situation, as strong by Art as by Nature, the Venetians did all that was humanly possible, before they yielded it to the Infidels. The Christian Princes for the most part sent Succours thither, by which means it sustained the efforts of a Siege the most memorable that ever was recorded in any History.
An Index Alphabetical of the several Coun∣tries Described in this Ʋniversal Geogra∣phy. ABissinia, page 90 Aegypt, page 73 Aethiopia, page 90 Africa, page 59 America, page 10 Antartick lands, page 7 Arabia, page 137 Arobic Region, page 2 Asia, page 110 Barbary, page 66 Biledulgerid, page 81 Brasile, page 54 Cafreria, page 96 Canada, page 19 Candia, page 426 Gastella Aurea, page 40 Chili, page 49 China, page 155 Congo, page 94 Denmark, page 299 England, page 410 Europe, page 196 Flanders, page 256 Florida, page 24 France, page 220 Franche-County, page 267 Georgia, page 132 Germany, page 283 Guyana, page 43 Guiney, page 89 Holland, page 246 Hungary, page 395 India, page 162 India intra Gangem, page 171 India extra Gangem, page 177 Ireland, page 420 Iseland, page 4 Isles Antilles, page 32 Isles British, page 409 Isles Canaries, page 101 Isles du Cap-Verd, page 103 Isles of Crylon, page 184 Isles of Japan, page 189 Island of Madagascax, page 104 Isles Maldive, page 182 Island of Maltha, page 105 Isles Moluccoe, page 193 Isles Philippine page 191 Isles of Sunda, page 186 Isles Tercera, page 101 Italy, page 275 Lorrain, page 263 Low-Countries, page 242 Magellanica, page 59 Mexico, page 28 Mexico nova, page 27 Mogul's Empire, page 163 Mono-motapa, page 96
Muscovy, page 369 Nigritia, page 94 Nova Hispania, page 28 Nubia, page 88 Peru, page 45 Persia, page 143 Plata, page 53 Poland, page 361 Portugal, page 237 Provinces Catholic, page 256 Provinces United, page 247 Ragusa Common-wealth, page 408 Savoy, page 274 Scotland, page 416 Sicily, page 422 Spain, page 223 Sueden, page 353 Suisser-land, page 269 Tartary, page 152 Tartaria Minor, page 403 Transilvania, &c. page 400 Tucuman, page 52 Turkish Empire, page 378 Turkei in Asia, page 117 Turkei in Europe, page 385 Virginia, page 22 Zaara, page 83 Zanguebar, page 99 FINIS.
Advertisement. THere is lately published a Book, en∣tituled the Honourable State of Ma∣trimony made comfortable, or an Antidote against Discord betwixt Man and Wife, &c. Wherein is shew'd, 1. From whence the Discord betwixt Man and Wife do arise. 2. The great Evil of these Discords nota∣bly discovered. 3. Whether the Fault be principally in the Man or the Wife, curi∣ously enquired into. 4. The never failing Remedies for the cure of these unkind Breaches, faithfully discovered. 5. The Pretences, and Plea's, and Excuses they have for these Discords, fully confuted and answered. 6. The Superiority of the Hus∣band asserted and proved, and the Subje∣ction of the Wife clearly demonstrated. 7. How Men and their Wives should carry it towards their Children and Servants: to∣gether with the Stepmothers Duty fully de∣clared. Sold by Francis Pearse at the Blew An∣chor, at the West-end of St. Pauls. 1685.
