E173 45789277 172590
EDINBURGHS JOY FOR HIS MAJESTIES Coronation in ENGLAND. ROom there, Give way a little to Edinen∣sis, What? Why? is not whiffling Caledonius gone; certainly he hath been only Babbon-struck, or Priest-stab'd, I need not fear he will peep out again; his muzzel'd mouth and hapshakled pen dar neither mute nor give a dash against so potent an &c. else surely the Wag had been discovering the Affairs of our Scots World, (for further I believe he durst not) what his Parliament which he magnified so much (and yet deservedly) had been acting this three weeks bygone; and in∣deed
it could have been well wished that that unparalelled act which cut off root and branch, every thing which either might kindle or give life to Rebellion had been timeously made known, that all Fanaticks whatsoever might know what they have to trust to from us, and so bid farewell, (or father fare-ill) to all the trash and trumpery hanging on and annexed to both the Co∣venants. But what then? must Caledonia suffer, because of Caledonius overshooting himself, let him go search, and bestow his Stock to purchase Forraigne Intelligence from Ʋtopia if he will, yet we ought to know our selves; That Smatterer in Latine would have called this () especially what Edina the Me∣tropolis is doing to expresse her Joy in behalf of her Dread So∣veraignes glorious Coronation in England; April 23. 1661. On which day set apart for Thanksgiving, the Lord High Com∣missioner accompanied with the Officers of State, and His MA∣JESTIES Life-guard in rich Furniture and sumptuous Ap∣parell, under the Command of Mr. Murray Brother to the Earl of Athole, went from the Palace of Holy rude-house to the Parlia∣ment House, where they heard Sermon Preached by that reverend Divine D. James Sharpe, quite of another strain then that at Scoone, Anno 1651. Heer our late proceedings were repented, and not justified: (but lest it befall me as it did to Caledonius) I pray in that Sermon view pag. 10. A King abusing his Power, &c. pag. 17. and pag. 4. there are many sins, &c. (:) to the great honour of the Preacher, and satisfaction of the Auditory. It was no lesse cheerfully and cordially done through the other Con∣gregations of the City, and blessed be God for it among other glorious recoveries, Priest and People are restored to their wits. Sermon ended, the Lord Commissioner returned to the Royal Palace attended by great numbers of Nobility, Knights and Gen∣try, and all Feasted at one time, and at several Tables in a most splendid and magnificent manner: And that nothing might be wanting to compleat the Solemnity, the Lord Commissioners Lady with her Daughters at the same time in another Room en∣tertained
many Ladies of quality with all the rarities and deli∣cacies imaginable, and with such admirable Consorts of Musick as hardly could been expected from a Nation so depressed: To∣wards the middle of Dinner, His MAJESTIES Health be∣gun by the Lord Commissioner, a signe given from the Tarras, the Canons of the Castle begun to thunder, which was answered from the Cittadell of Leith with the like roaring; and the great pyramide of Coals and Tar-Barrels which was in the out Court of the Palace was likewise given fire to, which for its greatnesse was extraordinary, and if it had been on the top of a hill in the night time, for two miles about it would showen light to have sung Te Deums in the smallest Print, and put into a sweat any that had been frozen with the greatest fit of a cold, and at the same distance too. After Dinner, the young Lords and Ladies came out and Danced all sort of Comtrey Dances and Reels, and none busier then the young Lord Cleremont Son to the Lord Com∣missioner who was so ravished with joy, that if he had not been restrained he had thrown Rings, Chains, Jewels and all that was precious about him into the Fire. Now let us take a little notice of the great signs of Joy mani∣fested by our Ancient and good Town of Edinburgh: After the Lord provest Sir Robert Murray, with the Bailies, Common Coun∣sel and other Magistrates had turned up their Spiritual Thanks to Heaven for so blessed an occasion, then they went altogether to a place appointed for the purpose, and in a most magnificent manner, regalled themselves with those humane lawfull Refresh∣ments, which is allowable for the Grandour of so Eminent a Blessing: By that time their Feast was finished, the Bonefire Bells allarmed them to minde the carrying on the Work of the Night: The Lord Provest, with the Magistrates, each of them with a white Batton in their hands, and the rest of the Counsel, appeared at the Crosse, which was disposed in a most hospitable piece of Pagiantry, viz. A splendid representation of a Vine∣yard, with all the Cognizances of Bachus, and under a large Wine∣tree of swelling and Ruddy Clusters, did that same god of Fro∣licks, bestride a Hogs-head of the most gracious Claret: he was
accompanied with his Uncle Silenus, and some half a score of most lovely and wanton Bachides: this same Grave and Spungy Moderator, by Proclamation, gave most ample permission to all mankind, for the space of twelve hours by the clock, to be as madd with mirth as their imaginations could fancy: The Indul∣gence was no sooner pronounced, but Streams of Claret gushed from the Conduits: Trumpets, Fluts, and all sort of Carrousing Instruments which might skrue up the passions, did forthwith sound a Charge: the breaking of Glasses, and tumbling of Gob∣lets amongst the Commonality, made a greater noise then the clashing of Zrexes Armies Armour did at a narrow Passe, when they were upon a Rout. But indeed, the Magistrates with a most becoming gravity, and extraordinary chearfulnesse, did round the Healths of His MAJESTIE, and Royal Relations. By this time all the private Bonefires was at their height: then as the Lord Provest had formerly appointed, there was five hun∣dred Musketiers of the Train-bands, commanded by John Fuller∣toun Captain of the first Regiment and his respective Officers that were not upon Duty, viz. Captain John Dunbar, Captain Ro∣bert Baird, Captain Thomas Wilson, Captain William Hamiltoun, Captain Thomas Crawford, Captain Thomas Brand, Captain John Johnstoun, all these Worthy Persons being of approven Loyalty, Discretion and Courage did in a stragling way, descend so far as to officiat as Serjeants, to keep the crowd from the Lord Provest and Magistrates, as he march'd along to the Palace Royal, the above mentioned Musketiers in gallant order marching before the Magistrates and Common Counsel. In the Rear of whom, there were four hundred Citizens with Partizans, led by Captain John Meen, first captain of the second Regiment, and the severall Captains thereto belonging, viz. Captain James Scot, Captain James Curry, Captain David Boyd, Captain Alexander Pearson, Captain Edward Cleghorn, Captain Robert Gray, Captain George Trumble, all of them of equal qualifications with the others: The Worthy Person who commanded this Squadron of Partizans, viz. Captain John Meen, because there be others of the same name in Town, it is fitting he be distinguished; for this is he who
hath lost three several Stocks in providing His MAJESTIES Forces with Armes, and that he be not mistaken to be one of these who served His MAJESTIE the wrong way, take notice that his first was in providing the Marquesse of Montrosse, which was so considerable, as would have overset any ordinary spirit: The second was with the same successe when Duke Hamiltoun enter∣prised His MAJESTIES relief, in Anno 1648. A third which was greatest of all, was immediately before His MAJE∣STIES going to Worster, where he had a Ship loadened with Ammunition for the use of the Country made Prize by the Usur∣pers: Yet notwithstanding all these losses and mischiefs which suc∣ceeded one another, God Almighty is pleased to prosper his un∣dertakings, and particularly in the diligent discharge of his trust, when he was Thesaurer to Heriots Hospital, where he was most in∣strumental in procuring the removal of all these obstructions, which did vitiate the Will of the Foundator, so that now it may be properly tearmed an Hospital. But that which hath rendered him most famous, was his kindnesse to His MAJESTIES prisoners; for besides▪ relieving many Gentlemens sons from the Barbadoes, he never scrupled to engage person and fortune for any that were by the Usurpers secured upon jealousies, and all these courtesies he purchased without either being shaken, or dis∣sembling his Royal Principles. Thus much we have made known of this honest Subject and Noble Good-fellow, that others here∣after may be encouraged to do handsome actions, so at lest they can never want the merit of fame and admiration. But let us return to the Lord Provest, who with this Guard of Musketiers and Partizans, came to the Lord Commisstoners Bonefire, where he was entertained by many Noblemen and Ladies, and at the rounding of the Royal Health, our Fire-men acquit themselves with admirable Vollies of Shot: In fine, there could be nothing more expressed of an Universal and Superlative Joy. And as the Lord Provest returned to the Town, he was regalled at the Bonefires of several persons of quality, and for a time, gra∣vity was laid aside to give place to all sort of Frisking and Gam∣boling, and nothing was more out of fashion and ridiculous, then
to see any one man in the space of three minuts, not to be hang∣ing two of them in the Aire with Capriols. But amongst all our Bontadoes and Caprices, that of the immortal Jenet Geddis, Princesse-of the Trone Adventurers, was most pleasant, for she was not only content to assemble all her Creels, Basquets, Creepees, Fums, and the other Ingredients that composed the Shope of her Sallets, Radishes, Turnips, Carrets, Spinnage, Cabbage, with all other sort of Pot Merchandise that belongs to the Garden; but even her Weather Chair of State where she used to dispense Justice to the rest of her Langkale Vassals, were all very orderly burned, she her self countenancing the Action with a high flown Claret and Vermilion Majesty. In all this pleasant madnesse which was strange, there was not any inconveniency at all happened, and even amongst the Canalia, there was not the least disorder. And to conclude the dayes. Ju∣bile, we were advertized of joyful tydings from the North, to wit, the Provincial Synod of the Church of Aberdene, hath made a solemn acknowledgement of all their rebellious Defections, Hy∣pocrisies and Oppressions, by which they either misled the people against His MAJESTIE, or trampled upon their Brethren who refused to commit Idolatry with either of the Dagons, National or League: They have ordained before the beginning of Sermon on the Sundays, that the reading of the Holy Scriptures, and Prayers, be used as formerly before the Rebellion, that Glory to the Father shall be sung at the ends of Psalms, that the Lords Prayer be likewise said by the Ministers, either at their first or se∣cond Prayer: that Parents who presents their Children to be Christened repeat the Creed, and be oblieged to educate their Children in the Christian Faith, and no more mention to be made of the Articles of the Covenant: They have in Imitation of our State, cancelled all these Kirk Acts that might relapse us in Re∣bellion. And Petitioners are hourly expected to supplicate the Parliament, to have the Government of the Church restored. It appeareth, these Worthy Divines of the North will as their Laicks been, hath frequent examples of Loyalty, so they will be now of Repentance, and the proverb of Raro vidi Clericum
paenitentem, we hope shall now perish, if the rest of the Brethren be so happy as to imitate them. And it is not much to be doubted, for as yet we hear of few Synods but the greatest part are blushing at their bypast actions, par∣ticularly that of Stirling, who by the discretion of Master Mungo Murray that sit with them, have likewise exspunged all these Acts that grated upon Loyalty and Obedience. The truth is, most of them begins now to see that they have been but the steps of Great-mens ambition to tread upon, and the weakest of them doth likewise know when such aspiring Spirits gains the top of the wall, that they then throw away the Ladder that mounted them, and that now their greatest security with the tranquillity of the Kingdom will be, not to dispute His MAJESTIES Commands, which who ever refuseth, let him be Anathema Ma∣rinatha. Advertisements. THe Horse Race of Lanerk Institute by King William above 600 years since, but obstructed these 23. years by the iniquity of the Times, is now restored by Sir John Wilkie of Fouldon, as being loath so Antient a foundation should perish, and for that effect he hath given gratis a piece of Plate of the accustomed value, with a silver Bell and Sadle to the second and third Horse; It is to be run the third Tuesday of May. The Race of Haddington is to be run on the 22. of May next, the Prize is a most magnificent Cup; this same Antient Town fa∣mous for its Hospitality, has many times sadly smarted by the Armies of Enemies, yet this glorious Revolution hath salved up all their miseries as very well was made appear by the noble En∣tertainment given to the Lord Commissioner at the Lord Provest William Seaton his Lodging, when his Grace made his entry to this Kingdom.
It was no sooner noised that we was to be Mercurius for the Good Town, but we was alarm'd with innumerable Advertise∣ments, as being oblieged to serve every one according to his Sta∣tionall handling; amongst the rest, one appeared for Caledonius, promising a munificent recompence to purchase the Copy of a Latine Ballad made of him; he could not tell whether it was in laudem or vituperium, Alas poor Caledon thy Enemies though few, thinks thy back at the wall, and so would smite thee, what may we expect then, a short time of it, for flattery doth not become us, and we dar not tell Truth as thou didst. Printed in the Year, 1661.
