H3450 e128_21 R788 99873206 156246
THE HUMBLE PETITION OF ALL THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN OF Old Braintford, TO The Honourable the Commons assembled in Parliament, for some speedy course for reliefe of such great damage and losse as they received by his Majesties Forces of the twelfth and thirteenth of this present November. Together with an Order for the Ministers of Middlesex, and partly of London, to reade in their Parish Churches on the next Fast day the Re∣lation of the sufferings of the Inhabitants of old Braintford lately printed for Ed. Husbands and Jo. Frank, and to excite the people to a compassionate consideration of them. Ordered, That this Petition and Order be forth∣with printed and published. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands and John Frank, November 27. 1642.
TO The Honourable Assembly of the COMMONS House of PARLIAMENT, The humble Petition of all and every the Inhabitants of the Towne of old Braintford, in the County of Middlesex Sheweth, THat it is too manifest to the world, how that your Petitio∣ners on the twelve and thirteen daies of this present moneth were plundered and bereaved of their severall and particular personall estates; as money, plate, houshold-stuffe of all sorts, and other necessaries, of what condition soe∣ver, by his Majesties Forces, then happening a∣mongst them: the griefe whereof it more piercing unto them, then your Petitioners are able to ex∣presse. The consideration of whose losse amounting to neere foure thousand pounds, as by particulars may appeare, together with the miserable and sad
condition they are brought unto, your Petitioners humbly leave to the consideration and wisdome of this honourable Assembly, Humbly craving some speedy course may be thought of, and taken, for the reliefe of your Petitioners in this their great distresse, by such waies and meanes as in your great and grave wisdomes shall be thought meet. And they shall ever pray, &c.
Die Sabbathi 26. Novemb. 1642. IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parlia∣ment, That the Mi∣nisters of Middle∣sex, and of those Parishes that are partly Middlesex, and partly of London, doe the next Fast day reade in their severall Parish Churches the Relation of the sufferings of the Inhabitants of old Braintford on the twelfth and thirteenth of this moneth by his Majesties Forces, and that they doe excite the people to a compassionate consideration of
them, and that whatsoever shall be collected upon the next Fast day within the Parishes afore∣said, may be imployed for the re∣liefe of the Inhabitants of old Braintford aforesaid, and of such of new Braintford as have been plundered and ruined by the Forces aforesaid. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Ordered by the Commons in Parli∣ament, that this Pe∣tition and Order be forthwith printed & published.
