H3415 669.f.12[39] 99869568 162832
The humble Desires of the Loyall hearted, wel-affected FREE-MEN of the City of London in their se∣verall Parishes, unto their severall Common-Councell-men by them intrusted for the Peace and welfare of the City. Gentlemen, WE have Elected you as Members of the Common Councell of this City for our severall precincts, to preserve our Liberties, not inthrall them; to advance the Publique, not your private Interests: and therefore may justly challenge from you an Account what (as our Proxies) you have done to these Ends. We find the whole Kingdome groaning under the burden of an oppressing Army, presenting their grievances to the Par∣liament, whilst our selves (as if the Interest of this City were dis-joyned from the publique Concernment) is ready to be in∣gaged against them; or (at least) to stand Neutrall: and after so late a threatning of Fire and Plunder, to satisfie our selves with a shadow of security, by a pretended putting the Militia in the hands of the City, which is indeed, into such hands as we, the Commoners of the City, cannot confide in: The Commander in chief being a Member of that Army, which so lately threatned us. And many others so particularly interessed, that we have much reason to doubt, they intend their owne, rather then the publique profit and Security. We therefore require you, in the Names of us, the Free-men of this City, by whom you are intrusted; forthwith to present to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and rest of the Common Councell, these our desires, and to endeavour to effect them: 1. That they make a speedy humble addresse by Petition to the two Honourable Houses of Parliament, that all further effusion of bloud, and Engagement in a New war be prevented, by a timely concession to the cries and humble desires of the whole King∣dome for Peace. 2. That His Majesty may speedily be brought to Westminster with Honour, Freedome, and Safety, to Treat Personally with His two Houses for a safe, wel-grounded Peace, and setlement of Religion, according to His Majesties presentation made by the Hollands Ambassadours to both Houses, 24 February. 1644. which we conceive to be agreeable to our Covenant, viz. That a Nationall Synod shall be Called, and all other Christian Churches admitted to send their Deputies; and what in our Religion shall be found disconsonant to the Word of God in part, or whole, to be reformed according to the Word of God, and best Reformed Churches. 3. That the Army under the Lord Fairfax may be forthwith Dis-banded, their Arrears Audited, all just satisfaction given, and a generall Act of Oblivion be sought from HIS MAJESTY. 4. That the Country may be eased of Taxes, Assesments, and Free-quarter. 5. That the Excise and Assesments of this City be either eased, or for the present, imployed onely for the security of the City. 6. That the Militia of this City be put into such hands as this City shall confide in for their security. 7. That the Colonels and Captains of the Trained Bands, and Auxiliaries, be Chosen by the Free-men of the City that are to serve under them. 8. That none of the Trained Bands or Auxiliaries, of this City, be forced, or suffered to march out of this City, to engage in any New war, but to remain within the City for the defence of it. 9. That no more Ingagements may be brought upon us, either to Combinations, Warre, or other Supplies thereon depending, o∣thers then according to the Laws and Statutes of the Land, and antient Customes of this City; and that such transactions as have been contrary to the same in these late times of distractions may be Cancelled out of the Register, and an Act passed, That they shall never more serve for a Principle to posterity. 10. That there may be no more Listing of our Children and Servants: for as we detest that late hypocriticall fiction of their private Listing, so we utterly dislike the publick Listing of them, in regard we conceive thereby our Rights, and present subsistance in∣teressed, and the peace and Safety both of City and County endangered. Of these our Desires, we expect a speedy Account from you, or otherwise shall declare, That you have broke the trust reposed in you by us. And therefore we may, and ought to revoke our Election, and protest against whatsoever you shall doe or Act by vertue thereof, and conceive the same contrary to our peace and safety, who do find our selves bound by Christian duty to provide for our Families by the peaceable following of our severall vocations, which by lamentable experience we have found wofully obstructed by the late Wars, which a Rebellious generation do now again indeavour to foment amongst us; from whose wicked practises, we hope under God, by your wis∣dome and provident indeavours to be preserved. All honest Free-men, into whose hands this Paper shall come, are required to underwrite and send it forwards to their Common-Councell-men, with effect. June 3d 1648 FINIS.
