H3476 e398_9 R201686 99862186 114337
The Humble PETITION OF Many Thousands of yong Men, and Apprentices of the City of LONDON, TO The High and Honorable, The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in the Supreme COURT of PARLIAMENT Assembled. Presented the 13 of JULY, 1647. Die Martis, 13 Julii, 1647. A Petition, stiled The humble Petition of many yong Men and Apprentices of the City of London, was this day read; and it is Ordered, That Sir John Danvers, Alder∣man Atkin, and Colonel Ven do acquaint the Petitioners, That the House is at this time upon the consideration of setlng the Peace and great Affairs of the Kingdom; That they will consider of it in convenient time. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for William Larnar, at the Sign of the Black-Moor in Bishopsgate-street, IULY 14. 1647.
To the High and Honorable, The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in the supreme Court of Parliament assembled: The Petition of divers yong Men and Apprentices of the City of London, Humbly sheweth, THat whereas upon the first of March last past your Petitioners presented (to this Ho∣norable House) an humble Petition, subscri∣bed with many thousand Hands, containing many things of publique concernment, both in rela∣tion to the Kingdom in general, and your Petitioners in particular, as may appear by the copy of the same hereunto annexed; at the reading of which, your Honors were pleased to promise the taking the same into serious consideration in convenient time: In hopes of which, your Petitioners have with all humi∣lity and modesty, according to our duty, waited ever since for the accomplishment of the same, forbearing all clamorous and tumultuous conventions, whereby your Honors might in the least have been disturbed in the quiet and peaceable prosecution of your weighty affairs. And we cannot but with all thankfulness ac∣knowledge what you have already acted toward the satisfaction of our just Desires in part; but finding, to the great grief of our hearts, that in matter of greatest concernment, in stead of hoped redress, our heavie Grievances are increased, by the late Ejection
of Men of known Fidelity out of their several Office in the City Regiments of Trained-Bands and Auxi∣liaries, to the great grief of most honest men, who have been eye-witnesses of their faithfulness and for∣wardness in the discharge of their several Trusts, and without any crime laid against them, so much as to give a pretended ground of this their unjust expulse. Likewise in stead of composure of Differences, we finde, that incouragement is given to men of turbu∣lent and seditious Spirits, to stir up Divisions, by ren∣dring those that concur not with them in every un∣ctilio (in point of Judgement) as men unworthy to in∣joy their birthright-Priviledges, of subsistence in the Kingdom, notwithstanding they have given never so eminent Testimony of their sincere affection to the common good; whereby these too officious Incendi∣aries seem more to drive at their particular Designs, then the conservation of Peace and Unity in the com∣monwealth: And hereby, together with their late in∣dustriousnes, in striving to exasperate the City against the Army, have endeavored what in them was, to embroil the Kingdom in a second War, most dread∣ful to all well minded people to think of: Neither is it the least of our grief, to remember the late abuse of the Authority of this House, by the too great influ∣ence of some Arbitrary Spirits, in the late abusing and sleighting Petitioners, contrary to their former Decla∣ration touching the Liberty of the Subject, the very foundation of which was by this means most misera∣bly shaken: Nor can we be unsensible of the misery some free-born Subjects yet undergoes, by being de∣tained in prison from time to time, without being
brought to a legal Tryal, notwithstanding their seve∣ral Appeals to this Honorable Court. Upon these and other pressing considerations, we assume the bold∣ness, once more to present these our insuing Requests to this Honorable House: First, That you will be pleased, with all convenient speed, according to your promise, to take the several Heads of our former Petition into serious consideration. Secondly, That your Authority so apparently abused, contrary to Right and Equity, by those that have of late ef∣fected the Ejection of Men of known fidelity and account out of places of so important Trust, may be forthwith re∣deemed out of their hands; and that those that have been so unreasonably expulsed, may be again restored to their places till sufficient ground be made apparent to the contrary. Thirdly, VVe further pray, That you will be pleased to Declare against all maner of invectives of the Clergie or others, tending to the aggravation of Differences a∣mongst peaceable Spirits. Fourthly, And that those Prisoners who have appealed to this Honorable Court for Justice, may be forthwith put into a way of impartial Tryal. And lastly, That the sum of all your Endeavors may tend to the sweet composure of Differences on all sides, so fr as it may be congruent to the Rules of Piety and Equity. And your Petitioners shall ever pray, &c. Die Martis, 13 Julii, 1647. A Petition, stiled The humble Petition of many yong Men and Apprentices of the City of London, was this Day read; and it is Ordered, That Sir John Danvers, Alderman Atkin, and Colonel Ven do acquaint the Petitioners, That the House is at this time upon the consideration of set∣ling the peace and great affairs of the Kingdom; That they will consider of it in convenient time. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Which the above-named Members did accordingly, and withal declared, That the House did with Thankfulness take notice of the civil and mo∣dest behavior of the Petitiones, in the delivery of their said Petition.
To the High and Honorable, The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in the Supreme Court of Parliament assembled: The Petition of divers yong Men and Apprentices of the City of London, Humbly sheweth, THat out of the grounded confidence we have of the readiness of this Honorable House, to hear and re∣pair the grievances of all those for whose welfare you were chosen and betrusted to take care and provide; and being encouraged unto the same, by several goodA Declarat. May 19 1642. Remonstrance May 20. 1642. Ordi∣nances and Declarations of your own to that purpose: We whose names are hereunto annexed, although the meanest members of this great Commonwealth; yet having by birth a right of subsistance here, conceived our selves (in our proportion) to have as real an interest in the Kingdoms enjoy∣ments, as those who in respect of place or other accidents are above us: As also many of us, having under the direction of your Honors grave Councel and Guidance, freely adven∣tured our lives, for the preservation of our Native Rights, and the just Priviledges of our dear Countrey, against the publique violaters of the same: Upon these and other serious grounds, we are bold at this time to make our humble addresses to this Honorable and supreme Court of Judicature (the only refuge un∣der God we have to fly to) and in the first place, we cannot but with all thankfulness take notice of the unwearied pains, toge∣ther with many great and almost intolerable difficulties by you undergone, in the faithful discharge of your trust, in bringing about the establishment of a wel-grounded peace; The perfe∣ction of which (in relation to the common enemy) seems now by the blessing of God to be brought near to a wished peri∣od: Yet the consummation of this work being (as it were) the Crown of all your labors, we humbly conceive it may deservedly challenge from you a more then ordinary respect, which we doubt not but that your grave wisdoms are very sensible of: yet (noble Senators) let it seem no presumption, if we your poor Petitioners in all humility make known the grounds of some fears and jealousies to us apparent in this
particular; And those are (amongst other great grievances) chiefly derived from the present sense we have of the too much prevalency of that party who have in the late Wars decla∣red themselves disaffected to the peace and well-fare of the Kingdom; who now seem to be in hopes of obtaining that by policy, which they have not been able to do by force; Cun∣ningly contriving to aggravate and encrease differences be∣tween the well-affected party, and striving to bring an Odium upon all good men, under the distinctions of several tearms of obloquie and disgrace, by such subtle endeavors, laboring to avert the edge of Justice from themselves (who come de∣servedly under the stroke of it, and to turn it upon those who are most innocent; Strongly endeavoring (and have already effected it in part) to justle all honest, faithful, well-affected men out of places of trust, office and authority, and to put in New∣ters, Ambodexters, or persons apparently disaffected: By all these means, together with the advantage of the Kingdoms present unsettledness; they seem to be in a more then probable expectation of getting the reins once more into their own hands, to the evident endangering of the Common-wealths speedy ruine, and to the great grief of your poor Petitioners, and all others who cordially desire the peace and safety of this distracted Kingdom. And further we are bold to make known (as more particularly relating to the condition of your Petiti∣oners) That whereas we at our being made free of the City are enjoyn'd by oath, to maintain the Liberties and Priviledges of the same City; which notwithstanding we are in a great measure disabled to do, by the intrusion of divers illegal and undue Customs, andA Clause of 11 Hen. 6. Monopolies (partly about the election and removal of our Magistrates) crept into the diminution of the ancient liberties of this famous City, whose just immu∣nities we are confident your Honors have been and are very ten∣der of. Wherefore your Petitioners humbly pray, that this Honorable House, taking into consideration the Premises, would be pleased by your mature Prudence and Care, to endeavor (as much as possibly you can) to take away all occasions of breaches be∣tween the well-affected party. And, that such as have in these
late times of trouble; (by adventuring their lives or othewise approved themselves faithful to their Countreys common good may without respect to differences, no way prejudicial to the Common-wealth, impartially enjoy their Birthright-Privi∣ledges, and be equally capable with others of the freedom to officiate in places of trust, which they are or shall be chosen un∣to. And on the contrary, that all those who have dis-fran themselves by Trayterously adhering to the enemy, may be dis∣abled from bearing office, or voting in the election of officers in the Common-wealth. And we further crave, (with sub∣sion to your Honors grave Approvements) that in regard of the Kingdoms present unsetledness, it may not be left destitute of a trusly and sufficient guard to secure it from intestine By and forraign Invasion. And as for your Petitioners more parti∣cular grievances, as they are members of this City; we humbly pray, that you would be pleased by your Authority so to provide that we (as we are or shall be capable of it) may be enabled to enjoy the benefit of all ancient Charters and Grants, made  confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, for the enlargeme  our Freedoms and Priviledges;Especially the 4 Charter of King John, of Edw. 2. confirmed by Edw. 3. and his Councel in Parliament. and that whatsoever hath b illegally intruded, may be taken away and made void. And  (as some have already desired, we likewise pray, that (if so  a thing may be worthy the intention of this grave and Hono∣rable Assembly) you would be pleased to appoint some time of lawful Recreations for severants, as your wisdom (shall think fit. And your Petitioners, as they have many of them already (according to their duty) freely adventured their lives, and whatsoever was dear to them for the common safety of their Country; so they still profess their readiness, to give their best assistance to the suppressing all Arbitrray and Tyranical power; and to the upholding the Fundamental Rights and Liberties of Free-born English men, and the just Priviledges of this Hono∣rable House, against all that shall set themselves in opposition of the same. And be ever bound to pray, &c Whatsoever is contained in the Petition, the Subscribers will be ready to make good by particular instances, when they shall be lawfully called  the same. FINIS.
