H821 E1013_7 99862816 168757
THE ROTA: OR, A MODEL OF A FREE-STATE, Or equall COMMON-WEALTH: Once proposed and debated in brief, and to be again more at large proposed to, and debated by a free and open Society of ingenious Gentlemen. Ite fortes, ite foelices. LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter, near the Middle-Temple Gate in Fleet-street, 1660.
At the ROTA. December 20. 1659. REsolved, That the Proposer be desired, and is hereby desired to bring in a Modell of a Free State, or Equall Common-Wealth, at large, to be farther debated by this Society, and that in Order thereunto it be first Printed. Resolved, That the Modell being Proposed in Print, shall be first Read, and then Debated by Clau∣ses. Resolved, That a Clause being Read over night, the Debate thereupon begin not at the soonest till the next evening. Resolved, That such as will Debate, be desired to bring in their Quaeres upon, or Objections against the Clause in Debate, if they think fit, in writing.
Resolved, That Debate being sufficiently had up∣on a Clause, the Question be put by the Ballatting-Box, not any way to determine of, or meddle with the Govern∣ment of these Nations, but to discover the Judgement of this Society, upon the Forme of Popular Govern∣ment, in abstract, or secundum artem▪
THE PRINCIPLES OF GOVERNMENT: ALL Government is Founded upon over-bal∣lance, in Propriety. If one Man hold the over-ballance unto the whole People in Propriety, his Propriety causeth abso∣lute Monarchy. If the Few hold the over-ballance unto the whole People in Propriety, their Propriety causeth Aristo∣cracie, or mixed Monarchy. If the whole People be neither over-ballanced by the Propriety of one, nor of a few, the Propriety of the People, or of the Many, causeth Democracie, or Popular Government. The Government of one against the Ballance, is Ty∣ranny. The Government of the few against the Ballance, is Oligarchie. The Government of the many, (or Attempt of the People to Govern) against the Ballance, is Rebellion, or Anarchy.
Where the Ballance of Propriety is equall, it cau∣seth a state of Warr. To hold, That Government may be founded upon Community, is to hold, That there may be a black Swan, or a Castle in the ayr; or, That what thing so∣ever is as imaginable, as what hath been in practise, must be as practicable, as what hath been in practise. If the over-ballance of Propriety be in one Man, it Necessitateth the Forme of the Government to be like that of Turkey. It the over-ballance of Propriety be in the Few, it Necessitateth the Forme of the Government to be like that of King, Lords, and Commons. If the People be not over-ballanced by one, or a few, they are not capable of any other Forme of Govern∣ment, then that of a Senate, and a Popular Assembly. For example, as followeth:
For the FORM or MODEL In Brief of a FREE-STATE, or equall COMMON-WEALTH; It hath been proposed in this manner. 1. LEt the whole Territory of Oceana, be divided as equally as may be into fifty Parts or Shires. 2. Let the whole Inhabitants (except wo∣men, children, and servants) be divided according unto their age into Elders and Youth; and according unto their estates into Horse and Foot. 3. Let all such as are eighteen yeares of age, or up∣wards to thirty, be accounted youth; and all such as are thirty or upwards, be accounted Elders. 4. Let all such as have one hundred pounds a year, or upwards, in Lands, Goods, or Monies, be account∣ed of the Horse; and all such as have under, be ac∣counted of the Foot of the Common-wealth. 5. Let every Parish in a Shire elect annually the fifth Elder of the same to be for that year a Deputy of that Parish; if a Parish be too small, let it be laid as to this purpose, unto the next; and in this respect, let every part of the Territory appertain to some Parish. 6. Where there is but one Elder of the Horse in a Parish, let him be annually eligible, without interval: where there are more Elders of the Horse, let no De∣puty of the Parish be re-eligible, but after the intervall of one year. 7. Where there be four Elders of the Horse, or more, in one and the same Parish, let not under two,
nor above halfe of them▪ be elected, at one and the same Election, or time. 8. Let the Deputies thus elected at the Parishes, as∣semble annually at the Capitall of their Shire, and let them then, and there elect out of their own num∣ber, two Elders of the Horse to be Knights or Sena∣tors, three Elders of the Horse, and foure Elders of the Foot, to be of the Assembly of the people, for the term of three years, injoyning an equall vacation, or interval, before they can be re-elected in either of these capacities. 9. Let there be elected at the same time in each Shire, the first year onely, two other Knights, and se∣ven other Deputies for the term of one year, and two other Knights, with seven other Deputies for the term of two years, which in all constituteth the Senate of three hundred Knights, and the Popular Assembly of one thousand and fifty Deputies, each being upon a triennial Rotation, or annual change in one third part. 10. Let the Senate have the whole Authority or right of debating and proposing unto the people; let the Popular Assembly have the whole power of result; and let what shall be proposed by the Senate, and re∣solved by the Popular Assembly, be the Law of Oceana. The Conclusion. TWo Assemblies thus constituted, must necessarily amount unto the understanding and the will, un∣to the wisdome and the interest of the whole Nation, and a Common-wealth; where the wisdom of the Na∣tion proposeth, and the interest of the people re∣solveth; can never faile in whatever shall be farther necessary, for the right constituting of it self.
The MODEL at large of a FREE-STATE, Or equall COMMON-WEALTH. Proposed in four parts: First, the Civill, Secondly, the Religious, Thirdly, the Military, Fourthly, the Provincial Part. PART 1. For the Civill Part, it is proposed, 1. THat the whole native or proper terri∣tory of Oceana (respect had unto the the Tax-role, unto the number of people, and to the extent of territory,) be cast with as much exactnesse as can be convenient, into fifty Precincts, Shires, or Tribes.
2. That all Citizens, that is, Free-men, or such a are not servants, be distributed into Horse▪ and Foot▪ That such of them as have one hundred pounds a year in Lands, Goods, or Money, or above that proportion be accounted of the Horse; and all such as have under that proportion, be accounted of the Foot. 3. That all Elders or Free-men being thirty years of age, or upwards, be capable of civill Administra∣tion; and that the Youth, or such Free-men as are be∣tween eighteen years of age, and thirty, be not capa∣ble of civill administration, but of Military onely; in such manner as shall follow in the military part of this Modell. 4. That the Elders resident in each Parish, annu∣ally assemble in the same; as for example, upon Monday next ensuing, the last of December. That they then, and there elect out of their own number every fifth man, or one man out of every five, to be for the term of the year ensuing, a Deputy of that Parish; and that the first and second so elected, be Overseers, or Presidents for the regulating of all Parochiall Congregations, whether of the El∣ders, or of the Youth, during the term for which they were elected. 5. That so many Parishes lying nearest together, whose Deputies shall amount to one hundred, or thereabouts, be cast into one Precinct, called the Hundred; And that in each Precinct called the Hundred, there be a Town, Village, or place appointed, to be the Capitall of the same. 6. That the Parochial Deputies elected through∣out the Hundred assemble annually, for example
upon Munday next ensuing, the last of January, at the Capitall of their Hundred. That they then, and there Elect out of the Horse of their number, one Ju∣stice of the Peace, one Jury▪Man, one Captain, one Ensign, and out of the Foot of their number, one other Jury Man, one High-Constable, &c. 7. That every twenty hundreds, lying neerest, and most conveniently together, be cast into one Tribe, or Shire. That the whole Territory being after this manner cast into Tribes, or Shires, some Town, Vil∣lage, or place, be appointed unto every Tribe, or shire, for the Capitall of the same; And that these three Precincts, that is, the Parish, the Hundred, and the Tribe, or shire, whether the Deputies thenceforth annually chosen in the Parishes, or Hundreds, come to increase, or diminish, remain firm, and inalterable for ever, save only by Act of Parliament. 8. That the Deputies Elected in the severall Parish∣es, together with their Magistrates, and other Officers, both Civill and Military, Elected in their severall Hundreds, Assemble, or Muster annually, For ex∣ample, upon Munday next ensuing the last of Febru∣ary, at the Capitall of their Tribe, or Shire. 9. That the whole body thus Assembled upon the first day of the Assembly, Elect out of the Horse of their number one High Sheriff, one Lieutenant of the Tribe, or Shire, one Custos Rotulorum, one Conductor, and two Censors. That the High Sheriffe be Com∣mander in Cheife, the Lieutenant Commander in the second place, and the Conductor in the third, of this Band, or squadron. That the Custos Rotulorum be Muster-Master, and keep the Rolls. That the Cen∣sors
be Governors of the Ballot. And that the Terme of these Magistracies be Annuall. 10. That the Magistrates of the Tribe, that is to say, the High-Sheriff, Lieutenant, Custos Rotulorum, the Censors, and the Conductor, together with the Magistrates and Officers of the Hundred (that is to say) the twenty Justices of the Peace, the forty Ju∣ry-Men, the twenty High-Constables be one Troope, and one Company apart, called the Prerogative Troop, or Company. That this Troope bring in, and assist the Justices of Assize, hold the quarter Sessions in their severall capacities, and performe their other Functions as formerly. 11. That the Magistrates of the Tribe, or shire, that is to say, the High Sheriff, Lieutenant, Custos Ro∣tulorum, the Censors, and the Conductor, together with the twenty Justices Elected at the Hundreds, be a Court for the Government of the Tribe called the Phylarch; and that this Court Proceed in all matters of Government, as shall from time to time be direct∣ed by Act of Parliament. 12. That the Squadron of the Tribe, upon the se∣cond day of their Assembly, Elect two Knights, and three Burgesses out of the Horse of their number, and four other Burgesses out of the foot of their number. That the Knights have Session in the Senate, for the Terme of three yeares, and that the Burgesses be of the Prerogativ e Tribe, or Representative of the Peo∣ple for the lik e Terme. That if in case of death, or expulsion, a Place become void in the Senate, or Popu∣lar Assembly, the respective shire, or Tribe have time∣ly notice from the Signory, and proceed in the manner
aforesaid unto extraordinary Election of a Deputy, or Senator, for the remaining part of the Terme of the Senator, or Deputy, deceased, or expelled. 13. That for the full and perfect institution, at once, of the Assemblies mentioned, the Squadron of each Tribe▪ or Shire, in the first year of the Common-Wealth, Elect two Knights for the Terme of one year, two o∣ther Knights for the Terme of two yeares, and lastly, two Knights more for the Terme of three yeares; the like for the Burgesses, of the Horse first, and then for those of the Foot. 14. That a Magistrate, or Officer Elected at the Hundred, be thereby barred from being Elected a Ma∣gistrate of the Tribe, or of the first dayes Election: that no former Election whatsoever barr a man of the second dayes Election at the Tribe, or to be chosen a Knight, or Burgesse. That a man being Chosen a Knight or Burgesse, who before was Chosen a Magi∣strate, or Officer of the Hundered, or Tribe, delegate his former Office, or Magistracy in the Hundered, or the Tribe, to any other Deputy, being no Magistrate nor Officer, and being of the same Hundred, and of the same Order, that is, of the Horse, or of the Foot respectively. That the whole, and every part of the foregoing Orders, for Election in the Parishes, the Hun∣dreds, and the Tribes, be holding, and inviolate upon such penalties, in case of failure, as shall hereafter be provided by Act of Parliament against any parish, Hun∣dred, Tribe, or Shire, Deputy, or Person so offending. 15. That the Knights of the Annuall Election in the Tribes▪ take their Places on Munday next ensuing, the last of March, in the Senate. That the like num∣ber
of Knights, whose Session determineth at the same time Rece. That every Knight, or Senator, be paid out of the Publique Revenue quarterly, seventy five pounds, during his Terme of Session, and be obliged to sit in Purple Robes. 16. That annually upon reception of the new Knights, the Senate proceed unto election of new Ma∣gistrates and Counsellors. That for Magistrates they elect one Archon or General, one Orator or Speaker, and two Censors, each for the term of one year, these promiscuously▪ and that they elect one Commissioner of the Great Seale, and one Commissioner of the Treasury; each for the term of three years, out of the new Knights onely. 17. That the Archon or General, and the Orator or Speaker, as Consuls of the Common-wealth, and Pre∣sidents of the Senate, be, during the term of their Magistracy, paid quarterly five hundred pounds: that the Ensignes of these Magistracies, be, a sword borne before the General, and a Mace before the Speaker: that they be obliged to wear Ducal Robes, and that what is said of the Archon or General in this Proposi∣tion, be understood only of the General sitting, and not of the General marching. 18. That the General sitting, in case he be com∣manded to march, receive Field-pay; and that a new General be forthwith elected by the Senate to succeed him in the House, with all the Rights, Ensignes, and Emoluments of the General sitting: and this so often as one or more Generals are marching. 19. That the three Commissioners of the Great seal, and the three Commissioners of the Treasury,
using their Ensignes and habit, and performing their other functions as formerly, be paid quarterly unto each of them three hundred seventy five pounds. 20. That the Censors be each of them Chan∣cellor of one University by vertue of their Electi∣on: That they govern the Ballot, that they be Presi∣dents of the Councel for Religion: That they have under appeale unto the Senate, right to note and re∣move a Senator that is scandalous, That each have a sil∣ver wand for the Ensign of his Magistracy, That each be paid quarterly three hundred seventy five pounds, and be obliged to weare scarlet Robes. 21. That the general sitting, the Speaker, and the six Commissioners above-said, be the Seigniory of this Common-wealth. 22. That there be a Council of State consisting of fifteen Knights, five out of each Order or Election; and that the same be perpetuated by the annual Election of five out of the new Knights, or last elected into the Senate. 23. That there be a Council for Religion consisting of twelve Knights, four out of each Order, and perpe∣petuated by the annual election of four out of the Knights last elected into the Senate. That there be a Council for Trade consisting of a like number, elected and perpetuated in the same manner. 24. That there be a Council of War, not elected by the Senate, but elected by the Council of State out of themselves. That this Council of War consist of nine Knights, three out of each Order, and be perpetuated by the annual election of three out of the last Knights elected into the Council of State.
25. That in case the Senate adde nine Knights more out of their own number unto the Council of War, the said Council be understood by such Addition, to be Dictator of the Common-wealth, for the term of three moneths, and no longer, except by further order of the Senate, the said Dictatorian pow∣er be prolonged for a like term. 26. That the Seigniory have Session and Suffrage, with right also joyntly or severally, to propose both in the Senate, and in all Senatorian Councils. 27. That each of the three Orders or Divisions of Knights in each Senatorian Council elect one Provost for the term of one week; and that any two Provosts of the same Council so elected, may propose unto the respective Council, and not otherwise. 28. That some fair room or roomes well furnished, and attended, be allowed at the States charge, for a free and open Academy unto all comers, at some con∣venient houre or houres, towards the evening. That this Academy be governed according to the Rules of good breeding or civil conversation, by some or all of the Proposers: and that in the same it be lawful for any man by word of mouth, or by writing in jest or in earnest, to propose unto the Proposers. 29. That for Embassadors in Ordinary, there be four Residences, as France, Spain, Venice, and Constantino∣ple, That every Resident upon Election of a new Em∣bassador, in Ordinary, remove to the next Residence in the order nominated, till having served in them all, he return home. That upon Monday next ensuing, the last of November, there be every second year ele∣cted by the Senate some fit person being under thirty
five yeares of age, and not of the Senate, nor of the po∣pular Assembly: that the party so elected repair upon Monday next ensuing the last of March following, as Embassador in Ordinary unto the Court of France, and there reside for the term of two yeares, to be computed from the first of April next ensuing his Election. That every Embassador in Ordinary be allowed three thou∣sand pounds a yeare, during the term of his Residen∣cies, and that if a Resident come to die, there be an extraordinary Election into his Residence for his term, and for the remainder of his Removes, and progresse. 30. That all emergent Elections be made by Scrutiny that is, by a Council, or by Commissioners proposing, and by the Senate resolving in the manner following: That all Field-Officers be proposed by the Council of War; That all Embassadors extraordinary be proposed by the Council of State: that all Judges and Serjeants at Law be proposed by the Commissioners of the Great Seal. Tha all Barons, and Officers of Trust in the Exche∣quer, be proposed by the Commissioners of the Trea∣sury, and that such as are thus proposed, and approved by the Senate, be held lawfully elected. 31. That the cognizance of all matter of State to be considered, or Law to be enacted, whether it be Pro∣vincial or National, Domestick or foreign, appertaine unto the Council of State. That such affaires of either kinde as they shall judge, to require more secreey, be remitted by this Councel, and appertain unto the Coun∣cil of War, being for that end a select part of the same. That the cognizance and protection both of the Natio∣nal Religion, and of the liberty of conscience equally established, after the manner to be shewne in the Re∣ligious part of this Modell, appertain unto the Council
for Religion. That all matter of traffique and regula∣tion of the same, appertain unto the Council for Trade. That in the exercise of these several Functions, which naturally are Senatorian or Authoritative onely; no Council assume any other power then such only, as shall be estated upon the same by Act of Parliament. 32. That what shall be proposed unto the Senate by one or more of the Signiory or Proposers general, or whatever was proposed by any two of the Provosts, or particular proposers, unto their respective Coun∣cil; and upon debate at that Council shall come to be proposed by the same unto the Senate, be necessarily debatable, and debated by the Senate. That in all cases wherein power is derived unto the Senate by Law made, or by Act of Parliament, the result of the Senate be ultimate: that in all cases of Law to be made, or not already provided for by Act of Parliament; as war and peace, levie of men, or money, or the like; the result of the Senate be not ultimate. That whatsoever is decreed by the Senate upon a case wherein their result is not ul∣timate, be proposed by the Senate unto the Prerogative Tribe, or Representative of the people, except onely in cases of such speed or secrecy, wherein the Senate shall judge the necessary slownesse, or opennesse, in this way of proceeding, to be of detriment, or danger unto the Common-wealth. 33. That if upon the motion or proposition of a Council, or Proposer-General, the Senate add 9 Knights, promiscuously chosen out of their own number unto the Council of War: The same Council, as thereby made Dictator, have power of life and death, as also to enact lawes in all such cases of speed or secrecy for,
and during the Term of three moneths and no longer, except upon new Order from the Senate. And that all Lawes enacted by the Dictator be good and valid, for the term of one year and no longer, except the same be proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the people. 34. That the Burgesses of the annual election re∣turned by the Tribes, enter into the Prerogative Tribe, Popular Assembly, or Representative of the people, upon Monday next ensuing the last of March; and that the like number of Burgesses, whose term is expired, recede at the same time. That the Burgesses thus entered, elect unto themselves out of their own number, two of the Horse, one to be Captain, and the other to be Cornet of the same; and two of the Foot, one to be Captain, and the other to be Ensigne of the same; each for the term of three years. That these Officers being thus elected, the whole Tribe or Assembly▪ proceed to the election of four Annual Magistrates, two out of the foot to be Tribunes of the foot, and two out of the horse, to be Tribunes of the horse. That the Tribunes be Commanders of this Tribe in chief, so far as it is a military body, and Presi∣dents of the same, as it is a civil Assembly. And last∣ly, that this whole Tribe be paid weekly, as followeth. Unto each of the Tribunes of the horse seven pounds. Unto each of the Tribunes of foot six pounds. Unto each of the Captains of horse five pounds. Unto each of the Captains of foot four pounds. Unto each of the Cornets three pounds, unto each of the Ensignes two pounds, seven shillings. Unto every horseman 2 pound, and to every one of the foot, one pound, ten shillings.
35. That inferiour Officers, as Captains, Cornets, Ensignes, be onely for the Military discipline of this squadron, or Tribe. That the Tribunes have Session in the Senate without suffrage; that they have Session of course, and with suffrage in the Dictatorian Coun∣cill, so often as it is created by the Senate. That they be Presidents of the Court in all cases, to be judg∣ed by the people: And that they have right under an appeale unto the Popular Assembly, to note or re∣move any Deputy or Burgesse, that is scandalous. 36. That peculate or defraudation of the publick, all cases tending to the subversion of the Government, be tryable by this Representative; and that there be an Appeale unto the same in all causes, and from all Magistrates, Courts, and Councils, whether National, or Provincial. 37. That the right of debate, as also of proposing to the people, be wholly and only in the Senate, without any power at all of Result, not derived from the people. 38. That the power of Result be wholly and onely the Popular Assembly, without any right at all of debate. 39. That the Senate having debated and agreed upon a Law to be proposed, cause promulgation of the same to be made for the space of six weeks before Proposition, that is, cause the Law to be printed and published, so long before it is to be proposed. 40. That promulgation being made, the Signiory demand of the Tribunes being present in the Senate, an Assembly of the people. That the Tribunes up∣on such demand by the Signiory or by the Senate, be obliged to assemble the Prerogative Tribe, or Repre∣sentative
of the people in Armes by sound of trumpet with Drums beating, and Colours flying, in any Town▪Field, or Market-place, being not above six miles di∣stant, upon the day, and at the hour appointed, except the meeting through inconvenience of the weather, or the like, be prorogued by consent of the Signiory and the Tribunes; That the Prerogative Tribe being assembled accordingly, the Senate propose to them by two or more of the Senatorian Magistrates there∣unto appointed, at the first promulgation of the Law: That the proposers for the Senate open unto the peo∣ple the Occasion, Motives, and Reasons of the Law to be proposed; and the same being done, put it by di∣stinct clauses unto the Ballot of the people. That if any material clause or clauses be rejected by the peo∣ple, they be reviewed by the Senate, altered, and proposed, (if they think fit) to the third time, but no oftner. 41. That what is thus proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the people, be the Law of the land, and no other, except as in the case reserved unto the Dictatorian Council. 42. That every Magistracy, Office, or Election throughout this whole Commonwealth, whether annual, or triennial, be understood of consequence, to injoyn an interval or vacation equall unto the term of the same. That the Magistracy of a Knight and of a Burgesse, be in this relation understood as one and the same: and that this Order re∣gard onely such Elections as are Nationall or Do∣mestick, and not such as are Provincial or for∣reigne.
43. That for an exception from this Rule, where there is but one Elder of the Horse in one and the same Parish, that Elder be eligible in the same without interval; and where there be foure Elders of the Horse, or above in one and the same Pa∣rish, there be not under two, nor above half of them eligible at the same Election. 44. That throughout all the Assemblies and Coun∣cils of this Common-wealth: the Quorum consist of one halfe in the time of health, and of one third part in a time of sicknesse, being so decla∣red by the Senate.
PART. 2. For the Religious part, it is proposed, 45. THat the Universities, being prudently refor∣med, be preserved in their Rights and In∣dowments for and towards the education, and provi∣sion of an able Ministry. 46. That the legall and ancient provision for the National Ministry be so augmented, that the meanest sort of Livings or Benefices, without defalcation from the greater, be each improved to the Revenue of one hundred pounds a year, at the least. 47. That a Benefice becoming void in any Parish, the Elders of the same may assemble, and give notice unto the Vice-chancellor of either University, by Certificate; specifying the true value of that Bene∣fice: that the Vice-chancellor upon receipt of such Certificate, be obliged to call a Congregation of his University, that the Congregation of the University to this end assembled, having regard unto the value of the Benefice, make choice of a person fitted for the Ministeriall Function, and return him unto the Parish so requiring: that the Probationer, thus re∣turned unto a Parish, by either of the Universities, exercise the office, and receive the Benefits, as Minister
of the Parish for the term of one year. That the term of one year expired, the Elders of the Parish assem∣ble, and put the election of the Probationer unto the Ballot. That if the Probationer have three parts in four of the Balls or Votes in the Affirmative, he be thereby ordained and elected Minister of that Parish; not afterwards to be degraded or removed but by the Censors of the Tribe, the Phylarch of the same, or the Council of Religion, in such cases as shall be unto them reserved by Act of Parliament. That in case the Probationer come to faile of three parts in four at the Ballot, he depart from that Parish; and if he return unto the University, it be without diminu∣tion of the former offices or preferments which he there enjoyed, or any prejudice unto his future pre∣ferment: and that it be lawfull in this case for any Parish to send so often to either University, and be the duty of either Vice-chancellor, upon such Cer∣tificates to make return of different Probationers, till such time as the Elders of that Parish have fitted themselves with a Minister of their own choice and liking. 48. That the Nationall Religion be exercised ac∣cording to a Directory in that case, to be made and published by Act of Parliament. That the Nationall Ministry be permitted to have no other publique pre∣ferment or office in this Common-wealth. That a National Minister being convict of Ignorance or scan∣dall, be moveable out of his Benefice by the Censors of the Tribe, under an appeale unto the Phylarch, or to the Council for Religion. 49. That no Religion being contrary unto, or
destructive of Christianity, nor the publique exer∣cise of any Religion, being grounded upon, or in∣corporated into a forreign interest, be protected by, or tolerated in this state. That all other Religions, with the publique exercise of the same, be both to∣lerated and protected by the Council of Religion: and that all Professors of any such Religion, be equally capable of all Elections, Magistracies, Preferments, and offices in this Common-wealth, according unto the orders of the same. PART. 3. For the military part it is proposed: 50. THat annually upon Wednesday next ensuing the last of December, the Youth of each Pa∣rish (under the inspection of the two over-seers of the same) assemble, and elect the fifth man of their num∣ber, or one in five of them, to be for the term of that year, Deputies of the Youth of that Parish. 51. That annually, on Wednesday next ensuing the last of January, the said Deputies of the respective Parishes, meet at the Capital of the hundred; (where there are games and prizes allotted for them, as hath been shewed elsewhere) that there they elect to them∣selves out of their own number, one Captain, and
one Ensign. And that of these Games, and this Ele∣ction, the Magistrates, and Officers of the Hundred, be Presidents and Judges for the impartiall distribution of the Prizes. 52. That annually, upon Wednesday next ensuing the last of February, the Youth through the whole Tribe thus elected, be received at the Capital of the same, by the Lieutenant, as Commander in chief, by the Conductor, and by the Censors, that under inspe∣ction of these Magistrates, the said Youth be enter∣tained with more splendid games, disciplined in a more Military manner, and divided by lot into sundry parts, or Essayes, according to rules else-where given. 53. That the whole Youth of the Tribe thus as∣sembled be the first Essay. That out of the first Essay there be cast by lot two hundred Horse, and six hun∣dred Foot: that they whom their friends will, or themselves can mount, be accounted Horse, the rest Foot. That these Forces amounting in the fifty Tribes, to ten thousand Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, be alwaies ready to march at a weeks warning: and that this be the second Essay, or the standing Army of the Common-wealth. 54. That for the holding of each Province, the Common-wealth in the first year assign an Army of the Youth, consisting of seven thousand five hundred Foot, and one thousand five hundred Horse. That for the perpetuation of these provinciall Armies, or Guards; there be annually at the time and places men∣tioned, cast out of the first Essay of the Youth, in each Tribe or Shire ten Horse, and fifty Foot; that is,
in all the Tribes five hundred horse, and two thou∣sand five hundred foot for Marpesia, the like for Pampea, and the like of both Orders for the Sea∣guards, being each obliged to serve for the terme of three yeares upon the States pay. 55. That the Senate and the People, or the Dictator having decreed or declared War, and the Field-Officers being appointed by the Council of War; the General by warrant issued unto the Lieutenants of the Tribes, demand the second Essay, or such part of it, as is decreed; whether by way of levy or recruit. That by the same warrant he appoint his time and Rendezvous: that the several Conductors of the Tribes or Shires, deliver him the forces de∣manded at the time and place appointed. That a Generall thus marching out with the standing Army, a new Army be elected out of the first Essay as for∣merly, and a new General be elected by the Senate: that so alwayes there be a General sitting, and a stand∣ing Army, what Generals soever be marching. And that in case of invasion, the bands of the Elders be obliged unto like duty with those of the youth. 56. That an onely son be discharged of these du∣ties without prejudice. That of two brothers, there be but one admitted to foreigne service at one time. That of more brothers not above halfe. That whoe∣ver otherwise refuseth his lot, except upon cause shewn, he be dispensed withall by the Phylarch, or upon pe∣nitence, he be by them pardoned, and restored; by such refusal be uncapable of electing, or being elect∣ed in this Common-wealth; as also, that he pay un∣to the State a fifth of his Revenue for protection, be∣sides
taxes. That Divines, Physitians, and Lawyers, as also Trades not at leisure for the Essayes be so far forth exempted from this Rule, that they be still ca∣pable of all preferments in their respective professi∣ons with indemnity. 57. That upon warrants issued forth by the Gene∣ral for Recruits or Levies, there be an Assembly of the Phylarch in each Tribe: That such Voluntiers or men being above thirty years of age, as are desirous of farther imployment in Armes, appear before the Phylarch so assembled. That any number of these not exceeding one moity of the Recruits or Levies of that Tribe or Shire, may be taken on by the Phylarch, so many of the youth being at the discretion of this Council disbanded, as are taken on of the Voluntiers. That the Levies thus made, be conducted by the Con∣ductor of the respective Tribe or Shire, unto the Ren∣dezvous appointed: And that the service of these be without other Term, or Vacation, then at the dis∣cretion of the Senate and the People, or such instructi∣ons unto the General, as shall by them in that case be provided.
PART. 4. For the Provincial Part it is proposed, 58. THat upon expiration of Magistracy in the Se∣nate, or at the annual recesse of one third part of the same, there be elected by the Senate out of the part receding into each Provinciall Council four Knights for the term of three yeares, thereby to ren∣der each Provincial Council, (presuming it in the be∣ginning, to have been constituted of twelve Knights, divided after the manner of the Senate, by three se∣verall lists or elections) of annual, triennial, and per∣petual revolution, or rotation. 59. That out of the same third part of the Se∣nate annually receding, there be unto each Pro∣vince, one Knight elected for the term of one year. That the Knight so elected, be the Provincial Archon, General, or Governour. That a Provinciall Archon, Governour, or General, receive annually in April, at his Rendezvous appointed, the Youth or Recruits elected in the precedent Moneth to that end by the
Tribes, and by their Conductors delivered according∣ly. That he repaire with the said Youth and Re∣cruits, unto his respective Province, and there dismisse that part of the Provincial Guard or Army, whose tri∣ennial term is expired. That each Provincial Gover∣nour have the Conduct of affaires of War, and of State, in his respective Province; with advice of the Provincial Council, and that he be President of the same. 60. That each Provincial Council elect three weekly Proposers or Provosts, after the manner, and to the ends already shewne in the constitution of Senato∣rian Councils, and that the Provost of the senior List during his Term, be President of the Council in ab∣sence of the Provincial Archon, or General. 61. That each Provincial Council proceed accor∣ding unto instructions received from the Councill of State, and keep intelligence with the same by any two of their Provosts, for the Government of the Province as to matter of War, or of State. That upon levies of Native, or proper Armes, by the Se∣nate, and the People, a Provincial Council (ha∣ving unto that end received orders) make levies of Provincial Auxiliaries accordingly. That Auxi∣liary Armes upon no occasion whatsoever exceed the proper or native Armes in Number. That for the rest, the Provincial Council maintain the Provincials, defraying their peculiar Guards and Council, by such knowne proportion of tributes, as on them shall be set by the Senate and the People, in their pro∣per Rights, Lawes, Liberties, and Immunitiess so far forth as upon the merits of the cause, whereup∣on
they were subdued, it seemed good unto the Senate, and the people to confirme them. And that it be lawful for the Provincials to appeale from their Provincial Magistrates, Councils, or Generals to the people of Oceana. FINIS.
