L1514 E400_40 R201769 99862269 160412
A LETTER FROM THE ARMIE. Concerning the KINGS MAJESTY And the proceedings of the ARMY. AND A Letter from both Houses of Parliament to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, con∣cerning the City of London, and other things related to the Peace of the Kingdome. AND The manner of the late fight at Dedford, neere London, where foure of Sir Robert Pyes men were slain, some taken, and di∣vers wounded, by a party of Horse in KENT. Printed at London by R. I. 1647.
A LETTER From both Houses OF PARLIAMENT to His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIREFAX. May it please your Excellency, THE Houses having this day received from their Commissioners a copy of your Letter to them, dated at Bedford July 29. with a Copy of a∣nother Letter of the same date, writ to the City of London, in both which though there be no accounts at all of the motion of your Army, yet the Houses understand by the Letters from their Commissioners in which the said Copies were inclosed, and other∣wise, that you have given Orders for the marching of the Army towards London, upon pretence of de∣fending the Houses from the danger of Tumults;
upon consideration whereof the Houses have com∣manded us to let you understand, that as they cannot but have a deepe sence of the undue Libertie which some Apprentices of the City of London, and others, from whom they might have expected more obedi∣ence, have taken to themselves to violate the just Authority, Priviledges, and freedome of Parliament, in which the safety of the whole Kingdome is con∣cerned and so they doubt not but the sense of so great an offence will at last strike all their brests that have been accessary thereunto, with a detestation of any practices of the like nature for the future, And as the Houses cannot imagine, That the disorder com∣mitted by some Apprentices, or those that ming∣led with them; had the allowance of the City of London so they have since received full satisfaction by the strict Orders given out by the Lord Mayor, and Common-councell of the City to all Masters, to have care of their Servants, and by their Declarati∣on proclaimed in the severall parts of the City, for the preventing and suppressing of Tumults, that they shall sit with much freedome and security, for the preventing and suppressing of Tumults, that they shall sit with much freedome and security from any distur∣bance for the future. And therefore the Houses see∣ing no cause to Command that Army; or any part thereof to march up for their defence, but rather judging (by the distractions raised at the newes there∣of) that the motion of the Army near the City, is like to precipitate the City and Army in a desperate and bloodly ingagement, not onely to the disturbance of the Parliaments sitting, but also to the distruction thereof, and of all Authoritie, by casting the whole
kingdome into confusion. For prevention thereof, they have sent you this inclosed Order, requiring you as you tender the freedome of Parliament, the safety of the City and whole Kingdome, to give exact o∣bedience thereunto; this being all we have in com∣mand, we rest. Westminster, 30 July. 1647. A Letter from the Army, Dated at Cole∣brooke, August, 2. 1647. Right Honourable, THE Generals head-quarters are yet here at Colebrooke, but this day they are intended to march to a Rendezvouz at Houn∣slow Heath, part of the Horse are gon over into Kent, of the Generals owne Regiment under Major Desborrough, the other part are in Essex, those (we heare) have seased on the Fort at Tilbury, called the Block-house; as for the Block-house at Graves-end, that we heare is not much tenable and of little use to be kept, except it be guarded when taken. The King is resolved to remove from La∣timer to a house nearer Windsor, which his
Majesty hath made choise of, and I suppose will not be denyed him, The Army hath contracted their Head∣quarters closer, out of the severall Coun∣ties where they were quartered; the last be∣ing now come up, and (I suppose will be at the Rendezvouz this day on Hounslow Heath. This night it is to be resolved, by a Coun∣cell of warre what shall be done in matter of advance against the City, when to ap∣proach and where. There is no Answer sent from the Gene∣rall or the Councell of Warre, to the Letter from the Parliament, by reason that they doe not take notice of the Houses sitting. I am sorry to see things so high. I am grieved at the very heart to see the eminent dangers hanging over us, if God divert not the deluge of blood threatning us. Collonel Tuleday had notice that Sir Samu∣el Luke was at his house at Cople in Bedford∣shire, nere Bedford, and thereupon hee sent out a party of his Regiament thither, who as we heare, have taken him prisoner.
Divers Members of both Houses are with the Army, & more with the Head-quarters. The Councell of Warre have had some debates about a Declaration, but as yet it is not concluded. I heare they are intended to summon the City of London first, but the truth is (I suppose) it is not fully resolved by the Generall and Councell of Warre in that particular. The printed Declartion from the City of London was yesterday brought to the Ge∣nerall, and read at a Councell of War. The Lord Lotherdale (one of the Scots Commissioners) is put away from the Court not being admitted to the King, be∣fore he went from Owburne. God send a composure of these unhappy differences. Colebrooke the 2 of August. 1647. A Letter from a Gentleman that was at Greenwich, to a friend of his in London. Deare Sir, I Have a sad subject to writ unto you of, which makes mee tremble; it is briefly thus, that Col∣lonell
Sir Robert Pies Troope quartered at Ded∣ford within a mile of this Towne, and at some other adjacent villages, a party of Horse came upon them (as it is said they came over Henly Bridge and so into Kent and wheeled about this way) they came to parley with the Souldiers, in∣tending (as it is beleeved to have taken them prisoners) but upon the parley some of them came to such high words, they called them Runaway Rogues, the other retorted to them again, and the meane while some got to Horse, but at last it came to blowes, some they tooke in pursuite, foure were slaine in the pursuite, and divers wounded of Sir Robert Pies men. Here is blowes struck, here is blood shed, the Lord direct the Parliament, and the City, and the Army, to study how to compose these fresh divissions, least poore England bee whelmed in the redde Sea of the subdivission. FINIS,
