l312 e308_14 99861162 113290
A true Relation of a great VICTORY OBTAINED (Through Gods Providence) BY The Parliaments Forces in Cheshire, under the command of Sir William Brereton, AGAINST The Kings Forces under the Com∣mand of Sir William Vaughan, neer Den∣bigh, November 1. 1645. Where were taken of the Enemy, about Four hun∣dred prisoners, Five or six hundred horse, and above One hundred slain. Sent in two Letters to the Honorable William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Relation be forthwith printed and published. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign of the Golden-Dragon neer the Middle-Temple, Novemb. 5. 1645.
To the Honorable VVilliam Lenthall Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. Honorable Sir, IT pleased God this day to be∣stow upon us a memorable Victory neer Denbigh; such is the throng of businesse lying on us at this time, that we cannot signifie the particulars under our own hands, but commit the account thereof to Mr. Lan∣caster, Chaplain to the Cheshire Forces, who was an Eye-witnesse in this Service; whose relation you may credit as under the hands of Your most humble and faithfull Servants, Tho: Mytton, Mic. Jones, James Louthian, Geo: Gouldegay. Denbigh Town, first Novem. 1645.
To the Honorable William Lenthall Esq Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons. Honorable Sir, IT pleased the most high, who commands all the Armies in heaven and earth, to magnifie his power this day by a me∣morable Victory over the Enemy neer Denbigh, of which (being appointed thereunto by the Commanders, whose many other imployments transmit it to this pen) I shall render as full an accompt as may be expected from a work yet in∣digested. Sir William Brereton upon his return to Cheshire, found the work for reducing Chester and Beston castle in a good po∣sture; but the Enemy esteeming Chester the Masterpiece of the Kingdom, exten∣ded their utmost endeavours for the relief thereof, gathered
into a body about Den∣bigh, waiting an opportunity for the effe∣cting of that high Design, without which they gave up those parts as utterly lost; sir William reserving a competent strength to make good both Leaguers, sent away Col: Jones and Adjutant Louthiane, dex∣trous and trusty men, with the Cheshire Forces and Auxiliaries of the counties of Lancaster, Derby, VVarwick, Mount∣gomery and Salop; the whole about four∣teen hundred horse, and one thousand foot, being the cream of all these parts of the Kingdom. The Enemy, under the command of Sir William Vaughan (as our best Intelligence by the prisoners gives us) were about seventeen hundred horse, and four hundred foot: on Thursday night we marcht to Moulde, on Friday to Ruthin, where having Intelligence the Enemy was at Denbigh (reported
to be a far greater number) wee hasted thither upon Saturday, Novem. 1. accompanied with that active Gentleman, Gen: Mytton and part of his Auxiliaries, the rest being left at Chester. The Forlorn-hope, forty out of every Regiment was commanded by Capt. Otter captain of the Reformades a gallant Souldier, & Capt. Will: Edwards a Cheshire captain, and well-deserving Gentleman, who coming to VVhitchurch a mile from Denbigh, were in a lane flanckt by the Enemies horse and Dra∣goons, so that they were forced to make good that passe with the Forlorn-hope and Cheshire Dragoons, under the com∣mand of capt. Finch and capt. Holt, stout and resolute men, these, with the Forlorn-hope, behaved themselves gallantly, and maintained the passe till the foot came up, the most part of which, with the VVar∣wick and Derbyshire horse, commanded by Major Sanders &
Major Hokesworth, seconding the Forlorn-hope, bare the burthen of the day, whiles the Refor∣mades, Cheshire horse, and four hundred Lancashire foot vvere intended for a greater service; for, the Commanders finding that strait lane too difficult a passe to fall through upon the Enemy, who were marshalled in open field; these last mentioned (by the advice of some who know the country) were drawn thence by Denbigh-green, a way neer four miles in compasse, to fall on the Enemy upon even ground, which whiles drawn off, the foot (exceeding forward to ingage them∣selves for the whole) beat the Enemy out of the lane, and routed both horse & foot, driving them under the command of the castle, where they rallyed themselves, but the forlorn-hope, Derby and VVarwick horse, with the foot, encountred them a∣gain, and utterly routed,
whom the horse chased eight miles in the way to Con∣way, making great execution on them in the way, taking many prisoners, and five or six hundred horse, and so long pur∣sued, that not above seven score were left together. To give every one his due, in this ser∣vice, would savour too much of vain∣glory: But this I may modestly report, That every one endeavoured to exceed each other in Gallantry, whose spirits God had raised to so high a pitch, as might suit to a work of so high a nature. Its conjectured by those who are best able to give account herein, that above one hundred of the Enemy were slain, about four hundred taken prisoners, with divers men of quality. Its not known that any of ours are slain, and few wounded. It is the desire of our hearts, that God alone may have the
honour of his own work, the characters of whose power are so memorably stampt upon it, whose goodnesse our sins have not yet so wea∣ried, to make him weary of renewed mercies. VVhiles we set before us, that which our eyes have seen, the Enemies compact body, falling off at pleasure, un∣der the protection of the castle, our di∣stracted body the lesser part ingaged with them, the greater at too great a distance for our own relief, theirs flying, our small part pursuing, overtaking, spoiling, and now safe return'd, after so great travell & hazard, wee cannot but proclaim to the world, that the Heavens rule; to the Church, that this God is our God for ever & he shalbe our guide unto death. By the next there will be given an exact account of the prisoners, & most memorable pas∣sages, which now cannot be presented by Sir,  Your Honours most humble Servant, Nathanael Lancaster. Denbigh town, 1. 1645.
