L3238 E1048_9 99867114 119404
THE SPEECH OF FRANCIS LOVELACE Esquire RECORDER OF CANTERBURY. TO THE KINGS most Excellent MAIESTIE At his coming to CANTERBURY The 27 day of October 1660. LONDON: Printed by S. Griffin, for Matthew Walbancke, at Grays-Inne Gate, 1660.
THE SPEECH OF FRANCIS LOVELACE Esq, Recorder of the City of CANTERBƲRY, to the Kings most excellent Majestie at his coming to Canterbury the 27. day of October 1660. MAy it please your sacred Maje∣sti, our most dread Soveraigne to vouchsafe me leave, to as∣sume courage from your grace and Goodness, once more to speake unto your Majestie, who like Almighty God, re∣gards more the affection of the heart, then the speech and utterance of the Tongue. I know most gracious Soveraigne that it will not become me now to make a long
Speech to your Majestie whose Judgement is deep and inscrutable, whose imployments are great and weighty. But because the power of Command be∣longs to Kings, and the glory of Obedience to Subjects: and that by the influence of your happy Raigne, your Subjects have Re∣ceived Peace, Safety, and Protection: And by your prudence, have been rescued from the stayn and rust of the late Iron times; and by your Princely Clemency in your never to be forgotten unparallel'd Act of Oblivion, restored to this Golden Age: They can∣not but with all humility from the bottome of their hearts, but render to your Majesty, subjection with all Loyalty, Faithfulness and Alleagiance.
THE SPEECH OF FRANCIS LOVELACE Esq RECORDER OF CANTERBVRY, TO THE QUEEN At her coming to Canterbury, the 31 day of October 1660. She then being in the same Coach, with the King, and all the Royal Princes and Princesses. MAy it please your Majestie, most great and glorious Queen, that hath made All England happy in your Royal Is∣sue. The Mayor, and Citizens of this City of
Canterbury, do present their hearty and sin∣cere thanks to God for your Majesties safe return to this Kingdome of England, (where∣in your Majestie hath so great an Interest) wishing your Majestie long life with all health and happiness; And that you may pro¦sper in all you undertake with a full fruition of your own hearts desire. And that these Royal Branches your Ma∣jesties Children, and their Childrens Chil∣dren, may for ever sway Englands Scepter, making your Majestie as great, and renoun∣ed in your ofspring, as you are already in your birth and royal Progenitors. And let, oh let, those royal Branches, let our most gracious Soveraign Lord King CHARLES for ever flourish here. FINIS.
