L510 E124_35 R212763 99871339 123749
THE LAST TRUE INTELLIGENCE FROM WARWICK: BEING A certaine Relation of the death of the Earle of Lindsey, Lord Generall of the KINGS Army, who was sorely wounded upon his being taken prisoner in the late battell neer Banbury. ALSO An exact Relation from the Forces of Lincolnshire, which have joyned themselves with the Lord Fairfax and Captain Hotham in Yorkshire, with their present proceedings in that County against the Earle of Cumberland and the Cavaliers. LONDON, Octob. 31. Printed for Thomas Watson. 1642.
THE LAST TRUE INTELLIGENCE FROM WARWICK: BEING A true Relation of the death of the Earle of Lindsey, Lord Generall of the Kings Forces, who was taken Prisoner in the late battell, and carried to Warwick Castle. Also a true Relation of all the present proceedings in Yorkshire, between the Lord Fairfax, and the Earle of Cumberland. AFter the late battell neere Banbury, between his Excellence the Earle of Essex, and the Kings Forces, where∣in many were slaine on both sides, and di∣verse eminent men of the Kings Party ta∣ken prisoners, as the Earl of Lindsey Lord chiefe Generall of His Majesties Forces, the Lord Willoughby of Eresby his sonne,
Sir Edmund Stradling, Colonell Vavasor, Colonell Lunsford, and divers more, his Excellency remaining Master of the field, marched with his Forces to Warwick, and is come safe thither, and hath laid his pri∣soners in the Castle, but the Earle of Lind∣sey, who was sorely wounded when he was taken prisoner, in the said battell, is since dead. There was a Priests lately taken at Clar∣kenwell, who had a Letter found about him full of treachery against the King and Parliament, wherein are discovered their policy used for the subversion of the Pro∣testant Religion, the substance of it was to this effect: That none but the Kings enemies are chosen of the Parliament: and that the Parliament avowes, that they will begin with the least, and will not give over till they have extirpated him and his posterity. On the other side, the sincere parties that are to be admired for their in∣defatigable industry, incessantly foment re∣venge and jealousie in most of the Parlia∣ment-men, especially they work upon the
pride and vain-glory of such as have beene imprisoned, possessing them, that they are the only martyrs & Worthies of the coun∣treys. London is as much distempered as Florence; for the Companies are at odds, and the Common Councell have opposed their Magistrates against the old custome, which hath bred a great deal of heart-bur∣ning in the city, so that twice a day we can divulge what we list in Pauls, and upon the Exchange, you shall see the same sword that hath wounded us, being drawne upon the same wound with an oyl that we have, shal make us whole. And this shalbe done in Parliament, in charming the wisest and temperatest: with the violent sort we take a strange course, by working upon their passions, and inebriating their fancies with probabilities and presidents, that favourites may wrestle with Parliaments for a time, but at last a Parliament will overthrow their backs: we incourage them with all the wits we have, to fall upon some great persons neere Ais Majesty, and perswade them that now is the time or never, the
King being in such necessity, insomuch that we assure our selves, God hath forsaken and infatuated them, that they shall not on∣ly strike against the same rock, but sink and rae in the bottome of the sea of destru∣ction. We have now many strings to our bow, and have strongly fortified our faction, and we have added two bulwarks more. For when K. JAMES was very violent against Arminianisme, and interrupted with his pestilent wit and deep learning our strong designes in Holland, and was a great friend to that old rebellious heretick the Prince of Orange; now we have planted the so∣veraigne drug of Arminianisme, which we hope will purge the Protestants from their heresie, and will flourish and bear fruit in due season. The foundation to build up the bulwark must be mutation; our mutation will cause reluctation, which will serve for as many violent diseases as the Stone, the Gowt, Tooth-ache, speedy destruction, or perpe∣tuall insufferable anguish of the body,
which is worse then death it self. There are other matters in hand of con∣sequence which we take to consideration & tender care, which is the state of the Pu∣ritans, for they are impudent subtill people. But to return again to our main fabrick: In the first place we take into consideration the Kings honour & present necessity, and we shew how the King may free himselfe from his wardship as Lewis the  did, and for his great splendor and lustre, he may raise vast summes, and not be beholden to his subiects, which is by way of imposition and Excise: we instance the Low Coun∣treyes, and shew what a masse of money they raise to pay their armies both by sea and land meerly out of Excise. Then our Church Catholikes proceed to shew the means how to settle this Excise which must be by an Army of horse and foot; for we have made it sure: they shall be Forraigners, and Germans, vvho vvill eat up the Kings revenues, and spoile the countreys vvheresoever they come, though they be vvell paid; vvhat havock vvill they
make then vvhen they have no pay. If the countrey be too hard for the souldiers, they must consequently outrage, vvhich is e∣qually advantagious to us. There are three Troupes of horse gone out of Lincolne shire into Yorkshire for the aid of the Lord Fairfax and Captaine Hotham, against the Earle of Cumberland and his Cavaliers: Captaine Hotham hath made good Cawood Castle and Selby, and is now to joyne his Forces with the Lord Fairfax, who hath raifed great store of men for the defence of the King & Parliament. There is a Lieutenant Colonell and a Ser∣jeant Major of the Kings Party taken in Buckinghamshire, and brought up to the Parliament, and committed to safe custody. FINIS.
