M1874A 45097859 171439
A Merry VVedding, OR, O brave Arthur of Bradly. To a pleasant New Tune. SEe you not Pierce the Piper His theeks as big as a Myter A piping among the Swain That dance on yonder plain. Where Tib and Tom do trip it, And Youths to the Horn-pipe nip it, With every one his carriage To go to yonders Marriage, But go with Arthur of Bradly, O brave Arthur of Bradly. When Arthur hath got him a Lass, A bonnier never was, The chiefest Youths in the Parish Come dancing all in a Morrice, Iumping with mickle pride, And each his Wench by his side, With Christmas Gambals flouncing, And Country wenches trouncing, They all were fine and gay. For the honor of Arthur of Bradly, &c. And when that Arthur was married, And his wife home had carried, The Youngsters they did wait To help to carry up meat, Francis carried the Furmaty, Michael carried the Mince-pye, Bortholomew Beef and Mustard, And Christopher carried the Custard, Thus every one in his array, For the honour of Arthur of Bradly, &c. And when that Dinner was ended, The Maidens they were befriended, For out steps Dick the Draper, And he did strike up Scraper, It's best to be dancing a little, And then to the Tavern and tipple, He call'd for a Horn-pipe, That went fine on the Bag-pipe, Then forward Piper and ploy, For the honour of Arthur of Bradly.
RIchard he did lead it, And Margery did tread it, Francis following then And after courteous Jane: Thus every one after another, As if they had been sister and brother, That it was great joy to see How well they did agree; And then they all did say, For the honour of Arthur of Bradly, &c. Then Miles in his motly breeches, And he the Piper beseeches, To play him Haw-thorn buds, That he and his wench might trudge, But Lawrence liked not that, No more did lusty Kate, For the cry'd canst thou not hit it, To see how fine Thomas can trip it, For the honour of Arthur of Bradly, &c. When all the Swains did see This mirth and merry glee; There's never a man did flinch, But each one did his wench; But Giles was greedy of gain, For he would needs kiss twain, Her Love seeing that Did swap him over the pate, That he had nought to say, For the Honour of Arthur of Bradly, &c. The Piper look'd aside, And there he spied the Bride, And he thought it a hard chance, That none would lead her a Dance; But none was there durst touch her, Save only Bat the Butcher, He took her out by the hand, And he danced while he could stand, The Bride was fine and gay, For the honour of Arthur of Bradly, &c. Then out stept Will the Weaver, And he swore he'd not leave her, He hopp'd it all on one Leg, For the honour of his Peg, But Kister in his Cambrick Ruff, He took that all in a snuff, For he against that day, Had made himself fine and gay, His Ruff was whipt with blew, And he cried out, a new dance a new, Then strike up a round delay, For the honour of Arthur Bradly, &c. Then gan the Sun decline, And every one thought it time To go unto his home, And leave the bride-groom alone: Tut, tut, says lusty Ned, Ile see them both in Bed, For i'le giv at a joynt, But i'le have his Codpiss point, Then forward Piper and play, For the honour of Arthur of Bradly, &c. And thus the day was spent, And no man homeward went, There was such a crowding and thrust∣ing That some were in danger of bursting, To see them go to bed For all the skill they had, He was got to his Bride, And lay close to her side, Then got they his points & his garters, And tut them in pieces like Martyrs, And then they all did play, For the honour of Arthur of Bradly, &c. Then Will and his sweet-heart, Did call for loth to depart, And then they did foot it and toss it, Till the Cook brought in the sack-posset The Bride-pye was brought forth, A thing of mickle worth, The each at his Beds side, Took leave of Arthur and his Bride, And so went all away From the Wedding of Arthur of Bradly, London, Printed for F. Cloes, T. Vere, J. Wright, and J. Clarke.
