P103 E135_3 99872497 156426
A TRUE INVENTORY OF THE Goods and Chattels OF SVPERSTITION. Late of the Parish of Ignorance, in the County of Blind-Devotion, and in the King∣dome of Idolatry, deceased: Taken and apprised, this nineteenth of February Anno Domini 1642. AS ALSO, A Relation of the Popes being in a swoun, at the Newes of the abolishment of Superstition in the Kingdome of England. In the Clymactericall yeere of the Bishops, Anno Dom. 1642. By R. P. LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LEE. 1642.
A true Inventory of the Goods and Chattels of Superstition, late of the Parish of Ignorance in the County of Blind-Devotion, and in the Kingdome of Idolatry, de∣ceased: Taken and apprised, Febr. 19. 1642. IMprimis, In the Hall 14. pictures: viz. of his Holinesse the Pope Pius 5. of the Virgin Mary, of Saint Peter, and the rest of the Apostles. 300. li. Item, the Tapestry which hangs about the said Hall, wherein is wrought and woven the Pictures of divers Saints departed, holy Fathers, Patriarchs, Cardinall, Bishops, Priests, Jesuites, and Friars. 100. li. Item, in the said Hall, the Table, Carpets, Chaires, Cushions, and other implements of houshold-stuffe, all of them curiously wrought and enameled with pictures of Crosses, ancient Fathers of the Church of Rome, and the like. 30. li. In the Parlour. Item, two Images of the Virgin Mary, and of Christ her Sonne. 20. li. Item, behind the Hangings in this Parlour, Images of most of the Popes that have been since Saint Peter left Rome, who I beleeve was never there. 100. li. Item, the Images of divers ghostly Fathers. 10. li. Item, a rich enameled close Cup-boord, wherein is kept holy-Bread, holy-Water, and fragments of their Eucharist. 30. li.
Item, other ceremonious Implements in the said Parlour; as Prayer-books to Saints, Masse-books, and the like. 10. li. In the Chamber over the Hall. Item, divers Pictures and Images of severall Kings and Queens of the Romish Religion. 1000. li. Item, a canopy-Bed, on which is engraven in gold and silver set with pretious stones and jewels, sent as tokens from his Holi∣nesse that now is, with the Bedding, Curtains, and Vallans, and other things thereunto appertaining, divers Reliques of Saints, as of Saint Peter and others. 2000. li Item, a paire of Andirons guilded, wherein is engraven the images of his Holinesse the Pope and S. Peter. 20 li. In the Chamber over the Parlour. Item, divers Pictures and Images of her Ancestors and Pro∣genitors of her Brothers, Sisters, Children, and Kindred depar∣ted. 100. li. Item, a paire of Andirons, wherein is engraven the Images of the Virgin Mary, and her Son Christ, commanding him to heare the Prayers of Saints on her behalfe, whom she dayly prayes unto. 10 li. Item, in the Library or Study in this Chamber, a Book called Pope Gregory the ninth his opinions of the Religion of Rome, a Book of Traditions and holy Ordinances of divers other holy Popes; a Book of Apocrypha, valued above Canonicall Scripture; a Book against the Apocalyps of Saint Iohn the Evangelist; the Old Testament after their Translation; a Book of Ave Ma∣ries; a Book of Imprecations and Prayers to Saints and holy men departed; all which are in the Latine tongue: and divers other learned Books, in all amounting to 1000. li. In the Chappell of Ease adjòyning to the House. Item, all the Pictures, Images, and Reliques of Saints, of
Popes, holy Fathers, and others of the order of holy Priest hood. 1000. li. Item, Tombs of Saints, with the images of them intombed; with Prayers and Crosses upon the same for their comming out of Purgatory. 1000. li. Item, the Ornaments of divine Worship lying in the Vestry, as Copes, Hoods, Lawn sleeves, Surplices, Caps for Cardinals, Miters, three-corned Caps, two-cornerd Caps, and the like implements to the same appertaining. 500. li. Item, at the celebration of the Eucharist, no Wine, bowing, creeping, crawling, cringing, whipping, slashing, beating, thumping, sighing, howling, and the like. 1000. li. Item, the garments for the Priests, lesuites, Friars, white, gray, and black; plasters for their bald Crowns, and the like. 100. li. Item, Bowing to the East, and at the name of JESUS, creep∣ing to the Altar, standing up at Gloria Patri, and the like, as Tapers, Wax-candles, Dirges, Masses, and Trentals. 10000. li. Item, her owne wearing apparell, and her Beads, Red Crosses, and signing her with the Crosse, sprinkling her self with holy-Water, which she daily useth. 1000. li Summa total. 16730.
A Relation of the Popes being in a Swoun at the Newes of Abolishment of Superstition in the Kingdome of England, in the Clymactericall yeare of the Bishops, 1642. THere being divers Intelligencers, as it is generally concei∣ved, now resident in the Kingdome of England, that hold private correspondency with his Holinesse the Pope of Rome; that have certified his Holinesse of the present estate, this, and other his Majesties Kingdomes standeth now in; and the great affaires in Agitation by the great and high Court of Parliament therein now assembled, and congregated for the setling of the peace and quiet of the same; the rectifying, and regulating of the corruptions innovated into Religion, and for the making of good and wholsome Lawes, for the Government of his Maje∣sties good People, and Loyall Subjects, in purity and righte∣ousnesse; and to suppresse, and punish Vice and enormous of∣fences, practised, and agitated by all such persons dis-affected to the welfare and prosperity thereof, of what dignity, or degree soever they be, whether Spirituall, or Temporall. His Holi∣nesse, at those tydings, grew much Male-content, fearing the effect thereof might prove dangerous, and destructive to the peace and prosperity of the Kingdome of Idolatry; whereof he hath beene the principall defender and preserver. To prevent and avoid which dangers, threatned by the calling of this Parlia∣ment: He endeavoured what in his power lay, by his Spirits, Priests, and Jesuits, infused into the body of that State, to worke and agitate with the Bishops, and Prelaticall faction, that were in subjection and obedience, or well-wishers, and great favou∣rers to that Kingdome of Idolatry, and the pious intentions of
his Holinesse to defend and preserve the same, to hinder their proceedings and intentions in setling and establishing true Reli∣gion in that Kingdome: the effects whereof have a long time succeeded according to their desires; but the Policy and Wise∣dome of that State perceiving the same, they then endeavoured to prevent, and annihilate their designes. First, by accusing and impeaching the Grand Instrument of practising and agitating their hinderance in the same, his little grace, and lesse gracious, the Archbishop, or intended Patriarch of Lambeth and Canterbury; and confining him to his private lodging in his strong Castle, and secure place of residence, the Tower; whereby hee became uselesse to the rest in perfecting their designes concerning that businesse. Secondly, the accusation and impeachment of divers Pre∣lates, Adherents; and Allyances to that faction; the little Wren, and the Bishop of Bathe and Wells, and many others, of great and enormous crimes, confining them likewise to severall places, under the like Jurisdiction of the Black Rod, of security and safety. Thirdly, the Grand Impeachment and accusation of no lesse then twelve of the greatest Competitors of that saction, of no lesse crimes then High Treason, for their perverse and wicked practices; upon which they were alwaies confined to the seventh dayes society of their Grand Patron, and Master Little Laud, in his Princely Palace the Tower; there to have residence for their security, during the pleasure of the Prince of that King∣dom, and the whole State now assembled in Parliament. Fourthly, the putting downe the votes of Prelates, and their sitting in Parliament, as a party in the House of Peeres, and ta∣king from them all Temporall Jurisdiction in any affaires of State, or Civill Government, Fiftly, their endeavours to take away the Votes, and sitting in Parliament, of Popish Lords, Alliances, and favourers of that faction. Sixthly, their proceedings against scandalous and dis-affected persons of the Inferior Clergy, well minded towards that Reli∣gion, and great defenders privately of the same. Seventhly, the disarming of all Popish Recusants, whereby
they are left destitute of all hopes to defend and preserve them∣selves and their Religion. Eighthly, and lastly, the putting of the Lawes of that King∣dome in execution against his Holinesse, the Spirits, Priests, and Iesuites: whereby all hopes of inducement of his Majesties good Subjects to side with them, and favour their cause, is quite ta∣ken away. His Holinesse having received certaine intelligence of these proceedings by the Parliament in England; at the receit where∣of, his Holinesse fell immediately into a deadly swoun; but by the help of his Magicians, Physitians, I would have said: being recovered againe to his senses, they then fell into consultation, what meanes were best to be used to prevent a dangerous sick∣nesse, and generall plague that might fall by this misfortune, not only on the person of his Holinesse, but on the whole King∣dome of Idolatry; and at last concluded these remedies were best to be used for the stopping, and prevention of these future dangers threatned. First, to raise Rebellion in his Majesties Kingdome of Ireland, of all that faction, against Protestants, and all that shall seeke the ruine and destruction of his Holinesses Kingdome in that State. Secondly, to send instruments of mischiefe privately into England, to stirre up all Catholickes in that Kingdome to raise the like sedition and Rebellion, to put into combustion and trouble that State also; whereby the Parliament being busily employed in appeasing such mutinies, may neglect their pro∣ceedings in setling true Religion, and abolishing Superstition. And lastly, to practice privately by treacherous Stratagems to bring to destruction divers worthy Peeres of that Kingdome, and Members of the Commons House, that doe most labour and endeavour the extirpation of Popery, and all Popish and super∣stitious Ceremonies, and corrupt Tenents in Doctrine and Dis∣cipline, innovated, and introduced into the Religion established and setled in that Kingdome. FINIS.
