P106 E1017_12 99866981 119271
THE RVMPS Last Will & Testament WHICH THE EXECUTORS Herein Named (being out of hopes of the MONSTER'S Reco∣very) have thought good to publish and exhibite. LONDON, rinted by John Tailor, 1660.
THE RUMPS Last Will and Testament, VVhich the Executors herein na∣med, being out of hopes of the MONSTERS recovery, have thought good to publish and exhibite, IN the NAME of OLD NICK and Sir Arthur, So be it: The day of our declining Condition, and (to our grief be it spoken) we fear in that Plato∣nical Year, wherein all Things are like to come Round: We the wretched RƲMP of a Long Parliament, at first Legally Elected, but since mi∣serably Degenerated, having scarce ever a good quality,
and finding a daily decay in our selves, both of Wit an Honesty, having a long time stunk above ground, do call to remembrance the uncertain estate of our Noysom Con∣tinuance, and that the RƲMP must yield to dissolution, when it shall please we to our sorrow know whom to call; and being desirous (according to our old wont) to put things in disorder, do make, constitute, ordain and de∣clare this our last wickedness, in manner and form fol∣lowing. And first, being penitent and sorry from the very bot∣tom of our Fundament, that we were not ten times worse then we are most humbly defiring forgiveness for the same, we permit our stinking RƲMP to the Close-Stool, where we desire (but are so much like Infidels that we cannot believe) to be preserved till that joyfull day of our third Resurrection, with our RVMP up∣ward in token of good Luck, and through the Industry and power of some seditious Sectaries, and Jesuitical Impostors possess and Inherit the Kingdom of Eng∣land, prepared we fear for a better purpose. And now for the setling of our real exacted Estates, and ill gotten goods, which the Devil (who usually to his power helps his servants) hath pretended to be∣stow upon us; we do Order give and dispose of them in manner and forme following (that is to say) we Will that all those Debts and Duties, either upon the Publique Faith, or otherwise, which we owe in Right or Conscience to any manner of person or persons whatsoever, shall never by our Consent be truly content∣ed or Paid, or Ordained to be paid at any time or times after Our Decease by our Executors hereafter named. ITEM. We give and bequeath all those Lands now in our Pos∣session,
commonly called, or known by the name of Good Conscience, which we enjoyed before the late times of Temptation, to be equally divided amongst such as intend to turn Knaves with the first opportunity. ITEM. We give and bequeath all other our Lands, being ten times the value of the former, which we raised out of the ruines of our Country, to be shared amongst our Instru∣ments of oppression, to the intent that they may pray heartily for our next Resurrection, and not to cease un∣less the Lands aforesaid revert to the Right Owners. ITEM. We give and bequeath all our broken Ware, as Oaths, Protestations, Solemn Leagues and Covenants, to whomso∣ever will take them, being like to prove troublesom stuff in another World. ITEM. (Because we know not how to avoid it) we give and bequeath to General MONK the Keys of our Shop of Iniquity (as we have made is) at Westminster, in Order to the Letting in of the secluded Members; and with them all the Curses we are able to pronounce for his presumpti∣on in being more honest then our selves. ITEM. To all his honest Officers and Souldiers we give and bequeath for the finding some few Trifles which we lately utterly lost (to wit) the Love, Good will, and Well∣wishes of the people.
ITEM, VVe give and bequeath our late Knack of Extortion in Folio (being for six moneths Assessment, not like to be paid by our Order) to be foulded in Quarto, and imployed only to backside service, in remembrance of the RVMP: ITEM. Our VVILL further is, that Haberdashers Hall be hanged round with mourning, in order to the celebra∣tion of our Obsequies, and that our two late Knacks of Sequestration (more dear to us then the Bible) be cut into Escutcheons and hanged about about Our Herse, and that every Ofi-cer there, lately gaping for Preferment, have a lighted Torch put in his mouth, ready to dance attendance upon our RVMP-SHIPS to Charon's Boat; and that Jack Lambert, late Master of mis-rule, and Ring-leader of the Phanatiques, be during this Solemnization Master of the Ceremonies. ITEM. Our VVILL further is, that all Buttons made by the RƲMP in their extremity, be valued at a High Rate, and that none be sold under the Rate of a Six Moneths Assessment the Gross. And we do hereby give unto our Executors hereafter named all benefit, profit, and ad∣vantage thereby accruing, that they may have cause to remember us by a good Token. ITEM. VVe give and bequeath what we cannot keep, to be imployed towards the repairing of those breaches we
have made both in Church and State, and in particular towards the mending of the City Gates and Port-Cullises, which as we have had the shame of throwing down, so our Will is, that we may have the Credit (seeing we deserve to be at the Cost) of the setting up, and to have this MOTTO engraven. These gates they fell with many a thump And were set up at the charge of the Rump And Lastly, we do by this our WILL nominate, con∣stitute, and appoint our loving Friends Praise God Barebone, together with his late Rabble of Fellow Peti∣tioners to be Executioners of this our Last Will and Testament, giving unto them the thanke of the House for their good infections; and our Will is, that as our Ri∣sing again, they be put into all places of Profit and Trust throughout our Dominions: and in the interim we give them a Copy of our Countenance, as a Commission to carry on their Damnable, Cursed; and Cut-throat Designs. In Witnesse whereof to this our LAST WILL and TESTAMENT, we have subscribed Our NAME, RVMP
Postscript. Reader, I Shall desire thee to take notice that this Rump-Will, though it be published in the Executors names, yet the promulgation thereof I must needs take upon my self, and then if thou sayest I might have been better imployed, I shall say so too, but (mistake me not) not because thou sayest it, but because I think it: And yet let me tell thee, I think I have done well, though I might have done bet∣ter, and thou that findest fault mayst do worse; but how∣ever if thou dost not like, thou hadst best look off, which is the best Counsel I can at this time give thee, only thus much I'le promise thee, that when I have any other Varie∣ties to treat the withal besides RVMPS, thou shalt find me more solid. S. P. FINIS.
