R138 E989_14 99867173 119467
The great and grievous Oppression of the SUBJECT; Exhibited in a REMONSTRANCE to the PARLIAMENT: Wherein is more particularly set forth, The unjust Dealings of the Two CORPORATIONS OF HULL AND HEADON In the County of YORK. By ROBERT RAIKES Gent. London, Printed for the Author. 1659.
For the Right Honorable The Supreme Authority of the Nation, the Commons assembled in Parliament, The humble Petition of Robert Raikes of Headon, Gent. Humbly sheweth unto your Honors, THat your Petitioner having been at all times, and in all changes a constant adherer to this present Parliament and Common∣wealth, and by reason thereof hath suffered and sustained great loss and damage in his Estate, partly by reason of his goods the Soldiers under the Lord Fairfax took, used and burned of your petitioners, both at Selby and Hull; but more especially by the violent and injust dealing of divers Malignants and Presbyterians in the town of Hull, and the base carriage and continual injust and illegal vexations of the Cavaliers and the drunken Aldermen of the town of Headon, these of Headon having from time to time sought and laid wait for the life of your petitioner, and many times not only driven his goods, but lamed and spoiled his goods so driven, and in the night-time broken his fences, stollen his goods both cows and mare off his ground, and being so stollen have laid actions on them, and forced extraordinary and extrajudicial compositions.  anting any Replevin for the goods so surreptiously stollen and take y, threatning those that came to meat the goods, seising and imprisoning of their persons, and milking the cows and spoil∣ing them, and countenancing the persons that so did: Being a Town guilty of supposed murder, and of much bloodshed, rapine, spoil, and per∣verting of Justice; the Magistrates drunken, idle and vicious persons, and all the Corporation for the most part little better, being a nest of Cava∣liers, Tinkers, drunken and malignant men, as your Petitioner doubteth not to make apparent to all the world, they having been along-customed to much mischief, and likely they are to commit more, threatning your Petitioner they will make the town of Headon too hot for him; having besides lying in wait to kill him, assaulted him in his own house, wound∣ed and beat him down in his own court-yard with halberts, dragged him out of his own house-porch and all along to prison, refusing Bail proffered by better men then any the drunken Aldermen his prosecutors, to the great hazard of his life, as may more plainly and sully appear in a Dis∣course called The transcendent vilany of Headon; as also by the malicious Malignants and Presbyterians of Hull, who have by their clandestine dealing, and after by open force and combination, without and against all law and equity and good conscience, put your Petitioner out of a
certain House-lease granted unto him formerly under the Hospital com∣mon seal and the Masters hand, witnessed by the Mayor and six Aldermen, to his damage in his trade and calling to the value of Three thousand pounds, even to his utter undoing. May it therefore please your Honors to refer your Petitioner to some Committee, who may order the Justices and others whom they think fit in the Country; to take the Grievances aforesaid into examination, that upon enquiry the honorable House may be certi∣fied in the truth of the premisses, and thereupon order relief to your Petitioner as they shall see cause; and your Petitioner doubteth not but to make apparent his wrongs aforesaid, and that the Commonwealth will receive profit by examining the Charters of the town of Hull, upon which your Petitioners Lease is grounded, and so much land concealed given for the maintenance of their Block-houses, now a daily and great charge to the Commonwealth: But also a great deal of honor to your selves, and security to the Country, in binding to the Peace and Good-behaviour such idle and evil disposed persons who shall appear guilty of such crimes, and also in restoring the oppressed Inhabitants into the freedom of the rest of the Country, to be governed by the Justices, and free from the vilanous extortions and oppressions of those vitious and idle drunken lewd people, the Major and Aldermen of Headon, who neither know how to do right, or able to satisfie for the wrongs and in∣justice they daily commit. And your Petitioner, as formerly, shall be ever ready to serve you and the Commonwealth with his life and estate, and shall ever pray for the continuance of your health, and your in∣crease of honor, &c. A List of the Aldermen of HEADON, As well the Drunken Aldermen, as the other, from the first to the last of their Officers. IMprimis, Mr. Lister eldest Alderman, an old illiterate fellow, a Cooper, lives by mending old Tubs and Butter-firkins; in his youth a kind of Professor, but in his age in his last Majoralty led by the drunken sort, and did for six-pence in Ale put a Soldiers wife by violence out of her Jointure-house, against all law, equity and good conscience; for which they gave him and his Officers two quarts of Ale more, in all ten penny∣worth of Ale. A poor simple old man, his land and dwelling-house worth 4 l. or 5 l. per annum: In whose time of Majoralty many oppressi∣ons and false imprisonmentss hapned. 2. Item, Mr. Burstal, one of the drunken sort, and a pitiful old illite∣rate fellow, saving that he is qualified for one of their Aldermen, being
vicious and given to drink; hath Bastards going in town that he owns, and is more careful of then of some of his best children; committed many absurdities in his Majoralty by raising and mispending of Assessments, false imprisonment of good people, and all other the scurvy tricks of the Town, to the great oppression of the people, scandal of religion, and raising of suits and troubles: A man at first worth 16 l. per annum, but gave away to his sons; now worth 5 l. per ann. or thereabouts. 3. Item, Richard Southwick, formerly a Spademan laborer, now a Chandler, one of the drunken Aldermen, a man given to much lewdness and baseness, a common drunkard and a sottish fellow, will be drunk twice or oftner in a day, and taste it roundly in a corner: One who com∣mitted many absurdities in his Majoraly, by raising and mispending of taxes, and false imprisonment of men. Worth at first 10 l. per ann. now worth 6 l. per ann. or under. A pitiful, vicious, and illiterate fellow to make an Alderman of. 4. Item, Thomas Burton, another of the drunken sort, an illiterate fel∣low; when his brother died, left shoo-making, and malted; had 12, or 14 l. per ann. but by his unjust and absurd dealing in his Majoralty, and his vicious and lewd living, sold some land, weakned his stock, and now not able to live but by his scandalous keeping of Mr. S. a Boarder. One who will not work at his trade, but idly given; committed many businesses in his Majoralty, for which he stood before the Judge at York-Assizes: It's almost impossible to mention all his absurdities and vilanies. 5. Item, Robert Ambler, another of the drunken sort of Aldermen; first a Spademan, but after the death of his Uncle, an Alderman and Tanner, worth 14 l. per ann. or thereabouts; but by his evil and injust dealing in his Majoralties weakned his estate, sold some land, ran into debt by his evil husbandry in drinking and other vicious courses: In his first Majoralty committed many vilanies, had like to have murdered one Thomas Smeadley in his bed, and had made an end of him, had not the Troopers rescued him from death: In his second Majoralty com∣mitted many absurdities by false imprisonment, and raising of taxes and mispending of them with much lewdness; A common drunkard, and one that is viciously given; had a contest with a Dutch Dctor about the curing the heat of his codpiece, to the great scandal of Religion, and the Corporations discredit. 6. Item, one Robert Blansherd another of the drunken Aldermen, a Joiner, a common drunkard, and an illiterate fellow, and a Cavalier against Hull, made (though unskilfully) those wooden Fire-works did occasion so much death at Cortingham when Hull was besieged, both of Kings party and other good people: One who had drunk himself deep in debt, but by begging for the fire hath gotten into some stock, and is 100 l. better then he was; which in regard of his lewd and vicious living will not last long. One that had a hand in the death of Mr Ethring∣ton, and many other cheats and false dealing, being not able to satisfie for the wrongs by him done: His estate worth 12 s. per ann. besides his house.
7. Item, Richard Barns once a Blacksmith, but by getting two widows turn'd a Baker; the richest man among them, but simple and illiterate, as all the rest are, and led by those of the drunken sort by reason of his simplicity, in the time of his Majoralty, into much lewdness, oppression and vilany, about the driving of cattel, false imprisonment of men, and receiving of a stollen Mare, stollen by Thomas Newson and some others by the counsel of Samuel Bains the Town-Clerk, and the said Barns with the advice of the drunken Aldermen, with many other absurdities too long to recite. 8. Item, Nathaniel Norris now Major, a great Prosessor, but very Hypocrite; for he joineth with all the rest in their vilanies and drunken courses, and caused a false action to be laid on a stollen Mare, and falsly imprisoned and caused to be apprehdended a servant for meating her masters cattel which he had caused unjustly to be driven and im∣pounded, and after laid false actions of the said cattel on purpose to get extrajudicial & extraordinary compositions for fees for the Town-clerk, and to spend among the drunken Aldermen, refusing Bail for the goods impounded. One that hath not a foot of land in all the town, and did give up shop at Hull, sold his corn and stock off the ground to make himself Major of Headon; A drunken consort as can be proved, is much in debt, and but little to pay with of his own goods. 9. Item, Henry Stringer another of the Aldermen, a Shoomaker, a very pitiful simple fellow and illiterate, and very poor, and led alto∣gether by the drunken sort to all mischief and vilany, worth 40 s per ann. and his house. Item, Samuel Bayns Town-Clerk, a lewd and vitious person, formerly tryed for his life at Oxford for murder (as is reported) a common quar∣reller and common drunkard, a keeper of an unlawful Tipling-house unlicensed and irregular, and therein many quarrels, bloodshed and suits are raised by him to the great disturbance of Town and Country; for he holdeth there the meeting of Cavaliers and Papists, to hatch their continual plots against the Commonwealth and the good people there∣of; as also there in his Tipling-house aforesaid is hatched and contrived all the vilany of the drunken malignant Aldermen his confederates and associates in mischief; there also he contriveth all his false practises to pervert the Law, and lying in wait for blood and murder, falsifying and forging of Records, to the great vexation of Town and Country; being also a common cheater and a cozener, and a great defrauder of mens estates that have to deal with him, having broken and compounded twice. Item, Thomas Robinson Butcher, for his knavery made Sergeant at Mace, and one of the Attornies of the Court; a common drunkard, one that keeps a common and unlicensed Tipling house where much vilany is hatched and contrived; a common Barrettor and betrayer of mens causes, taking upon him as an Attorney, being but an illiterate fellow; A common cheater, and one that often hath laid wait for blood, both against Mr. George Etherington and Mr. Raikes; and one that hath his Agents abroad to steal mens goods off their grounds, and drive their
cattel; and then with the advice of the drunken Aldermen and the lewd Town-Clerk, extort great compositions, and will suffer none of the relations of those that come to meat and relieve the cattel, so to do, but viol ntly assaulteth and beateth them, and carrieth them prisoners to the Major, who alloweth all their evil dealing and countenanceth them therein, to the great spoil of mens goods and cattel, so that no man can say his goods are his own, if they may so be suffered to take them: And in that Town and Country there is no remedy; for the Country-Justices do not meddle therewith, or are suffered so to do, by reason of the Charter the said Town doth plead, and thereby thinketh they may pervert justice as they themselves list. Item, Richard Newton another of the Serjeants at Mace, a Tanner, and an illiterate fellow, a Dingthrist and a common drunkard, a cheater and cozener at his Alehouse-bargains and gaming at cards; made only an Officer for his knavery, false-swearing, and perverting of justice; being an Attorney also of the Court, but so illiterate both he and the other Robinson, that neither of them can write their own name, at least∣wise neither of the said Attornies Robinson and Newton can write a De∣claration, or indite any Plea of themselves, being more versed in knavish dealing and pilfering and driving mens goods off their grounds, and re∣ceiving such goods so pilfered off other mens grounds, Fence-breakers and Night-walkers to prey and feed their horses of other mens grounds, then in any honest wie to discharge the place and office of Attorney as they ought to do; by reason whereof all Suits in that Court depending are carried as the knavish Town-Clerk will, and he will accept of no Declarations or Pleas but what he makes, nor will make none according to the Instructions given, though never so legal, but on purpose to pervert justice and overthrow the right of those he hates, or help those that will give him most for hire; taketh double or treble fees, a Suit formerly being tried for six or seven shillings, he hath now brought up to twenty four shillings, besides bribes or gratuities he takes, so well known to the Country, none will so much as expect any justice from such vile persons. The said Newton and Robinson being also Night-walkers, and putting their own and the drunken Aldermens horses, (the greatest oppression that can be, and indeed intolerable and insufferable, that so many base, idle, drunken fellows, so idly and basely given, should be suffered to oppress the Inhabitants by eating up their grounds every year as they do) they putting forty or fifty horses on their lanes (they call banks) which are insufficient for ten horse; and when the banks are bare, nay even at every Fare, they being so accustomed have every year, and do this year also enter the neighboring grounds to the said banks, all their Town∣ship consisting but of ninescore acres, and half of them being and belong∣ing to Foreiners, for so they call all them not within their base juris∣diction, and that will not allow of their base dealings as above-written, they continually eat and oppress the strangers grounds, and no remedy therefore, being a general practice and done in the night by base beggerly Night-walkers set on by the persons above, who never yet gave any re∣medy for so general and great a grievance, the Justices in the Country
having no power to right such Grievances in their Corporation. Item, their other Officers, two Constables chosen for their knavery, well versed, and if not, must learn all the vilany aforesaid, if they mean to be Churchwardens, and so Bailiffs, and at last drunken Alder∣men, &c. Item, The Pinder one Foster, a notorious Pilferer, Nightwalker, and one reported to be a notorious Thief and insufferable Vilain; keeps both Horse and Cow, buyes little or no Hay; and if any, at years end sells more then he buyes, and steals other mens Hay in the night. All the other Officers being but slaves and bloodhounds to serve the base lust and commands of their Major and drunken Aldermen; nay it is report∣ed, all the Burgesses do swear at their making free to do whatsoever the Major shall command them; by which much vilany is executed as above, and more, which I leave to your Honors to see remedied. The several Misdemeanors which the Drunken Aldermen practise in the Corporation of Headon, both by Commission, and toleration and connivence. IMprimis, They tolerate the Town clerk, who is a wicked lewd fellow in all his wickedness, being a man formerly tried for murder at Ox∣ford; A common drunkard and common quarreller, and a raiser of seditions and fomenter of quarrels and suits, a lier in wait for blood, a felonious stealer of mens goods off their ground, and a receiver, coun∣seller, and abetter of those that so steal mens goods off their grounds, a Night-walker, and perverter of justice; and borne out in all these by the lewdnesses of the drunken Aldermen aforesaid, to the great disturb∣ance of the publike peace. Item, A keeper of unlicensed Tipling-houses, selling Ale contrary to the Statute, and a common Cheater. In all which he is upholden by the drunken Aldermen aforesaid. Item, That after he had come from his Trial at Oxford, and from pra∣ctising his bloody tricks as a cut-throat Cavalier, keeping at Headon a common Tipling-house unlicensed, and as a Cheater had compounded twice to cozen men and make them take less then their due for their own, yet could not he forbear, but must needs continue his cozening and quarrelling, cheating and seditious practises in his lewd Tipling-house, cozening Robert Swack and others by raising and stirring up Suits when by him inticed to drink, raising divers quarrels, and among the rest, among the Tinkers of the Country, he set together by the ears and made parties among them being drinking with him, and so ordered
their quarrels, that those of the Cavalier-party should get the better and escape, and those of the Parliaments party that had been their Soldiers, being lamed and beaten by his wicked contriving, to be falsly imprison∣ed, and after long Imprisonment to be let go without any charge against them, besides many other quarrels he hath raised, and much bloodshed caused by lying in wait for the life of Mr. George Etherington, by breaking his stable-door and seising his horse, prosecuting the said Mr. Ethrington even to death when his goods were gone: And as greatly suspected to have occasioned the death of the said Mr. Etherington by laying violent hands on him at Paul, Newton's garth, and Headon, whose death and mur∣der would be inquired into. Nor did his murderous intentions rest there, but at the same time he also laid wait for the life of Mr. Robert Raikes; and for many days to∣gether on purpose to take the life of the said Robert Raikes, encouraged his Cut-throats he had hired, and that by the drunken Aldermens aid, advice and connivence; by whose wicked practices after much lying in wait, the said Cut-throats assaulted the said Robert Raikes in his own house, knockt him down with Black bills and other unlawful weapons, beat and wounded him, and having so beat and wounded him in his own house, dragged him therefrom by the heels all along the streets to prison, the same day Mr. Etherington was buried; the neighbors crying out of their murder and vilanous cruelty, bidding them take heed of committing one murder after another, and bade them first clear them∣selves of one murder before they committed another upon the body of the said Robert Raikes; the death of Mr. Etherington being fresh in every ones memory, and supposed by their cruelty to be made away, which caused suits and many troubles. Yet did not their cruelty so rest, but the drunken Aldermen being all combined to countenance such vilany, after long and false imprisonment, when they could prove nothing just and legal against the said Robert Raikes at the Sessions, yet out of meer malice they tyed him to his good abearing without shewing any cause why, and yet would not suffer him to live in quiet, but hired lewd and vitious persons to intercept him, and without cause carried him to prison, and scandalizing him with lyes and untruths, but never proved any thing against him to this day, but on purpose to lame, beat and take the life away of the said Robert Raikes, and to pervert the course of Law and Justice, and that by the whole Court of Aldermen in their drunken Sessions. Nor did their malice so cease, but the drunken Aldermen and Towns-Clerk caused the Fences of the said Robert Raikes to be broken down; and their lewd Under∣lings whom they keep to swear for them in all their vilany, eat up the ground of the said Robert Raikes to his great damage; and the Fences which the Town and their Tenants, being Town-Officers, should make up and repair, neither the drunken Aldermen nor their lewd Officers would or could be perswaded to repair, but on the con∣trary made a great deep ditch or pit just at the lane where he should have carried his goods out and in, on purpose to destroy and lame and kill those beasts of Mr. Raikes which they had designed to destroy in the
said pit, and should come upon his ground, and carried their own goods hrough Mr. Raikes and other mens ground, by reason the pit they had made to destroy mens goods at the entry of their own, having so spoiled his goods about seventeen head of beasts one time and other. They laid and contrived three false Actions, and arrested the said Robert Raikes; which was contrived by the Town-Clerk and Paget, two Cavalier-knaves: Paget declared for Twenty four shillings for fees, and the Town-Clerk swore falsly the said Robert Raikes owed so much within a little for fees, and promised to pay him, &c. being altogether false: For the said Robert Raikes never imployed Paget, or ever was owing him any thing for fees, but imployed one Smailes to reverse an Out∣lawry, and gave him money to discharge it and over: But who did it is not known; for Smailes is upon the Record, and had the money, though he did it knavishly, falsly, and contrary to his Attornies oath, as by Smailes Note of charges may appear: For, for Paget, he never was im∣ployed nor trusted so much then, or allowed to practise, nor never did or could prove any such fees due he sued for. The other two Actions were for slandering the Town Clerk for swearing so falsly: But that he swore falsly, is apparent by Record, no Fees proved or due. And the last was a false Action for a supposed Debt the Town-Clerk challenged falsly, it being paid before, and never was a quarter so much, as by his hand may appear; but he did it on purpose to cheat the said Mr. Raikes of a parcel of Cushions he bought of him, and never paid for. Neither did they keep their Courts order, by reason they were all imployed about begging for the Fire, and abusing the Justices to make them a Certificate according to the false oaths and in∣formations by them exhibited; by means whereof they got a large Patent, and by it and their begging got two times more then all their losses were by fire, but spent a great part of it as their drunken meet∣ings, as they do of all their Estreats and Forfeitures at the Sessions, and all other the Towns stock, that was not long since worth above Fifteen hundred pounds; besides their daily Res and Forfeitures, whereof few are brought to account, but almost all idly spent as can be easily proved. And as that was, which by a vile and illegal way they extorted from Robert Raikes, sending for him by a Serjeant, who is also Attorney of the Court, and under pretence of friendship by the new Major, who promised he might safely come and gow▪ The said Robert Raikes went along to know their pleasure, which the new Major told him, the Court had fined him Twenty shillings for contempts for not appearing to the Actions. He replied, He had desired to see their Declarations, but there were none in Court; and if any were then, he desired to see them; but none appeared till fourteen days after. Then they said, He should have fee'd his Attorney and answered Court-days: He replied, They were so busie about their Certificate, there was no legal Court kept: They said there was; But it was proved that their Court was neither legally kept, the doors being lock'd, none could come in, nor any At∣torney to fee there. But they said, If the Attorney was not there, his Wife was, and would have received Fee, having let the Major and Clerk
in at a back-door. So because none could get in to see the Serjeant or Jailors wife for an Attorney, they threatned the said Mr. Raikes, unless he would pay them Twenty shillings for that Contempt before Decla∣rations, they would drive his goods, or imprison him. Which the said Mr. Raikes, knowing them to be Knaves that sought his life, fearing they would use him as formerly, or as Mr. George Etherington, he became bound to pay them, and was forced so to do: But that would not so content them neither, but the Town-Clerk came violently upon the ground and chased his cows and cattel; which having been often used to be evil-intreated by those lewd people, knew them and run from them into the far close, so many as were formerly abused by them and knew their usage; so that there was but one cow left which was not acquaint∣ed with their cruelty, and that the Town-clerk stole off the ground, be∣longing to one Thomas Newsom, who was owing Mr. Raikes ten shillings for her grass. Upon what strange composition the poor man had his Cow again, is uncertain: But the Town-clerk and drunken Aldermen, and the knavish Officers counsell'd the man to steal a Mare from off the ground of Mr. Raikes, that cost six pounds; And having been counsellors and abettors to the man and his associates in the stealing the Mare, they the said Town-clerk, drunken Aldermen and Officers were the receivers of the Mare so stollen, knowing her to be so stollen: And the better to palli∣ate the Felony, they caused an Action to be laid at the suit of Thomas Newsom, who with his associates had stollen the Mare by their councel and abetting. The said Raikes being at Hull, he sent word and desired to have his goods so stollen secured, and the Felony enquired after: But by such base people could not get justice; Pilfering and such dealing being publikely countenanced by the drunken Aldermen and their as∣sociates. So that the said Robert Raikes can keep neither Cow, nor Horse, nor Swine, for their pilfering; having had One hundred pounds worth of goods spoiled by their illegal dealings, and ten or twelve Swine worried by the Dogs of the drunken Aldermen, who keep them contrary to Law to wreck their malice upon their neighbors, to do them hurt. And for their High-ways, they cause their Juries to swear even what they list, sometime one way, sometime another way, as guided by the drunken Aldermen; and very few of the Burgesses but are guilty of rash and false swearing, even concerning the High-ways, and the keeping their Fare; and are in all such contrary swearing promised to be holden harmless by the drunken Aldermen and their associates, and they led altogether by the Cavaliers to do mischief to those of the Parliaments party: The said Town clerk having always councels, plottings and con∣trivings of hurt, treason and mischief, in the Tipling-house of the said Town-clerk, by all the Papists and Cavaliers in the Country; which though the Aldermen know, and Mr. Barns was often complaining of, yet he never remedied, nor any other of the drunken Aldermen; by reason whereof the good peaceable people live in great fear and danger of their lives by reason of the misdemeanors aforesaid. FINIS.
