R1715 E146_24 99871304 156665
THE PETITIONERS VINDICATION from CALVMNIE and ASPERSION. And the Young Mans Animation to the building up of ZION. Published in their Defence, against a scurrilous Book or Pamphlet lately written against them by I. W. and scandalously intituled, Petitions against Bishops and their Votes in Parliament. Sub∣scribed unto after a Clandestine, delivered after a tumultuous manner, and falsly going under the name of a whole County or Town, proved to be both contrary to our late taken Protestation, as also utterly unlawfull by many other cleare and evident Reasons. Now answered and refuted, and Petitions delivered unto the PARLIAMENT, by impregnable reasons proved to be both lawfull, and according to the Petitioners duty, and the late taken Protestation. With many other remarkable passages worthy of observation. By T. Robinson. Veritati Devotum. Prov. 26. 24, 25. He that hateth will counterfeit with his lips, but in his heart he layeth up deceit. Though he speak favourably, beleeve him not: for there are seven abo∣minations in his heart. LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. and are to be sold at the Castle in Cornhill. 1642.
COurteous Reader, for your better understanding of this Book, I have first recited the Author of the book, I answer his matter, with the folio of his book wherein it is: then as I handle his particular say∣ings or assertions, I denote them alphabetically both in his matter and mine (as for example) In his Ingression or en∣trance, fo. 2. of this book he saith, viz. For him who is but a private subject and no Law-maker, to give his hand in a factious way, &c. I first undertaking to clear that scan∣dall set the letter (a) at the words factious way: and so like∣wise in my answer thereunto: And thus throughout the whole Treatise: that wheresoever a letter by it self is in any part of my Answer, you may look back to the same in my Authors argument just precedent, and discern more plainly the thing by him affirmed or implyed, and by me refuted. And if I had not so done, I know not how you would rightly have under∣stood him. For he hath observed neither rule or method in his discourse or argument, but heapeth up many things con∣fusedly together, thereby to perplex the mind, and darken reason, that so like a cunning Merchant, he may the better in a bundle put off his suffisticated ware for sound and currant unto men. T. R.
THE PETITIONERS VINDICATION FROM Calumnie and Aspersion. And the Young Mans Animation to the building up of ZION. THe Author of the aforesaid book, folio 1. doth by way of Introduction, first imply the impor∣tuning will of some friend (by him there called Mr. Cachisme) for his hand to a Petition, such as by his discourse appeares, have of late by severall parts and persons of this Kingdom been deli∣vered to the Honorable House of Parliament; Secondly, his un∣willingnesse to subscribe the same, and willing mind to satisfie him therefore, albeit (as he saith) he shall be alwayes readie and willing not onely to give his hand, but his heart and purse likewise for the good of the Common-weal, County, or Parish wherein he lives, and for that cause hath been both active and passive severall yeers to∣gether. Where he properly liveth, or what his proper name is, I know not, nor hath he declared, it may be he doth here but re∣side or sojourn upon some negotiation, and his true living may be in Spaine, France, Flanders, or elsewhere, and so what he hath apologized may be For the good of the common weal, County, or parish wher∣in he lives. good: otherwise the sequell of his writing (in my judgement) doth plainly render him evilly affected to our good, viz. to the Republique of this our England, and the common cause in hand. For his pretended satisfaction tends
meerly to the diminution of the courage and constancie of good men, the freezing of the cold, and the incouragement of the wic∣kedly bold. And his Ingression, But for me who am but a private Subject, &c. is palpably a slye insinuation of a matter of The best glosses are often put on the worst com∣modities, and the worst wine into the purest glasses. The Authors Ingression. con∣science, for the not subscribing his friends Petition, the better the reby to gain credence and perswsion from the hearts of peo∣ple, and that principally from the greater multitude, the igno∣rant and indifferent. But by the way a word of that, viz. But for me who am but a private (b) subject, a (c) Protestant, and no (d) Law-maker, to give my hand in a factious (a) way, and without (e) command from Authoritie, to will that there should be (f) no Bishops, and that they shall have no voice in the House (g) of Peers, is against my (h) conscience, and that (i) light of reason and understanding which I have received. And I dare not comply with the (k) distempers of the people, and follow the streame of a multi∣tude to do evill on these grounds follooeing. Ye have him in his own words verbatim. Lo here he concludes both Petitions and Petitioners to the House of Parliament to be (a) Mark, doth he not impu∣dently asperse the whole Par∣liament here∣by? as if they did counte∣nance both factions and factious per∣sons, for they accepted both the Petitioners and their Peti∣tions. factious: a phrase wholly scan∣dalous Answer. and used to deter others. For what disturbance or com∣motion was thereby either plotted or practised through them, either against King or State? what breach of Law? or publique peace? only as members sensible of the great jeopeardy the whole Body was in, they humbly fought for redresse to the Fountain of succour and justice. And every one as a private (b) man hath an interest in the publique state and cause of the Land. For it is not onely one mans cause, but every ones, and we are all members one of another. And as every particular member doth partici∣pate of the universall health or sicknesse of the body, and as every member naturall, doth grow and prosper according to the di∣stemperature or sound constitution of the heart or brain, from whence and on which its whole life and motion doth depend: so is it in every member politique. And as the members corporall being hurt; sick, or any wayes grieved, do by a naturall instinct and way inscrutable forthwith look and send unto the prime parts before named for strength and comfort, yea and secretly excite all the other parts also to be assistant. So questionlesse may the members of the Body politique, finding themselves wounded, weakned, and many wayes grieved by their oppressive foes, and
distractive fears, lawfully look up, and by humble Petition sue unto the King and Parliament (both which are one) the verie heart and head, life and being of this pristine land and Nation, and of every true member of the same, yea and invite others also to assist them therein. The woman in her distresse cried to the King of Israel for help, when it was not in his power to help, 2 King. 6. 26, 27. And shall not we pray help my Lord O King? Nay help, O ye Noble Senators, ye Parliament, in whose power it is (through Gods good hand upon them) to help us. For (blessed be our God) our case is not yet like the womans. And if mine Author be a (c) Protestant, (as he boasteth himself) and that in re, and not onely nomine: he ought the rather to sue in the Protestants behalf, and be the more forward in promoting their cause unlesse he be a withered branch, and live insensible of the generall calamitie, and so more fit to be cut off then nourished. Who will seek and sue if the Protestant do not, neither the Papist, nor the Atheist? nay, who should seek but the Protestant? For his cause it is even his onely. But mine Author is like the men of Ephraim, that being called would not go, Judg. 12. 2. and will abuse his brethren for going, ver. 4. But let him take heed, as like as he would seem to be a Anguis later sub herba. Gileadite, he will be found but an Ephraemite, he pronounceth Sibboleth for Shibboleth, ver. 6. And if none but (d) Law-makers ought to petition, then the Par∣liament men themselves should onely petition, and what needed that? know they not their own minds? and if the thing, to wit, petitioning, be (ipso facto) unlawfull, as he argueth against the Petitioners, then I conceive it is much more unlawfull in the Law-makers, (as in Majore) then it is in others: But if it be lawfull in the Law-makers, as by that word (d) Law-maker he inferres, then it is also lawfull in others, and so in the Petitio∣ners. Besides, freedome of information, and to make our grie∣vances known is a chiefe priviledge of Parliament, and of us by the Parliament. And what (e) command more authentique then liberty confirmed by Law? And although many have petitioned that there may be (f) no Bishops, yet have they but done what they ought, and what their oath doth require. For both their standings and present titles (as shall hereafter be fully proved) are altogether Popish and unlawfull: and to will that these Pre∣lates may have no Votes in the house (g) of Peers, who can deny
it to be a thing not onely lawfull but expedient? for can a man serve two Masters? no more can they serve two offices. And there∣fore all this sure can become no such heavy burthen to my Au∣thors (h) conscience, especially having received so much (i) light as he boasteth of. Nor need he fear to comply herein with the people, for these their humble supplications cannot by any judi∣cious Doctors be accounted (k) distempers. Indeed well he may do, not to follow the (l) stream of a multitude to do evil, for at this time it is so violent and strong as that perhaps it may suddenly carry him to ruine headlong. But the Petitioners part is not this multitude: for (comparatis comparandis) comparing them with the Adversaries they are but a manuall. And it is certain they are fewer in number that desire the good of Zion, and of the Citie Jerusalem, then they that hate it. But all this by the way upon his Exordium or Entrance. Now to his grounds, and I will re∣peate them in his own words as followeth, fol. 2. of his book, viz. First, because I have by the example and recommendation of the The Authors 1. ground. Parliament solemnly (m) taken the Protestation whereby I have se∣riously protested to maintain and defend so farre as lawfully I may, the (o) true reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the doctrine of the Church of England, against all (n) Poperie and Popish Innovations, contrary to the said doctrine. Now in the 36. Article of the said ex∣pressed doctrine, the office of Bishops is inclusively confirmed. Here he confesseth himself solemnly to have (m) taken the Pro∣testation for the maintenance of the true Reformed Protestant Reli∣gion: Answer. and yet is his writing against all such as according to this Protestation and their conscience do arise and apply themselves to the maintenance and defence of the same Religion, making the Protestation which is the very ground and strongest obliga∣tion of the Petitioners performance, his prime argument to de∣hort them therefrom; so perniciously inverting the end of the Protestation, as if it had been ordained, and by the Worthies of the Land taken and to us commended, rather for the quenching that little love of the truth, and zeal of Gods worship which is in men, then any wayes to inflame and excitate the same, and for the shutting men up in silence, and tying them up from action, rather then to imbolden and strengthen them both by word and deed to further the work of Reformation, and the building up
of the house of God. And although he hath sworn to defend this Religion against all (n) Poperie and Popish Innovations, yet he maketh his oath the cause of his refusing to joyn with others in lawfull means for the defence thereof, and thus he overthrow∣eth his first As read and mark it. ground and plea from thence. For if the Protestation doth bind a man (as indeed it doth, and so himself confesseth) to defend the true reformed Protestant Religion, and to oppose all Poperie and Popish innovations, how then is he left free? what excuse can it be to him? not onely for his sitting still and giving way to Poperie (for he that is not with us is against us) but also for his opposition against such as in discharge of their oath do stir in defence of the true Protestant Religion, and expulsion of poperie and popish Innovation. The Protestation hath not Twinnes in it, it comprehends not contraries, nor doth it leave a man to his own pleasure. Therefore being thus taken by him, it doth for his negligence and aversenesse plainly condemne him: and better had it been for him never to have taken it, then ha∣ving taken it not to keep it, Eccles. 5. 4. for the oath is not with man, but with God. When the people of Judah and Benjamin had sworn and entred into covenant with God, Ezra 9. 5. so soon as the Priest had told them their sin, and what they should do to glorifie God, they presently consent and put it in practise, ver. 10, 11, 12. We have sworn and entred covenant with our God, and our Priests, the faithfull Ministers of God, have told us our sin, and what the strange thing is we must put from us, that God may be glorified by us: and is it not lawfull for us to sue for a Bill of divorcement, yea to divorce our selves? For we have lo∣ved our strange Ceremonies and Service, as well as ever the Jews loved their strange wives. And although we lay not hands upon vain crosses and pictures, Copes and Surplices, Organs and Cor∣nets, and the rest of the Whores Dresse, yet give us leave at least to petition, that they may be all abolished; and that with all Is∣rael, 2 Chron. 31. 1. we may now at length break down all the Altars and Images, and cast away all vain Ceremonies out of the service of God throughout the whole Land. For these must be removed before our oaths can be fulfilled, or God truly worship∣ed. And whereas in the close of his first ground he ratifieth the reason of his refusall, by vertue of the 36. Article of the said ex∣pressed doctrine of the Church of England, wherein the office of Bi∣shops
is inclusively confirmed. I answer. The Protestation bindeth not to the maintenance of the whole and sole Doctrine compri∣zed and expressed in that book, nor of any part thereof, other∣wise and further then it consents with the wholsome words of Christ, for the very words in the oath are, the (o) true Note I pray. reform∣ed Protestant Religion; Now in that same book, and in many of those devised Articles, are many things contained and enjoyn∣ed, which are not truly reformed, (or rather conformed) to Gods holy Word. And therefore our Oath is of a larger extent, and we are thereby bounden even to oppose those Articles, and the whole form of Doctrine and discipline comprehended in them, so far forth as they and it be not opposite to Poperie and Popish Innovation, and dissent from the truth of Reformation: and this is more amply and obviously expressed in that resolving clause next under and adjoyning to the Protestation. It is true that in the said (p) 36. Article the consecration of Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are there allowed, according to the manner used at the first beginning of Reformation in the time of Edw. 6. But that therein or thereby, either Archbishops or Lordbishops, are justified or justifiable by Gods Word, I do nei∣ther read nor beleeve And therefore his secret fear of transgres∣sing an bsolute Act, or unlawfull constitution of the Church, is no sufficient plea for my Author to break his oath, and to in∣duce others to do likewise. Besides, grant what he pleads for: that the present office of the Bishops as it is at this day executed by them, be by a Law of Parliament confirmed, as lawfull by Gods Word: Is it therefore lawfull by the Word of God? No. There is neither Law nor Counsell against Gods Law: his Sta∣tutes are like himself pure and unalterable, and need not the frothy device of men either to illustrate or authorise them. And as for Archbishops and Bishops (nay and Prebends and Arch∣deacons too) I am certain there is neither precept, nor pattern in holy Writ for them, many against them. Matth. 23. 8. 10, 11. Mark 9. 35. and 10. 42, 43, 44. Luke 22. 25, 26. and 1 Pet. 2. 3. Nor doth Timothy or Titus justifie our Bishops, they were men of another order and stamp. 1 Tim. 3. 2, 3, 4. Tit. 1. 6, 7, 8. Nei∣ther doth the word , on which they so much stand, prove , id est, ab inspici∣endo their standing true; the Etymologie thereof hath no Analogie with them, their jurisdiction is originally from humane inven∣tion,
for their institution is not jure divino, but jure pontificio, not by God, but by the Pope, and for that cause the Pope calls himself Pater Patrum, the Father of the Fathers, that is, of the Bishops. Episcopus idem quòd Presbyter. The word signifieth no more then an Elder or Over∣seer, Act. 20. 28. One that hath the charge or Homer an Heathen Au∣thor many ages before Bi∣shops, calls Hector Prince of Troy, Episcopum, quòd esset Troje praeci∣puus inspector, & propugna∣tor, ejusque curam gerebat. Magistratus Atticus dictus fuit Episcopus. Cicero himself was called Episcopum or ae maritimae à Formiis. Epist: Famil. lib. 6. care of any place: and so it imports all the painfull Ministers of God as well as the Bishops. And that a Bishop and an Elder are one (to omit other Scriptures) it is evident by comparing the 7. verse of the 1. Chap. of Titus with the fifth verse. And if there be any dif∣ference between a Bishop or an Elder, and another Minister, a true Pastor or a Teacher, it is in this that the Bishop hath the greater care and burden, and therefore ought to be more hum∣ble and watchfull: But our Bishops will have other Ministers to differ nothing from them in pains and care, unlesse it be in ta∣king more then they do; for indeed they take none at all. But for dignity and honour, they will have a great distance betwixt them and their brethren, even as great as that betwixt Dives and Lazarus. They must be the Lords, (nay gracelesly) gracious Lords, and their Brethren the true labourers of Jesus Christ Sometime the Bishops of Oxons phrase. Rogues and Rascals. Their very Titles are usurped, and such as Christ the Lord never appointed: for there is but one Lord, saith the Apostle, Ephes. 4. 5. Isa. 42. 8. and had they not made more use of the Temporall Sword, (whereunto they have no right) then they have of the Spirituall (for they and Gods Word could never accord) their tyrannicall jurisdiction had not conti∣nued untill this time. Seeing all this, what sufficient ground then is there for mine Author to plead the Protestation in Bar against such as petition against them and their temporall power? what cause of scrupulositie for him to refuse the endeavour of their re∣movall? Nay what cause is there not for him to endeavour it? if he was well affected, or had so much light to walk by, and a conscience so tender as he speaks of. Therefore for as much as they are justly deemed Antichristian (because whatsoever office or officer in the Church, (Gods house) is not by, or is contrary to Christs own institution, the onely King and Lord of the same, Psal. 2. 6. Joh. 13. 13. is against him) the Petitioners have but done their duty, and discharged their oath in seeking to have them expelled. And so I will recite his second ground, fo. 2. viz.
Secondly, I am ingaged thereby also to maintain and defend the The Authors 2. ground. powers and priviledges of Parliaments, which is chiefly to be under∣stood of the (q) established Laws concerning the same. Now severall (r) Acts of Parliament do not onely confirm as aforesaid the office of a Bishop, but by the powers and priviledges of those Acts of Parlia∣ment they are also to sit as Members of the Lords House. I pray observe how this man doth preposterously tye the pri∣viledges Answer. of Parliament on the (q) Acts of Parliament. Cujus con∣trarium verum est, the contrary whereof is true. For (as I hum∣bly conceive) the Laws by them made, make not their privi∣ledges: But they by vertue of that inherent priviledge and power, ab initio, established on them, as the representative body of the whole kingdom, are inabled both to enact Laws, and if cause be, to repeal them, as the cause produceth the effect. Otherwise it could not be that we should be our own Law-makers: and in my understanding we are called a free people, because we are govern∣ed by a free Law, and not by constrained Ordinances violently obtruded against our wills upon us. The bounds of our Law be∣ing Meum & Tuum; and the Ends, Defence and Freedome. And therefore we are not free because the Laws do make us free, for by our Laws we are bound and must obey: But because we have free power to make such Laws unto which we willingly do as∣sent and obey. Now that these priviledges of Parliament are confirmed by Law, is undeniable: and therefore he that violates the least of them is punished as a Law-breaker: But that there may be Laws or Acts altered and repealed, and no priviledge broken is manifest, and one Parliament may, and we know doth often alter and abrogate what another did establish and enact. Ergo the maintenance of priviledges of Parliament is not to be understood chiefly of the Laws thereby established; but of the legislative power, priviledges, and libertie, wherewith they of the Parliament are invested as of right, and (as I may say) in feo∣do simpli, for the doing of whatsoever shall seem good unto them for the honour of the King, relief of the Subject, and good of the Kingdom, the which they lively personate. Therefore it is that their power, their priviledges, and personall liberties, which we are more principally bound to defend, and most nearly doth this concern us. For the life and libertie, estate, welfare, and verie
being (under God) of you and me, and of every man and mem∣ber of this Kingdom is wrapt up in them and their priviledges: And if we stand onely in defence of the Laws enacted (as they of the The Kings Army in the North, who under colour of maintaining the Law, would have imployed their Forces against the Parliament for the support of Bishops. Army in pretext would have done) and not of their persons and rights to them adherent as they are Parliament men: We may have still our old Laws (if not our old oppressions) but no execution of them, our Law-makers being illegally taken from us, as wofull experience of late had almost The case is plain, because the accusation was palpable. taught us. And al∣beit severall (r) Asts of Parliament do confirm both Bishops and their Votes in the Lords House, yet neither Bishops, nor their votes are therefore lawfull nor yet necessarie: Neither custome nor antiquitie can justifie falshood, or tolerate incommoditie. As for Bishops, I have spoken somewhat alreadie sufficient (as I sup∣pose) for this Treatise, they are a theme requiring a more ample discussion. And as for their votes in Parliament, it hath been proved, and long since adjudged that a Parliament may be abso∣lute without them, De Doctor Standish. 7. H. 8. and often have Laws been made and ratified by the Parliament without them, 25. E. 1. and 35. E. 1. and 7. R. 2. and what may be done, in this case, at one time may be done at any time, and therefore it followeth there is no ne∣cessitie of them, and what should any member unnecessarily do there? Besides, the Bishops right in Parliament is of another na∣ture then that of the Noble Peers, for that of the Peers is inhe∣rent and hereditary; but the Bishops theirs is onely durante bene placito, during the Kings pleasure, or so long as they shall please him. For they sit there but by their Masters favour, and what hope of good from him that is disswaded through fear or per∣swaded for favour? Again it is incongruous and inconsistent with their See the Speech of the Right Honor∣able the Lord Say, against the temporall power of Bi∣shops. function. The Bishops have often used that Pro∣verbe, Ne sutor ultra crepidam, let no man meddle out of his cal∣ling, to silence the just reproofs against them; when as indeed it might more justly have been objected to them: Ne Episcopus verò ultra Ecclesiam. But let not a Bishop leave the Church. But I will desist from further prosecution of this point, because (blessed be God) we have our desire in this matter most rightfully alreadie granted. Howsoever thus much may suffice to prove that such as have petitioned against Bishops and their votes in Parliament, have done nothing against their oath, as my Author doth sub∣tilly
infer, but truly done their duty, and discharged their con∣science. And so I come to my Authors third ground in these words following, fol. 3. viz. Thirdly, I am bound by the said Protestation to (s) maintain and The Authors 3. ground. defend the lawfull rights and liberties of the Subject, and if this ex∣tend to every subiect in particular, much more to a Parliament man Now they being Subiects, and their rights and liberties being lawfull, I am bound to maintain them, so far as lawfully I may, in those law∣full rights and liberties. Again the (t) making and repealing of laws for the good of the Common-wealth, is a speciall and peculiar power, priviledge, and right, proper (t) onely to Parliaments. Therefore not to be (v) forcedor coacted by me being no Parliament man. For that may be lawfull and warrantable in my governours to do by reason, which is altogether unlawfull and unwarrantable in me to require by will. This is rather to be a tyrannicall (w) Judge then a legall wit∣nesse, to break Laws rather then to preserve them, and in stead of Re∣formation, to bring in confusion. Here is much chaffe, but little corn. Now he acknowledgeth that he is bound to (s) maintain the lawfull rights and libertis of Answer. every subiect, and therefore much more of Parliament men: before he takes care onely for the established Laws, but as for the Law-makers he argueth nothing. I had almost thought him to be of those that would lately have had them in prison. And again here he grants that it is onely (t) proper to Parliament men to make Laws and repeal them, the which I am sure they can never do without their liberty, to convene and consult, and therefore (as I have already said) it is not so much the established Laws, as the power, priviledges, and personall liberties of Parliament men (whilest they are so, and do onely what is meet) that we must defend. Nor hath any man assumed this power and proprietie, but they (as I know) though my Author doth insinuate (t) so. Unlesse it be such as would limit their Councels, and propose them a way after their own fancies, accounting all that is done by the Par∣liament, contrary to their crooked will and liking, to be con∣trary both to law and justice: for there is a generation, with whom onely quod libet licet, what pleaseth is lawfull. But the Pe∣titioners are not of this kind, and therefore not thus presumpti∣ous, for they onely sue for justice, not directing but begging re∣dresse.
But toward the end my Author imputes an enforcement (v) or coaction to such as petition them. What impulsion he mea∣neth I am ignorant, for I am privie to none (I am sure not that By the Ca∣valliers and broken Soul∣diers. martiall commination Januar. 4. for in all his discourse he doth not so much as blow upon it.) And what way more hum∣ble and lesse offensive then supplication? and what way more sub∣misse and tolerable then petition? Sure he is rapt in the spirit, in∣timating divine deprication, then which with God nothing in∣deed is more forcible: But I think I may rather say unto him, Satin' sanus es? is he well in his wits? for what is more lawfull, nay more needfull and commendable? then to ask things lawfull whether from God above, or of the gods belowe, especially with this conclusion, humbly subjecting to their grave wisedom, as it is well known all our Petitioners have done. Again what man distempered in mind, sick, or maimed in body, or crazed in estate, will not discover to his Divine, Physitian, or Lawyer, his grief, yea, and the cause too if he can? earnestly imploring help and comfort from him, nay not cease untill (if it may be) he hath in some good measure obtained it. And hath not the whole mind and body (to wit) both the Ministery and Magistracie of the Land, and every living member thereof, been grievously di∣stempered, sick and wounded? and whom should we inform and make acquainted with our desperate maladies and their causes? But that most wise and ever approved skilfull Minister, Physitian, and Lawyer, the all healing Parliament, whom we have chosen, and in whom (under our God) we do confide for the diligent search of our distempers, redresse of our grievances, reparations of our estates, and restauration of our perfect health and strength again. Yet as the Patient doth alway find and feele somewhat more in himself then the Doctor can discover or discern: So doth the great Patient our Land and Kingdom, find and feele many close and inward griefs, which that learned Doctor the Parlia∣ment cannot of it self espie, and therefore on necessitie must be by their great Patient the people, informed of, or else they can mi∣nister no remedie. My Author hath forgot the old Rule, Egrotare malum, sed pejus nolle sanarl. It is ill to be sick, but much worse not to seek cure. Besides, he is but an ill servant and a negligent, that while his master is busie in
private consultation within, or in serious examination of his estate, will not have a carefull eye into the shop and affaires abroad, and in case he discry any danger, theft, or other evill act, do not speedily give his master notice for remedy. The hap∣pie Parliament is our Privie Councell Chamber, or the great withdrawing roome of the Kingdom, where they, as so many great State Masters, do sit in consultation and strict examination of our publique estate and welfare. The whole Land is the shop of all manner of intercourse and negotiation. We should prove our selves but very bad members, remisse servants and carelesse, if while our great Masters were thus busied within, we should not once look about in the shop in the common-wealth, every man according to his severall place, and if we see or foresee any evill present or approaching, not yeeld them intelligence, that so they may happily make prevention. And now do I remember the ur∣gencie, yea, and the varietie of vehement arguments the poore widow of Tekoah used to bring back banished Absolom, 2 Sam. 14. 4. to 21. a wretch and of no relation to her. Ought not we much more to be instant, and that by many Petitions with our David, with our Parliament, (who are indeed even as an Angel of God in hearing of good and bad, therefore the Lord their God be with them, vers. 17.) for the bringing back, not of a murderous Absolom, but a poore dejected, distressed Kingdom, spoiled and stabbed (as I may say) to the very heart, not by one, but many faire looked false-hearted Absoloms; yea and as all the people throughout the Tribes of Israel, 2 Sam. 19. 9. were at strife to bring back David to his Kingdom, whom ambitious Absolom his unnaturall sonne had put to flight: so why should not we contend? what City? what company? and what Coun∣ty? should be formost with our pains and petitions to bring back, I cannot say our King Charles from exile (God forbid) but I may say His Person to his Parlia∣ment. his ancient glory and honour, and the old renown of this Land and Nation, which the aspiring Absoloms of our time (un∣naturall Brats) have so farre as they could even put to flight and banished out of sight, yea out of many a heart. And I know no sound and honest heart can deem this a mark of a (w) tyran∣nicall Judge or an illegall witnesse, or of a transgressour of the Laws, or one that seeketh confusion, as my Author implyeth against the
Petitioners. But he will say they came with weapons, as swords, bils, staves, &c. It is true, but neither to offend nor enforce, but to defend their own persons from such as for their good will to the common good As Lunsford and his com∣pany: the Bi∣shops imps, and Dam-me Boies at Whitehall. did maligne them, and (to their eternall contempt and odium be it spoken) did despightfully use them. And thus much for his third ground. Now you shall hear his fourth, fol. 4. viz. I am likewise obliged to maintain the Kings royall person, honour, The Authors 4. ground. and estate, and to preserve the union and peace between the three king∣doms, (much more among our selves.) Now there is no better way thereunto then to (x) keep his laws: for both the honour and safety of the King, the liberty and peace of the Kingdom, and welfare of them both are involved in them. Here is little to be gainsaid, for who knoweth not that the Answer. prime way to honour his Majestie, and to preserve peace in the Kingdom and common-wealth, is to keep and obey the Laws, (provided alway they oppugne not Gods Laws) and I would they had been alway kept as they should have been, and then we should have had lesse trouble at this time. Yet one thing more then meer obedience to the Law, is every one that hath taken the Protestation bound unto (that is) to do their best to bring every one that doth disobey the Laws to condigne punishment, other∣wise there can be but little peace, be you and I never so obedi∣ent: and the best way to conserve peace, is to endeavour the cor∣rection of all the perturbers thereof, which are the violators of the Laws, the bonds of our peace: and herein have the Petitioners but justly also fulfilled their oath, in praying the execution of the Laws upon all Recusants and Delinquents, who have ever been the onely Authors of our unquietnesse, seeking still to break our bands, our Laws, and to cast our cords (to wit) our Statutes from them. But as for my Author, I do not understand that he desireth any such execution, for he rather judgeth the Pe∣titioners for justice, breakers of the Laws, then keepers of them, and this he secretly (x) implyeth, though not openly averreth▪ And so I come to his fifth ground, fol. 4. viz. Fifthly, I am ingaged also to oppose as far as lawfully I may, and by The Authors 5. ground. all good wayes and means (y) to bring to condigne punishment, all such as shall either by force practise, counsels, plots, and conspiracies
do any thing to the contrary of any thing in that present Protestation contained. How then dare (z) I be so farre from bringing to condigne punishment the offendors, that I shall wilfully consent to the breach of it, and procure others thereunto by practise, plots, conspiracies or the like. Here himself doth confirm what I last above did affirm, con∣cerning the (y) bringing of offenders to punishment. But he doth Answer. withall subtilly (by way of (z) interrogation intimate, as if the Petitioners for these things had both broken their oath, and procu∣red others also to do the like, and therefore dimerited punishment. Now he confesseth that all men by the Protestation are bounden by all good wayes and means to endeavour the punishment of Delin∣quents. And the Petitioners have been so farre from the neglect of this, and the procuring others thereunto, as that by the best and most justifiable means (humble petitioning) they have prin∣cipally endeavoured it, and therefore in this thing have not made the least breach of their oath, nor incurred punishment. But, Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum. It is a shame for a Teacher to reprehend that in another, he is guilty of himself, or to lay his own fault to anothers charge: the case in this place is my Authors, and by this he plainly proves himself to be a Delinquent, at the least of the Delinquent partie, (utrum vult) let him take his choice: for he is not content in this particular to violate his oath alone, but also by his writing and slye suggestions, seduceth and procureth others to do the same. But as his accusation is by way of question, so shall my answer be. If he know of any that have been so farre from bringing o∣thers, offenders, to deserved punishment, as that they have wil∣fully consented with them to the breaking of the Protestation, and procured others likewise by plots and practises to do the like; How dare he conceal them? nay why doth he not reveal them, and bring them forth to their just punishment according as he hath sworn? Lest whilest he condemne others, himself be found culpable of more severe judgement. And so till then I will leave him in question, and come to his sixth ground, fol. 5. viz. Sixthly, I am neither for (c) hope, feare, favour, or other respect The Authors 6. ground. whatsoever, to relinquish this promise, vow, or Protestation, much lesse to (a) break it for the same ends, and to make others to do the
like. This (b) betraying others thereunto, and making them guiltie of so solemne a vow, is an offence of an high nature both to God, and our governours. Here is nothing to the purpose: onely he doth seem to (a) tax Answer. some body, but nominates no body: and therefore indeed doth justly deserve to be taxed himself. For if he know any man guil∣tie of the (b) betraying he speaketh of, let him detect him open∣ly, and touch him boldly, or else (as I said before) himself is conscious of what he objects against others. But to invite others unto good and lawfull actions, is not to betray them unto wic∣kednesse, and therefore the Petitioners are innocent in the thing he intends, to wit, of doing evill in the procuring hands to their Petitions: for both the matter and manner was lawfull. And if any hath for (c) hope, fear, or favour, relinquished the promise and vow, it is he, and such as he, (and not the Petitioners at whom still he secretly girds) for albeit he hath taken it, his own mouth witnesseth that he hath departed from it, because instead of oppo∣sing Poperie, and Popish Innovation, he pleadeth for Popish Bi∣shops, and their Papall government, and opposeth all that op∣pose them, instead of applying himself to defend the Parliament, he applyeth himself to deterre and dehort others from doing it: and instead of using the best means for bringing Delinquents to be punished, he useth the best means to excuse them, and to accuse others who have endeavoured their punishment. And sure if he was not some Bishops favourite, stood not in some place, credit, or grace by their favour, or at least a favourer of their faction, and so in hope by them to be remunerated, or in fear to be dam∣nified, he would not have taken such a circuit, and traced such a round, for their defence and justification. As for the Petitioners, what hope could they have more then to be delivered from such soul-oppressing Tyrants? what should they fear but the spight of the prelaticall partie? and what favour could they expect? when all men for the most part then favoured the prelacie. And thus do I come to his last ground, fol. 5. viz. Finally, I am not bound in any Article thereof further then I may The Authors last ground. (d) lawfully perform it. The Law being the harmonious (e) scope, bounds, and limits of my Protestation. And therefore I may not un∣lawfully do any thing, that may tend to the breach or contradiction of any Article thereof.
True it is, that he is bound by the Protestation to the perfor∣mance Answer. of nothing further then he lawfully may. Neverthelesse let him not use this argument for the maintenance of things unlaw∣full, and for the discouragement of such as rightfully seek the ablation of them. For as it enjoyneth onely a lawfull defence: so it injoyneth the defence onely of lawfull things. By which word (d) lawfully, I do chiefly understand according unto conscience: otherwise we should be bound by our Protestation to the main∣tenance of some laws and things thereby established, altogether unlawfull and against the Word of God, even such as are most offensive, and we have sworn against. But that this (even consci∣ence) is the principall (e) scope of the Protestation, and of the Au∣thors and commenders thereof, let him that readeth it consider, and he shall find it evident: and not that our actions either of op∣position or defence▪ should be further▪ bounded or restrained by the Laws Nationall, then that they concurre with the Law of God, and conduce to the advancement of his truth and glory; if it was not thus, we had sworn to man, and not to God, nay we had sworn with man against God. But it is clear, and whose soul tels him not, that this oath is unto God, and with God, yea and in the presence of God. Let no man therefore be deceived, God is not mocked: He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength; who hath hardned himself against him and prospered? Job 9. 4. The law of the Land therefore is not to be taken principally for the bounds and limits of our Oath, but the law of God; and law∣fully may we oppose the law of man so farre forth as it opposeth the Law of God, and consenteth not therewith, and yet prove our selves both loyall▪ Subjects, and conserve our Oath, Acts 27. 28, 29. Thus much for my Authors grounds, the which I hope have been sufficiently refelled. Now he comes to shew you further cause why he would not subscribe his friends Petition, nor conjoyne in a petitionary way. And this he usshereth in with an Adverb, saying, fol. 5. viz. Moreover, the manner of the proceeding doth not satisfie me. The Authors 1. cause. First, because it is not done in that (f) right way it ought to be. For that which is to go under the name of a County or Town, ought to be first (k) assented unto by the Sheriffe, Justice of Peace, or other Magistrates respectively: and then they may be publiquely pro∣pounded
and condiscended unto, or contradicted, that men may be in∣couraged, or disswaded by good reasons pro & con. And this is that (i) lawfull and usuall way for the (g) election of Knights and Bur∣gesses for the Parliament, and of other Officers and matters concern∣ing the publique. Wherefore (h) clandestine and surreptitions acti∣ons going about from house to house by (h) night, and without the (l) consent and commission of Authority, to (m) ingage people to the breath of their Protestation, and to make it an Act of a County or Town, and in a manner to (n) force men thereunto, are but unlawfull works of darknesse, and will not (o) endure the light. All his former grounds alledged for his non subscription to Answer. their Petition, are taken by him (though falsely) out of the Pro∣testation. Now these subsequent which he calleth causes, are ta∣ken, a modo, from the manner of the action, viz. because it was not done in (f) the right way. For that which is to go under the name of a Town or a County, ought to be first affented unto by the Sheriffe, &c. then publiquely propounded, &c. and this he subtilly doth ex∣emplifie by the (g) election of Knights and Burgesses. And for that their Petitions were not so obtained and approved, therefore he most ignominiously termes them (h) Clandestine, that is, close, surreptitious, nightworks, and works of darknesse not enduring the light. How forcible are right words? but what doth this arguing reprove? Job 6. 25. In what manner the petitioners gathered hands I am ignorant: But that is not pertinent, the action being free, and the end lawfull▪ For it is not the doing of a lawfull work by (h) night, or in a private assembly that maketh it un∣lawfull, more then the doing of an unlawfull work by day, and in a publike assembly, doth make it lawfull. And to frame a Pe∣tition to the Parliament, comprehending (not factions or As the last of the County of Kent, so much countenanced by Sir Edw. Deering and others, may justly be sus∣pected. fa∣ctious implications) but the just fears and grievances of a City or County, and the causes of them, and to get others like sensible of them, for testimony to subscribe the same, is lawfull I am cer∣tain, and past all controversie, for neither the matter nor the manner is contrary to Law, nor by Law prohibited; nay the matter is for law, and the manner both humble and peaceable, free and voluntary, and therefore also lawfull. And a man may as soon (and sooner if the heads or chief proposers be not honest and sound men) be seduced and drawn to set his hand contrary
to Law, against his will, and Witnesse the Petition above noted. Protestation, in a publique As∣semblie or meeting, (as at a generall Assizes) then in a private. Because the greater sort of men are like sheep led by example; some relying on the judgement of particular men, who are emi∣nent amongst them for knowledge; others being afraid to refuse the thing (though they doubt and inwardly are unwilling) lest they should be counted singular, and more nice and wise then all the Countrey. Whereas whatsoever is propounded in private, or at home, is alway more maturely digested, the person taking boldnesse to require respite, both to examine and consider it. And for my Authors (i) example, it is not consonant, it concur∣reth not. For what is done in that election, is according to the great Charter of England, and by the Kings speciall power and Prerogative. The Sheriffes, Justices, and other Offices, do no∣thing therein of their own free motion, by vertue of priviledge onely as the Subjects do which petition: But in obedience to his Majesties Writ and precept. And how expedient it is that the whole County or City, even to the lowest member, should con∣sent to the election of the person which is to be instead of their persons, and the head and mouth of them, I appeal to all men. For the particular estates, interests, and liberties of every one of them is intrusted with him: But in case of petitioning, there is no such necessity, every man feels the generall evill, but every man desireth not the expurgation of it, nor doth every man know the cause of it, and therefore cannot make a particular remon∣strance, and sue for peculiar redresse. And because every man seeth not the reason of the epidemicall maladie, and so knoweth not what meanes to use for remedie, and others that do see it as dead members desire no cure of it, shall not therefore such as both know the cause and way of cure, and thirst after it, use the means, law and liberty hath allowed, for the effecting it? it were unreasonable to deny it. Neither doth the assent of a (k) Skeriffe, Justice of Peace, or other Magistrate, argue any thing lawfull, no more then the preaching of false doctrine by a publique Minister doth prove it true; the Laws are to be the rules of our civill acti∣ons, and not their licence. Too many things (fresh still in re∣membrance) have been both commanded and countenanced by Sheriffes and Prophanati∣on of the Sab∣bath, seizing of mens goods, and imprison∣ing of their persons. Magistrates, which we know will neither stand
with the Law of God, nor of the Nation. And if the Sheriffes or Magistrates assent and proposition make an Act lawfull, then the bloody Rebels in Ireland are justifiable. For (as report tels) they had for their beginning the consent both of Sir Phileme Oneale, and o∣chers, Peers & Justices of the Peace there. Sheriffes and Magistrates; yea themselves affirm authority for their present actions. Again, as there is no generall rule without its particu∣lar exception, so there is no particular or extraordinary exam∣ple to be taken for a generall rule. Ergo, though a universall suf∣frage and assent be necessarily required in the choice of Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament, yet it followeth not that the like is requisite in the way of Petitions to the Parliament. Now whereas he cals the Petitions Clandestine actions, that is, hidden and close, done in hugger mugger, and surreptitious, that is, as it were by stealth, how unsavourie this is, let every one that hath but a clear sence prove and trie. These are breathings of a corrupt stomacke, and the stench thereof is odious, even as that of a rot∣ten sepulchre. Insomuch that he may justly be challenged for one of those the Psalmist denotes, Psal. 5. 9. (But herein he re∣sembles those shagg headed Sages, who call the Kings best Subjects Thus (it is said) the Dam∣me Boyes or Long-heads at Yorke served the Lincoln∣shire Gentle∣men, & others that petitioned the King to re∣turn to His Parliament. Round-heads. I am sure they are Grosse Heads, ma∣king good the old Proverbe, More haire then wit: Meere Caca-fucoes: and would you know whose Agents? Plutoes. But their madnesse is apparant to all men, and their own venome will in the end burst them.) For were not the Petitions and the Petitioners purposes, evermore notified and made known, even before they came up and presented them? how then were they done in private, and in the night time? (it may be some mans hand might be had in the night, whose businesse kept him all day abroad▪) Truly they may rather be said to have done it on the house top, so publique have they been: Nor is there any reason why they should be so close in this good action; For of whom should they be afraid? it is neither Rebellion, Treason, nor Com∣motion (the black deeds of Papists and Bishops) which they con∣trived, and what man good and wise would go about to barre them of so just a priviledge? And for that he saith they did it without the (l) consent and commission of Authoritie. I answer: They had authoritie both strong and sufficient. First, their own right. Secondly, the Parliament, the onely object of their suits, a
Commission better then any that issued out of the High Commis∣sion, and such a one as my Author (though perhaps he love them not) dares not question. For this is one of the prime proprieties appertaining unto Parliaments, to receive and hear the grie∣vances of the people, and a grand priviledge of the Subjects, free∣ly without curb or prohibition of Magistrates and Officers to See the right worthy Wor∣thy, Sir Arthur Haselriggs Speech in de∣fence of him∣self and the other accused Members, impart their grievances, and seek for relief to the Parliament. And if we might not petition without the Sheriffes, Magistrates, and Officers consent of the City or County where we live, we should be but still in bondage. For our task-masters would but revile us when we should come to crave their assents, and say (with my Author) that we were idle and factious. For it may be these are the very causes we must complain of, and it cannot be that they will write against themselves. And so the evill causes might still remain, and we poore Subjects still groane under the mise∣rable effects. For the evill the Parliament knoweth not, it can∣not amend. Besides, admit that not onely Magistrates, but all sorts of people (as there are too many evilly affected) should dis∣sent to joyn with me in petition for redresse and reformation. Is it unlawfull therefore for me to petition, because I am left a∣lone, and the cause is diserted of all men? No. (to omit private interest and respect) In case that the welfare and being of the Land and Nation, City or Countrey where I live, and whereof I am member, is in jeopardy and danger, I ought and it is my bounden dutie, (though it be with my life in my hand) to make known the distresses thereof to the Ministers raised by God for preservation and redresse, and also to use those means God hath put into my hands for the redemption and deliverance of that place and people. Read that history of Esther from the 4. Chap. to the last. Ecclesiastes 9. 14, 15. Then he further shamelesly af∣firmeth, that people are thereby (m) ingaged to break their Pro∣testation, (he might better have said, they were thereby ingaged to keep their Protestation, for that had been truth.) But this is like the rest, and ill will never spake well. For is a certifying of their griefs with humble supplication that they may be eased, and all things troublesome to conscience (against which they have vowed) removed, a breach of their Protestation? Contrari∣um verò verum. It is onely the reall keeping of it, indeed had they
been perswaded to subscribe for the maintenance of such things as they have protested against, then had my Author hit the nail on the head. But none of them against whom he intends, have been thus As were of late some Kentish men. insnared, and therefore-his words here are both un∣just and scandalous. Neither have any been (n) enforced (as he de∣spightfully speaks) to subscribe their hands, for their own free wils have been their first movers, and their own understandings their chief Councellors. Nor is their ground or reason to force any in this action, where is their authority? where their justifi∣cation? neither would it ought avail or be profitable. Yea it would prove very pernicious and prejudiciall: But because my Author hath seen such great multitudes to accord in this thing, therefore (I beleeve) the greater hath his spight and grief been. And now I hope I have effectually proved those works by my Author injuriously called unlawfull, and works of darknesse, to be both lawfull and works of the light, as clear as the Sun in his strength. And whereas he saith they will not (o) endure the light, Omnibus est notum. It is well known to all men they have endu∣red the very eye of light, for all they against which my Author writes have had the full approbation and kind acceptation of the Parliament, who are even as an Angel of light. And so I come to his second and third cause why he is not satisfied with their manner of proceeding. For I will put them both together, be∣cause they are both of a nature, fo. 6. & 7. viz. Secondly, it is justly to be feared, that these wayes are sinister in The Authors 2. and 3. cause. the undertakers being very probable that some of them do it out of ill will, hatred, and malice, as well to the government and governours, or for favour and affection to some whom they suppose it pleaseth, or for (q) gain and profit, or fear of displeasure of (p) Landlords and Customers, or for (r) vain glory, that it may be said, this is the Ba∣bell which they have wrought with their own hands: and some few of those shall ingage and prejudice others, (and not without cause as it is to be feared) by false informations and reasons to make men subscribe. Thirdly, the like sinister proceedings are to be supposed in the sub∣scriber. These kind of wayes by tumults and multitudes without legall allegations and probations, to compasse that by will which you cannot obtain by reason, is of a dangerous (t) consequence, and threatens (u) the subversion of all government and governours. For which of
them, be they never so good, shall be secure if the multitude of distem∣pered people please to will the contrary? These cause much distractions, hinder the (s) proceedings of the State, and the relief of the oppressed; breake our blessed (w) unity, and bring the Actors within the com∣passe of a (x) punishment from the law of God and man, for not walk∣ing according to the expressed Statutes contained therein. In both these second and third causes I conceive little said, but Answer. what hath already been spoken and inserted. See his sixth ground where he secretly accuseth some for breach of their oath for sini∣ster ends, as fear, favour, &c. and see his third ground where he condemneth the Petitioners for enforcing that by will, which they cannot obtain by reason. See also to the latter end of his first cause, where he speaketh of ingaging men to breake their oath, and of en∣forcing them thereunto, &c. all which particulars are in their pro∣per places already answered. Yet by the way mark with me, I pray, how slily he seeketh to divide between the Landlord (p) and the Tenant, a man and his friends; as if dependancie, alliance, and relation, was sufficient cause to avert the one from perswa∣ding, and the other from according to concurre in a good acti∣on. Howsoever I will say somewhat more in the behalfe of the undertakers and subscribers, because in this place he speaketh loud. How can any man in common sense think the Petitioners (against whom he inveighs) did what they have done in a sinister way, either for fear or favour? nay in humane judgement, they might at that time have rather feared for doing it, and have reap∣ed disfavour, for was not then both wind and tide against them? were not our chief adversaries (the cause of all our troubles) then pregnant and powerfull above measure, threatning not onely the particular opposers of them, but even the ruin of the whole State and Kingdom? And for this cause to my knowledge many that were willing For they said, the popish Lords and Bi∣shops will get the upperhand, and then all that give their hands against them will be questioned. durst not underwrite against them: and many that did, were drawn thereunto more by force of conscience, through the Protestation, then any free will of their own, (though ardent in desire) by reason of the dread they apprehen∣ded from the might and malice of them against whom they pe∣titioned. So that if God had not wonderfully brought our foes down, the Petitioners had in stead of (q) gain sustained incom∣parable losse, for those the enemies would certainly have de∣voured
us. And as for (r) vain glory, that it might be said, this is the Babell they have wrought. It never, I am confident, entred into the Petitioners hearts, for their desires and endeavours are to pull down Babel, and to raze it to the very bottome, even that Tower of confusion which hath been here so long upheld by the Babylonish Priests and partie: that fame may tell future poste∣ritie, this your fathers did. Laid Babylon waste, expelled her Idol Priests, pulled down her high Altars and pleasant pictures, and trod all her rich ornaments under seet, that so they might serve the Lord in truth and peace. And this is both lawfull, and by God required, Deut. 12. 2, 3. 2 Chron. 14. 3▪ 5. Isa. 30. 22. And that the Petitioners and their petitions have not hindered, but fur∣thered proceedings of State, and prepared a way of relief for the oppressed, the blessed effects do testifie, and so apparantly the (t) consequence of these petitionarie wayes are not dangerous: and in stead of (u) threatning the subversion of law, government, and go∣vernours, they do promise, nay almost assure us an establishment of Law, government, and Governors, and that especially of good ones; for if they be good, what cause will there be to petition against them? much lesse to hurt them. Nor hath this way bro∣ken the (w) unity amongstus, but the bonds it hath broken of our sweet unity breakers. And what (x) punishment can there be incurred, where no transgression (as is proved) is committed? I am sure God by his good successe, and the Parliament by their good acceptance, have in stead of pronouncing the Petitioners guiltie, spoken them both innocent and honest, carefull and provident for their Countrey. And now am I come to my Au∣thors Furthermore, saying, fol. 7. viz. Furthermore, this doth not agree with the light of reason and The Author (y) understanding which God hath given me to walk by, nor that Christian experience I have found under (z) the crosse. In his sixth ground, fol. 5. of his book and elsewhere, he in∣veigheth Answer. vehemently against such as seduce others to break their Protestation: But if there be a more diabolicall meane or manner of seducement then this he here useth, judge ye: pretending con∣science against conscience, with the more facilitie to insnare con∣science. For thus doth he lead captive the simple, vanquish the feeble, and repell the fearfull and faint hearted. As if he was the
onely man, and (y) knowledge dwels onely with him. But if he have no more light then here shineth from him (for all his brags) he seeth no more then a Beetle, and his understanding is no more then the Asses: sensuall and earthy. But he hath been taught by (z) affliction, and therefore you must beleeve him. I must confesse affliction maketh many wise scholers, but not every one, nor hath he (so farre as I can see) yet perfectly learned his lesson, for if he had, or was sensible of trouble and oppression, sure he would omit no lawfull means for help and deliverance. I never knew but in any streight or trouble, I might make use of all law∣full wayes and occasions for the procurement of my ease and in∣largement, and that when God opened the doore, I not onely might (but ought) (otherwise I should be guilty of contempt) to come forth and escape, Gen. 8. 8. 12. 18. Jer. 38. 12. Act. 12. 9. 11. And we have all been a long time in bondage and sore af∣fliction, I hope seeing God is pleased by the Parliament, to open a doore unto us, yea and a wide one, it is lawfull for us to use our libertie, and to use those means he doth so freely affoord us for our Restauration and re-establishment. And so I come to more of his grounds, causes, or reasons, or rather repetitions, for I cannot tell what truly to call them: But you shall have them ex∣actly as I find them, fol. 8. viz. First, that for the vice or abuse of any thing, the right and lawfull The Author. use thereof, or execution of the office should be (c) abolished and taken away, or that for the (a) present particular offences of some, the in∣nocent posteritie shall suffer. For I am not convinced in my (d) con∣science of the unlawfulnesse of the office of a Bishop, and am perswaded that there have been many (b) godly and zealous Martyrs for the truth, and many of them still remaine godly and religious Pro∣testants. What reasonable man will deny all this? onely let my Au∣thor Answer. prove, that the office of a Bishop, as it is now by our Bishops held and exercised, lawfull and lawfully used: it is much more easie to prove both, altogether unlawfull, and utterly to be ab∣horred and abandoned. And that for the (a) present particular of∣fences of some, the innocent posteritie should suffer: we have many presidents both Divine and Civill, ancient and modern, especial∣ly where the offence is of so high a nature, as to strike at the
publique authoritie and honour of God, and the very being or well-being of his people. Witnesse that ever dreadfull ingurgi∣tation of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with all their families, Numb. 16. what there had the poore infants and children done? So likewise that universall desolation of Amaleke, 1 Sam. 15. 3. and that of Edom Obediah, ver. 10. Both which Nations were wholly destroyed, as well young as old, children as parents, for the iniquitie done (not by them, but) by their Progenitors to the people of God many ages before they had any being. Touch not mine anointed (that is, my chosen) saith God, and do my Pro∣phets no harme. God will not endure that his people shall be vex∣ed and troubled in the way of his worship: this was the ruine of Pharaoh, and of all his hoste, and shall be of the stoutest Prince or Potentate under the Sunne, and of all his force, Psal. 76. 12. if he will not let Israel go to worship the Lord their God: even Kings will he reprove for their sake, Psal. 105. 14. Amongst our selves is it not a Law, and held for reason? that he who seeks to ruine an innocent posterity, should have his innocent posteritie ruined, this is also ratified by Gods Word. Because Agags sword had made women childlesse, therefore shall Agags mother be childlesse amongst women, 1 Sam. 15. 31. And thus was it done to Haman, Esther 9. 10. he and all his sonnes perished, and his goods were given to others, yet he alone contrived that lethall plot against the Jews, Esth. 3. 8. 9. And truly it is equivolent to the rule of proportion, that what measure they meet unto others, should be meted unto them again: this even dealing was Adoni∣bezeks portion, Judg. 1. 7. True it is, there is some exception in that of Amaziah, 1 King. 14. 6. But it is where the wrong is per∣sonall, not Nationall; and principally concerning man, not God. But perhaps my Author here meaneth not this manner of suffering: but that for the faults of these Bishops, future posteri∣tie should be deprived of the like state and preferment, power, and revenews. Truly custome is no sound plea for the continu∣ance of an evill cause. And seeing these men have usurped the place and authoritie not due unto them, and have enjoyed more wealth and honour then hath been fit or profitable for them, all which meerly tend to insnare and corrupt men of holy function, fraighting them full (as experience plainly proveth) with all
manner of pride and insolence, impietie and idlenesse. It cannot be adjudged either improvidence, or injustice, to abolish these exorbitant usurpations, of honour, authority and power in them, and to convert their superabundant rents and revenews to some more necessarie and pious uses, that so the like enormities which in these persons have by these means hitherto accrewed, may in succeeding ages be prevented. And this can be no suffer∣ing to the future generation, because they are spoiled of nothing. But this I humbly refer to them, whom it doth more princi∣pally as Judges concern. Onely thus much for answer herein to my Author, and so I come to his other matter. I deny not but there have been godly (b) Bishops, and many of them Martyrs, but not because they were Bishops: Nor for the Service Book, though sir Ed. Deering im∣plyeth so▪ and the martyrdome of those men doth no more hallow and uphold their standing therefore, then Naamans conversion doth justifie his Idolatrous action, 2 King. 5. 17, 18. or Luthers persecution and For a man may be mar∣tyred living. martyrdome, his idolatrous transubstantiation. And (in charitie) I will hope with him, (though few tokens appeare in assurance) that there are some of them still godly Protestants: But as he will not have the impietie of the person to abrogate the (c) office: So I hope the pretended piety of the person shall not justifie the impietie of the office. And as for the conviction of his (d) conscience, it is a work onely proper to Gods holy Spirit, and when he comes into his heart he will convince him, Joh. 16. 8. In the mean time I will do my good will to inform him. And so I proceed to his own words, fol. 8. viz. Secondly, though time of (e) prosperitie hath made some of them The Author. guiltie of (f) foule offences, and it may be with the children of Israel, they have not worshipped the true God as they ought, and have incli∣ned to Idolatry, and thereby justly provoked the Almighty to wrath and indignation against them. Yet I am perswaded that for the very execution of their (h) office, and the (g) Ecclesiasticall Laws for the (k) unity and peace of the Church they suffer instrumentally by di∣vers ill (l) affected to government, or by such as have been punished by them for doing (i) contrary thereunto: and if the like proceedings may be suffered against all (m) Judges, and other (n) executioners of the Laws of the Kingdom, there shall be no (o) secure execution of the Laws against offenders, and so we shall live lawlesse, and let in
all manner of disorder and vice, murther, rapine, and the like. Those Bishops rather (under correction) that have done contrary (p) to the Law, are to be punished by the Law, on due and true proofs, and not according to your wils. In this instance and what followeth, you may plainly see Answer. what stamp my Author is of, what I all the way feared, he hath here verified. For he is a worshipper of the great gods of these times the ambitious Prelates; who lifted up themselves above all that is called God. But as they have been exalted, so (blessed be God) have they lately been humbled. But he saith, that (e) pro∣sperity hath made them faulty: it is true. For many of them before they were Bishops, were daily and diligent fishermen, drawing many unto God: but having caught what they fished for, (the world and preferment) they presently left both their nets, and the waters their Ministerie and the Word, and forthwith fell to drive men from God; with Demas giving themselves up to the present world. Howbeit in as much as their exuberancy of wealth, and lordly power, instead of advancing them forward, hath become an impediment to the discharge of their duties, and are the chief means to canker and corrupt them: the grave and gracious Parliament, (I beleeve, as is most meet) will impaire and lessen them, that being rid of so great a clog, they may the better gird up the loyns of their minds, and be more watchfull and sober. And I pray note, that my Author himself pronoun∣ceth them (f) foule offenders, false worshippers of God and idolatrous (a thing which themselves (vile wretches) would never yet con∣fesse) yet is he not willing to have them removed, yet or justly taxed, for he unjustly imputes their justly deserved punishment to such as have been punished by them for disobedience to their (g) Ecclesiasticall Laws, and such as are all affected to government. I verily beleeve no man hath prosecuted them, as they have been instruments under God to afflict him: but as they have been ene∣mies of Jesus Christ and his members, depressours of true wor∣ship, and promoters of false: not for executing their laws, but be∣cause they falsly executed them, and turned justice into persecu∣tion, not punishing men for disobedience, but for conscience. For the Papist, the Atheist, the drunkard, and whoremonger, and prophane person whatsoever, that would but bow down
and do them homage, should not onely have peace, but be pro∣moted by them; but the good and the godly, even the most pain∣full and conscionable Ministers and Servants of Christ Jesus, that would not, nor durst for their Lord and Masters sake and their own souls, fall down and worship them, were the onely objects of their Romish power and tyranny, using their Laws onely as spiders webs to take the painfull Bee and harmlesse Flie in, and so to make a prey of them. They do not therefore suffer for the very èxecution of their (h) office: but because they have perverted and neglected it, and intermedled with matters that they ought not; they would be Courtiers, Statesmen, Lawyers, Polititians, Magistrates, nay Witnesse, that Bellum Episcopale, the war between us and our bre∣thren of Scot∣land. Souldiers, or any thing rather then Ministers of Gods Word, and attend upon their office. Like their Grand∣father Pope Boniface the eighth, making use of both Swords at once. And was it onely for their persecution and idolatry, we ought all, and every one is bound both by Scripture and the Protestation to extirpate, and utterly expell them, Deut. 13. 5. to 11. Ezek. 44. 12, 13. Although Saul the King will spare Agag, yet will Samuel hew him in pieces. And Moses was bid to vex the Midianites, and smite them, because they vexed them with their wiles, and caused them to turn unto Idols, and sin against God. Numb. 25. 17, 18. Why should Gods House be any longer a den of theeves? Our Bethel be made Bethaven? the performance of this service is acceptable to God, and for this Jehu and his house was blest. 2 King. 10. 30. and as for many who have done (i) contrary to those their Ecclesiasticall Laws, I cannot judge them punishment worthy, albeit I know they have had it with∣out desert, for they did neither act nor omit any thing in con∣tempt, on purpose to oppose, but in tendernesse of conscience, because their Laws commanded things Gods Word forbids; and prohibites what God commands: and whether it be better to please God or man, judge ye? Act. 4. 19. for in truth many things are comprised in their Laws that are neither of God nor Christ, nor according to reason, but like those prodigious Can∣nons they last made, thinking therewith to blowe up the whole Kingdom, at least wise to have blown out all godlinesse and good men. But (praised be God) the snare is broken, and we are delivered, and they themselves are blasted with their own Ordi∣nance.
Nor can unity and (k) peace be within their principles. For Christ the Prince of peace and Head of his Church never ap∣pointed any such Constitutions, or A devised government must alway have a devised Law to sup∣port it. Cannons to govern his people: his last Will and Testament is full and sufficient for the declaration of his mind, it needs no superfluous codicill or ap∣pendix of the Bishops forging. In vain therefore doth my Au∣thor say, that they suffer for executing their laws for the peace of the Church, for by them they altogether broak the peace of it, and did mightily raise troubles and turmoiles both in it, and in the Commonwealth. And could it be otherwise? for the go∣vernment of the house being contrary to the Masters will, must on necessitie beget a reluctancy in the servants, and produce dis∣cord and division. And the government being found thus ill, why should it not be ill (l) affected? nay utterly rejected? It is more then high time to cease to do evill, and to learn to do well: to seek peace and pursue it, Isa. 1. 16, 17. and 1 Pet. 3. 11. We have recei∣ved more light, and therefore must walk more circumspectly, not as foolish (now) but as wise, redeeming the time because the dayes have been evill. Now touching that instance of his concerning the (m) Judges execution of the Laws temporall: his similitude holds not, unlesse it be in this, that he cals the Judges the Laws (n) executioners, which may truly be taken the Laws Hangmen, and indeed it is too true that some of them have (as I may say) both hanged the Law and drawn it, yea and quartered it, and (I think) had not God timely prevented them, would before this, have set up the As the yong mans were, be∣cause he did terrifie that St. Canterbury. quarters thereof on the gates, as an Archtraitor and Perturber of the Land. And I verily beleeve there are many wish as well to our Law, as the Papists do to our Bible. But the Judges administer punishment by a lawfull power, and by vertue of laws lawfully enacted upon persons offending: and the Bi∣shops administer punishment by a false power, and by vertue of Laws falsely constituted upon persons not Where have they punished one scandalous Minister? who can resolve me? offending. For it hath been their common course to justifie the wicked, and con∣demne the righteous; therefore is that curse their due, threatned in Isa. 5. 23. and that because people will not for conscience sake, suffer or subject unto an unreasonable and most unlawfull spirituall power, they will not therefore bear with, and submit unto a most lawfull temporall power, it followeth not, but ra∣ther
that they will be the more obedient according to the word, because they are so conscientious, and fearfull to offend the Lord. And the like just proceedings being taken against unjust Judges, as hath and (is likely to be) against impious Bishops, is the absolute way to (o) secure the execution of the Laws against offendors, for then will there not so many wilfull desperate mur∣thers, notorious robberies, publique transgressours, grievous oppressours, and extortioners, of widows, fatherlesse, poore, simple, and helplesse, for briberie, promotion, greatnesse, fear, and favour, be pretermitted or connived at, and escape with im∣punity; and so we shall extrude all vice, and the Law have his proper power and free course. Otherwise dum non metuunt, nil curant. And that the Bishops for their offences (p) against Law should be punished by Law, the Petitioners onely sue for, and their wills are none other: Onely as they have been ill stewards, and wicked in the House of God, so we humbly desire that they may be put out, and others according unto God placed in their stead. They have been false in much, how then can they be faithfull in a little? They have not well governed their own house, how then can they govern well the house of God? 1 Tim. 3. 4. 5. And so I come again to his own words, fo. 9. viz. Thirdly, because that which is or seemeth to (p) be a prejudice now, Author. may in Gods good time prove a great benefit. We many times earnest∣ly pray for those things, which afterwards we give God thanks for not (q) granting our requests, and this hath many times been for the re∣movall of our present afflictions: I am confident if there were good care taken (as there may be) that (r) good men may be made Bishops, we shall never (p) repent of their lawfull office or place: for (s) greatnesse with goodnesse will much advance the cause and welfare of the Church and commonwealth. And further I know it is possible for some (t) inferiours to execute the Law and the Gospel likewise in a farre more imperious and tyrannicall way, then some Superiours have done. True it is that many things which seem (p) hurtfull at the Answer. first may in due time prove very good: in taste they may be bit∣ter, but in digestion profitable. But it must be considered whe∣ther things be simply evill, and fundamentally; or by occasion, and accidentally. Now what is simply evill and fundamentally,
can never prove good, nor produce any otherwise then God by his all ruling providence, shall dispose it, but that is not thank-worthy to the instrument. And such is the power and jurisdicti∣on of the present Bishops, and therefore both we and ours need never fear (p) repentance for seeking to have them removed, but (q) heartily praise God if it may be granted. I know it is possible to have (r) good men for Bishops, but then they must be chosen ac∣cording to the rule of the Gospel (and not after the Articles of their Doctrine) Act. 1. 15. 24. to the end, and 14. 23. and not one Bishop be elected by another as they are, receiving the holy Ghost from such as (may be suspected) never had it. And my Author and the whole world (in my opinion) do mightily mistake whilest they imagine, that such externall (s) state and greatnesse is requisite in the Ministers of the Church. This was that delusion wherewith the devill blinded the eyes of the poore Jews: they looked for a triumphing Messias with stately atten∣dants, and in pompous trappings; but lo he cometh meekly ri∣ding on an Asse. Surely if outward state and glory had been ex∣pedient for Christs Church, He himself being her head and hus∣band would have put it on, and left it for a rule and an example to his Apostles and their successours, especially at that time when he came from heaven to marry her and occupied the place of a Bridegroome, Matth. 9. 15. But we do neither find it in his person for imitation, nor in his doctrine for direction: nay his rules are contrary, and so were his Apostles practises. Paul that Architect in the house of God, and chief Planter of Chur∣ches, although most worthy (if any more then other) was con∣tent to live in mean estate, not seeking his own but the good of others. I find not in all the new Testament that any of them had either lands or livings, (I am sure not glebe or Ecclesiasticall as they call them) if they had other they did sell and commu∣nicate them, Act. 2. 45. and 4. 37. no nor set allowance. In∣deed they eat of the fruit of their labours, as is most just, accor∣ding to that in the 1 Cor. 9. 1. to the 24. and it is our duty to take care for them: Rom. 15. 27. Gal. 6. 6. But I know no pre∣cept for any positive means. The Leviticall Law is abolished, tithes and tents are certainly ended; the Priesthood being chan∣ged, their rights are likewise changed: Hebr. 7. 12. and for cer∣tain
the Apostles were not ignorant both of the force and extent of this Law. I speak not this to abase the Ministerie, or encou∣rage any in their neglect or disrespect toward them: The La∣bourer is worthy of his hire, and (God forbid) but they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: 1 Cor. 9. 14. and that comfortably void of care. For if the servant of the old Law was so honourable, much more is the Minister of the new. How beautifull are the feet of them that bring glad tidings of salva∣tion? Isa. 52. 7. But (again I say) I conceive neither rule nor reason, why they should have so many thousands, and so many hundreds per annum: tithe of all, even to an egge: yea and all will hardly Witnesse that unreasonable demand, and unsatiable pur∣suite of 2. s. 9. d. in the pound. suffice, being most of them too much like those greedy dogges in Isaiah 56. 11. for by these means they become puft up, and set themselves in competition with the men of this world, contending for preheminence and priority, forgetting that godlinesse is great gain, and that they ought to teach the Gospel of a Christus ob gratiam Chri∣sti, non mune∣ris mundi prae∣dicandus est. ready mind, and not for filthy lucre: they plough not in hope, they thresh not in hope as the Apostles did, 1 Cor. 9. 10. But they will be at a surer lock: they wil know before hand what they shall have; (like Judas, quid dabis?) and if their own termes and conditions be not fulfilled, they wil neither Witnesse Mr. Finch, Mr. Hutton, Mr. Davies, Mr. Swadling, &c. cum multis aliis, quos jam praescribere longum est. preach, pray with you, administer the Sacrament to you, nor bury your dead: nay if a man put not into their mouthes, they prepare war against him, Mich. 3. 5. Thus by practise making good the old popish Proverbe, No peny, no Pater noster. These things have cau∣sed them to mind the Fleece onely, and not the Flock, and given them horns to gore the poore Saints of God. And besides, for these Quisquis ad praemia velox. things sake, have many crept into the folds, who have not been shepherds, but ravening wolves. And I have observed, that corruption came first into the primitive Church by the doore of ambition: and the coveting of worldly pomp and dignitie was the very Basis of the Seat of Rome, and the first step of the Beast his throne; for under the colour that exterior wealth and power would elevate and advance Religion, crept up that man (not of God, but) of sinne, with all his lordly train. But some will say, was it not for these incouragements, few or none would apply themselves to the Ministerie. I commend incou∣ragement, it is not the use but the abuse, not the end but the ex∣cesse
and unequall disposing of it I condemne. And fear not la∣bourers whilest there is a harvest, for God hath promised to send (or thrust) forth Labourers into his harvest; and to that end hath he commanded us to pray unto him, Matth. 9. 38. he will make his word in all those whom he appointeth unto this work, as it was in the Prophet, like fire, they cannot withhold it, they can∣not keep it in, Jer. 20. 9. it will be more then their meat to them or any worldly respect, Joh. 4. 32. 34. Now the glory of the Church (Christs Spouse) and of all her Ministers, is inward in the graces of the spirit: God hath chosen the poore of this world rich in faith, Jam. 2. 5. and the weak things of this world to confound the wise, &c. 1 Cor. 1. 27. 28. The Kings daughter is all glorious within, Psal. 45. 13. It is the propriety of a harlot out∣wardly to paint and adorn her self: but the honest woman aray∣eth her self in comely apparell with shamefastnesse and modesty, as it becometh one professing the fear of God: 1 Tim. 2. 9, 10. and 1 Pet. 3. 3. Thus doth the Spouse of Christ, whose apparelling is not outward, but the hid man of the heart; her voice is sweet (but not seducing) her sight is comely (but not gorgious,) Cant. 2. 14. Here I have somewhat digressed, because most conceive that outward estate is so exceedingly advantagious to the Church of God. But I say such abundance is rather disadvan∣tagious, as wofull experience palpably testifies: and the Apostle saith, that the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, (that is, in the things of this life) but righteousnesse, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost (in vertue and grace) and he that in these things ser∣veth Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved to men, Rom. 14. 17, 18. Wealth indeed is good and profitable, but it edifieth not: Let us follow therefore after the things which make for peace, and the things wherewith one may edifie another: Rom. 14. 19. Now I come to my Author: To whom I grant, yea I fear that others though (t) inferiour in place and power to the pre∣sent Bishops, may prove as imperious and tyrannicall as they have been, if not worse; and it is most probable if they be not right∣ly chosen and constituted. And who knoweth if that little horn spoken of in Daniel, 7. 8. be not now to come up? For it must rise up among the ten horns in some of the ten kingdoms, & this shall look well, but it shall speak big, and before it there shall be
three of the first horns plucked up by the roots, it may be A. S. H. but I prophesie not, nor am I a Prophets sonne. Howso∣ever it is justly to be feared (and may be expected) that yet with∣in this Nation there will be a generall apostasie in Religion, which in fine will produce a generall desolation. For light (and that in abundance) is come into the world, and men love darknesse rather then light. Like Jannes and Jambres they resist the truth, men of corrupt minds that turn their eares from the truth unto fables, being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work re∣probate: 2 Tim. 3. 8. and 4. 4. Tit. 1. 16. Oh how averse is the whole kingdom to a Molū omen. For, for this very cause hath God a quarrell with us, and if we will not bowe, he will break us. through Reformation? Will God, think you, alway brook our loathsome Laodicean like qualitie? No certainly; Revel. 3. 16. The Here I un∣derstand the regallor Im∣periall State. Sunne shall be turned into darknesse, and the The Church, or Ecclesiasti∣call State. The Author. Moon (by persecution) unto blood, before that great and terrible day of the Lord come: Joel 2. 31. Neverthelesse, all this ar∣gueth not, that because through ignorance or negligence, as great inconveniences may come in, these present known evils are not to be taken away, no more then it followeth that a man should not repaire his house because it may in time want repaire again. Yea we had the more need to remove the evils present, and to use the best means and heed to prevent the like for time to come. And so I come again to cite his own words, fo. 10. viz. Fourthly, that though there be obstacles and mountains in the way, and the supposed (u) enemies of Gods Church and children: yet as I am a Christian I (w) dare not judge them, or curse them, as they do or use any unlawfull (x) means to remove them, or under the pre∣tence of pulling down one Babell to set up another. What David did by way of prediction, as he was a King and a Prophet, against the in∣veterate and (y) incurable enemies of the Church of God; I as an or∣dinarie Christian ought not to do. I may live peradventure to see mine enemies desert upon them which I may not desire to see. That there are mountains in the way and (u) enemies to the Church and children of God, my Author acknowledgeth; but Answer. judge or curse them he (w) dare not. Indeed I beleeve him, lest the curse being just should come, and so he suffer with them being a Dependant on them. Touching the unlawfull (x) means used, and Babel raised (by my Author so much objected) read my answer to his first Cause, fol. 17. &c. of this book, and my Answer to his
second and third Cause in the 22. fol. of this book: in both which places and elsewhere, that grosse aspersion is refelled. Judge∣ment I confesse, is onely proper to the Lord, and so is ven∣geance: nor may we either curse or prosecute for any personall injury; yet of their outward actions and obstinate transgressions we may judge, and ought to be jealous of them, untill we see some assured testimony of their good will to Zion. Act. 9. 26, 27. and have we not good cause to suspect those for inveterate and (y) incurable foes, that in stead of confessing and repenting their Popish superstition and Ceremonies, usurpation and vio∣lenoe over Gods people, do still persist therein, and Witnesse the Bishop of Pe∣terborough, Elies, and Glo∣cesters, beastly bowings, rot∣ten Sermons, and Popish prayers. justifie their actions, yes and still would (were they not restrained) exercise their Antichristian power and cruelty by obtruding Witnesse at the Kings re∣turn from Scotland, their violent pres∣sing that grand Idol the Service Book: to all good men so detest∣able and bur∣thensome. on the conscience things offensive and idolatrous. And under favour so farre forth as they manifest themselves the professed foes of Christ and his Kingdom, I hold it lawfull to curse them, and that without prediction; for if they remain hardned, as may be justly Feared, God hath alreadie told what shall become of them: Psal. 129. 5, 6. And do not I hate them that hate thee, and contend with those which rise up against thee? saith holy David, Psal. 139. 19, 20, 21, 22. yea I hate them with an unfeigned hatred, as they were mine utter enemies. Now did ever any man hate another un∣feignedly as his utter enemy, and not curse him? I think not. But see Psal. 28. 4. Lament. 3. 64. to the end. If Meroz deserved a bitter curse for not coming forth to help the Lord against the mighty, Judg. 5. 23. a place considerable: Much more then de∣serve they to be cursed, that help against the Lord, and take part with the mighty against his people. Even so let thine enemies perish O Lord: But they that love him shall be as the Sun when he riseth in his strength. And so I return to the words of mine Author, as followeth, fol. 11. viz. I am to judge charitably of the (z) actions and intentions of my The Author. Governours, what I think (a) peradventure is for my hurt, may be (b) intended at leastwise turned to my good. I must walk by the (c) rule of Gods Word, and follow the (d) examples and precepts of my Saviour. To pray for them that hate me, and do good to them that persecute me: and not to forget to pray for all that are in authoritie, that I may live a godly life under them in all peace and quietnesse.
Why may I not suspect that this long enjoyment of the Gospel in peace and plenty, hath produced (e) ill effects in me, as well as in my go∣vernours? But be my governours what they will, I have learned to obey all their (f) lawfull commands, and (g) thank God that I may live under so happy a command. If they command me to do no other∣wise then what is just and right, I must and will willingly do it, nei∣ther dare I (h) neglect my duty to them, though they forget theirs to me. For their offences and neglects to me, shall not excuse me to God for them, for my offences and non performances of mine to either of them. We are not onely to judge charitably of the (z) actions and Answer. intentions of our governours, but of the actions and intentions of other men also; yet with this proviso, that they be not obstinate, and persist not in their actions and intentions, when as they see, or are informed, that either in themselves or the issues of them they are evill and ungodly: and that they do it of ignorance and misunderstanding, and not of wilfulnesse, despight, and malice, as many of the Bishops works and plots (yea and of others in authority too) have been and are proved. Nor must we go upon (a) peradventures, in cases so fundamentally adverse to the uni∣versall good. For it is not peradventure, but most sure: that he which seeks to raze the And by the Bishops and their faction, the very foun∣dations both of Church and State have been shaken. foundation of an edifice, seeks utterly to subvert it; nor will any man be so charitable as to let him alone, saying, he perhaps may intend some better structure or other work to it. Nor is it wisdom in any man to suffer a known evill (if it lie within his power to avoid it) in hope or meer con∣ceit, it may be well (b) meant, or at least so prove. This is a tempt∣ing of the most holy One. We know God turneth all things to the best of his chosen: but ought not therfore his chosen to use the lawful means for the avoiding those evils which palpably threa∣ten them, or the State and Nation wherein they live, or whereof they are members? Yes sure: Otherwise Mordecai and Esther might have done well to have sate still, and said in secure chari∣tie, or uncharitable securitie, sure Haman intends not such dead∣ly mischief against us as he seemeth, or howsoever it may perad∣venture turn to our greater good. But they took another course, or else they had been in a dolefull case, and all their people. And even so had we, and this whole Land, if we had not used the
means God called us to. Mine Author saith he must follow the (c) rule of Gods Word. I wish he may, for as yet in this he hath not, to call evil good, and good evil: and the (d) examples and precepts of our Saviour, who teacheth us to pray for them that hate us, &c. and for all that are in authority, that we may live godly, &c. that precept of praying for our enemies, is (as I conceive) principally meant as they are private enemies to our persons onely: so prayed Ste∣phen for them, Acts 7. 60. not as they are publique and irrecon∣cileable foes of Christ and his Church. Anathema Maranatha, saith Paul, to all that love not the Lord Jesus. And for praying for all Governours; I agree with him: provided they be in law∣full authority, and with his own conclusion, that we may live godly under them in all peace and quietnesse; the which we must not expect under the Bishops. That long peace and plenty under the Gospel hath produced (e) ill effects in us as well as our Gover∣nours, is undeniable. And we are all (like a ship that hath laine long still in harbour) over grown with the mosse and slime of corrupting securitie: and what then? Must we therefore any longer abide therein? God forbid. Let us up rather and be doing, and the Lord will prosper us. Let our sleeping Commanders be either rowsed, or with supine Jonas be cast over board, better they then the whole vessell, the Nation, perish. And let our great Barke of Church and State be careined, have her very keele turn∣ed upward, scraped, searched, calked, rigged, and trimmed, and so faithfully maned out again, to the astonishment of our foes, and the rejoycing of all those which are imbarked in her, and wish well unto her. And although the (f) lawfull commands of evill governours are to be obeyed, yet it argueth not, that evill Governours are to be tolerated. And indeed it is well, nay a Miracle, and a man hath speciall cause to (g) thank God, if his Governours being evill, command nothing but what is lawfull: But can an ill tree bring forth good fruit? raro aut nunquam: very seldom, or do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thi∣stles? if it be so, is it not by an overruling hand? are not the wick∣ed tethered? doth not the Almighty turn their wrath to his praise? and restrain the rest of their rage? Psal. 76. 10. yea and bridle their thoughts too. But we have much more cause to praise God, when our Governours be good, men of courage, fearing
God, and hating covetousnesse, Exod. 18. 21. then may we with boldnesse expect both good commands, and good effects, and blessed are the people that are in such a case: Eccles. 10. 17. True it is that we must (h) do our duty, and perform on our parts, though the Governours be wicked and fail on theirs, for their neglect shall not excuse ours: every vessell shall stand on his own bottome. Yet for such Governours as are not lawfully con∣stituted and authorised, as the Bishops, it is a Quaere: what duty is there due, whether any. So I come to what followeth, fol. 11. videlicet. Fifthly, I dare not but look at the hand of God, and not at the in∣strument The Author. onely of my afflictions; I know nothing can come to passe but by his permission, I am assured that (i) sin is the prime cause of all my sufferings, and I fear that ingratitude in not being thankefull, and walking worthy of those great mercies received, hath been a principall cause why God hath shut the hearts of some of our Governours at this present as is much feared. This whole argument is good and godly (let the Devill have Answer. his due) and worthy of practise in all Protestants; yet it tends nothing to prove that the Petitions, against which my Author hath undertaken his discourse, are unlawfull, or that the authors of them hath therein acted any thing either against God or man. And I do confesse, that for the wickednes of a people, God send∣eth wicked Governors, and that (i) sin is the prime cause of all our miseries: But that ingratitude, or other sin of the people, is the principall cause why God doth shut up the hearts of Governours, I do deny: that is their own wickednesse. Witnesse Pharaoh and Saul, 1 Sam. 15. 23. 26. Many people have suffered for their Gover∣nours, but to my knowledge I never read, that ever any Go∣vernour suffered for the people. Saul the hypocrite dealeth false∣ly, and slayeth the Gibeonites, but the people endure three yeers famine for it: 2 Sam. 25. 1, 2. So David sinneth, but the people are plagued, 1 Chron. 21. 7. 17. For the sin of Manasseh the King, was all Judah carried captive, 2 King. 24. 3, 4. And were they not the high Priests and Elders that crucified Christ? yet was the whole Nation therefore destroyed. And that it is the Governors own sin that causeth God to harden them, I further prove it thus. They having a will to fin, and no regard unto God, nor
unto his word, therefore doth he in his just judgement give them up to a reprobate mind, to do things that are not convenient: Rom. 1. 28. 30. Had Gods Word been by Saul regarded, Saul by God had never been rejected. And thus fall they to sin the more freely, and abuse their authoritie, eating up Gods people as bread, untill God by their hand hath sufficiently punished them: and then doth he break those rods in peeces, and con∣sume them in his wrath, for the evill of the people shall not ex∣cuse their ungodly government, no nor extenuate their judge∣ment. And so I proceed again as followeth, fo. 12. viz. Sixthly, I know God will correct his children for their sins, and in The Author. the exceution of his judgements on the world he will begin at his own house, either to work out sin, or to work in grace, or to make that grace more manifest which is already wrought. I know that the end of Gods correction is reformation, till then if smaller afflictions will not prevail, greater shall; if not one kind then another: if the sword of our enemies do not, the swords peradventure of our own amongst our selves shall; if not they, peradventure the pestilence, or the famine, or some other shall: sundrie of which sometimes come together to let the world know, that our afflictions come not immediate from any one (k) secondary or instrumental cause but that it is from the will and plea∣sure of the Almighty, so to order and to dispose it, who will not take off his judgements as the effects, till our sins as the cause be removed. Herein likewise is nothing to be gainsaid. Onely I must still Answer. notifie, that whatsoever is here alledged, doth not justifie mine Authors clandestine aspersions against the aforementioned Peti∣tioners and Petitions, or any wayes condemne therein either their actions or persons. That our afflictions come not imme∣diately from any (k) secondarie cause, who knoweth not? Is there evill in the City and God doth it not? Amos 3. 6. Lam. 3. 38. Yet this doth not therefore prove, that such instruments as a manifestly the secondarie causes of our troubles either justifiable or tolerable. And as mine Author would not have us account the Bishops the immediate cause of our perturbation and afflicti∣on: so I wish he would advise them not to take us for the onely cause of their shamefull fall and confusion, but their own detest∣able impietie and abomination: the which the righteous Lord hath justly brought on the heads of them to the astonishment of the whole earth. So I come again to his own words, fo. 13. viz.
Seventhly, I dare not (l) use any unlawfull means to ease mine The Author. affliction, I know no better way then by (m) humiliation and prayer to God, for a sight of those sins whereby I had provoked him to wrath, and for grace and true repentance for the same, and remission by the merits of my Savour Jesus Christ. And then to apply my self with all diligence to all lawfull means to remove them; yet I am not to put too much (n) confidence in them, I could never yet find any benefit by (o) impatience under the hand of the Almighty, I have found more afflictions procured thereby, and I am assured that the Church and children of God never lost by their (p) patient suffering. What this man (l) dare not do, I am sure as yet we have not Answer. done, as hath been plainly proved, albeit he secretly involves our rebuke, in his dare not. For as not he, so no man can prove a petitionary way unlawfull: and other means then humble peti∣tions and modest solicitations there hath been none used by us, (excepting that principall means of (m) humiliation by himself so much preferred, the which by the goodnesse of our King and Parliament hath rather been president then subsequent to our other endeavours.) And I verily beleeve men have been so farre from putting too much (n) confidence in the use of means, as that they have not given due credit to the promise of God made unto them. For how many but a while since did even despaire Witnesse every mans arming him∣self, and stand∣ing upon his guard.? not∣withstanding the means used. And of (o) impatience who can re∣prove us? what people have so easily subjected their necks to such grievous yokes as we have done? and that not for daies but yeers: illegal taxes, impoverishing Patents, forcible impositions, popish Inquisitions, cruell censures, and bloody sufferings. And now the waters are moved, & God hath sent his Angel to cure us, shall we not stir? shall we not enter? shall we not lay hold upon so hap∣pie an occasion? if we cannot make means our selves, we may with the lame man at the pool of Bethesda, sit still long enough: there are none so charitable (many otherwise) to make means for us. We have not with the traiterous Papists, rebelled for our oppressions, but like a woman with child patiently waited, (though in great anguish) the Lords appointed time for our de∣liverance, and it being come, and we in pain, may we not seek for help to the Midwife of our heavy burthens? the skilfull Parliament: yes doubtlesse lawfully, and ready and willing are
we to undergo whatsoever charge or trouble they shall enjoyn and put upon us, so that we may be eased, and acquit of our abor∣tives. And as never any through (p) patience in obedience to Gods will, hath in the end been damnified: so I am confident we shall not; but on the contrary be greatly benefited, for he that hath begun the good work for us, will not fail to perfect it. And so I come again to mine Authors own words, fol. 13. viz. Eightly, as I know that Gods (q) decree in his determination of The Author. judgements shall be fulfilled, so I am confidently assured, that when the time of his deliverance is come, all the power and subtilty of the devill and his instruments, as they shall go no further then he hath limited them, so they shall not hinder him from taking off his rod when he pleaseth. For he is able to bring his will to passe by means without (r) means, and contrary to means, rather then his children shall not have their due reliefe. The (s) Sea shall part, the earth shall open and swallow up their adversaries; or fire shall come down from heaven and destroy them. And this may (t) comfort Christians, that God reignes and rules as King in heaven, the cause of his Church and children is his, and he beholds and governs the inhabitants of the earth, he hath the hearts of all in his hand, he can turn them or over∣turn them when he pleaseth for the good of his: when our wayes please him, he can make our enemies be at peace with us, and the same hand to heal us that hath wounded us, it is he onely that can make men to be of one heart, and one mind, and to make all things to work together for the best of them that love him. There is nothing here but what is truth; Onely to me he seem∣eth Answer. subtilly to insinuate, that because whatsoever God hath (q) decreed cannot be altered or averted, we must therefore sit still and do nothing, like those desperate wretches, who say, if God hath ordained me to be saved, I shall be saved; if he have ap∣pointed me to be damned, I shall be damned: what can I do? But this ought not so to be. It behoveth us in the morning to sowe our seed, and in the evening not to withhold our hand, to be di∣ligent and constant in the use of all good means, omitting no op∣portunitie, for who knoweth whether shall prosper, this or that, or whether both shall be alike good? Eccles. 11. 6. we must do our endeavour, and refer the issue to God; who doth all things after his own good pleasure. True it is, that God can save
(r) without means, and by contrary means, but he seldome or never doth either, unlesse means be wanting, or that in case all means being used, have failed; then in a case extraordinary he will shew himself glorious for the deliverance of his Church, to get him∣self a name that his enemies may be astonished, and his people incouraged to trust in him. Such was the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt: and the blind mans receiving sight with spittle mixt with clay. But when the Israelites came to enter the pro∣mised Land, they must use the means (the sword) for it, if they will have it: although they could not divide the Sea, yet they can fight: And because they are afraid and will not fight, they shall wander fourty yeers longer, and perish every one that was un∣willing. God could as easily have slain the Canaanites for them, as he did the Egyptians, and so at once have given them posses∣sion, but he would not, the purchase would have been too cheap: they would not have valued the prize. And therefore when they come to win that strong City Jericho, they must take pains, and apply themselves to means, though it be but walking and sound∣ing on Rams horns. God doth not make miracles his everie dayes work, though truly we may say to his glory, that of late he hath daily shewed miracles amongst us: But for the most part they have been by his blessing through the use of means, though weak and mean; and therefore let us not be idle, but still be do∣ing. Mine Author appeareth plainly to be of their mind (at least his arguments tend to that end) who say, And others, who thank God their hand is to none of their petiti∣ons, or to the Protestation. what need we trouble our selves to petition, is not the Parliament wise enough? do they not know what they have to do? Yea undoubtedly, bet∣ter then we can teach them; and without question they are most wise. Yet (under favour) I beleeve not so fully wise, as altogether needlesse of instruction and advice: And though most understand∣ing, yet not so perfectly knowing, as not to stand in need of in∣formation & advertisement. I have known parents hearken unto children. And Eli that old Judge of Israel advised with & heark∣ned unto young Samuel, 1 Sam: 3. 17, 18. but this by permission. My Authors perswasion, wherewith he laboureth to have us do nothing, but fit & expect miracles from heaven, is much like that I have read of a certain Jew after Christ, who because God in old time had miraculously brought the Jews by the hand of
Moses through the Sea, perswaded the people that God would do the like for them by him, and so brought most of them to pe∣rish miserably in the waters: Even so this man infers. As if be∣cause God can do such mighty things as he (s) reckons, and hath formerly by his marvellous power delivered others, & us also, as in that Gunpowder-plot of the Papists, miraculously and abso∣lutely without us, that therefore he will do so now. But have we not found, and God by proof hath caused us to know, that if we had been thus minded, we almost all, before this had pe∣rished? For the rest of his eighth assertion, that it may (t) com∣fort Christians, that God reigneth in heaven, rules in the earth, ta∣keth the cause of his children to be his, &c. and turneth all to the best of them that love him, I acknowledge. But as it may serve for comfort to Gods Church and people; so may it serve for terrour and discomfort to all that are his enemies, and oppose his Church; for God is a most severe Avenger of their wrongs. And so I come to my Authors conclusion, fo. 15. viz. To conclude, I hope by this time you have received full (v) satisfa∣ction, The Author. why I have refused to subscribe. Yet let me (w) assure you, that if the Parliament shall think fit to alter that government, I dare not in conscience and duty to the Protestation, refuse to be governed by it. And now mine Author thinks that by his slight sophisticall Answer: arguments he hath (u) satisfied the whole world for his non sub∣scription, hoping by this means also to dehort many others. And truly amongst the ignorant, squint-eyed, and neutrall, his assertions may much prevail, and his Pamphlet have more faith from them then the Bible. But to the judicious, zealous, & more quick-sighted, he very obviously discovereth himself for an ene∣mie, and one much to be suspected, insomuch that we may just∣ly say to him (for all his faire pretences) as it was sometime said by Joram to Jehu, Is it peace, I. W.? yet there is hope of him, for in his close he (w) assureth us that if the Parliament shall alter the present government, he will in conscience and duty submit unto it. Indeed it is well spoken at last, and in charity I will beleeve what he hath spoken. Yet my opinion is, that his obedience will be more of necessitie then good will. For how can he, or any man, freely and with affection yeeld obedience to that government
which he never willed, or desired: and that he desireth no change or reformation (albeit the present estate of the Church is most corrupt) is apparant by his applauding and servent pleading for it, and his strong opposition against those who seek the al∣teration of it. And so I come to his perswasion (as I may terme it) annexed to his conclusion, fol. 15. viz. Be confident that not onely my prayers, but my true (x) endea∣vours The Author. have been, and by Gods grace shall continue, for Reformation. I know (y) God hath suffered many of his deare Saints and children to fall into great and hainous sins and offences, yet when he hath duely chastised them, after true repentance he hath made them greater in∣struments of his glory, and the good of his Church, then in former times they were. Here he sheweth mighty (x) zealous for reformation: but if he Answer. mean that Reformation In the Church. I do, I cannot be so confident as he bids me; my reasons are demonstrated in my last words above. But I conceive he intends some personall reformation either in himself, or the Bishops, and so his succeeding words do imply. I (y) know God, &c. because there he speaks that though God hath suffered him or them the Did not a Bishop or his Chaplain frame the book? without question he is a Bishops Mi∣nion, one that hath been con∣firmed by them, or recei∣ved some other ghostly gift from them. Bishops, as his deare Saints and children to fall into great and hainous sins, yet when he hath suffici∣ently chastised them (as now his rod is upon them) after their true repentance he will make them greater instruments of his glory then ever. Well I together with him do pray (if God so will) for this reformation in them. But in the interim I shall be in travell and never at rest, untill that long wished for Reformation in the Church be accomplished. For I desire not to stay till they be re∣formed and made such glorious instruments, lest it never be, and that God hath no such love unto them, for they have hated his truth, and loved lies. And thus do I accede to his following words, which I may justly terme an anticipation, as is manifest, fol. 15. viz. I must (z) expect for this, as well as the rest of my endeavours The Author. for (a) truth and peace your usuall jears, scoffes, and censures, of re∣probation, and the like: but my comfort is, that God knoweth (b) who are his, and who are the true friends and enemies of the Church and State, and that I have sincerely discharged my conscience, accord∣ing to that weak talent I have received in obedience to the (c) Pro∣testation for the good of both.
Being conscious of his own merit, and justly fearing reproach Answer. and hard censure for this his work, he cunningly prevents them at whose hands he expects it; telling them, that he (z) looketh for nothing else from them for all the good he hath done, as if his work was rather worthy of praise then contumacie: and if he was reviled, it was for (a) truth, and peace, and not for any evill or hypocrisie, either in his actions or ends. Thus audaciously (like a Pontifical) using the just mans plea for his unjust attempts. But that God who knoweth both (b) who are his, and who are the Churches friends, and foes, knoweth the secret windings of his heart; and if he be contrary minded, will in due time discover him. And touching his obedience to the (c) Protestation, let him that readeth consider. I will not judge him, there is one that judgeth him, his own conscience, but I refer him to the single eye of all men. And so am I come to his finall confirmation, or vin∣dication of his uprightnesse and innocency in these words fol∣lowing, fo. 16. viz. If therefore you shall remain still mine adversaries for so doing, The Author. peradventure I may for a while longer Note that he speaks as if he was in some durance or trouble, suffer, yet it shall comfort me it is for well (c) doing: whereas, (e) when ye shall (d) suffer as evill doers, you may (without timely repentance) everlastingly perish in the gainsayings of Core: For though (f) hand joyn in hand, God will not suffer the wicked to go unpunished. If you find any materiall errour herein (g) inform me, and (i) convince me thereof, and I do (h) assure you on the faith of a true Protestant, I will endeavour re∣formation: the like I do commend unto you hereby, and expect the same from you as a triall of your (k) profession, the which I shall plain∣ly (l) discover, if wilfully you (m) continue and persist in a known errour. And so I bid you farewell. Farewell. Here is nothing observable, but a self (c) justification, still la∣bouring Answer. to perswade the people that his refusall to joyn in peti∣tion against Bishops, and for the publique good, hath been in tendernesse of conscience, and that therefore whatsoever he doth undergo either for that or this his work, is for well doing: thus secretly at last (as well as in the beginning) endeavouring con∣sent even unto imitation, from the weak and simple, through a vain conceit of his conscionablenesse in religion. Touching the
Petitioners (d) suffering for what they have done, I say as he doth, (e) when they, or any others in the like case, for that cause shall suffer as evil doers, they may without timely repentance perish in the gainsayings of Core. But in what they have done, they have well done and not evilly (nor doth he prove the contrary) and therefore if suffer they should, they cannot as evill doers, far then are they (for this) from the danger of perishing with Core. As far may he be, for he speaks more like one of that gainsaying con∣gregation. It is most true, that although (f) hand joyn in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished: let him therfore be warned, and not take part with the ungodly: for the wicked and all that forget God shall be turned into hell: Psal. 9. 17. Then my Author pro∣miseth upon (g) reformation of any materiall errour, to endeavour reformation also. I hope he will not deny, (if he do the world will justifie) that, to maintain that by The Authors errours de∣noted. colour of his Protestation, which he is thereby bound to oppose, and by all good means to seek the abolition of, is an errour materiall and condemnable. And further, that to vilifie and inveigh against those that in pious discharge of their conscience and Protestation, have endeavoured the Parliaments security, and a reformation, and likewise by cunning craftinesse, and sophisticall arguments, both to disswade others from doing the same, and to animate and confirm other some in their indifferencie, lukewarmnesse, and neutralitie, to the great dishonour of God, their utter shame and souls-hazard, are errours of the same nature; all which my Author by his book hath done: But I hope being now informed, he will repent of his first work, and forthwith fulfill stis last (h) promise. But he must withall be (i) convinced of these his errours; The same objection hath the blind Jew, concerning Christ, against all the testimony of holy Scriptures: and it is the work of God to convince the conscience, and not of man. And so I will leave him, expect∣ing better fruits of his (k) profession, for by his fruits he shall be (l) known, according as he doth (m) persist or desist his errours. Onely I would as a friend advise him, nay as a brother intreat him, not to resist the known truth, nor willfully to shut his eyes against the light, lest he be found a fighter against God, and so perish suddenly in the way when his wrath is kindled but a little
against him. Let him weigh well what I have said, and the God of all knowledge (if he see it good) give him understanding in all things. Vivat Rex, vigeat grex, valeat Lex. Amen. Thus according to my poore abilitie have I answered parti∣cularly all his Assertions. For whatsoever he hath written is but barely affirmed by him; He hath neither positively nor by consequence proved any thing: Sophistry and colour of Conscience, are his strongest Arguments. Some were perswaded with the things that were spoken, and some beleeved not. Act. 28. 24.
THE YOVNG MANS ANIMATION TO THE building up of ZION. Now my desire is to write something for the incouragement of my Brethren and companions, that as they have begun, so they may go on to further by all good means the building up of Zion. And chiefly I write to the young men, for they through the might of God, have done wor∣thily; they have indeed excelled their Ancestry. And I had as much need (if not more) to write a word of comfort to the old men, for I think their hearts are even dying, if not with Nabals already dead within them; But to all of them both old and young, it may be the dead may hear and revive. WHen Cyrus King of Persia had made Proclamation for the return of the Jews, and for the reedifying the Temple of the God of heaven at Jerusalem, it is said that the chief Mark old men. Fathers amongst them, and the Priests and Levites, rose up with all them whose spi∣rit God had raised to go up to build the house of the Lord, Ezra 1. 1. to 5. In which words you may observe, it was not the great men, and the Church men onely that rose up to build Gods house, but all others also, whose hearts God had moved unto that work, were they old or young, rich or poore, bond or free, of what degree or condition soever, and we find none of them prohibited neither by the King, nor by any of their own heads or Governours. Be not then my brethren, discouraged, or dis∣ded for any reproaches or invectives of railing Rabshekehs, or jeering Sanballats, and Tobiahs the enemies of the Church of God: Nehem. 2. 19. and 4. 2. let not your hearts be faint, nor your hands weak, for there are more with us then against us.
The hand of our God is upon all them that seek him in good∣nesse: but his power and his wrath is against all them that for∣sake him. Ez. 8. 22. yea though Rehum the Chancellour, and Simshai the Scribe, (the great popish Lords, and popishly affect∣ed Officers) with the rest of their companions, Ezra 4. 9. do consult and combine, yea and misinform the King too, calling ye the Rebellious City, ver. 12. that the work of reformation may be hindred, the house of God still lie waste and defaced by our popish adversaries; yet it shall go on, the God of heaven shall prosper us, and therefore let us his servants rise up and build: be still diligent in the use of all good means; and as for them, they have no portion, nor right, nor memoriall amongst us, Nehem. 2. 20. When the people of the Jews laid the foundation of the second Temple, at Jerusalem, many of the ancient men that had seen the glorious fabrick of the first, wept to consider how inferiour the last was unto that of Solomons, Ezra 3. 12. But blessed be God, we shall have no such cause, for if our Ancients, who have know the first structure of our Temple, (the first Re∣formation in King Edward the sixt, and Queen Elizabeths daies) are not more blind then aged, they shall (if God be pleased so far to honour them) see the second frame of our Church, (this Reformation now by Gods good hand intended) far more ex∣cellent beautifull and glorious then the first: but I doubt many of them will rather weep then rejoyce at at; for then will they be like fishes drawn out of the waters, not able to breathe, though brought forth into a more pure element: for their great Idoll the Service Book being taken away, how shall they pray or serve God? Howsoever ye young men, ye glory of this dull age, (my brethren and companions) be ye merry and rejoyce, yea shout for joy, for the day of Redemption draweth nigh. The Lord hath brought again the Captivitie of Zion, he hath done great things for us, whereof we will rejoyce, Psal. 126. 1. 3. Come then let us go up to the Mountain and bring wood (our prayers, and petitions, our care, cost, and pains; yea, and if occasion be, our arms, Nehem. 4. 17, 18.) and build this house; for the Lord will be favourable in it, and he will be glorified, Hagg. 1. 8. Therefore be now of good courage, O Zerubabel, (O Princes, O Worthies of Parliament) saith the Lord, and be of good cou∣rage,
O Jehoshua, son of Jehozadek the Priest, (ye true Ministers of God) and be strong all ye people of the Land (ye masters and servants) saith the Lord, and do it: for I am with you, saith the Lord of hosts, according to the word that I commanded you when ye came out of Aegypt: (When I called you this Parlia∣ment, and ye came out of prelaticall tyranny, Poperie, and Su∣perstition, when you solemnly vowed before the Lord against it.) so my spirit shall remain amongst you, fear not, Hag. 2. 5, 6. And the glory of this last house shall be greater then the first, saith the Lord of hosts, at the 10. verse. Fear not therefore, nor be weary: onely be strong and very couragious to observe and do according to all that the true Moses (Jesus Christ) hath com∣manded you, Josh. 1. 7. The great mountains shall become plain, Zach. 4. 7. and the swellings of Jordan shall down, and ye shall go over, and drive out all your enemies, and injoy rest and peace again. And Babylon shall fall, even that great City Babylon, that hath made all Nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth to commit fornica∣tion with her, Revel. 18. 2, 3. Be therefore neither dismayed, nor afraid, but down with her, down with her even to the ground, that there may be no more remembrance of her. Blessed shall he be that doth reward her as she hath served us. Blessed shall he be that taketh and dasheth her Brats against the stones. Psal. 137. 8. 9. Sic sit. So be it. Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? To the Neutrall Atheist, or Atheisticall Neutrall. HAlt no longer between two opinions, lest with Absolom, as unworthy the earth and unfit for heaven, you be suddenly taken away by some exemplarie judgement; If the Lord be God follow him, if Baal be God follow him; If Christ be the Head, honour him; and if the Bishops be Head, honour them. Be not so easily removed from the sound form of doctrine, received from Christ Jesus by the mouth of his Apostles. Whosoever speaks not according to this word, it is because there is no light in him. Isa. 8. 20. Magna est veritas, & praevalet. FINIS.
