S1290 E337_6 R200821 99861456 113593
LETTERS AND PAPERS From the Committe of Estates, and Commissioners of SCOTLAND, Concerning the KINGS comming into the Scottish ARMIE: And His MAIESTIES Giving His Consent to the Surrender of Newarke to the PARLJAMENT. Dated the 7th and 8th of this instant May 1646. Commanded to be forthwith printed and Published. may. 9th London printed for L. Chapman, 1646.
Tudor rose surmounted by a crown Scottish thistle surmounted by a crown Irish harp surmounted by a crown French fleur-de-lis surmounted by a crown Right Honourable, HAveing received no other Adver∣tisment, neither from the Com∣mittee of Estates at the Scottish Army, nor by any other way, but that wee heare this after∣noone that Letters are come to the Honorable Houses, giving notice that the King is come in to the Scottish army neere Newarke. Wee have Iudged it incombent to us to represent to the Honorable Houses, that if his Maiestie be gon thither: we are verie confident that the Lord Generall and Committee with that army from whom we look to heare speedily, will doe that which beseemes their places and Trust for the good of both Kingdomes, accor∣ding
to the conditions of the mutuall Covenant and Treaty betweene the Nations: and wee doe desire that by common advice; the present opportunitie may be improved for setling of Religion and the peace of both Kingdomes, which as it hath alwayes been, so is it now and shall ever bee, the earnest desire and con∣endeavour of Your Lordships affectionate friends and humble servants Lowdon, Landerdaill, A: Jonston, Charles Erskine. Hugh Kennedy. Rob. Barclay. May 6. 1646. For the Right Honourable the Speaker of the House of Peeres pro tempore.
THe letter from the Committee of Estates of the Kingdome of Scotland residing with the Scottish Army directed to the Commissioners of both Houses, and their Letters to the Committe of both Kingdoms which we have received this morning we are confident will give full satisfaction to the Honourable Houses; That his Majesties comming to their Quarters was un∣expected, and their perswading him to give their con∣sent to the surrender of Newark to the Committee of both Kingdomes for the use of the Parliament, will we doubt not, be taken by the Houses as a sufficient testimony of their faithfullnesse and the sincerity of their intentions and resolutions, which we are perswa∣ded in our hearts are no other then they have bin from the beginning of this Cause to the prosecuting where∣of according to the Covenant and Treaty for the mu∣tuall good of both Kingdomes, they have and ever will limit themselves in all their endeavours. The earnest desire wee have accordinging to our Commission and the trust reposed in us to prevent all misunderstandings betweene these Kingdomes so hap∣pily conjoyned, and so neerely tyed by the solemne League and Covenant, hath enforced us to make knowne to the honourable Houses what we heare com∣monly reported concerning 5000. horse and Dragoones to have beene yesternight as farre as Bamberry upon their March towards Newarke, notwithstanding it is
every where knowne that Garrison upon a Treaty, and is now to be surrendred to morrow to the Commissio∣ners of Parliament, and none of the Scottish forces to be placed there, which being considered and that there is no force of the enemy in those parts, We do earnest∣ly desire that the honourable houses would bee pleased to cause stop their March, and to prevent every thing which may give just cause of jealousie, or any wise wea∣ken the good correspondence, or lessen the confidence that is betweene the Kingdomes. And as the Com∣mittee of the Army hath declared that they are free of all capitulations or Treaties with his Majesty. So we do for our parts declare the same to the honourable houses and to all the world, And that his comming to that Ar∣my was strange and unexpected to us, whereof we never heard till the Letters came to the Houses from their Commissioners upon the 6th. of this instant, And wee do solemnely protest and assure that it is our firme and constant resolution never to swerve in the least, from the Covenant and Treaty, but to apply our thoughts by joynt advice to do every thing which may procure and settle a happie and well-grounded peace. By Command of the Commissioners for the Parliament of Scot¦land. Io. Cheisley. 8 May. 1646.
Right Honourable, THe earnest desire which we have to keep  righ understandng betweene the 2 Kingdoms moves us to acquaint you with that strange Providence where∣with wee are now surprized together with our cariage and desires thereupon. The King came into our Army yesterday in so private a way, that after wee had made search for him (upon the surmises of some persons who pretended to know his face) yet we could not finde him out in sundry houses, And wee believe Your Lord∣ships will thinke it was matter of much astonishment to us, eeing we did not expect he would have come into any place under our power, Wee conceaved it not fit to enquire into the causes that perswaded him to come hither: But to endeavour that his being here might bee improved to the best advantage for promoting the work of Uniformity, for setling of Religion and Righ∣teousnesse, and attaining of Peace according to the League and Covenant, and Treaty by the advice of the Parliaments of both Kingdomes, or their Commissio∣ners authorized for that effect. Trusting to our Integri∣tie, wee doe perswade our selves that none will so farre misconstr us, as that wee intended to make use of this seeming advantage for promoting any other ends then are expressed in the Covenant, and have been hither to pursued by us, with no lesse Conscience then care. And yet for the further satisfaction wee doe ingeniously de∣clare, that there hath bin no Treaty nor Capitulation
betwixt His Majesty and us nor any in  And that wee leave the wayes and meanes of Peace un∣to the power and wisdome of the Parliaments of ts Kingdomes. And so farre as concernes us, as we have a witnesse in Heaven, wee are confident to make it ap∣peare to the world, that there is nothing more in our desires, then in all our resolutions and proceedings to adheire to the Covenant and Treaty. Our gravest thoughts shall be taken up in studying, and our utmost abilities imployed in acting those things that may best advance the publike good and common happinesse of both Kingdoms, wherein by the help of the most high wee shall labour to use so much tendernesse and care, that wee hope it shall soone appeare, our actions have beene the issue and result of honest and single intenti∣ons, And further we cannot (in a matter of so deepe consequence and common interest) but seeke Your Lordships advice, for which effect we have also written to the Committee of estates of Scotland with intention to move by Your joynt Councells and resolutions, that we at last after so bitter a seed time of many afflictions, We may reap the sweet fruits of Truth and Peace, nd in this confidence We Your Lordships humble Servants, Leven, Dunfermling, Lothian. Balcarris, S. D. Hme. S. Th: Carr. R. of Freeland. W. Glendonyn. Iohn Iohnston. Southwell 6. May 1646. For the Right Honourable the Committee of both KINGDOMES. FINIS.
