S1954A R230250 99895960 153575
royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE A PROCLAMATION Offering a Revvard for apprehending Mr. John Welsch Traitor, and others. CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lovits  Macers of Our Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, spe∣cially constitute, Greeting; Forasmuch as by Sentence of Our Justice Court, Mr. John Welsch, Mr. Gabriel Semple, and Mr. Samuel Arnot, are declared Traitors, for being in open Rebellion against us, in the year 1666. And they having for divers years past, made it their Work to pervert and abuse Our People from their Duty and Alleadgeance, at their Field Meetings, these Rendez∣vouzes of Rebellion; and by their Example and Impunity, severall others Intercommuned and Vagrant Preachers, having also followed that same Method and Way, whereby Our People, by not frequenting the publick Ordinances, and being exposed to hear Jesuits, or any other Irregular persons, who dare take upon them the Sacred Office of the Ministry, are debauched to Atheism and Popery: We therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council, have thought fit, for the encouragement of Our good Subjects, in Apprehending and Discovering these persons, hereby to declare and give assurance to any person or persons, who shall apprehend and secure Mr. John Welsch (or so Discover him as he may be Apprehended) shall have  payed to him or them, upon Delivery of his person, to any of Our Privy Council, or Commitment of him to prison, Nine Thousand Merks Scots Money, out of the first and readiest of Our Cash, as a Reward: And to any person who shall Apprehend and Secure, the saids Mr. Gabriel Semple, and Mr. Samuel Arnot, also Declared Traitors, or so Discover them, as they may be Apprehended, three thousand Merks for each of them; and to any person or persons, who shall apprehend and secure any of these Field Preachers, who are declared Fugitives, or are intercommuned, for each of them, two thousand Merks; and for each one of these Vagrant Preachers in the Fields that shall be apprehended, the sum of nine hundred Merks. And which Rewards, We Declare shall be instantly payed to the person or persons, who shall perform the said Service, without any maner of Delay or Defalcation. And furder, We declare, That if in pursute of the saids persons, they or any of their Complices shall make Resistance, and that there∣upon they or any of them shal be hurt, mutilat, or slain, the saids persons apprehenders of them or any assisting them, shall never be called in question for the same, criminally nor civily in all time coming, but shall be repute and esteemed persons, who have done Us and their Countrey good and acceptable Service. OUR WILL is herefore, and We charge you strictly, and command, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needfull, and thereat, in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Publication of the premisses; that all Our good Subjects may have notice thereof: and Ordains these presents to be printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh,  the sexth day of February, 1679. and of Our Reign the one and threttieth year. Tho: Hay: Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, 1679.
