S246A R229674 99895348 152719
A SAD and TRUE RELATION OF A most Barbarous and Bloody MURDER Committed by One Thomas Watson, a Weaver, UPON The Body of Mary Watson, his Wife, Being Great with Child, and near her Delivery, IN Peter's-Street, in the Parish of St. George's, South∣wark, on Thursday the 16th. of Decemb. 1686. TOGETHER, With the Circumstances that attended it; and how, upon Examination of the Witnesses, the CORONER's Inquest Found it: With other Material Matters, that oc∣curred on that Occasion. This may be Printed, Decemb. xx. 1686. R. P. LONDGN, Printed for E. C. and are to be Sold at the Golden Patten, near St. George's-Church in Southwark, 1686.
A SAD and TRUE RELATION OF A most Barbarous and Bloody MURDER COMMITTED By one Thomas Watson, &c. THE World cannot but stand amazed at, and deeply deplore the miserable con∣dition of Mankind, when it pleases the Almighty God to leave them to them∣selves: And the more Miserable it is, that no Example of Publick Justice can prevail upon them to take warning; nor yet by the Sacred Laws of Holy Writ, which absolutely says, That if Man spills Innocent Blood, by Mn his Blood shall be spilled; a most Miserable and Lamentable Example of which, You have here a True Relation as followeth.
Thomas Watson, a Stafford-shire-Man, Born at Hildersham near Stone, in the said County, of good and Honest Parents, was sent up to London to be an Apprentice, and was Bound to a Crape-Weaver, where he Served his Time Faithfully; and after that Married a Wife, and Lived in the Mint, in the Borough of Southwark, for some years; but there being often Quarrels between him and his Wife, as the Neigh∣bours Living near him, do affirm: At last, it so sell out, that on Thursday the 16th. of this Instant Decemb. (though nothing appeared to the contrary, but that she was an In∣dustrious and Laborious Woman) the said Thomas Watson committed a most Horrid and Barbarous Murder on his Wife, (being great with Child) that ever was heard of in the Memory of Man. The manner and provocation was this, viz. He having had some Jealousie of her Imbezling his Money, or taking it up and not giving him an account of it; for that he not only sent her abroad with his Work, but that she under∣took to Sell Crape and Hair-Plush for others, as also carry∣ing them on sundry occasions to the Dyers, he took occasi∣on to watch her, and found that she went into a Broakers-Shop (where she had Pawned two Pieces of Crape for Mo∣ney to supply her present Necessity) with an intent, as she said, to Redeem them; but this not satisfying him, he abu∣sed her in the Street, at an unseemly rate, threatning her likewise in such a manner, that she was afraid to come home, and so lay at a Friends House in Blackman-street that Night; when the next Morning he not only sent to Inquire for her, but came in search of her himself; but she being apprehen∣sive of some danger, refused to go with him, at least to go home with him, unless some Persons whom she named (and
were it seems Lodgers in the House where she Lived) were at home; whereupon he leaving her, on Thursday it hap∣pened, that she having heard that her Husband had given out some threatning words against her, came to a Neighbours House, and told the People what had befallen her, yet ex∣pressing a willingness to return home; and thereupon that matters might be somewhat accommodated between them, and a better understanding had; she desired one Cook a Journey man Weaver, to go up and pacifie her Husband, which he undertook to do; when coming into his Cham∣ber, he found Watson drying a piece of Crape by the Fire; whereupon, he said, How now, what are you Drying your Crape? Ay, says he; and thereupon looking over his shoul∣der, he espied his Wife, who was it seems, (contrary to the knowledge of the said Cook) unadvisedly come after him, upon the sight of her, Swearing an Oath, and giving out some threatning words for her refusing to come Home; he rise from his Chair, and made at her in a great Fury, but Cock Interposing; he steps to the Bed, and from the Teaster takes his Bayonet, (one of the Daggers the Granadeers wear by their side, having been lately a Souldier, but now cashier∣ed, or otherwise dismissed) and whilst Cook (who not know∣ing what he had in his hand, by reason of the darkness of the place, &c.) indeavoured to keep them asunder, reach∣ing out his Arm, he struck her on the Right Side, under the short Ribs, upon which the Blood gushing out, she then with a faint Voice cryed, O! Thomas, you have now done my business, and so fell down Dead; whereupon, whilst Cook run down to call People to Apprehend him, he took her in his Arms and placed her in a Chair, seeming much to be∣wail the unhappy accident, crying out, He had Kill'd his Wife, and was undone himself: Immediately the Chirurgeon
being sent for, and probing the Wound, delivered upon Oah, that the Wound was one Inch and an half in breadth, and as he believes nine Inches deep; and he does likewise believe, the Child was Drowned in its Mothers Blood, or else struck to the Heart with the aforesaid Dagger. Thomas Wason being asked what was the provocation he had to do this Wicked Murther? he answered very slightly, His Wife had ben a very had and ill Wife to him in a great many respects; but it was his Passion, and he was sorry for it. But by the Relation of his Neighbours (who were Sworn be∣fore the Justice of the Peace) he had often threatned his Wives Death; and that she her self had said oftentimes to her Neighbours, That she was afraid her Husband would be the Death of her some time or other. So after a long and tedious Examination before the Justice of the Peace, Thomas Watson was committed to the Mashalses, the Goal for the County of Surry; where he lyes tl the next Assizes for that County, and must then expect the rd of such a Bloody Murther: And it is hoped, the Horridness of this Ihumane Murther will set that serious mpession in, and a Holy Resolution on the Heart of every Man, for ever to abhor, and abandon such unheard of Barbarous Cruelties. On Fryday, Decemb. the 17th. the Coroner's Inquest took a View of the Body; and, upon Examination of the Wit∣nesses, Found it Wilful Murder: After which the Corps were Buried. FINIS.
I Being the Constable that Appre∣hended Watson the Murderer, and Heard the Examination of the Witnesses upon this Matter, do testifie This to be a True Account. Witness my Hand this 18th. of De∣cember, 1686. John Underhill. FINIS.
